 
 
3 
STANDING  COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2009-2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
                FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT  
 
 
 
NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION PLANNING BOARD (NCRPB)   
  
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in 
the Thirty Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha] 
  
 
  
  
 
 
          THIRD REPORT  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 


 
THIRD REPORT  
 
  
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
URBAN DEVELOPMENT  
(2009-10) 
 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT  
 
 
NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION PLANNING BOARD (NCRPB)   
  
  
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in 
the Thirty Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha] 
   
   
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  21.04.2010 
                                        Laid in Rajya Sabha on  21.04.2010 
 
 
 
    
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
April,  2010 / Vaisakha, 1932 (Saka) 


 
C.U.D. No.: 53 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2009 By Lok Sabha Secretariat  
 
Publish under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by ………… 
 

 
 
 
CONTENTS  
 
Page 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE …………………………………………               (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………..            (v) 
 
CHAPTER I  Report 1 
 
  
CHAPTER II  Recommendations that have been accepted by the 
Government 
17 
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
24 
 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
26 
 
  
CHAPTER V Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited 
33 
 
 
  
APPENDICES  
 
 I  Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Committee held on 05.01.2010 36 
 
II  Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in Thirty-Fifth Report of the Committee 
(14th Lok Sabha) 
38 
 
 
  

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010) 
Shri Sharad Yadav         -        Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.    Shri J.P. Agarwal 
3.    Shri Praveen Singh Aron 
4.    Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
5.    Shri Partap Singh Bajwa 
6.    Shri Ambica Banerjee 
7.    Smt. Priya Dutt 
8.    Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
9.    Shri Shakti Mohan Malik 
10.  Shri Kailash Joshi 
11.  Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
12.  Shri Ramesh Kumar 
13.  Shri Radhe Mohan Singh 
14.  Shri P.C. Mohan 
15.  Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
16.  Shri Sonawane Pratap Narayanrao 
17.  Shri Baijayant Panda 
18.  Prof. Ramshankar 
19.  Shri Kadir Rana 
20.  Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
21. Shri Adagooru H. Vishwanath 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Parvez Hashmi 
23. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
 24. Shri Surendra Motilal Patel 
 25. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki 
 26. Shri Amir Alam Khan 
 27. Shri Manohar Joshi 
 28. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa 
 29. Shri Shyam Benegal 
 30. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi 
 31. Vacant 
(ii) 
  

SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri K.D. Muley  - Director 
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Emma C. Barwa - Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 

INTRODUCTION  
 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2008 -09) 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, presen t 
the Third  Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirty Fifth Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Urban Development on ‘National Capital Region Planning Board’ of the Ministry of 
Urban Development.   
 
2. The Thirty Fifth Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 23 rd October, 2008. The replies of the Government to 16 
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 11th February, 2009.  
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted their report at their sitting held on 5 th 
January, 2010. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-Fifth Report  of the Committee is given at Appendix-II.  
   
  
  
 
 
 
New Delhi;  
 5th January, 2010 
 15 Pausa, 1931(Saka) 
SHARAD YADAV,  
Chairman, 
Standing Committee on  
Urban  Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

CHAPTER-I 
 
 
REPORT 
 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in their Thirty - 
Fifth Report (14 th Lok Sabha) on the subject “National Capital Region Planning 
Board” relating to the Ministry of Urban Development, which was presented to Lok 
Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 23rd October, 2008.  
 
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the 16 recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as 
follows: 
 
(i) Recommendations / Observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter – II): 
 
Para Nos.   2, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 14                             (Total 8) 
 
(ii) Recommendations / Observations, which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government‟s replies (Chapter –III): 
 
 Para Nos.  15                                                                             (Total 1)     
(iii) Recommendations / Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require 
reiteration (Chapter – IV):  
 
Para No. 1, 3, 4, 7 and 16           (Total 5)     
 
(iv) Recommendations / Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V):  
  
Para No. 5 and 13                (Total  2)     

 2 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost impor tance would be given by the 
Government to the implementation of their Recommendations. In cases, where it is 
not possible for the Government to implement the Recommendation (s) in letter and 
spirit for any reason, the matter may be reported to the Committe e with reasons for 
non-implementation.    
 
1.4 The Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations / Observations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and final 
replies in respect of the Recommendations for which only interim repli es have been 
furnished by the Government (included in Chapter -V) may be furnished to them 
within three months of the presentation of this Report.  
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
Non-Realization of objectives of NCRPB 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
1.6 In their report, the Committee had observed as below: 
 
“The National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRPB) was constituted in 
March, 1985 by an Act of Parliament for preparation of a plan for the development of 
the National Capital Region (NCR) and for coordination and implementation of such 
a plan. The National Capital Region comprises specified districts of Haryana, Uttar 
Pradesh, Rajasthan and the National Capital Territory of Delhi (NCT -Delhi). The 
first Regional plan prepared by NCRPB was the Regional Plan -200l which was 
aimed to disperse the economic activities from Delhi and to deflect future in-migrants 

 3 
to Delhi. The Committee's examination of the Nati onal Capital Region Planning 
Board has revealed that these objectives have not been realized. There has been 
lack of effective co -ordination in enforcement and implementation of plans. There 
had been no regular meetings of the NCRPB so much so that not a s ingle meeting 
of the Board was held for over three years. A number of projects in sub-regions were 
abandoned/ withdrawn after release of substantial funds by NCRPB. Though the 
Regional Plan -2021 was notified as far back as in September, 2005, the 
participating States are yet to prepare sub regional plans. The Committee's 
conclusions and recommendations arising out of the examination of these and other 
related issues are set out in the following paragraphs. “ 
 
1.7 The Government have replied as below: 
 
 
 “Para-wise replies to the committee‟s conclusions and recommendations 
given in the report have been dealt with in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
 With respect to non -realization of objectives of Regional Plan following is 
submitted: 
 
 Implementation of a Regional Plan is a long drawn process and it takes many 
years to develop a region. The National Capital Region has a geographical area of 
33578 sq. km which is almost equivalent to a medium size state.  It is 86% of the 
geographical area of Kerala, 75.9% of the geographical area of Haryana and 
66.67% of the geographical area of Punjab.  It is almost 23 times that of the 
geographical area of NCT -Delhi (1,483 sq km) and more than the combined 
geographical areas of the three states of Tripura, Nagaland and Sikkim (2 7,885 sq 

 4 
km). Looking at the comparison of the geographical areas, the budget allocation to 
NCRPB for development of NCR in the Central budget [which was about Rs. 63 
crore on an average per year during Xth Plan] has been meagre for development of 
such a vast inter-state region.  It is also important to note that the Regional Plan is a 
multi-sectoral plan and is to be implemented by the constituent State Governments 
and Central Ministries through their various departments / agencies.  The Plan has 
to be implemented through consensus on various issues. However, though there are 
inter-state issues, the implementation of the Regional Plan has led to many 
benefits.”   
 
1.8 The Committee are not convinced with the reply furnished by the 
Ministry. They observe tha t the fact of geographical area of NCR being vast 
was very much evident at the time of setting up of NCRPB and thus, it cannot 
be an excuse for the Board and its administrative Ministry i.e. the Ministry of 
Urban Development to justify the dismal progress card on the non -realization 
of the objectives under the Regional Plan. In this regard, the Committee 
further feel that unless regular meetings of the Board take place, there is no 
way to bring all the constituent States together to evolve consensus on issu es 
of common interest. The Ministry has chosen not to reply to the point of non -
convening of regular meetings of the Board mentioned in the Committee’s 
observation. In fact, the Committee note that the meetings of the Empowered 
Committee of the Board are also not regular, as between May, 2006 and March, 
2009, only two meetings of the same were held. The Ministry have not 
committed about future meetings and therefore, the Committee express their 
doubts as to whether the current situation would witness any ch ange in future 

 5 
too in the absence of regular meetings. The Committee, therefore, would 
reiterate that a conscious effort is required to be made to pursue the NCR 
participating States and Central Ministries / Departments to take necessary 
steps to implement  its policies and proposals of Regional Plan 2021 and to 
develop the region to achieve its objectives. They are convinced that in order 
to improve the implementation of Regional Plan 2021, NCRPB should increase 
the frequency of Board meetings.  The Committ ee are also of the view that the 
projects in sub -regions plans should not be abandoned / withdrawn abruptly 
after the release of funds for the same by NCRPB, as this can be counter -
productive. To prevent this, the monitoring mechanism should be 
strengthened and made transparent and it must be ensured that only credible 
and viable projects are funded by the Board.   
 
Shifting of Industries and offices from NCT-Delhi 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
1.9 In their report, the Committee had observed as below: 
 
“There had been phenomenal growth of industries in Delhi from 26,000 units 
in 1971 to 137,000 units in 1999. Though there were recommendations in the Master 
Plan of Delhi -200l for shifting certain heavy and large, hazardous and noxious non -
conforming units from Delhi, there was hardly any progress in this regard. It was only 
at the intervention of the Supreme Court in the year 1996 and 2004, there seemed to 
be some attempts for shifting of categorized industrial units out of Delhi. The 
Regional Plan -2021 has s ince proposed allowing of only high -tech industries in 
Delhi. The plan has also proposed decentralization of whole -sale trading of plastic, 

 6 
food grains, steel, timber, etc. at locations outside Delhi and shifting of the public 
sector offices from the NCT -Delhi. According to the Ministry of Urban Development, 
out of the 11 Central Government offices and 36 PSUs identified for shifting to 
places outside Delhi, 6 offices and 14 PSUs are yet to be shifted. The Committee 
view this as a perfect example of how pla ns and proposals eventually lose their 
steam due to non -implementation. The Committee would expect the Ministry to fix 
responsibility for the non -implementation of those decisions. The Committee further 
desire that the Government must chalk out a specific timeframe for the shifting of 
remaining Central Government offices and PSUs from NCT -Delhi and ensure that 
they are shifted within the timeframe.” 
 
1.10 The Government have replied as below: 
 
 “The Regional Plans -2001 & 2021 for National Capital Region sti pulates 
policies on shifting of offices from Delhi with a view to providing a balanced and 
regulated development of the Region. 
 
A. Public Sector Undertakings (PSU) 
 
 
 Regional Plans -2001 & 2021 provides that the Public Sector Offices should 
be allowed to retain only very small establishments to cater for ministerial and liaison 
functions.  The rest of the establishments should be shifted out of NCT -Delhi.  No 
new office spaces should be created in newly developed community, district or sub -
city and city ce nters.  The Central Government and any other organization, body or 
authority requiring additional space should be allowed to do so only outside NCT -
Delhi and beyond in Counter Magnet Areas(CMAs).  Relocation and expansion of 

 7 
Govt. offices/PSU‟s which need to perform such ministerial/protocol and liaison 
functions which make it incumbent upon them to be located in Delhi alone should be 
allowed to be located in the Central NCR towns.  The opening of new Govt. 
offices/PSU‟s or expanding the existing ones shoul d be encouraged in the rest of 
NCR/CMAs outside NCR. 
 
 In the year 1986 a high -powered committee was setup under the 
Chairmanship of the Cabinet Secretary which recommended 24 Public Sector 
Undertakings to be shifted out of Delhi which was approved by the Cabinet 
Committee on Accommodation.  Later on 12 other Public Sector Undertakings were 
identified for shifting after 1988.   Thus, the actual number of PSU offices to be 
shifted as per post 1988 list is 12 only.  Therefore, in total 36 identified offices o f 
Public Sector Undertakings were to be shifted outside Delhi. 
 
 Of the 36 offices of PSU‟s(Pre -1988:24 and post -1988:12) identified for 
shifting outside Delhi, 20 have already been shifted, 2 have been permitted to 
continue in Delhi and 14 identified PSU‟s are yet to be shifted from Delhi.   
 
B. Government Offices 
 
 The Regional Plans-2001 & 2021 provides that the main criterion for location 
of offices in the Capital should be that they perform ministerial functions, protocol 
functions or liaison functions , which, by their nature cannot be performed anywhere 
else except in the National Capital.  The existing offices, which do not perform any of 
the above functions, should be identified and shifted from NCT-Delhi.  
1.11 The  Committee deplore the fact that t wo decades have passed since 36 
PSUs offices were identified for shifting out of NCT -Delhi and yet, till date only 

 8 
20 establishments have actually been shifted. The Committee are in dark 
about most of other cases too as the Ministry have not provided the a ctual 
status of shifting of 11 PSUs to them. Moreover, what is particularly surprising 
to the Committee, w.r.t. the list of Government offices identified to be shifted 
out, is that one of such offices is the Department of Publication, an office of 
the Ministry of Urban Development itself. The Committee fail to comprehend 
as to why its shifting has been kept on hold when it does not perform any 
Ministerial or protocol function to justify its continuation in Delhi. The 
Committee would like to know the grounds  on which the continuation of 
Department of Publication is being considered by the Ministry of Urban 
Development. Besides, as some of the Government offices have approached 
the Cabinet Committee on Accommodation (CCA) against shifting, the 
Committee would like to be apprised as to whether the earlier decision to shift 
them out was approved by CCA, as was the case with PSUs. Overall, the 
Committee find it quite distressing that the Ministry have not been able to 
resolve issues regarding shifting of identifie d offices of the Central 
Government and PSUs from NCT- Delhi to outside Delhi.   They would impress 
upon the Government to make concerted efforts to speed up the process 
without further loss of time and chalk out specific time frame to complete the 
process expeditiously.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 9 
Need to make NCR a unified area in economic terms 
  
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
1.12 The Committee had noted as below: 
 
 
“As pointed out by the Regional Plan -2021, one of the main problems 
confronting the development of NCR is th e lack of uniformity in tax rates for various 
commodities and services in the constituent States which, in turn, leads to 
concentration of trade, Industry and services in Delhi. The Committee are of the firm 
view that there is a need to remove the fiscal b arriers and make NCR as a unified 
area in economic terms. The Committee would urge expeditious steps to address 
this issue.”  
 
1.13  The Government have replied as under: 
 
 
“The policy related to uniform taxes in the National Capital Region is to be 
enforced by the Ministry of Finance.  Initial steps have been taken by the Ministry of 
Finance, Govt. of India(GOI) to introduce VAT in the country with minimum floor 
rates of taxes.  It allows the States to keep higher VAT in their States in comparison 
to Delhi  and vice -versa.  Ministry of Finance, GOI and the State Finance 
Departments of the constituent States of NCR will also have to address this issue.”  
 
 
1.14 The Committee are of the view that though the policy related to uniform 
taxes in the National Capit al Region (NCR) is to be enforced by the Ministry of 
Finance and State Finance Departments by the constituent States of the NCR, 
the NCR Planning Board, in conformity with the Regional Plan 2021, should 
pursue the matter vigorously with the Ministry of Fin ance and State Finance 

 10 
Departments of the constituent States for uniformity of  ‘VAT’ rates in National 
Capital Region so as to make NCR a unified area in economic terms. The 
Committee feel that uniformity in ‘VAT’ rates in the NCR region would 
encourage b usiness establishments to shift out of the NCT -Delhi to set up 
businesses in the NCR region without suffering any financial loss. Also, the 
removal of fiscal barriers would not only result in harmonious and balanced 
development of the NCR region but also i n decongestion of trade, industry 
and services in NCT – Delhi. The Committee trust that the Government would  
take favourable steps expeditiously to address these issues.  
 
Preparation of Sub-Regional Plans by the constituent States 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
 
1.15 The Committee had noted as below: 
 
“As for the Regional Plan -2021, the Committee are given to understand that 
even three years after the notification of the Regional Plan – 2021, no participating 
States have prepared their Sub -regional plan.  It is only in July, 2008 that UP, 
Haryana and Rajasthan are stated to have initiated steps for preparation of Sub -
regional Plans. It is learnt that the Delhi Government has not yet started the process. 
The Committee urge that the State Governments should n ot be found wanting in this 
respect and should take expeditious steps to prepare their sub -regional plans in 
compliance with the NCRPB Act.”  
 
 
 
 

 11 
 
 
 
 
1.16 The Government have replied as under: 
  
“The directions of the Hon‟ble Committee have been conveyed t o the NCR 
constituent State Governments for compliance.”  
 
1.17 The Committee are not satisfied with the one -line reply of the Ministry. 
They are particularly anguished over the careless attitude of the Government 
of Delhi, where NCRPB has its headquarters , as the process of preparing the 
Sub-Regional Plan has not even been initiated by them. The Committee feel 
that NCT -Delhi, being in dire need of a plan to decongest the city, should 
ideally have led the way, which, however, is not the case at present. The  
Committee feel that the NCRPB has sufficient powers under the NCRPB Act, 
1985 to impress upon the constituent States to prepare their Sub -Regional 
Plans in conformity with the Regional Plan 2021 at the earliest so as to avoid 
lopsided and haphazard growth  in the National Capital Region. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate that all out efforts should be made to pursue 
and ensure that the State Governments prepare their Sub -Regional plans well 
in time.   
 
 
 

 12 
 
 
Budgetary Support to NCRPB 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
  
1.18 The Committee had noted as below: 
 
 
“The Committee agree with the plea of the Ministry of Urban Development 
that in order to play a more effective role with the ultimate objective of translating the 
vision of the NCR to develop as a region of global excellence into actual reality, the 
NCR Planning Board needs to substantially scale up its operations by undertaking 
financing large infrastructural projects. Due to resource constraints, NCRPB is not in 
a position to finance large level projects . The Committee regret to note that 
budgetary support to NCRPB was a meagre Rs. 100.00 crore during 2007 -08 and 
even this amount was reduced to Rs. 50.00 crore in 2008-09. The Committee expect 
the Government to provide sufficient funds to the Board to  enable it to discharge its 
functions effectively.  The Committee in this connection note that the Board has 
planned to raise about Rs. 9,000.00 crore from other sources such as loan from 
ADB/World Bank and market borrowings. The Committee believe that with the 
highest credit rating of the Board, it should be possible to generate adequate funds 
from the aforesaid sources.” 
 
1.19 The Government have replied as below: 
“(i)  The projects identified by NCRPB for being financed during the 11 th Plan 
(2007-12) involve a total investment outlay of Rs. 15,000 crore which involves 

 13 
loan component of about of Rs. 11000 crore . In order to achieve the 11 th 
Plan targets, the Board is making all-out efforts to step up its financial support 
to infrastructure projects in the NCR a nd Counter Magnet Areas. In order to 
extend loan assistance of Rs. 11000 crore as proposed above, substantial 
financial resources would have to be arranged by the Board through higher 
budgetary allocations for the NCRPB and/or by raising funds from other 
sources viz. multi -lateral funding and capital market. Accordingly, the Board 
had sought enhanced budgetary allocation of Rs. 2987 crore (Rs. 775 crore 
for NCRPB and another Rs. 2212 crore for grants -in-aid to be passed on to 
the borrowing Govts/agencies) during 11th Plan.    
 
(ii)  As against the grant requirement of Rs. 2987 crore, as above, the gross 
budgetary support during 11th Plan period has been limited to Rs. 900 crore 
only.  Budgetary support in BE 2008 -09 is only Rs. 50 crore.  As this 
amount is     too meagre to finance infrastructure projects in the National 
Capital Region, the Board requested this Ministry to consider higher 
plan grant of Rs 150 crore in the RE for the year 2008 -09. For the BE 
2009 -10, Board has requested for an allocation of R s. 250 crore. This fund 
requirement of the Board has been projected accordingly. However 
considering meager allocation during current financial year and in view of 
specific action point, requirement of the Board to the tune of Rs.55 crore  
was projected to  Budget Division of this Ministry in March 2008 and this 
was also taken up by Secretary(UD) with Secretary(Planning Commission) 
demi officially  on 11 th Feb. 2008. Ministry‟s request for higher allocation 

 14 
has not been considered by the Ministry of Finance on finalization of RE 
proposals for 2008 -09. 
 
(iii) In order to meet financing needs as per 11th Plan proposals, NCRPB will have 
to look for other sources of funds such as loans from multi -lateral aid 
agencies and/or market borrowings to the extent of Rs. 9000 crore as against 
Rs. 6850 crore proposed in plan proposals.  The borrowing of additional 
amount will, however, have negative impact on the cost of funds to the Board 
and may affect the Board‟s capacity to sustain higher level of operations. 
Therefore, NCRPB needs to be supported with higher level of budgetary 
allocation to sustain operation at higher level.   
 
iv)  Out of Rs. 9000 crore required to be raised from the market, the Board has 
proposed to raise Funds amounting to Rs. 4,000 crore each as loa n from the 
World Bank and the ADB and the balance from the capital market through 
issuance of Bonds. The purport of raising loan from multilateral funding 
institutions, duly backed by government guarantee, is to reduce our cost of 
funds in comparison to th e capital market for which the Government of India 
to guarantee the loan. Since all the funds are meant for development of 
Infrastructure Projects entailing a long gestation period and in many cases 
low to minimal returns in the case of water supply, sanit ation, sewage, 
drainage and internal road network Projects, the Government of India is 
considering to provide guarantee and waive the guarantee fee, so as to 

 15 
enable Board to keep cost of funds low and a meeting with the representative 
of Ministry of Finance is likely to be convened shortly to resolve the issue. 
 
v)  The amount of fund to be raised from the domestic capital market would be 
likely to be around Rs. 1000 crore. However, in case loan from the multi -
lateral agencies does not materialize to the ex tent proposed, the Board will 
have to raise higher amount from the market.  
 
vi)  In view of the foregoing, Ministry of Finance, Govt. of India has been 
requested to permit NCR Planning Board for raising a loan of Rs. 4,000 crore 
each from the ADB and Worl d Bank in Multi -Tranche over a period of next 
five to seven years starting from 2008 -09 duly backed by Govt. Guarantee 
and also to consider waiving of Guarantee Fee as the funds are to be 
deployed for development of Infrastructure Projects in the National Capital 
Region, which entails a long gestation period and in many cases low to 
minimal returns particularly in the case of water supply, sanitation, sewage, 
drainage and internal road network Projects.  The issue of Govt. Guarantee 
for NCR loans is under process in Ministry of Finance.” 
  
 
1.20 In view of the Ministry of Finance’s non -consideration of the request of 
the Ministry of Urban Development for higher allocation for NCRPB, the 
Committee note that the NCRPB will have to look for other sources of fun ds 
such as loans from multilateral aid agencies and for market borrowings to the 
extent of Rs. 9000.00 crore to meet their financing needs as per the 11 th Plan 

 16 
period proposals.  In such a scenario, the Committee are in agreement with 
the view of the NCRPB  that the Government should at least provide guarantee  
and waive the guarantee fee so as to enable NCRPB to raise the requisite loan 
from the multilateral aid agencies and to keep the cost of funds low, which are 
to be deployed for development of infrastr ucture projects in the National 
Capital Region. As the matter is under process in the Ministry of Finance, the 
Committee hope that the Government would agree to provide guarantee and 
waive the guarantee fee to NCRPB.    
  

 17 
 CHAPTER II  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
       
 
 
Population deflection from NCT-Delhi to the rest of NCR 
 
Recommendation  (Para No.  2) 
 
2.1 The Committee are distressed to note that none of the policy parameters 
set out by the regional plan -200l to be realized in the three zones of National 
Capital Region viz. (i) NCT -Delhi, (ii) Delhi Metropolitan Area (DMA) excluding 
NCT-Delhi and (iii) The Rest of NCT could be achieved by the year 2001. The 
Regional Plan 2001 notified in the year 1989 ass igned a population of 112 lakhs 
to NCT -Delhi, 38 lakhs to DMA and 49 lakhs to the Rest of NCR by the year 
2001 with the aim of deflecting 20 lakhs people from NCT -Delhi to the Rest of 
NCR. The Census 2001 has, however, shown that the population of NCT -Delhi 
shot up to 138 lakhs as against the assignment of 112 lakhs. DMA could attain a 
population of only 28 lakhs as against the proposed population of 38 lakhs and 
the Rest of NCR could attain a population of just 28 lakhs as against the proposal 
of 49 lakhs. It is evident that the plan to deflect 20 lakhs people from NCT -Delhi 
to the Rest of NCR by the year 2001 has miserably failed. The Committee note 
that in order to synergise the planning of NCT -Delhi and Rest of the NCR, the 
Regional Plan 2021 has assi gned a population of 225 lakhs for NCT -Delhi, 164 
lakhs for Haryana sub -region, 49 lakhs for Rajasthan sub -region and 204 lakhs 
for Uttar Pradesh sub -region by the year 2021. The Committee hope that the 
NCRPB and the States concerned, taking note of the pa st failures, will take 
necessary steps to keep the population at the assigned level by 2021. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.2 It is submitted that the Regional Plan(RP) 2001 has achieved partial 
success. The decadal rate of population growth for Delhi which was consistently 
above 50% since Independence has declined to 47.02% during the decade 
1991-2001. The component of migration as a share of growth of population of 
Delhi has also come down from 45% in 1971 to 39.82% in 2001. Further, a 
recent Study has show n that the in -migration to NCR districts outside NCT -Delhi 
is 24.55 lakh as compared to in -migration to NCT -Delhi, which is 21.02 lakh 
during the decade 1991 -01. The NCR towns, particularly DMA (now, Central 
National Capital Region) towns have shown signif icant growth and have 
achieved about 76% of the population assigned as per RP -2001. Out of these, 

 18 
Faridabad achieved 105% and Ghaziabad achieved 99%. The priority towns in 
the Rest of NCR have collectively achieved about 58% of their assigned 
population. 
 
 Since the policies and proposals of RP -2021 will have to be implemented 
by the participating states, NCRPB is making all efforts to pursue the NCR 
participating States and Central Ministries /Departments to take necessary steps 
to implement the policies a nd proposals of RP-2021 and to develop the region to 
achieve its objectives. These include development of expressways & better 
connectivity in the region, development of metro & regional centres & new towns, 
model industrial estates and social & physical infrastructure in the region.  
 
 In order to monitor the effective implementation of the policies & proposals 
of RP -2021, an Empowered Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary, 
Urban Development, Govt of India has been constituted with the Chief 
Secretaries and other senior officers as members in order take decisions relating 
to various critical activities in NCR and inter -state issues. Further, Steering 
Committees under the Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary of the participating 
State with the Princip al Secretaries/ Secretaries of the concerned Departments 
as members have been constituted in the States of Haryana, Rajasthan and 
NCT-Delhi.  Govt. of UP is in process of constituting the same.  The first such 
meeting of the  
Steering Committee of Haryana and Delhi has taken place where issues 
regarding implementation of RP-2021 were discussed.   
 
 
 
Preparation of Sub-Regional Plans 
 
Recommendation  (Para No.  6) 
 
 
2.3 In terms of NCRPB Act, 1985 each participating State is required to 
prepare a Sub -regional Plan for the Sub -region within that State and shall be 
responsible for the implementation of the Sub -regional plan as finalized while the 
Sub-regional plans prepared by UP and Rajasthan were in consonance with the 
Regional Plan-2001, those prepared by Ha ryana and NCT -Delhi were not.  The 
Committee regret to learn that the Board‟s attempts to get the sub -regional plans 
of Haryana and NCT -Delhi modified to align them with the Regional Plan – 2001 
did not yield results.  There appeared to be indifference on the part of the 
Governments of Rajasthan and NCT -Delhi which smacks of violation of the 
NCRPB Act. The Committee wish to believe that this was not intentional.   The 
Committee hope that these State Governments will give no room for such 
misgivings in future and discharge their responsibilities under the Act without fail. 
 
 

 19 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 It is „Governments of Haryana and NCT Delhi which have not prepared the 
Sub-regional Plan 2001‟ and not the „Governments of Rajasthan and NCT -Delhi‟ 
which is violation of the NCRPB Act, 1985.  Therefore, this modification needs to 
be incorporated in the recommendations / directions of the report.   
 
 The views/directions of the Hon‟ble Committee have been conveyed to the  
Governments of Haryana and NCT-Delhi.  
 
   
 
 
Monitoring Mechanism 
 
Recommendation (Para No.  8) 
 
 
2.5 The Committee commend the setting up of Steering Committees recently 
by the Governments of Haryana and NCT -Delhi with a view to monitoring 
implementation of policies and proposals of Regional P lan-2021 in a time bound 
manner.  The Committee trust that UP and Rajasthan too will constitute the 
Steering Committees headed by the Chief Secretary as suggested by the 
NCRPB.  The Committee urge the Steering Committees to meet every quarter 
and ensure pr eparation of Sub -regional Plans within the framework of Regional 
Plan-2021 and ensure their effective implementation.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.6 Government of Rajasthan has constituted the Steering Committee. 
Government of U.P. is in the process of c onstituting the Steering Committee.  
The first such meeting of the Steering Committee of Haryana and Delhi has 
taken place where the implementation of RP-2021 were discussed.   
 
 The directions of the Committee have been communicated to the 
respective State Governments for necessary action. 
 
Implementation of Projects 
 
Recommendation  (Para No.  9) 
 
 
2.7 As on 31.3.2008, the NCRPB had reportedly provided financial assistance 
to 214 infrastructure development projects – (154 projects prior to the year 2001 
and 61 projects thereafter) with an estimated cost of Rs. 13,942 crore.  It is 

 20 
observed from the information furnished by the Ministry of Urban Development 
that though 154 projects had been sanctioned prior to the year 2001; only 110 
projects could be compl eted as on 31 st March, 2008.  It is obvious that there has 
been inordinate delay in implementation of a large number of projects.  Sadly, as 
many as 9 projects were abandoned/ withdrawn in UP region after release of 
substantial amount of funds by NCRPB, ei ther due to non -availability of land or 
due to some other reasons.  The Committee wonder how the Project Sanctioning 
and Monitoring Group in the Ministry of Urban Development sanctioned and 
released funds for such projects without ensuring adequate prelimi nary 
requirements. The Committee would await an explanation in this regard.  The 
Committee would also like to know the extent of delay in implementation of 
projects with reference to the original schedule of completion and the 
effectiveness of the monitoring mechanism in curbing such delays. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
  
2.8 As regards Committee‟s observations regarding delay in implementation of 
projects and withdrawal of 9 projects in U.P. region, following are submitted :  
 
 NCRPB sanctions only loan assis tance to State Governments and their 
agencies for the infrastructure projects in the NCR and its Counter Magnet 
Areas(CMA) towns, as submitted by them.  It does not prepare or implement any 
infrastructure projects on its own and the responsibility for proj ect implementation 
lies with the concerned state departments/agencies. However, taking cue from 
previous experiences with regard to delays in implementation due to issues 
related to land acquisition, clearances from various departments etc., the Board 
has now initiated an elaborate project appraisal process wherein empanelled 
National Institutes are mandated to appraise the project DPRs with respect to 
technical and financial parameters and other issues related to land and 
clearances.  In addition, the loan s are sanctioned and released subject to land 
availability and necessary clearances from respective authorities, thus ensuring 
adequate preliminary requirements prior to loan release.   The issue of projects 
being withdrawn due to land acquisition problems was also deliberated by Project 
Sanctioning and Monitoring Group(PSMG) at its 31 st meeting held on 22.10.03, 
and it was decided that NCRPB will grant loans to agencies once the notification 
under section 4 & 6 of the Land Acquisition Act is issued. 
  
 It is submitted that the Board is monitoring progress of implementation 
through periodical reports – monthly and quarterly progress reports submitted by 
the implementing agency and also verifies the reported expenditures and general 
progress on site prior to release of subsequent loan installments.  But the 
success of the project implementation primarily defends on the State Govt., since 
apart from requesting the State Authorities/Implementing Agencies for expediting 
the implementation process, NCRPB does not have a direct role.  
 

 21 
 As informed by the Board as on 31.12.2008, there are delays ranging from 
about one month to over 7 years (only in one case) in respect of 48 out of 119 
ongoing projects.  With regard to the extent of delay in implementation of projec ts 
with reference to original schedule of completion, it is submitted that as per 
extant procedure, the implementing agencies have to request for necessary 
extensions as applicable with appropriate reasons to the Board which are then 
taken up in the PSMG m eetings for approval.   The Group while reviewing such 
requests expresses its concern over delay and exhorts the State Govt. officials to 
complete the project within agreed time frame.  The subsequent loan installments 
are also not released if requisite pr ogress has not been made on the project.  It 
has also been noticed that in a few cases, progress on projects are held up for 
considerable time due to court cases. Notwithstanding the above, the 
responsibility of adherence to timeline primarily lies with th e State 
Government/Implementing Agency.   
 
 Further, in order to incentivise timely implementation of project, NCRPB 
has put in place a system of rebate of 0.15% on inte rest rates w.e.f. August, 
2004. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
2.9 The Committee obser ves that five projects pertaining to sewerage/Solid 
Waste Management have been completed and 23 are under implementation.  
There were reports in print media about Government agencies dumping garbage 
illegally on the green belt due to absence of garbage dum ping site in Gurgaon.  
The Committee hope that such reports are taken note of for immediate remedial 
measures, expeditious completion of the on -going projects and taking up of new 
projects, keeping in view the adverse impact of inadequacy of waste disposal  
facilities on the quality of life of poor urban dwellers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.10 Various reports in media and other representations with respect to Board 
assisted projects in NCR are duly taken note of and the respective state 
governments and imp lementing agencies are asked to take necessary action on 
the same.  Provision of sewerage and sewerage treatment project has been 
identified as major thrust area in RP-2021.   
 
 The Board is also monitoring the progress of sewerage and sewerage 
treatment projects, which have been sanctioned and is monitoring for their timely 
completion with the concerned state Governments.  
 
 
 
 

 22 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
2.11 A consultancy study, initiated by NCRPB, on 'Integrated Transportation 
Plan for National Capital Region to suggest integrated multi -model transportation 
system for the National Capital Region was expected to be completed by 
January, 2008. It appears that there has been delay in completion of the study. 
The Committee would await the outcome of the stu dy. Incidentally, the 
Committee learn that Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) would provide 
hassle free and seamless mobility to people in the vast and complex urban 
environment of the NCR. The Committee desire that the possibility of dovetailing 
ITS in the Integrated Transportation Plan be examined. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.12 Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) is normally used within a city and 
can be successfully implemented while preparing mobility plan / intra -city 
transportation plan fo r a city.  However, the possibility of use of ITS at regional 
level will be examined in consultation with experts on the matter. In case it is 
found suitable, it would be appropriately incorporated in the study.  The 
constituent States would be requested b y the Board to use ITS while preparing 
the mobility plan for their towns.   
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
2.13 The UP Government is reportedly in favour of a Unified Metropolitan 
Transport Authority (UMTA) for facilitating the development of multi -modal and 
multi-tier transport system in the NCR. It has been stated that the proposal will be 
examined by a Committee of Transport Commissioners. The Committee desire 
that the proposal should be examined expeditiously within a time -frame under 
intimation to the Committee. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.14 NCRPB has drafted the Reciprocal Common Transport Agreement for the 
„Contract Carriage‟ and „Goods & Stage Carriage‟ for unrestricted and seamless 
movement of vehicles in NCR. The final contract carriage agreeme nt was signed 
by all the NCR constituent States on 14.10.2008 after following the due process.  
The public notice of draft „Goods and Stage Carriage‟ Agreement has been 
issued by the constituent States of NCR.  This will also be signed after 
addressing to the public objections / suggestions.  This is a significant step in 
achieving the objectives of RP-2021.   
 

 23 
 Further, in order to facilitate multi modal public transport system in NCR, 
an approach paper for constitution of Unified Metropolitan Transport 
Authority(UMTA) is being prepared which would be discussed in the Committee 
of the Transport Commissioners/Secretaries of NCR constituent States. 
 
 
 
Frequency of meetings of NCRPB 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
 
2.15 The Committee are of the firm view that t he process of preparation of sub -
regional plans and implementation of regional and sub -regional plans would not 
have been in such a sorry state of affairs as brought out in the preceding 
paragraphs, had the NCRPB, consisting of among others, the Union Urba n 
Development Minister and the Chief Ministers of the participating States, met as 
frequently as mandated by the Statute. The Committee regret to note in this 
connection that not even a single meeting of NCRPB was held for over three 
years between 13.7.200 0 and 15.01.2004. Perusal of information pertaining to 
the recent past reveals that during the years 2005, 2006 and 2007, the Board 
has met just once in a year as against the statutory requirement of meeting at 
least once in every six months. Getting the s ub-regional and project plans 
prepared by the participating States and co -ordinating the enforcement and 
implementation of the plans are part of the mandates of the NCRPB. The 
Committee hope that in order to effectively discharge these functions and in 
fulfillment of the statutory requirement, the NCRPB will meet at least twice in a 
year in future. They further feel that NCRPB being a very high -powered body, 
needs to be accorded due importance and thus are of the opinion that ideally the 
Board should be headed by the Prime Minister. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
2.16 At times, it is difficult to organize Board Meetings as per the norms 
because of pre -occupation of Chairman and other Board Members, in particular 
of Chief Ministers/ Ministers.  Nonetheless, the d irection to hold meeting at least 
twice in a year has been noted for compliance in future.  
 
  
 
 Although existing arrangement with the Minister of Urban Development as 
Chairman of Board has been working satisfactorily, the suggestion that the Prime 
Minister as the Chairman of the Board will be taken-up during the next meeting of 
the Board.  
 

 24 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OB SERVATIONS, WHICH TH E COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
Budgetary support to NCRPB 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
 
3.1 At present NCRPB provides long -term loans up to 75% of the project cost 
to the implementing agencies for implementing infrastructure development 
projects. The Committee feel that in order to provide incentives to the constituent 
States to take up implementation of sub-regional plans vigorously, at least certain 
percentage of the project costs be given as grants, as proposed by the NCRPB. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.2(i)  The objectives and functions as defined in the NCRPB Act, 1985 are  
entirely focused on development of the National Capital Region . The Board 
provides soft loans for the projects which are prepared and submitted by the 
participating State Govts. / their implementing agencies for development of 
infrastructure in the NCR in  the area of basic infrastructure development; water 
supply, sanitation and sewerage, drainage, solid waste management, roads, road 
over bridges etc. as mandated under the Act. 
 
 (ii)  Since, the inception of the Board, and upto 2007 -08, an amount of Rs.82 5 
crore has been released by Govt. of India as budgetary support whereas, the 
Board has released Rs.3333 crore as financial assistance in the shape of loan 
out of the NCRPB Fund. To do so, the Board has been leveraging grants 
received to raise money from t he capital market as well as by recycling 
repayments of loans and interests by the Borrowers. 
 
(iii)  In order to provide incentive for implementation of Sub -regional plans by 
the constituent States,   Working Group on Urban Development for the 11 th Five 
Year Plan has recommended a grant component of 15% to be provided for 
infrastructure projects financed by the NCR Planning Board which do not receive 
grant under the JNNURM or any other scheme and accordingly, the Board had 
sought enhanced budgetary allocat ion of Rs. 2987 crore (Rs. 775 crore for 
NCRPB and another Rs. 2212 crore for grants -in-aid to be passed on to the 
borrowing govts/agencies) during 11 th Plan. Against this, an amount of Rs.900  
crore have been allocated by  the Planning Commission, as gros s budgetary 
support (GBS). 

 25 
 
(iv) The budgetary support is meagre and cannot be passed on as grant to the 
participating States, thus, the same has been / proposed to be utilized to 
leverage higher volume of funds in accordance with the investment plan 
prepared for each year to meet Board‟s financial targets.   
 

 26 
 
CHAPTER NO. IV 
  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY  THE COMMITTEE AND 
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION  
 
 
 
Realization of objectives of NCRPB 
 
Recommendation (Para No.  1) 
 
 
4.1 The National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRPB) was constituted in 
March, 1985 by an Act of Parliament for preparation of a plan for the 
development of the National Capital Region (NCR) and for coordination and 
implementation of such a plan. The National Capital Region comprises specified 
districts of Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan and the National Capital Territory 
of Delhi (NCT -Delhi). The first Regional plan prepared by NCRPB was the 
Regional Plan -200l whi ch was aimed to disperse the economic activities from 
Delhi and to deflect future in -migrants to Delhi. The Committee's examination of 
the National Capital Region Planning Board has revealed that these objectives 
have not been realized. There has been lack  of effective co -ordination in 
enforcement and implementation of plans. There had been no regular meetings 
of the NCRPB so much so that not a single meeting of the Board was held for 
over three years. A number of projects in sub -regions were abandoned/ 
withdrawn after release substantial funds by NCRPB. Though the Regional Plan -
2021 was notified as far back as in September, 2005, the participating States are 
yet to prepare sub regional plans. The Committee's conclusions and 
recommendations arising out of th e examination of these and other related 
issues are set out in the following paragraphs.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
4.2 Para-wise replies to the committee‟s conclusions and recommendations 
given in the report have been dealt with in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
 With respect to non -realization of objectives of Regional Plan following is 
submitted: 
 
 Implementation of a Regional Plan is a long drawn process and it takes 
many years to develop a region. The National Capital Region has a geographical 

 27 
area of 3 3578 sq. km which is almost equivalent to a medium size state.  It is 
86% of the geographical area of Kerala, 75.9% of the geographical area of 
Haryana and 66.67% of the geographical area of Punjab.  It is almost 23 times 
that of the geographical area of N CT-Delhi (1,483 sq km) and more than the 
combined geographical areas of the three states of Tripura, Nagaland and Sikkim 
(27,885 sq km). Looking at the comparison of the geographical areas, the budget 
allocation to NCRPB for development of NCR in the Centr al budget [which was 
about Rs. 63 crore on an average per year during Xth Plan] has been meagre for 
development of such a vast inter-state region.  It is also important to note that the 
Regional Plan is a multi -sectoral plan and is to be implemented by the  
constituent State Governments and Central Ministries through their various 
departments / agencies.  The Plan has to be implemented through consensus on 
various issues. However, though there are inter -state issues, the implementation 
of the Regional Plan has led to many benefits.   
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
4.3 For comments of the Committee please see Paragraph No. 8 of Chapter I 
of the Report 
 
 
               
Shifting of Industries and offices from NCT-Delhi 
 
Recommendation (Para No.  3) 
 
 
4.4 There had been phenomenal growth of industries in Delhi from 26,000 
units in 1971 to 137,000 units in 1999. Though there were recommendations in 
the Master Plan of Delhi-200l for shifting certain heavy and large, hazardous and 
noxious non-conforming units from Delhi , there was hardly any progress in this 
regard. It was only at the intervention of the Supreme Court in the year 1996 and 
2004, there seemed to be some attempts for shifting of categorized industrial 
units out of Delhi. The Regional Plan -2021 has since pro posed allowing of only 
high-tech industries in Delhi. The plan has also proposed decentralization of 
whole-sale trading of plastic, food grains, steel, timber, etc. at locations outside 
Delhi and shifting of the public sector offices the NCT -Delhi. Accordi ng to the 
Ministry of Urban Development, Out of the  11 Central Government offices and 
36 PSUs identified for shifting to places outside Delhi, 6 offices and 14 PSUs are 
yet to be shifted. The Committee view this as a perfect example of how plans and 
proposals eventually lose their steam due to non-implementation. The Committee 
would expect the Ministry to fix responsibility for the non -implementation of those 
decisions. The Committee further desire that the Government \ must chalk out a 
specific timeframe for the shifting of remaining Central Government offices and 
PSUs from NCT-Delhi and ensure that they are shifted within the time-frame. 
 

 28 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.5 The Regional Plans -2001 & 2021 for National Capital Region stipulates 
policies on shifti ng of offices from Delhi with a view to providing a balanced and 
regulated development of the Region. 
 
 
A. Public Sector Undertakings(PSU) 
 
 Regional Plans -2001 & 2021 provides that the Public Sector Offices 
should be allowed to retain only very small esta blishments to cater for ministerial 
and liaison functions.  The rest of the establishments should be shifted out of 
NCT-Delhi.  No new office spaces should be created in newly developed 
community, district or sub -city and city centers.  The Central Governm ent and 
any other organization, body or authority requiring additional space should be 
allowed to do so only outside NCT -Delhi and beyond in Counter Magnet 
Areas(CMAs).  Relocation and expansion of Govt. offices/PSU‟s which need to 
perform such ministerial /protocol and liaison functions which make it incumbent 
upon them to be located in Delhi alone should be allowed to be located in the 
Central NCR towns.  The opening of new Govt. offices/PSU‟s or expanding the 
existing ones should be encouraged in the rest of NCR/CMAs outside NCR. 
 
 In the year 1986 a high powered committee was setup under the 
Chairmanship of the Cabinet Secretary which recommended 24 Public Sector 
Undertakings to be shifted out of Delhi which was approved by the Cabinet 
Committee for accom modation.  Later on 12 other Public Sector Undertakings 
where identified for shifting after 1988.   Thus, the actual number of PSU offices 
to be shifted as per post 1988 list is 12 only.  Therefore, in total 36 identified 
offices of Public Sector Undertakings where to be shifted outside Delhi. 
 
 Of the 36 offices of PSU‟s(Pre -1988:24 and post -1988:12) identified for 
shifting outside Delhi, 20 have already been shifted, 2 have been permitted to 
continue in Delhi and 14 identified PSU‟s yet to be shifted from Delhi. 
 
B. Government Offices 
 
 The Regional Plans -2001 & 2021 provides that the main criterion for 
location of offices in the Capital should be that they perform ministerial functions 
protocol functions or liaison functions, which, by their nature cannot be performed 
anywhere else except in the National Capital.  The existing offices, which do not 
perform any of the above functions, should be identified and shifted from NCT -
Delhi. A list indicating the present status of the offices identified for shifting  out of 
Delhi is also annexed.  
 
 

 29 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
4.6 For comments of the Committee Please see Paragraph  No. 11  of   
Chapter- I of the Report 
 
 
Need to make NCR a unified area in economic terms 
 
Recommendation (Para No.  4) 
 
 
4.7 As pointed out  by the Regional Plan -2021, one of the main problems 
confronting the development of NCR is the lack of uniformity in tax rates for 
various commodities and services in the constituent States which, in turn, leads 
to concentration of trade, Industry and serv ices in Delhi. The committees are of 
the firm view that there is a need to remove the fiscal barriers and make NCR as 
a unified area in economic terms. The Committee would urge expeditious steps 
to address this issue.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.8 The policy related to uniform taxes in the National Capital Region is to be 
enforced by the Ministry of Finance.  Initial steps have been taken by the Ministry 
of Finance, Govt. of India(GOI) to introduce VAT in the country with minimum 
floor rates of taxes.  It allows the States to keep higher VAT in their states in 
comparison to Delhi and vice -versa.  Ministry of Finance, GOI and the state 
finance departments of the constituent States of NCR will also have to address 
this issue.  
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
4.9 For comments of the Committee Please see Paragraph  No. 14 of   
Chapter I of the Report 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.  7) 
 
 
4.10 As for the Regional Plan -2021, the Committee are given to understand 
that even three years after the notification of the Regional  Plan – 2021, no 
participating States have prepared their Sub-regional plan.  It is only in July, 2008 
that UP, Haryana and Rajasthan are stated to have initiated steps for preparation 
of Sub-regional Plans. It is learnt that the Delhi Government has not y et started 
the process. The Committee urge that the State Governments should not be 

 30 
found wanting in this respect and should take expeditious steps to prepare their 
sub-regional plans in compliance with the NCRPB Act.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
4.11 The directions of the Hon‟ble Committee have been conveyed to the NCR 
constituent State Governments for compliance.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
4.12 For comments of the Committee Please see Paragraph  No. 17 of   
Chapter I of the Report 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.16) 
 
 
4.13 The Committee agree with the plea of the Ministry of Urban Development 
that in order to play a more effective role with the ultimate objective of translating 
the vision of the NCR to develop as a region of global excellence into actual 
reality, the NCR Planning Board needs to substantially sca1e up its operations by 
undertaking financing large infrastructural projects. Due to resource constraints, 
NCRPB is not in a position to finance large level projects. The Committee regret 
to note that bud getary support to NCRPB was a meagre Rs. 100 crore during 
2007-08 and even this amount was reduced to Rs. 50 crore in 2008 -09. The 
Committee expect the Government to provide sufficient funds to the Board to 
enable it to discharge its functions effectively.  The Committee in this connection 
note that the Board has planned to raise about Rs. 9,000 crore from other 
sources such as loan from ADB/World Bank and market borrowings. The 
Committee believe that with the highest credit rating of the Board, it should be  
possible to generate adequate funds from the aforesaid sources. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
4.14(i)  The projects identified by NCRPB for being financed during the 11 th 
Plan (2007 -12) involve a total investment outlay of Rs. 15,000 crore which 
involves loan component of about of Rs. 11000 crore . In order to achieve the 
11th Plan targets, the Board is making all -out efforts to step up its financial 
support to infrastructure projects in the NCR and Counter Magnet Areas. In order 
to extend loan assistance of Rs. 11000 crore as proposed above, substantial 
financial resources would have to be arranged by the Board through higher 
budgetary allocations for the NCRPB and/or by raising funds from other sources 
viz. multi-lateral funding and capital market. According ly, the Board had sought 
enhanced budgetary allocation of Rs. 2987 crore (Rs. 775 crore for NCRPB and 

 31 
another Rs. 2212 crore for grants -in-aid to be passed on to the borrowing 
Govts/agencies) during 11th Plan.    
 
(ii)  As against the grant requirement of Rs. 2987 crore, as above, the gross 
budgetary support during 11th Plan period has been limited to Rs. 900 crore 
only.  Budgetary support  in BE 2008 -09 is only Rs. 50 crore.  As  this    
amount      is     too         meagre   to     finance  
infrastructu re projects in the National Capital Region, the Board requested 
this Ministry to consider higher plan grant of Rs 150 crore in the RE for the 
year 2008 -09. For the BE 2009 -10, Board has requested for an allocation of 
Rs. 250 crore. This fund requirement of  the Board has been projected 
accordingly. However considering meager allocation during current financial 
year and in view of specific action point, requirement of the Board to the tune 
of Rs.55 crore  was projected to Budget Division of this Ministry in M arch 2008 
and this was also taken up by Secretary(UD) with Secretary(Planning 
Commission) demi officially  on 11 th Feb. 2008. Ministry‟s request for higher 
allocation has not been considered by the Ministry of Finance on finalization of 
RE proposals for 20 08-09. 
 
(iii) In order to meet financing needs as per 11 th Plan proposals, NCRPB will 
have to look for other sources of funds such as loans from multi -lateral aid 
agencies and/or market borrowings to the extent of Rs. 9000 crore as against Rs. 
6850 crore proposed in plan proposals.  The borrowing of additional amount will, 
however, have negative impact on the cost of funds to the Board and may affect 
the Board‟s capacity to sustain higher level of operations. Therefore, NCRPB 
needs to be supported with high er level of budgetary allocation to sustain 
operation at higher level.   
 
iv)  Out of Rs. 9000 crore required to be raised from the market, the Board has 
proposed to raise Funds amounting to Rs. 4,000 crore each as loan from the 
World Bank and the ADB and the balance from the capital market through 
issuance of Bonds. The purport of raising loan from multilateral funding 
institutions, duly backed by government guarantee, is to reduce our cost of funds 
in comparison to the capital market for which the Governm ent of India to 
guarantee the loan. Since all the funds are meant for development of 
Infrastructure Projects entailing a long gestation period and in many cases low to 
minimal returns in the case of water supply, sanitation, sewage, drainage and 
internal road network Projects, the Government of India is considering to provide 
guarantee and waive the guarantee fee, so as to enable Board to keep cost of 
funds low and a meeting with the representative of Ministry of Finance is likely to 
be convened shortly to resolve the issue. 
 
v)  The amount of fund to be raised from the domestic capital market would 
be likely to be around Rs. 1000 crore. However, in case loan from the multi -
lateral agencies does not materialize to the extent proposed, the Board will have 
to raise higher amount from the market.  

 32 
 
vi)  In view of the foregoing, Ministry of Finance, Govt. of India has been 
requested to permit NCR Planning Board for raising a loan of Rs. 4,000 crore 
each from the ADB and World Bank in Multi -Tranche over a period of next five to 
seven years starting from 2008 -09 duly backed by Govt. Guarantee and also to 
consider waiving of Guarantee Fee as the funds are to be deployed for 
development of Infrastructure Projects in the National Capital Region, which 
entails a long g estation period  and in many cases low to minimal returns 
particularly in the case of water supply, sanitation, sewage, drainage and internal 
road network Projects.  The issue of Govt. Guarantee for NCR loans is under 
process in Ministry of Finance.  
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
4.15 For comments of the Committee please see Paragraph No. 20 of Chapter I 
of the Report. 
 

 33 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Development of Counter-Magnet Areas 
 
Recommendation (Para No.  5) 
 
  
5.1 In order to achieve the objectives of Regional Plan, certain cities in the 
constituent States outside NCR have been identified as „Counter Magnet Areas‟ 
which could act as regional growth centres.   Under the Regional Plan  2001, five 
Counter-Magnet Areas were identified, namely, Hissar (Haryana), Bareilly (Uttar 
Pradesh), Kota (Rajasthan), Patiala (Punjab) and Gwalior (Madhya Pradesh). 
Out of 13 projects sanctioned for these cities, 4 projects were in Gwalior, 3 in 
Patiala and 2 each in Kota, Bareilly and Hissar.  A study commissioned by the 
NCRPB to review the Counter-Magnet Area development strategy has reportedly 
been completed.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
recommendations of the study and the progress in implementation thereof.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
5.2 NCRPB has informed that the study has been completed.  The study 
report has since been examined by the Secretariat of the NCRPB.  The 
recommendations made in the study report will be placed before the Board for its 
consideration during the next meeting of the Board. Once the recommendations 
are accepted by the Board, necessary action will be taken into implement the 
same.   
 
 
Inter-State issues 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
 
5.3 According to the Go vernment of Haryana, the inter -State issues between 
Delhi and Haryana pertaining to road connectivity, rail connectivity and water 
sharing were not getting resolved despite interaction at various levels. The 
Committee in this connection note that there are as many as three Committees to 
address inter -State issues. These are (i) Empowered Committee headed by 
Urban Development Secretary, (ii) Committee chaired by the Planning 

 34 
Commission Secretary and (iii) A Committee of Group of Secretaries under the 
Cabinet Secretary. The Committee would like to know the role and responsibility 
of each of these Committees, the number and dates of meetings held, the issues 
raised and discussed and the issues remaining unresolved, stating the duration 
of pendency, the reasons for delay in addressing the issues and whether the 
NCRPB ever considered those issues.  The Committee strongly believe that 
NCRPB being a very high powered body could carry conviction and amicably 
resolve all inter-State issues. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
5.4 Committee wise information sought is as follows:  
 
i) Empowered Committee  
   
 The Empowered Committee was constituted by the NCR Planning Board 
as per the decision taken in the 29 th Board Meeting held on 24.05.06 under the 
Chairmanship of Minister of U rban Development with a view to taking decisions 
about critical activities essential for making the National Capital Region a Region 
of global excellence. The Committee is Chaired by Secretary (UD) and following 
are the members: 
 
 Chief Secretary, Govt. of Haryana   
 Chief Secretary, Govt. of Rajasthan  
 Chief Secretary, Govt. of NCT of Delhi 
 Secretary, Housing Deptt., Govt. of U.P.  
 Member Secretary, NCRPB, Member Secretary 
 
 
 Terms of the reference of the Committee are as follows: 
 
i) Coordination amongst the c onstituents of the Board with regard to solving 
inter-state problems; 
ii) Development of large inter-state infrastructure projects; 
iii) Responding effectively to major events organized in Delhi from time to time like 
the Common-wealth Games 2010; and 
iv) Developing in novative models for public -private partnership with the 
cooperation of the constituent States. 
 
 So far, two meetings of the Empowered Committee have been held.  The 
Empowered Committee constituted a Committee of Transport 
Commissioners/Secretaries of the NCR States which has been able to pursue 
the signing of bilateral agreement between NCR States and Reciprocal Common 
Transport Agreement for Contract Carriage and State & Goods Carriage.  The 
bilateral agreements and the Contract Carriage Agreement of Reci procal 

 35 
Common Transport Agreement have been signed.  The process for Stage & 
Goods Carriage of Reciprocal Common Transport Agreement is in progress.   
 
 The other issue which was pursued is availability of CNG in NCR.  Ministry 
of Petroleum & Gas has constituted a regulator to look into the matter.   
 
 The Committee has recommended to extend the Metro Rail to Noida, 
Gurgaon, Faridabad, Ghaziabad & Bahadurgarh.   
 
 The Committee has also taken -up the issue of Delhi -Meerut Expressway 
with Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways.  That Ministry has agreed 
to construct this Expressway.   
 
 
 
New Delhi;  
 5th January, 2010 
 15 Pausa, 1931(Saka) 
SHARAD YADAV,  
Chairman, 
Standing Committee on  
Urban  Development 
 
 

 36 
 
APPENDEIX I 
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT(2009-2010) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON TUESDAY, 
5th JANUARY2010 
 
 The Committee sat from 1530 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Room No. „B‟, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Sharad Yadav - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Parveen Singh Aron 
3. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa 
4. Shri Ambica Banerjee 
5. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
6. Sk. Saidul Haque 
7. Shri Ramesh Kumar 
8. Shri Sonawane Pratap Narayanrao 
9. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
10. Shri Adagooru H. Vishwanath 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
11. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
12. Shri Surendra Motilal Patel 
13. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki 
14. Shri Amir Alam Khan 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri K.D. Muley   - Director 
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda  - Additional Director 
4. Ms. Amita Walia   - Under Secretary 
 
 

 37 
2. At the outset, the Ch airman welcomed the members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee took up the consideration of the draft report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in their Thirty Fifth 
Report (14 th Lok Sabha) on the subject „Nation al Capital Region Planning Board‟ 
(NCRPB) relating to the Ministry of Urban Development and adopted the same 
without any modification.  
3. Thereafter,  the Committee took up for consideration the draft report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the recommend ations contained in their Thirty 
Seventh Report (14 th Lok Sabha) on the subject „Urban Transport‟ relating to the 
Ministry of Urban Development and adopted the same with slight modifications. 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise both the reports and 
present the same to the Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

 38 
APPENDIX  II 
 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY -FIFTH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN  DEVELOPMENT (FOURTEENTH LOK 
SABHA) 
 
 
I. Total number of recommendations            16 
 
 
II. Recommendations which have been accepted by the  
 Government               (Total 8) 
Para Sl. Nos. 2, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 14                          
     
Percentage of total recommendations           (50.00%) 
 
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not  
 Desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s 
 Replies                           
Para Sl. Nos. 15                (Total 1) 
        
 
Percentage to total recommendations             (6.25%) 
 
IV Recommendations in respect of which replies of  
 the Government have not been accepted by the  
 Committee: 
 
 Para Sl Nos. 1,3,4,7 and 16                      (Total 5)  
 
Percentage to total recommendations             (31.25%) 
 
V Recommendations in respect of which final  
 Replies of the Government are still awaited: 
  
Para Sl No. 5 &13        (Total 2)       
 
Percentage to total recommendations                    (12.50%) 
 
 
  
 