 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
                                    (2012-2013) 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
                     MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN POVERTY ALLEVIATION 
 
THE STREET VENDORS (PROTECTION OF LIVELIHOOD AND 
REGULATION OF STREET VENDING) BILL, 2012. 
 
 
      TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2013/ Phalguna,1934 Saka 
 
 
 
 
 
23 


 
 
 
 
 
                                                TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
                    MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN POVERTY ALLEVIATION 
 
 
THE STREET VENDORS (PROTECTION OF LIVELIHOOD AND 
REGULATION OF STREET VENDING) BILL, 2012. 
 
 
  Presented to Lok Sabha on 13.3.2013 
 
                                  Laid in Rajya Sabha on 13.3.2013 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2013/ Phalguna, 1934(Saka) 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 C.U.D. No.: .77 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2010 By Lok Sabha Secretariat  
 
Publish under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by 
 
 

 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
                                    PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE………………………………………………….. (iii)   
INTRODUCTION…………………………………………. ………………………………  (v)
   
REPORT 
Chapter   I Background of "The Street Vendors (Protection of Livelihood and   
  Regulation of Street Vending) Bill, 2012……………………………………. 1 
Chapter    II Preliminary……………………………………………………………………… 6 
Chapter    III Registration of Street Vendors………………………………………………..  13 
Chapter IV Rights and Obligations of Street Vendors…………………………………...   18 
Chapter V Relocation of street vendors, their eviction and Procdure for    
  Confiscation of Goods…………………………………………………………   20 
Chapter VI   Dispute Redressal Mechanism………………………………………………..    26 
Chapter VII  Plan for street vending………………………………………………………….   28 
Chapter VIII  Town Vending Committee……………………………………………………..   30 
Chapter IX    Duties of Local Authority………………………………………………………    33 
Chapter X    Penal Provision…………………………………………………………………    35 
Chapter XI    Miscellaneous………………………………………………………………….    36 
ANNEXURE 
The Street Vendors (Protection of Livelihood and Regulation of Street Vending) Bill, 
2012…………………………………………………………………………………………………39 
                            
APPENDICES 
 
I Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Committee held on 6th November, 2012……  66 
II. Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Committee held on 17th     December, 2012…… 69 
III.  Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Committee held on  28th December, 2012…… 72 
IV. Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the Committee held on 5th March, 2013…………75
         
 
 (ii)  

 
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013) 
Shri Sharad Yadav         -        Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Praveen Singh Aron  
3. Shri Jayawant Gangaram Awale 
4.  Shri Ambica Banerjee  
5. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
6.  Shri Anant Gangaram Geete  
7.  Smt. Kaisar Jahan  
8.  Shri Kailash Joshi  
9. Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
10.  Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee  
11.  Shri Ramesh Kumar  
12. Shri Yadav Anjan Kumar M. 
13. Shri P.C. Mohan  
14. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
15.  Shri Sonawane Pratap Narayanrao  
16.  Dr. Ramshankar 
17.  Shri Ratansingh 
**18.  Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
#22. Vacant 
23. Shri Anil Desai 
24. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
25.  Shri Parvez Hashmi  
26. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
27.  Shri Avinash Pande  
28. Shri Ajay Sancheti 
29. Shri Amar Singh 
30.  Shri Khekiho Zhimomi  
*31.  Dr. M.S. Gill 
 
*    Dr. M.S. Gill has been nominated w.e.f. 27 December, 2012. 
**   Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patsani resigned w.e.f. 9 January 2013. 
#  Shri Shashi Bhushan Behera ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f.12 th  February,    
2013.  

 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain   -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S Malha   -  Director 
3. Smt. J.M.  Sinha   -  Deputy Secretary 
4 Smt. Rangamani N.   -  Under Secretary 
5. Shri Sumit Kumar Grover  -  Executive Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Urban Development having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the report on their behalf, present this           23 rd 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on "The Street Vendors (Protection of Livelihood and 
Regulation of Street Vending)Bill, 2012"  pertaining to the Ministry of  Housing and Urban 
Poverty Alleviation.  
2. The Street Vendors (Protection of Livelihood and Regulation of Street Vending)Bill, 
2012 introduced in Lok Sabha  on 6 th September, 2012 was referred to this Committee on 
10th September, 2012 for examination and Report thereon, by the Speaker Lok Sabha 
under Rule 331 E of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
 
3. The Committee obtained written information on various provisions contained in the 
aforesaid Bill fr om the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation . Written 
Memoranda on the provisions of the Bill were received from various NGOs/Organizations 
working for street vendors. 
 
4. The Committee had the briefing of the representatives of the Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Poverty Alleviation on the Bill on 6th November, 2012  and oral evidence on 28th 
December, 2012.  
 
5.  At the sitting held on 17 th December, 2012, the Committee heard the views of the 
representatives of National Association of Street Vendors of India (NASVI), Self Employed 
Women's Association (SEWA) and Centre for Equity Studies. 
 
6. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Re port at their sitting held on      
5th March, 2013. 
 
 
7. The Committee express their thanks to the officials of the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Poverty Alleviation  for placing before them the material and information desired 
from time to time in connection with examination of the Bill. The Committee would also  
thank all the NGOs for their valuable suggestions on the Bill. 
 
 
8.     For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold in the body of the Report.   
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  
5thMarch, 2013 
14 Phalguna, 1934 (Saka) 
SHARAD YADAV  
Chairman 
Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
 
(v)  

 
 
 
 
Report on 'The Street Vendors ( Protection of Livelihood and Regulation of Street 
Vending) Bill, 2012' 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
Background 
 
 The problem of unemployment continues  to persist in the country despite concerted 
efforts being made by the Government for generating employment through various schemes. 
The immigration of people from rural to urban areas further adds to this  problem in urban 
areas. Undoubtedly self- employment generated by poor populace in cities and towns 
provides an opportunity to  earn livelihood to those who are unable to get regular jobs in the 
remunerative formal sectors on account of their low level of education and skills .  These 
street vendors form a very important segment of the unorganized sector in the country 
besides contributing towards  urban poverty alleviation as a source of self -employment 
without major Government initiative. Street vending also provide s affordable as well as 
convenient services to a majority of the urban population. As per National Commission for 
Enterprises in the Unorganized Sectors(NCECUS) report based on 55 th round of 
NSSO(1999-2000) the estimated number of street vendors in urban areas was in the range 
of 17  to 25 lakhs. According to National Policy on Urban Street Vendors, 2009, street 
vendors are estimated to be  about 2 percent of the population  in several cities  and Women 
constitute a large segment of these street vendors in almost every city. Given the pace of 
urbanization and the opportunities presented through the development of urban areas, the 
growth of street vendors population is likel y to have an upward trend . It, therefore, becomes 
imperative that these vendors are enabled to pursue their livelihood in a congenial and 
harassment free atmosphere. However, street vendors are subjected to many difficulties 
which have been  enumerated by the Ministry of Urban Development as  given below: 
(i) Lack of recognition as part of formal system in town planning and municipal 
policies; 
(ii) Continuous harassment by police and civic authorities in the absence of legal 
protection; 
(iii) According to study of NCECUS , the average daily income  of street vendors is 
around Rs. 70 in most cities except in Patna. Women earn considerably less 

 
 
 
 
i.e. Rs.40 per day. The monetary problem is compounded by the fact that the 
vendors have scarce resources. For their trade they are to obtain credit by 
borrowing. Most of the street vendors are borrowing from money lenders who 
charge exorbitant interest rate as there is lack of institutional credit flow. 
(iv) Public authorities often regard street vendors as a nuisance and as 
encroachers of sidewalks and pavements an d do not appreciate the valuable 
services they render to the common man.  However, Hon'ble Supreme Court  
has ruled in Sodan Singh & others versus NDMC in the year 1989, as under: 
"If properly regulated according to the exigency of the circumstances, the sm all 
traders on the sidewalks can considerably add to the comfort and convenience 
of the general public, by making available ordinary articles of everyday use for 
a comparatively lesser price. An ordinary person not very affluent, while 
hurrying towards his home after a day's work, can pick up these articles without 
going out of his way to find a regular market. The right to carry on trade or 
business mentioned in Article 19(1) of the Constitution, on street pavements, if 
properly regulated, cannot be denied  on the ground that the streets are meant 
exclusively for passing or re-passing and no other use" 
 
1.2 In order to facilitate the street vending without being put to much hardship and 
harassment by civic bodies and police, Government came out with a National Policy on 
Urban Street Vending in the year 2004 for regulating the street vending which was revi sed in 
the year 2009.This revised policy aims at securing the rights of the citizens to have adequate 
means of livelihood as enshrined in Articles 14, 19(1)(g), 38(2), 39(a), 39(b) and 41 of the 
Constitution and fostering a congenial environment for the urban street vendors to carry out 
their activities without harassment from any quarter.  It also aims at providing a mechanism 
for regulation of street vending activities to avoid congestion on sidewalks and to ensure free 
flow of traffic on roads by a legislative framework to enable street vendors to pursue an 
honest living without harassment.  Accordingly, a model Street Vendors (Protection of 
livelihood and Regulation of Street Vending)Bill, 2009 was prepared by the Government of 
India and the same was also approved by the Union Cabinet on 23rd February, 2009 it was 
also circulated to all States for eliciting opinion while legislating on the subject. 
1.3 The Prime Minister addressed the Chief Ministers of States for effective action to 
implement the National Policy on Urban Street Vendors and for preparing Model Bill, by 

 
 
 
 
restructuring master plan laws, earmarking 'vending zones', 'restricting vending zones ' and 
'no vending zones' in Master/Zonal/Local plans and ensuring convergent delivery of schemes 
for the benefit of urban street vendors. Minister for Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation also 
addressed the State Chief Ministers in the matter from time to t ime – especially for the 
enactment of law on street vending on the lines of the Model Bill and in the spirit of recent 
judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court mentioned in para 1(iv) above. 
1.4 So far only 5 States namely Jharkhand, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Madhya 
Pradesh and Rajasthan have enacted their State legislation s. State of Chhattisgarh has 
made Bye -laws under Municipal Act. Few other States are  stated to be  working on the 
legislation but the progress is slow. 
1.5 Despite the wide proliferation of th e trades included in street vending, and its 
increasing acceptability in the social and economic fabric, there are very few proactive policy 
measures taken by States and Urban Local Bodies to protect the street vendors from the 
undue harassment from various quarters. Under the National Policy on Urban Street Vendors 
2009, States are responsible for creating a conducive framework for street vending through 
legislation as well as through implementation of the National Policy. However, a Central law 
on street vending is considered essential for giving a national recognition to the contribution 
of street vendors and to ensure uniformity in the legal framework for street vending across 
States.  
1.6 At the  same time, the Ministry had been receiving continuous rep resentations from 
the individual street vendors and their organizations and civil society to bring a Central 
legislation which would be uniformity and mandatorily applicable to all the States and UTs. 
The Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation took  up the matter with the Ministry of 
Law & Justice for legislative competency of the Government of India for Central legi slation on 
urban street vending and as per their advice, the proposed legislation may be covered under 
entries 20, 23 to 24 of List III of the Constitution, if the pith and substance of the proposed 
legislation is such.  
1.7 Learned Attorney General had also supported the opinion given by the Ministry of Law 
& Justice on the legislative competency of the Government of India on the subject. 

 
 
 
 
 
1.8 Following the opinion of Ministry of L aw & Justice and learned Attorney General, the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation drafted , 'The Street Vendors (Protection of 
Livelihood and Regulation of Street Vending) Bill, 2012, in con sultation with Legislative 
Department, Ministry of Law & Justice. National and Regional level consultations were  also 
organized on the subject of implementation of the National Policy on urban street vendors 
and legislative framework for street vending. T he draft Bill was circulated to States/UTs for 
comments. It was also discussed and deliberated during a national consultation of 
Housing/Urban Development Ministers of States and UTs on 28 th April, 2012, which was 
attended by 22 States, and received wide acceptance and support. 
1.9 Based on the opinion/views of Central Ministries/ Departments, States and other stake 
holders, the draft 'Street Vendors(Protection of Livelihood and Regulation of Street Vending) 
Bill, 2012 was finalized in consultation with the  Legislative Department. The Union Cabinet in 
its meeting held on 17 th August, 2012 approved the proposal of th e Ministry for the said 
enactment. After obtaining the approval of President of India, the Bill was introduced in the 
Lok Sabha on 6 th September, 2012   and referred to the Standing Committee on Urban 
Development by the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 10 th September, 2012 for examination and 
report under rule 331 E(b) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.  
1.10 The propose d Bill is aimed at protecting the livelihood right and social security of 
street vendors and regulating of urban street vending in the country and ensuring uniformity 
in the legal framework for street vending across States and Union Territories  and it inter alia 
seeks to provide for the following: 
(a) compulsory registration of every person intending to carry out street     
vending activities; 
(b) issue of  certificate of vending by the Town Vending Committee(TVC) and 
identity cards to street vendors; 
(c)  Appeal from decision of Town Vending Committee 
(d ) rights and obligations of street vendors; 
(e)  Procedure for relocation, eviction and confiscation of goods 
(f) redressal of grievances and resolution of disputes of street vendors; 

 
 
 
 
(g) making of a plan for street vending once in every five years; 
(h) framing of a scheme relating to street vending by the appropriate 
Government; 
(i)  Natural Market to be guiding principle for determining vending zones. 
(j) constitution of Town Vending Committee in each loc al authority with 
minimum forty per cent. representation of street vendors, out of which one third 
shall be women vendors and reasonable representation of the Scheduled 
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes, minorities and 
persons with disabilities; 
(k) certain duties of the local authority; 
(l) promotional measures for making available credit, insurance and other 
welfare schemes of social security for the street vendors; 
(m) penal provisions for street vendors including in vending without certificate of 
vending or contravening terms of vending  
 (n) street vendors not to be prevented by any person or police or any other 
authority from exercising their right to vend when carrying on street vending in 
accordance with the terms and conditions of certificate of vending. 
 
1.11 The Committee have solicited comments from various stakeholders viz ; Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, NGOs working in the field of street vending , namely, 
National Association of Street Vendors of India (NASVI), Self Employed Women's 
Association (SEWA), Nidan, Natio nal Hawker Federation (NHF), Faculty of Planning and 
Public Policy from CEPT university, Centre for Equity Studies, Centre for Civil Society  and 
also heard the views of some of the NGOs on various provisions of the Bill.  The Committee 
also took oral evide nce of the representatives of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation and sought clarifications on various iss ues that were brought to their notice by the 
various stakeholders.    
1.12 The Committee deliberated on the variou s provisions of th e Bill and commend the Bill 
for enactment with the modifications made by them in the succeeding chapters. 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
PRELIMINARY 
Clause 1 of the Street Vendors (Protection of Livelihood and Regulation of Street 
Vending) Bill, 2012 deals with short title, extent, commencement and provisions of Street 
Vendors (Protection of Livelihood and Regulation of Street Vending) Bill, 2012  and Clause 2 
gives definitions and meanings of certain words and expressions  used in various provisions 
contained in the Bill. The Committee will now deal with some of the provisions contained in 
these clauses : 
Clause 1(4) 
2.2 Clause 1(4) reads as under 
"The provisions of this Act shall not apply to any land, premises and trains 
owned and controlled by the Railways under the Railway Act, 1989."  
2.3 Regarding this sub clause , the representatives of National Association of Street 
Vendors of India(NASVI) during their deposition before the Committee submitted that: 
"Railway vendors have been excluded from the purview of the Bill.  Near 
railway stations or in the small -distance trains, vendors provide facilities to the 
passengers.  But their security finds no mention in the Bill.  Wherever possible 
such vendors should also be included in the purview of the Bill." 
2.4 The representatives of NASVI, further suggested that: 
"The clause about non - applicability of the provisions of the Bill on Railway 
vendors should be deleted" as such an exclusion would mean that the rights of 
many of the street vendors, who work in  and around railway stations and 
trains, would not be protected under this Act." 
2.5  In their written memorandum, NASVI also suggested as under: 
"A large number of urban poor are dependent on vending, be it near the railway 
stations or on the platforms or in the train. Due to lack of regulation, they 
remain exploited by (a) Municipal and Police authorities in front of the stations,   
(b) Stall License owners at the railway station who get stall allotted, but actually 
use the vendors to sell on very exploitative terms, (c) Railway commercial staff 
and Railway Police who harass and exploit the vendors providing very crucial 
service to the customers in pas senger trains without pantry car. Since railways 
provide a good opportunity to the urban poor, the proposed Act must remove 
the Clause 4 Section 1 of Chapter 1. The Railways should have control over 
their land, but it also needs to be allowed to provide dignified livelihood to urban 
poor through vending on their premises." 

 
 
 
 
2.6 On being enquired about  the desirability of this clause, the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Poverty Alleviation(HUPA), submitted as under: 
"The Ministry of Railways had during the cons ultation stage on the draft Bill 
stated that 'railways have a well established policy of granting licenses for 
vendors on the platforms/ trains for the benefit of the rail users'.  Railway 
premises are regulated under the Railways Act, 1989, and thus as re quested, 
Railway premises/ trains have been exempted from the purview of the Bill." 
 
2.7 The Committee note that  Clause 1(4) proposes that  the provisions of this B ill 
shall not apply to any land, premises and trains owned and controlled by the Railways 
under the Railway Act, 1989 . While acknowledging that the  railways have a well 
established policy of granting licenses for vendors on  the platforms/trains for the 
benefit of the rail users, the Committee  feel that there is lack of adequate regulation 
for vendors operating on Railway land and outside the stations and exclusion of such 
vendors from the provisions of this Bill duly expose them to harassment and 
exploitation by Railway authorities and P olice. The interest of these vendors who 
provide essential services to the passengers and the people residing near railway 
stations are required to be secured  in terms of provision s of the Bill . The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the issue of inclusion of street vendors on the Railway land 
outside the stations f or the purpose of applicability of the provisions of this Bill 
should be positively revisited by the Ministry before finalizing the Bill. Further, the 
Committee also feel that the vendors who provide essential services near bus stand, 
taxi stand, metro stations and inside the public  and private transport are equally need 
to be secured in terms of the provisions of the Bill. They desire that necessary 
provisions should be incorporated in the Bill. 
Clause 2(1)(d) 
2.8  Clause 2(1)(d) states that  
 "'Mobile vendors' means street vendors who carry out vending activities in designated 
area by moving from one place to another place vending their goods and services." 
 

 
 
 
 
2.9  The Committee feel that mobile vendors are most susceptible amongst the 
vendors. Therefore, they should be issued such a certificate/licence that categorically 
allow them to carry on their business freely. For this the Committee want if necessary 
they may be given more than one certificate of vending. 
Clause 2(1)(e) 
2.10 Clause 2(1)(e) defines natural market as: 
"―Natural market‖ means a market where sellers and buyers have traditionally 
congregated for more than a specified period for the sale and purchase of 
specific products or services and has been determined as such by the local 
authority."  
2.11 During deposition before the Committee, t he representative of  SEWA, stated as 
under: 
"SEWA feels that the Bill should have the thrust on natural market, because the 
natural market come into existence after a great effort.  Like the near a temple 
a natural market develops where vendors sell the things like flowers, incense 
sticks and garland etc.  In a new residential area slowly the number of vendors 
increases and leads to the formation of natural market over the years. Thus 
there is a compl ete process of formation of natural market.  If the natural 
markets are demolished it h as a very negative impact. If I talk about 
Ahmedabad city, a large number of infrastructure development program are 
being done there. Under - passes and over -bridges are being constructed, 
there.  But it never happens that vendors are asked about their probable site of 
relocation, where the natural market can be shifted.  Whenever, the natural 
market is demolished the income of vendor decreases drastically, say from 
rupees 100 it comes down to rupees 30 or 20 or even lower than that. The 
haats that existed in ancient India were nothing but the natural markets.  I want 
to emphasis about natural markets that these should be preserved, protected 
and regularized. But the Bill is not having any such clause.  It is easier to create 
a no-vending zone, but how to preserve natural markets has not been talked 
about in the Bill.  Our sincere suggestion is that clause pertaining to 
preservation of 'natural market' should be included in the Bill.  Second thing is 
that relocation of 'natural market' should also have a systematic plan.  At times, 
the street vendors are present here and there in the street. They should be 
made to sit in one line, this is what we call as natural market. Moreo ver, the 
relocation of natural market should be done within 15 metres of natural market.  
Also, the shifting/ relocation of the natural market should be done in one go, 
instead of doing it in parts."  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
2.12 Following Suggestion has been made by  the stake holders on the issue of natural 
market: 
―Natural markets will be central to determining vending zones, weekly markets, 
and holding capacity, and that the determination of natural markets should be 
done by Town Vending Committees, which are multi-stakeholder in their 
membership, and should be established by a transparent process which allows 
the participation and objections of street vendors. The demarcation of vending 
zones shall be based on the principles of natural markets, and the total a rea to 
be demarcated as vending zones shall be sufficient to accommodate all 
existing street vendors, and their natural growth in proportion to growth of urban 
populations.‖ 
The above suggestion was also endorsed by the representatives of NASVI, SEWA 
and Centre for Equity Studies during their briefing before the Committee. 
2.13 When enquired about the possibility of inclusion of Town Vending Committee while 
deciding the natural market and vending areas in such markets, the Ministry of Housing and 
Poverty Alleviation in their written replies submitted as under: 
"The Town Vending Committee is an integral part of the Bill, with responsibility 
towards implementation, as provided, and has a central role. The determination 
of natural markets by the local authority  is expected to be in consultation with 
the TVC, and the Bill should not cover all administrative and implementation 
issues". 
 
2.14 The Committee observe that the term 'natural market' is used in the Bill for such 
market where sellers and buyers have traditionally congregated for more than a 
specified period for the sale and purchase of specific products and service s and 
determined as such solely by the local authority. According to the Ministry of Housing  
and Urban Poverty Alleviation determination of natural markets by the local authority 
is expected to be in consultation with  Town Vending Committee  which is an integral 
part of the Bill and has a central role. Further, the Ministry has also expressed that the 
Bill should not cover all administrative and implementation issues . However, t he 
Committee feel that this issue is important which should not be left at the mercy of the 
executive and find place in the Bill itself. 

 
 
 
 
Clause 2(1)(J) 
2.15 Clause 2(1)(J) states as under: 
"Scheme means a scheme framed by the Government under section 40. A 
suggestion has been received to add in consultation with representatives of 
street vendors." 
2.16 When asked to furnish comments, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty  
Alleviation has stated as under: 
"The scheme under the Bill is provided to be framed by the Appropriate 
Government under section 40. However, it further states that the same shall be 
published in two local newspapers in such manner as provided by Rules. T he 
Government while framing the scheme is expected to consult the stakeholders, 
prior to finalization, and such administrative and implementation aspects need 
not be covered in the Bill."  
 
2.17 In the Bill everything has been left to the scheme. The stake holders viz;, NASVI, 
SEWA and Centre for Equity Studies,  have expressed their concern . The NASVI in their 
written memorandum, submitted to the Committee that: 
"The current bill leaves a lot with delegated legislation and it defeats  the 
purpose of a Cent ral law. Most of the issued are left to  the Scheme that is to 
be framed by the local authorities beginning with the manner of registration to 
the entire thing. Knowing the power relations at the City level, it is important 
that the Bill provides provision s ensuring that the Act shall 'protect the rights of 
urban street vendors and regulate street vending rather than prohibit and curb 
street vending." 
2.18 Further on the issue, the representative of Centre for Equity Studies, during their 
deposition before the Committee, stated as follows: 
"In a way the entire Bill is a kind of delegated legislation.  Many of the powers 
have been delegated to the Local Authorities and State Governments.  In this 
regard, our submission is to consult the representatives of the  street vendors 
while finalizing the scheme." 
 
 

 
 
 
 
2.19  On being asked why specific provisions cannot be incorporated in the Bill, the Ministry 
of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation in its written submission to the Committee states as 
under: 
"The Bill aim s to provide for flexibility in operation and implementation, as 
different States have different local conditions, and it would not be prudent to 
centralize all provisions, which may lead to implementation difficulties. Also, the 
Bill is aimed to provide o nly for the non -negotiable aspects, and details are to 
be provided through delegated legislation, taking into account local conditions." 
 
2.20 The Committee note that in the Bill  lots of powers have been left to the scheme 
to be framed by the appropriate Government under section 40  such as  final authority 
on issues like identification, registration and licensing of street vendors, identification 
of  natural markets and allocation of space based on the idea of natural market etc.  
The Committee appreciate the fact that the Government while framing the scheme is 
expected to consult the stakeholders prior to finalization of the scheme. However, they 
strongly disapprove the intention of the Ministry that in the name of flexibility in 
operation and implementation, the Ministry leaves  a lot with delegated legislation 
which defeat the very purpose of the Central law. The Committee are of the strong 
view that if specific provisions are not incorporated in the Bill , the Government may or 
may not consult the stakeholders. This will lead to confusion at various levels of the 
Government as a result the Street Vendors will suffer a lot. Moreover, the Committee 
feel that the 'scheme' is subjected to Parliament 's scrutiny only after it has been l aid 
but the provisions of the Bill could be scrutinized at the time of consideration of the 
Bill by the Committee. Therefore, the Committee want the Government to provide 
specific provisions in the Bill itself and use 'scheme' where its use is absolute 
necessary. 
Clause 2(1)(O) 
2.21 Clause 2(1)(O) states that: 
" Vending zone means an area or a place or a location designated as such by 
the local authority for the specific use by street vendors for street vending and 
includes footpath, side walk, pavement, embankment, portions of a street, 
waiting area for public or any such place considered suitable for vending 
activities and providing services to the general public." 

 
 
 
 
 
2.22 Suggestions from CEPT have been received to include the following words in clause 
2(1)(O): 
"vending zones means an area or a place or a location designated as such 
by the local authority, in  consultation with Town Vending Committee by local 
Committee, for the specific use by street vendors for street vending and 
includes footpath, side walk, pavement, embankment, portions of a street, 
waiting area of public or any such place considered suitable for vending 
activities and providing services to the general public". 
 
2.23 On bein g inquired about this inclusion of the above suggestion in the Act, the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, submitted in writing as under: 
"The TVC is an integral part of the Bill, with responsibility towards 
implementation, as provided.  Th e determination of vending zone by the local 
authority is expected to be in consultation with the TVC, which has a central 
role, and the Bill should not cover all administrative and implementation 
issues.  The definition of survey is not required as it has  been adequately 
detailed in the functions of the local authority, as provided in the Second 
Schedule, which is aimed at creating a database and preparation of a suitable 
plan for further vending activities." 
2.24 On being asked about extending civic facilities to the vendors, near the vending zone, 
the Secretary Ministry of HUPA during the briefing session stated: 
"As I had mentioned earlier, wherever we declare State Vending Zone, there 
municipal services are to be provided automatically. In return of that street 
vendors can be nominally charged for those facilities.  If there is any 
shop/stallage is being done, they should be provided with the facilities like 
lavatory, electricity and sanitation. The vendors can be charged for that on 
monthly basis." 
 
2.25 The Committee note the provision in this clause empowers the local authority 
to determine vending zone. The Committee note the reply of the Ministry on 
inclusion of Town Vending Committee that  local authority is expected to consult 
Town Vending Committee  in such cases .  The Committee find that the reply is  not 
free from ambiguity as the local authority may or may not consult the Town Vending 
Committee.  They see no reason why this  specific provision should not be reflected 
in the Bill and want the Ministry to act accordingly.  

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
REGISTRATION OF STREET VENDORS 
  
 Chapter II of the Bill deals with registration of street vendors and contains clauses      
3 to 11.  The Committee will now give their comments and observations on provisions 
contained in some of clauses of Chapter -II of the Bill.  The Committee will now give their 
comments and observations on provisions contained in some of the clauses of Chapter II of 
the Bill.  
Clause 3(2) 
3.2 The clause 3(2) states that: 
"Every application under sub -section (1) shall be made in such form and 
manner, accompanied by such documents and one time fees, as may be 
specified in the scheme." 
3.3 The provision of the Bill has not clearly spelt out the  documents needed and the 
amount of one -time fee while applying for street vending. When asked to furnish the 
comments on the this aspect, the Ministry stated :  
"This aspect has been left for the appropriate Government to determine, 
keeping in mind the local conditions."  
3.4 The Centre for Equity Studies has  raised the concern about the non - availability of 
domicile certificate and other documents with the street vendors  in their written submission 
as well as during their oral evidence before the Committe e.  In this regard, the Secretary 
Ministry of HUPA, stated as under: 
"The issue of supporting documents for registration has been left to the Local 
Governments. It is upto them to decide upon the document needed during 
registration. It can be Domicile certificate, Electricity Bill or Aadhar Card." 
3.5  The Committee note that certain documents are required to be submitted with 
the application for registration of street vendors.  Keeping in view the fact that most of 
the applicants are not literate, the Committee want they must not be asked to undergo 
cumbersome proced ure and only one of the easily accessible document s such as 
voter ID C ard/PAN Card/ Driving License/Aadhar Card/Ration Card/Electricity 
bill/Telephone bill etc., should be required.  The Committee want the Ministry to take 
this into account while framing rules in this regard.   

 
 
 
 
Clause 4 (1) 
3.6  The clause 4(1) of the Bill states that: 
"The registration of all street vendors who make application under section 3 
shall be made by the Town Vending Committee within such period, and in such 
manner, as may be specified in the scheme." 
3.7 The NGOs viz; NASVI and SEWA have suggested that initial registration and licensing 
process of the street vendors should be done on the basis of survey conducted by the local 
authorities. Also, the suggestion has been received that biometric data should be  the pre -
requisite for the registration.  
3.8  In this regard the National Policy on Urban Street Vendors 2009 states as under: 
"A system of registration of vendors/hawkers and non -discretionary regulation 
of their access to public spaces in accordance wit h the standards of planning 
and nature of trade/service should be adopted. The system as enumerated 
below: 
(a) Photo census of vendors: The Municipal Authority, in consultation with the 
Town Vending Committee (TVC) should undertake a comprehensive, 
digitalized photo census/survey/GIS Mapping of the existing stationary 
vendors with the assistance of professional organisations/experts for the 
purpose of granting them lease to vend from specific places within the 
holding capacity of the vending zones concerned. 
(b) Registration of Vendors: The power to register vendors would be vested 
with the TVC. Only those who give an undertaking that they will personally 
run the vending stall/spot and have no other means of livelihood will be 
entitled for registration. A person wil l be entitled to receive a registration 
document for only one vending spot for him/her(and family). He/she will not 
have the right to either rent or lease out or sell that spot to another person. 
3.9 When asked by the Committee about the survey based regis tration and licensing in 
the beginning of the implementation of the Act, and maintenance of biometric data at later 
stages, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"The Bill in Second Schedule provides for 'Duties of Local Authority' which 
apart from other things  provides for 'undertaking in consultation with the Town 
Vending committee, comprehensive digitalized photo census and survey of the 
existing number of street vendors with the assistance of such experts and in 
such manner as may be specified in the scheme,  for the purpose of 
accommodating street vendors within the holding the capacity of the vending 

 
 
 
 
zones.' Thus survey is aimed at creating a database and preparation of suitable 
plan for further vending activities.  Mandatory bio -survey though advisable, 
initially may lead to administrative and financial problems, for the ULBs.  
Moreover where Aadhar cards have been given, the same may be linked 
towards identification of street vendors." 
3.10 During briefing of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Allevi ation, the Secretary 
have submitted as under: 
"2 percentage of area to be allocated for street vendors will be reviewed every 
5 years period. The area so identified by Municipality and planning committee 
will be notified by concerned State Government so as  to avoid any arbitrary 
change identified in the location for vending by anybody." 
 
3.11 Regarding registration of all street vendors, the Committee are in agreement 
with the Ministry that bio -survey though advisable, initially may lead to administrative 
and financial problems for the ULBs. The Aadhar card may be linked towards 
identification of street vendors. However, the Committee desire that at the later stage 
the Municipal Authority in consultation with the TVC should undertake a 
comprehensive digitalized photo census/survey/GIS mapping of the existing vendors 
at the earliest. Moreover, the Committee are of the view that all the existing vendors 
should be invariably registered . However, if the number of applications are more and 
difficult to accommodate in a particular place, th en the local body in consultation with 
the TVC, may go for a lottery system.   Further, the Committee desire that in order to 
prevent unwanted rush for street vending a provision should be incorporated in the 
bill that only those w ho give an undertaking that they will personally run the vending 
stall/spot and have no other means of livelihood shall be entitled for registration. A 
person will be  entitled to receive a registration document for vending spot for him/ 
her (and family).H e /she will not have the right to either  allow or rent or lease or sell 
that spot to any other person.  
Clause 6(1) 
3.12 The clause 6 (1) states that: 
"Subject to the provisions of section 5, the Town Vending Committee or any 
officer authorized by the Town Vending Committee may, subject to such 

 
 
 
 
conditions and restrictions as may be specified in the scheme, issue a 
certificate of vending to every street v endor who has been registered under 
Section 4" 
3.13 In terms of Clause 6(1)(a)  certificate of vending would be issued by Town 
Vending Committee or its authorized Officer to the street vendors on their applications 
for the same.  However, no time frame has been prescribed for issuing such certificate 
after the submission of application . The Committee apprehend that in the absence of 
such provision, the Town Vending Committee may delay in issuing certificate of 
vending to the street vendors.  The Committe e recommend that a clear time period of 
one month should be mentioned in the Bill within which the certificate  of vending  will 
have to be issued by the Town Vending Committee. 
Clause 8  
3.14 Clause 8 states that: 
"Every Street vendor who has been issued certificate of vending shall pay such 
vending fee as may be specified in the scheme."  
 
3.15 Many stakeholders in their written submissions, wanted that the vending fee should be 
done away. 
3.16 In this regard the Ministry of HUPA in their written reply stated as under: 
"Vending is a business activity and ULB‘s are entitled to charge a fee for the 
facilities being provided. The determination of vending fees has been left to 
be determined by the scheme as per local conditions, which may vary from 
State to State." 
 
3.17 The Committee while agreeing with the views of the Ministry are of the opinion  
that the vending fee should be determined on the basis of type of street vend ing such 
as stationary v ending, mobile vend ing and any other category  and on the basis of 
types of city. They feel that this will ensure reasonableness to such vending fee being 
charged depending upon the nature and location of the market. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Clause 9 
3.18 Clause 9 states as under: 
" 9(1) Every certificate of vending shall be valid for such periods  as may be 
specified in the scheme. 
9(2) Every certificate of vending shall be renewable for such period in such 
manner and payment of such fees as may be specified in the scheme." 
 
3.19 According to the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Al leviation t he time period 
within which renewal of certificate of vending is to be carried out is required to be specified in 
the scheme. The implementation aspects have been appropriately left to the States. 
3.20 On this issue the National Policy on Street Vendor 2009 states that, 
"Registration should be renewed after every three years. However, a vendor 
who has rented out or sold his/her spot to another person will not be entitled to 
seek re-registration." 
3.21 The Committee are surprised to find  the time-line for renewal of the certificate 
of vending was provided in the National Policy on Street Vendors 2009 but completely  
left to the scheme under the present Bill.   The Committee strongly feel that in the 
absence of a specific provision, the local bodies may renew the certificate of vending 
as per their whims, which may lead to harassment of street vendors . The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the certificate of vending should be renewed every three 
years and a provision to this effect should be made in the Bill. 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER- IV 
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF STREET VENDORS 
Chapter III contains Clauses 12 to 17  the Committee have dealt with some of the se 
succeeding paragraphs. 
Clause 12 
4.2 Clause 12(1) states that: 
 "Every street vendor shall have right to carry on the business of street 
vending activities in the vending zones allotted to him in accordance with the 
terms and conditions mentioned in the certificate of vending and the scheme 
framed by the appropriate G overnment. Notwithstanding anything contained 
in sub-section(1), where any area or space, as the case may be, has been 
earmarked as no -vending zone, no street vendor shall carry out any vending 
activities in that zone." 
 
4.3 This clause deals with the righ ts of the street vendor.  Suggestion has been received 
from NASVI, by the Committee to include a new clause stating as under: 
"In case a registered vendor dies his legal heirs/nominee will have the right to 
continue the vending activity in allotted vending space." 
4.4 On being inquired by the Committee about their opinion the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Poverty Alleviation, submitted as under: 
"These matters of detail should be appropriately left to the scheme to be made 
by the appropriate Government." 
 
4.5  The Committee observe that clause 12(1 ) and ( 2) of the Bill give s right of 
vending by street vendors in the vending zone allotted to him/her as per specified 
terms and conditions.  It is, however, completely silent about the right of inheritance in 
case of death of original vendor.  According to the Ministry these matters have been 
appropriately left to the scheme to be made by the appropriate Government. The 
Committee feel that this is an important issue to be addressed  in order to ensure that 
legal he ir of the deceased vendor gets the vending rights  if he /she applies in this 
regard. Further, in case of serious illness or permanent disabilities of the vendors one   

 
 
 
 
of his/her legal heirs after obtaining the family consensus should get the vending 
rights and want the Ministry to provide this provision in the Bill. 
 Clause 13 
4.6 Clause 13 states that: 
"Every street vendor, who possesses a certificate of vending, shall, in case of his 
relocation under section 18, be entitled fo r new site or area, as the case may be, for 
carrying out his vending activities as may be determined by the local authority." 
4.7 In case of relocation, the street vendors are generally relocated where their goods are 
not in demand in the new market. There fore, the Committee and stakeholders were 
concerned about the hampering of business. Suggestions from NASVI, SEWA, CEPT, 
National Hawkers Federation and Centre for Equity Studies have been received that: 
"In case of relocation, attempts should be made to relocate vendors in natural 
market only which facilitate the carrying out their old businesses." 
4.8 When the Committee raised the issue of loss of business as a result of relocation of 
street vendor, the Secretary Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty All eviation submitted, 
during briefing meeting, as under: 
"Hon'ble Chairman Sir, all of the respected members have raised their concern 
about relocation of the street vendors from the places at which they have been 
vending since years. Members have also sugge sted that all the vendors should 
be permitted to continue at the same place.  The provision of space or area of 
street vending is reasonable and consistent with the existing natural markets. 
Then we have defined the natural market.  According to the definition, natural 
market means a market where sell ers and buyers have traditional ly 
congregated for more than specified period of time for the sale and purchase of 
specific product. This point has been incorporated in the Act in such a manner 
that it provides stability to the vendors by means of natural market" 
4.9 The Committee observe as per clause 13 a street vendor, on relocation is 
entitled for a new site or area for carrying out his/her vend ing activities which may be 
determined by the local authority. During the briefi ng session of the Ministry the 
Secretary has clarified the fact that the provision of space or area of street vending is 
reasonable and consistent with the natural market and this will provide stability to the 
vendors. The Committee desire that during the  relocation of street vendors attempts 
should be made to ensure that the street vendors carry on their own old business. 
Comment [B1]: (Sh.Arun Kr.Mishra cd.) 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER –V 
RELOCATION OF STREET VENDORS, THEIR EVICTION AND PROCDURE FOR 
CONFISCATION OF GOODS 
Chapter IV of the Street Vendors  (Protection of Livelihood)Bill, 2012 contains clause 
18 and 19. Clause 18 deals with relocation of eviction of Street vendors and Clause 19 deals 
with confiscation and reclaiming of goods. 
 Clause 18(1)  
5.2 Clause 18(1) states as under: 
"The local authority shall, having regard to public nuisance or obstruction of 
movement of general public caused by the street vendors, or for any other public 
purpose, relocate such street vendors in  such manner as may be specified in the 
scheme." 
 
5.3 It is suggested by Centre for Equity Studies  to replace the entire clause with the 
following: 
"Street vendors in vending zones shall not be evicted or relocated,  except in 
situations where(a) there are  serious law and order concerns, or(b) vending 
by the concerned street vendors has caused significant environmental 
damage or is an environmental hazard, or(c) vending by the concerned street 
vendors has resulted in aggravated public nuisance: Provided tha t the local 
authority shall invoke aggravated public nuisance only in consultation with the 
Town Vending Committee: Provided further that no provision of this law shall 
be understood to authorize the police or any other authority to confiscate the 
goods of any street vendor". 
 
5.4 When asked to furnish comments on the above suggestions the Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Poverty Alleviation stated as under: 
"The suggestion cannot be incorporated, as obstruction of movement of 
general public, public nuisance a nd consistent failure to comply with duties and 
obligations are important grounds for relocation or eviction as the case may be, 
for the overall benefit of all the street vendors." 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Clause 18(2) 
5.5 Clause 18(2) states as under: 
"Where the local authority is satisfied that a street vendor has consistently 
failed to comply with his duties and obligations under the Act or the rules and 
the scheme made thereunder, evict such street vendor in such manner as 
may be specified in the scheme." 
5.6 In connection with relocation and rehabilitation of street vendors, the National Policy 
on Urban Street Vendors 2004 states as under: 
"Street vendors are most vulnerable to forced eviction and denial of basic 
right to livelihood. It causes severe long -term hardship, impoverishment and 
other damage including loss of dignity. Therefore, no street vendor should be 
forcefully evicted. They wo uld be relocated with adequate rehabilitation only 
where the land is needed for a public purpose of urgent need. Therefore: 
a. Eviction should be avoided wherever feasible unless there is clear and 
urgent public need in the land in question. 
b. Where relocation is absolutely necessary, notice of minimum 30 days 
should be served to the concerned vendors. 
c. Affected vendors/ representative' involvement in planning and 
implementation of the rehabilitatiion project. 
d. Affected vendors should be assisted in their  efforts to improve their 
livelihoods and standards of living or at least to restore them, in real terms to 
pre-evicted levels. 
  e. Loss of assets should be avoided and if possible compensated. 
f. State machinery must take comprehensive measures to check and control 
the practice of forced eviction. 
No hawker/street vendor should be arbitrarily evicted in the name of 
'beautification' of the city-space. The beautification and clean up programmes 
undertaken by the states or towns should actively invo lve street vendors in a 
positive way as a part of the beautification programme. " 
5.7 In this connection the Ministry were asked to give their opinion on a suggestion that 
this clause be deleted since there is a provision under Sections 14 and 15 of the Bill. In this 
regard the Ministry replied that relocation of street vendors has been envisaged as an 
exception only in cases of public nuisance or obstruction of movement of general public 
etc., or for other purpose. 

 
 
 
 
5.8 The committee note that Clause 18(1) proposes that apart from the relocation 
of street vendor s on the ground of public nuisance or obstruction of movement o f 
general public, the local authority can also relocate them for any other public 
purpose as specified in the scheme.  The Committee also observe that if a street 
vendor consistently fails to comply with his duties and obligations under the Act or 
the rules, the local authority is empowered as per clause 18(2) to evict  him in 
accordance with the manner specified in the Scheme.  
The Committee feel that the decision of the local body for relocation/eviction 
of street vendors in both these cases appear  to be arbitrary. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the ULBs should be made to take decisions in such matters 
only after  consultation with the Town Vending Committee  by inserting requisite 
modifications in sub clauses (1) and (2) of Clause 18 of the Bill. 
Clause 18(3) 
5.9 Clause 18(3) states as under: 
"No street vendor shall be relocated  or evicted by the local authority from the 
site allotted to him unless he has been given seven days notice for the same 
in such manner as may be specified in the scheme." 
 
5.10 Suggestions have been received from SEWA,  to increase the days of serving notice 
from 7 days to 30 days for relocation or eviction of street vendors by the local 
authority. 
 
5.11 In this regard National Policy on Street Vendors 2004 provides as under: 
 XXX   XXX   XXX    XXX 
"Where relocation is absolutely necessary, notice of minimum 30 days  should be 
served to the concerned vendors." 
 
XXX   XXX   XXX    XXX 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
5.12 The Ministry in their written reply, submitted as under: 
"Notice period of 7 days is sufficient, as the cause for eviction and relocation 
cannot be allowed to be continued for 30 days.  Also, the manner of relocation 
has to be detailed under the Scheme.  Earlier goods used to be impounded 
by the Police/ Municipal Authority and release of goods was a cumbersome 
process, which is now proposed to be made street vendor friendly, providing a 
safety net for reclaiming of goods, and prevention of harassment." 
 
5.13 The Committee observe that  a period of 7 days ' notice provided under clause 
18(3) for eviction and relocation of a street ve ndor is too short a time and it should 
be increased  to 30 days as was proposed in National Policy on Urban Street 
Vendors-2004. 
 
Clause 19 
5.14 Clause 19 states as under: 
"(1) The local authority, in addition to evicting the street vendor under 
section 18, may, if deems necessary, confiscate the goods of such street 
vendor in such manner as may be specified in the scheme.  
(2) The street vendor whose goods have been confiscated under sub -
section (1) may, reclaim his goods in such manner, and after paying such 
fees, as may be specified in the scheme." 
 
5.15 On this issue suggestions have been received from Tata Institue of Social Sciences 
(TISS), NASVI and SEWA that details of the  confiscated goods of the vendors should be 
mentioned in a 'panchnama', a copy of which should be handed over to the vendors also. 
5.16 In this regard the Ministry, when asked to comment has  stated that the details of 
confiscation including panchnama are to be provided through the scheme to be made by 
the appropriate Government. 
 
 

 
 
 
 
5.17 On being asked about the time frame for releasing the confiscated goods of the 
vendor, the Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, during the 
deposition before the Committee stated: 
"Regarding releasing of confiscated property we have not incorporated 
specific provision in the Bill.  For confiscation we have provided 7 days notice.  
After that the procedure have been left to the scheme.  Municip al body may 
expedite the matter." 
5.18 Further when asked for incorporating the specific provision for fixing the time frame 
for releasing the confiscated goods, in the Act, the Secretary, Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Poverty Alleviation stated: 
"We are n oting one of the important point for fixing the time frame for 
releasing the confiscated property of the vendors.  We will incorporate your 
suggestion." 
5.19 On the issue of provision of penalty on the street vendor, the Secretary, further 
stated that: 
  "We have left it to the State Governments and Municipalities.  It is a very good 
  point that penalty should not be more than confiscated property."  
 
5.20 The Committee observe that under the provisions of the Bill confiscation of 
goods of street vendors in addition to evicting the street vendors  shall be made in 
such manner as may be specified in the scheme. The Committee desire that such 
confiscation must be accompanied by a 'Panchanama' detailing the goods 
confiscated and signed by an official as decided by the appropriate authority. 
5.21 The Committee also note that no specific time frame has been prescribed in 
the Bill for releasing of confiscated goods of the street vendors. They are happy that 
the Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation has agreed with the 
view of the Committee that specific time period of 15 days  be fixed in the Bill for 
releasing the confiscated property.  The Committee expect that necessary 
amendment will be carried out in the Bill.  
 

 
 
 
 
5.22 The Committee also recommend that the penalty to be imposed on the street 
vendors on confiscation should not be more than the value of confiscated goods   as 
agreed to by the Secretary , Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation and 
want  that  a suitable modification in this regard should be incorporated in the Bill . 
However, it should not exceed Rs. 2000 /- in any case.  
  

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER –VI 
DISPUTE REDRESSAL MECHANISM 
 
Chapter V of the Street Vendors(Protection of Livelihood)Bill, 2012 deals with Dispute 
Redressal Mechanism, Clause 20  and its sub-sections deal with redressal of grievances and 
resolution of disputes of street vendors.  
6.2 The Clause 20 of the Bill states as under: 
"(1) The local authority shall, for the purpose of disposing of application 
received under sub -section (2), constitute a permanent committee consisting 
of a person who has been a sub-judge or a judicial magistrate or an executive 
magistrate and such other persons having such experience in natural market 
and street vending activities as may be prescribed. 
(2) Every street vendor who has a grievance or dispute may make an 
application in writing to the committee constituted under sub -section (1) in 
such form and manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) On receipt of grievance or dispute under sub section (2), the committee 
referred to in sub -section (1) shall, after verification and enquiry in such 
manner, as may be prescribed, take steps for redressal of such grievance or 
resolution of such dispute, within such time and in such manner as may be 
prescribed 
(4)  Any person who is aggrieved by the decision of the committee may prefer 
an appeal to the local authority in such form, within such time and in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
(5)   The local authority shall dispose of the appeal received under sub -
section (4) within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed. 
Provided that the local authority shall, before disposing of the appeal, 
give an opportunity of being heard to the aggrieved person." 
6.3 A suggestion has been received from Centre for Equity Studies that: 
" In place of leaving this to local authority to constitute a permanent Committee, 
Central Government, for Union Territories, and in the St ate governments for their 
respective States, shall, in consultation with Town Vending Committee, should 
constitute the permanent committee, having persons having such experience in 
natural market and street vending activities as may be prescribed." 
 

 
 
 
 
6.4 In clause 20(1), there is no mention about the number of dispute redressal committee 
on the basis of population density in metropolitan cities. Further, in this clause there is no 
mention about the maximum time limit by which the dispute redressal committee gives its 
decision in a case.  In this regard, the suggestion from NASVI has been received that: 
"The Bill should mention a time frame of three months in this connection." 
 
6.5 The stakeholders like NASVI and Nidan have  also suggested that: 
"Executive magistrate should not be the part of this Dispute Redressal 
Committee." 
 
6.6 On the issue of inclusion of members in dispute redressal committee, Centre for 
Equity Studies have suggested that: 
"The Central Government, for Union Territories, and the State Government, for 
their respective states, shall, in consultation with the Town Vending Committee, 
for the purpose of disposing of an application received under sub -section, 
constitute a permanent committee, or committees, consisting of a person wh o 
has been a sub -judge or a judicial magistrate or an executive magistrate and 
one other person having such experience in natural market and street vending 
activities as may be prescribed."  
 
6.7 On being enquired about the comments, the Ministry of Housin g and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation, in this regard, submitted in their written reply as under: 
"Section 20 provides that the time within which the grievance is to be redressed 
by the Grievance Redressal Committee is to be specified by rules.  The same 
has been provided to be determined by the State Government based on local 
conditions, number of application etc." 
 
6.8 In order to create an accountable , expeditious and transparent grievance 
redressal system, the Committee are of the view that single grievance redressal 
mechanism may not be sufficient to address large number of cases in 
metropolitan/big cities. They, therefore, feel that a mechanism may be considered to 
constitute zonal grievance redressal system besides incorporating statutory time li mit 
by which the dispute redressal committees should give their decision. The Committee 
also feel that the Dispute Redressal Committee should be manned by Judicial Officers 
only and they want to omit the reference of 'Executive Magistrate' from clause 20 o f 
the Bill. The Committee recommend the Ministry to act accordingly. 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER –VII 
PLAN FOR STREET VENDING 
 
CHAPTER –VI of the Bill deals with preparation of Street vending Plan. It contains 
only one clause i.e. Clause 21 which reads as under: 
"Every Local Authority shall, in consultation with the Planning Authority, once 
in every five years, make out a plan to promote a supportive environment for 
the vast mass of urban street vendors to carry out their vocation, which shall 
provide for matters contained in  the First Schedule. (2) The street vending 
plans prepared by the local authority shall be submitted to the appropriate 
Government and the appropriate Government shall determine the planning 
norms for street vendors and notify the street vending plan so submitted." 
 
7.2 In this regard, NASVI in their written memorandum to the Committee, has stated as 
under: 
"According to clause 21(1), every Local Authority shall, in consultation with 
the Planning Authority, once in every five years, make out a plan to promote a 
supportive environment for the vast mass of urban street vendors to carry out 
their vocation. Whenever, the plan is made for one locality, it creates 
insecurity in the minds of vendors, as the planning is done only for very busy 
and congested are as of the city or on or two markets.  Thus the planning 
should take into account the whole of the city rather than one or two markets 
and planning should also take into consideration the expanding boundaries of 
the city." 
 
7.3 In connection with Planning for Street Vendors,  CEPT in  their written memorandum 
has submitted as under: 
" There is no role of the Town Vending Committee or the Street Vendors 
Association in making of the plan.  There should be a specific mention of 
public hearing/ consultation on the plan/ scheme of the street vendors to take 
the concerns of these stakeholders on board." 
 

 
 
 
 
7.4  On being asked to comment on the above issue the Ministry in their written 
submission replied as under: 
"The provisions in the Bill  regarding planning are in fact to address what has 
been highlighted in the question.  The First Schedule to the Bill provides that 
the (1) The Plan shall- (b) ensure that the provision of space or area for street 
vending is reasonable and consistent with existing natural markets.  Also it 
states that (2) The plan shall contain all of the following matters, namely - (d) 
making of spatial plans conducive and adequate for the prevalent number of 
street vendors in that city or town and also for the future growt h, by adopting 
such norms as may be necessary; (e) consequential changes needed in the 
existing master plan, development plan, zonal plan, layout plan and any other 
plan for accommodating street vendors in the designated vending zones."  
 
7.5 In connection with section 21(1) and 21(2) when asked about the consultative role 
for Town Vending Committee the Ministry in their written reply submitted as under: 
"The TVC is an integral part of the Bill with implementation responsibilities, 
and has been given a central role.  Thus, it is expected that the TVC would be 
consulted in the process of formulation of the plan."  
 
7.6 According to clause 21(1), every Local Authority shall, in consultation with the 
Planning Authority, once in every five years, make out a plan  to promote a 
supportive environment for the vast mass of urban street vendors to carry out their 
vocations. The Committee  are convinced that it is essential that consultations and 
public hearings are held before formulating and finalizing any street vendi ng plan. 
The Committee are not inclined to accept the optimism expressed  by the Ministry 
that it is expected that the TVC would be consulted in the process of such plans and 
they, therefore, desire that suitable modification  be made in the Bill to involve  the 
TVC and the stakeholders in the consultation process before formulat ions of any 
street vending plan. 
  

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER VIII 
TOWN VENDING COMMITTEE 
 The chapter VII of the Bill deals with Town Vending Committee and contains clauses 
from 22 to 27.  
Clause 22(2)(b) 
8.2  The clause states as follows: 
Each Town Vending Committee shall consist of:- 
(a)     XXX       XXX     XXX   XXX     
(b) "such number of other members as may be prescribed, to be nominated by the 
appropriate Government, representing the local  authority, the planning authority, 
traffic police, local police, association of street vendors, market associations, traders 
associations, resident welfare associations, banks and such other interests as it 
deems proper: 
Provided that the number of member s nominated to represent the street 
vendors shall not be less than forty percent: 
Provided further that one -third of such members shall be from amongst 
women vendors:  
Provided also that representation shall be given to the Scheduled Castes, the 
Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes, minorities and persons with 
disabilities" 
8.3  In this regard, the National Policy on Street Vendors, 2009 states that: 
" A TVC should consist of the Municipal Commissioner/Chief Executive 
Officer of the Urban Local Body as chairman and such number of members 
as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government, representing firstly, 
local authority, Planning authority and police and such other interest as it 
deems proper; secondly association of street vendors; thirdly residen t welfare 
associations and Community Based organisation(CBUs) and fourthly, other 
civil society organisations such as NGOs, representatives of professional 
groups such as lawyers, doctors, town planners, etc., representatives of trade 
and commerce, representatives of scheduled banks and eminent citizens." 
 

 
 
 
 
8.4 The clause 22(2)(b) of the bill has mentioned about the nomination of different 
categories of members to be nominated to the Town Vending Committee. The 
Committee find the categories of persons to be nominated to the TVC  is more 
exhaustive in the National Policy of Street Vendors 2009  than provided  in clause 
22(2)(b) of the present Bill . They want the Ministry to replace the composition of  TVC 
provisions with that provided in National Policy of 2009. The Committee also desire 
that the elected representatives should  also be the members of TVC. The Committee 
further find that neither  the  present provision  in the Bill nor  the National Policy of 
2009 provides for the tenure of nominated  Members. The Committee are of the view 
that absence of a specific provision in this regard may lead to a situation where 
members of Town Vending Committee may not act freely. The Committee accordingly 
recommend that a fixed tenure  of five years  for all the TVC Members should be 
prescribed in the Bill.  
8.5 The Clause 22(2)(b) further states that: 
"Provided also that representation shall be given to the Scheduled Castes, the 
Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Castes, Minorities and persons with 
disabilities" 
8.6 The Committee desire that the words "adequate and reasonable" should be 
added before the word "representation" to give due weightage to the Scheduled 
Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Castes, Minorities and persons with 
disabilities in the TVC. 
8.7 Clause 27(1) of the Bill provides as under : 
"Every Town Vending Committee shall publish the street vendor‘s charter 
specifying therein the time within which the certificate of registration and the 
certificate of vending shall be issued to a street vendor and the time within 
which such certificate of vending shall be renewed and other activities to be 
performed within the time limit specified therein." 
8.8  Self Employed Women Association(SEWA) in their memorandum to the Committee 
has submitted for inclusion of the following: 
"Every decision of the Town Vending Committee shall publicly set out the 
reasons for making the decision". 

 
 
 
 
 
8.9 In this Connection, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, submitted in 
their written reply, as under: 
"This suggestion is not required to be incorporated as the same are to be 
determined by the scheme, based on local conditions, giving flexibility to the 
appropriate Government in regard to implementation aspects." 
 
8.10 The Committee are of strong view that incorporation of this suggestion will in 
no way hamper the flexibility of the appropriate Government in regard to 
implementation aspects. On the other hand, insertion of such a provision, will infuse 
transparency in the working of Town Vending Committee. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that a new sub clause  should be incorporated in the Bill to provide that 
every decision of the Town Vending Committee shall publicly spell out the reasons for 
taking such decisions. 
  

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER –IX 
DUTIES OF LOCAL AUTHORITY 
The chapter VIII  contains clause 28 that deals with duties of Local Authority in 
connection with the provisions of this Act. 
Clause 28 
9.2 The clause 28 states that: 
"Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, the local authority shall carry out such duties under the provisions of this 
Act as are provided in the Second Schedule." 
 
9.3 The second schedule enumerates the following functions of the local authority:  
(a) overall supervision and monitoring of the scheme for street vendors; 
(b) monitoring effective functioning of the Town Vending Committee; 
(c) deciding appeals in respect of the registration, or issue of certificate of 
vending or the cancellation or suspension of certificate of vending, of street 
vendors in the manner specified in the scheme; 
(d) providing, in consultation with the Town Vending Committee civic services;  
(e) determining in consultation with the Town Vending Committee, the manner 
of collecting, through banks, counters of local authority and counters of Town  
Vending Committee, fees for registration, use of parking space for mobile stalls 
and availing of civic services;  
(f) undertake in consultation with the Town Vending Committee, comprehensive 
digitalized photo census and survey of the existing number of street vendors 
with the assistance of such experts and in such manner as may be specified in 
the scheme, for the purpose of accommodating street vendors within the 
holding capacity of the vending zones; 
(g)  ensure that no street vending activities is carried out in no-vending zone. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
9.4 The Centre for Equity Studies had rendered a suggestion for applying the provision of 
section 28 to the entire Act and not just to second schedule only.   
9.5 When the Committee asked the Ministry of Housing and Urban Pov erty Alleviation 
about their views in this regard, they submitted as under: 
"The suggestion is not clear.  However, the second schedule provides for 
specific responsibilities of the local authority to strengthen the main functions, 
which are in addition to those provided under the Bill." 
 
9.6 The Committee feel that the clause 28 gives an impression that the duties of 
local authority are confi ned to those functions which are  explicitly enumerated in the 
second schedule  only wheareas the duties of the loca l authority have also  been 
given in several provisions of the Bill. The Committee, therefore, desire that an 
explanation to this clause may be inserted to remove any ambiguity with regard to 
duties of local authority. 
  

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – X 
       PENAL PROVISION 
 CHAPTER –X of the Bill  contains penal provision  i.e. Clause 30 which reads as 
under : 
 If any street vendor— 
 
  (a) indulges in vending activities without a certificate of vending; 
  (b) vends beyond the designated vending zones or specified timings;  
  (c) Contravenes the terms of certificate of vending; or 
 (d) contravenes any other terms and conditions specified for the purpose of 
regulating street vending under this Act or any rules or schemes made there 
under, he shall be liable to a penalty for eac h such offence which may extend 
up to rupees two thousand as may be determined by the local authority. 
10.2  It is suggested by NASVI that: 
 
"These are too high. Hawkers may violate some conditions regarding public 
space but they are not criminals who shou ld be fined so heavily. These fines 
are common to all cities including the smaller ones where this may amount to a 
week or fortnight earnings. We would propose the fine to be equal of one day of 
minimum wages of unskilled workers prevalent in the area." 
 
10.3 When asked  to the Ministry of Housing  and Urban Poverty Alleviation comments as 
under: 
"Section 30 provides for a fine for contravention upto Rs. 2000. The matter was 
discussed at great length with both the State Governments and the Ministry of 
Law & Justice, and based on their inputs, the same has been provided for." 
10.4. The Committee note that clause 30 of the Bill provides for penalty to the street 
vendors in case of violation of terms and conditions of vending. While the Committee 
are in agreement with this provision, they are of the view that the maximum amount of 
fine of Rs. 2000 is too high and is applicable to all types of vendors. Therefore, the 
Committee suggest that the fine to be imposed on the street vendors should be 
reasonable in the first instance, which can be enhanced to Rs. 2000, if he/she is found 
indulging in such activities on the subsequent occasions. The Committee desire that 
such a provision should be incorporated in the Bill. 
 

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-XI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
 Chapter XI of the Bill, has been named as 'Miscellaneous' and contains clause from 
31 to 41 dealing with Provisions of this Act, not to be construed as conferring ownership 
rights, etc., returns, promotional measures, research training and awareness, act to have 
overriding effect, powers to delegate, power to amend schedules, power to make rules, 
power to make bye-laws, scheme for street vendors, and power to street vendors. 
Clause 33&34 
11.2 The clause 33 deals with various promotional measures to be taken in connec tion with 
the implementation of this Act, and states that, "The appropriate Government may, in 
consultation with the Town Vending Committee, local authority, planning authority and street 
vendors associations or unions, undertake promotional measures of ma king available credit, 
insurance and other welfare schemes of social security for the street vendors." 
11.3 The clause 34 deals with the Research, Training and Awareness to be inseminated 
amongst street vendors. It states as under: 
"The appropriate Government may, to the extent of availability of financial and 
other resources, (a) develop and organise capacity building programmes for 
street vendors and on how to exercise the rights contemplated under this 
Act;(b) undertake research, education and training p rogrammes to advance 
knowledge and understanding of the role of the informal sector in the 
economy, in general and the street vendors, in particular and to raise 
awareness among the public through Town Vending Committee." 
11.4 Clarifying on this issue duri ng briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, the Secretary stated as under: 
"The appropriate Government will undertake promotional measures for making 
available credit, insurance and other welfare schemes of social security. We 
have kept the word appropriate Government intentionally so that State and 
Central Governments will work together to implement these schemes. So far as 
insurance is concerned, I will to speak that we are covering this in our National 
Health Insurance Scheme. We have extended it to Street Vendors. With regard 
to credit is concerned, we have kept this provision in the self employment 
provision under NULM. The Street Vendors will be provided 33 per cent 
subsidy." 
 

 
 
 
 
11.5 On going through the n ational policy on Urban Street Vendors, 2009, the Committee 
find that there are elaborate promotional measures on Public Health & Hygiene, Health of 
Street Vendors, Educational & Skills Training, Credit & Insurance, Social Security, Allotment 
of Space/ Sta tionary Stalls, Rehabilitation of Child Vendors and Promoting Vendor's 
Organisations and other promotional measures. 
 
11.6 The Committee note that the proposed Bill is aimed at protecting the livelihood 
rights and social security of street vendors.  The proposed bill seeks to provide 
promotional measures for making available credit, insurance, and other welfare 
schemes of soci al security for the street vendors.  The Committee are of the strong 
view that the above measures are the most important factors for the successful 
implementation of the Act.  However, the Committee are distressed to note that the 
Ministry has not clearly spelt out the ways and means which find a clear mention in 
the National Policy on Urban Street Vendors 2009. In order to give special impetus to 
the promotional measures, the Committee strongly feel that there should be elaborate 
provisions on public healt h & hygiene, health of street vendors, education & skills 
training, credit & insurance, social security, rehabilitation of child vendors, as brought 
out in National Policy on Urban Street Vendors, 2009 and its implementation by State 
Governments and Local Bodies should be made mandatory.  
 
Clause 38(1) 
 
11.7 The clause 38(1) deals with power to make rules and states that, ‗The appropriate 
Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.‘ 
 
11.8 The Committee are of the view that this legislation is going to have a great 
impact on employment in urban areas and in the urban infrastructure planning and 
development.  The Committee, however, fail to understand why the Ministry has not 
laid down any ti me frame for State Governments and Local Bodies to make rules and 

 
 
 
 
implementation of provisions of this Bill after its enactment. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry should clearly mention a cut off date  not later than six 
months for making the rules and  implementation of its provisions by the State 
Governments and Local Bodies.  
 
 
 
New Delhi;  
5th March, 2013 
14 Phalguna, 1934 (Saka) 
SHARAD YADAV  
Chairman 
Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
Bill No. 104 of 2012 
 
 
 
 
THE STREET VENDORS (PROTECTION OF LIVELIHOOD AND 
REGULATION OF STREET VENDING) BILL, 2012 
A 
BILL 
 
  
   to protect the rights of urban street vendors and to regulate street 
vending activities and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 
    BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -third Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:- 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
 
1. 1. (1) This Act may be called the Street Vendors (Protection of Livelihood 
and Regulation of Street Vending) Act, 2012.  
  (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir. 
 
 
 
Short title, 
Extent and 
Commenc
ement. 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.      (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates 
may be appointed for different States and any reference in any provision 
to the commencement of this Act sha ll be construed in relation to any 
State as a reference to the coming into force of that provision in that 
State. 
  (4) The provisions of this Act shall not apply to any land, premises and 
trains owned and controlled by the Railways under the Railway Act, 
1989. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 of 
1989 
Definitions. 
 
3.      2.  (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- 
(a) ―appropriate Government‖ means,- 
(i) in relation to the lands owned or controlled by the Central 
Government, the Central Government; 
(ii) in relation to the lands owned or controlled by the State 
Government, the State Government; 
(iii) in relation to lands owned or controlled by the Union Territory 
Administration, the Union Territory Administration; 
(iv)  in relation to any other land, the auth ority empowered to 
make law with respect to such land under any law for the time 
being in force; 
(b) ―holding capacity‖ means the maximum number of street vendors 
who can be accommodated in any vending zone; 
(c) ―local authority‖ means a Municipal Corporat ion or a Municipal 
Council or a Nagar Panchayat, by whatever name called, or the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Cantonment Board, or as the case may be, a civil area committee 
appointed under section 47 of the Cantonment Act, 2006 or such other 
body  entitled to function as a local auth ority in any city or town to 
provide civic services and regulate street vending and includes the 
―planning authority‖ which regulates the land use in that city or town; 
(d) ―mobile vendors‖ means street vendors who carry out vending 
activities in designate d area by moving from one place to another 
place vending their goods and services; 
(e) ―natural market‖ means a market where sellers and buyers have 
traditionally congregated for more than a specified period for the sale 
and purchase of specific products o r services and has been 
determined as such by the local authority; 
(f) ―notification‖ means a notification published in the Official Gazette 
and the term ―notify‖ shall be construed accordingly; 
(g) ―planning authority‖ means an Urban Development Authority  or 
any other authority in any city or town designated by the appropriate 
Government as responsible for regulating the land use by defining the 
precise extent of areas for any particular activity in the master plan or 
development plan or zonal plan or layout plan or any other spatial plan 
which is legally enforceable under the applicable Town and Country 
Planning Act or the Urban Development Act or the Municipal Act; 
(h) ―prescribed‖ means prescribed by rules made under this Act by 
the appropriate Government; 
(i) ―Schedule‖ means the Schedule annexed to this Act; 
(j) ―scheme‖ means a scheme framed by the appropriate 
Government under section 40; 
(k) ―State Nodal Officer‖ means an officer designated by the State 
Government to co-ordinate all matters relating t o urban street vending 
in the State; 
(l) ―stationary vendors‖ means street vendors who carry out vending 
activities on regular basis at a specific location; 
(m) ―street vendor‖ means a person engaged in vending of articles, 
goods, wares, food items or merc handise of everyday use or offering 
services to the general public, in a street, lane, side walk, footpath, 
pavement, public park or any other public place or private area or from 
a temporary built up structure or by moving from place to place and 
includes hawker, peddler, squatter and all other synonymous terms 
which may be local or region specific; and the words ―street vending‖ 
with their grammatical variations and cognate expressions, shall be 
41 of 
2006 

 
 
 
 
construed accordingly; 
(n) ―Town Vending Committee‖ means th e body constituted by the 
appropriate Government under section 22; 
(o) ―vending zone‖ means an area or a place or a location 
designated as such by the local authority for the specific use by street 
vendors for street vending and includes footpath, side walk, pavement, 
embankment, portions of a street, waiting area for public or any such 
place considered suitable for vending activities and providing services 
to the general public. 
   (2) Any reference in this Act to any enactment or any provision thereof, 
shall, in relation to an area in which such enactment or such provision is 
not in force be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, if any 
in force in that area. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
REGISTRATION OF STREET VENDORS 
 
Application for 
registration. 
   3. (1) Every person who has completed the age of fourteen years, or as 
the case may be, the age prescribed by the appropriate Government and 
intends to do street vending, may make an application to the Town 
Vending Committee for registration as a street vendor. 
  (2) Every application under sub -section (1) shall be made in such form 
and manner, accompanied by such documents and one time fees, as 
may be specified in the scheme. 
 
 
Registration of 
Street Vendors 
and issue of 
certificate of 
registration. 
 
  4. (1) The registration of all street vendors who make application under 
section 3 shall be made by the Town Vending Committee within such 
period, and in such manner, as may be specified in the scheme. 
 
   (2) The Town Vending Committee shall not summarily reject any 
application without giving the applicant an opportunity to rectify 
deficiencies, if any, and affording him an opportunity of hearing. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
  (3) Where, on the completion of the period specified under sub -section 
(1), if the applicant does not receive any response about the deficiencies 
in his application or the rejection of his application, he shall be deemed to 
have been registered. 
 
 (4) If the Town Vending Committee, or any officer authorised by the Town 
Vending Committee, is satisfied that the application made under Section 3 
is in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules or schemes 
made thereunder, he shall issue a certificate of registration to the applicant 
with a serial number assigned to it.  
 
Persons not to 
engage in street 
vending without 
obtaining  
certificate of 
vending. 
   5. No person shall carry on or commence the business of street 
vending unless he holds a certificate of vending issued under this Act:  
    Provided that a person who has been issued a certificate of vending 
before the commencement of this Act (whether as a stationary vendor or 
a mobile vendor or under any other category) shall be deemed to be a 
street vendor for that category for the period for which he has been 
issued such certificate of vending.  
 
Issue of 
certificate of 
vending. 
6. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 5, the Town Vending Committee 
or any officer authorized by the Town Vending Committee may, subject to 
such conditions and restrictions as may be specified in the scheme, issue 
a certificate of vending to every street vendor who has be en registered 
under section 4. 
 
 (2)  The certificate of vending referred to in sub -section (1) shall be 
issued under any of the following categories, namely:  
(a) a stationary vendor;  
(b)  a mobile vendor; or 
     (c) any other category as may be prescribed. 
 
   (3)  The certificate of vending issued under sub -section (1) shall be in 
such form, and issued in such manner, as may be specified in the 
scheme and specify the vending zone where the street vendor shall carry 
on his vending activities, the time limit fo r carrying on such vending 
activities and the conditions and restrictions subject to which he shall 
carry on such vending activities. 
 

 
 
 
 
   (4)  Every street vendor who has been issued certificate of vending 
under sub -section (1) shall be issued identity ca rds in such form and 
manner as may be specified in the scheme. 
 
Criteria for 
issuing 
certificate of 
vending. 
   7. The criteria to be followed by the Town Vending Committee for 
issuing certificate of vending to a street vendor shall be as specified in 
the scheme, which may, apart from other things, provide for preference to 
the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes, 
women, persons with disabilities, minorities or such other categories as 
may be prescribed. 
 
Vending fee.   8. Every street vendor who has been issued certificate of vending shall 
pay such vending fees as may be specified in the scheme.  
Validity and 
Renewal of 
certificate of 
vending. 
 
   9. (1) Every certificate of vending shall be valid for such period as may 
be specified in the scheme.  
  (2) Every certificate of vending shall be renewable for such period, in 
such manner, and on payment of such fees, as may be specified in the 
scheme.  
 
Cancellation or 
suspension of 
certificated of 
vending. 
  10.  Where any street vendor who has been issued a certificate of 
vending under this Act commits breach of any of the conditions thereof 
or any other terms and conditions specified for the purpose of regulating 
street vending under this Act or any rules or schemes made thereunder, 
or where the Town Vending Committee is satisfied that such certificate 
of vending has been secured by the street vendor through 
misrepresentation or fraud, the Town Vending Committee may, without 
prejudice to any other fine which may h ave been incurred by the street 
vendor under this Act, cancel the certificate of vending or suspend the 
same in such manner as may be specified in the scheme and for such 
period as it thinks fit:  
 
     Provided that no such cancellation or suspension shall be made by 
the Town Vending Committee unless an opportunity of hearing has 
been given to the street vendor. 
 
Appeal from 
decision of Town 
Vending 
Committee.  
  11. (1) Any person who is aggrieved by any decision of the Town 
Vending Committee with respect to registration under section 4 or issue 
of certificate of vending under section 6 or cancellation or suspension of 
certificate of vending under section 10 may prefe r an appeal to the local 
authority in such form, within such period, and in such manner, as may 
 

 
 
 
 
be specified in the scheme. 
 (2) No appeal shall be disposed of by the local authority unless the 
appellant has been given an opportunity of hearing.  
 CHAPTER III 
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF STREET VENDORS 
 
Rights of street 
vendor. 
 
  12.(1)  Every street vendor shall have right to carry on the business of 
street vending activities in the vending zones allotted to him in 
accordance with the terms and conditions mentioned in the certificate of 
vending and the scheme framed by the appropriate Government. 
  (2)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section(1), where any 
area or space, as the case may be, has been earmarked as no -vending 
zone, no street vendor shall carry out any vending activities in that 
zone.  
 
Right of street 
vendor for a new 
site or area on 
relocation. 
  13. Every street vendor, who possesses a certificate of vending, shall, 
in case of his relocation under section 18, be entitled for a new site or 
area, as the case may be, for carrying out his vending activities, as may 
be determined by the local authority. 
 
Duty of street 
vendors.   14. Where a street vendor occupies space on a time sharing basis, he 
shall remove his goods and wares every day at the end of the time -
sharing period allowed to him. 
 
Maintenance of 
cleanliness and 
public hygiene. 
  15. Every street vendor shall maintain cleanliness and public hygiene 
in the vending zones and the adjoining areas.  
Maintenance of 
civic amenities 
in vending zone 
in good 
condition. 
  16. Every street vendor shall maintain civic amenities and public 
property in the vending zone in good condition and not damage or 
destroy or cause any damage or destruction to the same.  
Payment of 
maintenance 
charges. 
 17. Every street vendor shall pay such periodic maintenance charges 
for the civic amenities and facilities provided in the vending zones as 
may be determined by the local authority.  
 

 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RELOCATION OF STREET VENDORS, THEIR EVICTION AND 
PROCEDURE FOR CONFISCATION OF GOODS 
 
Relocation or 
eviction of street 
vendors.  
 
  18. (1) The local authority shall, having regard to public nuisance or 
obstruction of movement of general public caused by the street 
vendors, or for any other public purpose, relocate such street vendors in 
such manner as may be specified in the scheme.  
 (2) Where the local authority is satisfied that a street vendor has 
consistently failed to comply with his duties and obligations under the Act 
or the rules and the scheme made thereunder, evict such street vendor in 
such manner as may be specified in the scheme.  
(3)  No street vendor shall be relocated or evicted by the local authority 
from the site allotted to him unless he has been given seven days notice 
for the same in such manner as may be specified in the scheme.  
(4) A street vendor shall be reloc ated or evicted by the local authority 
physically in such manner as may be specified in the scheme only after 
he had failed to vacate the site after the expiry of said period of notice 
under sub-section (3).  
(5) Every street vendor who fails to relocate or vacate the site allotted to 
him after the expiry of said period of notice shall also be liable to pay, for 
every day of such default, a penalty which may extend upto rupees five 
hundred as may be determined by the local authority. 
 
Confiscation and 
reclaiming of 
goods. 
19(1)  The local authority,  in addition to evicting the street vendor under 
section 18, may, if deems necessary, confiscate the goods of such 
street vendor in such manner as may be specified in the scheme 
  (2)  The street vendor whose goods have been confiscated under sub-
section (1) may, reclaim his goods in such manner, and after paying 
such fees, as may be specified in the scheme. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
DISPUTE REDRESSAL MECHANISM 
 
Redressal of 
grievances or 
resolution of 
disputes of 
   20. (1) The local authority shall, for the purpose of disposing of 
application received under sub -section (2), constitute a permanent 
committee consisting of a person who has been a su b-judge or a 
judicial magistrate or an executive magistrate and such other persons 
 

 
 
 
 
street vendors. having such experience in natural market and street vending activities 
as may be prescribed. 
(2) Every street vendor who has a grievance or dispute may make an 
application in writing to the committee constituted under sub -section (1) 
in such form and manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) On receipt of grievance or dispute under sub section (2), the 
committee referred to in sub -section (1) shall, after verification and 
enquiry in such manner, as may be prescribed, take steps for redressal 
of such grievance or resolution of such dispute, within such time and in 
such manner as may be prescribed 
(4)  Any person who is aggrieved by the decision of the committee may 
prefer an appeal to the local authority in such form, within such time 
and in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(5)   The local authority shall dispose of the appeal received under sub-
section (4) within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the local authority shall, before disposing of the appeal, 
give an opportunity of being heard to the aggrieved person.  
 CHAPTER VI 
PLAN FOR STREET VENDING 
 
Preparation of 
street vending 
plan. 
   21. (1) Every Local Authority shall, in consultation with the Planning 
Authority, once in every five years, make out a plan to promote a 
supportive environment for the vast mass of urban street vendors to 
carry out their vocation, which shall provide for matters contained in the 
First Schedule. 
  (2) The street vending plans prepared by the local authority shall be 
submitted to the appropriate Government and the appropriate 
Government shall determine the planning norms for street vendors and 
notify the street vending plan so submitted.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER VII 
TOWN VENDING COMMITTEE 
 

 
 
 
 
Town Vending 
Committee. 
 
    22. (1) The appropriate Government may, by rules made in this behalf, 
provide for the term and the manner of constituting a Town Vending 
Committee in each local authority:      
     Provided that the appropriate Government may, if considers 
necessary, provide for constitution of more than one Town Vending 
Committee, or a Town Vending Committee for each zone or ward, in 
each local authority. 
   (2) Each Town Vending Committee shall consist of: 
   (a) Municipal Commissioner or Chief Executive Officer, as the case 
may be, who shall be the Chairperson; and 
   (b) such number of other members as may be prescribed, to be 
nominated by the appropriate Government, representing the local 
authority, the planning authority, traffic police, local police, association 
of street vendors, market associations, traders associations, resident 
welfare associations, banks and such other interests as it deems 
proper: 
     Provided that the number of members nominate d to represent the 
street vendors shall not be less than forty percent: 
    Provided further that one-third of such members shall be from amongst 
women vendors:  
    Provided also that representation shall be given to the Scheduled 
Castes, the Scheduled Tr ibes, Other Backward Classes, minorities and 
persons with disabilities. 
  (3) The Chairperson and the members nominated under sub -section (2) 
shall receive such allowances as may be prescribed by the appropriate 
Government. 
 
Meetings of 
Town Vending 
Committee. 
  23. The Town Vending Committee shall meet at such times and places 
within the jurisdiction of the local authority and shall observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, and 
discharge such functions, as may be prescribed. 
 
Temporary 
association of 
persons with 
Town Vending 
Committee for 
particular 
purposes.  
  24.  (1) The Town Vending Committee may associate with itself, in such 
manner and for such purposes, as may be prescribed, any person whose 
assistance or advice it may desire, in carrying out any of the provisions of 
this Act. 
    (2)  A person associated under sub -section (1) shall be paid such 
allowances as may be prescribed. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Office space and 
other employees 
for Town 
Vending 
Committee. 
 
  25. The Local Authority shall provide the Town Vending Committee with 
appropriate office space and such employees as may be prescribed.  
 
Constitution of 
ward vending 
committees. 
  26. The Town Vending Committee may, in such manner and for such 
purposes, constitute such number of zonal vending committees and ward 
vending committees as may be prescribed. 
 
Publication of 
street vendor‘s 
charter and 
data-base and 
carrying out of 
social audit. 
 
  27. (1) Every Town Vending Committee shall publish the street vendor‘s 
charter specifying therein the time within which the certificate of 
registration and the certificate of vending shall be issued to a street 
vendor and the time within which such certificate of vending shall be 
renewed and other activities to be pe rformed within the time limit 
specified therein. 
   (2) Every Town Vending Committee shall maintain an upto date records 
of registered street vendors and street vendors to whom certificate of 
vending has been issued containing name of such street vendor, s tall 
allotted to him, nature of business carried out by him, category of street 
vending and such other particulars which may be relevant to the street 
vendors, in such manner as may be prescribed. 
  (3)   Every Town Vending Committee shall carry out social  audit of its 
activities under the Act or the rules or the schemes made thereunder in 
such form and manner as may be specified in the scheme.   
 
 CHAPTER VIII 
DUTIES OF LOCAL AUTHORITY 
 
Duties of local 
authority. 
 
   28. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, the local authority shall carry out such duties under the 
provisions of this Act as are provided in the Second Schedule.  
 

 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER IX 
PREVENTION OF HARASSMENT OF STREET VENDORS  
Prevention of 
harassment by 
police and other 
authorities. 
  29. No street vendor who carries on the street vending activities in 
accordance with the terms and conditions of his certificate of vending 
shall be prevented from exercising such rights by any person or police  or 
any other authority exercising powers under any other law for the time 
being in force. 
 
 CHAPTER X 
PENAL PROVISIONS 
 
Penalty for 
contraventions. 
 
   30. If any street vendor -   
(a) indulges in vending activities without a certificate of vending; 
(b) vends beyond the designated vending zones or specified 
timings; 
(c) contravenes the terms of certificate of vending; or 
(d) contravenes any other terms and conditions specified for the 
purpose of regulating street vending under this Act or any rules or  
schemes made thereunder, 
he shall be liable to a penalty for each such offence which may extend 
upto rupees two thousand as may be determined by the local authority. 
 
 CHAPTER XI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
 
Provisions of 
this Act, not to 
be construed as 
conferring 
ownership 
rights, etc.  
  31. (1) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as conferring 
upon a street vendor any temporary, permanent or perpetual right of 
carrying out vending activities i n the vending zones allotted to him or in 
respect of any place on which he carries on such vending activity. 
 
   (2) Nothing contained in sub -section (1) shall apply to any stationery 
vendor, if a temporary leasehold or ownership right has been conferred 
on him by a lease deed or otherwise, in respect of a place at specific 
location where he carries on such vending activity in accordance with the 
provisions under any law for time being in force for carrying out such 
vending activity. 
 

 
 
 
 
Returns. 
 
   32. Every Town Vending Committee shall furnish, from time to time, to 
the appropriate Government and the local authority such returns as may 
be prescribed.         
 
Promotional 
Measures.   33. The appropriate Government may, in consultation with the Town 
Vending Committee, local authority, planning authority and street vendors 
associations or unions, undertake promotional measures of making 
available credit, insurance and other welfare schemes of social security 
for the street vendors.  
 
Research, 
Training and 
Awareness.  
  34. The appropriate Government may, to the extent of availability of 
financial and other resources, 
(a) develop and organise capacity building programmes for street 
vendors and on how to exercise the rights contemplate d under this 
Act; 
(b) undertake research, education and training programmes to 
advance knowledge and understanding of the role of the informal 
sector in the economy, in general and the street vendors, in particular 
and to raise awareness among the public t hrough Town Vending 
Committee. 
 
Act to have 
overriding effect.    35. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therein contained in any other law for the time being in force 
or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act: 
  Provided that where a State has enacted a law for protecting the 
livelihood of street vendors and regulation of street vending, and such 
State law is not inconsistent with this Act, then, the State Government 
may apply all or any of the provisions of this Act in the State.  
 
Powers to 
Delegate.   36. The appropriate Government may, by general or special order in 
writing, delegate such of its powers and functions under this Act 
(excluding the power to frame scheme un der section 40 and power to 
make rules under section 38), as it may deem necessary, to the local 
authority or the Town Vending Committee or any other officer, subject to 
such conditions, if any, as may be specified in that order.  
 
Power to amend 
Schedules.    37. (1) On the recommendations made by the appropriate Government 
or otherwise, if the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or 
expedient so to do, it may, by notification, amend the Schedules and 
thereupon the First Schedule o r the Second Schedule or the Third 
Schedule, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have been amended 
 

 
 
 
 
accordingly. 
(2) A copy of every notification issued under sub -section (1), shall be laid 
before each House of Parliament as soon as may be after it is issued. 
Power to make 
Rules. 
 
  38. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
  (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely: 
(a) the age for street vending;  
(b) any other categories of street vendors under of sub -section (2) of 
section 6; 
(c)  other categories of persons under section 7;  
(d)  the persons and the experience such person shall have under 
sub-section (1) of section 20;  
(e) the form and the manner of making application under sub -section 
(2) of section 20; 
(f) the manner of verification and enquiry on receipt of grievance or 
dispute, the time within which and the manner in which steps for 
redressal of grievances and resolution of disputes may be taken under 
sub-section (3) of section 20; 
(g) the form, the time wi thin which and the manner in which an 
appeal may be filed under sub-section (4) of section 20;  
(h)  the time within which and the manner in which an appeal shall be 
disposed of under sub-section (5) of section 20;  
(i)  The term of, and the manner of cons tituting, the Town Vending 
Committee under sub-section (1) of section 22;  
(j)  The number of other members of the Town Vending Committee 
under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 22;  
(k)  the allowances to Chairperson and members under sub -section 
(3) of section 22;  
(l)  the time and place for meeting, procedure for transaction of 
business at meetings and functions to be discharged by the Town 
Vending Committee under section 23; 
(m)  the manner and the purpose for which a person may be 
associated under sub-section (1) of section 24; 
(n)  the allowances to be paid to an associated person under sub -
Section (2) of section 24;  
(o) the other employees of Town Vending Committee under section 
 

 
 
 
 
25; 
(p)  the manner of, and the purposes for, constituting a zonal vending 
committee or ward vending committee and the number of zonal 
vending committees and ward vending committees to be constituted 
under section 26;  
(q)  the manner of maintaining upto date record of all street vendors 
under sub-section(2) of section 27; 
(r)  the returns to be furnished under section 32; 
(s) the manner of publishing summary of scheme under sub -section 
(2) of section 40.  
  (3) Every rule, and scheme made under this Act shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before the Ho use of Parliament/State 
Legislature, as the case may be, while it is in session, for total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule or scheme or both Houses 
agree that the rule or scheme should not be made, the rule or scheme 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or  be of no effect, 
as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule or scheme.  
Power to make 
bye-laws.   39. Subject to the provisions of this Act or any rules or scheme made 
there under, the local authority may make bye -laws to provide for all or 
any of the following matters, namely: 
(a) the regulation and manner of vending in restriction -free-vending 
zones, restricted-vending zones and designated vending zones; 
(b) determination of monthly maintenance charges for the civic 
amenities and facilities in the vending zones under section 17; 
(c) determination of penalty under sub -section (5) of section 18 and 
section 30; 
(d) the regulation of the col lection of taxes and fees in the vending 
zones; 
(e) regulation of traffic in the vending zones;  
(f) the regulation of the quality of products and services provided to 
the public in vending zones and maintenance of public health, hygiene 
and safety standards;  
(g)  the regulation of civic services in the vending zones; and 
 

 
 
 
 
(h) the regulation of such other matters in the vending zones as may 
be necessary. 
Scheme for 
street vendors. 40. (1)  For the purposes of this Act, the appropriate Government shall 
frame, by notification, a scheme, which may specify all or any of the 
matters provided in the Third Schedule. 
     (2)  A summary of the scheme notified by the appropriate Government 
under sub-section (1) shall be, published by the local authority in at le ast 
two local newspapers in such manner as may be prescribed. 
 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
 
  41. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, 
make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as 
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after expiry of 
three years from the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it 
is made, be laid before each House of Parliament. 
 
 
 First Schedule 
[See section 21] 
Street Vending Plan 
 
(1) The plan shall,- 
  (a) ensure that urban street vending activities do not lead to 
overcrowding and unsanitary conditions of public spaces, areas and 
streets and not impede the movement of the general public;  
  (b) ensure that the provision of space or area for street vend ing is 
reasonable and consistent with existing natural markets; 
  (c) take into account the civic facilities for appropriate use of identified 
spaces or areas as vending zones; 
  (d) promote convenient, efficient and cost effective distribution of 
goods and provision of services; 
  (e) such other matters as may be specified in the scheme to give 
effect to the street vending plan. 
(2) The plan shall contain all of the following matters, namely:- 
  (a) determination of spatial planning norms for street vending; 
 

 
 
 
 
  (b) earmarking of space or area for vending zones; 
  (c) determination of vending zones as restriction - free-vending zones, 
restricted-vending zones and no-vending zones; 
 (d) making of spatial plans conducive and adequate for the prevalent 
number of stre et vendors in that city or town and also for the future 
growth, by adopting such norms as may be necessary; 
 (e) consequential changes needed in the existing master plan, 
development plan, zonal plan, layout plan and any other plan for 
accommodating street vendors in the designated vending zones. 
 
 Second Schedule 
[See section 28] 
Duties of Local Authority 
(a) overall supervision and monitoring of the scheme for street vendors; 
(b) monitoring effective functioning of the Town Vending Committee; 
(c) deciding appeals in respect of the registration, or issue of certificate of 
vending or the cancellation or susp ension of certificate of vending, of street 
vendors in the manner specified in the scheme; 
(d) providing, in consultation with the Town Vending Committee civic 
services;  
(e) determining in consultation with the Town Vending Committee, the 
manner of collecting, through banks, counters of local authority and counters 
of Town Vending Committee, fees for registration, use of parking space for 
mobile stalls and availing of civic services;  
(f) undertake in consultation with the Town Vending Committee, 
comprehensive digitalized photo census and survey of the existing number 
of street vendors with the assistance of such experts and in such manner as 
may be specified in the scheme,  for the purpose of accommodating street 
vendors within the holding capacity of the vending zones; 
(g)  ensure that no street vending activities is carried out in no-vending zone.  
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 Third Schedule 
[See section 40] 
 
Matters to be provided in the Scheme for Street Vendors framed by the 
appropriate Government: 
 
(a) the form and the manner of making application for registration and 
the one time fees and the documents that may accompany such 
application;       
(b) the period within which and the manne r in which registration of street 
vendors may be made; 
(c) the conditions and restrictions subject to which certificate of vending 
may be issued to a street vendor; 
(d) the form and the manner in which the certificate of vending may be 
issued to a street vendor; 
(e) the form and  manner of issuing identity cards to street vendors; 
(f) the criteria for issuing certificate of vending to street vendors; 
(g) the vending fees; 
(h) the period of validity of certificate of vending; 
(i)  the period for which and th e manner in which a certificate of vending 
may be renewed and the fees for such renewal; 
(j) the manner in which the certificate of vending may be suspended or 
cancelled; 
(k) the form and the manner of filing appeal, the period within which an 
appeal may be filed; 
(l) the public purpose for which a street vendor may be relocated and the 
manner of relocating street vendor; 
(m)  the manner of evicting a street vendor; 
(n)  the manner of giving notice for eviction of a street vendor; 
(o) the manner of evicting a street vendor physically on failure to evict; 
(p) the manner of confiscation of goods by the local authority; 
(q)  the manner of reclaiming confiscated goods by the street vendor and 
the fees for the same; 
 

 
 
 
 
(r)  the form and the manner for carrying out s ocial audit of the activities 
of Town Vending Committee;  
 (s) the principles for determination of vending zones as restriction -free-
vending zones, restricted-vending zones and no-vending zones; 
(t) the conditions under which private places may be designat ed as 
restriction-free-vending zones, restricted -vending zones and no -vending 
zones; 
 (u) the principles for determining holding capacity of vending zones and 
manner of undertaking comprehensive census and survey;  
(v)  the terms and conditions for street vending including norms to be 
observed for up keeping public health and hygiene; 
(w) the designation of State Nodal Officer for co -ordination of all matters 
relating to street vending at the state level; 
(x) the manner of maintenance of proper records and other documents 
by the Town Vending Committee, local authority, planning authority and 
State Nodal Officer in respect of street vendors; 
(y) the manner of carrying out vending activities on time-sharing basis; 
 (z) any other matter which may be included in  the scheme for carrying 
out the purposes of this Act.  
 

 
 
 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
 Street vendors constitute an important segment of the urban population. Street vendors are 
those who are unable to get regular jobs in the remunerative formal sector on account of their low 
level of education and skills. They earn their livelihood through their own meagre financial resources 
and sweat equity.  
2. Street vending provides a source of self-employment, and thus acts as a measure of urban poverty 
alleviation without major Government intervention. Street vending also acts as an instrument to 
provide affordable as well as convenient services to a majority of urban population and has a 
prominent place in the urban supply chain and are an integral part of the economic growth process 
within urban areas. 
3. Given the pace of urbanisation and the opport unities presented through the development of urban 
areas, the growth of street vendors is likely to have an upward trend.It is vital that these vendors are 
enabled to pursue their livelihoods in a congenial and harassment free atmosphere. 
 4. Considering t he significant contribution made by street vendors to the urban society as a whole, 
more specifically to the comparatively poorer sections, and to enable  them to earn a livelihood 
through creation of good working conditions, without causing obstruction to  the public, the 
Government of India brought out revised National Policy on 
Urban Street Vendors, 2009 which aims at securing right of the citizens to have adequate means of 
livelihood as enshrined in articles 14, 19( 1)(g), 38( 2), 39( a), 39( b) and 41 of th e Constitution and 
fostering a congenial environment for the urban street vendors to carry out their activities, without 
harassment from any quarter. It also aims at providing a mechanism for regulation of street vending 
activities to avoid congestion on sidewalks and to 
ensure free flow of traffic on roads by a legislative framework to enable street vendors to pursue a 
honest living without harassment. 
 
5. Thus, the proposed Bill is aimed at protecting the livelihood rights and social security of street 
vendors and regulation of urban street vending in the country and ensuring uniformity in the legal 
framework for street vending across States and Union territories. The proposed Street Vendors 

 
 
 
 
(Protection of Livelihood and Regulation of Street Vending) Bill,  2012, inter alia, seeks to provide for 
the following, namely:— 
(a) compulsory registration of every person intending to carry out street vending 
 activities; 
(b) issue of a certificate of vending and identity cards to street vendors; 
(c) certain rights of street vendors; 
(d) certain duties of the street vendors; 
(e) constitution of Town Vending Committee in each local authority with minimum forty per 
cent.  representation of street vendors, out of which one -third shall be women 
vendors and reasonable  representation of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, 
Other Backward Classes,  minorities and persons with disabilities; 
(f) making of a plan for street vending once in every five years; 
(g) framing of a scheme relating to street vending by the appropriate Government; 
(h) redressal of grievances and resolution of disputes of street vendors; 
(i) promotional measures for making available credit, insurance and other welfare 
 schemes of social security for the street vendors; 
(j) street vendors not to be prevented by any person or police or any other 
authority from exercising their right to vend when carrying on street vending in 
accordance with the terms and conditions of certificate of vending. 
6.  The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 
NEW DELHI; 
The 31st August, 2012.          KUMARI 
SELJA 

 
 
 
 
__________ 
 
PRESIDENT‘S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
 
[Copy of letter No. E -14015/1/2011-USD/FTS-2764, dated 31st August, 2012 from Kumari Selja, 
Minister of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the proposed Street Vendors 
(Protection of Livelihood and Regulation of Street Vending) Bill, 2012, recommends the introduction 
of the Bill in the House under article 117(1) and the consideration of the Bill under article 117(3) of the 
Constitution. 
  

 
 
 
 
 
Notes on clauses 
 
 Clause 1 of the Bill seeks to provide the short title, extent and commencement of the 
proposed legislation. 
 Clause 2 of t he Bill seeks to provide the definitions of the various expressions used in the 
proposed legislation. 
 Clause 3 of the Bill provides that every person who has completed the age of fourteen years 
or such other age as may be prescribed by rules by the appropriate authority, and intends to do street 
vending, may make an application to the Town Vending Committee for registration as a street vendor. 
It further provides that every such application shall be made in such form and manner, accompanied 
by such documents and one time fees, as may be specified in the scheme. 
 Clause 4 of the Bill provides for registration of all street vendors, who make application, by the 
Town Vending Committee within such period, and in such manner, as may be specified in the 
scheme.  
 Sub-clause (2) of the said clause 4 provides that the Town Vending Committee shall not 
summarily reject any application without giving the applicant an opportunity to rectify deficiencies, if 
any, and affording him an opportunity of hearing. 
 Sub-clause (3) thereof provides that if, on the completion of the specified period, the applicant 
does not receive any response about the deficiencies in his application or the rejection of his 
application, then, he shall be deemed to have been registered. 
 Sub-clause (4) thereof provides that if the Town Vending Committee, or any officer authorised 
by the Town Vending Committee, is satisfied that the application so made is in accordance with the 
provisions of the Act and the rules or schemes made thereunder, he shall issue a certificate of 
registration to the applicant with a serial number assigned to it. 
 Clause 5 of the Bill provides that no person shall carry on or commence the business of street 
vending unless he holds a certificate of vending issued under this Act . However, a person who has 
been issued a certificate of vending before the commencement of this Act (whether as a stationary 

 
 
 
 
vendor or a mobile vendor or under any other category) shall be deemed to be a street vendor for that 
category for the period for which he has been issued 
such certificate of vending. 
 Clause 6 of the Bill provides that the Town Vending Committee or any officer authorized by it 
may, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be specified in the scheme, issue a certificate 
of vending to every street vendor who has been registered under clause 4. 
 Sub-clause (2) of said clause 6 provides that the certificate of vending shall be issued under 
any of these categories, namely, (a) stationary vendor; (b) mobile vendor; or (c) any other category as 
may be prescribed. 
Sub-clause (3) thereof provides that the certificate of vending shall be in such form, and issued in 
such manner, as may be specified in the scheme and shall specify the vending zone where the street 
vendor shall carry on his vending activities, the time limit for carrying on such vending activities and 
the conditions and restrictions subject to which he shall carry on such vending activities. 
 Sub-clause (4) thereof provides that every street vendor who has been issued cer tificate of 
vending under sub -section ( 1) shall be issued identity cards in such form and manner as may be 
specified in the scheme. 
Clause 7 of the Bill provides that the criteria to be followed by the Town Vending Committee for 
issuing certificate of vending to a street vendor shall be as specified in the scheme, which may, apart 
from other things, provide for preference to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, Other 
Backward Classes, women, persons with disabilities, minorities or such other categor ies as may be 
provided by rules. 
Clause 8 of the Bill provides that every street vendor who has been issued certificate of 
vending shall pay such vending fees as may be specified in the scheme. 
Clause 9 of the Bill provides that every certificate of vending shall be valid for such period as 
may be specified in the scheme. 
 Sub-clause (2) of said clause 9 provides that every certificate of vending shall be renewable 
for such period, in such manner, and on payment of such fees, as may be specified in the scheme. 
 Clause 10 of the Bill provides that if a registered street vendor commits breach of any 
conditions mentioned in the certificate of vending or of any other terms and conditions specified under 

 
 
 
 
the Act or any rules or schemes made thereunder, or  if the Town Vending Committee is satisfied that 
such certificate of vending has been secured through misrepresentation or fraud, the Town Vending 
Committee may cancel the certificate of vending or suspend the same in such manner as may be 
specified in the scheme and for such period as it thinks fit. However, such cancellation or suspension 
shall be made by the Town Vending Committee only after giving an opportunity of hearing to the 
street vendor. 
Clause 11 of the Bill provides that any person who is aggri eved by any decision of the Town 
Vending Committee with respect to registration or issue of certificate of vending or cancellation or 
suspension of certificate of vending may prefer an appeal to the local authority in such form, within 
such period, and in such manner, as may be specified in the scheme. 
 Sub-clause (2) of said clause 11 provides that no appeal shall be disposed of by the local 
authority unless the appellant has been given an opportunity of hearing.  
 Clause 12 of the Bill provides that every street vendor shall have right to carry on the business 
of street vending activities in the vending zones allotted to him in accordance with the terms and 
conditions mentioned in the certificate of vending and the scheme framed by the appropriate 
Government. 
Sub-clause (2) of said clause 12 provides that where any area or space has been earmarked 
as no-vending zone, no street vendor shall carry out any vending activities in that zone. 
 Clause 13 of the Bill provides that every street vendor who possesses a  certificate of vending 
shall, in case of his relocation, be entitled for new site or area as may be determined by the local 
authority, for carrying out his vending activities. 
 Clause 14 of the Bill provides that where a street vendor occupies space on a time sharing 
basis, he shall remove his goods and wares every day at the end of the time -sharing period allowed 
to him. 
 Clause 15 of the Bill provides that every street vendor shall maintain cleanliness and public 
hygiene in the vending zones and the adjoining areas. 
 Clause 16 of the Bill provides that every street vendor shall maintain civic amenities and 
public property in the vending zone in good condition and not damage or destroy or cause any 
damage or destruction to the same. 

 
 
 
 
 Clause 17 of the Bill provides that every street vendor shall pay such periodic maintenance 
charges for the civic amenities and facilities provided in the vending zones as may be determined by 
the local authority. 
 Clause 18 of the Bill provides that the local authority shall, having regard to public nuisance or 
obstruction of movement of general public caused by the street vendors, or for any other public 
purpose, relocate such street vendors in such manner as may be specified in the scheme. 
 Sub-clause (2) of said clause 18 pr ovides that where the local authority is satisfied that a 
street vendor has consistently failed to comply with his duties and obligations under the Act or the 
rules and the scheme made thereunder, it may evict such street vendor in such manner as may be 
specified in the scheme. 
 Sub-clause (3) of said clause 18 provides that no street vendor shall be relocated or evicted 
by the local authority from the site allotted to him unless he has been given seven days notice for the 
same in such manner as may be specified in the scheme. 
 Sub-clause (4) of said clause 18 provides that a street vendor shall be relocated or evicted by 
the local authority physically in such manner as may be specified in the scheme only after he had 
failed to vacate the site after the expiry of said specified period of notice.  
 Sub-clause (5) of said clause 18 provides that every street vendor who fails to relocate or 
vacate the site allotted to him after the expiry of said period of notice shall also be liable to pay, for 
every day of suc h default, a penalty which may extend up to rupees five hundred as may be 
determined by the local authority. 
 Clause 19 of the Bill provides that the local authority may, in addition to evicting of the street 
vendor, if deems necessary, confiscate his goods in such manner as may be specified in the scheme. 
 Sub-clause (2) of said clause 19 provides that the street vendor, whose goods have been so 
confiscated, may reclaim his goods in such manner, and after paying such fees, as may be specified 
in the scheme. 
 Clause 20 of the Bill provides for redressal of grievances or resolution of disputes of street 
vendors. It provides that the local authority shall, for the purpose of disposing of application received 
for redressal of grievances or resolution of dispute s of street vendors, constitute a permanent 
committee consisting of a person who has been a sub -judge or a judicial magistrate or an executive 
magistrate and such other persons having such experience 

 
 
 
 
in natural market and street vending activities as may be prescribed. 
 Sub-clause (2) of said clause 20 provides that every street vendor who has a grievance or 
dispute may make an application in writing to the committee in such form and manner as may be 
provided by rules. 
 Sub-clause (3) thereof provides that on receipt of any grievance or dispute, the committee 
shall, after verification and enquiry in such manner, as may be provided by rules, take steps for 
redressal of such grievance or resolution of such dispute, within such time and in such manner as 
may be provided by rules. 
 Sub-clause (4) thereof provides that any person who is aggrieved by the decision of 
the committee may prefer an appeal to the local authority in such form, within such time and 
in such manner as may be provided by rules. 
 Sub-clause (5) thereof provides that the local authority shall dispose of the appeal 
within such time and in such manner as may be provided by rules. However, the local 
authority shall, before disposing of the appeal, give an opportunity of being heard to the 
aggrieved person. 
 Clause 21 of the Bill provides that every local authority shall, in consultation with the 
Planning Authority, once in every five years, make out a plan to promote a supportive 
environment for the vast mass of urban street vendors to carry out their vocation, which 
shall provide for matters contained in the First Schedule. 
 
 Sub-clause (2) of said clause 21 provides that the street vending plans prepared by 
the local authority shall be submitted to the appropriate Government and the appropriate 
Government shall determine the planning norms for street vendors and notify the street 
vending plan so submitted. 

 
 
 
 
 Clause 22 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Governmentmay, by rules made in 
this behalf, provide for the term and the manner of constituting a Town Vending Committee 
in each local authority. However, the appropriate Government may, if considers necessary, 
provide for constitution of more than one Town Vending Committee, or a Town Vending 
Committee for each zone or ward, in each local authority. 
 Sub-clause (2) of said clause 22 provides that each Town Vending Committee shall 
consist of (a) Municipal Commissioner or Chief Executive Officer, as the case may be, who 
shall be the Chairperson; and (b) such number of other members as may be provided by 
rules, to be nominated by the appropriate Government, representing the local authority, the 
planning authority, traffic police, local police, association of street vendors, market 
associations, traders associations, resident welfare associations, banks and such other 
interests as it deems proper. However, the number of members nominated to represent the 
street vendors shall not be less than forty per cent., out of which one-third shall be from 
amongst women vendors, and reasonable representation shall also be given to the Scheduled 
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes, minorities and persons with 
disabilities. 
 Sub-clause (3) of said clause 22 provides that the Chairperson and the members so 
nominated shall receive such allowances as may be provided by rules by the appropriate 
Government. 
 Clause 23 of the Bill provides that the Town Vending Committee shall meet at such 
times and places within the jurisdiction of the local authority and shall observe such rules 
of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, and discharge such 
functions, as may be provided by rules. 

 
 
 
 
 Clause 24 of the Bill provides that the Town Vending Committee may associate with 
itself in such manner and for such purposes, as may be provided by rules, any person 
whose assistance or advice it may desire, in carrying out any of the provisions of this Act. 
 Sub-clause (2) of said clause 24 provides that a person associated under sub-section 
(1) shall be paid such allowances as may be provided by rules. 
 Clause 25 of the Bill provides that the local authority shall provide the Town Vending 
Committee with appropriate office space and such employees as may be provided by rules. 
 Clause 26 of the Bill provides that the Town Vending Committee may, in such manner 
and for such purposes, constitute such number of zonal vending committees and ward 
vending committees as may be provided by rules. 
 Clause 27 of the Bill provides that every Town Vending Committee shall publish the 
street vendor‘s charter specifying therein the time within which the certificate of registration 
and the certificate of vending shall be issued to a street vendor and the time within which 
such certificate of vending shall be renewed and other activities to be performed within the 
time limit specified therein. 
 Sub-clause (2) of said clause 27 provides that every Town Vending Committee shall 
maintain an up-to-date records of registered street vendors and street vendors to whom 
certificate of vending has been issued containing name of such street vendor, stall allotted 
to him, nature of business carried out by him, category of street vending and such other 
particulars which may be relevant to the street vendors, in such manner as may be provided 
by rules. 
 Sub-clause (3) of said clause 27 provides that every Town Vending Committee shall 
carry out social audit of its activities under the Act or the rules or the schemes made 

 
 
 
 
thereunder in such form and manner as may be specified in the scheme. 
 Clause 28 of the Bill provides that notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
law for the time being in force, the local authority shall carry out such duties under the 
provisions of this Act as are provided in the Second Schedule. 
 Clause 29 of the Bill provides that no street vendor who carries on the street vending 
activities in accordance with the terms and conditions of his certificate of vending shall be 
prevented from exercising such rights by any person or police or any other authority 
exercising powers under any other law for the time being in force. 
 Clause 30 of the Bill provides penalty for contraventions. It provides that if any street 
vendor indulges in vending activities without a certificate of vending or vends beyond the 
designated vending zones or specified timings or contravenes the terms of certificate of 
vending or contravenes any other terms and conditions specified for the purpose of 
regulating street vending under this Act or any rules or schemes made thereunder, he shall 
be liable to a penalty for each such offence which may extend up to rupees two thousand as 
may be determined by the local authority. 
 Clause 31 of the Bill provides that nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as 
conferring upon a street vendor any temporary, permanent or perpetual right of carrying out 
vending activities in the vending zones allotted to him or in respect of any place on which 
he carries on such vending activity. 
 Sub-clause (2) of said clause 31 provides that nothing contained in sub-clause (1) 
shall apply to any stationery vendor, if a temporary leasehold or ownership right has been 
conferred on him by a lease deed or otherwise, in respect of a place at specific location 
where he carries on such vending activity in accordance with the provisions under any law 

 
 
 
 
for the time being in force for carrying out such vending activity. 
 Clause 32 of the Bill provides that every Town Vending Committee shall furnish, from 
time to time, to the appropriate Government and the local authority such returns as may be 
provided by rules. 
 Clause 33 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government may, in consultation 
with the Town Vending Committee, local authority, planning authority and street vendors 
associations or unions, undertake promotional measures of making available credit, insurance 
and other welfare schemes of social security for the street vendors. 
 Clause 34 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government may, to the extent of 
availability of financial and other resources, develop and organise capacity building 
programmes for street vendors and on how to exercise the rights contemplated under this 
Act and undertake research, education and training programmes to advance knowledge 
and understanding of the role of the informal sector in the economy, in general and the 
street vendors, in particular and to raise awareness among the public through Town Vending 
Committee. 
 Clause 35 of the Bill provides that the provisions of this Act shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therein contained in any other law for the time 
being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act. 
However, where a State has enacted a law for protecting the livelihood of street vendors 
and regulation of street vending, and such State law is not inconsistent with this Act, then, 
the State Government may apply all or any of the provisions of this Act in the State. 
 Clause 36 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government may, by general or 
special order in writing, delegate such of its powers and functions under this Act (excluding 

 
 
 
 
the power to frame scheme under section 40 and power to make rules under section 38), as 
it may deem necessary, to the local authority or the Town Vending Committee or any other 
officer, subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in that order. 
 Clause 37 of the Bill provides that on the recommendations made by the appropriate 
Government or otherwise, if the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or 
expedient so to do, it may, by notification, amend the Schedules and thereupon the First 
Schedule or the Second Schedule or the Third Schedule, as the case may be, shall be 
deemed to have been amended accordingly. 
 Sub-clause (2) of said clause 37 provides that a copy of every notification issued 
under sub-section (1), shall be laid before each House of Parliament as soon as may be after 
it is issued. 
 Clause 38 of the Bill seeks to empower the appropriate Government to make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. 
 Sub-clause (3) thereof, provides that every rule, and scheme made under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the House of Parliament or State 
Legislature, as the case may be. 
 Clause 39 of the Bill seeks to empower the local authority to make bye-laws for 
carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. 
 Clause 40 of the Bill provides that for the purposes of the Act, the appropriate 
Government shall frame, by notification, a scheme which may specify all or any of the 
matters provided in the Third Schedule, which shall be published by the local authority in 
at least two local news papers in such manner as may be prescribed by rules. 
 Clause 41 of the Bill seeks to provide for power to remove difficulties. 

 
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 Sub-clause (1) of clause 20 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a permanent 
committee for redressal of grievances or resolution of disputes of street vendors by the 
local authority. 
 2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 21 of the Bill provides for making out a plan for street 
vending, once in every five years, by the local authority in consultation with the planning 
authority. 
 3. Sub-clause (1) of clause 22 of the Bill provides for the constitution of town vending 
committee in each local authority or where necessary more than one or two town vending 
committee in each local authority or zone or ward. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides 
for payment of allowances to the members of town vending committee. 
 4. Clause 25 of the Bill provides for office space and other employees to be provided 
to the town vending committee by the local authority. 
 5. Clause 26 of the Bill provides for constitution of zonal vending committees or ward 
vending committee by the town vending committee. 
 6. Clause 28 of the Bill provides for comprehensive digitalized photo census and 
survey of the existing number of street vendors to be carried out by the local authority, in 
consultation with the town vending committee. 
 7. Clause 33 of the Bill provides for promotional measures to be undertaken by the 
appropriate Government, in consultation with the town vending committee, local authority, 
planning authority and street vendor association or unions for making available credit, 
insurance and other welfare schemes of social security to street vendors. 
 8. Clause 34 of the Bill provides for developing and organising capacity building 

 
 
 
 
programmes for street vendors and to undertake research, training and awareness 
programmes for street vendors by the appropriate Government through the town vending 
committee. 
 9. Clause 40 of the Bill provides for framing of a scheme in respect of matters specified 
in the Third Schedule by appropriate Government. 
 10. The total financial implication in terms of recurring and non-recurring expenditure 
involved in carrying out the various functions under the Bill would be borne respectively 
by the local authority, the State Governments and the Central Government. However, it is 
not possible to estimate the exact recurring and non-recurring expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India at this stage. 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 
 Clause 38 of the Bill seeks to empower the appropriate Government to make rules to provide 
for (a) the age for street vending; ( b) any other categories of street vendors u nder sub-section (2) of 
section 6; ( c) other categories of persons under section 7; ( d) the persons and the experience such 
person shall have under sub -section ( 1) of section 20; ( e) the form and the manner of making 
application under sub-section (2) of section 20; (f) the manner of 
verification and enquiry on receipt of grievance or dispute, the time within which and the manner in 
which steps for redressal of grievances and resolution of disputes may be taken under sub-section (3) 
of section 20; ( g) the form, the time within which and the manner in which an appeal may be filed 
under sub-section (4) of section 20; (h) the time within which and the manner in which an appeal shall 
be disposed of under sub-section (5) of section 20; (i) the term of, and the manner of constituting, the 
Town Vending Committee under subsection (1) of section 22; (j) the number of other members of the 
Town Vending Committee under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 22; ( k) the allowances to 
Chairperson and members under sub -section (3) of section 22; ( l) the time and place for meeting, 
procedure 

 
 
 
 
for transaction of business at meetings and functions to be discharged by the Town Vending 
Committee under section 23; (m) the manner and the purpose for which a person may be associat ed 
under sub-section (1) of section 24; (n) the allowances to be paid to an associated person under sub-
section (2) of section 24; ( o) the other employees of Town Vending Committee under section 25; ( p) 
the manner of, and the purposes for, constituting a zonal vending committee or ward vending 
committee and the number of zonal vending committees and ward vending committees to be 
constituted under section 26; ( q) the manner of maintaining up -to-date record of all street vendors 
under sub -section ( 2) of sect ion 27; ( r) the returns to be furnished under section 32; and ( s) the 
manner of publishing summary of scheme under sub-section (2) of section 40. 
2. Clause 39 of the Bill empowers the local authority to make bye -laws to provide for ( a) the 
regulation and m anner of vending in restriction -free-vending zones, restricted -vending zones and 
designated vending zones; (b) determination of monthly maintenance charges for the civic amenities 
and facilities in the vending zones under section 17; ( c) determination of p enalty under sub -section 
(5) of section 18 and section 30; (c) the regulation of the 
collection of taxes and fees in the vending zones; (d) regulation of traffic in the vending zones; (e) the 
regulation of the quality of products and services provided to t he public in vending zones and 
maintenance of public health, hygiene and safety standards; ( f) the regulation of civic services in the 
vending zones; and ( g) the regulation of such other matters in the vending zones as may be 
necessary. 
 3. Clause 40 of th e Bill empowers the appropriate Government to frame, by notification, a 
scheme which may specify all or any of the matters provided in the Third Schedule. 
 4. The matters in respect of which said rules, bye-laws and scheme may be made are matters 
of procedure and administrative detail, and as such, it is not practicable to provide for them in the 
proposed Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
A 
BILL 
 
to protect the rights of urban street vendors and to regulate street vending activities and 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
(Kumari Selja, Minister of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation) 
 
 
 MGIPMRND—2756LS(S3)—04.09.2012. 
  

 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND  SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN 
DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013) 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 6 th November, 2012 from 1100 hrs. to 1430 hrs. in Room No 
074, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Sharad Yadav      - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ambica Banerjee  
3. Shri Kailash Joshi 
4. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee  
5. Shri Ramesh Kumar 
6. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
7. Shri Ratan Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Shri Anil Desai 
9. Shri Parvez Hashmi 
10. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
11. Shri Avinash Pande  
12. Shri Ajay Sancheti 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri D.S. Malha   - Director 
2. Smt. J.M. Sinha   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Smt. K. Rangamani N.  -  Under Secretary  
 
Part  I 
 
(1100 hrs. to 1130 hrs.) 
 
2. ****   ****    ****   **** 
Part  II 
(1130 hrs. to 1230 hrs.) 
 
WITNESSES 
 
1.       Shri Arun Kumar Misra  - Secretary,HUPA 
2.       Dr. P.K. Mohanty   - Addl. Secretary, 
3.       Shri Brij Kumar Aggrawal                - Joint Secretary(UPA) 
4.       Shri Avinash Kumar Mishra     - Dy. Secretary(UPA) 
         5.        Shri Nagendra Goel                        - Legal Counsel, HUPA 
 
4. The Hon'ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Poverty Alleviation and drew their attention towards Direction 59(1) of the Direct ions by the 
Speaker. Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation briefed the 
Committee on the purpose of bringing "The Street Vendors (Protection of Livelihood and 
Regulation of Street Vending) Bill, 2012". He dwelt on vari ous aspects of the Bill e.g. Compulsory 
registration of vendors, town vending committee and minimum interference by police. 
5. Members of the Committee expressed their views on the components/issues concerning "The 
Street Vendors (Protection of Livelihood and Regulation of Street Vending) Bill, 2012" and raised 
queries about the National survey of street vendors, banking finance for street vendors, domicile 
issue of migratory people, inventorisation of confiscated material from vendors, insurance facilities for 
vendors etc. The Secretary of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation responded to the 
same. The Committee directed the representatives of the Ministry to furnish written replies to the 

 
 
 
 
queries of the Members to the Lok Sabha Secretariat on which they could not respond during the 
meeting. 
  The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
Part  III 
(1330 hrs. to 1430 hrs.) 
 
6. ****   *****    ****   **** 
 
7. ****   ****    ****   **** 
  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
**** These portions are not related to the Report 
 
  

 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY,  17 DECEMBER, 2012 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1640 hrs. in Room No. 62, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Sharad Yadav      - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jayawant Gangaram Awale  
3. Shri Ambica Banerjee 
4. Shri Kailash Joshi  
5.  Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
6. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
7. Shri Ramesh Kumar 
8. Shri Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
9. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Md. Nadimul Haque 
11. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
12.  Shri Avinash Pande 
13. Shri Ajay Sancheti 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha   - Director 
3. Smt.  J. M.  Sinha   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
WITNESSES 
 
1. Mr. Arbind Singh, Coordinator, National Association of Street Vendors of 
India(NASVI). 
2. Ms. Gurvinder Kaur, National Association of Street Vendors of India(NASVI). 
3. Mr. Baskar, National Association of Street Vendors of India(NASVI). 
4. Mr. Ashok Kumar, National Association of Street Vendors of India(NASVI). 
5. Mr. Vinod Simon, National Association of Street Vendors of India(NASVI). 
6. Shri Harsh Mander, Director, Centre for Equity Studies. 
7. Ms. Warisha Farasat, Centre for Equity Studies. 
8. Dr Anup Surendranath, Centre for Equity Studies. 
9.  Dr Mathew John, Centre for Equity Studies. 
10.  Mr Amod Shah, Centre for Equity Studies. 
11. Ms. Renana Jhabvala, National Coordinator, Self Employed Women 
Association(SEWA). 
12.  Ms. Manali Shah,Self Employed Women Association(SEWA). 
13.  Mrs. Leela Tappu, Self Employed Women Association(SEWA). 
14.  Mr.Uday Khare, Self Employed Women Association(SEWA). 
15.  Ms. Champa Patani, Self Employed Women Association(SEWA). 
 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, Hon‘ble Chairman welcomed Shri Arbind Singh, his colleagues from National 
Association of Street Vendors of India; Shri Harsh Mander, his colleagues from Centre for Equity 
Studies and Ms. Renana Jhabvala and  her colleagues from Self Employed Women's Association and 

 
 
 
 
drew their attention towards Direction 59(1) of the Directions by the Speaker. Thereafter, the 
Committee invited them to present their views in the matter.  The representatives expressed their 
concern over deficiencies in certain clauses of the Bill and suggested corrective measures. Some of 
their suggestions covered various aspects of the Bill viz.,   application of the provisions of the Bill to 
the  vendors in and around railway premises;  mandatory registration of all vendors doing business at 
the time of commencement of the Act; declaration of vending zones sufficient enough to 
accommodate existing vendors before declaring the non -vending zones;  making provision for 
rehabilitation and resettlement o f street vendors in case of relocation or displacement; facilitating 
zone-wise  dispute redressal mechanism; all major decision s to be taken by Town Vending 
Committee and not by officials of Municipal Bodies; Town Vending Committee  to constitute 50% of 
street vendors of which 33% should be women among vendors; imposition of penalty on vendors 
equivalent  to his one day's earning; declaration of all natural markets as heritage markets etc.  The 
Members then put forth certain questions on which the representa tives of the NGOs gave their view 
points. The committee directed the representatives to furnish written replies to Member's queries 
which were not replied by them during the proceedings. 
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
****** 
  

 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN 
DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013). 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 28 th December, 2012 from 1100 hrs. to 1200 hrs. in Room No 
53, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Sharad Yadav      - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ambica Banerjee  
3. Shri Kailash Joshi 
4. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee  
5. Shri Ramesh Kumar 
6. Shri M. Anjan Kumar Yadav 
7. Dr.(Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani 
8. Dr. Ramshankar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Shri Anil Desai 
10. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
11. Shri Parvez Hashmi 
12. Shri Avinash Pande  
13. Shri Ajay Sancheti 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri D.S. Malha   - Director 
2. Smt. J.M. Sinha   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Smt. K. Rangamani N.  -  Under Secretary  
 
WITNESSES 
 
1.       Dr. P.K. Mohanty   - Addl. Secretary, 
2.       Shri Brij Kumar Aggrawal                - Joint Secretary(UPA) 
3.       Shri Avinash Kumar Mishra     - Dy. Secretary(UPA) 
        4.        Shri Nagendra Goel                       - Legal Counsel, HUPA 
 
2. The Hon'ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Poverty Alleviation and drew their attention towards Direction 59(1) of the Directions by the 
Speaker.  
3. Thereafter, Members of the Committee expressed their  views on the components/issues 
concerning "The Street Vendors (Protection of Livelihood and Regulation of Street Vending) Bill, 
2012" and raised queries regarding age limit prescribed for doing the business of street vending, 
prescribing uniform policy fo r all street vendors throughout the country, identifying plans for 
resettlement before relocating the street vendors, fair and transparent system to be followed in 
selection of street vendors, specifying rules for vending in and around railway station etc.  The 
representative of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation responded to the same. The 
Hon'ble Chairman emphasized upon the Ministry that copies of National policy on Street Vendors, 
2004 be made available to Hon'ble members of the Committ ee for their information and use.  The 
Committee directed the representatives of the Ministry to furnish written replies to the queries of the 
Members to the Lok Sabha Secretariat on which they could not respond during the meeting. 
 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
*********** 

 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN 
DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013). 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 5 th March, 2013 from 1000 hrs. to 1100 hrs. in Committee 
Room 'A', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Sharad Yadav      - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Jayawant Gangaram Awale 
3. Shri Anant Gangaram Geete 
4. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee  
5. Shri Ramesh Kumar 
6. Shri P.C. Mohan 
7. Dr. Ramshankar 
8. Shri Ratan Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Md. Nadimul Haque 
10. Shri Parvez Hashmi 
11. Shri Fagan Singh Kulaste 
12. Shri Avinash Pande 
13. Shri Khekiho Zhimomi  
 
 

 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha   - Director 
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. K. Rangamani N.  -  Under Secretary  
 
 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee. 
The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report on "The Street Vendors 
(Protection of Livelihood and Regulation of Street Vending) Bill, 2012". After deliberations the 
Committee adopted the draft Report with slight modifications.  
3. The Committee then authorized the Chair man to finalize and present the Report to 
Parliament.  
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
 