 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2010-2011) 
                                
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN POVERTY ALLEVIATION 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2010-2011) 
  
 
(Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on of the Standing Committee on Urban Development on Demands for Grants (2010-2011) ) of the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation] 
 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
      
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
    
13 


 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2010-2011) 
 
                                
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN POVERTY ALLEVIATION 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on of the Standing Committee on Urban Development on Demands for Grants (2010-2011) Ministry 
of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation] 
   
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 09.12.2010 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  09.12.2010 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, Agrahayana 1932 (Saka) 
 


   C.U.D No. 64 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2009 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and 
printed by the Indian Press, Delhi-110033. 
 
 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .....................……….…………………..........................….. (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ......................................................................………………………………………. (v) 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I  1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government  
15 
CHAPTER III Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
22 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and require reiteration  
23 
CHAPTER V Observations /Recommendations in respect of which final  replies 
of the Government are still awaited 
34 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I. Minutes of the Third  sitting of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2010 -11) held on 01 st  
December , 2010        ………………………………………………………………………  …………………..38 
 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Seventh Report 
of the Committee (15th Lok Sabha)    …. ………………………………………………………………………….40         
 
(i) 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2010-2011) 
 
Shri Sharad Yadav         -        Chairman 
  
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.    Shri J.P. Agarwal 
3.    Shri Praveen Singh Aron 
4.    Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
5.    Shri Partap Singh Bajwa 
6.    Shri Ambica Banerjee 
7.    Smt. Priya Dutt 
8.    Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
9.    Shri Sakti Mohan Malik 
10.  Shri Kailash Joshi 
11.  Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
12.  Shri Ramesh Kumar 
13.  Shri Radhe Mohan Singh 
14.  Shri P.C. Mohan 
15.  Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
16.  Shri Sonawane Pratap Narayanrao 
17.  Shri Baijayant ‘Jay’ Panda 
18.  Prof. Ramshankar 
19.  Shri Kadir Rana 
20.  Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
21.  Shri Adagooru H. Vishwanath 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Parvez Hashmi 
23. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
 24. Shri Surendra Motilal Patel 
 25. Shri Pravin Naik 
 26. Shri Avinash Pande 
 27. Shri Manohar Joshi 
 28. Shri Khekiho Zhimomi 
 29. Shri Shyam Benegal 
 30. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar 
 31.Shri  Kanwar Deep Singh 
 
(ii) 

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri K.D. Muley   - Director 
3. Ms. Amita Walia   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Priyadarshan   - Senior Committee Assistant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
  

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2010 -2011) having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Thirteenth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on the action 
taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Seventh Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Urban Development on the subject “ Demands for Grants (2010-2011) " of the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Poverty Alleviation. 
 
2. The Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 21 st April, 2010.  Replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received in July, 2010.  
 
3. The Standing Committee on Urban Development considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 
01st December, 2010. 
  
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Sixth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of th e Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
                    SHARAD YADAV 
01 December , 2010                                          Chairman, 
10 Agrahayana,1932 (Saka)                       Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
 
 (iv)  

CHAPTER-I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2010 -2011) deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in their Seventh Report (Fifteenth 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 2010-2011 of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation 
which was presented to Lok Sabha on 21 April, 2010.  
 
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the 10 
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows:  
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government (Chapter – II): 
 
Para Nos. 3, 4, 8 and 10         
(Total - 04) 
(Chapter-II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations, which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
Government‟s replies (Chapter –III): 
  
 NIL        
(Total - Nil) 
(Chapter-III)     
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee: 
 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 5 and 9 
(Total - 04) 
(Chapter-IV)     
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still 
awaited  
 
Para Nos. 6 and 7 
(Total - 02) 
(Chapter-V)     
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given by the Ministry to the 
implementation of thei r Recommendations. In cases, where it is not possible for the Ministry to 
implement the Recommendation(s) either fully or partially, for any reason, the matter may be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non-implementation.  

2 
 
1.4 The Committee further  desire that action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and final replies in 
respect of the Recommendations for which only interim replies have been furnished by the 
Government (included in Chapter -V) may b e furnished to them at the earliest and in any case, 
not later than three months of the presentation of this Report.  
 
1.5  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of these 
recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.          
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
 
Underutilization of funds 
 
1.6 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“From the expenditure details as furnished by the Ministry, the Committee note that there has 
been gross underutilization of funds during the year 2009 -2010. The total allocation for the year 
2009-2010 was Rs.850 crore out of which only Rs.521.56 crore cou ld be spent. Scheme -wise 
analysis also shows that there is a general shortfall in the utilization of funds across almost 
every programme implemented by the Ministry. For example, the total allocation under SJSRY 
was Rs.515 crore while the actual expenditur e was Rs.413.81 crore only. Similarly, the 
allocation under the ILCS was Rs.60 crore while the actual expenditure was Rs.36.92 crore 
only. The actual expenditure during the period was 38.64% below than what was allocated to 
the Ministry at the BE stage. So  far as the expenditure of the funds received as Additional 
Central Assistance are concerned, while the BE 2009 -2010 for the BSUP and IHSDP was 
Rs.2524.65 crore and Rs.1117.58 crore respectively, it was reduced to Rs. 1344.36 crore and 
Rs.786.74 crore at R E stage. Even this reduced allocation could not be spent fully and the 
actual expenditure under both BSUP and IHSDP schemes was only Rs.922.05 crore and 
Rs.613.19 crore, respectively.  
 
From this, the Committee can easily draw the inference that the delive ry mechanism of 
the Ministry is not proper and needs an urgent attention. What is more distressing to note is that 
while on the one hand the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation has demanded the 
larger allocation of funds for successful implem entation of various schemes, their actual 
performance shows that they have not been able to utilize the amount allocated to them 
completely. The Committee need to emphasize that this trend of under utilization of funds 
results in cut at the Revised Estimat e stage. That is why year after year plan allocations get 
reduced at RE stage which is evident from the fact that in 2008 -2009, the allocation was 
reduced from Rs.850 crore to Rs.670 crore and in 2009 -2010 from Rs.850 crore to Rs.575 
crore. If the Ministry  fails to spend even 60% of the entire funds allocated to them till the month 
of December, it cannot escape the cut at the RE stage.  Moreover, under -utilisation of funds 

3 
 
results in the reduced allocation of funds in successive years. Thus, the onus lies o n the 
Ministry to utilize the funds fully and that too in time to avoid reduction in allocation which 
ultimately reflect on the performance of schemes. 
 
The Committee are of the firm opinion that there are serious problems in planning and 
implementation of  various schemes. There is an urgent need to review the situation scheme -
wise and project-wise. The corrective action in this regard should be taken immediately and the 
Committee informed accordingly.” 
 
1.7 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:- 
  
“1. Utilisation of the allocated budget is dependent upon the ability of the States to submit 
requisite proposals for seeking 2 nd installments along with Utilisation Certificates of earlier 
releases.  Ministry has taken vigorous persuas ive action with the States and UTs in this regard 
such as review meeting with State Secretaries, field visits, monitoring of progress reports, 
capacity building workshops etc. However, during 2009 -10 the Ministry found constraints of the 
States by the enga gement of their personnel and attention in the General Elections (and in 4 
large States thereafter in the State Assembly elections) for the first 3 -5 months of the year, with 
the result that their requests for sanctions to subsequent releases were slow in coming.  
 
2. In case of Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY), due to the above factors, 
submission of Utilisation Certificates for the past releases was consequently delayed well 
beyond normal and therefore, Central fund release to the States/UTs g ot consequently delayed. 
This led to the downward Revised Estimates (RE) allocation for the scheme as Rs. 428.69 crore 
from the Budget allocation of Rs. 515.00 crore for the year. However, the Revised Estimates 
allocation of Rs. 428.69 crore was fully utilised under SJSRY during 2009-2010.  
 
3. The Budget provision for the year 2009 -10 under Integrated Low Cost Sanitation 
Scheme (ILCS) was Rs. 60 crore.  However, due to pending finalized Detailed Project Reports 
(DPRs) from the State Governments, actual expenditure incurred on ILCS Scheme during 2009-
10 was Rs. 50.50 crore.  
 
4. The Interest Subsidy Scheme for Housing the Urban Poor (ISHUP) scheme was 
approved by the CCEA on 26.12.2008. The guidelines of the scheme were firmed up in 
February, 2009, and was effectively put in place in 2009 -10. Anti cipating from the initial and 
encouraging response to the scheme, an allocation of Rs. 180.59 crore was made during 2009 -
10. ISHUP is a demand driven loan based scheme aimed at facilitating institutional loans to 
EWS & LIG beneficiaries and is essentially linked to ability of States in creation of additional 
housing stock by the States. FY 2009-10 being effectively the first year of scheme, the response 
from States has been slow and only Andhra Pradesh has been able to take advantage of 
scheme and dove -tail it with a state scheme i.e. INDIRAMA. As a result the Ministry was 
constrained to surrender funds to the tune of Rs 175.59 crore at RE stage. 
 
5. As regards BSUP and IH SDP the revised allocation was reduced to Rs.2131.10 crores      
following budget cut a cross the board. The BE, RE, actual sanction, actual release for the year 

4 
 
2009-10 under Basic Services for Urban Poor ( BSUP), Integrated Housing and Slum 
Development Programme (IHSDP),Rajiv Awas Yojana (RAY) and Swarna Jayanti Shahari 
Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY), are as follows:- 
 
(Rs. in crore) 
 BE RE Actual Sanction Actual Release 
BSUP 2524.65 1344.36 1530.27 1338.37 
IHSDP 1117.58 786.74 856.67 780.72 
RAY 150.00 60.00 60.00 60.00 
SJSRY 515.00 428.69 428.69 428.69 
Total 4307.23 2619.79 2875.63 2607.78 
 
It may be seen that the Ministry sanctioned an amount of Rs.255.84 crore over and 
above RE of Rs2619.79 crore. The sanctions excess of budget have been carried over for 
release to RE 2010-11. 
  
The Ministry of Finance, going by the pace of expenditure and th eir own urgencies 
imposed a cut on this Ministry‟s budget as with all other Ministries. “ 
 
1.8 The Committee take note of the explanation of the Government that huge                         
under-utilization of allocated funds was due to the inability of t he States to utilize the funds 
allocated to them largely due to their pre -occupation with the general elections and also due to 
elections in the four major States. The Committee , while appreciating  the efforts made by the 
Ministry to accelerate the pace of  utilisation of funds by holding review meeting with State 
Secretaries, field visits, monitoring of progress reports, capacity building workshops etc on 
regular basis so as to bring down the incidences of non -utilization of funds during the year and 
subsequent reduction at the revised estimate stage  would like to draw the attention of the 
Ministry towards the fact that  non -utilization of funds is not specific in this year, it has been 
persisting for quite some time now. The Committee are dismayed to note t hat despite their 
repeated requests, the Ministry have not utilized the entire allocated funds fully and judiciously. 
The Committee like to draw the attention of the Ministry  to the fact  that any reduction in 
allocation at the revised estimate stage, for w hatever reasons, unjustifiably resulting in the 
deprivation of the targeted beneficiaries of intended benefits and the Committee urge that there 
should be no reduction in fund allocation to the State Governments in respect of the 

5 
 
programmes being undertake n by the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, would like to be 
apprised of the outcome of the fresh measures initiated by the Ministry with a view to 
accelerating the pace of utilisation of funds  and at the same time avoid the situation where 
funds at their disposal are surrendered on any ground.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
 
Poor implementation of SJSRY 
 
1.9 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“Poverty alleviation is central to the urban development strategy. Swarna Jayanti Shahari 
Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) is the only poverty alleviation scheme for the urban dwellers being 
implemented by the Ministry with the aim of providing gainful employment to them. It was 
modified with effect from 01 st of April, 2009 so as to make it more meaningful.  However, it has 
been noticed that out of the total allocation of Rs.515 crore for the year 2009 -2010 only 
Rs.364.27 crore could be spent by the Ministry up to January, 2010. The poor spending of funds 
had a clear impact on the targets. The lone indicator of the success of the scheme is the 
number of persons covered under the scheme. The targets achieved under the scheme do not 
portray a pleasant picture about the progress of the scheme. For example, target fo r number of 
persons to be imparted gainful training under the STEP -UP component of SJSRY was 2,00,000 
whereas the achievement was not even 50% and only 91,019 persons could be covered under 
this scheme. Similarly, against the target of 25,000, the number o f beneficiaries assisted for 
setting up group micro enterprises was only 14,653. The Committee strongly feel that the total 
number of beneficiaries to be covered under the entire scheme is only 3 lakh which in itself is 
not sufficient even to tackle the is sue of unemployment among the urban poor keeping in view 
the ever increase in incidences of poverty in the urban areas. The recent Expert Group Report, 
headed by Shri Suresh Tendulakar, commissioned by the Planning Commission, estimates 
India‟s aggregate p overty to be 37.2% which is higher than what was estimated earlier. The 
estimated figures may vary but it is unarguably too high for a nation growing as rapidly as India. 
Special initiatives are needed to combat it. Thus, a greater allocation of resources is required to 
eliminate the poverty and related problems from the urban areas.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the allocations and the targets fixed by the Ministry should appropriately be 
increased so as to address the mismatch between the numbe r of urban poor and targets set by 
the Ministry. 
    
Moreover, the Committee find that performance in some of the States like Jammu & 
Kashmir, Jharkhand, Punjab, Meghalaya etc. is utterly dismal and no Central Funds have been 
released to them as they could not spend the funds in time and furnish the utilization certificates 
for their past release. Further, the state -wise expenditure reported by the States show that 
Rs.61175.19 lakh of Central fund are still lying unspent with the States. The Committee feel that 
this non -utilisation of fund affects the overall performance of the scheme. The Committee, 

6 
 
therefore, urge the Ministry to take remedial measures so as to ensure that the funds allocated 
to the states are optimally utilized within the stipulated time frame.  
 
The Committee further feel that the Ministry should ensure that personnel involved in the 
implementation of the Scheme should adequately be trained to handle the scheme. Infact, the 
Committee feel that except for the policy making, there should be  an independent agency which 
would handle the implementation part of the scheme. The Committee also feel that instead of 
providing traditional training to the urban poor, the Ministry should specifically design their 
training modules in consultations with the recruiting firms and agencies and the industries, to 
enable the beneficiaries to actually find recruiters. The Committee also feel that instead of 
surrendering the funds allocated for the Capacity Building/Research & Studies, it should be 
optimally uti lized to ensure that additional capacity is built up and optimum results could be 
achieved.”  
 
1.10 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:- 
 
“It is noted that the revised scheme of Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) was  
approved only in January 2009; it became effective from the year 2009 -2010. Due to the 
General Elections of Lok Sabha and State Elections in four major States soon after, the State 
Departments could turn their attention to plan schemes like Swarna Jayanti  Shahari Rozgar 
Yojana (SJSRY) only in the second half of 2009. Submission of Utilisation Certificates for the 
past releases was consequently delayed well beyond normal and therefore Central fund release 
to the States/UTs got consequently delayed. This led  to a downward revised allocation of Rs. 
428.69 crore for the year. However, the Revised Estimates allocation was fully released.  
 
The targets under the scheme were fixed commensurate with the Budget allocation for 
the scheme made by the Planning Commissi on. As the per capita subsidies under the 
revamped SJSRY have been substantially enhanced and the allocation for the scheme 
remained the same at Rs. 515 crore, as in the previous year, the physical targets changed. 
Regarding achievements against the target s, this Ministry is of the understanding that the over 
achievement of targets, which is quite substantial, is due to the States operating the scheme as 
per the old pattern, even as they focused on learning and relearning by all levels of the delivery 
machinery to reengineer the implementation to the revised parameters of the scheme. As per 
the updated Progress Reports received from the States/UTs for the year 2009 -10, number of 
urban poor assisted for individual self -employment are 81301, number of urban po or women 
assisted for Group enterprises are 49974, number of urban poor women assisted through 
revolving fund are 1,36,178 and the number of urban poor  imparted skill training are 1,83,883. 
Thus total beneficiaries covered under the scheme are more than 4 .51 Lakhs, against the target 
of 3 Lakhs.  
 
The views of Hon‟ble Committee regarding enhancement in the allocation for the 
scheme are noted. The Ministry will request Planning Commission for enhanced allocation for 
the scheme next year, basing the projecti ons on desired enhancement as well as the ability of 
the States to implement and utilise. 
 

7 
 
The unspent balances shown with the States/UTs include the Central funds released 
during the years 2008 -2009 (total Rs. 540.67 crore) and 2009 -2010 (total Rs. 421.61  crore), for 
which Utilisation Certificates have not become due till 31 st March 2010. In fact, UCs for only an 
amount of Rs. 18.32 crore were due, as on 31 st March 2010, from total 10 States/UTs, i.e. 
18.56% of the amount (cumulative Rs. 98.71 Crore) relea sed to these 10 States/UTs for which 
Utilisation was expected.  
 
For skill training of urban poor in the emerging skills, the Ministry has circulated 
operational guidelines for the skill training component under SJSRY. Ministry is also guiding the 
States/UTs in skill training under various emerging sectors like tourism & hospitality, wellness, 
security guards, modern appliances etc. 
 
For the capacity building and training of the project functionaries involved in the 
implementation of the scheme at the State /District/Urban Local Body (ULB) level, Ministry has 
empanelled various Institutions under the National Network of Resource Centers (NNRC) for 
comprehensive capacity building on urban poverty issues.  Four such institutions namely the 
Human Settlement Mana gement Institute (HSMI), New Delhi and the 3 Regional Centers for 
Urban & Environmental Studies (RCUES) at Lucknow, Mumbai and Hyderabad has been 
designated as the Nodal Resource Centers for revamped SJSRY and States/UTs have been 
distributed among these 4  Training Institutions for comprehensive capacity building of the 
State/ULB machinery as well as dissemination of the revised Guidelines of SJSRY at the local 
level.  
 
With regard to the independent agency for implementation of the scheme it is submitted 
that the scheme is implemented through designated Nodal Agencies at the State/District/ULB 
level. Independent implementing agencies and NGOs are increasingly being drawn in by States 
in implementing some aspects of the scheme, most commonly the skill traini ng. At the ground 
level, Community Structures such as Community Development Societies (CDS), Neighbourhood 
Committees (NHC) and Neighbourhood Groups (NHG) are involved in the implementation of the 
scheme in collaboration with the UPA Cells in the Urban Loc al Bodies.  However, the 
suggestion of the Committee in this regard will be evaluated for likely increase the budgetary 
demand and will be placed before the States and Planning Commission for serious 
consideration.”  
 
1.11 The reason advanced by the Government for downward revision of allocation for SJSRY 
do not sound to be too convincing. The Committee reiterate that the Ministry should take up the 
matter regarding enhancement in allocation of fund under SJSRY with the Planning Commission 
at the highest level and impress upon the m to enhance the funds under this scheme in order to 
tackle the new challenges that the rapid  growth in urbanization presents today , especially 
keeping in mind drastic increase in the number of poor in urban areas. The Committee noted the 
fact from the reply of the Ministry  that the progress of the Scheme in certain States is not 

8 
 
satisfactory. The Committee are perturbed to know that  even after implementation of revised 
SJSRY scheme with effect from J anuary, 2009, many States/UTs were operating the scheme as 
per the old pattern and not according to the guidelines of the revamped SJSRY. This shows the 
lack of coordination between the Central Government and the State/UT Governments and also 
total disregard and apathy among urban local bodies and other implementing agencies towards 
the guidelines for implementation of the poverty alleviation programme. The Committee , 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should take proper  follow-up action with the States/UTs 
to ensure compliance of Ministry’s guidelines issued to them on SJSRY from time to time.  
 
Further, the Committee in their earlier report had highlighted that the experiences of the 
Community Development Societies (CDSs) , which are involved in t he implementation of the 
scheme in collaboration with the Urban Local Bodies were not noteworthy, as no focused 
attention was given to the formation of these structures in various States. The Committee would 
like to apprised about the status of the number of CDSs formed in the past one year  after 
revamping of the SJSRY  and also about the steps taken up by the Government to promote the 
formation and strengthening of these societies.  The Committee hope that Ministry would take 
such coordinative measures so as  to ensure appropriate and adequate delivery system and 
inform the Committee about their achievement in implementation of the various schemes of the 
urban local bodies in various States/UTs. 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 5 
 
BSUP and IHSDP 
 
1.12 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“Under Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM), the Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Poverty Alleviation has been entrusted with the nodal responsibility for an integrated 
slum development in the 65 Mission cities under the component Basic Services to the Urban 
Poor (BSUP) and for providing shelter and basic amenities in other non -Mission cities under the 
Integrated Housing and Slum Development Programme (IHSDP). The key objectives of these 
programmes are to strive for holistic development, with a healthy and enabling urban 
environment by providing adequate shelter and basic infrastructure facilities. 
 
The submissions made by the Ministry suggest that of the total Additional Central 
Assistance (ACA) of Rs.16356.35 cr ore under the BSUP, about 82.29% have already been 

9 
 
committed to be released to the States/UTs. However, the cumulative ACA released to the 
States/UTs till mid March, 2010 was Rs.4646.64 crore only. Non -utilisation of funds is also 
evident from the fact tha t the number of dwelling units completed and those under construction 
till date is very low. Under BSUP and IHSDP, against the Mission period target of construction 
of 1.5 million housing units, sanctions for only 1022689 dwelling units have been obtained out of 
which, till date, only 165825 units have been completed and 361153 units are still under 
construction. Under IHSDP only 67160 units have been constructed and 137134 units are under 
construction against sanctioned 497671 dwelling units.  The progress  of the scheme is 
extremely dismal especially in the States like Punjab, Delhi, Jharkhand, Rajasthan, Goa and 
Bihar as these states have not yet availed the balance of ACA available with them. The basic 
reason attributed for the non release of the committe d ACA to them is that they have failed to 
submit adequate number of Detailed Project Reports, according to the JNNURM guidelines. The 
Committee are extremely concerned about the under -utilization of funds and delayed 
submission of the Detailed Project Repo rts and express their serious doubts about the number 
of projects which would actually take off and would be completed in time given the slow pace of 
the progress made by these States. 
  
From the material furnished to the Committee they feel that there are  variations in 
progress across the country.  In four years, since this major programme was launched, some 
States and Cities have progressed well and others towards tangible results.  The Committee 
feel that there is a need for more attention to governance reforms followed by building 
capabilities.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that there is a need to support the 
States/ULBs in their capacity building/training programmes in a structured manner to promote 
effective implementation of JNNURM and other poverty alleviation programmes.” 
 
1.13 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:- 
 
“The Ministry has taken many initiatives to enhance the capacity of States/ULBs in preparation 
of DPRs and implementation of projects.  Programme Manag ement Units comprising 5 experts 
have been sanctioned in 26 States.  Similarly, 111 Project Implementation Units have been 
sanctioned with 3-5 experts each at the city/ULB level for supporting implementation. 
 
More than 110 capacity building programmes have been conducted training more than 
12500 officials for States/ULBs.  The Ministry has conducted regular regional review at the level 
of Secretary (HUPA) and State level reviews where senior officers from Mission Directorate and 
Technical organization of HUDCO and BMTPC are going. 
 
In this regard a toolkit for Financial Support for Comprehensive Capacity Building for 
Improved Urban Governance and Poverty Alleviation has been circulated.  The Ministry plans to 
conduct capacity building programmes in the a reas of Project Monitoring, Quality Assurance, 
Social Audit, Reforms Implementation and Implementation of IPoMS in the structured manner in 
the coming years.” 
 

10 
 
1.14 The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry have taken several initiatives to 
enhance the capacity of States/U rban Local Bodies  in preparation of Detailed Project Reports  
and implementation of  the on -going projects. The Committee , however, feel that despite the 
passage of more than three years of JNNURM, very few State Governments have  given priority 
to provide basic services like infrastructure and housing in the urban areas. The Committee in 
their Report had drawn the attention of the Ministry towards the sorry state of affairs of JNNURM 
in some States like Punjab, Delhi, Jharkhand, Raja sthan, Goa and Bihar , where there is huge 
underutilization of resources. The Governments reply is silent as to reasons for non -submission 
of adequate number of DPRs and utilization certificates by these States due to which funds 
allocated to the Ministry a s Additional Central Assistance for the purpose could not be properly 
utilized. The Committee would like the Ministry to inform the Committee the reasons for the slow 
progress of work in these States. The Committee expect the Ministry to take up the matter 
vigorously with the concerned State Governments and ensure better performance in these 
States. The Committee further feel that the completion of on -going projects under JNNURM 
should also be given pri ority. There may be tendency to initiate more new works just to add up 
the data of  on going  works. While allocating funds, it should be analysed as to how many 
incomplete works were given priority and completed during the year. Quality of infrastructure of 
cities created under JNNURM  must also be ensured . The Committee while reiterating their 
earlier recommendation would also like the Ministry to monitor the data with regard to 
incomplete works regularly so that more stress may be given to the complet e the incomplete 
work on priority basis.  The Committee would like to  be apprised of the specific steps taken by 
the Government in this regard.  
 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 9 
 
Interest Subsidy Scheme for Housing the Poor 
 
1.15 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The „Interest Subsidy Scheme for Housing the Poor‟ (ISHUP) to provide 5% subsidy on interest 
charged on loan upto one lakh was introduced in Eleventh Five Year Plan with the allocation of 
1378 crore. During 2010 -11 Rs. 200 crore have been allocate d.  As informed by the Ministry, 

11 
 
during 2009-10 Rs. 5 crore were allocated out of which Rs. 52 lakh have been spent by Andhra 
Pradesh alone by dove-tailing it with a State scheme called „INDIRAMA‟.  There seems to be no 
progress in other States. Some of th e reasons attributed for slow progress, are very late 
finalization of guidelines, unawareness of banks and beneficiaries and less demands from 
States.  The Committee have been informed that ISHUP is to be subsumed in another newly 
introduced scheme called Rajiv Awas Yojana.  The Committee fail to understand the reasons for 
which the Ministry propose such a scheme that takes initially 4 years to take off and then later 
on proposed to be subsumed in another scheme that too has not started as yet. The 
Committee, therefore, expect the Ministry to do proper homework before introducing any 
scheme and then only go to planning Commission for approvals. 
  
The Committee further feel that the maximum limit of one lakh for providing subsidy is 
very low as no house could  be constructed with the amount of one lakh.  Therefore, the 
maximum limit should be approximately raised in order to make it more realistic and attract 
more beneficiaries under the scheme.  Moreover, the States should be directed to study the 
example of A ndhra Pradesh and come up with their demands to avail the benefits of the 
scheme to construct the houses for urban poor.” 
  
1.16 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:- 
 
“Interest Subsidy Scheme for Housing the Urban Poor (ISHUP)  is a demand driven loan based 
scheme aimed at facilitating institutional loans to EWS & LIG beneficiaries and is essentially 
linked to the ability of States in creation of additional housing stock by the State.  The State 
Level Bankers‟ Meetings have been  held so far in the states of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, 
Tamilnadu, Rajasthan, Kerala, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir Uttar Pradesh,  
Punjab, Jharkhand, Pudducherry, Delhi, Himachal Pradesh and Gujarat and first five states 
have fixed a total t arget of 6,29,121 beneficiaries under the Scheme. A review meeting with the 
identified states and banks/HFIs which have entered into agreement with the Central Nodal 
Agencies, namely, Housing and Urban Development Corporation and National Housing Bank 
was held in the month of December 2009 which was also addressed by representative of 
Ministry of Finance to impress upon the banks to make concerted efforts to achieve the targets 
assigned under the Scheme. Apart from this, consultations have been organized at  state level 
involving the concerned State Government and meetings with the State Secretaries, Municipal 
Commissioners, senior level bank officers etc. The states covered so far are Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, Kerala, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Madhy a Pradesh, Haryana, 
Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Orissa, Chhattisgarh, J&K, West Bengal and Assam. The 
response has been encouraging and the scheme has been received well by the State 
Governments and PLIs. 
  
Government has announced a new scheme called Rajiv Awas Yojana (RAY) for the 
slum dwellers and the urban poor.  This scheme aims at providing support to States that are 
willing to provide property rights to slum dwellers. The Government‟s effort through the 
implementation of RAY would be to en courage the States to adopt a pace that will create a 
Slum free India at the earliest.  The objectives of  ISHUP that is   to enable affordable housing  

12 
 
to EWS and LIG segments by giving interest subsidy and RAY, that is, to create slum free India 
are similar.  Further, as the aim of slum free India under RAY cannot be realized unless there is 
provision of affordable housing for EWS/LIG segments of population; the Government is 
considering to subsume the ISHUP Scheme under Rajiv Awas Yojana. Meantime, ISHUP  is 
under implementation. 
 
The „INDIRAMA‟ scheme, which is successful in the state of Andhra Pradesh, is 
discussed by the other states in Conferences organized and  reviewed by the Ministry whenever 
Andhra Pradesh Government is present. These forum serve t o propagate the Andhra Pradesh 
example among others.” 
 
1.17 From the information furnished by the Ministry, the Committee are pained to note                   
that the Interest Subsidy Scheme for Housing the Urban Poor (ISHUP), launched in                           
2008-2009, which aimed at encourag ing people belonging to EWS/LIG sections in urban                   
areas to avail loan from primary lending institutions with Central Government                                  
subsidy for acquisition/construct ion of houses, has dismally failed to achieve its                             
targets so far. The Committee understand that the total outlay as per this                                
programme was Rs.1100 crore which proposed to cover around 3.10 lakh  be neficiaries                           
in four years period. The Ministry in their reply have not provided the number                                           
of beneficiaries covered under the scheme during the period under consideration.                       
However, as per the figures furnished during the examination of the demands for  Grants, there 
was hardly any noticeable progress in the scheme. The Committee feel that the success of the 
Scheme largely depends upon the retail participation  alongwith cooperation among the 
agencies of the State Governments  responsible for implementation of the scheme and the 
primary lending institutions. The Ministry have stated about review meetings with the states and 
banks/HFIs which have entered into agreement with the Central  Nodal Agencies, namely, 
Housing and Urban Development Corporation and  National Housing Bank to make concerted 
efforts to achieve the  targets assigned under the Scheme. Apart from this, consultations were 
organized at state level involving the concerned State Government and meetings with the State 
Secretaries, Municipal Commissioners, senior level bank officers etc. The Committee would like 
to know whether such special review meetings have yielded any desired results in improving the 
performance of the scheme. The Committee, however, strongly feel that there is an urgent need 
to revisit the entire scheme and also increase the subsidised loan component  to make it more 
meaningful. 

13 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No.10 
 
Monitoring of Schemes 
  
1.18 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that their recommendation made in second Report on Demand for Grants 
(2009-10) regarding involving elected representatives in social auditing and monitoring of 
schemes and setting up of Vigilance Committees under the Chairmanship of the local Members 
of Parliament to monitor the progress of various ongoing schemes, supported by the Ministry, 
has not been given due attention.   
 
The Committee are of the firm view that involvement of the Members of Parliament is 
very essential in monitoring  of these scheme, as they can  keep a tight vigil on the quality of 
houses so constructed under JNNURM and keep a watch over the funds being spent under 
SJSRY etc.  Moreover, Members can create awareness among their constituents about the 
contents and bene fits of various schemes, as well as expedite the construction process and 
submission of utilization certificates by States which would further ensure timely funding in 
future.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge the M inistry 
to take up this mater on priority basis and set up a Vigilance Committee on the lines of rural 
development schemes for monitoring and social auditing of the schemes of Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Poverty Alleviation.” 
 
1.19 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:- 
 
“Following discussions in the Meeting of the National Steering Group, the Ministry of Urban 
Development has issued directives vide its letter dated 31.3.2010 to all States, Municipal 
Commissioners of Mission Ci ties and the State Level Nodal Agencies to notify Review & 
Monitoring Committee comprising MPs/ MLAs/ Mayors/ Chairperson of ULB / eminent citizens 
for review and monitoring of projects and reforms.  The order of Ministry of Urban Development 
prescribes Review and Monitoring Committee at the city level for BSUP and UIG and Review 
and Monitoring Committee at district level for UIDSSMT and IHSDP to review and monitor the 
progress of projects and reforms.   
              
The Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty  Alleviation has requested all States/UTs to 
comply with the directives as mentioned above.” 
 
1.20 The Committee are happy to note that both the Ministry of Urban Development and the 
Ministry of Housing  and Urban Poverty Alleviation has understood the importance of involving 
the elected representatives in the monitoring of the on going schemes and have issued 
directives to all States, Municipal Commissioners of Mission Cities and the State Level Nodal 
Agencies to notify a Review & Monitor ing Committee for review ing and monitoring the progress 

14 
 
of projects and reforms, accordingly. However a good number of States are yet to implement the 
Central directives. The Committee desire the Ministry to ensure that their directions in the 
matter are complied with by all States and their agencies and necessary action is taken on their 
part at the earliest. The Committee further desire the Ministry to issue necessary guidelines to 
these agencies to hold meeting s both at State and District Level in each q uarter so as to ensure 
effective monitoring of the projects and schemes. The Committee recommend that the role and 
powers of the Members of Parliament and other Members of the Review & Monitoring Committee 
may also be clearly defined so that they can discharge their duties effectively.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised regularly regarding steps taken by the States and the urban local 
bodies on the directions issued by the Ministry in the matter.  
  

15 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 3 
 
Integrated Low Cost Sanitation Scheme 
  
2.1 Under the Integrated Low Cost Sanitation Scheme (ILCS), which aims at conversion of existing 
individual dry latrines into low cost water seal pour flush latrines and construction of new latrines in 
EWS households, Rs. 71 crore have been allocated for 2010 -11 against the RE of Rs.45.00 crore 
during 2009-10. The Committee are perplexed to note that when ILCS was revised in 2008 to convert 
six lakh dry-latrines into water sealed toilets by 2010, why this target could not be achieved even when 
there are reportedly lesser number of dry latrines i.e., 304724 and that too only in four states.  The 
Committee further note that out of a total of 285930 sanctioned uni ts only 76679 units could be 
completed and 168120 units are in progress.  The Committee are quite apprehensive because the pace 
at which the scheme is progressing leaves much to be desired and wonder if the target could be 
achieved even by the end of 11 th Five Year Plan.  The Committee desire the Ministry to take up the 
matter with the State Governments and remove the impediments whatsoever so that 
conversion/construction work could be completed in time.  
 
 The Committee have been informed that previously S tates had estimated the existence of 6 
lakh dry latrines but afterwards, the States surveyed and informed that the figure is less.  Again, they 
want to conduct survey because, there is a huge difference between both the figures.  The Committee 
are perturbe d to note that the scheme is in operation since 1989 -90 and even today there is doubt 
about the exact figures of dry latrines in various states.  This shows that the Government is not serious 
about the problem.  The Committee, therefore, feel that the Mini stry should take up the matter with the 
States so as to arrive at an approximate number of dry latrines in the country.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 The figure of 6 lakh was the estimate submitted before the scheme was started. At that stage, 2 
states had reported that their surveys were pending and four states had submitted estimates amounting 
to approximate 6 lakh.  The others had noted that dry latrines do not exist.  

16 
 
Since the scheme was launched, house to house surveys were conducted to obtain benefi ciary 
details.  The figures on actual survey changed as follows:  
 
Uttar Pradesh    -- 2,38,253 
Uttarakhand    – 1613 
Bihar    --931 
Jammu and Kashmir  --63927 
 
The implementation of the scheme and conversion of all dry latrines by December, 2010 has 
been actively pursued at all levels, including coordination meetings held by Cabinet Secretary. The 
representatives of Governments of Uttar Pradesh and Uttarrakhand h ave assured the Ministry that they 
would be able to complete the conversion task by December 2010 deadline. Government of Bihar has 
reported additional 931 dry latrines and the State Government has been impressed upon to expedite 
their DPRs for necessary s anction by this Ministry for completion of conversion of all these units of 931 
by December, 2010.   
 
In so far as Jammu and Kashmir is concerned, the State has now informed that the dry latrines 
reported by them do not come under the definition of dry lat rines adopted by the scheme and hence 
they would submit a proposal for using the financial assistance for construction of latrines instead of 
conversion of dry latrines under new construction category of the ILCS Scheme.  
 
Recommendation Serial No. 4 
 
Problem related to lack of proper latrines and open defecation 
 
2.3 The Committee are shocked to learn that as per the Report of WHO 665 million people in India 
still defecate in open which is the highest in the world.  Moreover, as per census 2001, there were  
14,110,936 households without any latrines. The Committee are of the view that in view of increased 
population the number is bound to increase.  In urban localities 26% households do not have latrine 
facility within the house. The Committee are very much perturbed with this embarrassing scenario, and 
recommend the Government to tackle this issue on top priority basis. 
 The Committee observe that the Ministry of HUPA only takes care of dry latrines and under its 
scheme of Integrated Low Cost Sanitation Scheme (ILCS) Rs. 71 crore have been allocated for 
conversion of dry latrines into two -pit pour flush latrines.  During t he evidence, Secretary, HUPA 

17 
 
clarified that problem of no latrines and other kind of open defecation does not come under Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation but the same comes under Ministry of Urban Development 
under the head „total sanitati on‟.  The Committee find that the biggest problem in urban sanitation is 
open defecation by the urban poor and the revised ILCS scheme does not addressed this problem.  
The Committee, therefore, feel that the issue of open defecation should also come under  the jurisdiction 
of Ministry of HUPA instead of Ministry of Urban Development so as to address the problem in a better 
perspective. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 The views of the Committee on the subject of the transfer of business allocation from Ministr y of 
Urban Development to Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation will be put before the 
Government for consideration. 
 
It is noted however that the Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation is                        
contributing significantly to the programme of total sanitation by including the construction of                
individual Toilets in all houses in slums taken up for upgrading and redevelopment under                           
BSUP / ISHDP, the same emphas is has been placed on sanitation in the proposal for RAY.                        
Thus it may be hoped that by the end of these programmes open defecation in slums                                 
would have reduced significantly. The figure of houses constr ucted by toilet facilities and of                       
urban slums respectively 26% & 22% (2001) in urban areas being so proximate, it may be                  
concluded that the slum redevelopment programme would be the most appropriate method of               
tackling open defecation in urban areas.    
 
Recommendation Serial No. 8 
 
Rajiv Awas Yojana 
 
2.5 Rajiv Awas Yojana (RAY) for the slum dwellers and the urban poor envisages a „Slum -free 
India‟ through encouraging States/UTs to tackle the problems of slums in a definitive manner. The 
Committee feel that the main hindrance in the implementation of Rajiv Awas Yojana is ensuring supply 
of adequate serviced land for housing the EWS and LIG segments. The Committee have noticed that 

18 
 
participation on the part of the States have not been forthcoming in initiating of reforms which are pre -
condition to the effecti ve implementation and success of RAY. According to the Ministry‟s own 
submissions, it is a state -led action and the response of the States have been slow. In fact only two 
states viz. Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat have initiated the process of drafting State model frameworks 
based on the initial draft framework circulated by the Ministry. The Committee feel that the target of 
creating a slum free India in five years appears to be largely aspirational since it has not yet taken off till 
date even after the lapse of almost three quarters of a year and the Ministry still trying to impress on the 
stake-holders to initiate reforms.  The Committee feel that all the State/UTs Governments should be 
brought on board before proceeding with the necessary legal and adminis trative reforms especially 
keeping in view that acquisition of land has been a major problem in many States. The Committee feel 
that Ministry should draw realistic targets and realistic time-frame for addressing this issue. 
   
The Committee further feel th at while approving the housing layouts by the city planners 
emphasis should be on the demarcation of plots into small zones comprising of HIG and MIG segments 
along with the LIG and EWS segments so that these could evenly be spread across the city. Moreove r, 
special initiative should be taken to ensure creation of appropriate financial and institutional 
mechanisms for credit enhancement and flow of capital for this programme.     
  
The Committee feel the basic objective of RAY is to assign property rights t o the slum dwellers. 
However, past experiences have shown that in many cases the allottees transfer their rights in favour of 
others and shift to some other slum. The Committee, therefore, recommend that necessary safeguards 
may be included in the agreemen t itself wherein the allottee, or their heir on whom the title devolves on 
inheritance, cannot transfer their rights in any way, till the passage of at least 15 mandatory years from 
allotment.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6 The Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation has taken a series of measures towards 
the launch of RAY and the preparatory activities to be carried out by States and UTs.   
 

19 
 
After the announcement by Hon‟ble President, Ministry of HUPA prepared a Concept Note, 
which was circulated to Planning Commission. The Planning Commission gave its in -principle approval 
to the Concept Note and various consultations were held with Experts, Civil Society Representatives, 
Members of Technical Advisory Group, City Commissions, State Secretaries, Ce ntral Ministries and 
Departments etc. and based on the consultations the draft Guidelines were circulated to Planning 
Commission, Central Ministries and States for their comments.   
              
Based on the comments and suggestions received from Planning  Commission and Central 
Ministries and State Governments on the draft Guidelines and feedback from various quarters, a draft 
Rajiv Awas Yojana (Slum -free India Mission) Scheme was prepared and circulated to an Expert 
Committee constituted under the Chairma nship of Shri Deepak Parekh, Chairman, HDFC to critically 
examine the draft Rajiv Awas Yojana scheme prepared by the Ministry. The Committee has appraised 
and made suggestions on strategies, financial pattern and other features of the scheme.  Deepak 
Parekh Committee has recently submitted its report on 26.4.2010 and the Ministry has analysed the 
comments. The recommendations were discussed by Minister (HUPA) with Planning Commission, 
PMO and the Committee.  A revised scheme is prepared. The Ministry agrees  that target of 5 years is 
aspirational.  Therefore, it is envisaged that scheme would be implemented at the pace led by State 
pace of action. 
              
In order to utilize the budget of Rs.150 crore for RAY in 2009 -10, the Ministry held an EFC 
meeting in January, 2010, and it was decided to utilize Rs.120 crore (Rs. 60 crore in 2009 -10 and Rs. 
60 crore in 2010 -11) for preparatory activities such as compilation of data base, capacity building and 
slum free city planning activities for Rajiv Awas Yojana,  duly taking into account the suggestions by the 
Planning Commission and Finance Ministry.  In this respect a scheme of Slum -free City Planning for 
Rajiv Awas Yojana, with focus on Slum Survey, Slum MIS, GIS Mapping of Slums and Preparation of 
Slum-free Ci ty and State Plans has been started in March 2010. Out of this, Rs. 60 crore has been 
released to 20 States in 2009-10. An equal amount is expected to be released in the year 2010-11 also.   
  
Meanwhile, the Ministry has also held deliberations on the “Model Legal Framework for 
Assigning Property Rights to Slum Dwellers/Urban Poor” with State Government Officials, experts from 

20 
 
National Law School., Bangalore, National Law University, Delhi, Scho ol of Planning and Architecture, 
Delhi, Institute of Town Planners of India, etc. to guide the development of a model legal legislative 
framework for according property rights to slum dwellers/urban poor.  A draft model legal framework for 
according property rights to slum dwellers/urban poor (including housing or land to accommodate such 
housing) along with basic amenities such as water and sanitation, has been prepared by the Ministry 
and circulated to experts/State Nodal Agencies for their views and taki ng appropriate action with regard 
to developing their State level legal frameworks. 
 
Regarding the recommendation of the Committee that necessary safeguards may be included in 
the agreement itself wherein the allottee, or their heir on whom the title devol ves on inheritance, cannot 
transfer their rights in any way, till the passage of at least 15 mandatory years from allotment, the 
Ministry would keep the same in mind while formulating the programme.  
   
A provision of Rs.1270 crore has been  made for RAY f or year 2010-11, Rs. 1200 crore is in the 
budget of Department of Expenditure for release to States, Rs.10.20 crore in the Budget of Ministry of 
Home Affairs (for release to Delhi and Puducherry) and Rs.60 crore in the budget of Ministry of Housing 
& Urban Poverty Alleviation.   
 
The Ministry also emphasizes the pro -poor reforms on Reservation of land for EWS /LIG in all 
housing layouts which leads to inclusive development as recommended by the Committee.  The reform 
is an integral part of Rajiv Awas Yojana. 
 
Recommendation Serial No.10 
 
Monitoring of Schemes 
  
2.7 The Committee note that their recommendation made in second Report on Demand for Grants 
(2009-10) regarding involving elected representatives in social auditing and monitoring of schemes and 
setting up of Vigilance Committees under the Chairmanship of the local Members of Parliament to 
monitor the progress of various ongoing schemes, supported by the Ministry, has not been given due 
attention.   
 

21 
 
The Committee are of the firm view that involvement of the Members of Parliament is very 
essential in monitoring  of these scheme, as they can  keep a tight vigil on the quality of houses so 
constructed under JNNURM and keep a watch over the funds being spent under SJSRY etc.  
Moreover, Members can create awareness among their constituents about the contents and bene fits of 
various schemes, as well as expedite the construction process and submission of utilization certificates 
by States which would further ensure timely funding in future.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
earlier recommendation and urge the M inistry to take up this mater on priority basis and set up a 
Vigilance Committee on the lines of rural development schemes for monitoring and social auditing of 
the schemes of Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.8 Following discussions in the Meeting of the National Steering Group, the Ministry of Urban 
Development has issued directives vide its letter dated 31.3.2010 to all States, Municipal 
Commissioners of Mission Cities and the State Level Nodal Agencies to no tify Review & Monitoring 
Committee comprising MPs/ MLAs/ Mayors/ Chairperson of ULB / eminent citizens for review and 
monitoring of projects and reforms.  The order of Ministry of Urban Development prescribes Review and 
Monitoring Committee at the city lev el for BSUP and UIG and Review and Monitoring Committee at 
district level for UIDSSMT and IHSDP to review and monitor the progress of projects and reforms.   
              
The Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation has requested all States/UTs to comply 
with the directives as mentioned above. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
2.9 For comments of the Committee please see paragraph No.1.18 of Chapter-I of the Report 
  

22 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
  

23 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 1 
 
Underutilization of funds 
 
4.1 From the expenditure details as furnished by the Ministry, the Committee note that there has 
been gross underutilization of funds during the year 2009 -2010. The total allocation for the year 2009 -
2010 was Rs.850 crore out of which only Rs.521.56 crore coul d be spent. Scheme -wise analysis also 
shows that there is a general shortfall in the utilization of funds across almost every programme 
implemented by the Ministry. For example, the total allocation under SJSRY was Rs.515 crore while the 
actual expenditure was Rs.413.81 crore only. Similarly, the allocation under the ILCS was Rs.60 crore 
while the actual expenditure was Rs.36.92 crore only. The actual expenditure during the period was 
38.64% below than what was allocated to the Ministry at the BE stage. So far as the expenditure of the 
funds received as Additional Central Assistance are concerned, while the BE 2009 -2010 for the BSUP 
and IHSDP was Rs.2524.65 crore and Rs.1117.58 crore respectively, it was reduced to Rs. 1344.36 
crore and Rs.786.74 crore at RE  stage. Even this reduced allocation could not be spent fully and the 
actual expenditure under both BSUP and IHSDP schemes was only Rs.922.05 crore and Rs.613.19 
crore, respectively.  
 
From this, the Committee can easily draw the inference that the deliver y mechanism of the 
Ministry is not proper and needs an urgent attention. What is more distressing to note is that while on 
the one hand the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation has demanded the larger allocation 
of funds for successful impleme ntation of various schemes, their actual performance shows that they 
have not been able to utilize the amount allocated to them completely. The Committee need to 
emphasize that this trend of under utilization of funds results in cut at the Revised Estimate  stage. That 
is why year after year plan allocations get reduced at RE stage which is evident from the fact that in 
2008-2009, the allocation was reduced from Rs.850 crore to Rs.670 crore and in 2009 -2010 from 
Rs.850 crore to Rs.575 crore. If the Ministry fails to spend even 60% of the entire funds allocated to 

24 
 
them till the month of December, it cannot escape the cut at the RE stage.  Moreover, under -utilisation 
of funds results in the reduced allocation of funds in successive years. Thus, the onus lies on  the 
Ministry to utilize the funds fully and that too in time to avoid reduction in allocation which ultimately 
reflect on the performance of schemes. 
 
The Committee are of the firm opinion that there are serious problems in planning and 
implementation of various schemes. There is an urgent need to review the situation scheme -wise and 
project-wise. The corrective action in this regard should be taken immediately and the Committee 
informed accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 4.2 Utilisation of the allocated budget is dependent upon the ability of the States to submit requisite 
proposals for seeking 2nd installments along with Utilisation Certificates of earlier releases.  Ministry has 
taken vigorous persuasive action with the States and UTs in this regard  such as review meeting with 
State Secretaries, field visits, monitoring of progress reports, capacity building workshops etc. However, 
during 2009-10 the Ministry found constraints of the States by the engagement of their personnel and 
attention in the Ge neral Elections (and in 4 large States thereafter in the State Assembly elections) for 
the first 3-5 months of the year, with the result that their requests for sanctions to subsequent releases 
were slow in coming.  
 
 In case of Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozg ar Yojana (SJSRY), due to the above factors, 
submission of Utilisation Certificates for the past releases was consequently delayed well beyond 
normal and therefore, Central fund release to the States/UTs got consequently delayed. This led to the 
downward R evised Estimates (RE) allocation for the scheme as Rs. 428.69 crore from the Budget 
allocation of Rs. 515.00 crore for the year. However, the Revised Estimates allocation of Rs. 428.69 
crore was fully utilised under SJSRY during 2009-2010.  
  
The Budget pr ovision for the year 2009 -10 under Integrated Low Cost Sanitation Scheme 
(ILCS) was Rs. 60 crore.  However, due to pending finalized Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) from the 
State Governments, actual expenditure incurred on ILCS Scheme during 2009-10 was Rs.50.50 crore.  
 

25 
 
 The Interest Subsidy Scheme for Housing the Urban Poor (ISHUP) scheme was approved by 
the CCEA on 26.12.2008. The guidelines of the scheme were firmed up in February, 2009, and was 
effectively put in place in 2009 -10. Anticipating from th e initial and encouraging response to the 
scheme, an allocation of Rs. 180.59 crore was made during 2009 -10. ISHUP is a demand driven loan 
based scheme aimed at facilitating institutional loans to EWS & LIG beneficiaries and is essentially 
linked to abilit y of States in creation of additional housing stock by the States. FY 2009 -10 being 
effectively the first year of scheme, the response from States has been slow and only Andhra Pradesh 
has been able to take advantage of scheme and dove -tail it with a state  scheme i.e. INDIRAMA. As a 
result the Ministry was constrained to surrender funds to the tune of Rs 175.59 crore at RE stage.  
 
 As regards BSUP and ISHDP the revised allocation was reduced to Rs.2131.10 crores      
following budget cut across the board. T he BE, RE, actual sanction, actual release for the year 2009 -10 
under Basic Services for Urban Poor ( BSUP), Integrated Housing and Slum Development Programme 
(IHSDP), Rajiv Awas Yojana (RAY) and Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY), are as 
follows:- 
(Rs. in crore) 
 BE RE Actual Sanction Actual Release 
BSUP 2524.65 1344.36 1530.27 1338.37 
IHSDP 1117.58 786.74 856.67 780.72 
RAY 150.00 60.00 60.00 60.00 
SJSRY 515.00 428.69 428.69 428.69 
Total 4307.23 2619.79 2875.63 2607.78 
 
 It may be seen that the Ministry sanctioned an amount of Rs.255.84 crore over and above RE of 
Rs2619.79 crore. The sanctions excess of budget have been carried over for release to           RE 2010-
2011. 
  
The Ministry of Finance, going by the pace of expenditure and their own urgencies imposed a 
cut on this Ministry‟s budget as with all other Ministries.  
Comments of the Committee 
 
4.3 For comments of the Committee please see paragraph No.1.8 of Chapter-I of the Report. 

26 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 2 
 
Poor implementation of SJSRY 
 
4.4 Poverty alleviation is central to the urban development strategy. Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar 
Yojana (SJSRY) is the only poverty alleviation scheme for the urban dwellers being implemented by the 
Ministry with the aim of providing gainful employment to them. It was modified with effect from 01 st of 
April, 2009 so as to make it more meaningful.  However, it has been noticed that out of the total 
allocation of Rs.515 crore for the year 2009 -2010 only Rs.364.27 crore could be  spent by the Ministry 
up to January, 2010. The poor spending of funds had a clear impact on the targets. The lone indicator 
of the success of the scheme is the number of persons covered under the scheme. The targets 
achieved under the scheme do not portra y a pleasant picture about the progress of the scheme. For 
example, target for number of persons to be imparted gainful training under the STEP -UP component of 
SJSRY was 2,00,000 whereas the achievement was not even 50% and only 91,019 persons could be 
covered under this scheme. Similarly, against the target of 25,000, the number of beneficiaries assisted 
for setting up group micro enterprises was only 14,653. The Committee strongly feel that the total 
number of beneficiaries to be covered under the entire scheme is only 3 lakh which in itself is not 
sufficient even to tackle the issue of unemployment among the urban poor keeping in view the ever 
increase in incidences of poverty in the urban areas. The recent Expert Group Report, headed by Shri 
Suresh Tendulakar, commissioned by the Planning Commission, estimates India‟s aggregate poverty to 
be 37.2% which is higher than what was estimated earlier. The estimated figures may vary but it is 
unarguably too high for a nation growing as rapidly as India. Special initiatives are needed to combat it. 
Thus, a greater allocation of resources is required to eliminate the poverty and related problems from 
the urban areas. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the allocations and the targets fixed by the 
Ministry should appropriately be increased so as to address the mismatch between the number of urban 
poor and targets set by the Ministry. 
    
Moreover, the Committee find that performance in some of the States like Jammu & Kashmir, 
Jharkhand, Punjab, Meghalaya etc. is  utterly dismal and no Central Funds have been released to them 
as they could not spend the funds in time and furnish the utilization certificates for their past release. 
Further, the state -wise expenditure reported by the States show that Rs.61175.19 lakh  of Central fund 

27 
 
are still lying unspent with the States. The Committee feel that this non -utilisation of fund affects the 
overall performance of the scheme. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to take remedial 
measures so as to ensure that the fun ds allocated to the states are optimally utilized within the 
stipulated time frame.  
 
The Committee further feel that the Ministry should ensure that personnel involved in the 
implementation of the Scheme should adequately be trained to handle the scheme. Infact, the 
Committee feel that except for the policy making, there should be an independent agency which would 
handle the implementation part of the scheme. The Committee also feel that instead of providing 
traditional training to the urban poor, the Mini stry should specifically design their training modules in 
consultations with the recruiting firms and agencies and the industries, to enable the beneficiaries to 
actually find recruiters. The Committee also feel that instead of surrendering the funds alloc ated for the 
Capacity Building/Research & Studies, it should be optimally utilized to ensure that additional capacity 
is built up and optimum results could be achieved.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.5 It is noted that the revised scheme of Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) was 
approved only in January 2009; it became effective from the year 2009 -2010. Due to the General 
Elections of Lok Sabha and State Elections in four major States soon afte r, the State Departments 
could turn their attention to plan schemes like Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY) only in 
the second half of 2009. Submission of Utilisation Certificates for the past releases was consequently 
delayed well beyond normal and therefore Central fund release to the States/UTs got consequently 
delayed. This led to a downward revised allocation of Rs. 428.69 crore for the year. However, the 
Revised Estimates allocation was fully released.  
 
 The targets under the scheme were fi xed commensurate with the Budget allocation for the 
scheme made by the Planning Commission. As the per capita subsidies under the revamped SJSRY 
have been substantially enhanced and the allocation for the scheme remained the same at Rs. 515 
crore, as in th e previous year, the physical targets changed. Regarding achievements against the 
targets, this Ministry is of the understanding that the over achievement of targets, which is quite 

28 
 
substantial, is due to the States operating the scheme as per the old patt ern, even as they focused on 
learning and relearning by all levels of the delivery machinery to reengineer the implementation to the 
revised parameters of the scheme. As per the updated Progress Reports received from the States/UTs 
for the year 2009 -10, number of urban poor assisted for individual self -employment are 81301, number 
of urban poor women assisted for Group enterprises are 49974, number of urban poor women assisted 
through revolving fund are 1,36,178 and the number of urban poor  imparted skill training are 1,83,883. 
Thus total beneficiaries covered under the scheme are more than 4.51 Lakhs, against the target of 3 
Lakhs.  
 
 The views of Hon‟ble Committee regarding enhancement in the allocation for the scheme are 
noted. The Ministry will request Planning Commission for enhanced allocation for the scheme next year, 
basing the projections on desired enhancement as well as the ability of the States to implement and 
utilise. 
 
 The unspent balances shown with the States/UTs include the Central funds re leased during the 
years 2008-2009 (total Rs. 540.67 crore) and 2009 -2010 (total Rs. 421.61 crore), for which Utilisation 
Certificates have not become due till 31 st March 2010. In fact, UCs for only an amount of Rs. 18.32 
crore were due, as on 31st March 2010, from total 10 States/UTs, i.e. 18.56% of the amount (cumulative 
Rs. 98.71 Crore) released to these 10 States/UTs for which Utilisation was expected.  
 
 For skill training of urban poor in the emerging skills, the Ministry has circulated operational 
guidelines for the skill training component under SJSRY. Ministry is also guiding the States/UTs in skill 
training under various emerging sectors like tourism & hospitality, wellness, security guards, modern 
appliances etc. 
 
 For the capacity building and tra ining of the project functionaries involved in the implementation 
of the scheme at the State/District/Urban Local Body (ULB) level, Ministry has empanelled various 
Institutions under the National Network of Resource Centers (NNRC) for comprehensive capacit y 
building on urban poverty issues.  Four such institutions namely the Human Settlement Management 
Institute (HSMI), New Delhi and the 3 Regional Centers for Urban & Environmental Studies (RCUES) at 
Lucknow, Mumbai and Hyderabad has been designated as the Nodal Resource Centers for revamped 

29 
 
SJSRY and States/UTs have been distributed among these 4 Training Institutions for comprehensive 
capacity building of the State/ULB machinery as well as dissemination of the revised Guidelines of 
SJSRY at the local level.  
 
 With regard to the independent agency for implementation of the scheme it is submitted that the 
scheme is implemented through designated Nodal Agencies at the State/District/ULB level. 
Independent implementing agencies and NGOs are increasingly being drawn in by States in 
implementing some aspects of the scheme, most commonly the skill training. At the ground level, 
Community Structures such as Community Development Societies (CDS), Neighbourhood Committees 
(NHC) and Neighbourhood Groups (NHG) are invo lved in the implementation of the scheme in 
collaboration with the UPA Cells in the Urban Local Bodies.  However, the suggestion of the Committee 
in this regard will be evaluated for likely increase the budgetary demand and will be placed before the 
States and Planning Commission for serious consideration.  
 
4.6 For comments of the Committee please see paragraph No.1.11 of Chapter-I of the Report 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 5 
 
BSUP and IHSDP 
 
4.7 Under Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM), the Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Poverty Alleviation has been entrusted with the nodal responsibility for an integrated slum 
development in the 65 Mission cities under the component Basic Services to the Urban Poor (BSUP) 
and for providing shelt er and basic amenities in other non -Mission cities under the Integrated Housing 
and Slum Development Programme (IHSDP). The key objectives of these programmes are to strive for 
holistic development, with a healthy and enabling urban environment by providin g adequate shelter and 
basic infrastructure facilities. 
 
The submissions made by the Ministry suggest that of the total Additional Central Assistance 
(ACA) of Rs.16356.35 crore under the BSUP, about 82.29% have already been committed to be 
released to the States/UTs. However, the cumulative ACA released to the States/UTs till mid March, 
2010 was Rs.4646.64 crore only. Non-utilisation of funds is also evident from the fact that the number of 

30 
 
dwelling units completed and those under construction till date is very low. Under BSUP and IHSDP, 
against the Mission period target of construction of 1.5 million housing units, sanctions for only 1022689 
dwelling units have been obtained out of which, till date, only 165825 units have been completed and 
361153 units are  still under construction. Under IHSDP only 67160 units have been constructed and 
137134 units are under construction against sanctioned 497671 dwelling units.  The progress of the 
scheme is extremely dismal especially in the States like Punjab, Delhi, Jha rkhand, Rajasthan, Goa and 
Bihar as these states have not yet availed the balance of ACA available with them. The basic reason 
attributed for the non release of the committed ACA to them is that they have failed to submit adequate 
number of Detailed Projec t Reports, according to the JNNURM guidelines. The Committee are 
extremely concerned about the under -utilization of funds and delayed submission of the Detailed 
Project Reports and express their serious doubts about the number of projects which would actua lly 
take off and would be completed in time given the slow pace of the progress made by these States.  
 
From the material furnished to the Committee they feel that there are variations in progress 
across the country.  In four years, since this major progra mme was launched, some States and Cities 
have progressed well and others towards tangible results.  The Committee feel that there is a need for 
more attention to governance reforms followed by building capabilities.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend tha t there is a need to support the States/ULBs in their capacity building/training 
programmes in a structured manner to promote effective implementation of JNNURM and other poverty 
alleviation programmes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.8 The Ministry has taken many initiatives to enhance the capacity of States/ULBs in preparation of 
DPRs and implementation of projects.  Programme Management Units comprising 5 experts have been 
sanctioned in 26 States.  Similarly, 111 Project Implementation Units have been sancti oned with 3 -5 
experts each at the city/ULB level for supporting implementation. 
 
 More than 110 capacity building programmes have been conducted training more than 12500 
officials for States/ULBs.  The Ministry has conducted regular regional review at the level of Secretary 
(HUPA) and State level reviews where senior officers from Mission Directorate and Technical 
organization of HUDCO and BMTPC are going. 

31 
 
 
 In this regard a toolkit for Financial Support for Comprehensive Capacity Building for Improved 
Urban Governance and Poverty Alleviation has been circulated.  The Ministry plans to conduct capacity 
building programmes in the areas of Project Monitoring, Quality Assurance, Social Audit, Reforms 
Implementation and Implementation of IPoMS in the structured manner in the coming years. 
 
4.9 For comments of the Committee please see paragraph No.1.14 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 9 
 
Interest Subsidy Scheme for Housing the Poor 
 
4.10 The „Interest Subsidy Scheme for Housing the Poor‟ (ISHUP) to provide 5% subsidy on interest 
charged on loan upto one lakh was introduced in Eleventh Five Year Plan with the allocation of 1378 
crore. During 2010-11 Rs. 200 crore have been allocated.  As informed by the Ministry, during 2009 -10 
Rs. 5 crore were allocated out of which Rs. 52 lakh have been spent by Andhra Pradesh alone by dove -
tailing it with a State scheme called „INDIRAMA‟. There seems to be no progress in other States.  Some 
of the reasons attributed for slow progress, are very late finali zation of guidelines, unawareness of 
banks and beneficiaries and less demands from States.  The Committee have been informed that 
ISHUP is to be subsumed in another newly introduced scheme called Rajiv Awas Yojana. The 
Committee fail to understand the reas ons for which the Ministry propose such a scheme that takes 
initially 4 years to take off and then later on proposed to be subsumed in another scheme that too has 
not started as yet. The Committee, therefore, expect the Ministry to do proper homework befor e 
introducing any scheme and then only go to planning Commission for approvals. 
  
The Committee further feel that the maximum limit of one lakh for providing subsidy is very low 
as no house could be constructed with the amount of one lakh.  Therefore, the maximum limit should be 
approximately raised in order to make it more realistic and attract more beneficiaries under the scheme.  
Moreover, the States should be directed to study the example of Andhra Pradesh and come up with 
their demands to avail the benefits of the scheme to construct the houses for urban poor.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 

32 
 
4.11 Interest Subsidy Scheme for Housing the Urban Poor (ISHUP) is a demand driven loan based 
scheme aimed at facilitating institutional loans to EWS & LIG beneficiaries  and is essentially linked to 
the ability of States in creation of additional housing stock by the State. The State Level Bankers‟ 
Meetings have been held so far in the states of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamilnadu, Rajasthan, 
Kerala, Haryana, Madhya Prad esh, Jammu and Kashmir Uttar Pradesh, Punjab, Jharkhand, 
Pudducherry, Delhi, Himachal Pradesh and Gujarat and first five states have fixed a total target of 
6,29,121 beneficiaries under the Scheme.  A review meeting with the identified states and banks/HFI s 
which have entered into agreement with the Central Nodal Agencies, namely, Housing and Urban 
Development Corporation and National Housing Bank was held in the month of December 2009 which 
was also addressed by representative of Ministry of Finance to imp ress upon the banks to make 
concerted efforts to achieve the targets assigned under the Scheme. Apart from this, consultations have 
been organized at state level involving the concerned State Government and meetings with the State 
Secretaries, Municipal Co mmissioners, senior level bank officers etc. The states covered so far are 
Gujarat, Maharashtra, Kerala, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh, Haryana, 
Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Orissa, Chhattisgarh, J&K, West Bengal and Assam. The  response 
has been encouraging and the scheme has been received well by the State Governments and PLIs.  
 
Government has announced a new scheme called Rajiv Awas Yojana (RAY) for the slum 
dwellers and the urban poor.  This scheme aims at providing support to States that are willing to provide 
property rights to slum dwellers. The Government‟s effort through the implementation of RAY would be 
to encourage the States to adopt a pace that will create a Slum free India at the earliest.  The objectives 
of  ISHUP that is   to enable affordable housing  to EWS and LIG segments by giving interest subsidy 
and RAY, that is, to create slum free India are similar.  Further, as the aim of slum free India under RAY 
cannot be realized unless there is provision of affordable  housing for EWS/LIG segments of population; 
the Government is considering to subsume the ISHUP Scheme under Rajiv Awas Yojana. Meantime, 
ISHUP is under implementation. 
 
The „INDIRAMA‟ scheme, which is successful in the state of Andhra Pradesh, is discusse d by 
the other states in Conferences organized and reviewed by the Ministry whenever Andhra Pradesh 
Government is present. These forum serve to propagate the Andhra Pradesh example among others.  
 

33 
 
4.12 For comments of the Committee please see paragraph No.1.17 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
  

34 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT             
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 6 
 
 Lack of Finance and Land for Housing 
 
5.1 With rapidly rising rural urban migration and economic growth, it is estimated that by 2030, the 
urban population will increase considerably.  Given the trend, the Committee apprehend that with the 
high level of urbanization comes matching low level of poverty accompanied by acute shorta ge of 
houses for the urban poor. As per deposition of the Ministry, there are few constraints that are 
adversely affecting the Government‟s efforts to construct affordable houses.  One of them is lack of 
adequate resources with urban local bodies and another is availability of land. 
  
 The Committee note that under JNNURM, out of the committed allocation of Rs. 42287.04 crore 
during mission period (2005 -12) only 38% could be released by 31.12.2009. The main reason as 
submitted by the States like Punjab and Goa, where no fund has been released, is that they cannot 
raise the State‟s share to match the Central share of funds because the financial health of their 
municipalities is not good. The Committee feel that this problem is more or less same with all the 
States.  
  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry in consultation with the Planning 
Commission and the State Governments should work out a plan to generate the resources and 
financially strengthen the municipalities. The Committee also sugges t to explore the possibilities so that 
the Central share of the total funds allocation for the projects under BSUP and IHSDP may be provided 
to the municipalities directly so as to expedite the whole process. On this aspect the Committee further 
recommend that the experience of better performing States like Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat and cities 
like Ahmedabad could be followed by other States also. 
  
In regard to availability of land, the Committee recommend that the States should be asked to 
make it compul sory in their State expansion plans to specify 5 -10% land for EWS houses.  The 

35 
 
Committee further feel that the State Governments should try to go in for high rise buildings thereby 
accommodating more dwelling units.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.2 The Ministry fully agrees with the observations of the Standing Committee that lack of adequate 
resources with the Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) and availability of land are adversely affecting the 
government‟s effort to construct affordable houses. The Standing Commi ttee has rightly observed that 
in several States the Municipalities are not in a position to match the Central share of funds under 
JNNURM because of their precarious financial condition. However, there   is also the problem of non 
release of matching Stat e Share on time. Central assistance under JNNURM is provided to States as 
transfer in the form of Plan assistance (Additional Central Assistance).  Under the current financing 
pattern of JNNURM  the Central share is being  released  in the form of  Additio nal Central Assistance 
(ACA)  through  Ministry of Finance ( to States ) and Ministry of Home Affairs ( to Union Territories). 
Accordingly, it may not be possible to release funds to ULBs directly.  
 
 In so far as BSUP/IHSDP components under JNNURM are con cerned, out of the 7 year 
allocation of Rs. 23184.66 crore the Ministry committed ACA of Rs. 19910.58 Crore as on 30.6.2010 for 
1421 projects under BSUP/IHSDP in 31 States/UTs.  Out of this commitment Rs. 8841.39 crore has 
been released.  This includes 1 st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th installments for different projects depending upon their 
progress of implementation. Further releases depend upon the ability of the States to submit requisite 
proposals for seeking 2 nd and subsequent installments of ACA along with the U tilization Certificates of 
earlier releases. 
 
 As regards financially strengthening the Municipalities is concerned, the Thirteenth Finance 
Commission has recommended that local bodies be transferred a percentage of divisible part of taxes 
(over and above the share of the states).  For the year 2010-11, the recommended Aggregate Grants to 
local bodies is 1.5%. Further the Thirteenth Finance Commission recommends that State Governments 
should incentivize revenue collection by local bodies through methods suc h as mandating some or all 
local taxes as obligatory at non -zero rates of levy, by deducting deemed own revenue collection from 
transfer entitlements of local bodies, or through a system of matching grants.  
 

36 
 
 Regarding availability of land for EWS/LIG housing, the National Urban Housing and Habitat 
Policy, 2007 provides that 10% -15% land or 20%-25% Floor Area Ratio (FAR), whichever is greater, to 
be reserved for EWS and LIG housing.  
 
Recommendation Serial No. 7 
 
Promoting Public-Private Partnership to address the urban housing shortage problem 
 
5.3 As per the estimates of the Technical Group constituted by the Ministry, the total urban housing 
shortage in the country is projected to go up to 26.53 million durin g the 11th Five Year Plan (2007 -
2012). Out of the total urban housing deficit almost 99% pertains to EWS/LIG category houses.  
 
The Committee feel that the situation is very alarming and needs to be seriously addressed as 
housing is one of the basic human needs for which sufficient funding is required. The Working Group on 
Urban Housing pertaining to the 11th Plan  estimated that an investment of Rs.3,61,318.10 crore would 
be required for overcoming the problem of urban housing shortage, bulk of which belong  to the 
EWS/LIG category.  
 
The Committee further feel that the enormity of the funds that are required for the purpose 
cannot be met by the public money alone and desire that ample scope should be created for public -
private partnership in the housing sect or. S ince affordable housing projects may not be a viable 
business proposition for the private players, special fiscal and spatial incentives need to be devised to 
attract them. Incentives in the form of tax rebates on housing also needs to be re -looked in  present 
circumstances and the Committee would like the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation 
along with the Ministry of Finance to devise a mechanism to promote private participation in the housing 
sector especially for the EWS/LIG category an d arrive at a plausible solution.  State Governments and 
Urban Local Bodies may be advised to bring in necessary legislation to make lands available at 
affordable prices for the urban poor. However, while encouraging public -private partnership necessary 
caution may be exercised so that the interest of the urban poor are protected.  
  
The Committee appreciate the launch of the new initiative entitled, „Affordable Housing in 
Partnership‟ by the Ministry under which Rs.50,000 or 25% of the infrastructure cost wo uld be given as 

37 
 
subsidy for construction of each EWS dwelling unit. The Committee urge the Ministry to issue 
necessary guidelines so as to ensure enhanced participation by the Urban local bodies and developers 
in realizing the goal of affordable housing for all.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.4 It is noted that at 2008 -2009 prices, the requirement of funds for Affordable Housing for All is   
far higher under the scheme of „Affordable Housing in Partnership‟. A McKinsey Consulting Group 
report on the urban sector puts the requirement at Rs 423614.30 crore. The Ministry is pursuing the 
matter for issue of model guidelines for Public -Private Partnership in Housing to address the issues and 
two national level consultations involving NAREDCO and FICCI were held with the experts, 
realtors/developers and State Government representatives to develop a consensus on methodologies 
for developing such partnership. 
 
 In addition, noting that the size of the Affordable Housing for All ( AHA) programme cannot be 
done by the public sector alone, the Ministry is pursuing with the Ministry of Finance the creation of a 
set of initiatives to induce private sector development of Affordable Housing. 
 
New Delhi;  
 
01 December, 2010 
10 Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka) 
SHARAD YADAV  
Chairman 
Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
 
  

38 
 
APPENDIX - I 
 
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT(2010-2011) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON                                        
WEDNESDAY, 01 DECEMBER, 2010 
 
The Committee sat from 15 00 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Room No. „ D‟, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Sharad Yadav - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
3. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa 
4. Shri Sakti Mohan Malik 
5. Shri Ramesh Kumar 
6. Shri P.C. Mohan 
7. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
8. Shri Kadir Rana 
9. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Surendra Motilal Patel 
11. Shri Shyam Benegal 
12. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar 
SECRETARIAT 
 

39 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri K.D. Muley  -  Director 
3. Ms. Amita Walia  -  Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee. The 
Committee then took up for consideration the following draft Action Taken Reports:-  
 
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by the  Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on „Demands for Grants 2010 -
2011 of the Ministry Urban Development. 
 
(ii)  Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on „Demands for Grants 
2010-2011 of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation. 
 
3. The Committee adopted the draft Action Taken Reports without any change(s)/modifications.  
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise both the reports and present the same 
to the Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
* * * * * 
 
 
 
  

40 
 
APPENDIX - II 
[vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN 
DEVELOPMENT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
I. Total number of recommendations                                                10 
 
II. Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government                                    04 
 
(Para Nos. 3, 4, 8 and 10) 
 
Percentage to total recommendations                                          (40%) 
 
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue  
in view of Government‟s replies:                        NIL 
  
 
Percentage to total recommendations                                   NIL 
 
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the  
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:                       04 
 
(Para Nos. 1, 2, 5, and 9) 
 
Percentage to total recommendations                       (40%)
  
 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the                                        
Government are still awaited:                                                                                               02  
 
(Para No.  6 and 7)                                                     
 
Percentage to total recommendations                    (20%) 
 
 
 