 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2009-2010) 
                                
             FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT   
 
 
 
SOLID WASTE MANGEMENT   
 
(Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Thirty 
Eighth Report of the Committee on Urban Development (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Solid 
Waste Management ) 
 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
      
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
March, 2010 / Phalguna, 1931 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    5 


 
 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2009-2010) 
 
                                
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT   
 
  
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT 
 
(Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Thirty 
Eighth Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha)  
   
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21.4.2010 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  21.4.2010 
  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March, 2010/Phalguna, 1931 (Saka) 


 
    
 
C.U.D No. 55 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2009 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by the Indian Press, Delhi-110033. 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .....................……….…………………........ …..(iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ......................................................................……………………………. (v) 
 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I Repot…………………………….. 1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/ Observations that have been accepted by 
the Government………………………… 
 
20 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/ Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies……… 
 
40 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee………………………….. 
 
 
45 
CHAPTER V Recommendations / Observations in respect of which replies 
of the Government are still awaited………….. 
 
56 
 
 
 
APPENDICIS 
 
I. Minutes of the Seventh  sitting of the Standing Committee on Urban Development 
(2008-09) held on 11th  February, 2010.                                            ….        59 
                           
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirty Sixth Report of the Committee (14th Lok Sabha)   …. 61 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010) 
 
Shri Sharad Yadav         -        Chairman 
  
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.    Shri J.P. Agarwal 
3.    Shri Praveen Singh Aron 
4.    Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
5.    Shri Partap Singh Bajwa 
6.    Shri Ambica Banerjee 
7.    Smt. Priya Dutt 
8.    Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
9.    Sk. Saidul Haque 
10.  Shri Kailash Joshi 
11.  Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
12.  Shri Ramesh Kumar 
13.  Shri Radhe Mohan Singh 
14.  Shri P.C. Mohan 
15.  Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
16.  Shri Sonawane Pratap Narayanrao 
17.  Shri Baijayant Panda 
18.  Prof. Ramshankar 
19.  Shri Kadir Rana 
20.  Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
21. Shri Adagooru H. Vishwanath 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Parvez Hashmi 
23. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
 24. Shri Surendra Motilal Patel 
 25. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki 
 26. Shri Amir Alam Khan 
 27. Shri Manohar Joshi 
 28. Shri Varinder Singh Bajwa 
 29. Shri Shyam Benegal 
 30. Vacant 
 31. Vacant 
(ii)

 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda  - Additional Director 
3. Smt. Emma C. Barwa  - Committee Officer 
4. Shri Sumit Kumar Grover - Committee Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2009 -10) 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on  their behalf, present 
the Fifth Report (15th Lok Sabha)  on the action taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Thirty-Eighth Report (14th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Urban Development on the subject " Solid Waste Manageme nt" of the 
Ministry of Urban Development. 
 
2. The Thirty- Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 17th February, 2009.  
Replies of the Government to all the recommendations contain ed in the Report were 
received in March, 2009.  
 
3. The Standing Committ ee on Urban Development considered and adopted this 
Report at their sitting held on 11th February, 2010. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Thirty–Eighth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Commit tee is given 
at Annexure-II. 
 
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the 
Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;         SHARAD YADAV 
11th February, 2010                     Chairman, 
Magha,1931 (Saka)                     Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 
 
1 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
  
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in their Thirty Eighth Report 
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on "Solid Waste Management” relating to the Ministry of Urban 
Development, which was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 18 th  December, 
2008. 
 
1.2 Action taken notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the 23 
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government 
(Chapter-II): 
 
Sl. Nos. 1, 4, 6, 8, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 20, 21 and 23                                                                                                                                                                   
               (Total 12) 
          
(ii) Recommendations/Observations, which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the replies of the Government (Chapter-III): 
 
              Sl. Nos. 7, 10 and 19           (Total 3 ) 
 
 

 
 
2 
 
(iii)Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration (Chapter-IV): 
 
 Sl. Nos. 2, 3, 5, 9, 12 and 22                                         (Total  6) 
          
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are 
still awaited (Chapter-V): 
 
Sl. Nos. 11 and 17                         (Total  2) 
 
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given by the Government to the 
implementation of their Recommendations. In cases, where it is not possible for the Government 
to implement the Recommendations(s) either fully or partially, for any reason, the matter may be 
reported to the Committee with reasons for non-implementation. 
 
1.4 The Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter-I of this Report and final replies in respect  
of the Recommendations for which only interim replies have been furnished by the Government  
(included in Chapter -V) may be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case, not later than 
three months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
1.5 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their 
recommendations in the succeeding paragraph: 

 
 
3 
 
  
 Recommendation (Para No. 2)  
 
Implementation of Municipal Solid Waste (Management & Handling) Rules, 2000 
 
 
1.6 In their report, the Committee had observed as below:- 
 The Committee note that the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India, 
have notified the „Municipal Solid Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2000 through 
which specific directives have been issued to the urban local bodies, District Administrations and 
Departments of Urban Development of the State Governments to ensure proper and scientific 
management of municipal solid waste. The Ministry of Urban Development have not yet 
formulated any Nati onal Waste Policy for Solid Waste Management as according to them the 
MSW (M&H) Rules, 2000 act as the policy to handle MSW. However, the Ministry of Urban 
Development brought out a Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management in May, 2000 to 
facilitate the ULBs to address issues relating to the Solid Waste Management. In this connection, 
the Committee are distressed to note that the deadline of December, 2003 for implementation of 
MSW (M & H) Rules, 2000 could not be achieved due to huge capital investment r equired to 
implement, operate and maintain solid waste management projects.  Several other impediments 
like lack of planning, absence of segregation of waste at source, inadequate house -to-house 
collection, transportation, treatment and disposal of municip al solid waste, etc., have been 
identified by the Government in implementation of the MSW Rules, 2000. Consequently, the 
Committee note that the deadline for State Departments of Urban Development and Urban Local 
Bodies for implementation of these rules ha s been extended upto December 2008. The 

 
 
4 
 
Committee are sure that even this deadline would not be met since most of the ULBs and State 
Governments still lack requisite investment and infrastructure facilities for the same. The 
Committee, therefore, desire th at the Ministry should impress upon the States that they should 
take all steps necessary to ensure that MSW (M&H) Rules, 2000 are strictly implemented by all 
concerned as early as possible.  At the same time, the Committee also recommend that while 
sanctioning the Solid Waste Management Projects submitted by the States under the Centrally -
Sponsored Schemes like Jawharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) and 
Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme in Small and Medium Towns (UIDSSMT), the 
Government should ensure the implementation of MSW (M&H) Rules, 2000 as a pre-condition.  
  
 
1.7 The Government have replied as below: 
 
 "The Ministry had conducted Regional Workshops between November 2007 and 
February 2008 at various places viz. Chennai, Nagpur,  Chandigarh, Bhubaneswar, Guwahati and 
Dehradun to impart training to the personnel working in various ULBs, parastatals and State 
Nodal Agencies for preparation of Detailed Project Reports under UIG and UIDSSMT of 
JNNURM as per the guidelines of Municipal  Solid Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 
2000 and Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management published by this Ministry. Guidelines 
for preparation of DPRs had also been circulated to the participants in soft and hard copies for 
their reference and fu rther action. These steps are expected to enhance the knowledge and 
expertise of the participants for preparation of qualitative detailed project reports for 
consideration under JNNURM. 
Under JNNURM, while appraising the DPRs in respect of solid waste mana gement 
schemes posed by the ULBs, the CPHEEO (the technical wing of the Ministry) examines 
the DPRs with reference to the guidelines of MSW (M&H) Rules, 2000 and Manual on 
Municipal Solid Waste Management published by this Ministry and also the 

 
 
5 
 
characteristics of waste being generated by the concerned ULBs, their quantity, 
population, soil condition, topography and other technical parameters. While approving 
the DPRs, the CPHEEO recommends source segregation including recovery of 
recyclables so as to minimi ze quantum of waste for treatment facilities. Technology 
options such as composting, vermi -composting, energy recovery through RDF etc. for 
treatment of waste also reviewed based on the field conditions and characteristics of the 
wastes and technical approval accorded accordingly. " 
 
1.8. The Committee find the reply of the Ministry inadequate to address the most 
significant point raised in their recommendation. The implementation of MSW 
(Management & Handling) Rules, 2000 is required to be carried out by S tate Departments 
and Urban Local Bodies throughout the entire country while the Ministry’s reply is 
confined to JNNURM only, which at present is applicable for 65 cities only out of a total of 
5161 cities / towns all over India. Though the Committee apprec iate the efforts of the 
Ministry in assessing the DPRs submitted by the Mission cities for Solid Waste 
Management schemes in the light of MSW Rules as well as in conducting workshops to 
raise awareness on the issue, they feel that the requisite thrust by t he concerned authorities 
to ensure responsible handling of municipal solid waste still remains to be seen. Moreover, 
even the number of Solid Waste projects under the Mission is only thirty -seven till date, 
which cannot be termed as impressive. Besides, th e CPHEEO is understood to have 
rejected the DPR submitted for Solid Waste Management scheme in the city of Nashik. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the latest status in this case, as well as the increase, 
if any, in the number of Solid Waste Mana gement Schemes approved under JNNURM. 
The Committee are of the firm opinion that unless all the cities and towns gear up to 
reduce and manage their waste on a war footing as envisaged under MSW Rules, 2000, 

 
 
6 
 
urban people will continue to face pandemics and hardships and the country will have to 
suffer ridicule among the international community for the increasing garbage mountains 
all around its major cities. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to continue 
providing expert guidance to ULBs of Mission cities as well as other cities to follow the 
rules stringently for scientific handling and professional management of their solid waste.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
National Urban Sanitation Policy 
 
1.9 In their report, the Committee had observed as below: 
 Open defecation, particularly, near urban slums and railway tracks is still      prevalent in 
most of the cities and urban areas. It acts as a major hindrance in achieving „clean city‟ status. 
The Committee are happy to note that the long awaited N ational Urban Sanitation Policy has 
been approved by the Cabinet on 3rd October, 2008 during the International Year of Sanitation, 
with a view to formulate policy guidelines, strategies for implementation of sewerage and 
sanitation facilities in the urban areas, so as to eliminate open defecation in the cities and towns. 
To achieve the goals of National Urban Sanitation Policy, the Government is reportedly 
contemplating steps like awareness generation and behavioural change, integrated citywide 
sanitation system, sanitary and safe disposal, proper maintenance and management of all sanitary 
installation, etc. in due course. The Committee feel that for effective implementation of the 
National Urban Sanitation Policy, a time -bound action plan with specified tar gets focussing on 
the prevailing conditions in a State needs to be framed by the Government, with adequate 
financial support so that ULBs could be strengthened to provide substantial sanitation services. 

 
 
7 
 
The Committee hope that the Central Government and t he States will take necessary steps to 
achieve this goal. 
1.10 The Government have replied as under: 
"Sanitation is a State subject and hence it is the responsibility of the States to 
formulate and implement programmes for elimination of open defecation as  well 
as safe disposal of human excreta. However, the Central Government supplements 
the efforts of behavioural changes among public through awareness creation and 
seeks to promote open defecation free cities. In addition, the policy enunciates 
development of state sanitation strategies which include setting up of State level 
standards, asset creation, capacity building & training, reaching the urban poor, 
monitoring & evaluation etc. The policy also requires the preparation of City 
Sanitation Plan by the r espective ULBs to achieve the goal of 100% sanitation 
and open defection free cities in a time bound manner. The implementation of the 
City Sanitation Plan shall be monitored by the City Sanitation Task Force. A 
Programme of awareness generation is under f ormulation. Requests have also 
been received from some states for financial assistance for the formulation of state 
sanitation strategies and city sanitation plans. 
 
1.11 While the Committee agree  with the Ministry’s view that the subject of sanitation 
falls under the purview of State Governments and thus, it is their responsibility to 
formulate and implement sanitation plans and programmes, they, in their original 
recommendation, had felt the need for a time -bound plan with specific target. Now the 
Committee note from the Annual Report (2008 -2009) of the Ministry that there indeed is a 
target set under the National Urban Sanitation Policy, which is, hundred per cent 
sanitation during the 11 th Five Year Plan (2007-2012) with resources to the extent of Rs. 5 0 
crore over the 5 -year period. The Ministry have also not reflected another fact in their 

 
 
8 
 
Action Taken Reply that a National Advisory Group on Urban Sanitation already exists 
with representatives of various Ministries including that of Urban Development, external 
experts and State Government Representatives to assist them in implementing the 
Sanitation Policy. The Committee believe that counselling State Governments on achieving 
the desired goal of 100% sanitation and making appropriate suggestions for the  same is a 
part of the mandate of this Advisory Group. They feel that in view of the history of dismal 
performance of earlier sanitation scheme like the ILCS (Integrated Low Cost  Sanitation 
Scheme), a sense of accountability as well as commitment is requi red on the part of the 
Central Ministry , the State Governments and various stakeholders to bring requisite 
change in the current sanitation and hygiene scenario in urban households. Therefore, the 
Committee reiterate their earlier stand  and would like to  be apprised about the cities, 
which have prepared their Sanitation Plans, as well as any financial assistance extended to 
them from the Central Government.    
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) for Municipal Solid Waste 
1.12 In their report, the Committee had observed as below:- 
Lack of funds with Urban Local Bodies has been identified as a major hindrance in 
proper solid waste management. In this context, the Committee have been informed that Kerala 
State Government has created a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) for power generation  by 
integrating its 60 municipalities with three intermediate depots to collect garbage and waste to 
dispose it off in large containers. Ahmedabad and Bangalore cities have also reportedly created 
SPV for management of municipal solid waste. The Committee,  therefore, recommend that the 

 
 
9 
 
Government should closely monitor these initiatives and if found suitable, encourage other 
States, cities and ULBs to create such SPVs to address the shortage of funds. The Committee 
also recommend that the Government should examine the feasibility of developing, with 
adequate financial support, model clean cities in each State which demonstrate innovative MSW 
Management system. 
1.13 The Government have replied as under: 
“One of the optional reforms indicated in the JNNURM gui delines is to encourage Public 
Private Partnership. Under the approved JNNURM schemes, some cities have envisaged 
Public Private Partnership in lieu of contribution of ULBs In certain schemes, the 
operation and maintenance of compost plants have been propo sed for funding through 
private partnership. For instance, Coimbatore city has tied up with a private partner to set 
up compost plant/ Landfill site by the ULB share of the SWM project approved under 
JNNURM including O&M facilities created for a period of 20 years. Similarly, Surat city 
is contemplating entrusting construction and O&M of compost plant to a private operator. 
Secretary (UD) has issued an Advisory on SWM to all the States emphasizing the need 
for preparation of good quality DPR, timely impleme ntation of the approved SWM 
project, its effective O&M and levy of reasonable user charge to generate adequate 
revenue to make the scheme self-sustainable in the long run.”   
  
1.14 The Committee are not convinced by the reply tendered by the Ministry on t heir 
recommendation to encourage other States, cities and ULBs to create SPVs to address the 
shortage of funds as well as to examine the feasibility of developing ‘model clean cities’. 
There is no response from the Ministry on the latter part of the recomm endation and 
instead, the Committee have been merely informed that encouragement of Public Private 
Partnership is an optional reform indicated in the JNNURM under which few cities have 
tied up with private partners to set up compost plants / landfill sites . The Committee had 

 
 
10 
 
recommended that the Ministry should closely monitor these initiatives. They are aware 
that a fully -functional  JNNURM Directorate exists in the Ministry, which can coordinate 
with IRMAs (Independent Review and Monitoring Agencies) set up / proposed to be set up 
in 36 cities / States to know best practices followed by some of the cities like Coimbatore 
and Surat in handling their solid waste.  The Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that developing ‘model clean cities’ or en couraging and awarding cities 
with exemplary performance in the sanitation field will encourage other cities to follow 
suit. Specific response of the Government on the same would be appreciated.  
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
Non-Completion of Pilot Projects in Solid Waste Management in Airfield Towns 
 
1.15 In their report, the Committee had observed as below:- 
 The Committee are distressed to note that though the scheme of Solid Waste 
Management in 10 airfield towns was scheduled to be completed by March, 20 08, it has been 
delayed badly in Pune, Tezpur and Hindon. Only 45 per cent, 10 per cent and 45 per cent of 
work has been completed respectively in the three towns as on 30.6.2008. The progress of work 
in respect of project at Bareily has also remained inco mplete as per the information furnished to 
the Committee. They are perturbed to note that despite their recommendation in 31 st Report on 
Demands for Grants (2008-2009) (14th Lok Sabha) of the Ministry of Urban Development urging 
the Ministry to take necessary action in the matter for urgently completing the schemes in the 
remaining 4 towns, substantial amount of work is still left, particularly in Tezpur. While urging 
for completion of these schemes without further delay, the Committee would like to be apprised 
of the present status of implementation of these projects, along with the steps taken by the 

 
 
11 
 
Ministry in 2008 to remove the impediments in the projects pending till dat e. They hope that the 
Ministry would take up the matter concerning Tezpur with appropriate authorities urgently lest 
the very objective of the scheme would stand defeated.  
1.16 The Government have replied as under: 
 “The Tezpur project was mainly delayed due to non -availability of land for the project. 
Now, the land is in the possession of the State Government which will be handed over to NBCC 
for execution of the project. NBCC has called for tenders for implementation of Tezpur project. 
It is hoped that the Tezpur project may be completed by the end of this year.     
 As regards the Bareilly project, it is stated that the project was held up for want of funds. 
The funds have now been released and it is likely that the project will be completed within the 
year 2009. 
 As regards the Pune project, execution of work started at site in June, 2006 but was 
stopped due to local villagers disturbance and non -availability of land. The problem has been 
resolved by the ULB in September, 2008 and the work is in progress . It is likely to be completed 
by March, 2010.” 
1.17 The Committee, being extremely concerned about the delays in timely completion of 
the pilot project on Solid Waste Management in 10 airfield towns, have been urging the 
Ministry of Urban Development since their 31st Report (presented in April, 2008) to resolve 
the matter with the concerned authorities as well as State Governments and complete the 
project so that its intended objectives could be achieved. However, they are disappointed to 
note that alt hough two decades have passed since the decision was taken to cover all 10 
airfield towns by the 1st year of 11th Plan (i.e. 2007), yet the fate of the project in four towns 

 
 
12 
 
namely Pune, Tezpur, Bareilly and Hindon is still unclear. What is further disquie ting is 
the fact mentioned in the Ministry’s latest Annual Report, which states that the project has 
been examined by the C&AG of India too and has received adverse comments from them 
for the lack of adequate and sustainable efforts on the part of the Ministry. 
Further, from the reply tendered to the Committee in the instant case, they observe 
that the Pune project is likely to be completed by March 2010.  The Committee recall that 
earlier, in reply to their recommendation on the matter as contained in thei r 31 st report, 
the Government had stated that the Pune project was expected to be completed by 
December, 2008. From the foregoing the Committee are convinced that the likelihood of 
Tezpur and Bareilly projects planned to be completed by the end of this year (2009) is quite 
uncertain. Besides, no information has been shared with the Committee on the Hindon 
project, where the U.P. Government was stated to be considering an alternate site at village 
Dasna. The Committee expect the Ministry as well as the conce rned State Governments to 
show more commitment towards the goals set under the pilot project, and thus, reiterate 
their recommendation that the pilot project must be completed in all the remaining four 
towns expeditiously.  
  

 
 
13 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
Monitoring of Solid Waste Management (SWM) Projects 
  
1.18 In their report, the Committee had observed as below:- 
 The Committee find that although monitoring of Solid Waste Management is primarily 
not the responsibility of the Ministry of Urban Developmen t, the Ministry, however, monitor the 
implementation of approved Solid Waste Management projects under the Centrally - sponsored 
schemes through various mechanisms  such as Quarterly Project Reports, field visits etc. The 
Committee have been further apprise d that for monitoring and management of sanctioned 
projects of various sectors including SWM under JNNURM, the Project Implementation Unit 
(PIU) at ULB level and Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) at state level are being set up. The 
Committee are, however, con strained to note that in spite of the aforesaid efforts taken by the 
Central Government, only 30 PIUs, 12 PMUs and 4 Independent Review and Monitoring 
Agencies (IRMA) have been set up so far to monitor and manage the sanctioned projects. The 
Committee feel  that it is grossly inadequate in view of the fact that the issue of managing 
Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) concerns 5161 cities and towns. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that to give a major fillip to this programme, the Government  should meet 
frequently and make constant dialogue with the State Governments so that more project 
implementation and monitoring units could be set up at the ULB/ State levels. Further, the 
performance of PIUs, PMUs and IRMAs also needs to be assessed in order to ensure that no 
loopholes are left in the execution of SWM projects.  
  
 

 
 
14 
 
1.19 The Government have replied as below: 
 
“ As per the scheme, the PMU, PIU and IRMA are to be appointed under the UIG 
component of JNNURM. The JNNURM Directorate has brought out a tool kit for 
appointment of Independent Review and Monitoring Agencies (IRMA). IRMA are 
agencies to be appointed by the States for monitoring of progress of implementation of 
the projects sanctioned under JNNURM. The proposals of Kerala, Rajasthan, Madhya 
Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Maharashtra, West Bengal, Puducherry, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Karnataka for appointment of IRMA have been approved by the CSMC. IRMAs have 
been established in Andhra Pradesh , Gujarat, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and 
Rajasthan. The States of Assam, Bihar, Delhi, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh 
and Tamil Nadu are in the process of appointing IRMAs. For the States of Chandigarh, 
J&K, Punjab, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram, 
Meghalaya, Chhattisgarh, Jha rkhand, Orissa and Goa, Ministry of Urban Development 
has initiated steps for appointment of  IRMAs on behalf of the States. 8 no. of States are 
yet to submit proposals. 40 no. of PIUs have been approved and 23 no. have been set up. 
25 no. of ULBs are yet to submit proposals. 
1.20 The Committee acknowledge the constant efforts of the Ministry through which 40 
Project Monitoring Units and 36 IRMAs have either been set up or are in the processing 
stage in various cities / States. However, they note that JNNURM is due to complete its fifth 
year out of the seven -year mandate, yet all 65 cities still do not have a monitoring 
mechanism in place to ensure that the projects under the UIG component of the Mission 
are implemented appropriately. As various well -conceived policies and programmes  of the 
Government become ineffective due to improper implementation, strict monitoring of the 
same is absolutely essential. Lack   monitoring of Solid Waste projects straight -away 
translates into cities becoming an eyesore with their garbage mounds. The C ommittee, 
therefore, recommend that a fast -paced processing /approval of IRMAs  at the  Central 

 
 
15 
 
level and setting up of PIUs at ULB / State levels is the need of the hour. They also trust 
that the already set up monitoring units and agencies have initiated  monitoring 37 solid 
waste projects approved under JNNURM so far. The Committee desire to be apprised 
about further progress on the matter.   
Recommendation No.17 (Para No. 17) 
PROJECTS FOR WASTE CHARACTERIZATION AND FEASIBILITY STUDIES 
 
1.21 In their report, the Committee had observed as follows:-  
The Committee note that  a scheme for financial assistance for waste characterization and 
feasibility studies was introduced in 1992 under which the Ministry had sanctioned 3 projects 
viz. (i) the m unicipal solid waste management project, Nagar Nigam Ghaziabad at a cost of Rs. 
55 lakh, (ii) Pilot project for Solid Waste Management for Hyderabad city, Municipal 
corporation, Hyderabad at a cost of Rs. 53.3 lakh and (iii) Pilot project for Solid Waste 
Management in Shimla at a total cost of Rs. 25 lakh. However, none of these projects have been 
reported to be commissioned. The Committee would like to be apprised of the date of sanction of 
these projects, the reasons for their non -commissioning and the ac tual progress along with 
expenditure incurred, if any, on these projects. The committee strongly urge the Government to 
fix responsibility for the failure of commissioning these projects. 
1.22 The Government have replied as under: 
 
Urban Solid Waste Manage ment in Shimla : The Ministry of Environment &  Forests 
had released an amount of Rs. 25 lakhs to H.P Pollution Control Board, Shimla in March, 
1996 for setting up of a demonstration project on urban solid waste management facility 
in Shimla. However, due to some technological  and temperature constrai nts at Shimla, 

 
 
16 
 
the project was shifted to Nahan, wherein the temperature conditions was found to be 
adequate to facilitate composting. As per the information from the H.P. State Pollution 
Control Board, the project has been executed and completed at Nahan. 
 
Pilot project for Solid Waste Management for vermin -composting in Hyderabad 
City: The Municipal Commissioner of Hyderabad city had submitted a proposal to the 
Ministry of Environment & Forests (MoEF) in the year 1995 for a Pilot project for vermi-
composting at Hyderabad city. The total project cost was Rs. 431 lakhs for a period of 
5years. MoEF had approved the project for financial assistance of Rs. 53.30 lakhs as its 
share. The first installment of Rs. 25 lakhs was released on 28.03.1995. MoEF has taken  
up the matter with the State Government and has been pursuing the matter for the project 
completion activities. 
 
Municipal Solid Waste Management for Ghaziabad City : The Mukhya Nagar 
Adhikari (MNA), Ghaziabad city had submitted a proposal to the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests (MoEF) in the year 1998 for a Municipal Solid Waste 
Management and Compost (Organic Fertilizer)project at Ghaziabad city. The estimated 
project cost was Rs. 375/ - lakhs. MoEF approved the project for financial assistance of 
Rs. 55 lakhs as its share. The first instalment of Rs. 25 lakh  was released on 31stMarch, 
1998. MoEF has taken up the matter with the State Government and has been pursuing 
the matter for the project completion activities. 
 
1.23 Taking a strong view on the non -Commissioning of 3 Solid Waste Management 
Projects in Ghaziabad, Hyderabad and Shimla under the scheme for financial assistance 
for waste characterization and feasibility studies, the Committee had urged the 

 
 
17 
 
Government to fix responsibility for the same i n their recommendation.  Now, the 
Committee are surprised to find from the reply of the Government that the demonstration   
project  on  urban  Solid   Waste Management facility has been shifted from Shimla to 
Nahan.  They feel that the Ministry of Urban D evelopment  should have been aware of the 
fact that the same project has been shifted and has already been executed and completed at 
Nahan. It appears that the Government was also unaware of the actual progress and 
therefore could not keep the Committee in formed of the same. As regards the Hyderabad 
project for vermin-composting, there seems to be no progress even after the release of first 
instalment of Rs.25 Lakh in 1995.  The Committee are convinced that in past fifteen years, 
the original cost of Rs.431 Lakh of the project must have escalated manifold.   
 
The ground situation in respect of Ghaziabad project seems no better as the 
Ministry have not followed further progress of the same after releasing the first instalment 
of Rs.25 Lakh in 1998, which is q uite evident from the reply received from the Ministry.  
Though the Committee note that the major facilitator in all the three projects is the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests, nonetheless, the Ministry of Urban Development 
have reportedly extended limited financial assistance for these projects, besides sanctioning 
those. Thus, it should have followed their actual progress through proper dialogue with 
either the Ministry of Environment and Forests, or the concerned State Governments.  The 
Committee ther efore, deplore the casual manner with which these projects are being 
monitored and desire the Government to apprise them about the latest progress on the 
projects in Hyderabad and Gh aziabad within two months of presentation of this Report.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 

 
 
18 
 
 
Monitoring of Public Private Participation (PPP) Projects 
 
1.24 In their report, the Committee had observed as below:- 
 The Committee note that under Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission 
guidelines, Urban Local Bodi es shall have to implement obligatory reforms in which the 
Ministry of Urban Development has advocated for encouraging Public Private Participation 
(PPP). Further, the Ministry has approved PPP model for Indore, Coimbatore, Madurai, Surat 
and Mumbai. In si x municipal zones in Delhi, the entire collection and transportation of waste 
has been given to private parties. The Committee have been also informed that the Ministry of 
Urban Development, in an advisory note sent to all State Governments in October, 200 7, had 
advised them that the ULBs should explore possibility of including PPP and Non -Governmental 
Organizations / Resident Welfare Associations in door -to-door collection, transportation and 
treatment facility for municipal solid waste. The Committee, how ever, note that in some of the 
cities, Public Private Participation mode has been implemented successfully, while in others the 
performance has been dismal. They feel that an issue in PPP mode, which requires attention, is 
strengthening the ULB‟s capacity to enter into contracts and the private sector‟s ability to deliver 
professionally against a contract. They, therefore, recommend the Ministry to address the matter 
carefully keeping in view these crucial issues and initiate measures to tackle the same. 
 
1.25 The Government have replied as under: 
“This Ministry intends to develop Model Concession Agreement  (MCA) for solid waste 
management. For this, a workshop will be held and representatives of both private sector 

 
 
19 
 
and ULBs will be invited. This MCA will be disseminated through MoUD. The above 
exercise may be followed by Training Programmes at the State Level. 
However, pending preparation of MCA for PPP on Solid Waste Management, the 
Ministry has initiated proactive action for encouraging PPP in SWM projec ts approved 
under UIG of JNNURM. List of projects sanctioned under UIG of JNNURM involvin g 
PPP is enclosed at Annexure-V.” 
 
1.26 The Committee appreciate the fact that the Ministry intends to develop Model 
Concession Agreement (MCA) for solid waste managem ent  which will be followed by 
training programmes at the State level. They  hope that the matter is progressing 
satisfactorily. As regards PPP in solid waste management projects approved under UIG of 
JNNURM, the Committee note that in the 37 projects appr oved so far, PPP is envisaged in 
12 projects only. The Committee feel that more PPP is required to be explored for 
managing municipal waste. At the same time, as the performance of private partners in 
such projects is not always positive in all cases, the accountability clause needs to be 
ensured for every such agreement. The Committee, therefore, recommend that such a 
clause and suitable penalties in case of violation must be included in the Model Concession 
Agreement being developed by the Ministry.   
 
  

 
 
20 
 
Chapter-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Para No.1) 
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT – NEED FOR ALL STAKEHOLDERS TO BE 
PROACTIVE 
 
2.1 Solid Waste Management (SWM) is a State subject. As it is essentially a municipal 
function, all the municipal authorities in India deal with collection, transportation and disposal of 
the city garbage so as to reduce its impact on public health, environmen t and aesthetics. 
Management of commercial/ industrial waste like bio -medical waste/ e -waste is usually the 
responsibility of the generator. The Committee note that though there had been phenomenal 
growth in Municipal Solid Waste generation in India since Independence, there was hardly any 
progress towards improving the overall Solid Waste Management system in cities so as to match 
this growth, as Municipal Solid Waste Management was typically assigned a lower priority than 
water supply and sanitation. It w as only at the intervention of the Supreme Court in the late 
Nineties, that some attempts were made for ensuring proper and scientific management of 
Municipal Solid Waste through the MSW(Management & Handling) Rules and related Manual 
prepared by the Centr al Ministries of Environment & Forests and Urban Development 
respectively. A clean city is not an accident but a concerted effort of the citizens, the State, the 
city managers and the civil society. The Committee are of the view that in order to achieve th e 
objectives of a well -designed and scientific SWM system, all the stakeholders need to be pro -
active. They feel that particularly the State Governments should not be found wanting in this 

 
 
21 
 
respect. The Committee‟s observations and recommendations arising o ut of the examination of 
these and other related issues are set out in the following paragraphs. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.2 No action is required to be taken since it is a preamble for the recommendations / 
observations of the Committee. 
 
 Recommendation (Para No.4) 
MAGNITUDE OF THE MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) 
 
2.3 From the information furnished by the Ministry, the Committee note that at present urban 
India produces about 42 million tonnes of municipal solid waste annually which would mean 
1.15 lakh metric tonnes per day (TPD). Out of this, 83,378 TPD is generated in 423 class-I cities. 
They concur with the view of the Ministry that as soon as the problem in these class -I cities is 
addressed, 72.5% of the total urban waste generated could be managed. The Committee have 
also been informed that although Urban Local Bod ies  spend between Rs. 500/ - to Rs. 1500 per 
tonne on Solid Waste Management, less than 5% of this amount is used for treatment and 
disposal of waste after spending 60% to 70% on collection and 20% to 30% on transportation. 
The Committee, therefore, are convinced that more financial resources are required for treatment 
and disposal of waste generated. At present there is no tax/tariff on waste management services. 
The Committee are of the view that the possibility of levying direct tax for waste management 
services need to be explored since it is a common public utility like water and electricity. They, 

 
 
22 
 
therefore recommend that the Ministry of Urban Development may initiate steps on the same at 
the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
 2.4 Levy of user charges for urban services has been emphasized by the Ministry time and 
again in various fora. 
JNNURM guidelines indicated one of the mandatory reforms for cost recovery as 
follows: 
 “Levy of reasonable user charges by ULBs / Parastatals with the objective that fu ll cost 
of operation and maintenance of recurring cost is collected within next seven years. However, 
cities / towns in North East and other special category States may recover at least 50% of 
operation and maintenance charges initially. These cities / tow ns should graduate to full O&M 
cost recover in a phased manner.” 
 From the above, it is evident that the Ministry‟s vision is to achieve sustainability by 
levying user charges for the services provided by the ULB including SWM. 
 Moreover, it is pertinent t o mention that the SWM projects approved so far under 
JNNURM envisages provide for collection of requisite user fee from the households for SWM 
services rendered by the ULB to generate adequate revenue to meet the O&M expenditure and to 
make the SWM project sustainable throughout the design period.  
   
  

 
 
23 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6)  
TECHNOLOGICAL OPTIONS AVAILABLE FOR DISPOSAL OF MUNICIPAL 
SOLID WASTE 
 
2.5 The Committee observe that various technological options like composting including 
vermi composting, anaerobic digestion / biomethanation, production of refuse derived fuel / 
pelletisation, etc. are available for treatment and disposal of municipal solid waste. The 
Committee further note that these technological options find mention in the Technical Advis ory 
Group (TAG) Report and in the Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management.  However, 
these options are yet to gain wide acceptance. While deploring the crude dumping of waste by 
the Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) in most of the cities, the Committee recommen d that the 
Government should take the desired steps to encourge the State Governments/ULBs to adopt the 
available and proven technologies for safe disposal of Municipal Solid Waste. At the same time 
the Committee desire that the Government must also ensure  that only environment -friendly 
technological options are  adopted so as to prevent further worsening of an already polluted 
urban environment. 
  
Reply of the Government 
2.6 The technological options for treatment of municipal solid waste are always select ed 
based on the quantity, type and characteristics of the waste generated by the concerned ULBs. 
Report of the Technology Advisory Group (TAG) lists out merits and demerits of various 
technologies. The ULBs have been directed to select a suitable technolog y based on the quantity 
and quality of the wastes and as per the field conditions. If the State Governments / ULBs 
implement the guidelines issued in the Manuals and MSW Rules, the issue of solid waste 

 
 
24 
 
management will be addressed effectively. (Copy of the  relevant part of TAG Report is at 
Annexure-I.) 
By and large, the ULBs prepare DPRs as per the guidelines of the Manual on Municipal 
Solid Waste Management 2000, Report of TAG, Report on Integrated Plan Nutrient 
Management for City Compost etc. Wherever de ficiencies are found in the DPRs the CPHEEO 
suggests corrective measures including alternate equipment friendly technology options to the 
ULB at the DPR stage and gets it modified before approval under JNNURM  
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE PROJECTS UNDER JAWAHARLAL NEHRU 
NATIONAL URBAN RENEWAL MISSION, UIDSSMT, ETC. 
 
2.7 The Committee have been convinced that the Government is increasingly committed to 
improved MSW management through JNNURM, UIDSSMT, the pilot project of SWM in 10 
Airfield  towns and so on. The number of SWM projects sanctioned under JNNURM and 
UIDSSMT are 31 and 40 respectively. The Committee further note that the 12 th Finance 
Commission had also made a provision of Rs. 2500 crore in June, 2005 exclusively for Urban 
Local Bodies  for setting up Solid Waste Management systems in 423 class -I cities during the 
period, 2005-2010. The Committee are, however, concerned to note that only 26 schemes have 
been sanctioned so far at an approved cost of Rs.1458 crore and feel that th e number of projects 
undertaken so far is very low in comparison to the magnitude of the problem. The Committee 
feel that though an overall momentum has been established, yet the need of the hour is to expand 
and improve the coverage of SWM schemes, which requires both upgraded institutional and 
financial structures with suitable investments as well as the willingness of the municipal bodies 

 
 
25 
 
to develop and implement clear -cut SWM projects for upgrading their facilities at a sustainable 
pace.  
Reply of the Government 
2.8 The projects taken up under UIG and UIDSSMT are as per the priority of the State 
Governments and the ULBs consistent with their city development plans. Whenever the ULBs 
submit projects relating to SWM, the same are appraised and approved as per the guidelines of 
the Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management, 2000 and Solid Waste Management 
(Management & Handling) Rules, 2000 and considering the technology options spelt out in the 
Report of Technology Advisory Group and the recommendations co ntained in the Report of the 
Integrated Plant Nutrient Management for city compost and also considering the physical and 
chemical characteristics of the wastes, site conditions, climate, water table, etc. As on 28.2.2009, 
37 projects on solid waste management for 37 cities have been approved at a total estimated cost 
of Rs. 2006.40 crore under UIG and 64 number of projects under UIDSSMT. 
  

 
 
26 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
  
STRENGTHENING OF CENTRAL PUBLIC HEALTH AND 
ENVIRONMENTALENGINEERING ORGANIZATION (CPHEEO) 
 
2.9 As regards the monitoring mechanism of Solid Waste Management  system in 423 class -I 
cities available with the Ministry of Urban Development, the Committee observe that at present 
CPHEEO – the technical wing of the Ministry assists the Ministry in all tech nical matters 
relating to water supply and sanitation sector. It is stated to be a small organization having a 
sanctioned strength of only 9 officers. The Committee are further concerned to note that out of 
these 9 officers, 50% posts are reported to be ly ing vacant. The Committee have been further 
informed that a proposal for creation of 11 posts have been forwarded to Ministry of Finance for 
approval so that water supply, sewerage and solid waste management schemes implemented by 
the State Governments/ULB s could be monitored at Central level by CPHEEO. Taking note of 
the grossly inadequate manpower with CPHEEO for monitoring the water supply and sanitation 
services including solid waste management, the Committee, while recommending the 
Government to take a ppropriate action to fill up the existing vacancies at the earliest. The 
Committee would also like to know the present status of proposal of the Ministry to strengthen 
the organization by creation of 11 additional posts. The Committee would also like to be  
apprised as to how, with the increased strength of 20 officers, water supply and sanitation 
services including solid waste management in 5161 cities and towns in the country would be 
monitored by CPHEEO.  
 

 
 
27 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.10 The following measures are being taken up for the strengthening of CPHEEO: 
 
1. Proposal for strengthening through creation of 15 number of additional posts including a 
feeder cadre has been sent to the Ministry of Finance in February, 2009. 
 
2. Action is being taken for filling up existing vacancies.   
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
TASK FORCE ON INTEGRATED PLANT NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT (IPNM) 
 
2.11 The Committee note that subsequent to a Writ Petition filed in the Hon‟ble Supreme 
Court on solid waste management, an Inter-Ministerial Task Force on Integrated Plant Nutrient 
Management (IPNM) using city compost was created in August, 2003. In its Report submitted to 
the Supreme Court on 6.5.2005, the Task Force had recommended an integrated plant nutrient 
management using city compost so that it can be supplied within 50 km radius of all ULBs and 
their compost plants.  The Committee find that as a follow up action, the Ministry of Urban 
Development had advised all the State Governments and concerned Ministries to impleme nt the 
said recommendation including use of compost for development of plantation / afforestation and 
balanced integrated use of fertilizers. The Committee are concerned to note that although 
assistance of Rs. 20 lakh per unit were released from VII th to IXth Plan, no financial assistance 
for setting up / strengthening of soil testing laboratories and for setting up bio -fertilizer units 
were provided during 10 th Plan period.  The Committee are further dismayed to note that 

 
 
28 
 
although funds of Rs. 9.00 crore w ere  provided for setting up of 30 mechanical compost plants 
in different States for conversion of biodegradable organic city waste into compost, most of these 
plants are either not working to their optimum capacity or are not functioning at all.  While 
recommending the Government to take appropriate steps to ensure an optimum utilization of 
installed capacity of these compost plants, the Committee would like to be apprised of the 
reasons for their non-functioning as well as absence of financial assistance/ subsidy for setting up 
of more compost plants during the 10th and 11th Plans. 
 The Committee are further disappointed to note that despite the efforts made by the 
Ministry of Urban Development to involve the Central Ministries of Chemicals & Fertilizers a nd 
Agriculture to know as to how best the city composts can be integrated with chemical fertilizers 
for the benefit of farmers, these Ministries have not shown any enthusiasm for the same. They 
feel that as SWM concerns several stakeholders including these  Ministries, such an attitude is 
uncalled for. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Urban Development should again 
approach these Ministries to bring them on board.  
Reply of the Government 
2.12 Steps have already been initiated to involve the views o f other Ministries in the 
recommendations of the Task Force on Integrated Plant Nutrient Management. So far 3 meetings 
have been held under the chairmanship of Secretary (UD). The minutes of the meetings are at 
Annexure-II. 
 
 Moreover, it is pertinent to m ention that the Ministry of Urban Development had 
accorded technical approval under JNNURM for providing solid waste management facilities in 

 
 
29 
 
37 towns (Annexure IIA) and all the projects envisage compositing as one of the treatment 
facilities. The Ministry  of Fertilizers has also initiated action for co -marketing compost along 
with chemical fertilizers.  
 
 It may be mentioned that the quality of city compost depends on the characteristics of the 
incoming waste to the plant. Normally, un -segregated mixed was te is brought to the compost 
plant, resulting in the product compost not being of good quality. Therefore, the Ministry, while 
approving DPRs for MSMW in Mission cities under JNNURM, has emphasized the need for 
segregation of waste at source and use of organic portion only in the compost plant.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15)  
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION FUND 
2.13 The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry of Urban Development have created a 
Community Participation Fund (CPF) under which a community can conceive a project on 
municipal solid waste and submit it through the local Municipality to the Union Gover nment. 
Funds to the tune of Rs. 9.5 lakh can be granted with community contributing 5% in case of 
slums and 10% in case of others. However, the Committee are dismayed to note that the response 
to the scheme has not been very encouraging as only three schemes from Madurai city have been 
received by the Government so far. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government 
should analyse the reasons for CPF not being attractive enough and obviate the same. They 
should also create an awareness campaign amo ng the public through Urban Local Bodies 
(ULBs) / Non -Governmental Organizations (NGOs) so that more and more community 
participation projects could be taken up for municipal solid waste management. The Committee 

 
 
30 
 
also feel that communities availing CPF sho uld also undertake efforts to convince citizens to 
reduce waste and encourage exchange / gift of unwanted usable items instead of throwing them 
away. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.14 The Community Participation Fund (CPF) was initiated with a view to encourag ing 
communities to take part in the development of their area and develop a sense of ownership with 
respect to the projects being undertaken. It was envisaged that once Community Participation 
Law is passed by the State And Area Sabhas are in place, they w ould submit the projects under 
CPF for their area.  
 However, in the meantime, Community Based Organisations (CBOs) can submit projects 
provided 51% of registered voters of given polling stations, for whom the project is meant, give 
their consent to it. These clauses are difficult to fulfill and this is one of the main reasons for 
lesser number of projects, but they are in fact the essence of this fund wherein following the 
process is crucial for the development of the spirit of participation. 21 projects have been 
sanctioned under CPF so far, out of which 2 are on Solid Waste Management for Madurai and 
Bangalore respectively.   
Awareness is also being generated during city Technical Advisory Group (TAG) and City 
Volunteers Technical Corps (CVTC)  formation workshop held in different cities. In the recent 
PEARL Workshop on „Heritage Cities‟ held in Madurai, TAG Coordination Celll Team 
discussed about the funds, its guidelines and urged the city representatives (from ULBs and 
NGOs) to make the best use of CPF. Instructions is being issued to all CBOs which have been 

 
 
31 
 
sanctioned projects under CPF to create awareness regarding segregation and recycling of waste 
in their communities.  
 
Recommendation No.16 (Para No.16) 
 
 PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT TO MUNICIPAL STAFF AND RAG PICKERS  
 
2.15 The Committee observe that as per guidelines given in the Manual on Municipal Solid 
Waste Management, 2000, the local body should provide adequate protective equipment 
including clothing and health check up from time to time to the staff to ensure that the ir health is 
not adversely affected on account of their handling of solid waste. Further, free medical services 
should be made available to those whose health is affected on account of handling of solid waste. 
The Committee are, however, convinced that ver y few ULBs have implemented these rules. 
They are also dismayed to note that the Ministry of Urban Development could not obtain any 
information from the State Governments/ULBs about the staff engaged in garbage disposal, who 
are not properly provided with the protective equipment as required under the Manual on Solid 
Waste Management, 2000. The Committee would like to urge the authorities to ensure that not 
only the waste handling municipal staff but the rag -pickers in unorganized sector, who are 
reported to be about 1.3 lakh in number and play a special role in segregation of waste, should 
also be provided with the adequate protective equipment and health checkup including other 
incentives like identity cards and use of public sanitation services. The Commi ttee desire that the 
continuous monitoring of implementation of the guidelines in this regard should also be ensured 
at each level.  
 
Reply of the Government 

 
 
32 
 
 
2.16 It is pertinent to mention that an advisory note has also been sent to all the State 
Governments to direct the ULBs to undertake various measures for litter -free /garbage-free cities 
across the country. One of the measures is reproduced below: 
 “The workers should be provided with uniforms, shoes, gloves and other implements etc. 
for their safety  and easy working. They should be subjected to periodical health checks and 
health insurance.” 
 The Ministry will direct the ULBs through the PMUs, PIUs and Independent Review and 
Monitoring Agencies falling under JNNURM cities to ensure the provision of protective 
equipment to the municipal staff and rag pickers in their project are and render a rep ort to this 
Ministry.  
 In the Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management, 2000, requisite guidelines have 
been incorporated in regard to health and well being of the sanitary workers which the ULBs are 
expected to provide including periodical health check up of the workers.  
  
  

 
 
33 
 
 Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
RE-CYCLING OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE, PLASTIC, 
ETC. 
 
2.17 The Committee note that ULBs have been advised by the Ministry of Urban 
Development to segregate their construction and demolition waste and dispose them off in low 
lying areas. The Committee have also been apprised that Building and Material Technology 
Promotion Council (BMTPC) initiated a research and development project with Youth for Unity 
and Voluntary Action, Mumbai, for recycling of construction and demolition wastes as the use of 
recycled materials will help in reducing the use of natural resource m aterials for production of 
building materials. The Committee further observe that in Surat, Gujarat, the construction and 
demolition waste is reused for preparation of bricks for laying pavements.  While appreciating 
the Research and Development project by  BMTPC for recycling of construction and demolition 
waste, the Committee recommend that more such projects should be undertaken and 
implemented in other parts of the country. The Committee have also been informed that BMTPC 
has initiated and sponsored a pr oject in the Central Building Research Institute (CBRI), Roorkee 
to develop plastics building products from recycled plastics with emphasis on wastes generated 
from the building industry.  The Committee also learn that CBRI, Roorkee has developed 
building products using plastic waste, for special application in disaster resistant construction, 
though it has not been verified on the grounds of health and environment friendliness. While 
strongly recommending to promote the use of recycled plastic building pro ducts, the Committee 
feel that the  impact of these products on health and environment needs to be tested and verified 
before putting it up for large -scale use. The Committee also feel that there is an urgent need to 
frame laws to encourage recycling by sp ecifying mandatory deposit and return requirements to 

 
 
34 
 
shift the burden of waste disposal and recovery of materials back to the manufacturer of products 
by ensuring that retailers and wholesalers take back materials which is no longer required. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to gather expert opinion on this matter and 
approach the appropriate authority to initiate such a move. 
   
Reply of the Government 
  
2.18 The Ministry of Environment & Forests has constituted a Committee to evaluate a R oad 
Map on Management of Waste in India. The first meeting of the Committee was held on 
21.10.2008 under the chairmanship of Additional Secretary, Ministry of E&F, Government of 
India wherein it was recommended to constitute a Working Group under the chair manship of 
Secretary, Department of Environment, Government of Delhi to examine all the activities related 
to MSW. The meeting of the Working Group was held on 18.11.2008 under the chairmanship of 
Secretary, D/o Environment, Government of Delhi wherein it was decided to further constitute 
four Sub-Working Groups on various activities viz. (i) Municipal Solid Waste (ii) Plastic Waste 
(iii) Construction and Demolition Waste and (iv) Packaging Waste. The Sub -Working Groups 
were to finalize their work by 14.1.2009. Letters for constitution of various Sub-Working Groups 
are enclosed at Annexure-III.  
 The Sub-Working Group on Construction & Demolition Waste under the chairmanship 
of Deputy Adviser (PHE), CPHEEO has formulated and deliberated the guidelines and th e final 
draft guidelines shall be placed before the Sub -Working Group in April, 2009. The final report 
will be submitted to the main Committee in the end of April 2009. On receipt of the report of the 
Sub-Working Groups, the Ministry will be able to take appropriate action in this regard.   

 
 
35 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
 
AWARENESS CAMPAIGN FOR SEGREGATION OF WASTE AT SOURCE 
 
2.19 The Committee note that 30 to 55 per cent of municipal solid waste comprises bio -
degradable matter, 40 to 55 per cent is inert and 5 to 15 per cent is recyclable. The Committee 
are concerned to note that door -to-door collection of waste is not carried out in most parts of the 
country and it is still the responsibility of individual house owner to take the municipal waste to 
the dhalaos. The Committee cannot but deplore the way in  which most of the Urban Local 
Bodies are ignoring the provision of using sepa rate bins for non -organic and organic waste 
inspite of the Advisory Note sent in October, 2007 by the Ministry of Urban Development to all 
State Governments. In this context, the Committee observe that in Gujarat, cities like Surat and  
Vadodara have propo sed private sector participation in handling this organic waste and 
converting it into compost. Even other combustible wastes like paper, plastic, etc., are being 
separated and treated with Refuse Derived Fuel. Similarly, Municipal Corporation of Delhi is 
reported to have implemented the door -to-door collection of waste in various parts of Delhi in a 
phased manner. Notwithstanding these few instances, the Committee still feel that the most 
important aspect in Solid Waste Management, i.e. reduction of waste and the segregation of 
waste at source, is the most neglected one. In view of the Committee, it is probably because of 
indifference of citizens towards inculcating the habit of segregating wastes as well as lack of 
community participation towards waste man agement. The Committee feel that the task of 
creating facilities to treat the wastes either for producing energy or for composting or recycling 
and bringing awareness about reduction and segregation of waste at source by involving citizens 
rests with the M inistry of Urban Development and the State Governments. The Committee, 

 
 
36 
 
therefore, recommend that the Government should boost up measures for Information, Education 
and Communication (IEC) of the public on the matter through print and electronic media, NGOs, 
student community, women, institutions, etc., at all available opportunities. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.20 In order to promote segregation of waste at source, necessary provision is made for 
household bins for storing of segregated waste into bio -degradable and non -biodegradable 
portions under Solid Waste Management projects approved under JNNURM. Further, under the 
guidelines of JNNURM – Urban Infrastructure and Governance (UIG), in order to prepare City 
Development Plans, Detailed Project Reports, com munity participation, information Education 
and Communication (IEC), a provision of 5% of the Central grant or the actual requirement, 
whichever is less, has been kept for the cities / towns covered under the Mission. The State 
Government /Urban Local Bodi es can undertake IEC activities for promoting segregation of 
waste at source and funds for the purpose can be provided under the above -mentioned provision 
of the UIG guidelines.  
 
  

 
 
37 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 21) 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF PLASTICS MANUFACTURING AND USAGE (A) 
RULES, 2003 
 
2.21 The Committee note that to avoid littering and segregation of plastic waste at source, 
„Plastics Manufacturing and Usage (A) Rules, 2003 has come into force. Besides stipulating not 
to manufacture and sell thin plastic carry ba gs, the rules also prohibit the usage of recycled 
plastic carry bags for storing, carrying, dispensing or packaging of foodstuffs in India. Further, 
usage of plastics carry bags is banned in pilgrimage and tourists spots.  In this regard, the 
Committee are of the opinion that although in some States use of plastic carry bags has been 
totally banned, these provisions are not strictly followed by all the States / Urban Local Bodies. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to pursue all the State Go vernments / 
Urban Local Bodies not only to incorporate a clause for penalty on the defaulters in their by-laws 
but their implementation should also be strictly adhered. The Committee would like to be 
informed of the action taken by the Government in this regard.   
Reply of the Government 
2.22 The Ministry of Environment & Forests is the nodal agency for mentioning and control of 
use of plastic material and their impact on the environment. They have also brought out requisite 
guidelines in this regard.  
 
 Banning of plastic bags and imposition of penalty thereof comes within the purview of 
Municipal Rules and Regulations. Building By -Laws can only prescribe penalty in view of 
violations / deviations in the construction of buildings. Hence, the ULBs need to impose penalty 
against use of plastic bags as per the Municipal Rules and not under Building Bye-Laws per se.  

 
 
38 
 
 Monitoring of the implementation of “Plastic Manufacturing & Usage (A) Rules, 2003” 
is under the purview of Ministry of Environment & Forests. T he State  
Governments / ULBs are responsible for implementation of plastic waste management. The 
status of implementation of the aforesaid rules by different State Governments / ULBs as 
provided by the  CPCB are at Annexure-IV.  
 The Ministry has been coor dinating with the Ministry of Environment & Forests on 
environmental issues including banning of plastics by way of participating in the meeting 
convened by the Ministry of E&F regularly. Moreover, while sanctioning the MSWM projects 
under JNNURM, the ULBs  are advised to ensure segregation of plastic waste separately for 
recycling and reuse.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 23) 
 
ACUTE SCARCITY OF LANDFILLS 
 
2.23 Disposing of inert municipal solid waste in a landfill requires properly designed and well-
managed lan dfills. Such landfills can be a hygienic and relatively inexpensive method of 
disposing of waste materials. However, the Committee are seriously concerned to note that lack 
of appropriate land for landfills has resulted in mounds of MSW which has become se vere 
eyesores alongside roads in most of the class-I and medium cities in the country. The most recent 
instances noticed by the Committee in this connection are Gurgaon and Ghaziabad, where 
several public protests were witnessed on this account. In additio n to it, old, poorly designed or 
poorly managed landfills in cities are creating several adverse environmental conditions, for 
instance, wind-blown litter, generation of liquid leachate, poisonous gases, bad odours, attraction 
of vermin and bacteria etc. I n this connection, the Committee note that certain State 

 
 
39 
 
Governments are in the process of setting up landfill facilities, for instance, Andhra Pradesh, 
Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharahstra, Manipur, Rajasthan, West Bengal 
and Tamil N adu. The Committee also note that 12 ULBs of AUDA (Ahmedabad Urban 
Development Authority), Gujarat have taken initiatives to construct a common landfill site. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry of Urban Development should assess the success of this 
common facility, once completed and counsel other State Governments to follow suit, wherever 
feasible, particularly in those States where severe land crunch is experienced. The Committee are 
also dismayed that in Delhi, Goa, Bihar, Uttarakhand, Punjab, Chhati sgarh, Mizoram and 
Lakshadweep, no initiatives were reported on the part of their ULBs towards setting up of 
landfill facilities for waste disposal. The Committee would urge expeditious steps to address this 
issue. They would like to be apprised of the latest progress on this account. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.24 Letter has been sent to CPCB seeking requisite information on the aforesaid 
recommendation. On receipt of it, the same will be forwarded to the Lok Sabha Secretariat.  
 Moreover, as desired by the  Committee, once the Ahmedabad Urban Development 
Authority complete the construction of a common landfill site, the officers will visit and assess 
the success of the common facilities and counsel other State Governments to follow suite 
wherever feasible, particularly in those State where server land crunch is experienced. In respect 
of Committee‟s concern for lack of initiatives in Delhi, Goa, Bihar, Uttarakhand, Punjab, 
Chhattisgarh, Mizoram and Lakshadweep towards setting up of landfill facilities for was te 
disposal, an Advisory Note has already been circulated to all the States including the aforesaid 
States for implementation of the Solid Waste Management.  
 

 
 
40 
 
Chapter- III 
REOCMMENDATIONS /OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
Recommendation No.-7 (Para No.7) 
 
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT PROJECTS IN HILLY REGION 
  
3.1 In Hilly regions, difficult terrain, lack of adequate land huge cost of basic site 
developments and weak financial positions of the municipal bodies make SWM a daunting task. 
The Committee note that 7 Solid Waste Management Projects viz. Doda, Bhaderwah, A khnoor, 
Poonch, Samba, Kathua and Sunderbani in Jammu & Kashmir have been entrusted to the 
National Building Construction Corporations (NBCC), Ministry of Urban Development. The 
Committee appreciate that NBCC has entered into an agreement with the Central Pollution 
Control Board (CPCB) to develop solid waste management schemes in hilly regions, which shall 
be used to develop standard designs for future use. A scheme in Mandi, Himachal Pradesh has 
been taken up at present and is reported to be at design stag e. The Committee are, however, 
concerned to observe several constraints being faced by NBCC in implementation of the projects 
in Jammu & Kashmir owing to the non-availability of suitable land for the processing plant, poor 
economics of Operation & Maintenance cost vis-à-vis revenue from sale of products, high landed 
cost of material and equipment due to high entry and toll taxes and high cost of registration for 
sales tax. They, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Urban Development should take up 
these issues with the concerned authorities so that the sanctioned Solid Waste Management 
projects in Jammu & Kashmir are well-supported financially and completed in time. At the same 
time, the Committee recommend that the Government should work out the cost o f Solid Waste 

 
 
41 
 
Management projects in the hilly and difficult regions and accordingly raise the limit with 
respect to the project costs being sanctioned for such regions.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.2 The Ministry has not fixed any limit for the estimated cost of the project based on 
geographical area, population etc.  The schemes are being formulated based on the 
characteristics of waste, field conditions, topography, temperature etc.  For hilly regions, the 
Ministry provides power driven vehicles for primary and secondary collection rather than manual 
rickshaws etc. 
 The cost estimate for the SWM projects are prepared by the ULBs based upon the State 
Schedule of Rates (SOR) for civil works and prevailing market rates for other materials and 
equipment.  For hilly regions including J&K, the funding under JNNURM is 90% of the project 
estimated cost and the balance funding is from the State/ULBs. 
Recommendation No.10 (Para No.10) 
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AND SANITATION SCHEME FOR 
GHAZIABAD TOWN (HINDON AIRFIELD), U.P. 
 
3.3  The Committee observe that the Ministry of Urban Development  had approved a Solid 
Waste Management and Sanitation scheme for Ghaziabad town (Hindon Airfield) at an estimated 
cost of Rs. 13.52 crore. The project, which had commenced on 1.1.2006 is still in complete. As 
against a total release of funds of Rs. 12.76 crore, the expenditure incurred on the project so far 
is reported to be Rs. 6.05 crore. As regards the progress of work on the project, the Committee 
note that in respect of sanitary landfill and compost plant, only 10% and 7% of the total work has 

 
 
42 
 
been completed so far. These components could not be completed due to dispute in acquisition of 
43 acres of land which was originally identified by the Ghaziabad Nagar Nigam at Dooda Hera, 
Chippiyana Bujurg in Ghaziabad. The project has been further delayed due to a Writ Petition 
filed in 2006 for shifting of the site. The Committee have been further informed that on the 
direction of the Hon'ble High Court, a new site has been identified at Dasna in Ghazia bad which 
is about 9 Kms away from the present site. However, No Objection Certificates were required 
from Hindon Airfield and Uttar Pradesh Pollution Control Board by the Ghaziabad Development 
Authority before the start of land acquisition process at Dasn a site, which is yet to be done. The 
Committee are dissatisfied to note that the funds allocated and released for the scheme could not 
be utilized fully due to several above-stated impediments and that   the project is still languishing 
due to non-acquisition of land. The Committee hope that learning from the past experiences, the 
Government vigorously pursue the matter with the Uttar Pradesh State Government so that the 
scheme could be expedited.  The Committee also recommend that the Ministry should impre ss 
upon the State Governments to take prudent measures for advance and realistic planning so that 
all clearances and acquisition of land for a Solid Waste Management project are taken care of, 
before the start of the project on ground. Further, the Committ ee desire that for such projects the 
Government should take recourse to the Compulsory Acquisition of Land Act in public interest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
3.4 A meeting was convened in the Ministry on 12.12.2008 to discuss various issues related 
to implementation of Hindon Project, in which the representatives of U.P. Government were also 
present.  Representatives of Government of U.P. (GDA and UP Jal Nigam) stated that though the 
site is available, it can be utilized for construction of sanitary landfill only after change of land 
use.  The Ministry explained the constraints in extending the scheme beyond the prescribed time 

 
 
43 
 
limit.  However, a request dated 17.12 .2008 was received from the Principal Secretary, 
Government of U.P. to allow them 10 more months to complete the project.  The Ministry has 
accepted this requested. 
 The Secretary (UD) has issued an Advisory on SWM to all State Governments urging 
them inte r-alia to initiate advance action in respect of acquisition of land for setting up of 
compost plant, landfill etc.  since land is a very scarce resource in most of the bigger cities and 
towns. 
 The DPR received from the Mission cities for consideration und er UIG component of 
JNNURM indicates that the land required for setting up of compost plant, SLF, etc. are available 
with the ULB.  Based on this assurance only, the DPRs are approved by the Ministry. 
  
Recommendation No.19 (Para No.19) 
IMPLEMENTATION OF BIO-MEDICAL WASTE (MANAGEMENT AND 
HANDLING) RULES, 1998 
 
3.5 The Committee note that based upon the Bio-medical Waste (Management and Handling) 
Rules, 1998, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare had prepared National Guidelines on 
Hospital Waste Management and circulated it to States and Union Territories for information and 
compliance. The hospitals are required to implement these Rules by developing a comprehensive 
plan for hospital waste management in terms of segregation, collection, treatment, tran sportation 
and disposal of the wastes. Although the Committee have been informed that the Central 
Government hospitals are strictly adhering to the Bio -medical waste (Management and 
Handling) Rules, 1998 and implementation of these Rules by other Nursing h omes and hospitals 
has also improved, the Committee would like to know the monitoring mechanism available with 

 
 
44 
 
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to check any violation of rules and guidelines issued 
in this regard. At the same time, the Committee w ould like to know the steps taken by the 
Ministry of Urban Development to ensure that these wastes are not dumped with the other 
Municipal wastes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
3.6 The Municipal Solid Waste (Management &  Handling) Rules has categorically 
mentioned that the hospital wastes shall not enter into the municipal stream.  Since Ministry of 
Health & Family Welfare is having a separate scheme to provide necessary infrastructure to 
address the hospital waste includ ing bio-medical waste, it is likely that hospital waste will not 
enter into the municipal stream.  However, the ULBs will be directed to ensure that hospital 
wastes do not enter the Municipal wastes. 
 
 

 
 
45 
 
Chapter- IV 
REOCMMENDATIONS /OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIE OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRED REITERATION  
 
Recommendation No.2 (Para No.2) 
IMPLEMENTATION OF MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MANAGEMENT AND 
HANDLING)  RULES, 2000 
 
4.1  The Committee note that the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India, 
have notified the „Municipal Solid Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2000 through 
which specific directives have been issued to the urban local bodies, District Administrations and 
Departments of Urban Development of the State Governments to ensure proper and scientific 
management of municipal solid waste. The Ministry of Urban Development have not yet 
formulated any National Waste Policy for Solid Waste Management as  according to them the 
MSW (M&H) Rules, 2000 act as the policy to handle MSW. However, the Ministry of Urban 
Development    brought out a Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management in May, 2000 to 
facilitate the ULBs to address issues relating to the Solid Waste Management. In this connection, 
the Committee are distressed to note that the deadline of December, 2003 for implementation of 
MSW (M & H) Rules, 2000 could not be achieved due to huge capital investment required to 
implement, operate and maintain s olid waste management projects.  Several other impediments 
like lack of planning, absence of segregation of waste at source, inadequate house -to-house 
collection, transportation, treatment and disposal of municipal solid waste, etc., have been 
identified b y the Government in implementation of the MSW Rules, 2000. Consequently, the 
Committee note that the deadline for State Departments of Urban Development and Urban Local 

 
 
46 
 
Bodies for implementation of these rules has been extended upto December 2008. The 
Committee are sure that even this deadline would not be met since most of the ULBs and State 
Governments still lack requisite investment and infrastructure facilities for the same. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should impress upon the Stat es that they should 
take all steps necessary to ensure that MSW (M&H) Rules, 2000 are strictly implemented by all 
concerned as early as possible.  At the same time, the Committee also recommend that while 
sanctioning the Solid Waste Management Projects sub mitted by the States under the Centrally -
Sponsored Schemes like Jawharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) and 
Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme in Small and Medium Towns (UIDSSMT), the 
Government should ensure the implementation of MSW (M&H) Rules, 2000 as a pre-condition.  
Reply of the Government 
4.2 The Ministry had conducted Regional Workshops between November 2007 and February 
2008 at various places viz. Chennai, Nagpur, Chandigarh, Bhubaneswar, Guwahati and 
Deharadun to impart train ing to the personnel working in various ULBs, parastatals and State 
Nodal Agencies for preparation of Detailed Project Reports Reports under UIG and UIDSSMT 
of JNNURM as per the guidelines of Municipal Solid Waste (Management & Handling) Rules, 
2000 and Ma nual on Municipal Solid Waste Management published by this Ministry.  
Guidelines for preparation of DPRs had also been circulated to the participants in soft and hard 
copies for their reference and further action.  These steps are expected to enhance the k nowledge 
and expertise of the Participants for preparation of qualitative detailed project reports for 
consideration under JNNURM. 
 Under JNNURM, while appraising the DPRs in respect of solid waste Management 
schemes posed by the ULBs, the CPHEEO (the tech nical wing of the Ministry)  examines the 

 
 
47 
 
DPRs with reference to the guidelines of MSW(M&H) Rules, 2000 and Manual  on Municipal 
Solid Waste Management published by this Ministry and also the characteristics of wastes being 
generated by the concerned ULBs,  their quantity, population, soil condition, topography and 
other technical parameters.  While approving the DPRs,  the CHEEO recommends source 
segregation including recovery of recyclables so as to minimize quantum of waste for treatment 
facilities.  Technology options such as composting, vermin-composting, energy recovery through 
RDF etc. for treatment of waste also reviewed based on the field conditions and characteristics of 
the wastes and technical approval accorded accordingly. 
  
 Comments of the Committee  
4.3    For comments of the Committee please see para no.1.8 of Chapter I of the Report. 
 
 
Recommendation No.3 (Para No.3) 
NATIONAL URBAN SANITATION POLICY 
 
4.4  Open defecation, particularly, near urban slums and railway tracks is still prevalent in 
most of the cities and urban areas. It acts as a major hindrance in achieving „clean city‟ status. 
The Committee are happy to note that the long awaited National Urban Sanitation Policy has 
been approved by the Cabinet on 3 rd October, 2008 dur ing the International Year of Sanitation, 
with a view to formulate policy guidelines, strategies for implementation of sewerage and 
sanitation facilities in the urban areas, so as to eliminate open defecation in the cities and towns. 
To achieve the goals o f National Urban Sanitation Policy, the Government is reportedly 
contemplating steps like awareness generation and behavioural change, integrated city -wide 
sanitation system, sanitary and safe disposal, proper maintenance and management of all sanitary 

 
 
48 
 
installation, etc. in due course. The Committee feel that for effective implementation of the 
National Urban Sanitation Policy, a time -bound action plan with specified targets focussing on 
the prevailing conditions in a State needs to be framed by the Governm ent, with adequate 
financial support so that ULBs could be strengthened to provide substantial sanitation services. 
The Committee hope that the Central Government and the States will take necessary steps to 
achieve this goal. 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.5 Sanitation is a State subject and hence it is the responsibility of the States to formulate 
and implement programmes for eliminatin of open defecation as well as safe disposal of human 
excreta.  However, the Central Government supplements the efforts of beh avioural changes 
among public through awareness creation and seeks to promote open defecation free cities.  In 
addition, the policy enunciates development of state sanitation strategies which include setting 
up os State leel standards, asset creation, capa city building & training, reaching the urban poor, 
monitoring & evaluation etc.  The policy also requires the preparation of City Sanitation Plan by 
the respective ULBs to achieve the goal of 100% sanitation  and open defecation free cities in a 
time bound manner.  The implementation of the City Sanitation Plan shall be monitored by the 
City Sanitation Task Force.  A programme of awareness generation is under formulation.  
Requests have also been from some states for financial assistance for the formulation of state 
sanitation strategies and city sanitation plans. 
  

 
 
49 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
4.6 For comments of the Committee Please see Paragraph No. 1.11 of Chapter I of the Report. 
 
Recommendation No.5 (Para No.5) 
SPECIAL PURPOSE VEHICLE (SPV) FOR MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE 
 
 4.7 Lack of funds with Urban Local Bodies has been identified as a major hindrance in 
proper solid waste management. In this context, the Committee have been informed that Kerala 
State Government has created a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) for power generation by 
integrating its 60 municipalities with three intermediate depots to collect garbage and waste to 
dispose it off in large containers.  Ahmedabad and Bangalore cities have also reportedly created 
SPV for management of municipal solid waste. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
Government should closely monitor these initiatives and if found suitable, encourage other 
States, cities and ULBs to create such SPVs to address the shortage of funds. The Committee 
also recommend that the G overnment should examine the feasibility of developing, with 
adequate financial support, model „clean‟ cities in each State which demonstrate innovative 
MSW Management system. 
 
Reply  of the Government 
 
4.8 One of the optional reforms indicated in the JNNU RM guidelines is to encourage Public 
Private Partnership.  Under the approved JNNURM schemes, some cities have envisaged Public 
Private Partnership in lieu of contribution of ULBs.  In certain schemes, the operation and 
maintenance of compost plants have been proposed for funding through private partnership. 

 
 
50 
 
 For instance, Coimbatore city has tied up with a private partner to set up compost 
plant/Landfill site by investing the ULB share of the SWM project approved under JNNURM 
including O&M facilities created for a period of 20 years.  Similarly, Surat city is contemplating 
entrusting construction and O&M of compost plant to a private operator. 
Secretary (UD) has issued an Advisory on SWM to all the States emphasizing the need 
for preparation of good quality  DPR, timely implementation of the approved SWM project, its 
effective O&M and levy of reasonable user charge to generate adequate revenue to make the 
scheme self-sustainable in the long run.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
4.9 For comments of the Committee Please see paragraph No. 1.14 of Chapter I of the 
Report 
 
Recommendation No.9 (Para No.9) 
 
PILOT PROJECT ON SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT IN 10 AIRFIELD TOWNS 
4.10 The Committee are distressed to note that though the Scheme of Solid Waste 
Management in 10 Airfield  towns was scheduled to be completed by March, 2008, it has 
been delayed badly in Pune, Tejpur and Hindon. Only 45 per cent, 10 per cent and 45 per 
cent of work has been completed respectively in the three towns as on 30.6.2008.  The 
progress of work in re spect of project at Bareilly has also remained incomplete as per the 
information furnished to the Committee. They are perturbed to note that despite their 
recommendation in 31 st Report on Demands for Grants (2008 -09), (14 th Lok Sabha) of the 
Ministry of Urban Development urging the Ministry to take necessary action in the matter for 

 
 
51 
 
urgently completing the schemes in the remaining 4 towns, substantial amount of work is still 
left, particularly in Tejpur. While urging for completion of these schemes without further 
delay, the Committee would like to be apprised of the present status of implementation of 
these projects, alongwith the steps taken by the Ministry in 2008 to remove the impediments 
in the projects pending till date. They hope that the Ministry wou ld take up the matter 
concerning Tejpur with appropriate authorities urgently lest the very objective of the scheme 
would stand defeated.  
Reply of the Government 
 
4.11 The Tezpur project was mainly delayed due to non -availability of land for the project.  
Now the land is in the possession of the State Government which will  be handed over to NBCC 
for execution of the project.  NBCC has called for tenders for implementation of Tezpur project.  
It is hoped that the Tezpur project may be completed by the end of this year. 
 As regards the Bareilly project, it is stated that this project was held for want of funds.  
The funds have now been released and it is likely that the project will be completed within the 
year 2009. 
As regards the Pune project, execution of  work stated at site in June 2006 but was 
stopped due to local villagers disturbance and non -availability of land.  The problem has been 
resolved by the ULB in September 2008 and the work is in progress.  It is likely to be completed 
by March 2010.   
 
  

 
 
52 
 
Comments of the Committee 
4.12 For comments of the Committee Please see Paragraph No. 1.17 of Chapter I of the 
Report) 
 
Recommendation No.12 (Para No.12) 
 
MONITORING OF SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT (SWM) PROJECTS 
 
4.13 The Committee find that although monitoring of Solid Waste Management is primarily 
not the responsibility of the Ministry of Urban Development, the Ministry, however, monitor the 
implementation of approved Solid Waste Management projects under the Centrall y-sponsored 
schemes through various mechanisms such as Quarterly Project Reports, field visits, etc. The 
Committee have been further  apprised that for monitoring and management of sanctioned 
projects of various sectors including SWM under JNNURM, the Proj ect Implementation Units 
(PIU) at ULB level and Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) at State level are being set up. The 
Committee are, however, constrained to note that in spite of the aforesaid efforts taken by the 
Central Government, only 30 Project Implement ation Units (PIU), 12 Project Monitoring Units 
(PMU) and 4 Independent Review and Monitoring Agencies (IRMA) have been set up so far to 
monitor and manage the sanctioned projects. The Committee feel that it is grossly inadequate in 
view of the fact that th e issue of managing Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) concerns  5161 cities 
and towns. The Committee, therefore, recommend that to give a major fillip to this programme, 
the Government should meet frequently and make constant dialogue with the State Governments 
so that more project implementation and monitoring units could be set up at the ULB / State 
levels. Further the performance of PIUs, PMUs and IRMAs also needs to be assessed in order to 
ensure that no loopholes are left in the execution of SWM projects.  

 
 
53 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.14 As per the scheme, the PMU, PIU and IRMA are to be appointed under the UIG  
component of JNNURM.  The JNNURM Directorate has brought out a tool kit for appointment 
of Independent Review and Monitoring Agencies.  IRMA are agencie s to be appointed by the 
States for monitoring of progress of implementation of the projects sanctioned under JNNURM.  
The proposals of Kerala, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Uttrakhand, Maharashtra, West Bengal, 
Puducherry, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and Karnata ka for appointment of IRMA have been 
approved by the CSMC.  IRMAs have been established in Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Kerala, 
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Rajasthan.  The States of Assam, Bihar, Delhi, Haryana, 
Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Tamil Na du are in the process of appointing IRMAs.  For 
the States of Chandigarh, J&K, Punjab, Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Manipur, Mizoram, Meghalaya, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Orissa and Goa, Ministry of Urban 
Development has initiated steps for  appointment of IRMAs on behalf of the States.  16 no. of 
PMUs have been approved and 8 no. of PMUs have set up by the states 8 no. of States are yet to 
submit proposals.  40 no. of PIUs have been approved and 23 no. have been set up. 25 no. of 
ULBs are yet to submit proposals.  
Comments of the Committee 
4.15  For comments of the Committee Please see Paragraph No. 1.20 of Chapter I of the 
Report) 
  
  

 
 
54 
 
Recommendations (Para No. 22) 
 
MONITORING OF PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTICIPATION (PPP) PROJECTS 
 
4.16 The Committee  note that under Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission 
guidelines, Urban Local Bodies shall have to implement obligatory reforms in which the 
Ministry of Urban Development has advocated for encouraging Public Private Participation 
(PPP). Further, the Ministry has approved PPP model for Indore, Coimbatore, Madurai, Surat 
and Mumbai. In six municipal zones in Delhi, the entire collection and transportation of waste 
has been given to private parties. The Committee have been also informed that the Min istry of 
Urban Development, in an advisory note sent to all State Governments in October, 2007, had 
advised them that the ULBs should explore possibility of including PPP and Non -Governmental 
Organizations / Resident Welfare Associations in door -to-door co llection, transportation and 
treatment facility for municipal solid waste. The Committee, however, note that in some of the 
cities, Public Private Participation mode has been implemented successfully, while in others the 
performance has been dismal. They f eel that an issue in PPP mode, which requires attention, is 
strengthening the ULB‟s capacity to enter into contracts and the private sector‟s ability to deliver 
professionally against a contract. They, therefore, recommend the Ministry to address the matte r 
carefully keeping in view these crucial issues and initiate measures to tackle the same. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.17 This Ministry intends to develop Model Concession Agreement (MCA) for solid waste 
management.  For this, a workshop will be held and representatives of both private sector and 
ULBs will be invited.  This MCA will be disseminated through MoUD.  The above exercise may 
be followed by Training Programmes at the State Level. 

 
 
55 
 
However, pending preparation of MCA for PPP on Solid Waste Manageme nt, the 
Ministry has initiated proactive action for encouraging PPP in  SWM projects approved under 
UIG of JNNURM.  List of projects sanctioned under UIG of JNNURM  involving PPP is 
enclosed at Annexure-V.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
4.18 For comments of the Committee please see Paragraph No. 1.26 of Chapter I of the 
Report.   

 
 
56 
 
 
CHAPTER-V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation No.11. (Para No.11) 
 
LACK OF LANDFILL SITE IN GURGAON, HARYANA 
5.1 The Committee note with concern that in the National Capital Region, particularly, in 
Gurgaon, where the present population is more than 10 lakh against the 3.42 lakh as per 2001 
Census, the problem of unmanaged municipal solid waste has create d an uproar. They have been 
given to understand that now an integrated site to be developed on Build -Own-Operate-Transfer 
(BOOT) basis has been identified at Bandhwari village on Gurgaon - Faridabad Road on a 
Public-Private-Partnership model. The Committee note that although all necessary clearances for 
the project has been obtained, the project is likely to take one and a half years for completion 
after approval of the budget. The Committee hope that keeping in view the problem the project 
would be sanctioned and undertaken urgently and desire that it should be completed without any 
delay. 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.2 The Haryana PWD, Water Supply and Sanitation Department, Gurgaon has been 
requested to provide requisite information/ material.  On receipt of it, the same will be forwarded 
to the Committee. 
 

 
 
57 
 
  Recommendation No.17  (Para No. 17) 
PROJECTS FOR WASTE CHARACTERIZATION AND FEASIBILITY 
STUDIES 
  
 5.3 The Committee note that a scheme for financial assistance for waste characterization and 
feasibility studies was introduced in 1992 under which the Ministry had sanctioned 3 projects 
viz. (i) the municipal solid waste management project Nagar Nigam, Ghaziabad at a cost of 
Rs.55 lakh,  (ii) Pilot project for solid waste management for Hyderabad City, Mu nicipal 
Corporation, Hyderabad at a cost of Rs. 53.3 lakh and (iii) Pilot project for solid waste 
management in Shimla at a total cost of Rs.25 lakh. However, none of these projects have been 
reported to be commissioned. The Committee would like to be apprised of the date of sanction of 
these projects, the reasons for their non -commissioning and the actual progress alongwith 
expenditure incurred, if any, on these projects. The Committee strongly urge the Government to 
fix responsibility for the failure of commissioning these projects.   
  
Reply of the Government 
 
5.4 Urban Solid Waste Management in Shimla:  The Ministry of Environment &  Forests 
had released an amount of Rs. 25 lakhs to H.P Pollution Control Board, Shimla in March, 1996 
for setting up of a demonstration project on urban solid waste management facility in Shimla. 
However, due to some technological  and temperature constrai nts at Shimla, the project was 
shifted to Nahan, wherein the temperature conditions was found to be adequate to facilitate 
composting. As per the information from the H.P. State Pollution Control Board, the project has 
been executed and completed at Nahan. 

 
 
58 
 
Pilot project for Solid Waste Management for vermin -composting in Hyderabad 
City: The Municipal Commissioner of Hyderabad city had submitted a proposal to the Ministry 
of Environment & Forests (MoEF) in the year 1995 for a Pilot project for vermi -composting at 
Hyderabad city. The total project cost was Rs. 431 lakhs for a period of 5years. MoEF had 
approved the project for financial assistance of Rs. 53.30 lakhs as its share. The first installment 
of Rs. 25 lakhs was released on 28.03.1995. MoEF has taken up the matter with the State 
Government and has been pursuing the matter for the project completion activities. 
Municipal Solid Waste Management for Ghaziabad City: The Mukhya Nagar 
Adhikari (MNA), Ghaziabad city had submitted a proposal to the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests (MoEF) in the year 1998 for a Municipal Solid Waste Management and Compost 
(Organic Fertilizer)project at Ghaziabad city. The estimated project cost was Rs. 375/- lakhs. 
MoEF approved the project for financial assistance of Rs. 55 lakhs as its share. The first 
instalment of Rs. 25 lakh  was released on 31stMarch, 1998. MoEF has taken up the matter with 
the State Government and has been pursuing the matter for the project completion activities. 
Comments of the Committee 
5.5 For comments of the Committee please see Paragraph No. 23 of Chapter I of the Report. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                SHARAD YADAV, 
11th February, 2010                                 Chairman, 
Magha,1931 (Saka)                                        Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 

 
 
59 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 
THURSDAY, 11th  FEBRUARY, 2010 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Room No. 53, Parliament House, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Sharad Yadav - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri J.P. Agarwal 
3. Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
4. Shri Ambica Banerjee 
5. Shri Ramesh Kumar 
6. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
7. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
8. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
9. Shri Amir Alam Khan 
10. Shri Manohar Joshi 
11. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri K.D. Muley   - Director 
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda  - Additional Director 
  
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE   MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
1.  Dr. M. Ramachandran  - Secretary (UD) 
2.   Ms. Sudha Krishnan  - JS&FA 
3.  Shri P.K. Srivastava  -  J S& MD 
4.  Shri Nitin R. Gokarn  - Director (NURM-III) 
5.  Shri Sanjay Kumar   - Director (NURM-I) 

 
 
60 
 
6.  Shri Upendra Malik   - Director, (CSO), CPWD 
7.  Shri M. Shankaranarayanan  - Deputy Advisor (CPHEEO) 
8.  Shri R. Sethuraman   - Consultant (CPHEEO) 
9.  Shri J.B. Kshirsagar   - Chief Planner, TCPO 
10.  Shri K.K. Joadder   - Add. Chief Planner (TCPO) 
11.  Shri S.K. Lohia   - OSD (Urban Transport)  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members and representatives of the Ministry 
of Urban Development to the sitting of the Committee.  
***     ***     *** 
6. Thereafter the Committee considered and adopted the Action Taken Report on 38 th 
Report (14 th Lok Sabha) on the subject „Solid Waste Management‟ without any 
changes/modifications. 
4. The Committee  then adjourned. 
* * * * * 
 
  

 
 
61 
 
APPENDIX II 
   [Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]  
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY EIGHTH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
I. Total number of recommendations    23 
II. Recommendations which have been accepted by      
the Government. 
 
 
Para Nos. Sl. Nos. Sl. Nos. 1, 4, 6, 8, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 20,  
21 and 23             (Total 12)                                                                                                                                                               
                
Percentage to total recommendations    (52.17%) 
 
III. Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue  
in view of Government‟s replies:      
 
Para Sl. Nos.7,10 and 19      (Total 3) 
 
Percentage to total recommendations     (13.04%) 
 
IV. Recommendations in respect of which replies of the  
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
Para Sl. Nos.2,3,5,9,12, and 22     (Total 6) 
Percentage to total recommendations    (26.08%)  
 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the  
Government are still awaited:  
 
Para Sl. Nos.11 and 17     (Total 2) 
  
Percentage to total recommendations      (8.69%) 
                    