1 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
                          (2012-2013) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
ROLE OF CENTRAL PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT (C.P.W.D.) IN 
CHECKING UNAUTHORIZED OCCUPATION OF GOVERNMENT LAND  AND 
COLONIES AND EVALUATION OF THEIR PERFORMANCE IN MAI NTAINING 
GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS 
 
 
 
TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2013 /  Bhadrapada,  1935 (Saka)  
26 


2 
 
TWENTY SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING  COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
ROLE OF CENTRAL PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT (C.P.W.D.) IN 
CHECKING UNAUTHORIZED OCCUPATION OF GOVERNMENT LAND  AND 
COLONIES AND EVALUATION OF THEIR PERFORMANCE IN MAI NTAINING 
GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 29 th  August, 2013 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  29 th  August, 2013 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
29 August, 2013 /  7 Bhadrapada,  1935 (Saka) 


3 
 
 
 
 C.U.D. No. 
: 80 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2013 By Lok Sabha Secretariat  
 
Publish under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by  
 
 
 

4 
 
 CONTENTS 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .................................................. (iii) 
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................... (vi) 
 
 
PART- I 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I    INTRODUCTORY …………………………………………… 1   
 
CHAPTER II   FUNCTIONING OF CPWD……………………………………5  
 
CHAPTER III   ENCROACHMENT OF GOVT. LAND AND COLONI ES…8  
       
CHAPTER IV  PERFORMANCE OF CPWD IN MAINTAINING GOVT . BUILDINGS 
AND GOVT. RESIDENTIAL COLONIES..      20 
 
 
PART-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE………50 
 
 
ANNEXURES  
 
1. List of major projects executed by CPWD in last 10 years. 
2. Court cases 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
***** 
  
 
 
 
 
 
****  Not appended. Will be appended at the time of printing.  
 
 
 
(ii) 

5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013) 
    Shri Sharad Yadav         -        Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
 
2.  Shri Praveen Singh Aron  
3. Shri Jayawant Gangaram Awale 
4.  Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
5. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
6.  Shri Anant Gangaram Geete  
7.  Smt. Kaisar Jahan  
8.  Shri Kailash Joshi  
9. Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
10. 
 Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee  
11.  Shri Ramesh Kumar  
12.  Shri Yadav Anjan Kumar M. 
13.  Shri P.C. Mohan  
14.  Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
15.  Shri Sonawane Pratap Narayanrao  
16.  Dr. Ramshankar 
17.  Shri Ratan Singh 
18.  Vacant 
19.  Vacant 
20.  Vacant 
21.  Vacant 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22. 
 Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
23.  Shri Anil Desai 
24.  Md. Nadimul Haque 
25.  Shri Parvez Hashmi  
26.  Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
27.  Shri Avinash Pande  
28.  Shri Ajay Sancheti 
29.  Shri Amar Singh 
30.  Shri Khekiho Zhimomi  
31.  Dr. M.S. Gill 
 
 
 
(iii) 

6 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri R.K. Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha   - Director 
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Dr. (Maj.) Jagmohan Khatry - Committee Officer 
 
  
  

7 
 
 
INTRODUCTION  
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2012-13) having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Repo rt on their behalf, present the Twenty 
Sixth Report on the subject " Role of Central Public Works Department (C.P.W.D.) in 
checking unauthorized occupation of government land  and colonies and evaluation 
of their performance in maintaining Government buil dings"  relating to the Ministry of 
Urban Development.  
 
2. The Committee took oral-evidence of the represen tatives  of the Ministry of  Urban 
Development on 6 November, 2012, 27 June and 18 Jul y 2013. The Committee also took 
oral evidence of various client Ministries like Hea lth and Family Welfare, Human Resource 
Development, Commerce, Home Affairs and Department of Personnel and Training on 7 
May, 2013. Further, the representatives of Resident  Welfare Associations of Government 
Residential colonies such as Vasant Vihar, Sarojini  Nagar, Laxmibai Nagar and Lodhi 
colony were also invited to render oral evidence on 23 May, 2013. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted their repor t on the subject at their sitting held 
on 27 August,  2013. 
 
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to th e officers of Ministries of Urban 
Development, Health and Family Welfare, Human Resou rce Development, Commerce, 
Home Affairs and Department of Personnel and Traini ng for furnishing the material and 
information which the  Committee desired from time to time  in connection with the 
examination of the subject and also for  appearing before the  Committee. 
 
5. The Committee convey their gratitude to the  rep resentatives of Resident Welfare 
Associations (RWAs) of various Government residenti al colonies  for  sharing their views 
and suggestions and also for  appearing before the Committee. 
 
6. For facility of reference and convenience, the r ecommendations/observations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in part II of the Report. 
 
New Delhi:           SHARAD YADAV 
27 August, 2013 
               CHAIRMAN 
5 Bhadrapada, 1935 (Saka)               Standing Co mmittee on Urban Development  
(iv)  

8 
 
Report 
 
Part I 
Chapter I 
 
Introduction  
 
  The execution of public work has been an organize d function of the State from 
times immemorial in our country.  The Central Publi c Works Department (CPWD), a 159 
years old institution, is the principal agency of G overnment of India under the Ministry of 
Urban Development  responsible for creation and mai ntenance of all Central Government 
assets except Railways, Defence, Communication, Ato mic Energy, Airports Authority of 
India and All India Radio.   CPWD came into existen ce as a central agency meant for 
carrying out the public works in July 1854. However , it was in 1938, that the CPWD got 
organized into its existing structure. Over the years CPWD has executed wide variety of civil 
works ranging from building residential accommodati on and office complexes to roads, 
bridges and border fencing, not only in India but also in neighboring countries of South Asia. 
  
1.2 CPWD provides the services of an architect, a s tructural engineer, a project manager, 
and a facility manager to various government depart ments. Its activities are spread 
throughout the length and breadth of the country. I t also undertakes the projects of 
Autonomous Bodies and Public Sector Undertakings as  Deposit Works. Besides being the 
construction agency of the Government, it performs a regulatory function in setting the pace 
and programmes for the building industry in the cou ntry. The DG, CPWD also functions as 
Technical Advisor to the Government of India. CPWD handles a wide range of projects like 
Housing and office, space, schools, laboratories, hospitals, stadia, gymnasia and auditorium 
storages, highways, flyovers, tunnels bridges, jett ies, sports facilities, border fencing, 
airports, runways etc. It is also involved in other  multiple discharge other functions for 
examples custody of Estates, valuation, rent assess ment, Standardization and 
Benchmarking.  CPWD executes projects on turnkey ba sis including all the services viz. 
water supply, sewerage, roads, electrical, air-cond itioning, fire fighting etc. Expertise in all 
fields of building construction namely Architecture, Civil Engineering, Structural Engineering, 
Electrical and Mechanical Engineering and Horticult ure are available under one umbrella. 

9 
 
The department takes upon itself full responsibilit y for planning designing, estimation, 
evaluation of bids, finalization of contracts, defe nding arbitration and court cases. The 
Department provides comprehensive building construc tion management services and the 
project becomes the responsibility of the departmen t. CPWD has also emerged as an 
agency which has benchmarked construction costs and  specifications in the country. It has 
well documented specifications and standards, sched ule of rates, which are updated from 
time to time, and are used extensively by various c onstruction agencies in the country be it 
in the public or private sector.  The onus of responsibility with regard to preventing, reporting 
and removal of unauthorized constructions/encroachments thereon is of the CPWD. 
 
  
ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE 
 
 
1.3 CPWD as an organization is under the administra tive control of Ministry of Urban 
Development (MoUD) in terms of the Government of In dia (allocation of business) Rules, 
1961. CPWD is headed by Director General (Works) [D . G (W)], who acts as the chief 
professional advisor to Ministry of Urban Developme nt in all matters concerned with public 
works. He is also the principal adviser to the Gove rnment of India on all technical matters 
related to civil, electrical and mechanical enginee ring, horticulture and architecture. He is 
responsible for full technical and supervisory control over all disciplines, its officers and staff. 
The DG (W) or his nominees are associated with vari ous technical bodies or standing 
committees of different institutions and organizations. DG (W) exercises a concurrent control 
with the audit officer in connection with maintenan ce of accounts, preparation of budget 
estimates for works under his control and monitors closely the progress of expenditure 
against it. The DG (W) is assisted by six Special D irector General and fifteen Additional 
Director General of Works [ADG(W)] for effective administration and proper control of works, 
CPWD has been divided into four regions, each headed by an ADG. The regions have been 
further subdivided into zones headed by Chief Engin eers (CE), zones into circles headed by 
Superintending Engineer (SE), circles into division s, headed by Executive Engineer (EE), 
and divisions into subdivisions, headed by Assistan t Engineers (AE). The AE/JE is 
responsible for management and execution of all works in a sub-division. 

10 
 
 
 
1.4 Apart from the four ADGs covering the four regi onal offices of CPWD, there are five 
ADGs looking after the functional aspects as listed below :- 
1. Additional Director General (Northern Region) 
2. Additional Director General (Western Region) 
3. Additional Director General (Eastern Region) 
4. Additional Director General (Southern Region) 
5. Additional Director General (Strategy and Planning) 
6. Additional Director General (Technology Development) 
7. Additional Director General (Architecture) 
8. Additional Director General (Training) 
9. Additional Director General (Borders) 
 
1.5 In general functions of CPWD are as follows: 
 
 
a) Designing, constructing and maintaining Central Government non-residential 
buildings other than those for Railways, Communicat ions, Atomic Energy, Defence 
services, All India Radio, Doordarshan, and Airports (AAI). 
b) Designing, constructing and maintaining resident ial accommodation meant for 
Central Government Employees. 
c) Construction works for some public sector undert akings (which do not have captive 
civil engineering division) and some autonomous organizations, as deposit works. 
d) Provide consultancy services in planning, design ing and construction of civil 
engineering projects, as and when required by publi c undertakings and other 
autonomous bodies. 
e) The DG (W), CPWD is also the principal technical  adviser to the Government of India 
on all technical matters within the Central Government purview. 
f)  Construction in foreign countries of Embassy an d other buildings/ projects at the 
request of Ministry of External Affairs and other Ministries. 

11 
 
g) Defence / security related works, and other work s as assigned to Government of 
India from time to time. 
h) Management of Central Government Estates, which are not under the purview of 
Directorate of Estates. 
i) Prevention and Removal of unauthorized construct ions/encroachments of 
Government land within the purview of CPWD. 
 
1.6 The main purpose of selecting the subject by th e Committee for examination and 
report is to dwell into   the nitty-gritty of funct ioning of CPWD and make recommendations to 
enhance its performance to meet the client’s satisf action and stop denigrating image of 
CPWD in the perception of its clients and common pe ople at large.  In this connection, the 
Committee took oral evidence of the representatives  of the Ministry of Urban Development 
and other Ministries like Ministry of Health and Fa mily Welfare, Commerce, Home Affairs, 
Human Resource Development and Department of Person nel and Training (DOPT) to know 
the first hand account of the functioning of CPWD i n maintaining Government Buildings and 
to find out various lacunae in implementation of pr ojects by CPWD.  The Committee also 
invited various representatives of Resident Welfare  Associations (RWAs) of various 
Government Colonies to understand the exact problems they are facing and how the CPWD 
is attending to their maintenance requirements.  The Committee also undertook study visit to 
Kochi, Munnar, Chennai, Mumbai and Nagpur from 5 
th  to 12 th  June, 2013 and held informal 
discussions with the representatives of CPWD at the se Stations.  Various aspects of the 
functioning of CPWD have been dealt with in the succeeding Chapters. 
  

12 
 
 CHAPTER II 
Functioning of CPWD 
 
 
 CPWD came into existence as a central agency meant  for carrying out the public 
works in July 1854. However, it was in 1930, that t he CPWD got organized into its existing 
structure. Over the years CPWD has executed wide va riety of civil works ranging from 
building residential accommodation and office compl exes to roads, bridges and border 
fencing, not only in India but also in neighboring countries of South Asia. As per information 
provided by Ministry of Urban Development,  CPWD ha s executed approx. 125 major 
projects during last 10 year. The cost of each proj ect is costing more than Rs. 25 crore.  In 
its endeavours of re-orienting and redefining its p rocesses, CPWD invited ICRA 
Management Consulting Services (IMaCS), formerly kn own as ICRA Advisory Services,  to 
undertake a process improvement study and make reco mmendations to enhance 
performance and client satisfaction. The ICRA Manag ement Consulting Services in its 
Report for ‘Process Improvement Study for Restructuring and Improvement Functioning’ had 
highlighted the following in regard to  delays in project planning and execution :- 
 
“Compliance to envisaged time-lines” is one of the most important elements of 
service delivery and the same holds good for CPWD i n the context of project 
management. 
 
 An office order issued by C.E. (SWZ) (Ref #.WS-36/ Misc/11 (80) 864), dated 1st 
January1980 defines the following time scales for various activities: 
 
•  From receipt of requisition to submission of line  sketches to the client: Three 
months 
• Preparation of ‘working drawings showing wall thic knesses and layout of doors and 
    windows: Two months 
• Preparation of estimates: One month 
• Preparation of structural drawings: Three months o f receiving AA. 
• Preparation of detailed cost estimates: Three mont hs post preparation of structural   
drawings 
• Preparation of detailed working drawings: One mont h post preparation of structural 
drawings 
• Preparation of tender documents and issue of NIT: Another Nine months 

13 
 
 
 The above mentioned timeline allows a total period  of 21 months (excluding the time 
taken for  according the AA and ES from the client) from the date of requisition from 
client. 
 
2.2 The Analysis has revealed that a large number o f projects do not adhere to even 
these time frames and there are inordinate delays in various projects.  
 From the analysis of information supplied by the M inistry (Annexure – I) it is observed 
that out of 107 projects only 46 projects (less tha n 50%) got executed in time.  28 projects 
got delayed for one year, 14 projects got delayed f or two years, 5 projects got delayed for 
three years, 2 projects took four years, one projec t took five years and one project up to six 
years.  
2.3 On being asked about the reasons for delay in e xecuting the Projects, the Ministry in 
its written replies submitted that :- 
 “ The delay in completion is on account of varying re asons. Main reasons for delay 
are delay in approval of drawings from local bodies /statutory clearances, delay in 
finalization of functional requirements by users/cl ients,  frequent change in scope of 
the work, non-availability of encumbrance free site , non-availability of budget/funds, 
local disturbances, bad weather, sometimes delay in  mobilizing  requisite 
materials/manpower/machinery by the Contractors (Pe nalties are imposed to 
contractors in such cases.  vacant posts of staff and officers etc.” 
  
2.4 When asked whether all these projects proceeded  according to the prescribed 
schedule, the Ministry replied in negative. 
 
2.5 There is usually escalation in the sanctioned c ost of the project due to increase in 
cost index in the duration of project when the esti mate is prepared and when the project is 
completed. Where the projects are delayed owing to reasons attributable to contractors, the 
compensation for loss/damage occurred to government is recovered from the contractors. 
   
2.6 Despite delays, projects are not abandoned midw ay but completed invariably. As per 
currently available data base, there is only one su ch project of National Police Memorial at 
Chanakyapuri, New Delhi which  was abandoned on the  directions of Hon’ble High Court of 
Delhi. 

14 
 
2.7 From the information furnished by the Ministry it is observed that out of 125 projects 
executed by the CPWD during the last ten years, it has the information about only 102 
projects.  
2.8 The reasons quoted by CPWD for delay in the pro jects inter-alia include frequent 
change in scope of work, career stagnation etc.  Wh en asked to elaborate as to how these 
factors are responsible for delay in the projects, the Ministry in its written replies submitted 
that :- 
 “The frequent changes in the scope of the work req uire changes in drawings, 
specifications etc. These have financial implicatio ns also. These are duly evaluated 
as per laid down norms and approval of competent au thorities are taken for such 
changes. All this is a time taking exercise.”  
 
2.9 Career stagnation brings down the morale of sta ff/officers which affect their output 
both in terms of quality and efficiency. However wi th the recent cadre review approved by 
the government, the problem of stagnation has been overcome to great extent. 
 
  

15 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
ENCROACHMENT OF GOVT. LAND AND COLONIES 
  
 As per Chapter 10 of the maintenance manual of CPW D 2012, Encroachment on 
government land/public premises will not be allowed  to occur. Since the government 
buildings standing on the land and the land underne ath and appurtenant there to along with 
the land under roads, parks, toilets, play grounds,  situated in government colonies come 
under the administrative control of CPWD for all pu rposes, the responsibility with regard to 
preventing, reporting and removal of unauthorized c onstruction /encroachments thereon is 
that of the CPWD. The services like roads, parks, s torm water drains which have been 
handed over to local bodies will come under their p urview for taking action regarding 
prevention and removal of the encroachments. Direct orate of Estate, which is the authority 
for allotment of government premises will receive r eports from CPWD regarding 
unauthorized construction or encroachments by the a llottees of general pool residential / 
commercial premises and would take steps for cancel lation of allotments. The responsibility 
for removal of such unauthorized construction/encro achment as also encroachments by the 
persons other than the allottees will vest with the  CPWD. The CPWD is also entrusted with 
the responsibility for taking action for removal of  encroachments or un-authorised 
construction under common areas such as roads, park s not handed over to local bodies or 
un-allotted land in government colonies, which cannot be specifically attributable to allottee. 
Responsibility for detection/removal of encroachments  
3.2 Ministry of Urban Development has issued compre hensive guidelines for removal/ 
demolition of unauthorized constructions. As per gu idelines of the Ministry, CPWD is 
responsible to ensure that encroachments do not tak e place in the area. Junior Engineer 
and Assistant engineer of the CPWD are personally r esponsible for the encroachments 
taking place in their jurisdictions. Executive Engi neers, Assistant Engineers & Junior 

16 
 
Engineers in case of transfers, will prepare a deta iled note/ list of the encroachments 
already existing in their areas and action taken/pr oposed to be taken will be mentioned 
clearly in their handing over reports to their succ essors. Under-mentioned procedure will be 
adopted to prevent further encroachment in CPWD are as and remove the encroachments 
already taken place. 
(i) Whenever any construction activity going on in the locality is noticed by the 
J.E/A.E. on their inspection carried out by them on  day to day basis, they will 
verify whether the construction is according to bui lding plans sanctioned by 
the local bodies. Immediate steps shall be taken to  stop or demolish the 
constructions which are being carried out in the ab sence of sanctioned 
building plans. 
(ii)  A report will be sent to the Directorate of E states in case the building 
activity is within the premises allotted by the Dir ectorate of Estates or in the 
area appurtenant to the premises allotted by them. For this purpose, area 
within the compound wall and gate of the premises w ill be considered as 
appurtenant to the premises allotted by the Directo rate of Estates. Side by 
side the matter will also be reported to the Police  for immediate prevention of 
unauthorized construction. Director of Estate will upon receiving such 
intimation of unauthorized encroachment within prem ises allotted by him, 
cancel the allotment and take action to evict the a llottee. Whenever such 
premises are vacated by the allottee all unauthoriz ed encroachments, 
structures/additions / alterations etc. shall be de molished by CPWD before 
the premises are re-allotted by DoE. 
(iii) In case unauthorised construction/encroachmen t is not stopped/removed by 
the encroacher, a notice may be issued to him by th e Estate Officer of the 
area under P.P. (Eviction & Unauthorised occupants)  Act, 1971. Side by side 
F.I.R. may be lodged with the police against the defaulter/encroacher. 
(iv) Action will be taken by the Estate Officer und er the P.P (E of U.O.)Act 1971 
and eviction proceedings will be passed. Consequent  upon the passing of the 
eviction proceedings, Estate Officer i.c. Executive  Engineer / DD (H) will 

17 
 
approach Special Task Force constituted by Governme nt of NCTD in Delhi 
and similar mechanisms in other states in consultat ion with local police and 
State Government authorities and get the unauthoriz ed encroachments 
removed. 
(v) It is the responsibility of the department to a ct immediately as and when un-
authorized construction/encroachment is noticed. Th ey will not take the plea 
that said encroachment had already taken place befo re taking over their 
duties in the area. It is expected that irrespectiv e of the fact whether the 
encroachment had taken place during the time of the ir predecessors or in 
their own period, they will take action under the r ules and direction issued by 
Government from time to time. Their performance wil l be judged by the action 
they have taken to stop/remove the encroachment. It  shall be kept in mind 
that police on receiving the report regarding encro achment/ unauthorised 
construction may not act at their own.Their duty is  to provide protection to the 
officers of the department against any untoward inc idence at the time of 
removal of encroachments and for that police help c an be sought. 
Arrangement for labour and equipments for demolitio n/removal has to be 
made by CPWD officers. Divisional officer or his re presentative A.E. or J.E. 
may take the help of Demolition Squad of local bodi es in case they do not 
have any arrangements of their own or in case it wi ll take time for them to 
make arrangement for arranging the demolitions and exigency of job warrants 
the demolitions to be arranged on emergency basis. Local governments also 
have Demolition Squads in certain cities. In Delhi the Lt. Governor has 
constituted Special task Force, in every District. Assistance of special Task 
Force Demolition Squad can be taken by writing to the ADM/DM of the District 
concerned. 
Removal of Encroachments on Public Land  
3.3 The responsibility for prevention, detection an d removal of encroachments from 
lawns, parks and other green areas are under Hortic ulture wing of CPWD. The Section 
Officer (Horticulture), Assistant Director (Horticulture), and Deputy Director (Horticulture) are 

18 
 
personally responsible for prevention, detection an d removal of encroachments. Their 
responsibilities will be similar to their counter p arts on Civil and Electrical side relating to the 
encroachment within their jurisdiction. They will a lso follow the above procedure for 
prevention, detection, and removal of encroachments  
Role of local bodies in prevention of encroachment  
3.4 Local bodies like municipal Corporations, Devel opment authorities play a vital role in 
prevention of encroachment in the cities. For any c onstruction in the cities, construction 
plans have to be approved by local bodies. Their in spectors are required to go round their 
areas on inspections and stop any construction acti vities going on without any approved 
plan. 
Government Instructions to local bodies  
3.5 In cities like Delhi, encroachments have occurr ed on a large scale, which has 
engaged the attention of Ministry of Urban Affairs and Employment. Under Section 41(1) of 
Delhi Development Act, Section 487 of Delhi Municip al Corporation Act, and Section 395 of 
NDMC Act. Ministry has issued under mentioned directions to local bodies NDMC, MCD and 
DDA for strict compliance and land owning agencies report action taken by them to 
Ministry:-  
a) NDMC, MCD and DDA should set up within their financial resources mobi le 
squads headed by jurisdictional Assistant Engineers in ord er to conduct spot 
verification of all ongoing constructions is their respective areas on a day to day 
basis, with a view to ensuring that these are based  on building plans duly sanctioned 
by respective local Authorities/bodies. Such inspec tions should not be confined 
merely to the lands owned by these bodies but will extend over all public and private 
lands in their respective jurisdictions 
b) Immediate steps should be taken to stop or demol ish the constructions which are 
being carried on in the absence of sanctioned build ing plans; Effective liaison with 
the jurisdictional Police stations should be mainta ined  while carrying out these 
tasks to prevent any law and order or other untoward problems. 

19 
 
c) The performance of the mobile squads may be revi ewed by the District level 
Special Task Forces set up under the orders of the LG, Delhi in each district. 
d) Whenever deemed necessary and specially in cases  where unauthorized 
constructions are not stopped despite issuing of no tice, steps should be taken to 
register F.I.Rs and prosecutions  against the defaulters/encroachers. 
e) Special attention must be paid to ensure that pa rks, green spaces and other public 
open spaces are not encroached upon even through temporary construc tions . 
Any temporary construction allowed for a specific p urpose should be got vacated 
within the allotted time frame in the absence of wh ich action be taken to remove such 
constructions forthwith at the cost of the party co ncerned and deduct the expenditure 
from his security deposit. 
f) All land owning agencies should take effective m easures including fencing, regular 
inspection of the land, etc . to protect their lands from future encroachments.  
Private security agencies  may be deployed for this purpose, where ever found  
absolutely necessary. 
g) All land owning agencies should also take necess ary protective and preventive 
measures and ensure that their land is not utilized for dumping garbage  and 
thereby be lost to its regular use. 
RESPONSIBILITY FOR DETECTION/REMOVAL OF UNAUTHORISED 
CONSTRUCTIONS 
Sl. 
No. 
Type of 
unauthorised 
construction 
Area where it 
takes place 
Responsibility 
for detecting and 
reporting 
/removal 
Responsibility for 
cancellation/evectio 
n proceedings. 
1. Unauthorised 
construction 
Inside a 
residential 
quarter/shop 
allotted by the 
Directorate of 
Estates 
CPWD Directorate of Estates 
to cancel the 
allotment & initiate 
eviction proceedings 
evict the person 
concerned from the 
premises 
2. Unauthorised 
construction 
 In a lawn/space 
attached to a 
specific 
residential 
quarter/shop or 
CPWD Directorate of Estates 
to cancel the 
allotment and initiate 
eviction proceedings 
and evict the person 

20 
 
by an identifiable 
allottess/shopkee 
per 
concerned from the 
premises. 
3. Unauthorised 
construction 
On common 
lawns of 
residential 
quarter/markets 
not attributable to 
a specific quarter 
or a specific 
allottee and 
internal roads not 
handed over to 
local bodies. 
CPWD CPWD 
4. Unauthorized 
construction 
On open lands 
which do not form 
part of open 
space attached to 
specific 
quarters/shops or 
which do not form 
part of common 
lawns of 
quarters/markets. 
L&DO/CPWD/Lan 
d owning agency 
L&DO/CPWD/Land 
owning agency 
5. Unauthorized 
construction 
Roads/lands/ope 
n space declared 
as public streets 
handed over to 
local board 
Land owing 
agency 
Land owing agecy 
 
 
3.6 Pertaining to 
 the total area of Government land under encroachme nt in all the States 
and Union Territories of India, the  Ministry of Urban Development in its written repli es 
furnished to the Committee during the month of Marc h, submitted that the number of 
encroachment in Delhi is 51 and the approximate land area 166944 sq. mtr.  In Mumbai the 
number of encroachment is 24 and the approximate la nd area is 24390.56 sq mtr.  In  
Sikkim the number of encroachment is 2 and the appr oximate land area is 2100.00 sq mtr.  
The total areas under encroachment is 193434.56 sq mtr.  
 
 
 

21 
 
3.7 The reply to the additional list of points, the   Ministry has submitted that :- 
  
 “Approximately 250796 Square Meter of CPWD land is  under encroachment in 
 India as per currently available data base.” 
      
3.8 The Ministry in its latest replies dated 12 th  August, 2013 has stated that the number of 
encroachments in Delhi is approximately 228050.45 s q. mtr. In Mumbai the number of 
encroachment is 24 and the land area is 24390.56 sq  mtr.  In Sikkim the number of 
encroachment is 2 and the area is 2100 sq. mtr.  In Calcutta, the number of encroachment is 
2 and the area is 53917.16 sq. mtr.  In Kochi (Kera la) the number of encroachment is 1and 
the area is 72 sq. mtr.  In Indoor (MP) the number of encroachment is 1, the land area is 
14.63 sq mtr.  In Shimla (Himachal Pradesh) the num ber of encroachment is 9 and the 
approximate land area is 2274.15 sq. mtr.  The tota l areas as on 29.07.2013 is 310818.95 
sq. mtr.  
 
3.9 When asked since when  the cases of encroachmen t on government land are in the 
knowledge of CPWD and the steps taken by the CPWD t o get the land vacated, the Ministry 
in its written reply has submitted that :- 
 “The encroachments are mostly old.   The eviction proceedings have been instituted 
against the encroachers in many cases. In some case s, there are court proceedings 
going on. In some places, the encroachment has been  successfully removed by 
CPWD like:-  
 
a) An area of 34235 sq.m. has been reclaimed in poc ket 6 DDU Marg, New Delhi 
during 2009 by removing juggis with the help of DUSIB. 
 
b) The encroachment at Nicholson Square (North of K .B.Marg), New Delhi has 
been removed in the month of  February 2012.  
 
The encroachment on J.J.Cluster near type V quarter  (Rai School), Meher Chand 
Market, Lodhi Road, New Delhi has been removed on December 2006. 
 
When asked about the total value of land encroached  by land grabbers in monetary 
terms, the Ministry submitted that:-  
 
“As per currently available data  approx. 310819 sq uare meter of CPWD land 
is under encroachment in India.  It is not feasible  to find out the value of 
encroached land.” 
 

22 
 
3.10  When asked to explain the authorized and exis ting manpower & mechanism 
available with CPWD specially designated for checki ng the unauthorized occupation of 
Government lands and vacating the already encroache d lands,  the Ministry of Urban 
Development in its written reply stated that:-  
“There is no specially designated manpower availabl e with CPWD for checking 
unauthorized occupation of government land and vaca ting the encroached land. 
However, this requirement is being met from the exi sting strength of the CPWD 
Divisions. The mechanism of checking the unauthoriz ed occupation on Govt land is 
provided in the CPWD Maintenance manual. AE/JE to d etect and verify the 
encroachments within the premises and report to Dir ectorate of Estates. Directorate 
of Estates to cancel the allotment and evict allott ees and CPWD to demolish the 
unauthorized construction.  Encroachments  on vacan t land is to be removed by 
Estate officer under PP Act 1971 with police help. All EEs, In-charge of maintenance 
is declared as estate officer under PP Act. The num ber of cases reported during the 
last three years, the Ministry has informed that su ch data base is not 
compiled/maintained at Directorate level. Further CWD report to such cases. 
      
 
3.11 On being  asked to clarify about other agencie s with whom CPWD is constantly 
liaisoning to create awareness with general public to stop encroachment and vacate the 
encroached land and whether CPWD is getting right k ind of assistance in right time, the 
CPWD in its written reply submitted that :  
“Local bodies are other agencies with whom CPWD is constantly liaisoning to stop 
encroachment and vacating the encroached land. Resi dent Welfare Associations are 
being encouraged to stop any encroachment in their colony. CPWD is not getting 
required assistance in right time to remove the enc roachment from police and local 
authorities." 
 
 
3.12 When asked about the suggestive measures  the CPWD has stated that:- 
"Local bodies and specially constituted Task Force may be held responsible to 
remove the encroachments.” 
      
 
 
 
3.13 When asked about the steps taken by CPWD to cu rb the encroachment, the CPWD 
in its written submission state that: 

23 
 
“Directions issued to all field formations of CPWD to Co- operate and Co-Opt. with 
local authorities & Police and seek Co-operation fr om dedicated task force whenever 
constituted by state Govt. for removal of encroachm ents. No fresh encroachments 
have been reported in Delhi as well as other major cities due to above said 
measures.” 
      
 
3.14  On being asked to clarify why CPWD is not hav ing its own task force to 
prevent the unauthorized occupation and vacate the already encroached lands when it is 
not getting required assistance from the police and  local authorities in right time to remove 
the encroachment, CPWD has stated that:- 
“Having its own task force to prevent the unauthoriz ed occupation and vacate the 
already encroached lands is not feasible on account  of limitations of handling Law 
& Order problems. Government of Delhi has created s ub-division level special task 
force to check encroachment in public land; their a ssistance is obtained whenever 
any new encroachment is noticed” 
      
 
3.15  In view of the above statement the Committee further asked the CPWD to give 
their suggestions for institutional support they re quire to vacate the encroached land under 
their jurisdiction and also for constitution of Special Task Force in other cities on the pattern 
of GNCTD to vacate the old and new encroachments, t he Ministry in its written replies 
submitted as under :-  
“No new institutional mechanism is required for rem oving encroachment. Existing 
mechanism is adequate. In existing mechanism, Execu tive Engineer has been 
declared as Estate officer under P. P. Act.  In sta tions other than Delhi, help of local 
police and civic agency, if required, is taken to remove encroachment. T
he help of the 
special Task Force of GNCT D is taken whenever required and feasible whether the 
encroachment  in new or old. Compensation is paid to civic agenc y/Delhi Urban 
Shelter Improvement Board (DUSIB) for removing encr oachment from Juggi Jhopri 
clusters for their relocation.” 
      
 
 
3.16 When asked to clarify about the BE, RE, Actual  allocation and actual expenditure of 
CPWD for checking of unauthorized occupation of Gov ernment colonies since last five 
years, Ministry’s written reply is as under:- 
“No separate BE, RE and Actual allocation is made f or checking unauthorized 
occupation of Govt. colonies.” 

24 
 
     
 
3.17 When asked about the system being followed by the CPWD to look after the 
expenditure incurred on activities relating to chec king of unauthorised occupation in 
Government colonies, CPWD in its written replies submitted that :- 
 
 " The expenditure incurred on activities relating to checking of unauthorised 
occupations in Government colonies being charged to  maintenance budget of 
CPWD." 
 
3.18 When asked to explain about the unauthorized c onstructions in Delhi and to clarify 
about why these unauthorized constructions have not  been checked and stopped in first 
instance and what actions have been taken against c onniving officials, Ministry has stated 
as under:- 
 
“The unauthorized construction as well as amalgamation relate to building activities of 
Building Bye-laws is looked after by the MCD.  No s pecific action seems to have 
taken as noticed from the records available as of n ow.  A separate inquiry will be 
conducted by DUSIB in this regard and action will b e taken against the officials 
responsible” 
 
   
 
 
3.19 As per the 14 th  report on DFG of the Standing Committee Urban Deve lopment,  the 
Committee have been informed that in all government al residential colonies across Delhi 
there is a large sprawl of Jhuggi clusters.  The re sidents of these colonies have also been 
issued voter identity cards and ration cards. When the Committee asked about the steps 
being taken by the Government to remove such illega l encroachments from all such 
colonies, the Ministry in their written replies submitted as under:- 
“CPWD is aware of unauthorized encroachment in its land. All such unauthorized 
construction/encroachment in the CPWD land got surv eyed by the local authorities. 
Local body undertakes detailed survey in respect of  these Jhuggis. Dwellers who 
qualify for resettlement/rehabilitation, bill is ra ised by the local body and money is 
deposited by the CPWD. In cases, where Jhuggi dwell ers are found to be ineligible, 
they are removed by CPWD with the help of police force.” 
 
 

25 
 
3.20 During oral evidence before the Committee, the  RWA’s submitted that large sprawl of 
Jhuggi clusters are still persisting and no action has been taken by local authorities till now.  
When asked to explain the situation and the action taken by  the CPWD in this regard, the 
CPWD in its written replies has stated that:- 
 
"It pertains to  Government of NCT of Delhi, as removal of slum clusters in Delhi is 
done by DUSIB, an organisation with Delhi Government." 
 
 
3.21 When the Committee raised the issue with the M inistry of Urban Development 
regarding fixing the responsibility on the official s under whose nose such encroachments 
had taken place,  the   Ministry in its written replies stated that : - 
“The encroachments on Govt. lands/colonies under ju risdictions of CPWD are 10 
to 20 years old, so it is not feasible to fix responsibilities of CPWD officials.” 
      
 
 
3.22 When asked to elaborate &  further clarify upon the fixi ng of responsibilities of the 
officers responsible for removal of encroachments on Govt . lands/colonies und er 
jurisdictions of CPWD,   the Ministry in its written replies  has stated  as under:  
 
“An area of 34235 sq.m. has been reclaimed in pocket 6 DDU Marg, New Delhi during 
2009 by removing juggis with the help of DUSIB. The  encroachment at Nicholson 
Square (North of K.B.Marg), New Delhi has been remo ved on February 2012. The 
encroachment on J.J.Cluster near type V quarter (Ra i School), Meher Chand Market, 
Lodhi Road, New Delhi has been removed by CPWD on D ecember 2006. CPWD 
engineers try their best to remove encroachment. Success is sometimes achieved and 
sometimes not achieved due to reasons beyond their control.  However, Ministry has 
asked the DG, CPWD to fix responsibility for the sa me by conducting enquiry through 
CVO, CPWD.” 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

26 
 
 
 
Court Cases 
 
  
3.23 On being asked  about the court case filed by the CPWD to evict the land 
encroachment upon  by the land grabbers, the CPWD i n its written submission has stated 
that : 
"Encroachments are evicted by recourse to administr ative action with the help of 
police etc.  It is observed from Annexure II (copy attached)  that the 39 Court Cases 
pending at various Court. No court case have been f illed by CPWD to evict the land 
encroached upon by the land grabbers. However the e ncroachers have moved to the 
court in so many cases on receipt of eviction notice issued by the CPWD. “ 
 
3.24 On enquiring about the scientific study undert aken to study the problems of 
encroachment of government land, the Ministry has stated that:- 
"No such study has been carried out because the det ails of guidelines/polices on 
encroachments have been incorporated in chapter 10 of the CPWD maintenance 
manual 2012." 
  

27 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
 
Performance of CPWD in maintaining Govt. Buildings and Govt. residential 
colonies 
 
 In its endeavours of re-orienting and redefining i ts processes, CPWD invited 
ICRA Management Consulting Services (IMaCS), former ly known as ICRA Advisory 
Services,  to undertake a process improvement study  and make recommendations to 
enhance performance and client satisfaction. It is observed by the study of  ICRA 
that CPWD offers essentially two core services viz;  construction and maintenance, 
which are discussed below:- 
 
a) Construction services :  
CPWD builds its projects by expending public money within the framework of 
various rules and  codes laid down in its manuals. While CPWD has othe r 
functions (like consultancy, valuation of  properties etc.) to perform, its primary 
activity is related to design, and construction of buildings  be it be residential, 
non-residential or institutional- in various parts of the country.  
 
b) Maintenance services:   
Maintenance activity is defined by BIS as “A combin ation of many actions 
carried out to restore an item in, or restore it to  an acceptable condition”. 
Building maintenance is thus “work undertaken to ke ep, restore or improve 
every facility i.e. every part of a building, its s ervices and surroundings to a 
currently acceptable standard and sustain the utility and value of the facility”. 
Maintenance of capital assets of the Central Govern ment of India is one of the 
core functions  performed by CPWD. It includes maintenance of resid ential and 
non-residential buildings,  including civil, electrical, mechanical, air-
conditioning, horticulture, and other services.  Maintenance activity is very 
important not only for the client departments, whos e assets are  maintained by 
CPWD, but also very significant for CPWD as a large  percentage of its work 

28 
 
force  is deployed in this activity and forms a very large  percentage of the work 
load being handled.  
 
CPWD is responsible for maintaining a large stock o f Central Government 
residential and nonresidential accommodation spread  all over the country. It 
includes maintenance of prestigious buildings such as Rashtrapati Bhawan, 
Parliament House, North Block, South Block, Vigyan Bhawan, Hyderabad 
House, National Museum and various other buildings and also the residences 
of Vice President, Prime Minister, Union Cabinet Mi nisters, Members of 
Parliament, and other officials. CPWD provides comp rehensive maintenance 
services in respect of civil, electrical and hortic ulture work. It is also 
responsible for providing certain amenities in resi dences of VVIP/ VIP as per 
prescribed norms of the Government.  
 
The type of maintenance works carried out by CPWD c an be classified in 
various categories as mentioned below: 
• Day to day repairs/ service facility:  Day to day repairs carried out by 
CPWD in all buildings under its maintenance on the basis of day to day 
complaints received at the service centre. 
• Annual repairs:  To maintain the aesthetics of buildings and services as 
well as to preserve their life, some works like whi te washing, 
distempering, painting, cleaning of lines, tanks et c are carried out 
periodically. These works are planned on year to year basis. 
• Special repairs : Such works are undertaken to repair the existing parts 
of buildings and services, which get deteriorated o n ageing of buildings. 
It is necessary to prevent the structures and servi ces from deterioration 
and restore it back to its original conditions to the extent possible.  
• Additions and alternations : The works of additions/alterations are 
carried out in buildings to suit the special requir ements of occupants for 
functional efficiency. Norms for facilities in gove rnment residential and 

29 
 
non-residential buildings are revised from time to time. The facilities are 
upgraded by carrying out such works. 
• Preventive maintenance:  Preventive maintenance is carried out to 
avoid breakdown of machinery (such as pumps and ele vators) and 
occurrence of maintenance problems in buildings and  services. Works 
of preventive maintenance are carried out on the ba sis of regular 
inspection/survey. 
Institutional set up for maintenance activity 
 
4.2 In CPWD, the overall direct control of maintena nce activity for different 
items is with respective Executive Engineers of eac h discipline. Each division 
has been given a geographically defined area for ef fective control and 
management of maintenance activities. JE (Civil) is  responsible for maintaining 
the buildings and civil services, JE (Electrical) i s responsible for maintaining the 
electrical services and SO (Horticulture) is respon sible for maintaining the green 
areas. 
Maintenance Process by CPWD 
4.3 The existing maintenance process in CPWD compri ses of preparation 
of maintenance budget and compliant  registration and redressal process of 
CPWD can be divided into eight activities. 
 
1. Preparation of Maintenance Budget:  At the beginning of the year, the 
concerned JE/AE is expected to conduct a survey of buildings under his 
charge to identify the items of day to day repairs,  annual repairs, and 
special repairs, On the basis of plinth area rates and manpower 
yardsticks as mentioned in the CPWD manual, annual budget estimates 
are prepared. The annual maintenance budgets are pr epared at each 
division level, and then compiled at circle, zonal and regional level which 
are required in their division /sub-division. The b udget, which is approved 
by competent authority at each level, is then compl ied and submitted as 
maintenance budget for the entire CPWD for approval  to MOUD/Ministry 
of Finance along with budget for construction activity. 

30 
 
 
2. Registration of complaint by an occupant: 
 
In the residential areas maintained by CPWD, the te nants have following 
options for registering their complaints.  
• In a service centre either over a phone or in pers on. 
• Through IVRS- available in Delhi only 
• Online complaint ( though internet) – available in  Delhi only 
    
CPWD and NIC have developed a complaint registratio n and monitoring 
system for Delhi. A complaint can be logged in at t he web-site 
(http://cpwdsewa .nic.in) where one can select service centre, type of 
quarter, category of complaint and type of complain t. The complainant can 
also monitor status of his complaint online and get  contact details of e-
service centre where complaint has been registered. 
3. Recording of complaints by clerk at service cent re 
The complaints are registered in a complaint regist er maintained by the 
enquiry clerk in service  centre. In Delhi, the service centre also records 
the compliant it receives through online or IVRS  system. An 
acknowledgement slip is given to the complainant al ong with a complaint 
number.  
4. Categorization of complaints 
The service centre is responsible for maintenance o f premises including 
the services within it.  These service centres cater to complaints relating to 
civil, electrical and horticulture disciplines  in the department. The 
complaints received are then categorized in the above three categories.  
5. Recording of complaints in respective registers - JEI, JE (E), SO 
(Horticulture):  There are different registers maintained at each se rvice 
centre for different disciplines for  convenience of concerned Junior 
Engineer/ Section Officer (Horticulture). The compl aints are  recorded in 
the register of the respective JE or the equivalent  officer of each 
discipline.  

31 
 
 
6. Classification of complaints 
 
The service centre segregates the request of users in the following 
categories:  
• No delay:  These include complaints of electricity failure, s hort 
circuiting, blowing of fuse,  failure of water supply, blockage of 
drains etc. These complaints are to be attended ear liest in  any 
case within 24 hours. (Day to day repairs)  
• Minor:  These include complaints pertaining to replacement  of 
damaged electrical fittings,  carpentry work, and works requiring 
service of a mason. These complaints are to be atte nded  earliest 
in any case within 48 hours. (Day to day repairs)  
• Major : These complaints pertain to items such as replace ment of 
doors, windows, overhead  tanks etc. These are normally attended 
to through contracts for specific items. Separate  registers for major 
complaints are maintained for monitoring the dispos al of such 
complaints.  These are attended on first cum first serve basis a nd 
within the constraints of the budget  available. (Annual/ Special 
repairs)  
7. Attending to day to day complaints by the work-charged staff : Day to 
day repairs is carried out by CPWD in all the build ings it maintains. The 
purpose of this facility is to ensure satisfactory and continuous functioning 
of various services in the buildings. These service s are provided on 
receipt of complaint from the users at respective s ervice centers. Day to 
day repairs are attended by work-charged staff of C PWD, which are 
supervised by the concerned JE. Each work-charged s taff is required to 
maintain a diary to indicate the complaints attende d by him and record 
the signature of complainant certifying that the co mplaint has been 
attended to satisfactorily. The JE and AE are requi red to check the 
complaint register and each work charge staff’s dia ry on a regular basis 

32 
 
to ensure that complaint are attended to promptly, methodically and 
completely. 
8. Attending to Annual/Special repairs  to be done in 1 to 3 years based 
on annual contracts. A separate register is maintai ned at service centres 
for recording complaints of periodical nature. The complaints that cannot 
be attended on daily basis are transferred to this register. From this 
register/ records of the particular premises approp riate information is 
passed on to the complainant about admissibility of  the request and likely 
time it shall take for the compliance. To undertake  maintenance work 
either of annual or special repairs, same procedure  is followed as is done 
for construction work. Detailed estimates and drawi ngs if necessary are 
made and the technical sanction is obtained from th e competent authority 
(EE, SE or CE depending on the size of the project) . CPWD has laid 
down detailed rates for expenditure for maintenance  and repairs of 
buildings based on the plinth area. There are diffe rent plinth area rates 
for civil and electrical engineering maintenance fo r residential and non-
residential buildings of different ages as given in  the CPWD Manual. 
Detailed estimates and drawings if necessary are ma de and technical 
sanction is obtained from the competent authority. Tenders are called for 
either by advertisement or by public notice on the notice board. Tenders 
are evaluated and the contract is awarded usually t o the lowest bidder. 
Any work of special repair to be undertaken in the division as intimated by 
JE has to be certified by the EE with prior approva l of higher authorities 
depending on the nature of the repair work to be undertaken. 
9. Attending to additions/alterations to be done in 1 to 3 years  based on 
annual contracts Apart from annual and special repa irs, additions and 
alterations are also carried out by CPWD for non-re sidential and 
residential buildings.  
 
 

33 
 
10. Two types of additions/ alterations are carried  out in non-residential 
buildings, as mentioned below:  
a) Additions/ alterations carried out to suit the special requirements 
of the occupying department for functional efficiency. Such works 
are carried out at the cost of occupying department  after ascertaining 
the technical feasibility. 
b) Additions/ alterations carried out by CPWD thems elves as a general 
requirement for better functioning of offices. Such  works are carried 
out at the cost of the Ministry of Urban Development. 
c) Works of additions/ alterations are also carried  out in residences at 
the request of the occupants. Such request after du e scrutiny and 
consideration are carried out on payment of certain  percentage of the 
estimated cost of providing the facility. 
11. Obtain feedback from the complainant  on complaints attended by the 
work charged staff The service centres are daily at tended by Junior 
Engineer/ Section Officer (Horticulture) and Assist ant Engineer/ ADH 
every day and by Executive Engineer/ DDH at least o nce a week in 
general and twice a week where the service centres cater to maintenance 
need of VIP residences. As per the CPWD manual, the  service centres 
are required to should address at least 90% of the complaints within 24 
hours of their being lodged with it and the balance  within 48 hours unless 
they are of special repairs or periodical repairs. The concerned JE/AE 
has the responsibility for getting feedback from th e complainants on 
complaints of the nature of day to day repairs, att ended to by the work-
charged staff. 
12. Respond to tenant on likely time for compliance  of the compliant: If 
the complaints registered by the complainant are of  annual repairs/ 
special repairs, the  concerned enquiry clerk/ AE/ JE responds back to the 
complainant on the likely time for  compliance of the compliant.  The 
process of registering complaints, recording and at tending the 
complaints, and tasks and  responsibilities of the attending clerk and the 

34 
 
JE/ AE/ SE and CE with respect to the service  centre is well detailed out 
in the CPWD maintenance manual.  
4.4 The BE, RE, actual allocation and actual expend iture, the percentage of allocation in 
comparison to the total allocation to CPWD for main tenance of Government buildings and 
residential accommodations since the last five years is as under :- 
 
 
Rupees  in crore  
Year  BE  RE  Actual 
Allocation  
Actual 
Expenditure 
on 
maintenance 
 
% of 
allocation of 
maintenance 
to the total 
allocation 
2007-
08 
940.64 787.92 746.18 732.31 55% 
08-09  953.43 791.17 780.68 775.83 59% 
09-10  1144.97  903.75 903.64 909.08 55% 
10-11  1187.23  921.98 988.65 994.78 53% 
11-12  1362.02  1137.80  1136.52 1131.16 56% 
 
 
CLIENT MINISTRIES PERCEPTION ABOUT THE MAINTENANCE PROCESS BY THE 
CPWD  
 
4.5  During deposition before the Committee, it was  submitted by the 
representatives  of  the Ministries that the cost e stimate given by the CPWD is more as 
compared to other agencies. When asked about the co st estimate, the CPWD in its written 
replies has submitted as under :- 
 
 “It is incorrect to say that CPWD cost estimates a re more compared to other 
agencies. All public sector construction agencies t hroughout the country adopt 
CPWD standard rates only for preparing estimates an d then they add their margin 
over it. CPWD being fully government agency without  any commercial interest does 
not add any margin itself and hence CPWD estimates are lower than the other 
agencies.” 
 
 

35 
 
 
 
Ministry of  Health and Family Welfare 
 
 
4.6 During oral deposition before the Committee, th e representatives of  Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare has stated that “- 
 Our building at Nirman Bhawan, departmental buildi ngs, hospitals, CGHS 
dispensaries and wellness centres are being maintai ned by CPWD.  We are 
keeping more watch to our 2 PSUs i.e. HSCC  and HLL  than to the CPWD.  
CPWD maintenance work is holistic but there is dela y in petty renovations and 
other works.  We are facing the problems of water s upply and electricity in our 
hospitals.  The Executive Engineers and other Offic ers are not under the 
control of Medical Superintendant. Some ways should  be there so that he is 
answerable and responsible to the Medical Superinte ndant.  We are getting 
our construction work done by some other agencies r ather than CPWD.  
CPWD is of the view that it will maintain only thos e buildings which are 
constructed by it and not  the other agencies.  The re are  multiple agencies 
which are undertaking the maintenance work.  There should be only one 
agency incharge of the maintenance works.  Another problem is that there is 
delay in construction of CGHS building even after r eleasing of money in favour 
of CPWD.  We have released Rs. 18-20 crore, but  CP WD had spent only   
Rs. 5 crore and the rest of the money have been sur rendered back to us.  
There is no coordination between the CPWD and the a dministrative Ministry 
regarding the progress of work. Therefore, we want that the prioritize project 
should be completed within a   time-bound period an d we should be involved 
and consulted in every aspect of the project.  Beca use of delays we are 
handing over some of the projects to our own public  sector units which can 
take into account all our requirements viz., constr uction of wards, corridors, 
ICUs, Emergency Units etc.   CPWD is maintaining Safdarjung Hospital except 
the Sports Injury Centre and Vardhman Mahavir Medic al College which are 
being built by HSCC.  CPWD has declined to take up the maintenance activity 
in spite of our repeated request. Now, we are consi dering the alternate 
options.  Always there is problem of coordination b etween the CPWD and 
HSCC.  
 xxxxx  One of the logistic problem that arise is t hat there is certain common 
services like lights, water supply, affluent treatm ent plants and also the fire 
safety.  So, this cannot be divided.  This has to b e comprehensive.  That is 
why we did not engage two agencies for maintaining two different buildings.  
Ultimately, there has to be coordination and the co ordination is lacking at the 
moment.   
 xxxxx Sir, the Safdarjung Hosptial is a mixture of  very old buildings as well as 
new structure. Some of our wards are as old as 1940s and 1950s and some of 
them have been very recently build. So, there is so me amount of inequality 

36 
 
between the structures.  But to overcome this probl em the Ministry of Health 
has now sanctioned new projects and we are going to add a super specialty as 
well as an emergency block. We are also going to ad d another 1500 beds.  
We are going to take care of all these aspects.  It  will be totally a renovated 
structure with the latest gadgets.  It has all latest technology as well as modern 
architecture. We are constrained because some of th e premises are so old.  It 
will be very difficult to give a facelift to that a nd even if you do so, then, it will 
be difficult to maintain it.  So, the best thing is  to go for the redevelopment of 
the entire hospital structure.  The work is expecte d to begin by July or August 
and the time duration given for the completion of t he project is two years.  So, 
we are going to have an entirely new Safdarjung Hos pital in a span of about 
three years.  
 
4.7 On being asked to explain the status of maintenance  of hospital buildings like RML 
hospital, Safdarjung hospital (LHMC, Kalawati Saran , CGHS wellbeing centres) maintained 
by CPWD in terms of Engineering maintenance and hou sekeeping maintenance in terms of 
grievances being faced by the hospital staff and as  well as patients, the Ministry of Urban 
Development in his written replies stated that :- 
“Problems are mainly due to broken taps etc. in the  toilet/ shortage of water, chocking 
of sewer, leakage etc. In Sucheta Kirpalani Hospita l, damage to various services is 
frequently being caused by other agencies which are  engaged for construction of new 
buildings by Ministry of Health & Family Welfare.  Hence there is frequent interruption 
of the services. In spite of that whenever the complaints are received, efforts are made 
to attend the same.  In addition, in the last few y ears, there has been addition of new 
buildings in the various Hospital campuses (like PG IMER in RML Hospital, VMCC & 
SIC in SJ Hospital). The sewerage disposal of these  building is also connected to 
existing sewerage system maintained by CPWD. This l eads to occasional over flow of 
main sewer line.  CPWD is facing problem from users as they throw wastes like cloths, 
refuse, cotton etc. direct into the toilet & gully taps etc. resulting into chocking of sewer 
lines etc. Frequent meetings are being held by hospital authorities with CPWD officials 
to address the problems.” 
       
 
4.8 When asked to explain fire fighting mechanism i n the Govt. Hospitals and Nirman 
Bhawan and to clarify the no of fire fighting drill s conducted in Govt. Hospitals and Nirman 
Bhawan in last 2 years, the Ministry of Urban Development in its  written replies stated that:- 
 
“Wherever mandatory fire detection is existing or w ork in progress, Maintenance 
through contract /out sourcing is being done for va rious fire fighting installations. In 
addition in RML, Hospital authorities have deployed  the additional manpower 
exclusively for fire fighting”     

37 
 
       
 
4.9 During the oral evidence, the representatives o f the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare stated that Executive Engineer of C.P.W.D. is not answerable or not under the 
control of hospital authorities. In response to tha t the Ministry of Urban Development 
clarified  the position as under :- 
“The same preposition is administratively infeasibl e and undesirable as a number of 
administrative, technical and financial issues are involved. The same is not required 
also. Most of the issues are sorted out during the weekly meetings/rounds taken jointly 
with hospital authorities” 
      
4.10 During the oral evidence, the representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare further stated that CPWD maintains those bu ildings which are constructed by them. 
CPWD do not maintain buildings which are not constr ucted by them. There are multiple 
agencies doing construction work and there is lack of coordination between two agencies in 
the same organization. In response to that the Mini stry of Urban Development in its written 
replies submitted as under :- 
“CPWD rules generally prohibit it to undertake main tenance of buildings constructed 
by other agencies. There are practical difficulties  in maintenance of such buildings. 
CPWD is sure of design, structural safety and quali ty of construction in respect of 
buildings constructed by it. It is also sure that t he services have been laid out as per 
laid down standards and plans. These things cannot be assured by CPWD in respect 
of buildings constructed by other agencies.  Mainte nance of such buildings thus 
becomes very difficult and risky. 
In all the three hospital campuses, (i.e. Dr. Ram M anohar Lohia Hospital, Safdarjung 
Hospital, Sucheta Kirpalani Hospital) where CPWD is  engaged, either some buildings 
have been constructed by other agencies during last  5-6 years or are under 
construction as on date as well.  Only those buildings which have been constructed by 
CPWD in the past are being maintained by it.  The m aintenance of buildings 
constructed by other agencies normally not done by CPWD as a policy. In fact 
buildings which  are constructed by us , are as per   CPWD’s specifications and 
guidelines meeting all the safety standards as well  as all likely future requirements for 
the proper upkeep & maintenance . If other agency c onstructs the building, it may not 
be possible by CPWD to ascertain the safety of desi gn and quality/ specifications etc. 
of the work done by them.  Moreover, in many modern  buildings many services are 
provided by concealing either in walls, floor, fals e-ceiling, wall-paneling, etc. Hence 
difficulty can be faced on account of this in the m aintenance. Further, due to 
multiplicity of agencies, Services for new building s are not being integrated with the 
existing services in the campus which are under cha rge of CPWD.  This may create 
technical difficulties either due to haphazard plan ning without involving CPWD/ or due 

38 
 
to overburdening of existing services like sewerage  disposal system.  Besides, cost of 
services may be higher if not integrated with the e xisting system.  Not only this, 
construction by other agencies in existing campus m any times causes breakage of 
service lines like water supply, electrical cables,  sewer lines etc. which causes 
inconvenience to the occupants of existing building s. Hence, it is advisable to have 
one agency in-charge of all construction including architecture services as well as 
maintenance work in one campus.” 
      
Ministry of Human Resource Development 
 
4.11 When the committee enquired from the Departmen t of School Education and Literacy  
about the maintenance of Shastri Bhawan conducted b y the CPWD, it is stated in the  
written replies that :- 
“NCERT has informed that maintenance of the NCERT C ampus as well as that of all 
constituents units is being done by the CPWD.  It h as been mentioned that there has 
been considerable delay by the CPWD in construction  of building at Shillong and 
Bhopal”. “Initially the construction works of JNVs was being entrusted to the CPWD 
but due to “Time and Cost” overrun of the projects given to CPWD, the NVS decided 
to entrust the work to other Central/State PSUs als o as to ensure competitiveness.  
Major problems faced by the NVS  are inordinate delay in the finalizing the contrac ts 
as well as execution of projects resulting to cost escalation, poor quality of 
construction, etc.” “CPWD undertakes KVS constructi on works from concept to 
commissioning stage right from beginning up to succ essful completion and handing 
over on “Deposit Work” concept. Majority of KVS sch ool building & staff quarters 
have been constructed by CPWD in civil sector. Scho ol Buildings are maintained by 
CPWD and MES.” 
 
4.12 The committee came to know from the brief note  sent by the Ministry of H.R.D that 
maintenance of the NCERT Campus as well as that of all constituents units is being done by 
the CPWD. It is observed that there has been consid erable delay by the CPWD in 
construction of building at Shillong and Bhopal. In  response to queries raised by the 
committee,  the Ministry in its written reply has submitted that :- 
“It has been found that the work was delayed owing to reasons attributable to client i.e., 
MHRD, like delays in issuing sanctions, delay in gr anting budget and poor performance 
of  Consultant namely School of Planning and Archit ecture (SPA) who was appointed by 
MHRD. In the case of some buildings at Bhopal (cons truction of PSSCIVE building at 
RIE campus, Bhopal), the job of preparation of arch itectural drawings and structural and 
building plans approval from local bodies was directly assigned to SPA, New Delhi by the 
client. They could neither give drawings nor got th e drawings approved from Bhopal 
Nagar Nigam for four years. A revised preliminary e stimate is also pending for approval 
from client” 

39 
 
          
 
4.13  When asked  to explain the status of maintena nce of Shastri Bhawan by CPWD in 
terms of Engineering maintenance and housekeeping m aintenance, the Ministry’s in its 
written reply stated that:- 
“Following matters need to be attended and expected from Client Ministries for better 
maintenance of the Building.  
• False Ceiling should not be disturbed by various ag encies like telephone, 
cable, electrical. Ministries should ensure that th e false ceiling removed for 
any work is placed back in position.  
• Different Client Ministries has kept a number of fu rniture in the corridor. All 
these furniture should be removed from the corridor.  
• Corridor should be kept neat and clean. Cleaning ag encies engaged by 
various ministries should improve the cleaning.  
• The External area cleaning is also found poor. Clea ning in external area 
should also be improved.  
• Cleaning agencies are putting the malba in the Toil et shafts. Toilet shafts are 
found blocked with malba that finally lead to block age of sewer lines also. 
Cleaning agencies engaged by various ministries sho uld be instructed not to 
put Malba in the shaft. 
• Some of the doors of staircase has been kept closed. These doors need to be 
opened and CISF personnel are to be deployed on these doors.  
• Water Supply needs to be improved by NDMC. Water su pply is not adequate. 
All the Valves has been checked and replaced wherev er found old. Problem 
is to be sorted out by NDMC only by increasing the number of hours of supply 
to meet the extra demand in summer season.” 
       
 
4.14 When the Committee asked the Ministry of Urban  Development and CPWD to explain 
fire fighting mechanism in the buildings of Shastri  Bhawan and no of fire fighting drills 
conducted in the buildings of Shastri Bhawan in las t 2 years, Ministry’s written response is 
as under:- 
“Fire Fighting Mechanism in Shastri Bhawan  is provided through Wet Riser 
System, Automatic Fire Alarm System and Portable Fi re Extinguishers by Electrical 
division 8, CPWD. The concerned officials are satis fied with the mechanism adopted 
by Fire fighting personnel arranged at Shastri Bhaw an. Fire Fighting mechanism has 
also been got inspected through Delhi Fire Service in  
February 2012 who reported no major deficiency in F ire Fighting System except 
minor ones. Although checking of Fire fighting mech anism is being carried out on 
monthly basis in close co-ordination with CISF personnel but no major Fire Fighting 
drill has been conducted in the building in the last two years.  EE, E8 is taking up 

40 
 
this matter regularly with Nodal Ministry i.e. Human Resource Development at Shastri 
Bhawan for arrangement of Fire Fighting drills whic h includes rescue and evacuation 
procedure in which CPWD does not have expertise. 
       
 
 
4.15     When asked to explain the reasons for acut e problem of drinking water, especially 
during the summer season in Shastri bhawan, the Min istry in its written replies has stated 
that :- 
“During summer season more water is required for th e building. Water supply is not 
adequate. Water Supply needs to be improved by NDMC . All the Valves has been 
checked and replaced wherever found old. Problem is  to be sorted out by NDMC only 
by increasing the number of hours of supply to meet  the extra demand in summer 
season.” 
      
4.16 When committee asked to explain the reasons fo r delay in completion of renovation 
works by CPWD in Shastri bhawan,  the Ministry in its written replies has stated :- 
 Due to occupied building, work is done mostly on h olidays and executed in phase 
manner. Mostly delay is due to taking up the work i n phased manner and executing 
the work within the restricted period. Sometime sit e for work is also handed over in 
phases that lead to delay in completion of work. It  is always tried to get the work 
completed as early as possible.” 
       
 
Ministry of Home Affairs 
 
4.17 The Committee are informed during the oral evi dence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Home affaires that major repairs and ma intenance of North Block are done by 
CPWD themselves but they do not consult them regard ing action plan of maintenance in 
next one year. When Committee asked the Ministry of  Urban Development to clarify the 
position, the Ministry has submitted that :- 
• “Monthly meeting with JS (Admn), MHA are being held  since April 2013.  All issues 
pertaining to works in progress, works in pipeline (under sanction), new requirement 
are discussed and priorities drawn as per client requirements.” 
       

41 
 
 
 
4.18 The Committee came to know during the oral evi dence of the representatives of the  
Department of Personnel and Training  that waste ge nerated is not removed immediately 
during major repairs. This causes problem in workin g of Department. When Committee 
asked the Ministry of Urban Development to clarify the reasons not removing the waste 
immediately, Ministry’s written reply is as under: 
“Specific dumping grounds have been developed behin d North/South Block. These 
dumping grounds are generally hidden from public vi ew by view cutters.  Day today 
malba generated from renovation sites is immediatel y removed to these dumping 
grounds.  Dumping grounds are in turn regularly cle ared as soon as quantity enough 
for a truck loads created.” 
      
 
 
Ministry of Commerce 
4.19 The Committee came to know during the oral evi dence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Commerce that there is delay in executi on of projects by CPWD. Moreover their 
technology is not totally updated. When Committee a sked the Ministry of Urban 
Development to clarify the reasons for delay in exe cution of projects by CPWD,  the Ministry 
in its written replies has submitted as under :- 
“Delay in projects are more often due to reasons no t attributable to CPWD like delay in 
approvals by local bodies, delay in approvals by cl ients, delay in budget allocation, 
frequent change of already approved provisions and specifications by clients during 
execution of project, delay in furnishing land owne rship documents by clients, delay 
owing to consultants which are sometimes engaged by clients themselves etc.  It is also 
incorrect to say that updated technologies are not being adopted by CPWD in their new 
projects. Specific comments can be offered if speci fic instances are quoted by Ministry 
of Commerce.”  
       
 
4.20 When asked to explain the steps contemplated i n case of any natural calamities like 
(earthquake, flood etc.) and also about the insuran ce cover being provided to Government 
buildings and offices of Government Undertakings,  the Ministry in its written replies has 
stated that :- 

42 
 
 “The Government property is not insured and no exp enditure regarding insurance 
covers can be incurred without prior consent of Min . of Finance. (Para 39.1 of CPWD 
Works Manual)”             
                
 
4.21 When asked to explain the time taken by the CP WD to attend minor and major works, 
the Ministry in its written replies has stated that :-  
“Generally the time limits prescribed for attending different nature of complaints is given 
as below: 
a) Emergency Complaints   - 6 Hrs. 
b) Minor Complaints            - 24 Hrs. 
c) Major  Complaints          - 15 days” 
                
4.22 When asked to explain about outsourcing of mai ntenance activities and to clarify how 
their performance is benchmarked,  the Ministry in its written replies has stated that:- 
 
“Comprehensive maintenance has been outsourced in f ew colonies to specialized 
agencies.  The benchmarking and service delivery sy stem is through e-Sewa. The 
experience of outsourced comprehensive maintenance is by & large encouraging, with 
improved client satisfaction” 
              
4.23 The Committee came to know from the ICRA Manag ement Study that the change in 
scope of work and / or any specification during the  course of the construction is one of the 
major reasons for delay in project implementation. The typical problem is in fixation of rates 
for the new items with the existing Contractor.  Moreover, if the existing contractor refuses to 
carry out the additional/ changed scope of work at the rates recommended by CPWD / 
client, then CPWD has to engage a new contractor. H owever, this further leads to co-
ordination problems and project delays. The contrac tors do not invest in modern tools and 
machinery that becomes a bottleneck in timely deliv ery or reducing the lead time for 
construction. A related issue is regarding contractor’s unwillingness to recruit full time skilled 
labour / technicians. Deployment of semi-skilled la bour also results in inefficiency and delay 
in projects. 
4.24 There was mention of non availability of resou rces at service centers of CPWD.  
When asked to explain the reasons of non availabili ty of resources at service centers and 
details about resources constraints, the Ministry in its written replies has stated that:- 

43 
 
 “Constraints experienced are in terms of Budget av ailability & shortage of 
 supervisory level staff” 
              
 
4.25 When asked to elaborate about the non availabi lity of resources at service centers 
and details about resources constraints, the  Ministry in its written replies has stated that :- 
 “Budget is allocated by Ministries and departments . CPWD, however, projects 
required demands in BE and RE. CPWD also brings to notice of respective clients, 
the delays due to non-allocation of required budget  and the contractual problems 
created due to inadequate budget in on-going works.” 
“Regarding shortage of staff at supervisory level ( JE), it is submitted that there was 
shortage of 691 JE(C) [out of 2200 sanctioned post] and shortage of 305 JE (E) [out of 
890 sanctioned posts] as on 31.03.2013. Part of the se vacancies has been intimated 
and rests are being intimated to Staff Selection Commission for recruitment.” 
       
 
 
4.26 The Committee came to know that all buildings/ structures are required to be 
inspected once a year by the Assistant Engineer-in- charge to ensure that the 
building/structure is not unsafe for use (according  to CPWD maintenance manual of 2012). 
In case of electrical and other installations, the Assistant Engineer (Electrical) should inspect 
the same and record a certificate to that effect. W hen asked to clarify about the periodic 
Inspection of buildings installations for safety an d maintaining the data for the same ,  
the Ministry in its written replies has stated that:- 
 “Data bank of such checking is not maintained in t he directorate. However incidence 
of unsafe structures rarely go unnoticed as field E ngineers, apart from such 
mandatory annual inspection, frequently visits buil dings under their jurisdiction for 
supervising maintenance works etc. and meetings wit h clients/users wherein such 
incidences generally comes to notice immediately.”  
 
4.27 When asked about the regular liaison of CPWD o fficials with administrative officials of 
client Ministries for checking safety measures in t he respective buildings, Ministry of Urban 
Development and CPWD responded in negative.         
 
4.28 When asked about the deficiencies  in the impo rtant buildings like Prime Minister's 
House, Cabinet Ministers' House, Vice-President's H ouse and houses of other V.I.Ps, and 

44 
 
to explain the mechanism that will report unsafe co nditions in these buildings Ministry in its 
written replies has stated that :- 
 
 “A complete survey of LBZ bungalows w.r.t their st ructural safety vis-à-vis latest IS 
codes for Earthquake resistant structures has alrea dy been undertaken.  Most of the 
bungalows were found unsafe.  The matter has been r eported to MoUD.  It has been 
proposed to take up redevelopment of LBZ bungalows in phased manner.”   
      
4.29   When  asked to clarify about, optimizing bui lding design to reduce the conventional 
energy demand and climate responsiveness, adopt an adequate comfort range, less air-
conditioned areas, day lighting, avoid over-design of the lighting and air- conditioning 
systems, the  Ministry in its written replies has stated that:- 
“For this purpose, passive features for utilisation  of solar energy are being 
incorporated by way of suitable orientation of the building. Passive features increase 
the use of solar energy to meet heating and lightin g loads and the use of ambient air 
for the cooling. This is different than energy cons ervation techniques.  Buildings are 
also being planned as per the ECBC norms of the BEE.”  
 
4.30 The Committee came to know from the maintenanc e manual of CPWD that CPWD 
will meet energy requirements for a minimum of 10% of the internal lighting load (for 
general lighting) from renewable energy sources (so lar, wind, biomass, fuel cells, etc). 
When asked to clarify about level of implementation  of renewable energy utilization in the 
Govt buildings constructed by the CPWD, the  Ministry in its written replies has stated that:- 
 
“As per CPWD Green building norms given in chapter 6A of CPWD works Manual 2012, 
provision for meeting energy requirements for minim um of 10% of the internal lighting 
load (for general lighting) or its equivalent from renewable energy sources (solar, wind, 
biomass, fuel cells etc.) is being made. Provision of Solar Photo Voltaic (SPV) 
generation is being encouraged to be used in the bu ildings by keeping suitable provision 
at the preliminary stage/ planning stage of the building.” 
4.31 When asked to clarify about  the status of implementation of barrier free facili ties in 
the Government Buildings to ensure basic minimum le vel of  accessibility and usability of the 
building to employees, visitors, and clients with d isabilities, the Ministry in its written replies 
has stated that :- 
 

45 
 
“As per CPWD Green building norms given in chapter 6A of CPWD works Manual 2012, 
provision to ensure accessibility and usability of the building and its facilities by 
employees, visitors and clients with disabilities i s being made. Provision of barrier free 
movements for differently abled persons is generally being kept in all the buildings being 
constructed by CPWD.”  
      
4.32 When asked to explain the mechanism adopted by  the CPWD to classify the 
satisfaction level of its clientele, the Ministry in its written replies has stated that :- 
“In the existing e-sewa module, there is no classif ication/grading of satisfaction 
levels. The feedback on attended complaint is taken  by call centre or recorded by 
allottees themselves through SMS (toll free), with two options:- 
1) Satisfied with the work done. 
2) Not satisfied with the work done. 
A complaint is simply treated as disposed of satisf actorily if the allotee perceives so 
as per feedback given by him.” 
         
 
4.33 When asked to explain the reasons for inadequa te electricity supply in Shastri 
bhawan (as per brief given by the Ministry of Human  Resource Development), the Ministry 
in its written replies has stated that :- 
 
“Due to exponential rise in the air-conditioning lo ad in the last 2-3 years, the demand 
has increased manifold and Ministries are adding ai r-conditioners without certification 
from CPWD. The current peak season demand has surpa ssed 5000 KW. This year 
CPWD has made adequate arrangement of electric supply from NDMC with the result 
that no load shedding has been resorted to unlike p ast years and efforts are also 
being made for enhancing the infrastructure to meet the load demand.” 
            
4.34 When asked to explain about the introduction o f system of effective periodic 
preventive maintenance inspections by the CPWD,  th e Ministry in its written replies has 
stated that:-  
 “ Periodic preventive maintenance is part of the main tenance manual and is thus 
institutionalized. However, actual preventive maint enance will depend on the 
allocation of budget.” 
       
 
 
 

46 
 
 
4.35 When asked to explain about the satisfaction l evel of the clients on various 
components of the maintenance work, e.g. day to day  repairs/service facility, Annual 
repairs, Special repairs, additional and alteration s, preventive maintenance, the Ministry in 
its written replies has stated that:- 
 
“No such data bank regarding satisfaction level on various component of the 
maintenance work is maintained in the directorate.” 
      
RESIDENT WELFARE ASSOCIATION’S PERCEPTION ABOUT THE  MAINTENANCE 
OF RESIDENTIAL BUILINDGS BY CPWD  
 
 
4.36 The Committee heard the views of representativ es of Resident Welfare Associations 
regarding their experience on the functioning of CP WD in maintaining their Government 
Residential Colonies.  During oral deposition befor e the Committee many representatives 
of Resident Welfare Associations (RWA) apprised abo ut the maintenance aspects of 
Government Residential Colonies by CPWD,  these are as under :- 
 
“There are common problems of all RWAs regarding maintenance of quarters, drains, 
street lights and roads. Roads were not repaired fo r the last 10 years. Stairs were in 
dilapidated conditions, ceiling of the quarters wer e in bad shape leading to seepage 
everywhere. In rainy seasons roofs give way to water. The complaints were not being 
attended to even after bringing the same to the not ice of CPWD sewa call centers.  
Officials concerned are not available either in per son or on telephone in regard to 
complaints. Electrical Engineer looks after civil t hings.  If Engineers are available, 
funds are not available. The debris are lying in the streets and in the parks for months 
and years together.  Another major grievance of res idents was with the horticulture 
department of CPWD.  Whenever CPWD take up the prop osal of maintenance, the 
RWAs were not being consulted.  CPWD acts as the fa cilitator of the contractor. 
There was no monitoring/checking mechanism in the CPWD. CPWD has stopped the 
upgradation work in Lodhi Colony. CPWD is not repai ring the flats as a result the 
occupants of the flats do not get the minimum facil ities. The quality of material being 
used is very low, in many times the minor work get converted to major work and it 
takes a longer period to complete the work. ”      
      
 
 
 
 

47 
 
 
4.37 When asked about the horticulture aspects of G ovt. Residential Colonies by CPWD, 
the representatives of Resident Welfare Associations (RWA)  submitted as follows: 
“Generally No Mali visits the parks in the Govt. re sidential colonies. Contractors 
dumps construction waste inside the park. There is no specific place for playing of 
children.” 
        
 
4.38 About the attitude and behavior of officials o f CPWD, the representatives of RWA 
during oral evidence have submitted that:- 
 
“CPWD is an old department. They don’t consider the m as service provider; in fact 
they consider themselves as owner of Govt. property . More over, they talk to the 
users (residents) in a very unfriendly manner. We c annot find them in their offices. 
When ever we go to their offices to meet them regar ding our complaints, they are 
said to be in the field sites. Which is that site? When their jurisdiction is the colony 
only, then why they are not available in the colony ? It is very difficult to access junior 
level officers like J.E/A.E but it is impossible to  access senior officers like S.E/Chief 
Engineers. We have written many letters to higher o fficers but they don’t respond to 
us, not even acknowledge our grievances. CPWD offic ers don’t consult 
representatives of RWAs, whenever they take up any proposal of maintenance. 
There is no check on quality of maintenance. No bod y listens to RWAs. CPWD 
usually facilitates the contractors. Projects which  are suitable for contractors are 
taken up by the CPWD. There are projects running wh ich are not justified and 
suitable for the residents.” 
       
4.39 When asked about the coordination between offi cials of MCD, NDMC and CPWD, 
about the representatives of Resident Welfare Associations (RWA) have submitted that :- 
 
There are many issues in NDMC area. NDMC and CPWD b oth are working in certain 
areas. Many roads, grounds and offices are maintain ed by NDMC and there are 
many roads, grounds and offices which are maintaine d by CPWD. There is no clear 
cut demarcation of jurisdiction between NDMC and CP WD. Both of the agencies are 
passing the buck on each other. Because of this dis pute of jurisdiction there is no 
improvement seen on the ground. We recommend throug h the Committee that there 
should be one accountable agency which will make su re that there is coordination 
between both the agencies. There should be some wor king relationship between 
CPWD and NDMC. (Page no 6 Verbatim 23 
rd  May 2013). 
 
 
 

48 
 
4.40 When Committee asked representatives of Reside nt Welfare Associations (RWA) 
about the condition of quarters of Government resid ential colonies, there version is stated 
as follows: 
“The conditions of Government quarters became very worse because of seepage. In 
rainy seasons roofs give way to water. Cracks can b e seen in the roofs and in the 
stairs. Junior engineers never visits these quarter s. Only contractors do the certain 
repairing. It is requested that technical team of t he CPWD should inspect D.G block of 
Sarojni Nagar. ” 
      
4.41   When Committee asked representatives of Resi dent Welfare Associations (RWA) 
about number of interactions between RWAs and CPWD officials, there version is stated as 
follows: 
“They talk to the users (residents) in a very unfri endly manner. We cannot find them 
in their offices. When ever we go to their offices to meet them  regarding our 
complaints, they are said to be in the field sites.  Which is that site? When their 
jurisdiction is the colony only, then why they are not available in the colony? It is very 
difficult to access junior level officers like J.E/ A.E but it is impossible to access senior 
officers like S.E/Chief Engineers. We have written many letters to higher officers but 
they don’t respond to us, not even acknowledge our grievances. CPWD officers don’t 
consult representatives of RWAs, whenever they take  up any proposal of 
maintenance.” 
       
4.42 When asked to explain the reasons for not insp ecting the works executed by private 
contractors from time to time, to make sure that works is done as per the specifications, the 
representatives of CPWD during oral evidence has submitted that :- 
 “Sir, Hon’ble Member of Parliament has mentioned a bout the inspection of quality of 
work done by private contractors. We have prioritiz ed the work that who will check how 
much percentage of work.” 
      
4.43   When asked to explain the reasons for non av ailability and inaccessibility of J.E/A.E 
in their offices whenever residents or representati ves of RWAs went to meet them 
regarding their complaints,  the representatives of  CPWD during oral evidence has 
submitted that :- 
   “ Sir, some times Junior Engineer holds the responsib ilities of two or more than two 
colonies.  Problem erupts when he is available in one colony, not in other.” 
 
       
 

49 
 
4.44 During oral evidence of the representatives of  RWA they submitted before the 
Committee that:- 
   “The main problems with CPWD are lack of close i nteraction with the senior Officers 
of CPWD.  No Officer visits the areas.  We do not k now which Chief Engineer and 
Superintendent is looking after our areas.  As a re sult the Assistant Engineer and 
Junior Engineer are also not attending the problems  of our area.  There is an urgent 
need for close interaction of all the Officers with  the RWA.  They should consult us 
before finalizing any proposals and undertaking any development work in our colony.”   
  
4.45 When asked to clarify the position the DG, CPW D during oral evidence has stated 
that:- 
 
   “There is a provision in our system that our Off icers should have interaction with the 
RWA once or twice in a month. However, if the meeti ng has not been held till now, I 
will look into this matter and asked my officers to  convene a meeting with the RWA 
people.” 
 
4.46 During oral evidence, the representatives of R WA stated that :- 
 
   “In our area parks and roads are not being maint ained properly.  Neither the CPWD 
nor NDMC clean the dustbins regularly. No officer o r the safai karamchari attend to 
that work.   
 
4.47  While clarifying the above problems the representatives of NDMC during oral evidence 
has stated that :- 
  “Regarding the cleaning of the roads I will ask t he concerned officials to go and 
attend the work. We are having shortage of manpower to clean the roads. To mitigate 
the problem of manpower we have started taking peop le on daily wages. As a result 
of  which there is a gap of one month and  the dust bins are not being cleaned on a 
regular basis.”  
 
4.48 When  asked to explain the reasons why Horticu lture officer never visits in the Govt. 
Colonies (Vasant Vihar) and even gardener never vis its the parks allotted to them, the 
representatives of CPWD during oral evidence has submitted that :- 
 “Sir, water never comes in that area. Last time we  have sent one person to inspect 
the area. We have held meeting with the RWAs also. We cannot use drinking water 
for horticulture purpose. We use unfiltered water. We have made proposal for that but 
we have not got permission for that till now. We ca n also use sewerage water for 
horticulture but it is large colony. Sewerage water  treatment plant can be 
commissioned there and that water can be used for horticulture” 
       
 

50 
 
4.49 The Committee asked the Ministry of Urban Deve lopment about the plan of action 
regarding recycle, recharge, and reuse of water tha t will enrich the landscape by using 
native species, reduction in water requirement for landscaping purposes to improve the 
irrigation efficiency in the Govt. Buildings and Go vt. residential colonies. CPWD stated that 
there is shortage of water due which horticulture department face difficulties in irrigating the 
landscape and watering the plants. The Committee as ked the Ministry of Urban 
Development about the solutions and suggestions for  beautification of the landscape. The 
Ministry in its written replies submitted as under:- 
 
 “To sort out the shortage of the water problems, S ewerage Treatment Plants (STP) 
are being provided to improve the beautifications o f the landscape. Sewage 
Treatment Plant (STP) for Type-V and Type-VI Qtrs. at DDU Marg New Delhi of 
capacity 360 KLD with MBBR Technology is being prov ided. The recycle water is 
proposed to be used for horticulture operations and  cleaning of Roads. Sewage 
Treatment Plant (STP) at Kaka Nagar residential Area is proposed and Market survey 
is being conducted for selecting suitable technology.”        
       
 
 
4.50 When asked about the reasons for sending the c ompliance SMSs by the CPWD e-
sewa Kendra even without attending the day-to-day m aintenance complaints, the Ministry 
in its replies submitted as under :- 
“Compliance SMS is sent to allottee when the complai nt is shown attended by the JE 
concerned at the website.  However, the complaints are again verified on telephone 
(through call centres) from  the allottee concerned  and if the complaint has not been 
attended, it is again shown as “not attended” on th e website and again the workers is 
sent to attend the complaint.  The satisfaction level of the services is between 70-80%.”  
      
4.51 When asked about the reasons for conversion of  small maintenance works into major 
works and handed over to the contractor which remai ns pending for month’s altogether, the 
Ministry in its replies submitted as under :- 
  
   “This is not common. When absolutely needed from  technical consideration, the 
minor complaints are converted to major complaints by JE/AE concerned of the 
service centre on the basis of feedback from the wo rk charged staff as well as 
personal inspections of the site. Major complaints are monitored by senior officers 
and attempts are made to get them attended with in shortest possible time”. 
       

51 
 
4.52 When asked to clarify the conditions of servan t quarters which are in very pathetic 
shape, the Ministry in its replies submitted as under :- 
: 
“The servant quarters attached with main units are being maintained regularly. 
However no specifications for up gradation are laid  down by the Ministry of up 
gradation of servant units attached with main units.” 
 
       
Maintenance of  Government Residential Buildings by CPWD  
 
4.53 When asked to clarify about  the  details of dilapidated houses/colonies state-wise/ 
city-wise and to elaborate about the steps being ta ken by Ministry to maintain and repair 
such houses/colonies, the Ministry in its written replies has stated that:- 
“The details of dilapidated houses/colonies state-w ise/ city-wise other than declared 
as dangerous are as follows:- 
a.  Delhi              -  4480 nos.( i/c colonies proposed for re-    development) 
b.  Mumbai        - 704 nos. 
c.  Kolkata          - 40 nos. 
d.  Nagpur          - 8 nos. 
Repair and rehabilitation work are carried out on r egular basis depending upon the 
condition of quaters & availability of budget. In a ddition, following cases have been 
reported by CE,CZ, Bhopal. 
a.  16 Nos Type-I, 48 Nos Type-B quarters of IT  of IT Colony, Kotra Sultanabad,   
Bhopal. 
b.   24 Nos Type-I, 26 Nos Type-II, 30 Nos Type-III and 8 Nos Type-IV quarters at    
AG Colony, Bhopal. 
c.  12 Nos Type-I, 8 Nos Type-II, 4 Nos Type-III quarte rs of MET Department at 
Bhadbhada, Bhopal are in dilapidated condition. The  Clients have been informed 
accordingly.  
 
Due to non-providing of funds strengthening/renovat ion of the above quarters in 
Bhopal could not be taken up by CPWD. 
       
 
4.54 When asked  how many cases of maintenance work   has got delayed because of 
non-availability of quarters from Directorate of Es tates and budgetary allocations, the 
Ministry of Urban Development in its written replies has submitted as under :- 

52 
 
 “There is no reported case of delay in maintenance  in general pool quarters due to 
non availability of quarters with Director of  Esta te. As regard budgetary limitations, it 
is not possible to take all building for structural  repairs at a time which may require 
huge budget. The structural repairs are taken in ha nd giving top priority to most 
dilapidated buildings and funds availability.  Nece ssary repairs and maintenance is 
carried out through the allotted budget.” 
4.55 When asked to furnish details of accommodation  which are unfit for habitation and 
which are declared dangerous by the CPWD in Delhi  and New Delhi areas, the Ministry in 
its written replies stated as under :- 
 
 
Colony  No of 
Accommodations 
declared dangerous 
Kali Bari Marg, New 
Delhi 
304 
Minto Road Complex 67 
Arambagh & Chitra 
Gupt Road 
90 
Probyn Road & Lancer 
Road 
70 
Mohammed Pur 328 
Lodhi Colony & Lodhi 
Road Complex 
17 
East Kidwai Nagar 11 
Lakshmi Bhai Nagar 1 
Sarojini Nagar 4 
Kasturba Nagar 20 
Andrews Ganj 12 
Total  924 Nos.  
 
4.56 Pertaining to the accommodation which are unfi t for habitation and have been 
declared dangerous by the CPWD in Delhi and New Delhi areas are as under :- 
 
 
 
 
 

53 
 
 
 Colony No.of 
Accommodations 
declared dangerous 
 
           
            Latest Status Report 
Kali Bari Marg, New 
Delhi 
 
304 
 
 
 
In the list 304 Quarters have been shown as 
dangerous .The break up is as follows:- 
B.K.S.Marg – Phase I – 34 nos. 
 
These Quarters were declared dangerous 
due to dangerous 
condition of staircases.  
However, the same have been repaired by 
providing steel  staircases since the 
occupants were reluctant to vacate.  The 
work of construction of permanent staircases 
will be taken up shortly. 
 
 
ii) Kali Bari Marg – 234 nos. 
These Quarters were declared unsafe 
because of damaged balconies and service 
shafts.  Since the occupants were not ready 
to vacate these houses and therefore, the 
same are being/have been repaired in the 
occupied position. 
iii) Jafri Square – 3nos*. 
iv) Raja Bazar- 31nos*. 
*Since these Quarters are also in staggered 
position and therefore the same are being 
repaired in the occupied position. 

54 
 
b) Minto Road 
Complex : 
67 nos. These Quarters are located in staggered 
locations.  Though Dte. Of Estates has been 
requested to allot alternative accommodation 
so that repair of these quarters is taken up.  
However, the occupants who are allowing 
repair in the occupied position, the same are 
being carried out simultaneously. 
c) Aram Bagh & 
Chitragupta Road 
89 Nos. Out of these quarters, 45 quarters are 
located in complete block i.e. block 
no.186,187 and 190.  These quarters have 
been declared dangerous and mostly 
vacated.  These blocks are to be fully 
dismantled and new blocks are to be erected.  
The balance 44 quarters are at the staggered 
locations.  The Directorate of Estates has 
been requested to provide alternative 
accommodation so that the repair work is 
taken up accordingly.  The occupants who 
are allowing repair in the occupied position 
are being carried out.  
c) Mohammedpur 328 Quarters at Mohammad Pur (328 Nos.) are 
declared dangerous and Directorate of 
Estate has already been informed. 
These quarters are also under 
redevelopment scheme. 
d) Lodhi Colony & 
Lodhi Road 
Complex. 
17 Quarters at Lodhi Colony ( 5 nos.) &  Lodhi 
Road Complex are under repair and will be 
completed in due course. 
e) East Kidwai 
Nagar 
11 These quarters are under redevelopment 
scheme and handed over to NBCC for 
redevelopment. 

55 
 
 
  
4.57 From the analysis of aforementioned Chapters o f this Report,  it has been revealed 
that CPWD has lost the confidence of its clients.  CPWD has failed to follow the guidelines 
to stop encroachments and evict the already encroac hed land under its purview; there is 
lack of timely support from related organizations t o stop encroachment and absence of 
specialized mechanism to deal with the issue of enc roachment.    There is inordinate delay 
in execution of various projects.  There are many p roblems of civil and engineering in 
various government official building including Rash trapati Bhawan, Prime-Minister House, 
North Block and South Block.  The occupants of Gove rnment residential buildings have a 
bad perception about CPWD.  CPWD does not consider as a service provider rather it feels 
as the owner of Government property.  Officers are not available at the enquiry office.  No 
senior level engineers meet the RWA and consult the m while undertaking the projects.  
Their behaviors to the clients are very rude.  They  do not respond to the phone calls, letters 
and email.  The materials used by CPWD are very sub-standard.  The cost of the projects of 
CPWD is very high in comparison to other organizations. In view of the above, there is a dire 
need to redefine the service standard of CPWD, impr ove its processes and reorient its 
practices in line with the changing expectations of  its clients.  In this connection, the 
Committee have given their important recommendations in the succeeding chapter. 
 
  
f) Lakshmi Bhai 
Nagar 
1 This quarter is under repair and will be 
completed in due course. 
g) Sarojini Nagar 4 This colony is under redevelopment scheme 
h) Kasturba Nagar 20 This colony is under redevelopment scheme 
i) Andrews Ganj 12 These quarters are  under repair and will be 
completed in due course. 
Total 924 Nos  

56 
 
PART II  
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
1. Need to arrest delay in execution of Projects by  CPWD  
 
 The Committee note that CPWD was conceived to unde rtake public 
works ranging from irrigation facility and bridges to public housing and 
government buildings.  Over the years the responsib ilities and 
jurisdiction of CPWD got re-aligned, however, the b asic activity of civil 
construction still remains its raison d’être.  The organizational structure 
and practices have also evolved largely to address the requirements of 
executing these construction projects.  Compliance to envisaged time-
lines is one of the most important elements of serv ice delivery.  The 
Committee observe that an Office Order issued by Ch ief Engineer of 
South Western Zone dated 1 
st  January, 1980 has defined the time-scale 
for various activities related to Planning and exec ution i.e. 21 months.  
However the Committee are unhappy to note that  a l arge number of 
projects do not adhere to even these time frames an d there are inordinate 
delays in various project related activities. Vario us clients of CPWD 
examined by the Committee emphasized the need to ar rest delays.  The 
Committee observe that CPWD has executed 125 major Projects during 
the last ten years.  The Committee are surprised to  note that out of 125 

57 
 
major projects, information on only 102 projects ar e available with CPWD.  
This clearly reflects the casual approach of CPWD i n maintaining data of 
the projects being executed by itself.  Out of 102 projects the Committee 
observe that only 46 projects (less than 50%) were got executed in time.  
28 projects got delayed for one year, 14 projects g ot delayed for two 
years, 5 projects got delayed for three years, 2 pr ojects took four years, 
one project took five years and one project up to s ix years.  The delays in 
completing the projects in time is on account of va rying reasons, which 
include delay in approval of drawings from local bo dies/statutory 
clearances, delay in finalization of functional req uirements by 
users/clients,  frequent change in scope of the wor k, non-availability of 
encumbrance free site, non-availability of budget/f unds, local 
disturbances, bad weather, sometimes delay in mobil izing  requisite 
materials/manpower/machinery by the Contractors, va cant posts of staff 
and officers,  etc. Career stagnation of Officers  is also another reason for 
delay in completion of the projects.  CPWD informed  the Committee that 
Career stagnation brings down the morale of staff/o fficers which affect 
their output both in terms of quality and efficienc y. The Committee wish 
to recommend that the clients should be consulted i n each and every 
stage of drawing so that there remains no scope for  frequent changes in 
the drawing of the projects.  At the same time they  also want that clients, 
too, should cooperate fully with CPWD in finalizing  the projects in time 
and do not make material changes in the on-going pr ojects. The 

58 
 
Committee also wish to recommend that budget should  not be a 
constraint for the Projects.  However, the Committe e are happy to note 
that with the recent cadre review approved by the g overnment, the 
problem of stagnation is likely to be overcome to a  great extent. The 
Committee  hope that CPWD would implement the recen tly held cadre 
review at the earliest to arrest the shortage of ma npower so that the 
delays in executing the Projects could  be reduced and  time-line could be 
adhered to.   
  

59 
 
ENCROACHMENT OF GOVT. LAND AND COLONIES  
 
2. Need for Specially designated manpower for remov ing encroachment 
and issues related thereto  
 
 As per chapter 10 of the maintenance manual of the  CPWD, it is  
responsible to prevent and remove unauthorized cons truction and 
encroachment in or near all the Govt. buildings sta nding on the land and 
the land underneath and appurtenant thereto along w ith the land under 
road, parks, toilets, play grounds situated in govt . colonies come under 
the administration of the CPWD.  The Committee are alarmed to note that  
the total area of Government land under encroachmen t in all the States 
and Union Territories of India has been increased f rom 193434.56 sq mtr. 
in the month of March, 2013 to 3,10819 in the month  of August, 2013.  
Even then the Ministry was maintaining that there w as no new 
encroachment.  They are surprised to note that the Ministry’s reply is 
based on  surmises and guesstimates and hence cauti on the Ministry to 
be more vigilant in future while furnishing replies  to a Parliamentary 
Committee. 
 
  T
he Committee were informed that there is no special ly designated 
manpower/task force available with CPWD for checkin g unauthorized 
occupation of government land and vacating the encr oached land.  The 
Committee are not convinced with the reply of the M inistry. They were 

60 
 
given to understand that under the manual of CPWD, this duty is cast on 
the Junior Engineer/Assistant Engineer concerned.  It is not understood 
to the Committee when Junior Engineer and Assistant  Engineers are duty 
bound where from the question of having no designat ed work force 
comes.  AE/JE is supposed to detect and verify the encroachments within 
the premises and report to Directorate of Estates. Directorate of Estates is 
supposed to cancel the allotment and evict allottee s and CPWD to 
demolish the unauthorized construction.  The Commit tee are of the view 
that if the concerned Junior Engineer or Assistant Engineer performs his 
duties honestly and diligently, then it will become  impossible for the 
encroachers to lay on the Government land.  For thi s they could get the 
assistance from RWAs who will report the matter of encroachment to 
JE/AE and the JE/AE may swing into action forthwith .  The Committee 
want RWAs to report such cases at the earliest oppo rtunity.  They are of 
the view that the encroachment should be nipped in the bud.  
Encroachments on vacant land are to be removed by E state officer under 
the Public Premises Eviction of Unauthorized Occupa nts  Act 1971 with 
the police help. All EEs, in-charge of maintenance are declared as estate 
officers under the Public Premises Eviction of Unau thorized Occupants  
Act 1971. The Committee are distressed to note that CPWD is n ot getting 
required assistance in right time to remove the enc roachment from police 
and local authorities. In some cases even after vac ating the land, the 
encroachers manage to occupy the land again. The CP WD find hard to 

61 
 
have its own task force to prevent the unauthorized  occupation and 
vacate the already encroached lands on account of limitations of handling 
Law & Order problems. The Committee have come to kn ow that 
Government of Delhi has created a sub-divisional le vel Special Task 
Force to check encroachment in public land. Their a ssistance is being 
obtained whenever any new encroachment is noticed.  In other cities 
such type of special task force does not  exist  in  line with the Delhi Govt.  
However, to the utmost surprise of the Committee, C PWD is still satisfied 
with the existing mechanism and does not require an y new institutional 
mechanism to deal with the menace of encroachment.  In view of the 
above, the Committee strongly recommend that CPWD m ust constitute a 
Special Task Force in all the zones and empower the m with all necessary 
powers and equipments to prevent encroachment and v acate the already 
encroached land. For obtaining assistance from the police and local 
authorities the Committee strongly recommend to tak e this matter to the 
highest authority and an executive order might be issued in this regard so 
that there is no difficulty for seeking help from t he police and civil 
authorities.  The Committee are also given to understand that CPWD does 
not maintain data regarding encroachment and recove ries of Government 
land.  They are surprised that in the absence of data how will CPWD come 
to know about the extent of encroachment.  The Comm ittee, therefore, 
recommend that CPWD should develop its own data bas e with regard to 
encroachment with the help of dedicated staff as early as possible.   

62 
 
 The Committee are continuously insisting on the is sue of fixing 
responsibility on the Officer concerned whose negli gence has resulted 
into encroachment.  Even today the encroachment is taking place 
otherwise it was not possible for the Ministry to f urnish the revised 
figures of area under encroachment  to the Committe e.  But, the Ministry 
is reticent on the issue and tries to downplay the entire matter by stating 
that since the encroachment dates back to 10 to 20 years, it is not 
possible to fix the responsibility.  The Committee are not satisfied with 
this explanation of the Ministry.  They are of the view that 10 to 20 years 
period is not such a long period where concerned of ficers could not be 
identified and located.  The Committee insist that the Ministry should fix 
responsibility in those matters after digging the o ld cases and if the 
connivance of officials is proved, a deterrent puni shment should be 
inflicted.  A status report in this regard may be s ubmitted to the 
Committee within three months of the presentation o f the report.  They 
also recommend that the CPWD should maintain data r egarding action 
taken in this regard.   
 
  

63 
 
 
3. Court Cases 
 
 
 The Committee observe that the CPWD guidelines whi ch empower 
JE/AE to carry day to day inspection to verify all the construction going 
on in their locality and to take immediate steps to  stop or demolish the 
construction are not being followed in a true spiri t to prevent the 
encroachment in the first instance.  As a result at  present 310819 sq. mtr. 
land is under encroachment and there are 39 count c ases pending at 
various Courts.  The Committee feel that this is a serious issue and 
requires particular attention of the Government.  T he Ministry may advise 
their lawyers to impress upon the Courts not to giv e adjournments on 
flimsy grounds so as to secure speedy judgments.  T he Committee are of 
the view that the interest of the encroacher lies i n  protracted litigation 
which  should be resisted with full force. Regardin g Public Premises 
Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants  Act 1971, the C ommittee want to 
reiterate their earlier recommendation that Governm ent may consider to 
fix a time line for deciding such cases in order to  ensure that 
unscrupulous elements do not make use of the system.   
  

64 
 
 
4. Need for a separate budgetary Head for checking unauthorized 
occupation of Government Colonies.  
 
 
 The Committee observe that there is no separate Bu dgetary Head for 
meeting the expenses incurred in connection with ch ecking unauthorized 
occupation of Government land.  The expenditure inc urred on activities 
relating to checking of unauthorized occupation is being charged from 
the maintenance budget of CPWD. This results into f und shortage for 
maintenance activities.  As a result, both these ar eas viz. maintenance 
and checking encroachments are gravely affected.  T herefore, the 
Committee strongly feel that the Ministry should cr eate a separate 
budgetary head for this purpose and allocate judici ous allocations for the 
same.  
  

65 
 
5. Need For A Fresh Look To Evict Unauthorized Encr oachment In CPWD 
Colonies  
 
 The Committee further find that the encroachment p ersists on the 
lands already got vacated by CPWD with the help of local bodies 
including police.  This is an alarming situation an d needs to be curbed.  
The Committee cannot rule out the possibility of a nexus between 
officials and encroachers.  Hence, they want the Mi nistry to thoroughly 
investigate the matter and bring the guilty to book  and restore the land 
under encroachment expeditiously.  
  

66 
 
MAINTENANCE OF GOVT. BUILDINGS AND GOVT.RESIDENTIAL  
COLONIES  
 
6.  Need to Rationalize Cost Estimates of its Project by CPWD 
 
 
 The Committee observe that cost estimate of projec ts undertaken by 
CPWD is on higher side as compared to other agencie s. In response to 
that CPWD has clarified that all public sector cons truction agencies 
throughout the country adopt CPWD standard rates on ly for preparing 
estimates and then they add their margin over it. C PWD being the 
Government agency without any commercial interest d oes not add any 
margin itself and hence CPWD estimates are lower th an the other 
agencies. However, the Committee while taking oral evidence of the 
representatives of other Ministries such as Home Af fairs, Human 
Resource Development, Commerce, Health and Family W elfare and 
Department of Personnel and Training came to know t hat cost estimates 
of projects executed by CPWD were very high in comp arison to other 
agencies. Even then they will have to award these p rojects to CPWD only 
because it being a Government Company. The Committe e do not accept 
the CPWD version on the issue. Being the only agenc y responsible for 
executing various projects of Government of India, the Committee 
strongly recommend that CPWD should prepare correct and cost effective 
estimates of the projects lest the clients do not o pt for cheaper 
alternatives.  

67 
 
7. Dual Control of Engineers in Client Organization s  
  
 The Committee also came to know during the oral ev idence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs tha t major repairs and 
maintenance of North Block are done by CPWD themsel ves without 
consulting them regarding action plan of maintenanc e for the coming 
years.  As such, the CPWD does not keep the Ministr y in loop with regard 
to repairs and the maintenance.  
 The Committee have been apprised that engineers of  C.P.W.D. are not 
answerable or not under the control of client organ izations. The 
Committee have been given to understand by CPWD tha t technical 
control of engineers under the hospital authorities  or client organizations 
are administratively infeasible and undesirable as a number of 
administrative, technical and financial issues are involved.  However, the 
Committee are not convinced with the view  of the M inistry   that most of 
the issues are sorted out during the weekly meeting s/rounds taken jointly 
with hospital authorities. Therefore, the Committee  strongly recommend 
that CPWD Executive engineer should be placed on th e strength of 
hospital staff/Ministry concerned on the pattern of  technical posting of 
engineers in army infantry battalions. Confidential  reports of these 
officers should be written by both administrative  as well as technical 
heads viz.,  Medical Superintendent of the Hospital  and their superior 
officer in CPWD. This will ensure better interface of CPWD engineers and 

68 
 
client Ministries to arrest delays in executing the  works and 
accountability of CPWD engineers.  
8. Need of Single  Unified  Agency for construction  and maintenance of 
 
 hospitals   
 
 The Committee have been apprised of the  status of  maintenance of 
hospital buildings like RML hospital, Safdarjung ho spital, Lady Harding 
Medical College, Kalawati Saran, CGHS wellbeing cen tres maintained by 
CPWD in terms of Engineering maintenance and housek eeping 
maintenance.  The Committee have also been informed  about the 
problems in the Govt. hospitals e.g. broken taps in  the toilets, shortage of 
water, chocking of sewer, leakage etc.  The Committ ee were also 
enlightened  that in Govt. hospitals interruption t o various services is 
frequently being caused by other agencies which are  engaged for 
construction of new buildings by the Ministry of He alth & Family Welfare.   
It is observed by the Committee that in the last fe w years, there has been 
addition of new buildings in the various Hospital c ampuses (like PGIMER 
in RML Hospital, VMCC & SIC in Safdarjang Hospital) . The sewerage 
disposal of these new buildings is also connected t o existing sewerage 
system maintained by the CPWD. This leads to occasi onal overflow of 
main sewer line.  CPWD is facing problems from user s as they throw 
wastes like cloth, refuse, cotton, etc. direct into  the toilet, gully taps etc. 
resulting in the choking of sewer lines etc. Theref ore, the Committee are 
of firm view that there should be one unified agenc y responsible for 

69 
 
construction and maintenance of Govt. buildings,  G ovt. Hospitals and 
residential colonies. In case of more than one agen cy being involved in 
the construction and maintenance works there is an urgent need to have 
a proper and effective coordination amongst all suc h agencies.  The 
Committee are surprised to note that manual of CPWD  prohibits them to 
take up maintenance of that building which has not been constructed by 
CPWD.  The Committee feel that this rigidity will a ffect the maintenance 
work and thereby hurting a common man.  Hence, the Committee want 
the Ministry to ensure that maintenance of any buil ding may not be 
withheld on account of rules and if there is a need , such rules may be 
suitably amended.  
 
9. Need to Redeem Image By CPWD 
 
 
 The Committee are given to understand by certain M inistries of the 
Government of India and RWAs of Government resident ial colonies about 
their satisfaction level from the services/maintenance of CPWD. While the 
client Ministries were not very vocal in criticizin g the role of CPWD but 
RWAs spared no room in doing so. Ministries were no t happy with the 
excessive cost estimates, lack of coordination, acc ountability and delay 
in execution of works.  RWAs vent their ire towards  haughty attitude of 
CPWD officials, delay, tilt towards contractors and  unavailability and 
inaccessibility of CPWD officials.  The Committee a re constrained to 

70 
 
observe that CPWD, a service rendering  organizatio n should not invite 
the ire of its clients in such a way. This will ero de their  reputation and 
reputation once damaged takes a long time to regain .  The Committee are 
of the view that officials of CPWD should think themselves servants of the 
public rather than their masters.  Their non-availa bility to the public is not 
understandable to the Committee.   More and more de pendence on 
contractors even for petty work is deplorable.  Thi s is adding stigma to 
the organization.  Mandatory periodic inspection by  AEs are conveniently 
abandoned and no action or serious view is taken by  CPWD in this 
regard.  There is no coordination between CPWD and their civic agencies.  
In such circumstances, the Committee are constrained to hold a view that 
CPWD has lost its image badly and unless concrete s teps are taken by 
the Ministry, the 159 years old premier organizatio n will be lost in 
oblivion. Therefore, this necessarily calls for ‘pu blic relations’ or ‘image’ 
management by CPWD to redeem its lost image. Hence the Committee 
strongly recommend to follow certain steps by the C PWD in their 
maintenance unit to ensure better customer interfac e and service 
delivery. 
  
a) Posting of officials with requisite ‘people frie ndly’ skills in 
maintenance unit : Posting of CPWD officials in maintenance area sho uld 
be done keeping in view their ability/capacity to i nteract with the public 
and respond to their requirements in a positive and  friendly manner. 

71 
 
Extensive training should be imparted to the EE, AE  and JE to enhance 
their interpersonal skills and improve motivational levels. 
b)  Introduce system of periodic preventive mainten ance inspection : In 
this system, AE, JE from civil and electrical divis ion along with Additional 
Director (horticulture) and Section Officer (hortic ulture) should inspect 
buildings within their division/ sub division at an  interval of six months 
and detect buildings which require repairs, so that  annual periodic 
maintenance can be done on time. For housing stock,  the Residents 
Welfare Associations (RWA) could be involved as par t of this periodic 
preventive maintenance inspection unit. 
c) Co-ordination between various disciplines while attending the 
complaint : To enable effective co-ordination between various  disciplines 
of civil and electrical services, while performing maintenance activity, it is 
proposed that work gangs be formed at each service centre comprising of 
work charged staff from various disciplines. The in terdisciplinary work 
gang would move together, while attending a complai nt to ensure that all 
types of complaints (irrespective of it being of ci vil or electrical nature) 
are attended to without any delay. 
d) Introduction of incentives for better performanc e 
: To improve 
motivational levels among the maintenance staff, a system of annual 
incentives/ rewards could be introduced for best ma naged service 
centres. These service centres and their officer in -charge (JE) should be 

72 
 
judged by the concerned CE in-charge along with ass istance from the SE 
based on following parameters: 
- Physical inspection of cleanliness of buildings a nd area maintained by 
the service centre 
- Number of complaints successfully addressed 
- A customer satisfaction index based on sample sur vey of clients and 
residents. 
e) Up gradation of specifications of old buildings 
: A time bound 
programme for upgradation of specifications of old construction work of 
buildings should be made and submitted to Governmen t for obtaining a 
one time technical approval and the requisite budge tary support. This 
would enable CPWD to carry out necessary upgradation in form of special 
repairs and give better appearance to the building,  thus reducing 
subsequent maintenance requirements. 
f) Creation of a dedicated maintenance unit 
: To enable officers to 
concentrate on maintenance activity and improve qua lity of service 
provided by CPWD, it has an option to de-link, wher ever possible, 
maintenance from construction activity. Separate ma intenance units 
should be created with exclusive manpower concentra ting only on this 
activity. However, these activities should be segre gated in circles/ 
divisions where there is large workload of maintena nce activity and work 
for a separate unit can be fully justified. A maint enance unit could be 
created at division level/ sub-division level. A di vision could have more 

73 
 
than one maintenance unit, depending on the mainten ance workload 
involved in the division. Superintendant Engineer  in-charge of the circle 
along with CE in charge should decide on the number  of maintenance 
units to be created within a division. 
g) Dependence on Contractors should be shunned 
 : In order to refurbish 
its lost image, CPWD should evolve a mechanism wher e need for private 
contractor is not felt for minor works.  The Commit tee are of the view that 
name of the Contractor has become a synonym to the corruption so every 
effort should be made to free the system from the s o called evil.  In 
addition, the Officers concerned should carry out p eriodic inspection of 
the work being done by the contractor and if any de ficiency is found with 
regard to work and material, he should be immediate ly taken to task.  
Higher officials of the rank of SE and CEs may also  carry out surprise 
checks in order to ensure that there is no nexus be tween the contractor 
and the officials. 
h) Bimonthly meeting of representatives of RWAs and  CPWD officials 
 : 
The Committee are compelled to form the opinion tha t RWAs of 
Government Colonies are a neglected lot and they ha ve to run from the 
pillar to the post to voice their concerns. Hence, the Committee 
recommend for setting up a Grievance Cell in the Di rectorate to attend to 
the grievances of RWAs on a regular basis. They rec ommend for 
institutionalization of mechanism to have bimonthly  meetings between 
CPWD higher authorities and representatives of  RWAs.   

74 
 
10.    Sewerage Water Treatment Plant for Horticulture  
 
    The Committee were informed that there is scarc ity of water in 
the Govt. Bungalows and Govt. residential colonies due to which 
Horticulture Department faces difficulties in irrig ating the landscape and 
watering the plants. The Committee have been appris ed that drinking 
water cannot be used for horticulture purpose while  unfiltered water can 
be used.  CPWD have made proposal for usage of unfi ltered water for 
horticulture purpose but have not got permission ti ll now. The Committee 
were also  apprised that for beautification of the landscape and to sort out 
the shortage of the water, Sewerage Treatment Plant s (STP) of capacity 
360 KLD with MBBR Technology are being provided for  Type-V and Type-
VI Qtrs. at Deen Dayal Upadhaya Marg, New Delhi. Th e recycled water is 
proposed to be used for horticulture operations and  cleaning of Roads. 
Sewage Treatment Plant (STP) at Kaka Nagar residential Area is proposed 
and Market survey is being conducted for selecting suitable technology.  
    In view of the acute shortage of water and the benefits of 
Sewerage Treatment Plants,  the Committee  recommen d that Sewerage 
Treatment Plant should be installed in other Govt. residential colonies 
throughout the country.  
 
  

75 
 
11. Regular monitoring of horticulture department i n Govt. Residential 
colonies  
 
 The Committee came to know that generally Malis (G ardners) do not 
visit the parks in the Govt. residential colonies. Contractors dump 
construction waste inside the park and it turns to the breeding grounds 
for mosquitoes. Therefore, the Committee strongly r ecommend that the 
horticulture department should take proactive role in maintaining the 
parks and roads in the residential buildings at reg ular interval.  There is 
no specified place for the children to play. The Co mmittee feel that unless 
there is regular monitoring of Gardens and parks by  the senior officers of 
that Zone, the situation will not improve and hence  recommend to the 
Ministry to ensure the same.    
12. Utilisation of Solar Energy in Govt. buildings 
 
 
 According to the Maintenance Manual of CPWD, CPWD will meet 
energy requirements for a minimum of 10% of the int ernal lighting load 
(for general lighting) from renewable energy source s (solar, wind, 
biomass, fuel cells, etc). The Committee have been apprised by the 
Ministry that provision for meeting energy requirem ents for minimum of 
10% of the internal lighting load (for general ligh ting) or its equivalent 
from renewable energy sources (solar, wind, biomass, fuel cells etc.) have 
been made.   In this context, the Committee recommend  that solar energy 
panels should be installed in all  Govt. office bui ldings and also in Govt. 

76 
 
residential colonies so as to reduce the demand for  conventional energy.  
The Committee also desire the CPWD  to take measure s like adopting an 
adequate comfort range, less air-conditioned areas,  day lighting and 
avoid over-design of the lighting and air- conditio ning systems which 
would further minimize dependence on conventional source of energy. 
 
13. Updating of technology to avoid delay in execution of projects. 
 
 
 The Committee have learnt from various client Mini stries that 
invariably there is delay in execution of projects by CPWD assigned to 
them. Moreover, their technology is not totally updated. The Ministry cited 
various reasons for the delay in projects which are  not directly 
attributable to CPWD such as delay in approvals by local bodies, delay in 
approvals by clients, delay in budget allocation, f requent change of 
already approved provisions and specifications by c lients during 
execution of project, delay in furnishing land owne rship documents by 
clients, delay owing to consultants which are somet imes engaged by 
clients themselves, etc.  The Committee, however, n ot being convinced 
with the Ministry’ logic, strongly recommend  for u pdating of technology 
used by CPWD in execution of their projects besides  involving  the client 
Ministry in each and every step to avoid delays.   
 

77 
 
14. Responsibilities of the Client Ministries  
  The Committee observe that besides the commitment  of CPWD 
towards fulfilling its duties, Client Ministries al so have certain 
responsibilities regarding engineering & housekeepi ng maintenance in 
the Govt. buildings. The Committee emphasize that t he following matters 
need to be addressed to by the Client Ministries fo r ensuring better 
maintenance of the Govt. Buildings: 
 
1) Air-conditioners should not be installed in the Government buildings 
without certification from CPWD to effectively manage the situation. 
2) False Ceiling should not be disturbed by various  agencies handling  
telephone, cable, electrical etc.,  Ministries shou ld ensure that the 
false ceiling removed for any work is placed back in position.  
3) Different Client Ministries keep a lot of furnit ure in the corridors.  Such 
furniture should be removed from the corridors.  
4) Corridors should be kept neat and clean. Cleanin g agencies engaged 
by various Ministries should improve the cleaning.  
5) The external area cleaning is also found wanting  and needs proper 
attention.  
6) Cleaning agencies which are generally putting th e malba 
 in the toilet 
shafts should be dissuaded from doing the same, as it finally leads to 
blockage of sewer lines.  
7) Some of the doors of staircase have been kept cl osed. These doors 

78 
 
need to be opened and CISF personnel are to be depl oyed on these 
doors.  
8) Water Supply needs to be improved by NDMC.   All  the Valves needs to 
be  checked and replaced wherever found old. Proble m is to be sorted 
out by NDMC only by  increasing  the  number  of  h ours of supply to  
meet  the  extra demand in summer season.” 
 
 The Committee are aware that the above-mentioned r esponsibilities 
cast on the client Ministries are not exhaustive bu t they are sure that if 
taken in right spirit by the Ministries the situation will improve immensely.  
 
 
New Delhi;           SHARAD YADAV 
27 August, 2013 
               CHAIRMAN 
5 Bhadrapada, 1935 (Saka)              Standing Com mittee on Urban Development  
  

79 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND  SITTING OF THE STANDING COMM ITTEE ON URBAN 
DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013) 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 6 th  November, 2012 from 1100 hrs. to 1430 hrs. 
in Room No 074, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT  
Shri Sharad Yadav      - Chairman  
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Ambica Banerjee  
3. Shri Kailash Joshi 
4. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee  
5. Shri Ramesh Kumar 
6. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
7. Shri Ratan Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
8. Shri Anil Desai 
9. Shri Parvez Hashmi 
10. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
11. Shri Avinash Pande  
12. Shri Ajay Sancheti 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri D.S. Malha   - Director 
2. Smt. J.M. Sinha   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Smt. K. Rangamani N.  -  Under Secretary  
 
 
2. *******                  *********                                *********                        *********      
3.       ********                   *********             *********               ********* 
4. ********                   *********             *********               ********* 
5   ********                   *********             *********               ********* 
 

80 
 
 
 
WITNESSES 
 
1.       Dr. Sudhir Krishna  -         Secretary 
2.       Shri C.K. Khaitan  -        Joint Secretar y(L.W) 
3.       Shri Rakesh Mishra              -        D irector General,CPWD 
4.       Shri V.K. Gupta  -        Special D.G.,CPW D 
5.       Shri Ashok Khurana  -        Special DG,CP WD 
6.       Shri Krishna Dutt  -        Director of Es tates-II 
7.       Shri P.K. Singh  -        Supdt. Engineer 
8.       Shri K.P. Abraham  -        Director(with laptop and pendrive) 
 
6. After lunch break, the Convenor,  Shri Kailash J oshi, M.P.  chaired the meeting in  the 
absence of the Chairman of the Committee. He welcomed the  representatives of Ministry of 
Urban Development and drew their attention towards Direction 59(1) of the Directions by the 
Speaker. Thereafter, Secretary, Ministry of Urban D evelopment,      Dr. Sudhir Krishna 
presented a power point presentation about "Role of  C.P.W.D. in checking unauthorised 
occupation of Government land and colonies and eval uation of their performance in 
maintaining Government buildings."  
7. Members expressed their views on the issues rela ting to illegal encroachment of 
Government land especially by religious structures,  condition of M.Ps flats, connivance of 
officials of  department  in encroachment and unaut horised constructions, insurance 
arrangement in case of natural calamities like eart hquakes etc. The Secretary and other 
officials of the Ministry of Urban Development resp onded to queries of the Members and 
took permission from Chairperson to provide informa tion in writing on which information 
could not be provided during the sitting of the Committee. 
  
 A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Sittin g has been kept. 
 
 The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
*********** 
****** These portions do not relate to the Report 

81 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON  
TUESDAY, 7 TH MAY, 2013 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 7 th May, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in 
Committee Room 'E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT  
Shri Sharad Yadav - Chairman  
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Anant Gangaram Geete 
3.  Shri Kailash Joshi  
4. Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
5. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
6.  Shri Ramesh Kumar  
7. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
8. Shri Ratan Singh 
                                                
 
                                                      RAJYA SABHA  
 
9. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
10. 
 Shri Anil Desai 
11.  Md. Nadimul Haque 
12.  Shri Fagan Singh Kulaste 
13.  Shri Avinash Pande 
14.  Shri Ajay Sancheti 
15.  Shri Khekiho Zhimomi 
 
 
 
 

82 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha   - Director 
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. K. Rangamani N.  -  Under Secretary  
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
 
1. Shri R. Bhattacharya - Secretary, (SE&L), Minist ry of HRD 
2.  Prof. Praveen 
Sinclair 
- Director, NCERT,  Ministry of HRD 
3. Shri Vineet Joshi - Chairman, C.B.S.E., Ministry  of HRD 
4. Shri Avinash Dikshit - Commissioner, KVS,  Minis try of HRD 
5. Shri G.S. Bothyal - Commissioner, NVS, Ministry of HRD 
6. Prof.  S.S. Jena - Chairman, NIOS, Ministry of H RD 
7. Shri Alok Verma - Director, CTSA,  Ministry of H RD 
8. Ms. R. Jaya - Secretary, NCTE,  Ministry of HRD 
9. Dr. Usha Kumar M.C. 
 - Director, National Bal Bhawan,  Ministry of HRD 
10.  Shri P.K. Mishra - Secretary, DoPT, Ministry of Per sonnel, P.G. and 
Pensions 
11.  Shri Manoj Joshi - Joint Secretary,  DoPT,  Ministr y of Personnel, P.G. 
and Pensions 
12.  Shri R.K. Jain - AS &DG, CGHS, Ministry of Health a nd Family 
Welfare 
13.  Ms. Sujaya Krishnan - Joint Secretary,   Ministry o f Health and Family 
Welfare 
14.  Dr. H.K. Kar - MS. RML Hospital, Ministry of Health  and Family 
Welfare 
15.  Dr. B.D. Athani - MS. Safdarjung Hospital, Ministry  of Health and 
Family Welfare 
16.  Shri Khurshid Ahmed 
Gannai 
- Additional Secretary,  Ministry of Home Affairs 
17. 
 Shri K.K. Pathak - Joint Secretary,(UT), Ministry o f Home Affairs 
18.  Shri B.S. Bassi - Spl. C.P. , Delhi Police,  Minist ry of Home Affairs 
19.  Shri T.N. Mohan - Jt. C.P.,  Delhi Police, Ministry  of Home Affairs 
20.  Shri Dharmendra - Joint Secretary, Ministry of Urba n Development 
21.  Shri V.K. Gupta - Director General, CPWD 
22.  Shri Atul Chaturvedi - Joint Secretary,  Ministry o f Commerce & Industry 
23.  Shri Anurag Saxena - Joint Secretary, Ministry of C ommerce & Industry 

83 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairman welcomed all  the Members to the 12th sitting 
of the Committee and made an obituary reference on the sad demise of Shri Ambica 
Banerjee, M.P., Lok Sabha, who was the Member of the Committee during the year 2012-13 
and the Committee stood for a while  as mark of respect to the departed soul. 
3. Then the Hon'ble Chairman welcomed the newly app ointed Member, Shri. TKS 
Elangovan, to the Committee. 
4. The Committee also decided to undertake an on-th e-spot study visit to Kochi, 
Munar, Chennai, Mumbai and Nagpur from 7 to 12 June , 2013.  Thereafter the Committee 
took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministries of Health, Commerce, Department 
of Personnel and Training, Home Affairs and Human R esource Development Ministries on 
the role of Central Public Works Department (C.P.W. D.) in maintenance of Government 
buildings and evaluation of their performance and d rew their attention towards Directions 
55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker. 
5.  The Committee heard the views of Secretaries an d other senior Officers 
regarding their experiences on functioning of CPWD in maintaining their Government 
buildings. All the representatives insisted on the point that contracts with the CPWD 
invariably get delayed and there should be one agen cy in charge of maintenance of all the 
works. There is lack of coordination of the CPWD an d other agencies in undertaking 
maintenance of buildings under their administrative  purview and the technology of CPWD is 
outdated. Thereafter, the Members sought clarificat ions, which were responded by the 
officials. The witnesses then withdrew. 
6. Representatives from CPWD were called in. The Ho n'ble Chairman then 
welcomed the Director General, CPWD and his colleag ues and drew their attention towards 

84 
 
Directions 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker. He apprised them about the issues raised 
by the representatives of various Ministries and Me mbers of the Committee on the role of 
CPWD in maintenance of Government buildings apart f rom checking unauthorized 
occupation of Government land and colonies and aske d for clarifications. The Director 
General and other officials gave clarifications. Th e Committee directed the representatives 
to furnish the replies to the queries of Members to  the Lok Sabha Secretariat on which they 
could not respond during the meeting. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
*********** 
  

85 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON  
THURSDAY, 23 rd MAY, 2013 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 23 rd May, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in 
Committee Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT  
Shri Sharad Yadav – Chairman  
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2.  Shri Kailash Joshi  
3. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
4.  Shri Ramesh Kumar  
5. Dr. Ramshankar 
6. Shri Ratan Singh 
                                                
 
                                                      RAJYA SABHA  
 
7. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
8. Md. Nadimul Haque 
9. Shri Parvez Hasmi 
10. 
 Dr. M.S. Gill 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha   - Director 
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 

86 
 
 
 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
 
1. Shri Manoj Sharma, President, RWA(Type-II), Laxmi Bai Nagar 
2. Shri S.C. Tyagi, President, RWA(Type-IV), Laxmi Bai Nagar 
3. Shri Hari Om, President, RWA, Lodhi Colony 
4. Shri Gurcharan Singh, President (RWA, C-III), Lodhi Colony 
5. Shri Shiv Kumar, President (RWA), Sarojini Nagar 
6. Shri Ran Vijay Rao, (RWA), Sarojini Nagar 
7. Shri Avinash Chaturvedi, , RWA, Vasant Vihar 
 
 
2.       At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairman welcom ed all the Members to the 13 
th  sitting 
of the Committee and apprised them of the agenda of  the sitting i.e. " Role of Central Public 
Works Department (C.P.W.D.) in checking unauthorized occupation of government land and 
colonies and evaluation of their performance in maintaining Government buildings." 
3. The Hon'ble Chairman drew the attention of the r epresentatives of RWAs towards 
maintaining confidentiality in terms of Directions  of the Speaker, Lok Sabha. Thereafter, the 
Committee took oral evidence of the representatives  of the Resident Welfare Associations 
on maintenance of Government residential colonies a nd evaluation of performance of 
CPWD. 
4.  The Committee heard the views of representative s of Resident Welfare 
Associations regarding their experience on the func tioning of CPWD in maintaining their 
Government Residential Colonies. All the representatives deplored the pathetic conditions of 
the Government colonies. There were common problems  of all RWAs. e.g., maintenance of 
quarters, drains, peripherial walls and of street l ights was not being done regularly. Roads 
have not been repaired for the last 10 years. Stair s were in dilapidated conditions, ceiling of 
the quarters were in bad shape leading to seepage e verywhere. In rainy seasons roofs give 

87 
 
way to water. The complaints were not being attended to even after bringing the same to the 
notice of  CPWD sewa call centres.  They also expre ssed their grievance over non-
availability of officials concerned either in perso n or on telephone in regard to their 
complaints.  Another major grievance of residents w as with the horticulture department of 
CPWD.  The RWAs have also mentioned that whenever C PWD take up the proposal of 
maintenance, the RWAs were not being consulted.  CP WD acts as the facilitator of the 
contractor. There was no monitoring/checking mechanism in the CPWD. 
5. The Committee directed the representatives of Re sident Welfare Associations to 
furnish a written memorandum to the Committee so th at these issues could be discussed 
with CPWD during their next sitting. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
*********** 
  

88 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON  
THURSDAY, 27 th   JUNE, 2013 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 27 th   June, 2013  from 1500 hrs. to 1645 hrs. in 
Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT  
Shri Sharad Yadav – Chairman  
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2.  Shri Jayawant Gangaram Awale 
3. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
4.  Shri Ramesh Kumar  
5. Shri P.C. Mohan 
                                                
 
                                                      RAJYA SABHA  
 
6. Shri Anil Desai 
7. Shri Parvez Hasmi 
8. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste 
9. Shri Avinash Pande 
10. 
 Dr. M.S. Gill 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha   - Director 
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. K. Rangamani N.   - Under Secretary 
 
 
 

89 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES  
 
Central Public Works Department  (CPWD)  
1. Shri V.K. Gupta - Director General, CPWD 
2. Shri Vikas Rokade - Addl. DG(TD) 
3. Shri Vijay Motwani - Addl. DG(NDR) 
4. Shri A.K. Verma - Addl. DG(DR) 
5. Shri Prabhakar Singh - Chief Engineer, (NDZ)-I 
6. Shri Akhilesh Kumar - Chief Engineer, (NDZ)-II 
7. Shri Gurvinder Singh - Chief Engineer, (NDZ)-III / VII 
8. Shri P.K. Singh - Chief Engineer, (NDZ)-IV 
9. Shri Veer Sain - Chief Engineer, (NDZ)-V 
10. Shri P.K. Garg - Chief Engineer, (NDZ)-VI 
11. Dr. B.C. Katiyar - Director(Horticulture)CPWD 
12. Shri D.S. Sangwan - SE, DCC-IV, CPWD 
 
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF DELHI(MCD) 
 
13. Shri Deepak Hastir - Addl. Commissioner(L&E), 
MCD(North zone) 
14. Shri Anil Prakash - Engineer-in-Chief, MCD(Nort h Zone) 
15. Shri Sanjay Jain - Chief Engineer, MCD(North Zo ne) 
16. Shri R.P. Gautam - Asst. Commissioner(L&E) 
17. Shri Devender Kumar - Chief Engineer, MCD(East Zone) 
18. Shri Ravi Dass - Engineer-in-Chief, MCD(South Z one) 
19. Shri Feroz Ahmad - Chief Engineer, MCD(South Zo ne) 
20. Shri Ranbir Singh - Additional Director, Hortic ulture,MCD, 
East Zone 
21. Dr. Alok Singh - Dy. Director(Horticulture) 
 
 
 
 

90 
 
New Delhi Municipal Council  (NDMC)  
22. Shri Arun Kumar Mishra - Director(Enforcement)N .D.M.C 
23. Shri H.K. Bachauri - Director(Horticulture)NDMC  
 
Resident Welfare Association(RWA) 
 
24. Shri Avinash Chaturvedi   
 
- Resident Welfare Association, Flat 
No. 64-J, CPWD Colony 
25. Shri Manoj Sharma  - President, RWA(Type-II) La xmi Bai 
Nagar 
26. Shri S.C. Tyagi 
 
- President, RWA(Type-IV) Laxmi Bai 
Nagar, 
 
27. Shri Hari Om - President, RWA Lodhi Colony 
28. Shri Gurcharan Singh 
 
- (RWA, C-III), Lodhi Colony 
29. Shri Shiv Kumar  
 
- President (RWA), Sarojini Nagar 
30. Shri  Ran Vijay Rao 
 
- (RWA), Sarojini Nagar 
 
 
 
2.       At the outset, the Hon'ble Chairman welcom ed all the Members to the    14 
th  sitting 
of the Committee and apprised them of the importanc e of the subject " Role of Central 
Public Works Department (C.P.W.D.) in checking unau thorized occupation of government 
land and colonies and evaluation of their performan ce in maintaining Government 
buildings." 
3. The Hon'ble Chairman also welcomed the represent atives of CPWD, MCD, 
NDMC and RWA to the sitting of the Committee and dr ew their attention towards 
maintaining confidentiality in terms of Directions 55 (1) of Directions by the Speaker, Lok 
Sabha.  
4.  The Committee heard the views of representative s of Resident Welfare 
Associations regarding their experience on the func tioning of CPWD in maintaining their 

91 
 
Government Residential Colonies. All the representatives deplored the pathetic conditions of 
the Government colonies. They were vociferous about  their complaints with regard to 
maintenance of quarters, drains, peripheral walls a nd street lights besides roads that have 
not been repaired for the last 10 years. In additio n, they raised their voice about the 
inefficient complaint redressal mechanism. The repr esentatives of CPWD while denying the 
charges leveled by the RWAs admitted that some aber ration could have happened and 
promised to look into the problems/grievances personally. They apprised the Committee that 
they are having better coordination with NDMC and M CD. However, the Committee were 
not satisfied. 
5. The Committee directed the CPWD, NDMC and MCD to  hold monthly or bi-
monthly meeting with the representatives of Residen t Welfare Associations and report the 
same to this secretariat.  The Committee also direc ted the CPWD to plant traditional trees 
like Neem and Jamun in the bungalows and on the roads of New Delhi. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
*********** 
  

92 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON  
THURSDAY, 18 TH JULY, 2013 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 18 th July, 2013  from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in 
Committee Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT  
Shri Sharad Yadav - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2.  Shri Jayawant Gangaram Awale  
3. Shri Anant Gangaram Geete 
4. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
5.  Shri Ramesh Kumar  
6. Dr Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
7. Shri Sonawane Pratap Narayanrao 
                                                  
RAJYA SABHA  
 
8. Shri Pyari Mohan Mohapatra 
9. Shri Anil Desai 
10. 
 Md. Nadimul Haque 
11.  Shri Fagan Singh Kulaste 
12.  Shri Avinash Pande 
13.  Dr. M.S. Gill  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha   - Director 
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. K. Rangamani N.  -  Under Secretary  
 

93 
 
 
 
7. At the outset, Hon'ble Chairman and the Committe e paid tribute to the victims of 
Uttarakhand disaster and death of innocent  school children after eating Mid-day meals in  
Bihar. 
8. Thereafter, the Hon'ble Chairman welcomed all th e Members of the Committee 
and representatives of Ministry of Urban Developmen t to the fifteenth sitting of the 
Committee and apprised representatives about the pr ovisions of Direction 55(1) of 
Directions by the Speaker regarding maintaining con fidentiality of the deliberations of the 
Committee. 
9.  The Committee pinpointed various lacunae in the  functioning of the CPWD e.g. 
contract system, collusion of officials with the co ntractors, dilapidated conditions of 
Government staff quarters, inaccessibility of CPWD officials, non interaction of CPWD 
officials with Representatives of RWAs, non-availab ility of  dedicated staff with CPWD for 
removing encroachments from the Govt. land, decreased credibility of CPWD etc. 
10. Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development clarif ied that CPWD was trying to 
improve the image of the organization by introducin g number of reforms like e-sewa, e-
tendering, online monitoring of projects, regular interaction with RWAs etc.  
11. Members raised various issues including critici sm of the buildings constructed by 
the CPWD for the Commonwealth Games, substandard ma terial used for constructing 
Government Buildings and quarters, non-plantation o f trees by the Horticulture Department 
of CPWD, selective maintenance of quarters, inabili ty of CPWD in evicting the 
encroachment, problems of security in Government re sidential colonies because of low 
boundary wall, flooding of sewerage water in the ho uses along the Mathura Road and 

94 
 
Patiala House, bad conditions of furniture in MPs F lats, complaints of the toll free call 
center- “SMS are being send to the Complainant of r esolution of the complaint even without 
attending the complaint” etc. Secretary then clarified the queries raised by the Members. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.  
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
*********** 
 
  

95 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013). 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 27 th  August, 2013 from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in 
Committee Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT  
Shri Sharad Yadav      - Chairman  
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA  
 
2.  Shri Jayawant Gangaram Awale 
3. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
4. Shri Anant Gangaram Geete 
5. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
6.  Shri Ramesh Kumar  
7. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
8. Shri Ratan Singh 
                                                
 
                                                      RAJYA SABHA  
 
9. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
10. 
 Md. Nadimul Haque 
11.  Shri Avinash Pande 
12.  Shri Ajay Sancheti 
13.  Shri Khekiho Zhimomi 
  
   
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha   - Director 
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. K. Rangamani N.  -  Under Secretary  
 

96 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members  to the sitting of the Committee. 
The Committee then took up for consideration the dr aft Report on the "Role of Central 
Public Works Department (C.P.W.D.) in checking unau thorized occupation of government 
land and colonies and evaluation of their performan ce in maintaining Government 
buildings". After deliberations, the Committee adop ted the draft Report with slight 
modifications.   
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to fi nalize and present the Report to 
Parliament.  
The Committee then adjourned . 
***** 
 
 