22
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2012-2013)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN
POVERTY ALLEVIATION
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2012-2013)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the
Nineteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Urban Development on Demands for Grants (2012-2013) of the
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation]
TWENTY-SECOND REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)


TWENTY-SECOND REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2012-2013)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN
POVERTY ALLEVIATION
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2012-2013)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the
Nineteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Urban Development on Demands for Grants (2012-2013) of the
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 05.12.2012
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 05.12.2012
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)


C.U.D. No. 74
Price : Rs. 28.00
© 2012 BY LOK SABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct
of Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by
Anupam Art Printers, New Delhi.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report ................................................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ...................................... 7
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies ..................................................... 13
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee and require
reiteration ......................................................................... 14
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited.............................................................................. 18
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Second sitting of the Standing Committee
on Urban Development (2012-13) held on 6.11.2012 ....... 19
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report
of the Committee (15th Lok Sabha) .................................... 21

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013)
Shri Sharad Yadav —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Praveen Singh Aron
3. Shri Jayawant Gangaram Awale
4. Shri Ambica Banerjee
5. Shri Biren Singh Engti
6. Shri Anant Gangaram Geete
7. Smt. Kaisar Jahan
8. Shri Kailash Joshi
9. Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru
10. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee
11. Shri Ramesh Kumar
12. Shri Yadav Anjan Kumar M.
13. Shri P .C. Mohan
14. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik
15. Shri Sonawane Pratap Narayanrao
16. Dr (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani
17. Dr. Ramshankar
18. Shri Ratansingh
19. Vacant
20. Vacant
21. Vacant
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
23. Shri Anil Desai
24. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque
25. Shri Parvez Hashmi
(iii)

26. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
27. Shri Avinash Pande
28. Shri Ajay Sancheti
29. Shri Amar Singh
30. Shri Khekiho Zhimomi
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.K. Jain — Joint Secretary
2. Shri D.S. Malha — Director
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Raj Kumar — Executive Assistant
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2012-2013) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present this Twenty Second Report (15th Lok
Sabha) on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations
contained in the Nineteenth Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing
Committee on Urban Development on the Demands for Grants (2012-
2013) of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation.
2. The Nineteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 25th
April, 2012. Replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received in July, 2012.
3. The Standing Committee on Urban Development considered and
adopted this Report at their sitting held on 06th November, 2012.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Nineteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok
Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters
in the body of the Report.
  N
EW D ELHI; SHARAD YADAV ,
30 November, 2012 Chairman,
9 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Urban Development.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2012-2013) deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in their Nineteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Housing
and Urban Poverty Alleviation which was presented to Lok Sabha on
25 April, 2012.
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government
in respect of all 8 recommendations contained in the Report. These
have been categorized as follows:
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted
by the Government. Chapter-II):
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 5, 7, 8
(Total-05)
(Chapter-II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations, which the Committee does
not desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies.
(Chapter-III):
Recommendation No. 0
(Total-Nil)
(Chapter-III)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which replies
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and require reiteration. (Chapter-IV):
Recommendation Nos. 3, 4, 6
(Total-03)
(Chapter-IV)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which final
replies of the Government are, still awaited (Chapter-V):
Recommendation No. 0
(Total-Nil)
(Chapter-V)

2
1.3 The Committee desire that specific replies to the comments
contained in Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished to them at
the earliest and in any case, not later than three months of the
presentation of this Report.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)
Concurrent Evaluation of SJSRY
1.5 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee during examination of Demands for Grants
(2011-12) observed that the concurrent evaluation of SJSRY which
is being done only in one State from each region, had
recommended that this should be extended across the whole
country. However, the action taken reply also did not reflect any
positive response on the issue.
This year when the Committee asked a follow up question about
the concurrent evaluation of SJSRY, the Ministry in their written
reply submitted that the concurrent evaluation process is in progress
in 5 selected States. The improvements/shortcoming in
implementation of the scheme will be assessed once the final report
of the study is available. The Committee are dismayed to note
that such an important recommendation of the Committee has not
been adhered to by the Ministry.
While the Ministry is getting ready to launch National Urban
Livelihood Mission (NULM), the Committee fail to understand what
had restricted the Ministry from extending this “concurrent
evaluation to the whole country”. The Committee are of the strong
view that the ambit of concurrent evaluation of SJSRY should be
extended to all other States and Union Territories, then only, the
improvements/shortcomings in implementation of scheme can be
assessed in real sense. This will help in implementing NULM in
a better way. Also while conducting concurrent evaluation of the
SJSRY Scheme, the Ministry should collect statistics about the
number of beneficiaries that have been assisted for setting up of
individual micro enterprises/group enterprises after training and
got employment during the last three years.”

3
1.6 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as
follows:—
“A concurrent evaluation of Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana
scheme is currently being conducted by independent agencies in
selected 5 States namely, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, West
Bengal and Haryana. As the Ministry has proposed to upscale the
existing Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana into National Urban
Livelihood Mission (NULM) in the 12th Five Year Plan, the scope
of concurrent valuation would be extended to other states after
studying the results of the current exercise, if required. Alternatively,
a full scale evaluation of the scheme will be undertaken.”
1.7 The Committee are distressed to note that one of their very
important recommendations to extend the ambit of concurrent
evaluation of SJSRY to all States and Union Territories has not been
implemented by the Ministry. They are given to understand that the
concurrent evaluation is being conducted by independent agencies
in selected 5 States. Even after up scaling the SJSRY to NULM, in
the 12th Plan, the scope of Concurrent Evaluation would be extended
to other States after studying the results of the current exercise if
required.
The Committee cannot understand the reasons as to why the
Ministry is not taking their recommendation seriously. They are of
the view that only sample implementation of their recommendation
in 5 States will not serve any useful purpose. The efficacy of the
scheme could be ascertained if it is evaluated on the national level.
Hence, the Committee deplore this callous attitude of the Ministry
towards their recommendation and reiterate the recommendation of
extending the “concurrent evaluation to the whole country” and
collecting the statistics about the number of beneficiaries assisted
through SJSRY scheme in setting up of individual micro enterprises/
group enterprises and gaining employment during the last three
years.
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
National Urban Livelihood Mission (NULM)
1.8 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee are given to understand that the current SJSRY,
which has so far been the only programme which is run in the
country for assisting the urban unemployed youth in getting gainful

4
employment, will now be covered under National Urban Livelihood
Mission on the pattern of National Rural Livelihood Mission
(NRLM).
The Committee have been informed that under NULM, in every
municipality, irrespective of the size of the municipality, a small
programme management unit will be set up with some financial
support from the Central Government. The Committee note that
unlike SJSRY, efforts are being made to provide that training
providers will ensure employment guarantee for around 72-80 per
cent of the people they are training which will be verifiable after
six months.
The Committee are apprehensive about the future of those trainees,
in case their services are discontinued by the training providers
after the stipulated period of 6 months. Considering the above
facts the Committee recommend that at the stage of selection of
training provider its capacity to induct at least 80 to 90 per cent
of trainees per year for next five years should be ensured. Also,
for those trainees who will be employed by the service provider,
the verification should be done after every six months, for two
consecutive years.”
1.9 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as
follows:—
“Skill Training for the urban poor under the existing Swarna Jayanti
Shahari Rozgar Yojana/proposed NULM is meant for facilitating
both self employment and wage employment opportunities for the
urban poor. It has been experienced that in small towns due to
lack of market based job opportunities, urban poor are primarily
engaged in informal sector through self employment. Prospective
employers/job opportunities with private sector are not available
in all town/cities. Hence, in smaller towns, skill trained urban
poor may opt for self employment due to lack of availability of
wage employment.
Under the proposed NULM, efforts will be made to link training
to placement in remunerative jobs/enterprises. Selection of
marketable trades, competent skill training providers and
certification that have national/State recognition are the keys to
the success of a skills training programme, as the same will ensure
absorption of the trained persons into the local industry. Hence,
for the purpose of skills training with placement in remunerative
jobs, States will be suggested to select skills training agencies
through a transparent selection process for conduct of proper
training and at least 70% placement in remunerative jobs.”

5
1.10 The Committee are aware that in smaller towns, skilled
urban poor may opt for self-employment due to lack of availability
of wage employment. The Committee strongly feel that the
beneficiaries who opt for self-employment need protection and hence
be followed up for quite some time by a dedicated team of officials
so as to ensure the smooth functioning of their ventures.
Moreover, as regards wage employment of beneficiaries under
NULM, the Committee are of the view that instead of suggesting at
least 70% placement in remunerative jobs by skill training agencies
under NULM, the Ministry may consider to make this provision
mandatory.
The Ministry’s silence on the issue of verification of trainees for
two consecutive years after being employed by the training provider
surprises the Committee. While reiterating their earlier
recommendation, the Committee want to be informed in this regard
periodically.
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
Rajiv Awas Yojana (RAY)
1.11 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“Rajiv Awas Yojana is aimed at making India slum free based on
Slum free State and Slum free City Plans. RA Y envisages creating
a slum free India by encouraging States to assign property rights
to slum dwellers. However, the Committee find that there is no
allocation for RAY under current financial year.
This is reflecting upon the callous attitude of Central Government
towards implementation of various schemes and policies. Since,
RAY is not a normal Housing Scheme, rather, it is the reflection of
Governments’ vision for improving urban growth through making
slum free States and cities and giving property rights and through
RAY Central Government is attempting to bring back to life the
two housing schemes namely, Affordable Housing Scheme and
Interest Subsidy Scheme of Housing for the Urban Poor (ISHUP)
that have not performed well till date. The Committee therefore
want that adequate care should be taken by the Ministry to ensure
that RAY does not face the same problems which earlier schemes
viz. ISHUP and IHSDP experienced. The Committee further desire
that before finalization of RAY the Government should consult the
various stakeholders to make it practicable.”

6
1.12 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as
follows:—
“The Rajiv AwasYojana (RAY) is of the nature of Additional Central
Assistance (ACA). This year for RAY Rs. 1533.50 crore ACA has
been allocated under the Demand No. 35 of Ministry of Finance
and Demand No. 56 of the Ministry of Home Affairs. Under the
Demand No. 57 of the Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty
Alleviation Rs. 30.00 crore has been allocated for Rajiv Awas Yojana
(RAY), out of which Rs. 27.58 crore is apportioned for Capacity
Building and Preparatory Activities.
The strategy for implementation of RAY is based on the learning’s
from JNNURM (BSUP) and IHSDP . RAY proposes flexibility to the
States and ULBs to plan their pace of implementation and models
for arranging land, resources, housing, and partnerships. A ‘whole
city’, ‘all slums’ approach has been adopted, in keeping with the
goal of slum free cities under RAY.”
1.13 From the action taken replies, the Committee observe that
funds have been allocated to RAY under different demands. Under
three Ministries Rs. 1533.50 crore has been allocated under Demand
No. 35 of the Ministry of Finance and Demand No. 56 of the M/o
Home Affairs. Under Demand No. 57 of the Ministry of Housing
and Urban Poverty Alleviation Rs. 30.00 crore has been allocated.
The Committee understand that the RAY is based on the learning
from JNNURM (BSUP) and IHSDP which were under the
administrative control of the Ministry of HUPA which will be
implementing the schemes under RAY. The Committee fail to
understand the rationale behind allocation of funds under different
Demands and different Ministries.
The Committee are of the view that such multiplicity of agencies
may hamper the proper implementation and monitoring of the
scheme. Hence such multiplicity should be avoided in future
allocations for RAY and other schemes being implemented by
Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation.

7
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 1)
Lesser Allocation of Funds by Planning Commission and
Underutilization of Funds by the Ministry
The Committee observe that housing shortages at the beginning of
11th Plan was 24.71 million household. This is likely to go up to 26.53
million by the end of 11th Plan period 2011-12. Urban poverty in
India remain high at over 25 per cent. The incidence of decline of
urban poverty has not accelerated with GDP growth. Hence, as the
urban population in the country growing, so is the urban poverty.
Thus, the task of housing the poor and alleviation of poverty is a
challenging task. Against this backdrop, the Committee note that during
the entire 11th Plan the allocation at BE is far less than the projections
made by the Ministry and at the RE stage, it has been further reduced.
The proposed 12th Plan outlay is Rs. 27628.00 crore. Against that the
allocation for 2012-13 is Rs. 1155 crore. The percentage allocation for
the current year against the total 12th Plan is 4.18 per cent. Planning
Commission will be allocating the remaining 95.82 percentage during
the remaining four years.
The percentage variation over BE 2011-12 and 2012-13 is only 5%
and the percentage variation over RE 2011-12 and BE 2012-13 is only
5.26 per cent. Further the percentage of Ministry’s budget allocation
against the total Central Government’s budget has been decreasing.
The Committee further observe that during the 12th Five Year
Plan, the Ministry would be starting three new schemes namely,
National Urban Livelihood Mission (NULM), Scheme for Urban
Homeless and Street Vendors Scheme. In comparison to BE of 2011-12
the BE for all the major schemes of the Ministry reveals that except
for SJSRY, the allocation for the remaining schemes has been lessened
or remained the same.
Taking into account the task, functions and nobility of the work
which is devolving on the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty
Alleviation in a big way and keeping in view the financial allocations

8
made, the Committee express its regret and strongly recommend to
Planning Commission that this kind of allocation should not be
practiced in case of allocations for Ministry of Housing and Urban
Poverty Alleviation. They want that the allocations projected for the
12th Plan period may be evenly placed at the disposal of the Ministry
so that projects are commissioned in the beginning of the Plan period
and do not remain in waiting till the end of the Plan. Otherwise, the
lofty objectives which the Ministry is supposed to fulfil will be derailed.
The Committee further observe that it is not only the lesser
allocation of fund by the Planning Commission and Finance Ministry,
which is resulting in poor performance of various schemes of the
Ministry, the underutilization of allocated funds have also added to
the problem. The underutilization of funds during past five years is
conspicuous. The Committee can easily draw the inference that while
on the one hand the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty
Alleviation has demanded the larger allocation of funds for successful
implementation of various schemes, their actual performance shows
that they have not been able to completely utilize the amount allocated
to them. Thus, the onus also lies on the Ministry to utilize the funds
fully and that too in time to avoid reduction in allocation.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry
should pursue with the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance
for better funding in the coming financial years and utilization of the
allocated amount. The Committee further recommend that no financial
cut should be imposed on the Ministry at the RE stage. While
recommending higher allocation, the Committee would like the Ministry
to strive for better implementation which would justify their demand
for an increased allocation for various programmes being implemented
by them.
Reply of the Government
2.2 The observations of the Committee to impress upon the
Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission to allocate adequate
funds to various schemes so as to achieve the targets set out for the
12th Five Year Plan have been noted. As regards budgetary allocation,
the Ministry had projected a requirement of Rs. 2835.48 crore for the
Annual Plan 2012-13 to Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission has allocated Gross Budgetary Support of Rs. 1155 crore
for the Annual Plan 2012-13.
As regards, enhancement of adequate budgetary allocation to the
Ministry, the matter will be taken up with the Planning Commission
and Ministry of Finance at revised estimate/supplementary stage. The
Ministry will also bring to the notice of Planning Commission and
Ministry of Finance of the views expressed by the Hon’ble Committee.

9
It is further submitted that most of the schemes of the Ministry
are demand driven and utilization of the allocated budget depends
upon the ability of the State to submit requisite proposals for release
of funds with Utilization Certificates and required Matching State Share.
Ministry has been consistently persuing with States/UTs through
Review meeting with State Secretaries, fields visit, monitoring of
progress reports, capacity building workshops etc.
The views of the Hon'ble Committee to impress upon Planning
Commission & Ministry of Finance to allocate adequate funds to the
Ministry for effective implementation of the Schemes have been noted
and will be taken up at RE/Supplementary stage depending upon the
trend of pace of expenditure.
However, a DO letter dated 24th July, 2012 has been written to
Secretary, Planning Commission, conveying the concerns of the Hon’ble
Committee with the request to allocate adequate funds for the coming
Financial Years.
Recommendation (Serial No. 2)
Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rojgar Yojana (SJSRY) Compilation and
Maintenance of data on Gainful Employment by NBO
2.3 The basic objective of SJSRY is urban poverty alleviation through
gainful employment to the urban unemployed or underemployed poor
by encouraging them to set up self-employment ventures (individual
or group), to support their sustainability to undertake wage
employment.
In the year 2011-12 a total 3,63,794 beneficiaries have been assisted
by providing training to them. The achievement of SJSRY in terms of
both physical and financial appears to be very impressive. But, when
the Committee asked during the course of oral evidence about the
number of trainees that have been gainfully employed after the training,
the Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation
accepted that no such data is being maintained under SJSRY. The
Committee strongly feel that without data, it would be difficult to
monitor the programme and do necessary modifications to bring forth
improvements in its implementation.
The Committee are of the view that National Building Organisation
(NBO), an attached office of the Ministry of Housing and Urban
Poverty Alleviation, that has been functioning as an apex organisation

10
in the country for collection, tabulation and dissemination, of statistical
information on housing and building construction activities, can be
assigned the job of maintaining statistics of generation of employment,
number of gainfully employed trainees and fund utilized for such
employment generation.
The Committee also desire that a mandatory provision be made in
the NULM for maintaining record of the information of employment
generated by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation
to make their effort fruitful.
Reply of the Government
2.4 The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee regarding
assigning the job of maintaining statistics of generation of employment,
number of gainfully employed trainees and fund utilized for such
employment generation under SJSRY to NBO and making provision in
the National Urban Livelihood Mission (NULM) for maintaining record
of the information of employment generated have been noted.
Recommendation (Serial No. 5)
Integrated Low Cost Sanitation Scheme (ILCS)
2.5 The Committee are happy to note that the definition of
sanitation worker has been expanded to include the sanitation workers
conducting sewer cleaning and pit cleaning activities also. The
Committee observe that a new survey is to be conducted to know the
current status of ‘Manual Scavenging practice’ in India. The Committee
recommend that those organizations that have raised the objections to
the earlier survey should also be consulted during the course of
proposed new survey. Also, every effort should be made by the Central
Government to ensure the collection of authentic data. The Committee
also desire that the Ministry of housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation
should implement the mandate of completing the balance work, which
is remaining on the basis of earlier survey within this financial year
only.
Reply of the Government
2.6 This Ministry has sanctioned projects for conversion of all
reported 2,51,963 dry latrines into twin pit pour flush latrines in the
State of Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Jammu and Kashmir,
Nagaland and Tripura and construction of 1,55,937 new sanitary toilets
in the State of Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand,

11
Kerala, Odisha, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Nagaland,
Rajasthan, Tripura and West Bengal. The States which have earlier
reported dry latrines in existence have now confirmed that there are
no dry latrines remaining in their States. The States have not so far
approached Government of India with new demand for conversion of
dry latrines. Revised scheme of ILCS, 2,51,963 units pertaining to
conversion of dry latrines into sanitary ones has been completed. Out
of 1,55,937 toilets sanctioned to EWS beneficiaries who have no toilets,
the progress has been slow and near-about 1,49,000 units are states to
be in progress. It is anticipated that during the current financial year,
the balance work would be executed and majority of the task
completed.
The fresh survey of manual scavengers thus covering remaining
dry latrines being undertaken by the Ministry of Social Justice has not
yet begun. However Census of India 2011 has brought out that nearly
2,08,000 toilets in urban areas still exist wherein night soil is removed
by the humans. Considering this revelation, the Government of India
is taking a call whether Ministry of HUPA should continue with
Integrated Low Cost Sanitation (ILCS) scheme during the 12th Plan
period or a comprehensive sanitation programme for urban areas
including mechanical cleaning of sewers and septic tanks and
conversion of individual dry latrines, if any, among the EWS
households should be taken up by Ministry of UD as the subject of
sanitation falls within the allocation of business pertaining to that
Ministry.
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
Affordable Housing Scheme
2.7 Affordable Housing Scheme is an important programme of the
Ministry. The Committee observed that though this programme was
supposed to bring in investment in the sector, it has not taken off
well. Under this scheme, the private sector developer is given a
financial support of Rs. 50,000 per house or 25 per cent of the
infrastructure cost whichever is less. The Committee are of the view
that incentives under this programme are too meagre to attract private
builders.
With regard to implementation of this scheme by States, the
Committee have come to know about the success achieved by Rajasthan
Government. The success of Rajasthan Government is attributed to
providing a lot of other facilities like some Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
facilities, Floor Space Index (FSI) facilities, Transferable Development
Right (TDR) facilities, rebate in the local taxes, etc., to private builders,
so that it is attractive for them.

12
The Committee recommend that affordable housing programme
should be modified on the pattern of Rajasthan to a certain extent.
However, The Committee further feel that the concept of affordable
housing which requires support of the Government both for private
developer and the beneficiaries who are generally very poor, is required
to be redefined including financial parameters so as to make it
successful.
Reply of the Government
2.8 Housing is a State subject. The creation of affordable housing
by the private sector is dependent on a number of factors like
availability of cheap developed land, fast-track approval systems,
flexible planning norms and other incentives like extra FAR, rebate on
stamp duty etc. The role of the Central Government is to create a
facilitative enabling policy environment and also advocate with the
States to do the same. On its part, the National Housing & Habitat
Policy-2007 has sought to do so. As regards Affordable Housing in
Partnership Scheme, the action to be taken at the State Level in the
form of incentives etc. has been advocated in the scheme guidelines.
The financial parameters of the scheme are being redefined in
consultation with all the stakeholders to make it more attractive for
the private sector, where in the recommendation of the Standing
Committee will also be factored in.
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
Issue of Subsidy Financial Help under various schemes of the
Ministry Like ISHUP, IHSDP etc.
2.9 Under ISHUP 5% of interest subversion to a loan upto Rs. 1
lakh is provided to the beneficiary with Central Government subsidy
for acquisition of houses as also for construction or acquisition of new
house to EWS/LIG persons. The size of the housing being 25 square
meters in the case of EWS and 40 square meters in case of LIG.
The Committee, keeping the present scenario in mind, are of the
opinion that a financial help of Rs. 1 lakh is very less, as in most of
the cities and towns the cost of Housing has gone up. Thus, the
Committee recommend that under ISHUP the loan amount should be
raised from 3 lakhs to Rs. 5 lakhs with subsidy of 5 per cent on
interest charged on loan depending on the type of the city.
Reply of the Government
2.10 The scheme was implemented as on pilot basis in 11th Five
Year Plan. The Ministry is now proposing to launch the scheme in its
revised form to be implemented in the 12th Five Year Plan. The scheme
is being revisited and reconceived keeping in mind all the pitfalls
encountered while implementing the new scheme and recommendations
of the Standing Committee.

13
CHAPTER III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT
-Nil-

14
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)
Concurrent Evaluation of SJSRY
The Committee during examination of Demands for Grants (2011-
12) observed that the concurrent evaluation of SJSRY which is being
done only in one State from each region, had recommend that this
should be extended across the whole country. However, the action
taken reply also did not reflect any positive response on the issue.
This year when the Committee asked a follow up question about
the concurrent evaluation of SJSRY, the Ministry in their written reply
submitted that the concurrent evaluation process is in progress in
5 selected States. The improvements/shortcoming in implementation
of the scheme will be assessed once the final report of the study is
available. The Committee are dismayed to note that such an important
recommendation of the Committee has not been adhered to by the
Ministry.
While the Ministry is getting ready to launch National Urban
Livelihood Mission (NULM), the Committee fail to understand what
had restricted the Ministry from extending this “concurrent evaluation
to the whole country”. The Committee are of the strong view that the
ambit of concurrent evaluation of SJSRY should be extended to all
other States and Union Territories, then only, the improvements/
shortcomings in implementation of scheme can be assessed in real
sense. This will help in implementing NULM in a better way. Also
while conducting concurrent evaluation of the SJSRY Scheme, the
Ministry should collect statistics about the number of beneficiaries that
have been assisted for setting up of individual micro enterprises/group
enterprises after training and got employment during the last three
years.
Reply of the Government
4.2 A concurrent evaluation of Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar
Yojana scheme is currently being conducted by independent agencies
in selected 5 States namely, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan,

15
West Bengal and Haryana. As the Ministry has proposed to upscale
the existing Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana into National Urban
Livelihoods Mission (NULM) in the 12th Five Year Plan, the scope of
concurrent valuation would be extended to other States after studying
the results of the current exercise, if required. Alternatively, a full
scale evaluation of the scheme will be undertaken.
Comments of the Committee
4.3 For comments of the Committee please see paragraph No. 1.7
of Chapter-I of the Report.
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
National Urban Livelihood Mission (NULM)
4.4 The Committee are given to understand that the current SJSRY,
which has so far been the only programme which is run in the country
for assisting the urban unemployed youth in getting gainful
employment, will now be covered under National Urban Livelihood
Mission on the pattern of National Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM).
The Committee have been informed that under NULM, in every
municipality, irrespective of the size of the municipality, a small
programme management unit will be set up with some financial
support from the Central Government. The Committee note that unlike
SJSRY, efforts are being made to provide that training providers will
ensure employment guarantee for around 72-80 per cent of the people
they are training which will be verifiable after six months.
The Committee are apprehensive about the future of those trainees,
in case their services are discontinued by the training providers after
the stipulated period of 6 months. Considering the above facts the
Committee recommend that at the stage of selection of training provider
its capacity to induct at least 80 to 90 per cent of trainees per year for
next five years should be ensured. Also, for those trainees who will be
employed by the service provider, the verification should be done
after every six months, for two consecutive years.
Reply of the Government
4.5 Skill Training for the urban poor under the existing Swarna
Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana/proposed NULM is meant for facilitating
both self employment and wage employment opportunities for the
urban poor. It has been experienced that in small towns due to lack

16
of market based job opportunities, urban poor are primarily engaged
in informal sector through self employment. Prospective employers/
job opportunities with private sector are not available in all towns/
cities. Hence, in smaller towns, skill trained urban poor may opt for
self employment due to lack of availability of wage employment.
Under the proposed NULM, efforts will be made to link training
to placement in remunerative jobs/enterprises. Selection of marketable
trades, competent skill training providers and certification that have
national/State recognition are the keys to the success of a skills training
programme, as the same will ensure absorption of the trained persons
into the local industry. Hence, for the purpose of skills training with
placement in remunerative jobs, States will be suggested to select skills
training agencies through a transparent selection process for conduct
of proper training and at least 70% placement in remunerative jobs.
Comments of the Committee
4.6 For comments of the Committee please see paragraph No. 1.10
of Chapter-I of the Report.
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
Rajiv Awas Yojana (RAY)
4.7 Rajiv Awas Yojana is aimed at making India slum free based
on Slum free State and Slum free City Plans. RAY envisages creating
a slum free India by encouraging States to assign property rights to
slum dwellers. However, the Committee find that there is no allocation
for RAY under current financial year.
This is reflecting upon the callous attitude of Central Government
towards implementation of various schemes and policies. Since, RAY
is not a normal Housing Scheme, rather, it is the reflection of
Governments’ vision for improving urban growth through making slum
free States and cities and giving property rights and through RAY
Central Government is attempting to bring back to life the two housing
schemes namely, Affordable Housing Scheme and Interest Subsidy
Scheme of Housing for the Urban Poor (ISHUP) that have not
performed well till date. The Committee therefore want that adequate
care should be taken by the Ministry to ensure that RAY does not face
the same problems which earlier schemes viz. ISHUP and IHSDP
experienced. The Committee further desire that before finalization of
RAY the Government should consult the various stakeholders to make
it practicable.

17
Reply of the Government
4.8 The Rajiv Awas Yojana (RAY) is of the nature of Additional
Central Assistance (ACA). This year for RAY Rs. 1533.50 crore ACA
has been allocated under the Demand No. 35 of Ministry of Finance
and Demand No. 56 of the Ministry of Home Affairs. Under the
Demand No. 57 of the Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty
Alleviation Rs. 30.00 crore has been allocated for Rajiv Awas Yojana
(RAY), out of which Rs. 27.58 crore is apportioned for Capacity Building
& Preparatory Activities.
The strategy for implementation of RAY is based on the learning’s
from JNNURM (BSUP) and IHSDP . RAY proposes flexibility to the
States and ULBs to plan their pace of implementation and models for
arranging land, resources, housing, and partnerships. A ‘whole city’,
‘all slums’ approach has been adopted, in keeping with the goal of
slum free cities under RAY.
Comments of the Committee
4.9 For comments of the Committee please see paragraph No. 1.13
of Chapter-I of the Report.

18
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
-Nil-
  N EW D ELHI; SHARAD YADAV ,
30 November, 2012 Chairman,
9 Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Urban Development.

19
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 6th November, 2012 from
1100 hrs. to 1430 hrs. in Room No. 074, Parliament Library Building,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Sharad Yadav — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ambica Banerjee
3. Shri Kailash Joshi
4. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee
5. Shri Ramesh Kumar
6. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik
7. Shri Ratan Singh
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Anil Desai
9. Shri Parvez Hashmi
10. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
11. Shri Avinash Pande
12. Shri Ajay Sancheti
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha — Director
2. Smt. J.M. Sinha — Deputy Secretary
3. Smt. K. Rangamani N. — Under Secretary
Part I
(1100 hrs. to 1130 hrs.)
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed all the Members
to the Second sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up
for consideration the draft Report on (i) Action taken by the

20
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the
18th Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Urban Development, (ii) Action
taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations
contained in the 19th Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee
on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Housing and Urban
Poverty Alleviation. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the
reports without any modification.
3. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to finalise the
above mentioned Reports and to present these to both the Houses of
Parliament.
4. **** **** **** **** ****
5. **** **** **** **** ****
A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Sitting has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
****This portion does not relate to the Report.

21
ANNEXURE II
 [ Vide para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN
THE NINETEENTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON URBAN DEVELOP
MENT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations 8
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been 5
accepted by the Government:
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 5, 7 and 8
Percentage to total recommendations (62.5%)
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 0
do not desire to pursue in view of Government’s
replies:
Recommendation No. Nil
Percentage to total recommendations (0%)
IV . Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 3
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee:
Recommendation Nos. 3, 4 and 6
Percentage to total recommendations (37.5%)
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 0
final replies of the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation No. 0
Percentage to total recommendations (0%)