 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2013-2014) 
                                
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
                 MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Urban Development on “Role of Central Public Works Department (C.P.W.D.) 
in checking unauthorized occupation of government land and colonies and 
evaluation of their performance in maintaining Government buildings”] 
 
TWENTY NINTH  REPORT 
 
      
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
February,2014/Magha,1935 (Saka) 
 
 
29 


2 
 
 
   TWENTY NINTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2013-2014) 
 
                                
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Urban Development on “Role of Central Public Works Department (C.P.W.D.) 
in checking unauthorized occupation of government land and colonies and 
evaluation of their performance in maintaining Government buildings”] 
   
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  17.02.2014 
             Laid in Rajya Sabha on  13.02.2014 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February,2014/Magha,1935 (Saka) 


3 
 
 
 
   C.U.D No.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2014 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and printed by the Indian Press, Delhi-110033. 
 

4 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
           PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ….…………………..........................….. (ii) 
INTRODUCTION..........................…………………………………………..………. (iv) 
 
REPORT  
 
CHAPTER I 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government  
 
CHAPTER III Observations /Recommendations which the  
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies 
 
CHAPTER IV 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration  
 
CHAPTER V Observations /Recommendations  in respect of 
which final  replies of the Government are still 
awaited 
 
 
ANNEXURES  
I. Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Standing C ommittee on Urban 
Development (2013-14) held on 12 th    February, 2014    
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Ninth Report of the Committee (15 th  Lok Sabha) 
 
 

5 
 
 (i) 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2013-2014) 
Shri Sharad Yadav         -        Chairman 
  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Praveen Singh Aron 
3. Shri Jayawant Gangaram Awale 
4. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
5. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
6. Shri Anant Gangaram Geete 
7. Smt. Kaisar Jahan 
8. Shri Kailash Joshi 
9. Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
10 Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
11. Shri Ramesh Kumar 
12. Shri P.C. Mohan 
13. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
14. Shri Sonawane Pratap Narayanrao 
15. Dr. Ramshankar  
16. Shri Ratan Singh 
17. Shri Anjan Kumar M. Yadav 
18. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Anil Desai 
23. Dr. M.S. Gil 
24. Md. Nadimul Haque 
25. Shri Parvez Hashmi 
26. Dr. Chandan Mitra 
27. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
28. Shri Avinash Pande 
29. Shri Ajay Sancheti 
30. Shri Amar Singh 
31. Shri Khekiho Zhimomi 
 
 
 
(ii) 

6 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha   - Director 
3. Smt. J.M.Sinha   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Dr.(Maj.)Jagmohan Khatry  - Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
 

7 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2013-
2014) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present the Twenty Ninth Report (15 th  Lok Sabha) on the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty Sixth Report (15 th  Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban Development on “Role of Central Public 
Works Department (C.P.W.D.) in checking unauthorize d occupation of government 
land and colonies and evaluation of their performan ce in maintaining Government 
buildings” of the Ministry of Urban Development. 
2. The Twenty Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sab ha on 29 August, 2013.  
Replies of the Government to all the recommendation s contained in the Report were 
received in 9
th  December, 2013.  
 
3. The Standing Committee on Urban Development cons idered and adopted this 
Report at their sitting held on 12 February, 2014. 
  
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Governmen t on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Fourth Report (Fifteenth Lo k Sabha) of the Committee is 
given at Annexure-V. 
 
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, t he 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters 
in the body of the Report. 
 
NEW DELHI;   
             SHARAD 
YADAV 12 February, 2014
                                                                                           
Chairman,   23 Magha 1935 (Saka)                                Standing Committee on 
Urban Development 
 
 
 (iv)  
 

8 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2013- 2014)  deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the recommend ations contained in their Twenty 
Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject “ Role of Central Public Works 
Department (C.P.W.D.) in checking unauthorized occu pation of government land and 
colonies and evaluation of their performance in mai ntaining Government buildings” 
which was presented to Parliament on 29 August, 2013. 
1.2 Action Taken Replies have been received from th e Government in respect of all 
 the 14 recommendations contained in the Report. Th ese have been categorized 
 as follows: 
(i) Recommendations /Observations, which have been accepted by the Government. 
 (Chapter II): 
 Recommendation Nos. 3,4,5,6,10,12,13 and 14                      (Total -08) 
(Chapter-II) 
(ii) Recommendations /Observations, which the Commi ttee does not desire to pursue 
 in view of Government's   replies.  (Chapter-III):  
 Recommendation No.- Nil                (Total -Nil ) 
                 (Chapter-III) 
(iii) Recommendations /Observations, in respect of which replies of Government 
 have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter I V): 
 Recommendation Nos.1, 2, 7, 8,9 and 11                                        (Total -6) 
                (Chapter-IV) 
(iv) Recommendations /Observations, in respect of w hich final replies of the 
 Government are, still awaited (Chapter-V): 
 Recommendation  No. - Nil              (Total –nil  ) 
                (Chapter-V) 
 
 

9 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that specific replies to t he comments contained in 
Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished to them at the earliest and in any  case, not 
later than three months of the presentation of this Report. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action tak en by the Government on some 
of their recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.   
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
 
Need to arrest delay in execution of Projects by CPWD  
 
1.5   The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that CPWD was conceived to unde rtake public works ranging from 
irrigation facility and bridges to public housing a nd government buildings. Over the years the 
responsibilities and jurisdiction of CPWD got re-al igned, however, the basic activity of civil 
construction still remains its raison d’être. The o rganizational structure and practices have 
also evolved largely to address the requirements of  executing these construction projects. 
Compliance to envisaged timelines is one of the mos t important elements of service delivery. 
The Committee observe that an Office Order issued b y Chief Engineer of South Western 
Zone dated 1st January, 1980 has defined the time-s cale for various activities related to 
Planning and execution i.e. 21 months. However the Committee are unhappy to note that a 
large number of projects do not adhere to even thes e time frames and there are inordinate 
delays in various project related activities. Vario us clients of CPWD examined by the 
Committee emphasized the need to arrest delays. The  Committee observe that CPWD has 
executed 125 major Projects during the last ten yea rs. The Committee are surprised to note 
that out of 125 major projects, information on only  102 projects are available with CPWD. 
This clearly reflects the casual approach of CPWD i n maintaining data of the projects being 
executed by itself. Out of 102 projects the Committ ee observe that only 46 projects (less than 
50%) were got executed in time. 28 projects got delayed for one year, 14 projects got delayed 
for two years, 5 projects got delayed for three yea rs, 2 projects took four years, one project 
took five years and one project up to six years. Th e delays in completing the projects in time 
is on account of varying reasons, which include del ay in approval of drawings from local 
bodies/statutory clearances, delay in finalization of functional requirements by users/clients, 
frequent change in scope of the work, non-availabil ity of encumbrance free site, non-
availability of budget/funds, local disturbances, b ad weather, sometimes delay in mobilizing 
requisite materials/manpower/machinery by the Contr actors, vacant posts of staff  and 
officers, etc. Career stagnation of Officers is als o another reason for delay in completion of 
the projects. CPWD informed the Committee that Care er stagnation brings down the morale 
of staff/officers which affect their output both in  terms of quality and efficiency. The 
Committee wish to recommend that the clients should be consulted in each and every stage of 
drawing so that there remains no scope for frequent changes in the drawing of the projects. At 
the same time they also want that clients, too, sho uld cooperate fully with CPWD in 
finalizing the projects in time and do not make material changes in the on-going projects. The 
Committee also wish to recommend that budget should  not be a constraint for the Projects. 
However, the Committee are happy to note that with the recent cadre review approved by the 
government, the problem of stagnation is likely to be overcome to a great extent. The 
Committee hope that CPWD would implement the recent ly held cadre review at the earliest 

10 
 
to arrest the shortage of manpower so that the dela ys in executing the Projects could be 
reduced and time-line could be adhered to." 
1.6 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has sta ted as follows: 
"The instructions have been issued vide para 1 of A nnexure B  to all concerned CPWD 
officers that the clients should be consulted in ea ch and every stage of drawing so that there 
remains no scope for frequent changes in the drawin g of the projects.  An O.M. has also been 
issued by MoUD vide para 12 of Annexure Y that clie nts, too, should cooperate fully with 
CPWD in finalizing the projects in time and do not make material changes in the on-going 
projects and that the budget should not be a constr aint for the Projects. Cadre Review in 
CPWD has been implemented and all required steps ar e being taken to complete the Project 
in a specified time limits." 
1.7  The Committee note that in pursuance to their recom mendations to reduce 
delays in executing the projects of CPWD, CPWD has informed that necessary 
instructions have been issued to all concerned CPWD  officials that the clients should be 
consulted in each and every stage of drawing so tha t there remains no scope for 
frequent changes in the drawing of the projects. An  Office Memorandum has also been 
issued by Ministry of Urban Development in which it  has drawn the attention of all the 
Ministries/Departments and Autonomous organisations  towards the recommendations 
of the Committee and requested to take note of thes e and take necessary action for their 
implementation. It has also requested the Departmen ts/Ministries to cooperate fully 
with CPWD in finalising the projects in time and do  not make material changes in the 
ongoing projects. The Committee strongly feel that mere issuing of Office 
Memorandum will not serve meaningful purpose rather it should be followed by sincere 
pursuance at the highest level, periodic monitoring  and follow up action there on. 
Therefore, the Committee desire the Ministry of Urb an Development/CPWD to pursue 
the matters vigoursly and take concrete action to see the acutal results and apprise them 
accordingly. The Committee also note that the Minis try has not replied about the non-
availability of information on all the projects dur ing the last 10 years. The Committee 
desire that the above information may be sent to th em within three months of the 
presentaiton of the Report.  
 The Committee also desire the Ministry to furnish action taken about the 
availability of budget for all the projects, so tha t no project suffer for want of budget 
availability. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
 
ENCROACHMENT OF GOVT. LAND AND COLONIES 
 
Need for Specially designated manpower for removing  encroachment and issues related 
thereto  
1.8   The Committee had recommended as under: 
"As per chapter 10 of the maintenance manual of the  CPWD, it is responsible to prevent and 
remove unauthorized construction and encroachment i n or near all the Govt. buildings 
standing on the land and the land underneath and ap purtenant thereto along with the land 
under road, parks, toilets, play grounds situated i n govt. colonies come under the 
administration of the CPWD. The Committee are alarm ed to note that the total area of 
Government land under encroachment in all the State s and Union Territories of India has 

11 
 
been increased from 193434.56 sq. mtr. in the month  of March, 2013 to 3,10,819 in the 
month of August, 2013.  Even then the Ministry was maintaining that there was no new 
Encroachment. They are surprised to note that the M inistry’s reply is based on surmises and 
guesstimates and hence caution the Ministry to be m ore vigilant in future while furnishing 
replies to a Parliamentary Committee. 
The Committee were informed that there is no specia lly designated manpower/task 
force available with CPWD for checking unauthorized  occupation of government land and 
vacating the encroached land. The Committee are not  convinced with the reply of the 
Ministry. They were given to understand that under the manual of CPWD, this duty is cast on 
the Junior Engineer/Assistant Engineer concerned. I t is not understood to the Committee 
when Junior Engineer and Assistant Engineers are du ty bound where from the question of 
having no designated work force comes. AE/JE is sup posed to detect and verify the 
encroachments within the premises and report to Directorate of Estates. Directorate of Estates 
is supposed to cancel the allotment and evict allot tees and CPWD to demolish the 
unauthorized construction. The Committee are of the  view that if the concerned Junior 
Engineer or Assistant Engineer performs his duties honestly and diligently, then it will 
become impossible for the encroachers to lay on the Government land. For this they could get 
the assistance from RWAs who will report the matter  of encroachment JE/AE and the JE/AE 
may swing into action forthwith.  
The Committee want RWAs to report such cases at the  earliest opportunity. They are 
of the view that the encroachment should be nipped in the bud. Encroachments on vacant 
land are to be removed by Estate officer under the Public Premises Eviction of Unauthorized 
Occupants Act 1971 with the police help. All EEs, i n-charge of maintenance are declared as 
estate officers under the Public Premises Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants Act 1971. The 
Committee are distressed to note that CPWD is not getting required assistance in right time to 
remove the encroachment from police and local authorities. In some cases even after vacating 
the land, the encroachers manage to occupy the land  again. The CPWD find hard to have its 
own task force to prevent the unauthorized occupati on and vacate the already encroached 
lands on account of limitations of handling Law & O rder problems. The Committee have 
come to know that Government of Delhi has created a  sub-divisional level Special Task 
Force to check encroachment in public land. Their a ssistance is being obtained whenever any 
new encroachment is noticed. In other cities such t ype of special task force does not exist in 
line with the Delhi Govt. However, to the utmost su rprise of the Committee, CPWD is still 
satisfied with the existing mechanism and does not require any new institutional mechanism 
to deal with the menace of encroachment. In view of  the above, the Committee strongly 
recommend that CPWD must constitute a Special Task Force in all the zones and empower 
them with all necessary powers and equipment’s to p revent encroachment and vacate the 
already encroached land. For obtaining assistance f rom the police and local authorities the 
Committee strongly recommend to take this matter to  the highest authority and an executive 
order might be issued in this regard so that there is no difficulty for seeking help from the 
police and civil authorities. The Committee are als o given to understand that CPWD does not 
maintain data regarding encroachment and recoveries  of Government land. They are 
surprised that in the absence of data how CPWD will  come to know about the extent of 
encroachment. The Committee, therefore, recommend t hat CPWD should develop its own 
data base with regard to encroachment with the help of dedicated staff as early as possible. 
The Committee are continuously insisting on the iss ue of fixing Responsibility on the 
Officer concerned whose negligence has resulted int o encroachment. Even today the 
encroachment is taking place otherwise it was not p ossible for the Ministry to furnish the 
revised figures of area under encroachment to the C ommittee. But, the Ministry is reticent on 

12 
 
the issue and tries to downplay the entire matter b y stating that since the encroachment dates 
back to 10 to 20 years, it is not possible to fix t he responsibility. The Committee are not 
satisfied with this explanation of the Ministry. They are of the view that 10 to 20 years period 
is not such a long period where concerned officers could not be identified and located. The 
Committee insist that the Ministry should fix respo nsibility in those matters after digging the 
old cases and if the connivance of officials is pro ved, a deterrent punishment should be 
inflicted. A status report in this regard may be su bmitted to the Committee within three 
months of the presentation of the report. They also  recommend that the CPWD should 
maintain data regarding action taken in this regard." 
1.9 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has sta ted as follows: 
"It is submitted that in the month of March 2013 an  Area of 193434.56Sqm was intimated on the 
basis of data available in the directorate at that time by recording a certificate that full extent 
Area is being collected from the field formations. This encroachment area was in three cities of 
Delhi, Mumbai and Sikkim. Copy of the same is enclo sed as Annexure-C.  Later information on 
encroachment in a few more cities i.e., Kolkata, Co chin, Indore and Shimla was received from 
field-formations and in August 2013, the Area of 31 0819.95 sqm was intimated with details . 
However no fresh Encroachment was reported as is cl ear from details of 310819.95 sqm area 
which was also sent with the reply. All the encroachment was old one.The instructions have been 
issued vide para 2 of Annexure B to all concerned C PWD officers to encourage RWAs to report 
encroachment on CPWD land. Special Task Force in De lhi has been formed by the Govt of 
Delhi. Similar task forces can be constituted in ot her states and provided necessary power and 
resources to prevent and vacate the encroachment. F or taking up this matter at highest level and 
issue of executive order, Action is being taken sep arately.  Office Memo has been issued to all 
Additional Director Generals of various sub- region s of CPWD as per para 2 of Annexure ‘B’  to 
develop their own data base with regard to encroachment by deploying dedicated staff as early as 
possible. Office Memorandum for constitution of the  committee for fixing responsibility in 
respect of encroachment has already been issued vid e No. 3/1/2012-W-II/Vol. VIII/858 dated 
15.10.2013 attached as Annexure D." 
 
1.10 To prevent and vacate the encroachment of Gove rnment land coming under the 
purview of CPWD, the Committee had recommended (i)t o take assistance from RWA, 
who will report the matter of encroachment to JE/AE  and JE/AE may swing into 
action.(ii) CPWD must constitute a Special Task For ce in all the zones and empower 
and equipments to prevent encroachment and vacate t he already encroached land (iii) 
for obtaining assistance from the police and local authority the Committee had 
recommended to took this matter at the highest leve l and an executive order might be 
issued in this regard so that there was no difficul ties for seeking help from the  police 
and civil authorities. (iv) CPWD should develop its  own  data base with regard to 
encroachment with the help of dedicated staff as ea rly as possible.(v) the Committee 
insisted to fix responsibility in those matters aft er digging the old cases and if the 
connivance of officials was proved, a deterrent pun ishment should be inflicted and the 
status report should be submitted to the Committee within three months of the 
presentation of the report. The Committee are surpr ised to note that CPWD has not 
taken any concrete action in this regard except to the points that instructions have been 
issued to all concerned CPWD officers to encourage RWAs to report encroahcment on 
CPWD land, Office Memorandum has been issued to all  Additional Director General of 

13 
 
various sub-regions of CPWD to develop their own da ta-base. The Committee deplore 
the routine nature of replies furnished to them ins tead of taking of any concrete action 
thereon. With regard to constitution of a special T ask Force in all the Zones the 
Committee are concerned to note that CPWD has tried  to escape its own responsibility 
and tried to mislead the Committee by stating that similar task forces can be constituted 
in other States. In pursuance to the recommendation  to take up the matter at the 
highest authority for seeking help from police force and civic authorities and issuance of 
an executive order thereof, the Ministry has remained silent. 
 Pertaining to fixing up of responsibility, the Com mittee are disappointed to note 
that till date only an O.M. has been issued on 15 th  October, 2013 for constitution of a 
Committee. 
Keeping in view the above reply, the Committee depl ore the casual and 
lackadaisical approach of CPWD in dealing with the serious menance of encroachment 
of Government land. Therefore, the Committee wish t o reiterate their earlier 
recommendations and desire the Ministry to adopt serious approach and take necessary 
action at the earliest under intimation to them. Th e Committee also desire the Ministry 
to furnish a comparative data on encroachment of Go vernment lands under the 
purview of CPWD before and after presentation of th is Report. This data may be 
furnished within three months after presentation of  this Report and may continue 
thereafter at periodic intervals.  
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
 
Court Cases 
 
1.11     The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
"The Committee observe that the CPWD guidelines whi ch empower JE/AE to carry day to 
day inspection to verify all the construction going  on in their locality and to take immediate 
steps to stop or demolish the construction are not being followed in a true spirit to prevent the 
encroachment in the first instance. As a result at present 310819 sq. mtr. land is under 
encroachment and there are 39 count cases pending a t various Courts. The Committee feel 
that this is a serious issue and requires particula r attention of the Government. The Ministry 
may advise their lawyers to impress upon the Courts  not to give adjournments on flimsy 
grounds so as to secure speedy judgments. The Commi ttee are of the view that the interest of 
the encroacher lies in protracted litigation which should be resisted with full force. Regarding 
Public Premises Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants Act 1971, the Committee want to 
reiterate their earlier recommendation that Governm ent may consider to fix a time line for 
deciding such cases in order to ensure that Unscrup ulous elements do not make use of the 
system." 
 
 
1.12 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated as follows: 
"Directions have been issued by MoUD vide  para 14 of Annexure Y  to Law Ministry to 
advise its lawyers to impress upon the Courts not t o give adjournments on flimsy grounds so 
as to secure speedy judgments in court proceedings for removal of encroachment on 
Govt./CPWD land." 

14 
 
 
1.13  The Committee are happy to note that Directio ns have been issued by MoUD to 
Law Ministry to advise its lawyers to impress upon the Courts not to give adjournments 
on flimsy grounds so as to secure speedy judgments in court proceedings for removal of 
encroachment on Govt./CPWD land. However, the Minis try has not replied about the 
fixing of specific time-limit for disposal of the c ourt cases. Tlherefroe,  the Committee 
are of the firm view that along with the directions , periodic monitoring of the cases by 
the Ministry is required, to prevent adjournments o n flimsy grounds. The Committee 
also desire that the Ministry of Urban Development should pursue this matter at the 
highest level of Ministry of Law & Justice so that court cases can be disposed of in a 
fixed time so that unscrupulous elements do not make use of the system. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
 
Need to Rationalize Cost Estimates of its Project by CPWD  
 
1.14  The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
"The Committee observe that cost estimate of projec ts undertaken by CPWD is on higher side 
as compared to other agencies. In response to that CPWD has clarified that all public sector 
construction agencies throughout the country adopt CPWD standard rates only for preparing 
estimates and then they add their margin over it. C PWD being the Government agency 
without any commercial interest does not add any ma rgin itself and hence CPWD estimates 
are lower than the other agencies. However, the Com mittee while taking oral evidence of the 
representatives of other Ministries such as Home Af fairs, Human Resource Development, 
Commerce, Health and Family Welfare and Department of Personnel and Training came to 
know that cost estimates of projects executed by CP WD were very high in comparison to 
other agencies. Even then they will have to award t hese projects to CPWD only because it 
being a Government Company. The Committee do not ac cept the CPWD version on the issue. 
Being the only agency responsible for executing var ious projects of Government of India, the 
Committee strongly recommend that CPWD should prepa re correct and cost effective 
estimates of the projects lest the clients do not opt for cheaper alternatives." 
 
1.15    In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated as follows: 
"With regard to imputation that CPWD estimates are very high in comparison to other 
agencies, It is submitted that CPWD can offer specific comments and take necessary  action if 
such estimates are provided to CPWD directorate for  examinations. On the contrary, CPWD 
has been pointed out undue inflations/ inconsistenc ies in the cost estimates of various PSUs 
attached within various SFC/EFC memos received by i t for comments. A list of such 
comments pertaining to cost estimates of a few major projects are given as under:-  
C/o Dr. Ambedkar National Centre for Social Justice by M/s. NBCC. 
 

15 
 
Proposal for Renovation, Modernization and Augmentation of training infrastructure by 
NPTI.  
 
C/o permanent Campuses of the 10 new NITs by M/s Education Consultants India Ltd. 
 
C/o Rajsawa Bhawan National Tax Headquarters of Govt. of India for Ministry of Finance by 
DRDO.  
 
The copy of comments on above projects are enclosed as Annexure ‘E’  
It is also submitted that the comparative study of actual cost of construction incurred by 
various construction agencies and by CPWD on simila r works/Projects is more relevant than 
mere estimates. Such an exercise, if undertaken, ca n reveal true picture about the cost 
effectiveness. 
Nevertheless Direction has been Issued to all conce rned  as per Para 3 of Annexure ‘B’  to 
prepare cost effective and correct estimates of all  projects so that the clients do not opt for 
cheaper alternatives in their projects." 
 
1.16  The Committee are happy to note that directions have been issued by the MoUD to 
prepare cost effective and correct estimates of all  projects by the CPWD so that the 
clients do not opt for cheaper alternatives for the ir projects. The Committee are of the 
firm view that comparative studies of actual cost o f construction incurred by various 
construction agencies and by CPWD on similar works/ Projects should be conducted at 
the earliest and at the same time results of such c omparative studies should be made 
available to the client organizations so that they do not opt for cheaper alternatives. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
 
Dual Control of Engineers in Client Organizations 
 
1.17  The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee also came to know during the oral ev idence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Home Affairs that major repairs and mai ntenance of North Block are done by 
CPWD themselves without consulting them regarding a ction plan of maintenance for the 
coming years. As such, the CPWD does not keep the M inistry in loop with regard to repairs 
and the maintenance. The Committee have been apprised  that engineers of C.P.W.D. are 
not answerable or not under the control of client o rganizations. The Committee have been 
given to understand by CPWD that technical control of engineers under the hospital 
authorities or client organizations are administratively infeasible and undesirable as a number 
of administrative, technical and financial issues a re involved. However, the Committee are 
not convinced with the view of the Ministry that mo st of the issues are sorted out during the 
weekly meetings/rounds taken jointly with hospital authorities. Therefore, the Committee 
strongly recommend that CPWD Executive engineer sho uld be placed on the strength of 
hospital staff /Ministry concerned on the pattern of technical posting of engineers  in army 

16 
 
infantry battalions. Confidential reports of these officers should be written by both 
administrative as well as technical Heads viz., Med ical Superintendent of the Hospital and 
their superior officer in CPWD. This will ensure better interface of CPWD engineers and 
client Ministries to arrest delays in executing the  works and accountability of CPWD 
engineers." 
1.18  In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has s tated as follows: 
"CPWD like all other government departments/ organi zations follows, on mandatory basis, 
Performance appraisal reporting system and rules in this regard framed by  Department of 
personnel & Training, Govt of India. It prima facie appears infeasible that  performance of a few 
officers (who work, inter alia, for hospital maintenance) out of the  total in the same category is 
appraised by adopting a different system. In all go vernment departments /organizations, the 
reporting and reviewing of performance are done by superior officials of that organization. If 
client organization desires to have control, then t hey can have deputation/ en-cadre posts of 
CPWD officers with them." 
 
1.19 During examination of the subject, the Committ ee were apprised that major 
repairs and maintenance of client Ministries were b eing done by CPWD without 
consulting them. Engineers were not answerable or n ot under the control of client 
organizations. As a result, many client Ministries were dissatisfied with the 
performance of CPWD. In view of the back drop, the Committee had desired that 
CPWD executive engineer should be placed in the str ength of hospital staff/Ministry 
concerned on the pattern of technical posting of en gineers in army infantry battalions. 
Confidential reports of these officers should be wr itten by both administrative and 
client Ministries. In response to this the Ministry  in its action taken reply has expressed 
unwillingness to take desired action. However, it h as been stated that if client 
organizations desire to have control, then they can  have deputation/en-cadre posts of 
CPWD officers with them.  Tlhe Committee do not agr ee with the replies of the 
Ministry. They are of the strong view that if dual control of engineers is feasible in 
Defence Organisations then this can also be impleme nted in the case of CPWD and 
other client organisations. The Committee reiterate  its earlier recommendation that 
engineers in all the ranks should be placed on the strength of client Ministries on the 
pattern of technical posting of engineers in army i nfantry battalions. Confidential 
reports of these officers should be written by both  administrative as well as technical 
Heads viz., Medical Superintendent of the Hospital and their superior officer in CPWD. 
This will ensure better interface of CPWD engineers  and client Ministries to arrest 
delays in executing the works and accountability of CPWD engineers. 
 
 

17 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
Need for Single Unified Agency for construction and maintenance of 
 
Hospitals  
1.20  The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee have been apprised of the status of maintenance of hospital buildings like 
RML hospital, Safdarjung hospital, Lady Harding Med ical College, Kalawati Saran, CGHS 
wellbeing centres maintained by CPWD in terms of En gineering maintenance and 
housekeeping maintenance. The Committee have also b een informed about the problems in 
the Govt. hospitals e.g. broken taps in the toilets , shortage of water, chocking of sewer, 
leakage etc. The Committee were also enlightened th at in Govt. hospitals interruption to 
various services is frequently being caused by othe r agencies which are engaged for 
construction of new buildings by the Ministry of He alth & Family Welfare. It is observed by 
the Committee that in the last few years, there has  been addition of new buildings in the 
various Hospital campuses (like PGIMER in RML Hospi tal, VMCC & SIC in Safdarjung 
Hospital). The sewerage disposal of these new build ings is also connected to existing 
sewerage system maintained by the CPWD. This leads to occasional overflow of main sewer 
line. CPWD is facing problems from users as they throw wastes like cloth, refuse, cotton, etc. 
direct into the toilet, gully taps etc. resulting i n the choking of sewer lines etc. Therefore, the 
Committee are of firm view that there should be one  unified agency responsible for 
construction and maintenance of Govt. buildings, Go vt. Hospitals and residential colonies. In 
case of more than one agency being involved in the construction and maintenance works 
there is an urgent need to have a proper and effect ive coordination amongst all such agencies. 
The Committee are surprised to note that manual of CPWD prohibits them to take up 
maintenance of that building which has not been con structed by CPWD. The Committee feel 
that this rigidity will affect the maintenance work and thereby hurting a common man. Hence, 
the Committee want the Ministry to ensure that main tenance of any building may not be 
withheld on account of rules and if there is a need, such rules may be suitably amended." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.21  In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated as follows: 
"a) Directions have been issued by MoUD vide  para 11 of Annexure Y  that there should be one 
unified agency responsible for construction and mai ntenance of Govt. buildings, Govt. Hospitals 
and residential colonies and in case of more than o ne agency being involved in the con Direction 
have been issued by MoUD vide para 11 of Annexure Y  that there should be one unified agency 
responsible for construction and maintenance of gov ernment buildings, Govt. hospitals and 
residential colonies.  
 b) CPWD has a mandate to undertake construction/ m aintenance etc. of all 
government buildings of various Ministries/ Departm ents of Govt of India. CPWD is bound 
to do the same as per GFR 126.  The various Ministr ies/ Departments who do not have a 
construction wing of their own are bound to get the ir construction works get done from 
CPWD. Such a situation arises when some of the Mini stries/Departments do not get 
constructed their buildings from CPWD but want CPWD  only for maintenance work. This 
causes practical problem in sharing of responsibili ty for poor construction done by other 
agency. Most often such defects are not overt but l atent. Also this causes imbalance in man 

18 
 
management in CPWD because Maintenance works requir e far more manpower as compared 
to construction. " 
 
1.22  The Committee were surprised to note that the manua l of CPWD prohibited them 
to took up maintenance of that building which had n ot been constructed by CPWD. 
While condemning this rigidity, the Committee had d esired that maintenance of any 
building might not be withheld on account of rules and if needed  such rules might be 
suitably amended. But to the utter surprise of the Committee, CPWD still has strong 
reservations to initiate right steps in this direct ion. The Committee do not approve the 
reply of the CPWD that they are facing practical pr oblems in sharing of responsibility 
for poor construction done by other agencies and th is causes imbalance in man 
management in CPWD because maintenance work require  more manpower as 
compared to construction. The Committee expressed t heir displeasure over the 
unwillingness on the part of CPWD. During examinati on of this subject, the Committee 
were apprised that Ministries/hospitals were gettin g their construction work done by 
some other agencies because of the specialization t hey were having in that field. 
Therefore, the Committee wish to reiterate their ea rlier recommendation for having a 
proper and effective co-ordination amongst the conc erned agencies, instead of totally 
denying undertaking maintenance work. The Committee  also desire to amend the rules 
which prohibit them to do the same. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
 
Need to Redeem Image by CPWD  
 
1.23  The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee are given to understand by certain M inistries of the Government of India 
and RWAs of Government residential colonies about their satisfaction level from the services 
/maintenance of CPWD. While the client Ministries were not very vocal in criticizing the role 
of CPWD but RWAs spared no room in doing so. Minist ries were not happy with the 
excessive cost estimates, lack of coordination, acc ountability and delay in execution of 
works. RWAs vent their ire towards haughty attitude  of CPWD officials, delay, tilt towards 
contractors and unavailability and inaccessibility of CPWD officials. The Committee are 
constrained to observe that CPWD, a service renderi ng organization should not invite the ire 
of its clients in such a way. This will erode their  reputation and reputation once damaged 
takes a long time to regain. The Committee are of t he view that officials of CPWD should 
think themselves servants of the public rather than  their masters. Their non-availability to the 
public is not understandable to the Committee. More  and more dependence on contractors 
even for petty work is deplorable. This is adding s tigma to the organization. Mandatory 
periodic inspection by AEs are conveniently abandon ed and no action or serious view is 
taken by CPWD in this regard. There is no coordinat ion between CPWD and their civic 

19 
 
agencies. In such circumstances, the Committee are constrained to hold a view that CPWD 
has lost its image badly and unless concrete steps are taken by the Ministry, the 159 years old 
premier organization will be lost in oblivion. Ther efore, this necessarily calls for ‘public 
relations’ or ‘image’ management by CPWD to redeem its lost image. Hence the Committee 
strongly recommend to follow certain steps by the C PWD in their maintenance unit to ensure 
better customer interface and service delivery. 
a) Posting of officials with requisite ‘people frie ndly’ skills in maintenance unit: Posting of 
CPWD officials in maintenance area should be done k eeping in view their ability/capacity to 
interact with the public and respond to their requi rements in a positive and friendly manner. 
Extensive training should be imparted to the EE, AE  and JE to enhance their interpersonal 
skills and improve motivational levels. (b) Introdu ce system of periodic preventive 
maintenance inspection: In this system, AE, JE from  civil and electrical division along with 
Additional Director (horticulture) and Section Offi cer (horticulture) should inspect buildings 
within their division/ sub division at an interval of six months and detect buildings which 
require repairs, so that annual periodic maintenanc e can be done on time. For housing stock, 
the Residents Welfare Associations (RWA) could be i nvolved as part of this periodic 
preventive maintenance inspection unit. (c) Co-ordi nation between various disciplines while 
attending the complaint: To enable effective co-ord ination between various disciplines of 
civil and electrical services, while performing mai ntenance activity, it is proposed that work 
gangs be formed at each service centre comprising o f work charged staff from various 
disciplines. The interdisciplinary work gang would move together, while attending a 
complaint to ensure that all types of complaints (i rrespective of it being of civil or electrical 
nature) are attended to without any delay. (d) Intr oduction of incentives for better 
performance: To improve motivational levels among t he maintenance staff, a system of 
annual incentives/ rewards could be introduced for best managed service centres. These 
service centres and their officer in-charge (JE) sh ould be judged by the concerned CE in-
charge along with assistance from the SE based on following parameters: 
- Physical inspection of cleanliness of buildings a nd area maintained by the service 
centre 
- Number of complaints successfully addressed. 
- A customer satisfaction index based on sample survey of clients and residents. 
(e) Up gradation of specifications of old buildings: A time bound programme for up gradation 
of specifications of old construction work of build ings should be made and submitted to 
Government for obtaining a onetime technical approv al and the requisite budgetary support. 
This would enable CPWD to carry out necessary up gr adation in form of special repairs and 
give better appearance to the building, thus reduci ng subsequent maintenance requirements.  
                          
(f) Creation of a dedicated maintenance unit: To en able officers to concentrate on 
maintenance activity and improve quality of service  provided by CPWD, it has an option to 
de-link, wherever possible, maintenance from constr uction activity. Separate maintenance 
units should be created with exclusive manpower con centrating only on this activity. 
However, these activities should be segregated in c ircles/divisions where there is large 
workload of maintenance activity and work for a sep arate unit can be fully justified. A 
maintenance unit could be created at division level / sub-division level. A division could have 
more than one maintenance unit, depending on the ma intenance workload involved in the 
division. Superintendent Engineer in-charge of the circle along with CE in charge should 
decide on the number of maintenance units to be cre ated within a division.   (g) Dependence 
on Contractors should be shunned: In order to refur bish its lost image, CPWD should evolve 
a mechanism where need for private contractor is no t felt for minor works. The Committee 

20 
 
are of the view that name of the Contractor has bec ome a synonym to the corruption so every 
effort should be made to free the system from the s o called evil. In addition, the Officers 
concerned should carry out periodic inspection of t he work being done by the contractor and 
if any deficiency is found with regard to work and material, he should be immediately taken 
to task. Higher officials of the rank of SE and CEs may also carry out surprise checks in order 
to ensure that there is no nexus between the contra ctor and the officials.(h) Bimonthly 
meeting of representatives of RWAs and CPWD officia ls :The Committee are compelled to 
form the opinion that RWAs of Government Colonies are a neglected lot and they have to run 
from the pillar to the post to voice their concerns . Hence, the Committee recommend for 
setting up a Grievance Cell in the Directorate to a ttend to the grievances of RWAs on a 
regular basis. They recommend for Institutionalizat ion of mechanism to have bimonthly 
meetings between CPWD higher authorities and representatives of RWAs." 
 
1.24  In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated as follows: 
"(a)The transfer & posting Authorities in CPWD have  been directed (Para 1 of Annexure-G) to 
post CPWD officials in maintenance area, keeping in  view their ability, their capacity to interact 
with the public and respond to their request in a p ositive and friendly manner. Extensive training 
is being imparted to various officials in CPWD Trai ning Institute to enhance their interpersonal 
skill and improve motivational level.  A copy of Ca lendar showing training topics/courses in 
CPWD Regional Training Institute, R.K. Puram, New D elhi and CPWD Training Institute, 
Ghaziabad is enclosed. The relevant  topics/courses are as Annexure-II.(b)The inspection 
schedule is given in CPWD maintenance manual. The c opy of relevant portion of the same is 
enclosed as Annexure-III. Nevertheless the recommen dation of committee have been taken note 
of and the instructions have been issued vide Para 2 of Annexure-G as per these 
recommendations.(c)With regard to this recommendati on of the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee, it is submitted that there are large num ber of disciplines of work men like plumber, 
mason, carpenter, sewer man, electrician, pump/moto r operator, lift man etc.  Most of the time, 
the nature of the work in a complaint pertains to o ne trade only. If all types of workmen will be 
deployed simultaneously on a complaint, the work men of other trades, with whom the complaint 
do not pertain, shall remain idle and this will cau se huge idling of men and increase in cost of 
attending each complaint.  However, keeping in view  the recommendations, the field units have 
been directed to have better co-ordination where a complaint requires contribution of labour 
from more than one trade.  In such type of complain ts, directions have been issued that AE shall 
make sure that the workmen of different trades shal l coordinate with each other and go to the 
allottees premises at the same time to attend the c omplaint..  Instructions have been issued as per 
Para- 3 of Annexure-G.  d) There is already a syste m of Annual incentive/award for best 
managed service centre. Each year, On CPWD day on 1 2th July, the awards are given for best 
employees as per circular attached herewith, (Annex ure –IV). However, the recommendation of 
Parliament Standing Committee w.r.t. parameters to be observed shall be kept in mind while 
judging best service centre. Instruction for the sa me has been issued as per Para 4 of Annexure-
G.  (e) Ministry of Urban Development may like to t ake a considered decision on the 
recommendations keeping in view the budgetary limit ations for undertaking this exercise in one 
go in a financial year and issue necessary directio ns along with proper requisition for preparing 
consolidated estimates for according A/A & E/S for up- gradation of specifications of all 
government residential buildings in Delhi under CPW D maintenance.  However, it is submitted 
that the budgetary support for up-gradation work has always been far less than the requirement in 
the past even for undertaking up-gradation in phases which is the primary cause of dissatisfaction 
among the allottees in this respect.            
(f)There already exist exclusive maintenance units in Delhi for GPRA’s which are as under – 

21 
 
Zones  - Chief Engineer (NDZ – III) and Chief Engineer (NDZ II). 
Circles – DCC-I, DCC-IV, DCC-VI, DCC-VII, DCEC-VII.  Dir (Hort.) DR, DCC-XI, 
DCC-IX. 
Divisions G, Q, S, M, D, J, T, ED-5, ED-9, ED-10, E D-17, DD(Hort.) Div. 6, ED-11, 
ED-13, ECD-3, PVMD, P, V, U, EECD-6, EECD-12,EECD-1 4 etc. Nevertheless 
these recommendations of Parliamentary Standing Com mittee have again been 
communicated to concerned officers to further stren gthen such exclusive maintenance 
units and to remove mixing of maintenance and const ruction units as per Para-5 of  
Annexure-G. 
 
(g) The departmental labour is deployed for minor m aintenance works for day to day 
maintenance works as per the availability.  There is shortage of Department labour due to ban 
on recruitment of work charged staff. The contracto rs have contributed immensely in the 
performance of the department and CPWD do not agree  with the view that they are evil. 
Nevertheless, these recommendations of the parliame ntary committee have been issued to all 
officers as per Para-6 of  Annexure-G. (h) There is  a system of meeting up to the 
Superintending Engineer level with RWA’s as per CPW D maintenance manual Para 3.6.4 as 
per Chapter 3 of Maintenance Manual copy enclosed A nnexure-V. Chief Engineers have also 
been directed to hold meetings with RWAs as per OM No. 3/1/2012 (W-II)/Vol.-V/DG/400 
dt. 10.07.2013 Annexure-VI." 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
 
Regular monitoring of horticulture department in Govt. Residential  
Colonies  
 
1.25 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
"The Committee came to know that generally Mali’s ( Gardner’s) do not visit the parks in the 
Govt. residential colonies. Contractors dump construction waste inside the park and it turns to 
the breeding grounds for mosquitoes. Therefore, the  Committee strongly recommend that the 
horticulture department should take proactive role in maintaining the parks and roads in the 
residential buildings at regular interval. There is  no specified place for the children to play. 
The Committee feel that unless there is regular mon itoring of Gardens and parks by the 
senior officers of that Zone, the situation will no t improve and hence recommend to the 
Ministry to ensure the same."
 
 
1.26 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated as under: 
 
"The instructions have been  issued as per Para 5 o f Annexure ‘B’   that horticulture wing 
officials shall take proactive role in maintaining the parks in the residential colonies at regular 
interval and Officer of the rank of Superintending Engineer and Executive Engineer  shall 
also monitor gardens and parks under their jurisdiction." 
 

22 
 
 
 
 
1.27 In pursuance to the recommendations 9 and 11 o f the Committee to take 
necessary steps to redeem the lost image of CPWD an d regular monitoring of 
horticulture department in Government residential c olonies, the Ministry has informed 
the Committee that necessary instructions have been  issued to all the concerned 
authorities. The Director-General is the highest au thority in the CPWD and responsible 
for entire administration and management. It has be en found out that majority of the 
clients are not satisfied by the administration and  output given by the Department 
which were proved when the Committee heard the repr esentatives of RWAs and client 
Ministries. Certain steps were directed by this Com mittee to improve work atmosphere 
in Delhi so as to improve the satisfaction level of  the clients. The Committee are 
disgusted to find out that the O.M. issued by the M inistry in this regard also. They are 
of the view that Ministry is in habit of issuing O. M. to pass its buck. This casual 
approach of the Ministry is not acceptable to the C ommittee. They note with anguish 
that neither the Ministry nor the CPWD has taken an y concrete action to refurbrish the 
lost image of the CPWD. CPWD could have demonstrate d this by some action taken in 
this regard.  
  The Committee strongly desire that this negative attitude of CPWD should 
undergo change forthwith. The Committee, desire the  Ministry to monitor the action 
taken by the authorities of CPWD as per the instruc tions issued to them. They further 
desire to intimate them regarding the actual outcome thereof. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
Sewerage Water Treatment Plant for Horticulture 
 
1.28 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee were informed that there is scarcity  of water in the Govt. Bungalows and 
Govt., residential colonies due to which Horticultu re Department faces difficulties in 
irrigating the landscape and watering the plants. T he Committee have been apprised that 
drinking water cannot be used for horticulture purp ose while unfiltered water can be used. 
CPWD have made proposal for usage of unfiltered wat er for horticulture purpose but have 
not got permission till now. The Committee were als o apprised that for beautification of the 
landscape and to sort out the shortage of the water , Sewerage Treatment Plants (STP) of 
capacity 360 KLD with MBBR Technology are being pro vided for Type-V and Type- VI 
Qtrs. at Deen Dayal Upadhaya Marg, New Delhi. The r ecycled water is proposed to be used 
for horticulture operations and cleaning of Roads. Sewage Treatment Plant (STP) at Kaka 
Nagar residential Area is proposed and Market surve y is being conducted for selecting 
suitable technology. In view of the acute shortage of water and the benefits of Sewerage 
Treatment Plants, the Committee recommend that Sewe rage Treatment Plant should be 
installed in other Govt. residential colonies throughout the country." 
 
1.29       In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated as follows: 
"Directions have been issued to all concerned CPWD officers vide Para-4 of Annexure-B to 
explore the feasibility of providing the sewage tre atment plant in General Pool Office 

23 
 
Accommodation as well as in General Pool Residentia l Accommodation colony and to use 
the recycled water for horticulture operations." 
 
1.30       The Committee are happy to note that dir ections have been issued by the 
Ministry of Urban Development to all concerned CPWD  officers to explore the 
feasibility of providing the sewage treatment plant  in General Pool Office 
Accommodation as well as in General Pool Residentia l Accommodation colony and to 
use the recycled water for horticulture operations.  The Committee are of the firm view 
that exploration & feasibility studies for providin g the sewage treatment plant in the 
above mentioned colonies should be carried out at t he earliest in a time bound manner 
under intimation to the Committee on the quarterly basis. 
 
 

24 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
 
Court Cases 
 
2.1 The Committee observe that the CPWD guidelines which empower JE/AE to carry day to 
day inspection to verify all the construction going  on in their locality and to take immediate 
steps to stop or demolish the construction are not being followed in a true spirit to prevent the 
encroachment in the first instance. As a result at present 310819 sq. mtr. land is under 
encroachment and there are 39 count cases pending a t various Courts. The Committee feel 
that this is a serious issue and requires particula r attention of the Government. The Ministry 
may advise their lawyers to impress upon the Courts  not to give adjournments on flimsy 
grounds so as to secure speedy judgments. The Commi ttee are of the view that the interest of 
the encroacher lies in protracted litigation which should be resisted with full force. Regarding 
Public Premises Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants Act 1971, the Committee want to 
reiterate their earlier recommendation that Governm ent may consider to fix a time line for 
deciding such cases in order to ensure that Unscrup ulous elements do not make use of the 
system.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 Directions have been issued by MoUD vide  para 14 of Annexure Y to Law Ministry to 
advise its lawyers to impress upon the Courts not t o give adjournments on flimsy grounds so 
as to secure speedy judgments in court proceedings for removal of encroachment on 
Govt./CPWD land.  
 
2.3 For comments of the Committee please see paragraph no 1.13 of Chapter-1. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
 
Need for a separate budgetary Head for checking una uthorized occupation of 
Government Colonies . 
 
2.4 The Committee observe that there is no separate  Budgetary Head for meeting the 
expenses incurred in connection with checking unaut horized occupation of Government land. 
The expenditure incurred on activities relating to checking of unauthorized occupation is 
being charged from the maintenance budget of CPWD. This results into fund shortage for 
maintenance activities. As a result, both these are as viz. maintenance and checking 
encroachments are gravely affected. Therefore, the Committee strongly feel that the Ministry 
should create a separate budgetary head for this pu rpose and allocate judicious allocations for 
the same. 
 
 
 

25 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 2.5 All possible efforts shall be made for allotme nt of sufficient budget to CPWD for 
meeting expenses incurred in connection with checki ng unauthorized occupation of 
Government land in BE 2014-15 keeping in view demand raised by CPWD. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
Need For A Fresh Look To Evict Unauthorized Encroachment In CPWD Colonies  
2.6 The Committee further find that the encroachmen t persists on the lands already got 
vacated by CPWD with the help of local bodies inclu ding police. This is an alarming 
situation and needs to be curbed. The Committee can not rule out the possibility of a nexus 
between officials and encroachers. Hence, they want  the Ministry to thoroughly investigate 
the matter and bring the guilty to book and restore  the land under encroachment 
expeditiously. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.7 Office Memorandum for constitution of the commi ttee for fixing responsibility in respect 
of encroachment has already been issued vide No. 3/ 1/2012-W-II/Vol. VIII/858 dated 
15.10.2013 attached as Annexure D . The committee has been asked to submit its report  by 
15.12.2013. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
 
MAINTENANCE OF GOVT. BUILDINGS AND GOVT.RESIDENTIAL COLONIES  
Need to Rationalize Cost Estimates of its Project by CPWD  
 
2.8 The Committee observe that cost estimate of pro jects undertaken by CPWD is on higher 
side as compared to other agencies. In response to that CPWD has clarified that all public 
sector construction agencies throughout the country  adopt CPWD standard rates only for 
preparing estimates and then they add their margin over it. CPWD being the Government 
agency without any commercial interest does not add  any margin itself and hence CPWD 
estimates are lower than the other agencies. Howeve r, the Committee while taking oral 
evidence of the representatives of other Ministries  such as Home Affairs, Human Resource 
Development, Commerce, Health and Family Welfare an d Department of Personnel and 
Training came to know that cost estimates of projec ts executed by CPWD were very high in 
comparison to other agencies. Even then they will have to award these projects to CPWD only 
because it being a Government Company. The Committe e do not accept the CPWD version 
on the issue. Being the only agency responsible for  executing various projects of Government 
of India, the Committee strongly recommend that CPW D should prepare correct and cost 
effective estimates of the projects lest the clients do not opt for cheaper alternatives. 
 
 
 
 

26 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.9  With regard to imputation that CPWD estimates are very high in comparison to other 
agencies, It is submitted that CPWD can offer specific comments and take necessary  action if 
such estimates are provided to CPWD directorate for  examinations. On the contrary, CPWD 
has been pointed out undue inflations/ inconsistenc ies in the cost estimates of various PSUs 
attached within various SFC/EFC memos received by i t for comments. A list of such 
comments pertaining to cost estimates of a few major projects are given as under:-  
i.  C/o Dr. Ambedkar National Centre for Social Justice by M/s. NBCC. 
ii.  Proposal for Renovation, Modernization and Augmenta tion of training infrastructure by 
NPTI.  
iii.  C/o permanent Campuses of the 10 new NITs by M/s Education Consultants India Ltd. 
iv.  C/o Rajsawa Bhawan National Tax Headquarters of Govt. of India for Ministry of Finance 
by DRDO.  
 
The copy of comments on above projects are enclosed as Annexure ‘E’  
It is also submitted that the comparative study of actual cost of construction incurred by 
various construction agencies and by CPWD on simila r works/Projects is more relevant than 
mere estimates. Such an exercise, if undertaken, ca n reveal true picture about the cost 
effectiveness. 
Nevertheless Direction has been Issued to all conce rned  as per Para 3 of Annexure ‘B’ to 
prepare cost effective and correct estimates of all  projects so that the clients do not opt for 
cheaper alternatives in their projects. 
2.10 For comments of the Committee please see paragraph no 1.16  of Chapter-1. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
 
Sewerage Water Treatment Plant for Horticulture  
 
2.11   The Committee were informed that there is sc arcity of water in the Govt. Bungalows 
and Govt., residential colonies due to which Hortic ulture Department faces difficulties in 
irrigating the landscape and watering the plants. T he Committee have been apprised that 
drinking water cannot be used for horticulture purp ose while unfiltered water can be used. 
CPWD have made proposal for usage of unfiltered wat er for horticulture purpose but have 
not got permission till now. The Committee were als o apprised that for beautification of the 
landscape and to sort out the shortage of the water , Sewerage Treatment Plants (STP) of 
capacity 360 KLD with MBBR Technology are being pro vided for Type-V and Type- VI 
Qtrs. at Deen Dayal Upadhaya Marg, New Delhi. The r ecycled water is proposed to be used 
for horticulture operations and cleaning of Roads. Sewage Treatment Plant (STP) at Kaka 
Nagar residential Area is proposed and Market surve y is being conducted for selecting 
suitable technology. In view of the acute shortage of water and the benefits of Sewerage 
Treatment Plants, the Committee recommend that Sewe rage Treatment Plant should be 
installed in other Govt. residential colonies throughout the country. 
 
 

27 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.12   Directions have been issued to all concerned  CPWD officers vide Para-4 of 
Annexure-B to explore the feasibility of providing the sewage  treatment plant in General 
Pool Office Accommodation as well as in General Poo l Residential Accommodation colony 
and to use the recycled water for horticulture operations. 
 
2.13      For comments of the Committee please see paragraph no 1.30 of Chapter-1. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
 
Utilization of Solar Energy in Govt. buildings  
2.14     According to the Maintenance Manual of CPW D, CPWD will meet energy 
requirements for a minimum of 10% of the internal l ighting load (for general lighting) from 
renewable energy sources (solar, wind, biomass, fue l cells, etc). The Committee have been 
apprised by the Ministry that provision for meeting  energy requirements for minimum of 
10% of the internal lighting load (for general ligh ting) or its equivalent from renewable 
energy sources (solar, wind, biomass, fuel cells et c.) have been made. In this context, the 
committee recommend that solar energy panels should  be installed in all Govt. office 
buildings and also in Govt. residential colonies so  as to reduce the demand for conventional 
energy. The Committee also desire the CPWD to take measures like adopting an adequate 
comfort range, less air-conditioned areas, day ligh ting and avoid over-design of the lighting 
and air- conditioning systems which would further m inimize dependence on conventional 
source of energy.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.15 Directions have been issued to provide the Sol ar Panel in Central Govt. offices and GPRAs 
as per Para-6 of Annexure ‘B’ . It is also stated that the above activities are p art of the Green 
building norms and the same have been already incor porated in CPWD Plinth Area Rates 2012. 
Copy of the relevant portion of the same is enclosed as Annexure F.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
 
Updating of technology to avoid delay in execution of projects.  
 
2.16  The Committee have learnt from various client  Ministries that invariably there is 
delay in execution of projects by CPWD assigned to them. Moreover, their technology is not 
totally updated. The Ministry cited various reasons  for the delay in projects which are not 
directly attributable to CPWD such as delay in appr ovals by local bodies, delay in approvals 
by clients, delay in budget allocation, frequent ch ange of already approved provisions and 
specifications by clients during execution of proje ct, delay in furnishing land ownership 
documents by clients, delay owing to consultants wh ich are sometimes engaged by clients 
themselves, etc. The Committee, however, not being convinced with the Ministry’ logic, 
strongly recommend for updating of technology used by CPWD in execution of their projects 
besides involving the client Ministry in each and every step to avoid delays.  
 
 

28 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.17  Latest technology including RMC with fly ash,  fly ash bricks, energy efficient glazing, 
mechanized construction and project monitoring syst em etc. are being adopted by CPWD for 
its new-projects throughout India. Updating of tech nology used by CPWD in execution of 
their projects besides involving the client Ministr y in each and every step to avoid delays is 
being implemented in New-projects of CPWD throughou t India. Training is being imparted 
to CPWD officers on latest technology in constructi on and use of latest softwares on project 
management inhouse as well outside Training courses  in India and Abroad. Directions have 
been issued to all concerned officers for updating of technology used by CPWD in execution 
of their projects besides involving the client / Ministry in each and every steps to avoid delays 
as per Para 7 of Annexure ‘B’.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
 
Responsibilities of the Client Ministries 
 
2.18 The Committee observe that besides the commitm ent of CPWD towards fulfilling its 
duties, Client Ministries also have certain respons ibilities regarding engineering & 
housekeeping maintenance in the Govt. buildings. Th e Committee emphasize that the 
following matters need to be addressed to by the Cl ient Ministries for ensuring better 
maintenance of the Govt. Buildings:- 
1) Air-conditioners should not be installed in the Government buildings without certification 
from CPWD to effectively manage the situation. 
2) False Ceiling should not be disturbed by various  agencies handling telephone, cable, 
electrical etc., Ministries should ensure that the false ceiling removed for any work is placed 
back in position. 
3) Different Client Ministries keep a lot of furniture in the corridors. Such furniture should be 
removed from the corridors. 
4) Corridors should be kept neat and clean. Cleanin g agencies engaged by various Ministries 
should improve the cleaning. 
5) The external area cleaning is also found wanting and needs proper attention. 
6) Cleaning agencies which are generally putting th e malba in the toilet shafts should be 
dissuaded from doing the same, as it finally leads to blockage of sewer lines. 
7) Some of the doors of staircase have been kept cl osed. These doors need to be opened and 
CISF personnel are to be deployed on these doors. 
8) Water Supply needs to be improved by NDMC. All t he Valves needs to be checked and 
replaced wherever found old. Problem is to be sorte d out by NDMC only by increasing the 
number of hours of supply to meet the extra demand in summer season.” 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.19 An O.M. has been circulated to all Ministries/ Departments conveying these 
recommendations of the Standing committee as per Para 1 to 8 of Annexure Y. 
 
  

29 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
-Nil- 
  

30 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
 
Need to arrest delay in execution of Projects by CPWD  
 
4.1    The Committee note that CPWD was conceived to undertake public works ranging from 
irrigation facility and bridges to public housing a nd government buildings. Over the years the 
responsibilities and jurisdiction of CPWD got re-al igned, however, the basic activity of civil 
construction still remains its raison d’être. The o rganizational structure and practices have 
also evolved largely to address the requirements of  executing these construction projects. 
Compliance to envisaged timelines is one of the mos t important elements of service delivery. 
The Committee observe that an Office Order issued b y Chief Engineer of South Western 
Zone dated 1st January, 1980 has defined the time-s cale for various activities related to 
Planning and execution i.e. 21 months. However the Committee are unhappy to note that a 
large number of projects do not adhere to even thes e time frames and there are inordinate 
delays in various project related activities. Vario us clients of CPWD examined by the 
Committee emphasized the need to arrest delays. The  Committee observe that CPWD has 
executed 125 major Projects during the last ten yea rs. The Committee are surprised to note 
that out of 125 major projects, information on only  102 projects are available with CPWD. 
This clearly reflects the casual approach of CPWD i n maintaining data of the projects being 
executed by itself. Out of 102 projects the Committ ee observe that only 46 projects (less than 
50%) were got executed in time. 28 projects got delayed for one year, 14 projects got delayed 
for two years, 5 projects got delayed for three yea rs, 2 projects took four years, one project 
took five years and one project up to six years. Th e delays in completing the projects in time 
is on account of varying reasons, which include del ay in approval of drawings from local 
bodies/statutory clearances, delay in finalization of functional requirements by users/clients, 
frequent change in scope of the work, non-availabil ity of encumbrance free site, non-
availability of budget/funds, local disturbances, b ad weather, sometimes delay in mobilizing 
requisite materials/manpower/machinery by the Contr actors, vacant posts of staff  and 
officers, etc. Career stagnation of Officers is als o another reason for delay in completion of 
the projects. CPWD informed the Committee that Care er stagnation brings down the morale 
of staff/officers which affect their output both in  terms of quality and efficiency. The 
Committee wish to recommend that the clients should be consulted in each and every stage of 
drawing so that there remains no scope for frequent changes in the drawing of the projects. At 
the same time they also want that clients, too, sho uld cooperate fully with CPWD in 
finalizing the projects in time and do not make material changes in the on-going projects. The 
Committee also wish to recommend that budget should  not be a constraint for the Projects. 
However, the Committee are happy to note that with the recent cadre review approved by the 
government, the problem of stagnation is likely to be overcome to a great extent. The 
Committee hope that CPWD would implement the recent ly held cadre review at the earliest 
to arrest the shortage of manpower so that the dela ys in executing the Projects could be 
reduced and time-line could be adhered to. 
 
 
 

31 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2 The instructions have been issued vide para 1 of Annexure B to all concerned CPWD 
officers that the clients should be consulted in ea ch and every stage of drawing so that there 
remains no scope for frequent changes in the drawin g of the projects.  An O.M. has also been 
issued by MoUD vide para 12 of Annexure Y  that clients, too, should cooperate fully with 
CPWD in finalizing the projects in time and do not make material changes in the on-going 
projects and that the budget should not be a constr aint for the Projects. Cadre Review in CPWD 
has been implemented and all required steps are bei ng taken to complete the Project in a 
specified time limits. 
4
.3  For comments of the Committee please see para 1.7 of Chapter –I of the Report. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
 
ENCROACHMENT OF GOVT. LAND AND COLONIES 
 
Need for Specially designated manpower for removing  encroachment and issues related 
thereto  
4.4   The Committee had recommended as under: 
"As per chapter 10 of the maintenance manual of the  CPWD, it is responsible to prevent and 
remove unauthorized construction and encroachment i n or near all the Govt. buildings 
standing on the land and the land underneath and ap purtenant thereto along with the land 
under road, parks, toilets, play grounds situated i n govt. colonies come under the 
administration of the CPWD. The Committee are alarm ed to note that the total area of 
Government land under encroachment in all the State s and Union Territories of India has 
been increased from 193434.56 sq. mtr. in the month  of March, 2013 to 3,10,819 in the 
month of August, 2013.  Even then the Ministry was maintaining that there was no new 
Encroachment. They are surprised to note that the M inistry’s reply is based on surmises and 
guesstimates and hence caution the Ministry to be m ore vigilant in future while furnishing 
replies to a Parliamentary Committee. 
The Committee were informed that there is no specia lly designated manpower/task 
force available with CPWD for checking unauthorized  occupation of government land and 
vacating the encroached land. The Committee are not  convinced with the reply of the 
Ministry. They were given to understand that under the manual of CPWD, this duty is cast on 
the Junior Engineer/Assistant Engineer concerned. I t is not understood to the Committee 
when Junior Engineer and Assistant Engineers are du ty bound where from the question of 
having no designated work force comes. AE/JE is sup posed to detect and verify the 
encroachments within the premises and report to Directorate of Estates. Directorate of Estates 
is supposed to cancel the allotment and evict allot tees and CPWD to demolish the 
unauthorized construction. The Committee are of the  view that if the concerned Junior 
Engineer or Assistant Engineer performs his duties honestly and diligently, then it will 
become impossible for the encroachers to lay on the Government land. For this they could get 
the assistance from RWAs who will report the matter  of encroachment JE/AE and the JE/AE 
may swing into action forthwith.  

32 
 
The Committee want RWAs to report such cases at the  earliest opportunity. They are 
of the view that the encroachment should be nipped in the bud. Encroachments on vacant 
land are to be removed by Estate officer under the Public Premises Eviction of Unauthorized 
Occupants Act 1971 with the police help. All EEs, i n-charge of maintenance are declared as 
estate officers under the Public Premises Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants Act 1971. The 
Committee are distressed to note that CPWD is not getting required assistance in right time to 
remove the encroachment from police and local authorities. In some cases even after vacating 
the land, the encroachers manage to occupy the land  again. The CPWD find hard to have its 
own task force to prevent the unauthorized occupati on and vacate the already encroached 
lands on account of limitations of handling Law & O rder problems. The Committee have 
come to know that Government of Delhi has created a  sub-divisional level Special Task 
Force to check encroachment in public land. Their a ssistance is being obtained whenever any 
new encroachment is noticed. In other cities such t ype of special task force does not exist in 
line with the Delhi Govt. However, to the utmost su rprise of the Committee, CPWD is still 
satisfied with the existing mechanism and does not require any new institutional mechanism 
to deal with the menace of encroachment. In view of  the above, the Committee strongly 
recommend that CPWD must constitute a Special Task Force in all the zones and empower 
them with all necessary powers and equipment’s to p revent encroachment and vacate the 
already encroached land. For obtaining assistance f rom the police and local authorities the 
Committee strongly recommend to take this matter to  the highest authority and an executive 
order might be issued in this regard so that there is no difficulty for seeking help from the 
police and civil authorities. The Committee are als o given to understand that CPWD does not 
maintain data regarding encroachment and recoveries  of Government land. They are 
surprised that in the absence of data how CPWD will  come to know about the extent of 
encroachment. The Committee, therefore, recommend t hat CPWD should develop its own 
data base with regard to encroachment with the help of dedicated staff as early as possible. 
The Committee are continuously insisting on the iss ue of fixing Responsibility on the 
Officer concerned whose negligence has resulted int o encroachment. Even today the 
encroachment is taking place otherwise it was not p ossible for the Ministry to furnish the 
revised figures of area under encroachment to the C ommittee. But, the Ministry is reticent on 
the issue and tries to downplay the entire matter b y stating that since the encroachment dates 
back to 10 to 20 years, it is not possible to fix t he responsibility. The Committee are not 
satisfied with this explanation of the Ministry. They are of the view that 10 to 20 years period 
is not such a long period where concerned officers could not be identified and located. The 
Committee insist that the Ministry should fix respo nsibility in those matters after digging the 
old cases and if the connivance of officials is pro ved, a deterrent punishment should be 
inflicted. A status report in this regard may be su bmitted to the Committee within three 
months of the presentation of the report. They also  recommend that the CPWD should 
maintain data regarding action taken in this regard." 
4.5 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"It is submitted that in the month of March 2013 an  Area of 193434.56Sqm was intimated on 
the basis of data available in the directorate at t hat time by recording a certificate that full 
extent Area is being collected from the field forma tions. This encroachment area was in three 
cities of Delhi, Mumbai and Sikkim. Copy of the sam e is enclosed as Annexure-C. Later 
information on encroachment in a few more cities i. e., Kolkata, Cochin, Indore and Shimla 
was received from field-formations and in August 20 13, the Area of 310819.95 sqm was 
intimated with details . However no fresh Encroachment was reported as is c lear from details 

33 
 
of 310819.95 sqm area which was also sent with the reply. All the encroachment was old 
one.The instructions have been issued vide para 2 of Annexure B  to all concerned CPWD 
officers to encourage RWAs to report encroachment o n CPWD land. Special Task Force in 
Delhi has been formed by the Govt of Delhi. Similar  task forces can be constituted in other 
states and provided necessary power and resources t o prevent and vacate the encroachment. 
For taking up this matter at highest level and issu e of executive order, Action is being taken 
separately.  Office Memo has been issued to all Add itional Director Generals of various sub- 
regions of CPWD as per para 2 of Annexure ‘B’ to develop their own data base with regard 
to encroachment by deploying dedicated staff as ear ly as possible. Office Memorandum for 
constitution of the committee for fixing responsibi lity in respect of encroachment has already 
been issued vide No. 3/1/2012-W-II/Vol. VIII/858 da ted 15.10.2013 attached as Annexure 
D." 
4.6      For comments of the Committee please see para 1.10 of Chapter –I of the Report. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
 
Dual Control of Engineers in Client Organizations 
 
 
4.7 The Committee also came to know during the oral  evidence of the representatives of 
the Ministry of Home Affairs that major repairs and  maintenance of North Block are done by 
CPWD themselves without consulting them regarding a ction plan of maintenance for the 
coming years. As such, the CPWD does not keep the M inistry in loop with regard to repairs 
and the maintenance. The Committee have been apprised  that engineers of C.P.W.D. are 
not answerable or not under the control of client o rganizations. The Committee have been 
given to understand by CPWD that technical control of engineers under the hospital 
authorities or client organizations are administratively infeasible and undesirable as a number 
of administrative, technical and financial issues a re involved. However, the Committee are 
not convinced with the view of the Ministry that mo st of the issues are sorted out during the 
weekly meetings/rounds taken jointly with hospital authorities. Therefore, the Committee 
strongly recommend that CPWD Executive engineer sho uld be placed on the strength of 
hospital staff /Ministry concerned on the pattern of technical posting of engineers  in army 
infantry battalions. Confidential reports of these officers should be written by both 
administrative as well as technical Heads viz., Med ical Superintendent of the Hospital and 
their superior officer in CPWD. This will ensure better interface of CPWD engineers and 
client Ministries to arrest delays in executing the  works and accountability of CPWD 
engineers. 
Reply of the Government 
4.8 CPWD like all other government departments/ org anizations follows, on mandatory 
basis, Performance appraisal reporting system and rules in this regard framed by  Department of 
personnel & Training, Govt of India. It prima facie appears infeasible that  performance of a few 
officers (who work, inter alia, for hospital maintenance) out of the  total in the same category is 
appraised by adopting a different system. In all go vernment departments /organizations, the 
reporting and reviewing of performance are done by superior officials of that organization. If 
client organization desires to have control, then t hey can have deputation/ en-cadre posts of 
CPWD officers with them. 
 
4.9  For comments of the Committee please see para 1.19 of Chapter –I of the Report. 

34 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
 
Need of Single Unified Agency for construction and maintenance of  
Hospitals  
4.10  The Committee have been apprised of the statu s of maintenance of hospital buildings 
like RML hospital, Safdarjung hospital, Lady Hardin g Medical College, Kalawati Saran, 
CGHS wellbeing centres maintained by CPWD in terms of Engineering maintenance and 
housekeeping maintenance. The Committee have also b een informed about the problems in 
the Govt. hospitals e.g. broken taps in the toilets , shortage of water, chocking of sewer, 
leakage etc. The Committee were also enlightened th at in Govt. hospitals interruption to 
various services is frequently being caused by othe r agencies which are engaged for 
construction of new buildings by the Ministry of He alth & Family Welfare. It is observed by 
the Committee that in the last few years, there has  been addition of new buildings in the 
various Hospital campuses (like PGIMER in RML Hospi tal, VMCC & SIC in Safdarjung 
Hospital). The sewerage disposal of these new build ings is also connected to existing 
sewerage system maintained by the CPWD. This leads to occasional overflow of main sewer 
line. CPWD is facing problems from users as they throw wastes like cloth, refuse, cotton, etc. 
direct into the toilet, gully taps etc. resulting i n the choking of sewer lines etc. Therefore, the 
Committee are of firm view that there should be one  unified agency responsible for 
construction and maintenance of Govt. buildings, Go vt. Hospitals and residential colonies. In 
case of more than one agency being involved in the construction and maintenance works 
there is an urgent need to have a proper and effect ive coordination amongst all such agencies. 
The Committee are surprised to note that manual of CPWD prohibits them to take up 
maintenance of that building which has not been con structed by CPWD. The Committee feel 
that this rigidity will affect the maintenance work and thereby hurting a common man. Hence, 
the Committee want the Ministry to ensure that main tenance of any building may not be 
withheld on account of rules and if there is a need, such rules may be suitably amended. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.11 a) Directions have been issued by MoUD vide  para 11 of Annexure Y that there 
should be one unified agency responsible for constr uction and maintenance of Govt. 
buildings, Govt. Hospitals and residential colonies and in case of more than one agency being 
involved in the con Direction have been issued by M oUD vide para 11 of Annexure Y  that 
there should be one unified agency responsible for construction and maintenance of 
government buildings, Govt. hospitals and residential colonies.  
 b) CPWD has a mandate to undertake construction/ m aintenance etc. of all 
government buildings of various Ministries/ Departm ents of Govt of India. CPWD is bound 
to do the same as per GFR 126.  The various Ministr ies/ Departments who do not have a 
construction wing of their own are bound to get the ir construction works get done from 
CPWD. Such a situation arises when some of the Mini stries/Departments do not get 
constructed their buildings from CPWD but want CPWD  only for maintenance work. This 
causes practical problem in sharing of responsibili ty for poor construction done by other 
agency. Most often such defects are not overt but l atent. Also this causes imbalance in man 
management in CPWD because Maintenance works requir e far more manpower as compared 
to construction.  
 
4.12   For comments of the Committee please see para 1.22 of Chapter –I of the Report. 

35 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
 
Need to Redeem Image by CPWD  
 
4.13  The Committee are given to understand by cert ain Ministries of the Government of 
India and RWAs of Government residential colonies a bout their satisfaction level from the 
services /maintenance of CPWD. While the client Min istries were not very vocal in 
criticizing the role of CPWD but RWAs spared no roo m in doing so. Ministries were not 
happy with the excessive cost estimates, lack of co ordination, accountability and delay in 
execution of works. RWAs vent their ire towards hau ghty attitude of CPWD officials, delay, 
tilt towards contractors and unavailability and ina ccessibility of CPWD officials. The 
Committee are constrained to observe that CPWD, a s ervice rendering organization should 
not invite the ire of its clients in such a way. Th is will erode their reputation and reputation 
once damaged takes a long time to regain. The Commi ttee are of the view that officials of 
CPWD should think themselves servants of the public  rather than their masters. Their non-
availability to the public is not understandable to  the Committee. More and more dependence 
on contractors even for petty work is deplorable. T his is adding stigma to the organization. 
Mandatory periodic inspection by AEs are convenient ly abandoned and no action or serious 
view is taken by CPWD in this regard. There is no c oordination between CPWD and their 
civic agencies. In such circumstances, the Committe e are constrained to hold a view that 
CPWD has lost its image badly and unless concrete s teps are taken by the Ministry, the 159 
years old premier organization will be lost in obli vion. Therefore, this necessarily calls for 
‘public relations’ or ‘image’ management by CPWD to  redeem its lost image. Hence the 
Committee strongly recommend to follow certain step s by the CPWD in their maintenance 
unit to ensure better customer interface and service delivery. 
a) Posting of officials with requisite ‘people frie ndly’ skills in maintenance unit: Posting of 
CPWD officials in maintenance area should be done k eeping in view their ability/capacity to 
interact with the public and respond to their requi rements in a positive and friendly manner. 
Extensive training should be imparted to the EE, AE  and JE to enhance their interpersonal 
skills and improve motivational levels. 
b) Introduce system of periodic preventive maintena nce inspection: In this system, AE, JE 
from civil and electrical division along with Addit ional Director (horticulture) and Section 
Officer (horticulture) should inspect buildings wit hin their division/ sub division at an 
interval of six months and detect buildings which r equire repairs, so that annual periodic 
maintenance can be done on time. For housing stock,  the Residents Welfare Associations 
(RWA) could be involved as part of this periodic preventive maintenance inspection unit. 
c) Co-ordination between various disciplines while attending the complaint: To enable 
effective co-ordination between various disciplines  of civil and electrical services, while 
performing maintenance activity, it is proposed tha t work gangs be formed at each service 
centre comprising of work charged staff from variou s disciplines. The interdisciplinary work 
gang would move together, while attending a complai nt to ensure that all types of complaints 
(irrespective of it being of civil or electrical nature) a 
re attended to without any delay.                                      
d) Introduction of incentives for better performanc e: To improve motivational levels among 
the maintenance staff, a system of annual incentive s/ rewards could be introduced for best 
managed service centres. These service centres and their officer in-charge (JE) should be 
judged by the concerned CE in-charge along with ass istance from the SE based on following 
parameters: 

36 
 
- Physical inspection of cleanliness of buildings a nd area maintained by the service 
centre 
- Number of complaints successfully addressed. 
- A customer satisfaction index based on sample survey of clients and residents. 
e) Up gradation of specifications of old buildings:  A time bound programme for up gradation 
of specifications of old construction work of build ings should be made and submitted to 
Government for obtaining a onetime technical approv al and the requisite budgetary support. 
This would enable CPWD to carry out necessary up gr adation in form of special repairs and 
give better appearance to the building, thus reducing subsequent maintenance requirements.                                   
f) Creation of a dedicated maintenance unit: To enable officers to concentrate on maintenance 
activity and improve quality of service provided by  CPWD, it has an option to de-link, 
wherever possible, maintenance from construction ac tivity. Separate maintenance units 
should be created with exclusive manpower concentra ting only on this activity. However, 
these activities should be segregated in circles/di visions where there is large workload of 
maintenance activity and work for a separate unit c an be fully justified. A maintenance unit 
could be created at division level/ sub-division le vel. A division could have more than one 
maintenance unit, depending on the maintenance work load involved in the division. 
Superintendent Engineer in-charge of the circle along with CE in charge should decide on the 
number of maintenance units to be created within a division.                                         
g) Dependence on Contractors should be shunned: In order to refurbish its lost image, CPWD 
should evolve a mechanism where need for private contractor is not felt for minor works. The 
Committee are of the view that name of the Contract or has become a synonym to the 
corruption so every effort should be made to free t he system from the so called evil. In 
addition, the Officers concerned should carry out p eriodic inspection of the work being done 
by the contractor and if any deficiency is found wi th regard to work and material, he should 
be immediately taken to task. Higher officials of t he rank of SE and CEs may also carry out 
surprise checks in order to ensure that there is no  nexus between the contractor and the 
officials. 
h) Bimonthly meeting of representatives of RWAs and CPWD officials : 
The Committee are compelled to form the opinion tha t RWAs of Government Colonies are a 
neglected lot and they have to run from the pillar to the post to voice their concerns. Hence, 
the Committee recommend for setting up a Grievance Cell in the Directorate to attend to the 
grievances of RWAs on a regular basis. They recomme nd for Institutionalization of 
mechanism to have bimonthly meetings between CPWD h igher authorities and 
representatives of RWAs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.14 (a)The transfer & posting Authorities in CPWD have been directed (Para 1 of 
Annexure-G)  to post CPWD officials in maintenance area, keepin g in view their ability, 
their capacity to interact with the public and respond to their request in a positive and friendly 
manner. Extensive training is being imparted to var ious officials in CPWD Training Institute 
to enhance their interpersonal skill and improve mo tivational level.  A copy of Calendar 
showing training topics/courses in CPWD Regional Tr aining Institute, R.K. Puram, New 
Delhi and CPWD Training Institute, Ghaziabad is enclosed. The relevant  topics/courses are 
as Annexure-II . 

37 
 
 
(b)The inspection schedule is given in CPWD mainten ance manual. The copy of relevant 
portion of the same is enclosed as Annexure-III . Nevertheless the recommendation of 
committee have been taken note of and the instructi ons have been issued vide Para 2 of 
Annexure-G as per these recommendations. 
(c) With regard to this recommendation of the Parli amentary Standing Committee, it is 
submitted that there are large number of discipline s of work men like plumber, mason, 
carpenter, sewer man, electrician, pump/motor opera tor, lift man etc.  Most of the time, the 
nature of the work in a complaint pertains to one t rade only. If all types of workmen will be 
deployed simultaneously on a complaint, the work me n of other trades, with whom the 
complaint do not pertain, shall remain idle and thi s will cause huge idling of men and 
increase in cost of attending each complaint.  Howe ver, keeping in view the 
recommendations, the field units have been directed  to have better co-ordination where a 
complaint requires contribution of labour from more  than one trade.  In such type of 
complaints, directions have been issued that AE sha ll make sure that the workmen of 
different trades shall coordinate with each other a nd go to the allottees premises at the same 
time to attend the complaint..  Instructions have been issued as per Para- 3 of Annexure-G.   
d) There is already a system of Annual incentive/aw ard for best managed service centre. 
Each year, On CPWD day on 12th July, the awards are  given for best employees as per 
circular attached herewith, (Annexure –IV). However , the recommendation of Parliament 
Standing Committee w.r.t. parameters to be observed shall be kept in mind while judging best 
service centre. Instruction for the same has been issued as per Para 4 of Annexure-G.  
(e) Ministry of Urban Development may like to take a considered decision on the 
recommendations keeping in view the budgetary limit ations for undertaking this exercise in 
one go in a financial year and issue necessary dire ctions along with proper requisition for 
preparing consolidated estimates for according A/A & E/S for up- gradation of specifications 
of all government residential buildings in Delhi un der CPWD maintenance.  However, it is 
submitted that the budgetary support for up-gradati on work has always been far less than the 
requirement in the past even for undertaking up-gra dation in phases which is the primary 
cause of dissatisfaction among the allottees in this respect.                          
(f)There already exist exclusive maintenance units in Delhi for GPRA’s which are as under – 
Zones - Chief Engineer (NDZ – III) and Chief Engineer (NDZ II). 
Circles  – DCC-I, DCC-IV, DCC-VI, DCC-VII, DCEC-VII. Dir (H ort.) DR, DCC-XI, 
DCC-IX. 
Divisions  G, Q, S, M, D, J, T, ED-5, ED-9, ED-10, ED-17, DD( Hort.) Div. 6, ED-11, 
ED-13, ECD-3, PVMD, P, V, U, EECD-6, EECD-12,EECD-1 4 etc. Nevertheless 
these recommendations of Parliamentary Standing Com mittee have again been 
communicated to concerned officers to further stren gthen such exclusive maintenance 
units and to remove mixing of maintenance and const ruction units as per Para-5 of 
Annexure-G. 
(g) The departmental labour is deployed for minor m aintenance works for day to day 
maintenance works as per the availability.  There is shortage of Department labour due to ban 
on recruitment of work charged staff. The contracto rs have contributed immensely in the 
performance of the department and CPWD do not agree  with the view that they are evil. 

38 
 
Nevertheless, these recommendations of the parliame ntary committee have been issued to all 
officers as per Para-6 of  Annexure-G. 
(h) There is a system of meeting up to the Superint ending Engineer level with RWA’s as 
per CPWD maintenance manual Para 3.6.4 as per Chapt er 3 of Maintenance Manual copy 
enclosed Annexure-V. Chief Engineers have also been directed to hold meetings with RWAs 
as per OM No. 3/1/2012 (W-II)/Vol.-V/DG/400 dt. 10.07.2013 Annexure-VI . 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
 
Regular monitoring of horticulture department in Govt. Residential  
Colonies  
 
4.15     The Committee came to know that generally Mali’s (Gardner’s) do not visit the parks 
in the Govt. residential colonies. Contractors dump  construction waste inside the park and it 
turns to the breeding grounds for mosquitoes. There fore, the Committee strongly recommend 
that the horticulture department should take proact ive role in maintaining the parks and roads 
in the residential buildings at regular interval. T here is no specified place for the children to 
play. The Committee feel that unless there is regul ar monitoring of Gardens and parks by the 
senior officers of that Zone, the situation will no t improve and hence recommend to the 
Ministry to ensure the same.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.16 The instructions have been  issued as per Para 5 of Annexure ‘B’  that horticulture 
wing officials shall take proactive role in maintai ning the parks in the residential colonies at 
regular interval and Officer of the rank of Superin tending Engineer and Executive Engineer  
shall also monitor gardens and parks under their jurisdiction  
 
4.17   For comments of the Committee please see paragraph no 1.27  of Chapter-1. 
 
. 
 
  

39 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Nil  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
                           SHARAD YADAV  
February,  2014 
                                                                                             Chairman,          
Magha, 1935 (Saka)                                      Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
  

40 
 
 
ANNEXURE -I 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HE LD ON 
WEDNESDAY,12 FEBRUARY, 2014 
       
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room  ‘C’ Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT  
Shri Sharad Yadav      - Chairman  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Anant Gangaram Geete 
3. Shri Kailash Joshi 
4. Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
5. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
6. Shri Ramesh Kumar 
7.  Shri Ratan Singh 
8. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
RAJYA SABHA 
9. Shri Anil Desai 
10. Md. Nadimul Haque  
11. Dr. Chandan Mitra 
12. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
13. Shri Khekiho Zhimomi 
                           SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha  - Director 
3. Smt.  J. M.  Sinha  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. K. Rangamani N.-  Under Secretary  

41 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members  to the sitting of the Committee. 
The Committee then took up for consideration the dr aft  Action Taken Report on “Role of 
Central Public Works Department (C.P.W.D.) in check ing unauthorized occupation of 
government land and colonies and evaluation of thei r performance in maintaining 
Government buildings” of the Ministry of Urban Deve lopment. After deliberations, the 
Committee adopted all the report unanimously without any change. 
3. ****      ****             *****   ***** 
4. **** *****   *****   ***** 
 
5.  ******                *****   *****   ******* 
6. ******                *****   *****   ******* 
 
7. ******     *****   *****   ******* 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
**** these portions do not relate to the report 
  

42 
 
 
ANNEXURE -II 
                                            [Vide para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON T HE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWEN TY SIXTH 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPLM ENT 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
I.  Total number of recommendations                                          14 
 
II.  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government:                              08 
Recommendation Nos. 3,4,5,6,10,12,13,14  
Percentage to total recommendations                                                         ( 57.14%) 
 
III.  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:                     
Recommendation Nos.Nil 
Percentage to total recommendations                                              (0%)  
 
IV.  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of                                      
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation No. 1,2, 7, 8,9 & 11                          (6) 
 
Percentage to total recommendations                                          (42.86%) 
                             
V.  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final                    
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
-Nil-    
     Percentage to total recommendations                                                          (%) 
 
 
 