STANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ONSTANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENTURBAN DEVELOPMENTURBAN DEVELOPMENTURBAN DEVELOPMENTURBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2009-2010)(2009-2010)(2009-2010)(2009-2010)(2009-2010)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHAFIFTEENTH LOK SABHAFIFTEENTH LOK SABHAFIFTEENTH LOK SABHAFIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF URBAN
DEVELOPMENT
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND
TWELFTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
88888
EIGHTH REPORTEIGHTH REPORTEIGHTH REPORTEIGHTH REPORTEIGHTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIATLOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHINEW DELHI
November, 2007/Kartika, 1929 (Saka)
lR;eso t;rs


EIGHTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2009-2010)
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND
TWELFTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
Presented to Speaker, Lok Sabha on 25.06.2010
Presented to Lok Sabha on__________
Laid in Rajya Sabha on____________
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2010/Sravana, 1932 (Saka)
lR;esolR;esolR;esolR;esolR;eso t;rst;rst;rst;rst;rs


C.U.D. No. 58C.U.D. No. 58C.U.D. No. 58C.U.D. No. 58C.U.D. No. 58
Price : Rs. 48.00
© 2010 B Y LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and printed by The Indian
Press, Delhi-110 033.

CONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTSCONTENTS
(iii)
(v)
1
4
17
23
29
31
33
35
37
39
C
OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ........................................................................
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................
REPORT
PART I. Background of ‘The Constitution (One Hundred and
Twelfth Amendment) Bill, 2009’...........................................
PART II. Deliberations held by the Committee on the Bill.......
PART III. Recommendations/Observations..............................................
ANNEXURES
I. The Constitution (One Hundred and Twelfth
Amendment) Bill, 2009...........................................................
II. List of experts on urban affairs who tendered written
submission/oral evidence during the examination of
‘The Constitution (One Hundred and Twelfth
Amendment) Bill, 2009’..........................................................
III. List of States/Union Territories that have forwarded
their replies/suggestions on ‘The Constitution
(One Hundred and Twelfth Amendment) Bill, 2009’.....
A
PPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of the Committee held on
28.01.2010.....................................................................................
II. Minutes of the Eleventh Sitting of the Committee held
on 14.05.2010..............................................................................
III. Minutes of the Twelfth Sitting of the Committee held
on 14.05.2010..............................................................................
IV. Minutes of the Thirteenth Sitting of the Committee
held on 11.06.2010....................................................................
PAGE

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010)
Shri Sharad Yadav —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri J.P. Agarwal
3. Shri Praveen Singh Aron
4. Shri Gajanan D. Babar
5. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa
6. Shri Ambica Banerjee
7. Smt. Priya Dutt
8. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad
9. Shri Shakti Mohan Malik
10. Shri Kailash Joshi
11. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee
12. Shri Ramesh Kumar
13. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh
14. Shri P.C. Mohan
15. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik
16. Shri Sonawane Pratap Narayanrao
17. Shri Baijayant Panda
18. Prof. Ramshankar
19. Shri Kadir Rana
20. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
21. Shri Adagooru H. Vishwanath
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Parvez Hashmi
23. Shri Rajeev Shukla
24. Shri Surendra Motilal Patel
25. Shri Amir Alam Khan
26. Shri Manohar Joshi
27. Shri Shyam Benegal
28. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi
29. Shri Khekiho Zhimomi
30. Dr. Balchandra Mungekar
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Joint Secretary
2. Shri K.D. Muley — Director
3. Ms. Amita Walia — Deputy Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Urban Development
having been authorized by the Committee to present the report on their
behalf, present this Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘The
Constitution (One Hundred and Twelfth Amendment) Bill 2009’
pertaining to the Ministry of Urban Development.
2. One of the functions of the Standing Committee on Urban
Development as laid down in Rule 331E(1)(b) of ‘The Rules of Procedure
and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha’ is to examine such Bills
pertaining to the concerned Ministries as are referred to the Committee
by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha or the Speaker, Lok Sabha, as the case
may be, and make Report thereon. In pursuance of this Rule,
‘The Constitution (One Hundred and Twelfth Amendment) Bill 2009’,
introduced in Lok Sabha was referred by the Hon’ble Speaker to this
Committee on 29th December, 2009 for examination and Report.
3. The Committee then decided to have the views of the State
Governments/Union Territories and also of some experts in the field of
urban affairs to enable the Members to have an in-depth knowledge
about various clauses of the Bill. Fifteen States and two Union Territories,
namely; Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Gujarat,
Haryana, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Mizoram,
Orissa, Sikkim, Tripura, Himachal Pradesh, Chandigarh and Puducherry
have forwarded their views/suggestions to the Committee.
4. The Committee had a briefing from the representatives of the
Ministry of Urban Development and Ministry of Law and Justice on the
Bill on 28th January, 2010 on the bill and took the oral evidence of the
representatives of Ministry of Urban Development on 14th May, 2010.
5. The Committee also heard the views of the experts on urban
affairs viz., Shri Chetan Vaidya, Director, National Institute of Urban
Affairs, Prof. Nishith Rai, Director, Regional Centre for Urban and

Environmental Studies, Shri Lojy Thomas, Regional Director, All India
Institute of Local Self Government and Shri Akshay Anand, Associate
Project Director, All India Institute of Local Self Government (PRUDA)
on 14th May, 2010 and had detailed discussions with them on various
provisions of the Bill.
6. The Committee express their thanks to the State Governments
and the experts who gave their valuable suggestions/views to enable the
Committee to arrive at consensual decision on various clauses of the Bill.
The Committee also express their thanks to the officials of the Ministry
of Urban Development for placing before them the material and
information desired from time to time in connection with examination
of the Bill.
7. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the
invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha
Secretariat attached to the Committee in connection with examination of
the Bill and drafting of the Report thereon.
8. The Committee (2009-2010) considered and adopted the Report
at their sitting held on 11th June, 2010.
9. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of
the Committee have been printed in bold letters and placed as Part III
of the report.
  N
EW DELHI; SHARAD YADAV,
11 June , 2010 Chairman,
21 Jyaistha , 1932  (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.
(vi)

REPORT
PART I
BACKGROUND OF ‘THE CONSTITUTION
(112TH AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009’
Urban areas in the country present a number of challenges to policy
makers and implementers in India today due to rapid rise in the urban
population.  As per 2001 Census, 27.8 percent of the total population lived
in urban areas, of which women constituted nearly 47 per cent.  However,
India still has second largest urban population in the world as about
285 million persons are living in urban areas. Urban population is
expected to rise to about 40 per cent by the year 2020.  Number of cities
with a million plus population, which were just 35 as of 2005, are likely
to increase to 53.  Therefore, there is a tremendous pressure on Cities’
Governments to provide infrastructure in the cities. The role of Urban
Local Bodies assumes great significance in this context.
1.2 Parliament through The Constitution (Seventy-fourth
Amendment) Act enacted in 1992, inserted “Part IX A” in the Constitution
relating to Municipalities.  The 74th Amendment which took effect in
the year 1993 accorded constitutional recognition to the third layer of the
Government that is the Urban Local Bodies. Article 243T of the
Constitution provides for reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes and also 33 per cent reservation of seats for
women in Urban Local Bodies.  The States have since passed compliance
legislations and as on 2002, the total number of elected representatives
was 67,990 of which 22,665 were women.  However, the expected
empowerment of women in decision-making process has not fully
materialized.
1.3 Many issues relating to urban governance have specific
implications for women empowerment.  Since women constitute nearly
50 per cent of population, successful implementation of any programme

would gain from women’s participation in policy formulation and
decision making.  Increased representation of women in Urban Local
Bodies would go a long way in ensuring their participation at grass root
level and mainstreaming of gender concerns in governance and decision
making including those related to basic municipal services like water
supply, sanitation, solid waste management, health and education.
1.4 In recognition of this concern, the Hon’ble President of India
in her address to Parliament on June 4, 2009 stated that a Bill providing
50 per cent reservation for women in the Panchayats and Urban Local
Bodies would be moved by the Government within 100 days as women
suffer multiple deprivations of class, caste and gender and enhancing
reservation in Urban Local Bodies would lead to more women entering
the public sphere.  This is only desirable since women constitute nearly
half of the population.
1.5 In the aforesaid background, the Constitution (112th Amendment)
Bill, 2009 was introduced in Lok Sabha on 24 November, 2009 and
referred to the Standing Committee on Urban Development on
29th December, 2009 for examination and report to Parliament.  As stated
in the Objects and Reasons of the Bill, the proposed legislation seeks to
enhance mainstream gender concerns in governance and decision
making process.  To achieve the aforesaid objective, the proposed
legislation seeks to amend Article 243T of the Constitution.
1.6 As stated above, the Constitution (112th Amendment) Bill, 2009
was referred to the Standing Committee on Urban Development on
29th December, 2009 for examination and making report to Parliament.
The Committee accordingly obtained written information on various
issues which might have a direct bearing on the Bill from the nodal
ministry i.e., the Ministry of Urban Development.  The preliminary
meeting of the Committee was held on 28th January, 2010 whereby
the representatives of the nodal ministry briefed about the various
provisions of the Bill.  During the deliberations, the nodal Ministry was
assisted by the representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice, who
clarified various legal provisions.  The Committee at their sitting held
on 28th January, 2010 decided to invite the views of the State
2

Governments and the Union Territories Administrations with the
permission of the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha in pursuance of the
Direction 60 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.
1.7 For wider consultations, the Committee invited the views of the
experts, organizations and public at large through print and electronic
media on the aforesaid legislation.  Accordingly, six experts/organiza-
tions submitted memoranda.  The Committee took evidence of three
experts as well as the representatives of the Nodal Ministry at their sitting
held on 14th May 2010.
1.8 The Committee deliberated the various provisions of the Bill
in detail.  The details about the deliberations have been given in
Part–II and the suggested amendments have been given in Part-III of the
Report.
3

PART IIPART IIPART IIPART IIPART II
DELIBERATIONS HELD BY THE COMMITTEE ON THE
CONSTITUTION (112TH AMENDMENT) BILL
1.9 So far as the existing Constitutional provisions are concerned,
Article 243T of the Constitution reads as under:
“243T. Reservation of seats243T. Reservation of seats243T. Reservation of seats243T. Reservation of seats243T. Reservation of seats
(1) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes in every Municipality and the number of
seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same
proportion to the total number of seats to be filled by direct
election in that Municipality as the population of the Scheduled
Castes in the Municipal area or of the Scheduled Tribes in
the Municipal area bears to the total population of that area
and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different
constituencies in a Municipality;
(2) Not less than one third of the total number of seats reserved
under clause (1) shall be reserved for women belonging to
the Scheduled Castes or, as the case may be, the Scheduled
Tribes;
(3) Not less than one third (including the number of seats reserved
for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled by
direct election in every Municipality shall be reserved for
women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different
constituencies in a Municipality;
(4) The offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities shall be
reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and
women in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by
law, provide;
4

(5) The reservation of seats under clauses (1) and (2) and the
reservation of offices of Chairpersons (other than the
reservation for women) under clause (4) shall cease to have
effect on the expiration of the period specified in article 334;
(6) Nothing in this Part shall prevent the Legislature of a State from
making any provision for reservation of seats in any
Municipality or offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities
in favour of backward class of citizens.”
1.10 The Constitution (One Hundred and Twelfth Amendment) Bill,
2009 seeks to amend Article 243T. The operative clauses of the Bill read
as under:
“In article 243T of the Constitution,—
(i) in clause (2), for the word “one-third”, the word “one-half”
shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (3), for the word “one-third”, the word “one-half”
shall be substituted;
(iii) for clause (4), the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“(4) The offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities shall
be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and
women in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law,
provide:
Provided that the number of offices of Chairpersons reserved
for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the
Municipalities in any State shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same
proportion to the total number of such offices as the population of
the Scheduled Castes in the State or of the Scheduled Tribes in the
State bears to the total population of that State:
Provided further that not less than one-half of the total number
of offices of Chairpersons reserved for the Scheduled Castes and
the Scheduled Tribes in the Municipalities shall be reserved for
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as the case may be,
the Scheduled Tribes:
5

Provided also that not less than one-half of the total
number of offices of Chairpersons (including the number of offices
reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes) in the Municipalities shall be reserved for
women:
Provided also that the number of offices reserved under this
clause shall be allotted by rotation to different Municipalities.”.
[A copy of the Bill is appended as Appendix-I]
Views of the States and UT Administrations/Experts on clausesViews of the States and UT Administrations/Experts on clausesViews of the States and UT Administrations/Experts on clausesViews of the States and UT Administrations/Experts on clausesViews of the States and UT Administrations/Experts on clauses
(2) and (3) of the Bill:—(2) and (3) of the Bill:—(2) and (3) of the Bill:—(2) and (3) of the Bill:—(2) and (3) of the Bill:—
1.11 The Ministry of Urban Development in their written
material provided to the Committee had stated that out of 35 States and
Union Territories only 15 have responded to the issue concerning
enhancement of reservation for women to fifty percent in Urban Local
Bodies. Besides, only 10 out of the 15 States/UTs have supported the
idea of enhancing the prescribed reservation for women from one-
third to one half.   When asked whether there was enough support to
get the Bill passed, the Ministry in their written statement replied as
under:
“10 States/UTs had earlier supported for enhancement of
reservation for women to 50 percent in Urban Local Bodies.
Subsequently major States like Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and
Andhra Pradesh have now supported the proposal and no State/
UT has opposed the same except Government of Arunachal Pradesh
and Sikkim. In case of Government of Sikkim, it has already
enhanced the reservation for women from 33% to 40% of the total
seats in Urban Local Bodies and supported maintaining the current
level of reservation.”
1.12 The 74th Amendment Act had favoured one-third reservation
for SC/ST women in Urban Local Bodies. However, it is yet to be
implemented by all States & UTs. Despite this the Constitution (One
Hundred and Twelfth Amendment) Bill, 2009 suggesting a rise in the
6

said reservation has been proposed. When the Ministry of Law and
Justice was asked to clarify on the issue they replied as under:—
“…The ground that certain States have yet to implement the existing
provisions need not become a ground in  providing a better
percentage of reservation in favour of women as the ultimate aim
is the achievement of women empowerment.  Hence, there is no
legal impediment in providing any change in the level of
reservation. The increase in reservation of seats for women is a
matter of policy.”
1.13 In response to the views elicited by the Committee on the
aforesaid Bill 1414141414 State Governments viz. Jharkhand, Sikkim, Mizoram,
Meghalaya, Orissa, Bihar, Maharashtra, Assam, Haryana, Tripura,
Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Karnataka and Gujarat and 0202020202
Union Territories, namely Lakshadweep and Chandigarh, responded in
writing to the Committee.
1.14 On the question of increasing the prescribed reservation for
women in Urban Local Bodies up to 50 percent, all States/UTs, except
the State of Meghalaya and Arunachal Pradesh, have favoured the
increase in the quantum of reservation for women up to 50 percent. The
State Government of Meghalaya in principle does not oppose the policy
of increasing the reservation for women up to 50 percent in the Urban
Local Bodies. They have stated that since as on date provisions of
reservation for women does not exists in the State and the provision for
providing 33 percent reservation is under process, the increase or decrease
is subject to the impact assessment in the future.  The State Government
of Arunachal Pradesh have suggested that the one-third reservation for
women should be continued.
1.15 On the question of supporting the overall policy of the
Government of  India in providing reservation to women in Urban Local
Bodies, each and every State/UT has  expressed their support to the overall
policy of providing reservation to women in Urban Local Bodies. In fact
many of these States had already tendered their concurrence when their
views were solicited in the matter while preparing the background of the
proposed amendment Bill by the Government of India.  As stated in the
7

Objects and Reasons of the Bill, the State Governments of Himachal
Pradesh, West Bengal, Bihar, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh and
Andhra Pradesh have supported the proposal for providing fifty per cent
reservation for women in Urban Local Bodies. The State Governments
of Bihar, Himachal Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh have already provided
for fifty per cent reservation for women in Urban Local Bodies.
1.16 So far as the amendment to clauses (2) and (3) of Article 243T
relating to reservation of not less than one half of the total number of
seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or the
Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, of the total number of seats reserved
for women is concerned, there has been consensus among all experts who
have tendered there views/suggestions that enhancement of reservation
for women in the Urban Local Bodies from one third percent to fifty
percent is necessary for increasing the participation and representation
of women in governance and decision making process.
Clause 4 of Article 243TClause 4 of Article 243TClause 4 of Article 243TClause 4 of Article 243TClause 4 of Article 243T
1.17 As regards amendment to clause 4 of Article 243T,  the un-
derlined principle as stated in Clause (1) of Article 243T is that the seats
shall be reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in every
Municipality and the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly
as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats to be filled
by direct election in that Municipality as the population of the Scheduled
Castes in the Municipal area or of the Scheduled Tribes in the Municipal
area bears to the total population of that area and such seats may be
allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a Municipality. However,
the proviso to Clause (4) as proposed in the Bill provides that the number
of Offices of Chairpersons reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes in the Municipalities in any State shall bear, as nearly
as may be, the same proportion to the total number of such offices as
the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or of the Scheduled
Tribes in the State bears to the total population of that State and not
according to the total urban population of the State.
1.18 When asked about the opinion of the Ministry if in
proviso (i) of Clause 4 line 5 the word “urban” is added in between
8

9
“total” and “population”, the Ministry of Urban Development in the
written reply stated as under:
“The present proviso given in draft is in order. If word ‘urban’ is
added in between ‘total’ and ‘population’ in proviso (i) of
Clause (4) line (5), the representation of SCs and STs at the level
of Offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities to the total number
of such offices shall not be in proportion  of their population in
the State and would become skewed. Assuming that the population
of SCs and STs in urban areas is lower than rural areas in the State,
this would mean lesser number of Chairpersons in urban areas
which would require related amendment in respect of rural areas
(Article 243D) so as to address the imbalance. In order to have a
holistic approach in the matter, consultations with the Ministry of
Panchayati Raj and Ministry of Law would be necessary.”
1.19 All the experts who had tendered their views/suggestions have
in principle favoured the basic idea of providing for reservation of seats
for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and women for the offices
of Chairpersons in the Municipalities. The Director, Regional Centre for
Urban and Environmental Studies, Hyderabad in written submission has
stated:
“…In the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, the
manner of reservation was left to the discretion of the State
Legislatures. But, the proposed Amendment Bill has clearly
specified the manner of reservation.  These provisions are clearer
not leaving any ambiguity for State Legislatures for interpretation.”
1.20 The Chief Planner, Town and Country Planning Organization
in his written submission stated as under:
“ In para 2 of section (2) it has been stated that the number of offices
of Chairpersons reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes in the Municipalities in any State shall bear as nearly as may
be the same proportion to the total number of such offices as the
population of Scheduled Castes in the State or of the Scheduled
Tribes in the State bears to the total population of that State. In this

10
regard it is felt that   reservation for SCs/STs may be in proportion
to their population in the respective city/town”.
A similar view was tendered by the Director, Regional Centre for
Urban and Environmental Studies, Lucknow in his written submission
stated:
“In proviso (i) of clause (4) the word ‘urban’ may be added in
between ‘total’ and ‘population’. This would reflect the real
population of SC and ST in place of whole State.”
1.21 The Committee sought further clarification in the above matter
from the Legislative Department of the Ministry of Law and Justice. In
their written correspondence, the Legislative Department clarified as
under:—
“After carefully considering the proposal, Legislative Department is
of the opinion that there is a rationale behind the provision
proposed by the Committee and we feel that the proposed
amendment is in consonance with the underlying principle
embodied in Article 243T of the Constitution. However, this being
a matter of policy, the administrative Ministry and the Department
of Legal Affairs may be consulted before any action in the matter
is taken.”
Other Backward ClassesOther Backward ClassesOther Backward ClassesOther Backward ClassesOther Backward Classes
1.22 The Committee also deliberated the issue pertaining to the
provision for reservation of seats for the ‘Other Backward Classes (OBCs)’
in the Urban Local Bodies. Almost all the States have unanimously
suggested that the matter may be left to the State Governments to decide
the issue of reservation of extending the provisions of reservation for
women belonging to the ‘Other Backward Classes’ category. In fact, some
States like Bihar, Maharashtra and Orissa have already made statutory
provisions for providing reservation to women belonging to OBC
category.
1.23 On being asked as to why the issue of reservation for the OBCs
has been left to the States and the impact  it would have if the same

11
is provided in the proposed Bill itself, the Ministry of Urban Development
in their written reply stated as under:—
 “Since the Seventy-fourth Amendment Act provided for an
enabling provision to Legislature of the State, to consider for
reservation of seats for Backward Class citizens in Municipalities,
it has been proposed to leave the matter relating to providing
enhanced reservation for women belonging to OBCs in the
Municipalities and offices of the Chairpersons of Municipalities to
the State legislatures.”
The Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development while briefing the
Committee about the proposed Bill stated as under:
 “As per the policy of the Governments, the decision has been that
as was before it will continue with the States.”
Further elaborating on this issue during the oral evidence he
submitted that Article 243(d) provides as under:
“… The Constitution already provides for a provision that States
can decide on this basis. … ‘Nothing in this part shall prevent the
Legislature of a State from making any provision for reservation
of seats in any Panchayat of Offices of Chairpersons in Panchayat
at any level in favour of backward class of citizens.’ So, that is the
provision which is available at the State level. The same is the
provision for the urban local bodies also.”
1.24 Further, clarifying on the issue, the Secretary, Ministry of
Urban Development in his oral submission before the Committee stated
as under:—
“The provisions for providing reservation to the Other Backward
Classes women have been left for the State Government to do it.
…The intention is to provide 50 per cent reservation but as far as
the provision for Other Backward Classes women is concerned, the
Constitution itself gives the option to the State Governments.  We
made an analysis of how the State Governments have exercised this
function.  Our review shows that the State Governments have taken

12
note of this provision and there are varying arrangements made
by different State Governments like Andhra Pradesh has provided
for 33 per cent reservation for OBCs.  That is one extreme.
Madhya Pradesh has provided for 25 per cent, Maharashtra and
Orissa have provided 27 per cent.  Rajasthan has provided 12 per
cent and there are some States which have not made a provision;
like Tamil Nadu and West Bengal.  So, there is a varying situation.
The intention at that time was to leave it to the State Governments
to take note of the requirement of that particular State and
accordingly make a provision in their respective urban legislations.
This analysis shows that they have taken into account their State
specific situation and provided for it in the respective legislation.
As I mentioned, there are varying situations. There are some States
which have not made a provision like the North Eastern States have
not made a provision separately for the OBCs. So, this itself
demonstrates the fact that a national representation may not be
appropriate.  It is better left to the States and the Constitution
mandates the States to take note of this.  They have accordingly
taken note of how it should be incorporated in their legislations.
That is why we felt that, that is not the issue to be addressed through
this amendment.  What we are basically trying to do through this
amendment is provide for women participation in this scheme of
things.”
1.25 When the Ministry of Law was asked to specify the reasons
for non-inclusion of the provision of reservation for women belonging
to OBC category in the proposed amendment Bill, the Secretary,
Legislative Department, Ministry of Law during the oral evidence stated
as under:
“The Legislative Department is concerned with translating the
policies of the concerned administrative Ministry to the legislations.
So, probably the administrative Ministry has already submitted the
policy of the Government in this regard.”
When further asked to specify the reasons for not specifically
providing for reservation to OBCs women in Urban Local Bodies and

13
whether it would be possible to include a proviso to this extent, the
Ministry in their written statement replied that this is a matter of policy.
The drafting of any provisions in this regard would depend on the policy
of the Government.
1.26 When the similar question was posed to the experts, they also
unanimously opined that there is an enabling provision in the Act itself
which provides that nothing shall prevent the States from making any
provision for reservation of seats in any Municipality or offices of
Chairpersons in the Municipalities in favour of Backward Classes of
citizens.
Rotation of SeatsRotation of SeatsRotation of SeatsRotation of SeatsRotation of Seats
1.27 The Committee while discussing the provisions of the Bill
came across the fact that there is no inter-State parity so far as the rotation
of reserved seats in each and every State is concerned. The Ministry of
Urban Development when asked to tender their views on the rotation of
reserved seats in Urban Local Bodies in their written statement stated as
under:—
“In terms of the Seventy-Fourth Amendment Act, this matter was
left with the State Governments as details of the different
constituencies and the representation of SC/ST and women, etc. are
available with the State Government. Hence, in the proposed Bill
also it is proposed to leave the matter relating to the rotation of seats,
prescribing of term etc., to the discretion of State Government.”
1.28 Deliberating on the issue, the Director, Regional Centre of
Urban and Environmental Studies, Hyderabad in his written reply stated
as under:—
“Similar to the earlier 74th Constitution Amendment Act, the
proposed Amendment also provides for allocation of the reserved
seats by rotation.  Though there is no problem with rotation, the
Amendment is silent on the period of rotation.  Because of this, the
State Governments adopted different methods for rotation of the
council members as well as the chairpersons. For instance, the
Municipal Acts in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Kerala provided

14
for the rotation of the reserved seats without mentioning the period.
But, the States have adopted a policy of rotation of reserved seats
including the chairpersons every term.  However, in Tamil Nadu,
rotation takes place every two terms. The research findings of the
RCUES study reveal that the council members in the States of
Andhra Pradesh and Kerala are not happy with the rotation every
term. They feel that this will de-motivate them to focus on their ward
level development as they are not sure as to which ward is in
allocation for them in the next elections. This uncertainty makes
them a bit indifferent to the local level issues and problems.  This
is true especially for the ward councillors who want to serve for
longer years from the same ward. Many of the councillors feel that,
a two term rotation method may be adopted for developing their
political careers.  In Tamil Nadu, the councillors feel that they are
happy with the two term rotation.  In Karnataka, the councillors
are happy with rotation every term rotation saying that it gives
opportunity for many people to serve.”
1.29 Further, the Director, Regional Centre for Urban and Environ-
mental Studies, Lucknow has in his written suggestion has stated as
under:
“The State Governments have been taking the decision in this
regard. The seats are rotated in every election. The term should be
specified. We are of the opinion that the minimum rotation period
should be 10 years. It would provide an opportunity to the women
councillors for long term planning and commitment. Rotation after
every election may inculcate disinterest amongst the councillors
towards the development of their ward/city. Albeit exceptions may
be there. Many of the women have been re-elected even after
rotation.”
Training of Women CouncillorsTraining of Women CouncillorsTraining of Women CouncillorsTraining of Women CouncillorsTraining of Women Councillors
1.30 The Committee during deliberations found that new set of
persons altogether with little or no experience of the working and
functioning of the Urban Local Bodies and with very little knowledge

15
of the rights, responsibilities as well as their duties as members of Urban
Local Bodies are likely to enter the political arena with this proposed
enhancement of reservation for the women and SCs/STs.  The proposed
Bill after becoming an Act would lead to new set of untrained
persons entering the electoral fray thus leading to their greater
representation in these Urban Local Bodies. When asked as to how does
the Government plan to address this issue given the fact that Urban Local
Bodies are already being criticized for not performing well due to lack
of trained pool of persons representing these bodies, the Ministry clarified
as under:
“As the women are becoming increasingly conscious of their rights
and desirous of contributing in the decision making towards
various urban issues concerning them, the proposed Bill is a
significant step in that direction. Further, as regards untrained
persons entering the electoral fray, the same would be taken care
by giving them adequate training about various aspects of
municipal governance, its acts and rules etc. and thereby making
them more competent to handle the different urban issues which
arise from time to time.”
1.31 When asked about the measures that exist to impart training
to the elected representatives of Urban Local Bodies and whether there
are sufficient number of personnel qualified enough to impart such
training, the Ministry of Urban Development in their written statement
submitted as under:—
“Yes. Training of women Councillors is an important programme
of the Ministry of Urban Development under which 100% assistance
is provided to the State Governments. In addition various
training programmes are conducted by the different Regional
Centres of Urban and Environmental Studies, All India Institute of
Local Self Government, NIUA and other training institutes in
various States. These institutes have adequate capacity to provide
training even if representation of the women is increased to fifty
percent.”

16
1.32 In this regard, the Director, Regional Centre of Urban and
Environmental Studies, Lucknow, in his written statement stated as
under:
“There has been a special package of orienting women councillors.
Under this initiative the Government of India has fixed a sum of
Rs.1000/- per day per head for organizing residential orientation
programmes for the elected women councillors. The cost is equally
shared between the Government of India and the State Government.
Many State Governments have not shown any interest in this
package for want of specific budget allocation at the State level. ...
The Union Government should develop a package of rapid training
programmes for all the women representatives of Urban Local
Bodies. Such an endeavour must be centrally financed, otherwise,
State Governments would not show their interests in training due
to lack of fund for the purpose. Even many NGOs/VOs are
imparting training to prospective candidates.”
1.33 The Director, Regional Centres for Urban and Environmental
Studies, Hyderabad, in his written statement further suggested that,
different strategies should be adopted to mainstream women and achieve
the gender balance in the governance process such as preparing the
potential women representatives through training in skills like running
and managing election campaigns and enhancing their political
knowledge and awareness levels, networking of women working in
different sectors and focused capacity building initiatives.

17
PART IIIPART IIIPART IIIPART IIIPART III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
Clauses (2) and (3) of Article 243T
The Committee note that Article 243T of the ConstitutionThe Committee note that Article 243T of the ConstitutionThe Committee note that Article 243T of the ConstitutionThe Committee note that Article 243T of the ConstitutionThe Committee note that Article 243T of the Constitution
(Seventy Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992 provides for reservation of(Seventy Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992 provides for reservation of(Seventy Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992 provides for reservation of(Seventy Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992 provides for reservation of(Seventy Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992 provides for reservation of
seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and also womenseats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and also womenseats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and also womenseats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and also womenseats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and also women
in Urban Local Bodies. Clause (2) of Article 243T provides that notin Urban Local Bodies. Clause (2) of Article 243T provides that notin Urban Local Bodies. Clause (2) of Article 243T provides that notin Urban Local Bodies. Clause (2) of Article 243T provides that notin Urban Local Bodies. Clause (2) of Article 243T provides that not
less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under clauseless than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under clauseless than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under clauseless than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under clauseless than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under clause
(1) of the said Article shall be reserved for women belonging to(1) of the said Article shall be reserved for women belonging to(1) of the said Article shall be reserved for women belonging to(1) of the said Article shall be reserved for women belonging to(1) of the said Article shall be reserved for women belonging to
Scheduled Castes or as the case may be, Scheduled Tribes.  Similarly,Scheduled Castes or as the case may be, Scheduled Tribes.  Similarly,Scheduled Castes or as the case may be, Scheduled Tribes.  Similarly,Scheduled Castes or as the case may be, Scheduled Tribes.  Similarly,Scheduled Castes or as the case may be, Scheduled Tribes.  Similarly,
clause (3) of the Article 243T provides that not less than one-thirdclause (3) of the Article 243T provides that not less than one-thirdclause (3) of the Article 243T provides that not less than one-thirdclause (3) of the Article 243T provides that not less than one-thirdclause (3) of the Article 243T provides that not less than one-third
(including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to(including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to(including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to(including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to(including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seatsScheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seatsScheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seatsScheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seatsScheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats
to be filled by direct election in every Municipality shall be reservedto be filled by direct election in every Municipality shall be reservedto be filled by direct election in every Municipality shall be reservedto be filled by direct election in every Municipality shall be reservedto be filled by direct election in every Municipality shall be reserved
for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to differentfor women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to differentfor women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to differentfor women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to differentfor women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different
constituencies in a Municipality.  Further clause (4) of Article 243Tconstituencies in a Municipality.  Further clause (4) of Article 243Tconstituencies in a Municipality.  Further clause (4) of Article 243Tconstituencies in a Municipality.  Further clause (4) of Article 243Tconstituencies in a Municipality.  Further clause (4) of Article 243T
provides that the offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities shallprovides that the offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities shallprovides that the offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities shallprovides that the offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities shallprovides that the offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities shall
be reserved for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and women inbe reserved for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and women inbe reserved for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and women inbe reserved for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and women inbe reserved for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and women in
such manner as the legislature of a State may, by law, provide.such manner as the legislature of a State may, by law, provide.such manner as the legislature of a State may, by law, provide.such manner as the legislature of a State may, by law, provide.such manner as the legislature of a State may, by law, provide.
2.2.2.2.2. The Committee find that the proposed, ‘ConstitutionThe Committee find that the proposed, ‘ConstitutionThe Committee find that the proposed, ‘ConstitutionThe Committee find that the proposed, ‘ConstitutionThe Committee find that the proposed, ‘Constitution
(112th Amendment) Bill, 2009’ seeks to amend Article 243T clauses(112th Amendment) Bill, 2009’ seeks to amend Article 243T clauses(112th Amendment) Bill, 2009’ seeks to amend Article 243T clauses(112th Amendment) Bill, 2009’ seeks to amend Article 243T clauses(112th Amendment) Bill, 2009’ seeks to amend Article 243T clauses
(2) (3) and (4) thereby increasing the women representation including(2) (3) and (4) thereby increasing the women representation including(2) (3) and (4) thereby increasing the women representation including(2) (3) and (4) thereby increasing the women representation including(2) (3) and (4) thereby increasing the women representation including
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes women, in Urban LocalScheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes women, in Urban LocalScheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes women, in Urban LocalScheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes women, in Urban LocalScheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes women, in Urban Local
Bodies from existing one-third to one-half and making provisionsBodies from existing one-third to one-half and making provisionsBodies from existing one-third to one-half and making provisionsBodies from existing one-third to one-half and making provisionsBodies from existing one-third to one-half and making provisions
for reservation of offices of Chairpersons for Scheduled Castes andfor reservation of offices of Chairpersons for Scheduled Castes andfor reservation of offices of Chairpersons for Scheduled Castes andfor reservation of offices of Chairpersons for Scheduled Castes andfor reservation of offices of Chairpersons for Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes and women.Scheduled Tribes and women.Scheduled Tribes and women.Scheduled Tribes and women.Scheduled Tribes and women.
3.3.3.3.3. The Committee while agreeing to the amendments inThe Committee while agreeing to the amendments inThe Committee while agreeing to the amendments inThe Committee while agreeing to the amendments inThe Committee while agreeing to the amendments in
clauses (2) and (3) of the proposed Bill feel that enhancement ofclauses (2) and (3) of the proposed Bill feel that enhancement ofclauses (2) and (3) of the proposed Bill feel that enhancement ofclauses (2) and (3) of the proposed Bill feel that enhancement ofclauses (2) and (3) of the proposed Bill feel that enhancement of
reservation for women in Urban Local Bodies would not only ensurereservation for women in Urban Local Bodies would not only ensurereservation for women in Urban Local Bodies would not only ensurereservation for women in Urban Local Bodies would not only ensurereservation for women in Urban Local Bodies would not only ensure
their increased representation and participation in Urban Localtheir increased representation and participation in Urban Localtheir increased representation and participation in Urban Localtheir increased representation and participation in Urban Localtheir increased representation and participation in Urban Local

18
Bodies, but would also go a long way in articulating the voice ofBodies, but would also go a long way in articulating the voice ofBodies, but would also go a long way in articulating the voice ofBodies, but would also go a long way in articulating the voice ofBodies, but would also go a long way in articulating the voice of
women who constitute almost fifty per cent of the population andwomen who constitute almost fifty per cent of the population andwomen who constitute almost fifty per cent of the population andwomen who constitute almost fifty per cent of the population andwomen who constitute almost fifty per cent of the population and
thus ensure that their concerns are reflected in various policies andthus ensure that their concerns are reflected in various policies andthus ensure that their concerns are reflected in various policies andthus ensure that their concerns are reflected in various policies andthus ensure that their concerns are reflected in various policies and
programmes related to urban governance which are implemented atprogrammes related to urban governance which are implemented atprogrammes related to urban governance which are implemented atprogrammes related to urban governance which are implemented atprogrammes related to urban governance which are implemented at
a decentralized level.a decentralized level.a decentralized level.a decentralized level.a decentralized level.
Clause (4) of article 243TClause (4) of article 243TClause (4) of article 243TClause (4) of article 243TClause (4) of article 243T
4. The Committee note that in the Constitution (Seventy-The Committee note that in the Constitution (Seventy-The Committee note that in the Constitution (Seventy-The Committee note that in the Constitution (Seventy-The Committee note that in the Constitution (Seventy-
Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, the manner in which the reservationFourth Amendment) Act, 1992, the manner in which the reservationFourth Amendment) Act, 1992, the manner in which the reservationFourth Amendment) Act, 1992, the manner in which the reservationFourth Amendment) Act, 1992, the manner in which the reservation
for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and women in so farfor Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and women in so farfor Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and women in so farfor Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and women in so farfor Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and women in so far
as it relates to the offices of Chairperson was to be applied wasas it relates to the offices of Chairperson was to be applied wasas it relates to the offices of Chairperson was to be applied wasas it relates to the offices of Chairperson was to be applied wasas it relates to the offices of Chairperson was to be applied was
left to the discretion of the State Legislatures.  But, the proposedleft to the discretion of the State Legislatures.  But, the proposedleft to the discretion of the State Legislatures.  But, the proposedleft to the discretion of the State Legislatures.  But, the proposedleft to the discretion of the State Legislatures.  But, the proposed
Amendment Bill has clearly specified the manner in which theAmendment Bill has clearly specified the manner in which theAmendment Bill has clearly specified the manner in which theAmendment Bill has clearly specified the manner in which theAmendment Bill has clearly specified the manner in which the
reservation has to be applied in future.reservation has to be applied in future.reservation has to be applied in future.reservation has to be applied in future.reservation has to be applied in future.
The Committee while deliberating the aforesaid provisionThe Committee while deliberating the aforesaid provisionThe Committee while deliberating the aforesaid provisionThe Committee while deliberating the aforesaid provisionThe Committee while deliberating the aforesaid provision
thread bare came across the fact that there is no consonance betweenthread bare came across the fact that there is no consonance betweenthread bare came across the fact that there is no consonance betweenthread bare came across the fact that there is no consonance betweenthread bare came across the fact that there is no consonance between
Article 243 T (1) and proposed clause 4 proviso (i) of the Bill.  TheArticle 243 T (1) and proposed clause 4 proviso (i) of the Bill.  TheArticle 243 T (1) and proposed clause 4 proviso (i) of the Bill.  TheArticle 243 T (1) and proposed clause 4 proviso (i) of the Bill.  TheArticle 243 T (1) and proposed clause 4 proviso (i) of the Bill.  The
Committee note that Article 243T (1) provides for reservation of seatsCommittee note that Article 243T (1) provides for reservation of seatsCommittee note that Article 243T (1) provides for reservation of seatsCommittee note that Article 243T (1) provides for reservation of seatsCommittee note that Article 243T (1) provides for reservation of seats
for SCs/STs in proportion to their population in the concernedfor SCs/STs in proportion to their population in the concernedfor SCs/STs in proportion to their population in the concernedfor SCs/STs in proportion to their population in the concernedfor SCs/STs in proportion to their population in the concerned
Municipal Area. In the present Bill, in clause (4) which providesMunicipal Area. In the present Bill, in clause (4) which providesMunicipal Area. In the present Bill, in clause (4) which providesMunicipal Area. In the present Bill, in clause (4) which providesMunicipal Area. In the present Bill, in clause (4) which provides
for reservation for the offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities,for reservation for the offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities,for reservation for the offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities,for reservation for the offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities,for reservation for the offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities,
four provisos have been added.  Proviso (1) provides for reservationfour provisos have been added.  Proviso (1) provides for reservationfour provisos have been added.  Proviso (1) provides for reservationfour provisos have been added.  Proviso (1) provides for reservationfour provisos have been added.  Proviso (1) provides for reservation
of offices of Chairpersons in Municipalities for SC or ST or as theof offices of Chairpersons in Municipalities for SC or ST or as theof offices of Chairpersons in Municipalities for SC or ST or as theof offices of Chairpersons in Municipalities for SC or ST or as theof offices of Chairpersons in Municipalities for SC or ST or as the
case may be in proportion to their population in the whole State.case may be in proportion to their population in the whole State.case may be in proportion to their population in the whole State.case may be in proportion to their population in the whole State.case may be in proportion to their population in the whole State.
The Committee fail to understand the rationale behind two separateThe Committee fail to understand the rationale behind two separateThe Committee fail to understand the rationale behind two separateThe Committee fail to understand the rationale behind two separateThe Committee fail to understand the rationale behind two separate
sets of rules sets of rules sets of rules sets of rules sets of rules viz.viz.viz.viz.viz. one for electing the councillors in a Municipality one for electing the councillors in a Municipality one for electing the councillors in a Municipality one for electing the councillors in a Municipality one for electing the councillors in a Municipality
and another for electing Chairpersons from amongst them.and another for electing Chairpersons from amongst them.and another for electing Chairpersons from amongst them.and another for electing Chairpersons from amongst them.and another for electing Chairpersons from amongst them.
When all the seats in a Municipality are reserved in proportion toWhen all the seats in a Municipality are reserved in proportion toWhen all the seats in a Municipality are reserved in proportion toWhen all the seats in a Municipality are reserved in proportion toWhen all the seats in a Municipality are reserved in proportion to
the SC/ST population in that Municipal Area, while electing thethe SC/ST population in that Municipal Area, while electing thethe SC/ST population in that Municipal Area, while electing thethe SC/ST population in that Municipal Area, while electing thethe SC/ST population in that Municipal Area, while electing the
Chairperson, the population of whole State is proposed to be takenChairperson, the population of whole State is proposed to be takenChairperson, the population of whole State is proposed to be takenChairperson, the population of whole State is proposed to be takenChairperson, the population of whole State is proposed to be taken
into consideration. The Committee are of the view that a trueinto consideration. The Committee are of the view that a trueinto consideration. The Committee are of the view that a trueinto consideration. The Committee are of the view that a trueinto consideration. The Committee are of the view that a true
demographic representation should be taken into account for electingdemographic representation should be taken into account for electingdemographic representation should be taken into account for electingdemographic representation should be taken into account for electingdemographic representation should be taken into account for electing
the Chairperson also. The Committee find that the present Provisothe Chairperson also. The Committee find that the present Provisothe Chairperson also. The Committee find that the present Provisothe Chairperson also. The Committee find that the present Provisothe Chairperson also. The Committee find that the present Proviso
(1) of Clause (4) is not in consonance with the underlying principle(1) of Clause (4) is not in consonance with the underlying principle(1) of Clause (4) is not in consonance with the underlying principle(1) of Clause (4) is not in consonance with the underlying principle(1) of Clause (4) is not in consonance with the underlying principle
embodied in Article 243 T (1) of the Constitution. Duringembodied in Article 243 T (1) of the Constitution. Duringembodied in Article 243 T (1) of the Constitution. Duringembodied in Article 243 T (1) of the Constitution. Duringembodied in Article 243 T (1) of the Constitution. During  the the the the the

19
evevevevevidence, while discussing the issue of demographic representationidence, while discussing the issue of demographic representationidence, while discussing the issue of demographic representationidence, while discussing the issue of demographic representationidence, while discussing the issue of demographic representation
as per population of urban areas, the Secretary informed that theyas per population of urban areas, the Secretary informed that theyas per population of urban areas, the Secretary informed that theyas per population of urban areas, the Secretary informed that theyas per population of urban areas, the Secretary informed that they
have not come across any such instance where any State has raisedhave not come across any such instance where any State has raisedhave not come across any such instance where any State has raisedhave not come across any such instance where any State has raisedhave not come across any such instance where any State has raised
it as an issue.  The Committee would like to point out that earlierit as an issue.  The Committee would like to point out that earlierit as an issue.  The Committee would like to point out that earlierit as an issue.  The Committee would like to point out that earlierit as an issue.  The Committee would like to point out that earlier
no such proviso existed in Article 243T clause (4) as inserted byno such proviso existed in Article 243T clause (4) as inserted byno such proviso existed in Article 243T clause (4) as inserted byno such proviso existed in Article 243T clause (4) as inserted byno such proviso existed in Article 243T clause (4) as inserted by
Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992. It was simplyConstitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992. It was simplyConstitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992. It was simplyConstitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992. It was simplyConstitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992. It was simply
left to the State Government to decide the manner in which theyleft to the State Government to decide the manner in which theyleft to the State Government to decide the manner in which theyleft to the State Government to decide the manner in which theyleft to the State Government to decide the manner in which they
wanted to implement the Clause (4) of Article 243T. The provisowanted to implement the Clause (4) of Article 243T. The provisowanted to implement the Clause (4) of Article 243T. The provisowanted to implement the Clause (4) of Article 243T. The provisowanted to implement the Clause (4) of Article 243T. The proviso
(1) to Clause (4) has been proposed to be inserted in the present(1) to Clause (4) has been proposed to be inserted in the present(1) to Clause (4) has been proposed to be inserted in the present(1) to Clause (4) has been proposed to be inserted in the present(1) to Clause (4) has been proposed to be inserted in the present
Constitution (One Hundred and Twelfth Amendment) Bill, 2009. ItConstitution (One Hundred and Twelfth Amendment) Bill, 2009. ItConstitution (One Hundred and Twelfth Amendment) Bill, 2009. ItConstitution (One Hundred and Twelfth Amendment) Bill, 2009. ItConstitution (One Hundred and Twelfth Amendment) Bill, 2009. It
is, therefore, evident that the question of any complaint being raisedis, therefore, evident that the question of any complaint being raisedis, therefore, evident that the question of any complaint being raisedis, therefore, evident that the question of any complaint being raisedis, therefore, evident that the question of any complaint being raised
by any of the State Governments could not arise earlier.  Moreover,by any of the State Governments could not arise earlier.  Moreover,by any of the State Governments could not arise earlier.  Moreover,by any of the State Governments could not arise earlier.  Moreover,by any of the State Governments could not arise earlier.  Moreover,
the Legislative Department (Ministry of Law and Justice) has alsothe Legislative Department (Ministry of Law and Justice) has alsothe Legislative Department (Ministry of Law and Justice) has alsothe Legislative Department (Ministry of Law and Justice) has alsothe Legislative Department (Ministry of Law and Justice) has also
supported the concerns of the Committee in this regard as per theirsupported the concerns of the Committee in this regard as per theirsupported the concerns of the Committee in this regard as per theirsupported the concerns of the Committee in this regard as per theirsupported the concerns of the Committee in this regard as per their
written communication dated 20th May, 2010.  The Committee,written communication dated 20th May, 2010.  The Committee,written communication dated 20th May, 2010.  The Committee,written communication dated 20th May, 2010.  The Committee,written communication dated 20th May, 2010.  The Committee,
therefore, strongly feel that the offices of Chairpersons for SC ortherefore, strongly feel that the offices of Chairpersons for SC ortherefore, strongly feel that the offices of Chairpersons for SC ortherefore, strongly feel that the offices of Chairpersons for SC ortherefore, strongly feel that the offices of Chairpersons for SC or
ST should also be reserved on the basis of their total urbanST should also be reserved on the basis of their total urbanST should also be reserved on the basis of their total urbanST should also be reserved on the basis of their total urbanST should also be reserved on the basis of their total urban
population in that State (population in that State (population in that State (population in that State (population in that State ( i.e.i.e.i.e.i.e.i.e. by calculating total population of all by calculating total population of all by calculating total population of all by calculating total population of all by calculating total population of all
the Municipalities in a given State).the Municipalities in a given State).the Municipalities in a given State).the Municipalities in a given State).the Municipalities in a given State).
5.5.5.5.5. Accordingly, the Committee recommend that proviso (1) ofAccordingly, the Committee recommend that proviso (1) ofAccordingly, the Committee recommend that proviso (1) ofAccordingly, the Committee recommend that proviso (1) ofAccordingly, the Committee recommend that proviso (1) of
Clause (4) of the Bill should be amended as under:Clause (4) of the Bill should be amended as under:Clause (4) of the Bill should be amended as under:Clause (4) of the Bill should be amended as under:Clause (4) of the Bill should be amended as under:
“Provided that the number of offices of Chairpersons reserved“Provided that the number of offices of Chairpersons reserved“Provided that the number of offices of Chairpersons reserved“Provided that the number of offices of Chairpersons reserved“Provided that the number of offices of Chairpersons reserved
for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in thefor the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in thefor the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in thefor the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in thefor the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the
Municipalities in any State shall bear, as nearly as may be,Municipalities in any State shall bear, as nearly as may be,Municipalities in any State shall bear, as nearly as may be,Municipalities in any State shall bear, as nearly as may be,Municipalities in any State shall bear, as nearly as may be,
the same proportion to the total number of such offices as thethe same proportion to the total number of such offices as thethe same proportion to the total number of such offices as thethe same proportion to the total number of such offices as thethe same proportion to the total number of such offices as the
population of the Scheduled Castes in Urban Areas or of thepopulation of the Scheduled Castes in Urban Areas or of thepopulation of the Scheduled Castes in Urban Areas or of thepopulation of the Scheduled Castes in Urban Areas or of thepopulation of the Scheduled Castes in Urban Areas or of the
Scheduled Tribes in Urban Areas bears to the total UrbanScheduled Tribes in Urban Areas bears to the total UrbanScheduled Tribes in Urban Areas bears to the total UrbanScheduled Tribes in Urban Areas bears to the total UrbanScheduled Tribes in Urban Areas bears to the total Urban
population of that State.”population of that State.”population of that State.”population of that State.”population of that State.”
6.6.6.6.6. The Committee understand that this suggested amendmentThe Committee understand that this suggested amendmentThe Committee understand that this suggested amendmentThe Committee understand that this suggested amendmentThe Committee understand that this suggested amendment
would also require corresponding amendment in Article 243(D)(4),would also require corresponding amendment in Article 243(D)(4),would also require corresponding amendment in Article 243(D)(4),would also require corresponding amendment in Article 243(D)(4),would also require corresponding amendment in Article 243(D)(4),
which relates to reservation of seats for Chairpersons in thewhich relates to reservation of seats for Chairpersons in thewhich relates to reservation of seats for Chairpersons in thewhich relates to reservation of seats for Chairpersons in thewhich relates to reservation of seats for Chairpersons in the
Panchayati Raj Institutions in rural areas, so as to address anyPanchayati Raj Institutions in rural areas, so as to address anyPanchayati Raj Institutions in rural areas, so as to address anyPanchayati Raj Institutions in rural areas, so as to address anyPanchayati Raj Institutions in rural areas, so as to address any
imbalance created and accordingly give actual representation to SCimbalance created and accordingly give actual representation to SCimbalance created and accordingly give actual representation to SCimbalance created and accordingly give actual representation to SCimbalance created and accordingly give actual representation to SC
or to ST as the case may be, as per their actual population ior to ST as the case may be, as per their actual population ior to ST as the case may be, as per their actual population ior to ST as the case may be, as per their actual population ior to ST as the case may be, as per their actual population i n then then then then the

20
rrrrrespective  urban or rural areas.  The Committee desire that theespective  urban or rural areas.  The Committee desire that theespective  urban or rural areas.  The Committee desire that theespective  urban or rural areas.  The Committee desire that theespective  urban or rural areas.  The Committee desire that the
Ministry of Urban Development to decide the matter in consultationMinistry of Urban Development to decide the matter in consultationMinistry of Urban Development to decide the matter in consultationMinistry of Urban Development to decide the matter in consultationMinistry of Urban Development to decide the matter in consultation
with Ministry of Panchayati Raj and Ministry of Law in this regard.with Ministry of Panchayati Raj and Ministry of Law in this regard.with Ministry of Panchayati Raj and Ministry of Law in this regard.with Ministry of Panchayati Raj and Ministry of Law in this regard.with Ministry of Panchayati Raj and Ministry of Law in this regard.
Rotation of SeatsRotation of SeatsRotation of SeatsRotation of SeatsRotation of Seats
7.7.7.7.7. The issue of rotation of seats while providing reservationsThe issue of rotation of seats while providing reservationsThe issue of rotation of seats while providing reservationsThe issue of rotation of seats while providing reservationsThe issue of rotation of seats while providing reservations
in Municipalities and Offices of Chairpersons also engaged thein Municipalities and Offices of Chairpersons also engaged thein Municipalities and Offices of Chairpersons also engaged thein Municipalities and Offices of Chairpersons also engaged thein Municipalities and Offices of Chairpersons also engaged the
attention of the Committee. The Committee note that in terms ofattention of the Committee. The Committee note that in terms ofattention of the Committee. The Committee note that in terms ofattention of the Committee. The Committee note that in terms ofattention of the Committee. The Committee note that in terms of
the Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, this matterthe Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, this matterthe Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, this matterthe Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, this matterthe Constitution (Seventy-Fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, this matter
was left to the State Governments as details of the differentwas left to the State Governments as details of the differentwas left to the State Governments as details of the differentwas left to the State Governments as details of the differentwas left to the State Governments as details of the different
constituencies and representation of SC/ST and women are availableconstituencies and representation of SC/ST and women are availableconstituencies and representation of SC/ST and women are availableconstituencies and representation of SC/ST and women are availableconstituencies and representation of SC/ST and women are available
with them only.  The Committee find that the present Bill also leaveswith them only.  The Committee find that the present Bill also leaveswith them only.  The Committee find that the present Bill also leaveswith them only.  The Committee find that the present Bill also leaveswith them only.  The Committee find that the present Bill also leaves
this matter of rotation of seats and prescribing its term etc. to thethis matter of rotation of seats and prescribing its term etc. to thethis matter of rotation of seats and prescribing its term etc. to thethis matter of rotation of seats and prescribing its term etc. to thethis matter of rotation of seats and prescribing its term etc. to the
discretion of State Governments.  The Committee find that the Statesdiscretion of State Governments.  The Committee find that the Statesdiscretion of State Governments.  The Committee find that the Statesdiscretion of State Governments.  The Committee find that the Statesdiscretion of State Governments.  The Committee find that the States
have adopted different methods and terms for rotation.  For instancehave adopted different methods and terms for rotation.  For instancehave adopted different methods and terms for rotation.  For instancehave adopted different methods and terms for rotation.  For instancehave adopted different methods and terms for rotation.  For instance
the municipal Acts in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Kerala providethe municipal Acts in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Kerala providethe municipal Acts in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Kerala providethe municipal Acts in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Kerala providethe municipal Acts in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Kerala provide
for the rotation of the reserved seats without mentioning the periodfor the rotation of the reserved seats without mentioning the periodfor the rotation of the reserved seats without mentioning the periodfor the rotation of the reserved seats without mentioning the periodfor the rotation of the reserved seats without mentioning the period
but have adopted the policy of rotation in every term.  Whereasbut have adopted the policy of rotation in every term.  Whereasbut have adopted the policy of rotation in every term.  Whereasbut have adopted the policy of rotation in every term.  Whereasbut have adopted the policy of rotation in every term.  Whereas
in Tamil Nadu, the rotation takes place after every two terms.  Thein Tamil Nadu, the rotation takes place after every two terms.  Thein Tamil Nadu, the rotation takes place after every two terms.  Thein Tamil Nadu, the rotation takes place after every two terms.  Thein Tamil Nadu, the rotation takes place after every two terms.  The
Committee feel that restricting the term of reserved seats includingCommittee feel that restricting the term of reserved seats includingCommittee feel that restricting the term of reserved seats includingCommittee feel that restricting the term of reserved seats includingCommittee feel that restricting the term of reserved seats including
the Chairpersons to one term actually demotivate them to focus onthe Chairpersons to one term actually demotivate them to focus onthe Chairpersons to one term actually demotivate them to focus onthe Chairpersons to one term actually demotivate them to focus onthe Chairpersons to one term actually demotivate them to focus on
their developmental works.  This uncertainty makes them a bittheir developmental works.  This uncertainty makes them a bittheir developmental works.  This uncertainty makes them a bittheir developmental works.  This uncertainty makes them a bittheir developmental works.  This uncertainty makes them a bit
indifferent to the local level issues and problems.  As such, theindifferent to the local level issues and problems.  As such, theindifferent to the local level issues and problems.  As such, theindifferent to the local level issues and problems.  As such, theindifferent to the local level issues and problems.  As such, the
Committee desire that the rotation cycle of reservation of seats forCommittee desire that the rotation cycle of reservation of seats forCommittee desire that the rotation cycle of reservation of seats forCommittee desire that the rotation cycle of reservation of seats forCommittee desire that the rotation cycle of reservation of seats for
women may be extended to two terms and strongly feel that therewomen may be extended to two terms and strongly feel that therewomen may be extended to two terms and strongly feel that therewomen may be extended to two terms and strongly feel that therewomen may be extended to two terms and strongly feel that there
needs to be a uniformity across the States.  The Committee,needs to be a uniformity across the States.  The Committee,needs to be a uniformity across the States.  The Committee,needs to be a uniformity across the States.  The Committee,needs to be a uniformity across the States.  The Committee,
therefore, urge that the Government to bestow more thought on thistherefore, urge that the Government to bestow more thought on thistherefore, urge that the Government to bestow more thought on thistherefore, urge that the Government to bestow more thought on thistherefore, urge that the Government to bestow more thought on this
aspect by inviting views from all the States so as to ensure uniformityaspect by inviting views from all the States so as to ensure uniformityaspect by inviting views from all the States so as to ensure uniformityaspect by inviting views from all the States so as to ensure uniformityaspect by inviting views from all the States so as to ensure uniformity
in term of rotation of seats for at least two term in Municipalitiesin term of rotation of seats for at least two term in Municipalitiesin term of rotation of seats for at least two term in Municipalitiesin term of rotation of seats for at least two term in Municipalitiesin term of rotation of seats for at least two term in Municipalities
of all the States.of all the States.of all the States.of all the States.of all the States.
Status of OBCsStatus of OBCsStatus of OBCsStatus of OBCsStatus of OBCs
8.8.8.8.8. The Committee note that the present Bill does not mentionThe Committee note that the present Bill does not mentionThe Committee note that the present Bill does not mentionThe Committee note that the present Bill does not mentionThe Committee note that the present Bill does not mention
about reservation of women belonging to Other Backward Classabout reservation of women belonging to Other Backward Classabout reservation of women belonging to Other Backward Classabout reservation of women belonging to Other Backward Classabout reservation of women belonging to Other Backward Class
category in Municipalities. Article 243T(6) of The Constitutioncategory in Municipalities. Article 243T(6) of The Constitutioncategory in Municipalities. Article 243T(6) of The Constitutioncategory in Municipalities. Article 243T(6) of The Constitutioncategory in Municipalities. Article 243T(6) of The Constitution
(Seventy-Fourth Amendment), Act, 1992 states that ‘Nothing in this(Seventy-Fourth Amendment), Act, 1992 states that ‘Nothing in this(Seventy-Fourth Amendment), Act, 1992 states that ‘Nothing in this(Seventy-Fourth Amendment), Act, 1992 states that ‘Nothing in this(Seventy-Fourth Amendment), Act, 1992 states that ‘Nothing in this

21
part shall prevent the legislature of State from making any provisionpart shall prevent the legislature of State from making any provisionpart shall prevent the legislature of State from making any provisionpart shall prevent the legislature of State from making any provisionpart shall prevent the legislature of State from making any provision
for reservation of seats in any municipality or offices of Chairpersonsfor reservation of seats in any municipality or offices of Chairpersonsfor reservation of seats in any municipality or offices of Chairpersonsfor reservation of seats in any municipality or offices of Chairpersonsfor reservation of seats in any municipality or offices of Chairpersons
in the municipalities in favour of backward class of citizens’.  Viewsin the municipalities in favour of backward class of citizens’.  Viewsin the municipalities in favour of backward class of citizens’.  Viewsin the municipalities in favour of backward class of citizens’.  Viewsin the municipalities in favour of backward class of citizens’.  Views
sought from various State Governments on issue reveal that Statessought from various State Governments on issue reveal that Statessought from various State Governments on issue reveal that Statessought from various State Governments on issue reveal that Statessought from various State Governments on issue reveal that States
like Orissa, Bihar, Maharashtra have already provided reservationlike Orissa, Bihar, Maharashtra have already provided reservationlike Orissa, Bihar, Maharashtra have already provided reservationlike Orissa, Bihar, Maharashtra have already provided reservationlike Orissa, Bihar, Maharashtra have already provided reservation
to OBCs women in municipalities.  All the States/UTs were alsoto OBCs women in municipalities.  All the States/UTs were alsoto OBCs women in municipalities.  All the States/UTs were alsoto OBCs women in municipalities.  All the States/UTs were alsoto OBCs women in municipalities.  All the States/UTs were also
of the view that the issue of reservation for OBCs in municipalitiesof the view that the issue of reservation for OBCs in municipalitiesof the view that the issue of reservation for OBCs in municipalitiesof the view that the issue of reservation for OBCs in municipalitiesof the view that the issue of reservation for OBCs in municipalities
should best be left with State Governments only.  Experts who haveshould best be left with State Governments only.  Experts who haveshould best be left with State Governments only.  Experts who haveshould best be left with State Governments only.  Experts who haveshould best be left with State Governments only.  Experts who have
furnished their comments and appeared before the Committee alsofurnished their comments and appeared before the Committee alsofurnished their comments and appeared before the Committee alsofurnished their comments and appeared before the Committee alsofurnished their comments and appeared before the Committee also
favoured that the State Governments are the best judge to decidefavoured that the State Governments are the best judge to decidefavoured that the State Governments are the best judge to decidefavoured that the State Governments are the best judge to decidefavoured that the State Governments are the best judge to decide
the issue as the population as well as categories of OBCs differthe issue as the population as well as categories of OBCs differthe issue as the population as well as categories of OBCs differthe issue as the population as well as categories of OBCs differthe issue as the population as well as categories of OBCs differ
from State to State.  Since the population of OBC category womenfrom State to State.  Since the population of OBC category womenfrom State to State.  Since the population of OBC category womenfrom State to State.  Since the population of OBC category womenfrom State to State.  Since the population of OBC category women
and their socio-economic position in that particular State varies fromand their socio-economic position in that particular State varies fromand their socio-economic position in that particular State varies fromand their socio-economic position in that particular State varies fromand their socio-economic position in that particular State varies from
State to State, therefore, the decision regarding implementation ofState to State, therefore, the decision regarding implementation ofState to State, therefore, the decision regarding implementation ofState to State, therefore, the decision regarding implementation ofState to State, therefore, the decision regarding implementation of
reservation to OBCs women and also its modalities and the mannerreservation to OBCs women and also its modalities and the mannerreservation to OBCs women and also its modalities and the mannerreservation to OBCs women and also its modalities and the mannerreservation to OBCs women and also its modalities and the manner
in which it has to be done in a particular State should be left within which it has to be done in a particular State should be left within which it has to be done in a particular State should be left within which it has to be done in a particular State should be left within which it has to be done in a particular State should be left with
that State depending on their local needs.  The Committee is alsothat State depending on their local needs.  The Committee is alsothat State depending on their local needs.  The Committee is alsothat State depending on their local needs.  The Committee is alsothat State depending on their local needs.  The Committee is also
of the considered opinion that since the reservation  for backwardof the considered opinion that since the reservation  for backwardof the considered opinion that since the reservation  for backwardof the considered opinion that since the reservation  for backwardof the considered opinion that since the reservation  for backward
classes is an enabling provision in view of Article 243T(6) the matterclasses is an enabling provision in view of Article 243T(6) the matterclasses is an enabling provision in view of Article 243T(6) the matterclasses is an enabling provision in view of Article 243T(6) the matterclasses is an enabling provision in view of Article 243T(6) the matter
relating to the reservations for OBC category women may be leftrelating to the reservations for OBC category women may be leftrelating to the reservations for OBC category women may be leftrelating to the reservations for OBC category women may be leftrelating to the reservations for OBC category women may be left
with State Governments do decide on the basis of the local socio-with State Governments do decide on the basis of the local socio-with State Governments do decide on the basis of the local socio-with State Governments do decide on the basis of the local socio-with State Governments do decide on the basis of the local socio-
economic structure and situations in their particular States. Theeconomic structure and situations in their particular States. Theeconomic structure and situations in their particular States. Theeconomic structure and situations in their particular States. Theeconomic structure and situations in their particular States. The
Committee find that there is no such need to interfere with theCommittee find that there is no such need to interfere with theCommittee find that there is no such need to interfere with theCommittee find that there is no such need to interfere with theCommittee find that there is no such need to interfere with the
present arrangement which empowers the State to act according topresent arrangement which empowers the State to act according topresent arrangement which empowers the State to act according topresent arrangement which empowers the State to act according topresent arrangement which empowers the State to act according to
their local conditions.their local conditions.their local conditions.their local conditions.their local conditions.
Training for Women CouncillorsTraining for Women CouncillorsTraining for Women CouncillorsTraining for Women CouncillorsTraining for Women Councillors
9.9.9.9.9. The Committee note that off late women in India haveThe Committee note that off late women in India haveThe Committee note that off late women in India haveThe Committee note that off late women in India haveThe Committee note that off late women in India have
become increasingly conscious of their rights and duties. Theybecome increasingly conscious of their rights and duties. Theybecome increasingly conscious of their rights and duties. Theybecome increasingly conscious of their rights and duties. Theybecome increasingly conscious of their rights and duties. They
strongly desire to contribute in the decision making process onstrongly desire to contribute in the decision making process onstrongly desire to contribute in the decision making process onstrongly desire to contribute in the decision making process onstrongly desire to contribute in the decision making process on
various urban issues concerning them. The Committee are happyvarious urban issues concerning them. The Committee are happyvarious urban issues concerning them. The Committee are happyvarious urban issues concerning them. The Committee are happyvarious urban issues concerning them. The Committee are happy
to note that the proposed Bill is a significant step in that direction.to note that the proposed Bill is a significant step in that direction.to note that the proposed Bill is a significant step in that direction.to note that the proposed Bill is a significant step in that direction.to note that the proposed Bill is a significant step in that direction.
The Committee, nevertheless, cannot overlook the fact that womenThe Committee, nevertheless, cannot overlook the fact that womenThe Committee, nevertheless, cannot overlook the fact that womenThe Committee, nevertheless, cannot overlook the fact that womenThe Committee, nevertheless, cannot overlook the fact that women
in the absence of proper training and guidance, if enter electoralin the absence of proper training and guidance, if enter electoralin the absence of proper training and guidance, if enter electoralin the absence of proper training and guidance, if enter electoralin the absence of proper training and guidance, if enter electoral
fray would only act as proxy representatives. In the socio-economicfray would only act as proxy representatives. In the socio-economicfray would only act as proxy representatives. In the socio-economicfray would only act as proxy representatives. In the socio-economicfray would only act as proxy representatives. In the socio-economic
set up of the country that the patriarchal society which exists inset up of the country that the patriarchal society which exists inset up of the country that the patriarchal society which exists inset up of the country that the patriarchal society which exists inset up of the country that the patriarchal society which exists in

22
the country, the proxy representation is inevitable. The Committeethe country, the proxy representation is inevitable. The Committeethe country, the proxy representation is inevitable. The Committeethe country, the proxy representation is inevitable. The Committeethe country, the proxy representation is inevitable. The Committee
are of the view that to obviate such proxy representation theare of the view that to obviate such proxy representation theare of the view that to obviate such proxy representation theare of the view that to obviate such proxy representation theare of the view that to obviate such proxy representation the
Government should initiate and develop a package of rapid trainingGovernment should initiate and develop a package of rapid trainingGovernment should initiate and develop a package of rapid trainingGovernment should initiate and develop a package of rapid trainingGovernment should initiate and develop a package of rapid training
programme for all women representatives of Urban Local Bodies.programme for all women representatives of Urban Local Bodies.programme for all women representatives of Urban Local Bodies.programme for all women representatives of Urban Local Bodies.programme for all women representatives of Urban Local Bodies.
Needless to say that such an endeavour must be centrally financedNeedless to say that such an endeavour must be centrally financedNeedless to say that such an endeavour must be centrally financedNeedless to say that such an endeavour must be centrally financedNeedless to say that such an endeavour must be centrally financed
directly or through various regional centres working in the fielddirectly or through various regional centres working in the fielddirectly or through various regional centres working in the fielddirectly or through various regional centres working in the fielddirectly or through various regional centres working in the field
otherwise States would not be showing their interest in training onotherwise States would not be showing their interest in training onotherwise States would not be showing their interest in training onotherwise States would not be showing their interest in training onotherwise States would not be showing their interest in training on
the pretext of lack of funds for the purpose. Capacity building forthe pretext of lack of funds for the purpose. Capacity building forthe pretext of lack of funds for the purpose. Capacity building forthe pretext of lack of funds for the purpose. Capacity building forthe pretext of lack of funds for the purpose. Capacity building for
women representatives is a pre-requisite for providing reservationwomen representatives is a pre-requisite for providing reservationwomen representatives is a pre-requisite for providing reservationwomen representatives is a pre-requisite for providing reservationwomen representatives is a pre-requisite for providing reservation
to them. The number of training personnel is also required to beto them. The number of training personnel is also required to beto them. The number of training personnel is also required to beto them. The number of training personnel is also required to beto them. The number of training personnel is also required to be
increased in proportion to the enhanced women representation. Theincreased in proportion to the enhanced women representation. Theincreased in proportion to the enhanced women representation. Theincreased in proportion to the enhanced women representation. Theincreased in proportion to the enhanced women representation. The
Committee, therefore, urge the Government to ensure adequateCommittee, therefore, urge the Government to ensure adequateCommittee, therefore, urge the Government to ensure adequateCommittee, therefore, urge the Government to ensure adequateCommittee, therefore, urge the Government to ensure adequate
funds and proper training to the women councillors for capacityfunds and proper training to the women councillors for capacityfunds and proper training to the women councillors for capacityfunds and proper training to the women councillors for capacityfunds and proper training to the women councillors for capacity
building particularly SC/ST and backward classes so that thebuilding particularly SC/ST and backward classes so that thebuilding particularly SC/ST and backward classes so that thebuilding particularly SC/ST and backward classes so that thebuilding particularly SC/ST and backward classes so that the
objectives of the Bill are achieved in letter and spirit.objectives of the Bill are achieved in letter and spirit.objectives of the Bill are achieved in letter and spirit.objectives of the Bill are achieved in letter and spirit.objectives of the Bill are achieved in letter and spirit.
10.10.10.10.10. The Committee have arrived at various conclusions madeThe Committee have arrived at various conclusions madeThe Committee have arrived at various conclusions madeThe Committee have arrived at various conclusions madeThe Committee have arrived at various conclusions made
in the Report after exhaustive deliberations with various Unionin the Report after exhaustive deliberations with various Unionin the Report after exhaustive deliberations with various Unionin the Report after exhaustive deliberations with various Unionin the Report after exhaustive deliberations with various Union
Ministries, State Governments and other stakeholders.  TheMinistries, State Governments and other stakeholders.  TheMinistries, State Governments and other stakeholders.  TheMinistries, State Governments and other stakeholders.  TheMinistries, State Governments and other stakeholders.  The
Committee strongly recommend that due consideration should beCommittee strongly recommend that due consideration should beCommittee strongly recommend that due consideration should beCommittee strongly recommend that due consideration should beCommittee strongly recommend that due consideration should be
given to the various recommendations/observations of the Committeegiven to the various recommendations/observations of the Committeegiven to the various recommendations/observations of the Committeegiven to the various recommendations/observations of the Committeegiven to the various recommendations/observations of the Committee
and amendments as suggested brought before the Parliament whenand amendments as suggested brought before the Parliament whenand amendments as suggested brought before the Parliament whenand amendments as suggested brought before the Parliament whenand amendments as suggested brought before the Parliament when
the legislation is taken up for consideration by the Parliament.the legislation is taken up for consideration by the Parliament.the legislation is taken up for consideration by the Parliament.the legislation is taken up for consideration by the Parliament.the legislation is taken up for consideration by the Parliament.
  N EW DELHI; SHARAD YADAV,
11 June , 2010 Chairman,
21 Jyaistha , 1932  (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development.

23
ANNEXURE I
LOK SABHA
________
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
________
(Shri S. Jaipal Reddy, Minister of Urban Development)

24
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 100 of 2009
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND TWELFTH
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution
(One Hundred and Twelfth Amendment) Act, 2009.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint.
2. In article 243T of the Constitution,—
(i) in clause ( 2), for the word “one-third”, the word
“one-half” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause ( 3), for the word “one-third”, the word
“one-half” shall be substituted;
(iii) for clause (4), the following shall be substituted,
name:—
“(4) The  offices of Chairpersons in the
Municipalities shall be reserved for the Scheduled
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and women in such
Short title
and
commencement.
Amendment of
article 243T.

25
manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law,
provide:
Provided that the number of offices of Chairpersons
reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes in the Municipalities in any state shall bear, as
nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total
number of such offices as the population of the
Scheduled Castes in the State or of the Scheduled Tribes
in the State bears to the total population of that State:
Provided further that not less than one-half of the
total number of offices of Chairpersons reserved for the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the
Municipalities shall be reserved for women belonging to
the Scheduled Castes or, as the case may be, the
Scheduled Tribes:
Provided also that not less than one-half of the total
number of offices of Chairpersons (including the number
of offices reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) in the Municipalities
shall be reserved for women:
Provided also that the number of offices reserved
under this clause shall be allotted by rotation to different
Municipalities.”

26
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Parliament enacted the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment)
Act in 1992. This Act has inserted “Part IXA” in the Constitution relating
to Municipalities Article 243T of the Constitution provides for
reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
and also for women in Urban Local Bodies Clause (2) of Article 243T
provides that not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved
under clause (1) of the said article shall be reserved for women
belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as the case may be the Scheduled
Tribes. Similarly, clause (3) of article 243T provides that not less than
one-third (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging
to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total
number of seats to be filled by direct election in every Municipality
shall be reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by
rotation to different constituencies in a Municipality. Further clause (4)
of article 243T provides that the offices of Chairpersons in the
Municipalities shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled
Tribes and women in such manner as the Legislature of a State may,
by law, provide.
2.  The Hon’ble President of India in her address to Parliament on
June 4, 2009 stated that a Bill providing fifty per cent reservation for
women in the Urban Local Bodies would be moved by the Government
as women suffer multiple deprivations of class, caste and gender and
enhancing reservation in Urban Local Bodies will lead to more women
entering the public sphere. Enhancement of reservation for women in
Urban Local Bodies will not only ensure their increased representation
and participation in Urban Local Bodies but also mainstream gender
concerns in governance and decision making process, particularly, those
related to women’s issues such as water supply, sanitation, solid waste
management, health and education. This is only desirable since women
constitute nearly half of the population.

27
3. Accordingly, a Bill has been prepared after inter-Ministerial
consultations and the State Governments. The State Governments of
Himachal Pradesh, West Bengal, Bihar, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Madhya
Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh have supported the proposal for providing
fifty per cent reservation for women in Urban Local Bodies. The State
Governments of Bihar, Himachal Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh have
already provided for fifty per cent reservation for women in Urban Local
Bodies.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
 N
EW DELHI;
The 10th November, 2009 . S. JAIPAL REDDY.

28
*   *   *   *   *
243T. ( 1)     *             *             *              *
(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of
seats reserved under clause (1) shall be reserved for women
belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as the case may be,
the Scheduled Tribes.
(3) Not less than one-third (including the number of
seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of
seats to be filled by direct election in every Municipality
shall be reserved for women and such seats may be
allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a
Municipality.
(4) The offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities
shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled
Tribes and women in such manner as the Legislature of
a State may, by law, provide.
*   *   *   *   *
ANNEXURE
E
XTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
Reservation of
seats.

29
ANNEXURE II
List of Experts on urban affairs who had tendered written
submission/oral evidence before the Committee during
the examination of ‘The Constitution (One Hundred
and Twelfth Amendment) Bill, 2009’
Sl. Name of the Expert/ Tendered Tendered
No. organisation written oral
submission submission
12 3 4
1. Shri K.K. Pandey, Yes No
Chairman,
Centre of Urban Studies,
Indian Institute of Public
Administration,
New Delhi
2. Prof. Bhupatthi Rav Yes No
Director,
Regional Centre for Urban and
Environmental Studies,
Osmania University, Hyderabad
3. Shri J.B. Kshirsagar, Yes No
Chief Planner,
Town and Country Planning
Organisation
E Block, Vikas Bhawan,
New Delhi
4. Shri Ranjit S. Chavan, Yes No
Director-General,
All India Institute of Local Self-
Government,
Bandra (East), Mumbai

30
12 3 4
5. Shri Chetan Vaidya, Yes Yes
Director,
National Institute of Urban Affairs,
Indian Habitat Centre, New Delhi
6. Prof. Nishith Rai, Yes Yes
Director,
Regional Centre for Urban and
Environmental Studies,
Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh
7. Shri Lojy Thomas, No Yes
Regional Director,
All India Institute of Local Self-
Government, AIILSG, New Delhi
8. Shri Akshay Anand, No Yes
Associate Project Director, (PRUDA),
AIILSG, New Delhi

31
ANNEXURE III
List of States/Union Territories that have forwarded their replies/
suggestions on the examination of ‘The Constitution (One
Hundred and Twelfth Amendment) Bill, 2009’
Sl. Name of the States/Union Territories
No.
12
1. Government of Sikkim,
Urban Development and Housing Department
2. Government of Mizoram,
Urban Development and Poverty Alleviation Department
3. Government of Meghalaya,
Urban Affairs Department
4. Government of Orissa,
Housing and Urban Development Department
5. Government of Bihar,
Urban Development and Housing Department
6. Government of Maharashtra,
Urban Development Department
7. Government of Assam,
Urban Development Department
8. Government of Haryana,
Urban Local Bodies, Haryana
9. Government of Tripura,
Directorate of Urban Development
10. Government of Andhra Pradesh,
Municipal Administration and Urban Development (Elec-II)
Department

32
12
11. Government of Arunachal Pradesh,
Urban Development Department
12. Government of Karnataka,
Urban Development Department
13. Government of Gujarat,
Urban Development Department
14. Government of Jharkhand,
Department of Urban Development
15. Administration of the Union Territory of Lakshadweep,
(Department of Panchayats)
16. Chandigarh Administration,
Local Government Department

33
APPENDIX I
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010)
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON
THURSDAY, 28th JANUARY, 2010
The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1210 hrs. in Committee
Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Sharad Yadav —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Parveen Singh Aron
3. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa
4. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee
5. Shri Ramesh Kumar
6. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik
7. Shri Sonawane Pratap Narayanrao
8. Dr. (Prof.) Ramashankar
9. Shri Kadir Rana
10. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
11. Shri Adagooru H. Vishwanath
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Parvez Hashmi
13. Shri Rajiv Shukla
14. Shri Krishan Lal Balmiki
15. Shri Amir Alam Khan
16. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi

34
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Joint Secretary
2. Shri K.D. Muley — Director
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Additional Director
4. Ms. Amita Walia — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development
1. Dr. M. Ramachandran, Secretary (UD)
2. Shri A.K. Mehta, Joint Secretary (UD)
3. Mrs. E.P. Nivedita, Director
Representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri V.K. Bhasin, Secretary (Law and Justice)
2. Shri N.K. Nampoothiry, Joint Secretary (LC)
3. Dr. M. Vijaywargiya, Addl. L.C.
4. Shri N.R. Battu, Addl. L.C.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members and
representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development and the Ministry
of Law and Justice to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman then
requested the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development and Law and
Justice to give a brief presentation on ‘The Constitution (One Hundred
and Twelfth Amendment) Bill, 2009’. He also drew the attention of the
representatives of the Ministry to the provisions of direction 55(1) of
Directions by the Speaker.
3. The Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development thereafter
briefly explained the various provisions of the Bill. The Committee then
discussed in detail various issues related to the examination of the Bill.
The representatives of the both Ministry also clarified to the queries raised
by the Members.
4. It was decided by the Committee to call for the comments from
the respective state governments and public opinion on the proposed bill.
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

35
APPENDIX II
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010)
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON FRIDAY, 14th MAY, 2010
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1200 hrs. in Committee
Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Sharad Yadav —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gajanan D. Babar
3. Smt. Priya Dutt
4. Shri Sakti Mohan Malik
5. Shri Kailash Joshi
6. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee
7. Shri Ramesh Kumar
8. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh
9. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Surendra Motilal Patel
11. Shri Rajiv Shukla
12. Shri Amir Alam Khan
13. Shri Parvez Hashmi
14. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Joint Secretary
2. Shri K.D. Muley — Director
3. Ms. Amita Walia — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. Emma C. Barwa — Under Secretary

36
WITNESSES
Sl.No. Name Designation
1. Shri Chetan Vaidya Director,
National Institute of Urban Affairs,
Indian Habitat Centre, New Delhi
2. Prof. Nishith Rai Director,  Regional Centre for Urban
and Environmental Studies, Lucknow,
Uttar Pradesh
3. Shri Lojy Thomas, Regional Director, All India Institute of
Local Self-Government, AIILSG,
New Delhi
4. Shri Akshay Anand Associate Project Director, (PRUDA),
AIILSG, New Delh
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members
and experts on the urban affairs to the sitting of the Committee. The
Chairman then requested the experts to give a brief presentation on ‘The
Constitution (One Hundred and Twelfth Amendment) Bill, 2009’. He also
drew the attention of the experts to the provisions of Direction 55(1) of
‘Directions by the Speaker’.
3. The experts briefly explained the various provision of the Bill.
The Committee, thereafter, discussed in detail various issues related to
the examination of ‘The Constitution (One Hundred and Twelfth
Amendment) Bill, 2009’. The experts then clarified to the queries raised
by the Members relating to these provisions of the Bill.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned.

37
APPENDIX III
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010)
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD
ON FRIDAY, 14th MAY, 2010
The Committee sat from 1200 hrs. to 1250 hrs. in Committee
Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Sharad Yadav —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gajanan D. Babar
3. Smt. Priya Dutt
4. Shri Sakti Mohan Malik
5. Shri Kailash Joshi
6. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee
7. Shri Ramesh Kumar
8. Shri Radhe Mohan Singh
9. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Surendra Motilal Patel
11. Shri Rajiv Shukla
12. Shri Amir Alam Khan
13. Shri Parvez Hashmi
14. Shri Gireesh Kumar Sanghi
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Joint Secretary
2. Shri K.D. Muley — Director
3. Ms. Amita Walia — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. Emma C. Barwa — Under Secretary

38
WITNESSES
Sl.No. Name Designation
1. Dr. M. Ramachandran Secretary (UD)
2. Shri A.K. Mehta Joint Secretary (UD)
3. Mrs. E.P. Nivedita Director (LSG)
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members
and representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development to the sitting
of the Committee. The Chairman then requested the Secretary, Ministry
of Urban Development to give a brief presentation on ‘The Constitution
(One Hundred and Twelfth Amendment) Bill, 2009’. He also drew the
attention of the representatives of the Ministry of the provisions of
Direction 55(1) of ‘Directions by the Speaker’.
3. The Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development, thereafter,
briefly explained the overall position with regard to various provisions
of ‘The Constitution (One Hundred and Twelfth Amendment) Bill, 2009’.
The Committee then took oral evidence of the representatives. The
Committee, thereafter, discussed in detail various issues such as inclusion
of OBC, demography of the local areas to give proper representations,
rotation of seats etc. related to the examination of ‘The Constitution
(One Hundred and Twelfth Amendment) Bill, 2009’. The representatives
of the Ministry clarified to the queries raised by the Members. The
evidence was concluded.
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5. The witnesses then withdrew.
The Committee then adjourned.

39
APPENDIX IV
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2009-2010)
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON FRIDAY, 11th JUNE, 2010
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1200 hrs. in Room No. 53
Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Sharad Yadav —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Gajanan D. Babar
3. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa
4. Shri Ambica Banerjee
5. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee
6. Shri Ramesh Kumar
7. Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad
8. Shri Kailash Joshi
9. Shri Sanjeev Ganesh Naik
10. Shri Sonawane Pratap Narayanrao
11. Shri Baijayant ‘Jay’ Panda
12. Dr. (Prof.) Ramashankar
13. Shri Adagooru H. Vishwanath
Rajya Sabha
14. Shri Parvez Hashmi
15. Shri Rajiv Shukla
16. Shri Surendra Motilal Patel
17. Shri Khekiho Zhimomi

40
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee — Joint Secretary
2. Shri K.D. Muley — Director
3. Smt. Emma C. Barwa — Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration
the draft Report on examination of ‘The Constitution (One Hundred and
Twelfth Amendment) Bill, 2009’. The Committee adopted the draft Report
without any changes.
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to present the
Report to Lok Sabha.
4. *** *** **** ****
The Committee then adjourned.

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed by
Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at
Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The
Souvenir items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale
at Souvenir Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. List of these items are
available on the website mentioned above.”