STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2012-2013)
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2012-2013)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Eighteenth
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban Development on
Demands for Grants (2012-2013) of the Ministry of Urban Development]
TWENTY FIRST REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
21

TWENTY FIRST REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(2012-2013)
( FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA )
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2012-2013)
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the
Eighteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Urban Development on Demands for Grants (2012-2013)
of the Ministry of Urban Development]
Presented to Lok Sabha on  5.12.2012
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  5.12.2012
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)

C.U.D. No. 73
Price : Rs. 46.00
© 2012 B Y L OK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and printed by National Printers,
New Delhi-110 028.

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ............................................................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... (v)
REPORT
CHAPTER I Report............................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ........................................ 13
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s
replies ............................................................................... 21
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted
by the Committee and require reiteration ................. 22
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited ...... 30
APPENDICES
I. Circular dated 15th May , 2012 of DG, CPWD to curb
encroachment and removal of encroachment of public
areas .................................................................................. 33
II. D.O. letter dated 09 May , 2012 of Minister of
Urban Development to Dy. Chairman Planning
Commission .................................................................... 35
A
NNEXUREs
I. Minutes of the Second sitting of the Standing
Committee on Urban Development (2012-13) held on
6th November, 2012 ....................................................... 37
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations contained in the Eighteenth
Report of the Committee (15th Lok Sabha)................ 39

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013)
Shri Sharad Yadav — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Praveen Singh Aron
3. Shri Jayawant Gangaram Awale
4. Shri Ambica Banerjee
5. Shri Biren Singh Engti
6. Shri Anant Gangaram Geete
7. Smt. Kaisar Jahan
8. Shri Kailash Joshi
9. Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru
10. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee
11. Shri Ramesh Kumar
12. Shri M. Anjan Kumar Yadav
13. Shri P .C. Mohan
14. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik
15. Shri Sonawane Pratap Narayanrao
16. Dr. (Prof.) Prasanna Kumar Patasani
17. Dr. Ramshankar
18. Shri Ratansingh
19. Vacant
20. Vacant
21. Vacant
(iii)

(iv)
Rajya Sabha
22. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
23. Shri Anil Desai
24. Md. Nadimul Haque
25. Shri Parvez Hashmi
26. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
27. Shri Avinash Pande
28. Shri Ajay Sancheti
29. Shri Amar Singh
30. Shri Khekiho Zhimomi
31. Vacant
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri R.K. Jain — Joint Secretary
2. Shri D.S. Malha — Director
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha — Deputy Secretary
4. Smt. K. Rangamani N. — Under Secretary

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2012-2013) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report
on their behalf, present the Twenty First Report (15th Lok Sabha) on the
action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in
the Eighteenth Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Urban Development on the Demands for Grants (2012-2013) of the
Ministry of Urban Development.
2. The Eighteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 25th April,
2012. Replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained
in the Report were received in July, 2012.
3. The Standing Committee on Urban Development considered and
adopted this Report at their sitting held on 6th November, 2012.
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in the Eighteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Committee is given at Annexure-II.
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in
the body of the Report.
N
EW DELHI; SHARAD YADAV,
30 November, 2012 Chairman,
9 Agrahayana,  1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Urban Development.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
1.1 This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development
(2012-2013) deals with the action taken by the Government on the
recommendations contained in their Eighteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Urban
Development which was presented to Parliament on 25 April, 2012.
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government
in respect of all the 11 recommendations contained in the Report. These
have been categorized as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted
by the Government. (Chapter-II):
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 1, 4, 6, 9 and 10
(Total-5)
(Chapter-II)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations, which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies. (Chapter-
III):
Recommendation No. –Nil–
(Total-Nil)
(Chapter-III)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which replies
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee
(Chapter-IV):
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 2, 7, 8 and 11
(Total-04)
(Chapter-IV)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which final
replies of the Government are, still awaited (Chapter-V):
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 3 and 5.
(Total-02)
(Chapter-V)

2
1.3 The Committee desire that specific replies to the comments
contained in Chapter-I of this Report and final replies in respect of the
Recommendations for which only interim replies have been furnished by
the Government (included in Chapter-V) may be furnished to them at
the earliest and in any case, not later than three months of the presentation
of this Report.
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of their recommendations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
Recommendation (Serial No. 2)
Inclusion of more cities under the Urban Infrastructure Governance
(UIG) component of JNNURM
1.5 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“ At present 65 cities are covered under the UIG component of the
JNNURM. The Committee in their earlier Reports have been
repeatedly emphasizing upon for inclusion of 28 more cities having
a population of 5 lakh and above in Jawaharlal Nehru National
Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) so as to improve their civic
infrastructure including roads, water supply, sewage, solid waste
management, transport etc. The Ministry have informed the
Committee that inclusion of more cities can be considered in the
next phase of the JNNURM to be launched in 12th Plan, the strategy
of which is yet to be finalized. The Committee, therefore, desire
the Ministry to finalize the strategy at the earliest and pursue this
matter with Planning Commission for inclusion of cities having a
population of 5 lakh and above.
The Committee note that many of the projects are likely to spill
over beyond the present Mission Period i.e. 31.03.2012, the Ministry
is proposing for further extension of Mission Period for 2 years for
completion of projects and reforms by the States/ULBs. However,
the Committee feel that since more and more cities are evincing
interest to be covered under the scheme, the Government may
consider to extend the scheme till the end of 12th Five Year Plan.”
1.6 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as
follows:—
“The Mission has completed its normal tenure of seven years on
31.03.2012 and the Government has extended the period for 2 years
i.e. up to 31.03.2014 for completion of reforms and ongoing projects

3
under JNNURM. It has no mandate now for consideration/sanction
of new projects. Hence, any addition at this stage in the present
Mission may not be fruitful. Further, it has been separately proposed
for launching of JNNURM phase-II in the 12th Five Year Plan for
which policy and strategy is under formulation. For the Transition
phase, a proposal has been mooted for fresh allocation under UIG
and UIDSSMT for sanctioning of fresh projects. The Note for the
Cabinet has been circulated soliciting comments/views of the
concerned Department/Ministries before sending the proposal to
the Cabinet Committee on Infrastructure (CCI) for consideration
and approval. This is proposed to be subsumed in the JNNURM
phase-II which would cover the period of the 12th Five Year Plan.
The directions of the Committee for inclusion of more cities having
a population of 5 lakh and above has been noted for taking up with
Planning Commission while finalizing JNNURM phase-II. However,
it is clarified that all cities, not covered under UIG Sub-Mission
are eligible for consideration of financing under Urban Infrastructure
Development Scheme for Small and Medium Towns (UIDSSMT).
However, keeping in view less allocation for the UIDSSMT it has
not been possible to cover many towns as out of nearly 5000 towns,
as per 2011 census, only 764 towns could be covered.”
1.7 The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry has
proposed for launching of JNNURM phase-II in the 12th Five Year
Plan for which policy and strategy is under formulation. For the
transition phase a proposal has been mooted for fresh allocation under
UIG and UIDSSMT for sanctioning of fresh projects. In this regard
a note for the Cabinet has been circulated soliciting comments/views
of the concerned Department/Ministries before sending the proposal
to the Cabinet Committee on Infrastructure for consideration and
approval. This is proposed to be subsumed in the JNNURM Phase II.
However, the reasons adduced by the Ministry for not accepting the
recommendations of the Committee with regard to inclusion of more
cities under UIG component are not acceptable to the Committee as
they fail to understand the logic of making fresh allocations for fresh
projects under UIG and UIDSSMT during the transition phase i.e.
period falling after the 31st March 2012 and upto start of 12th Plan
on one hand and not agreeing to the recommendation of the Committee
for inclusion of more cities on the other hand. The Committee are of
the strong view that there should have been no problem in accepting
the recommendation of the Committee when these proposals are to be
subsumed in JNNURM Phase-II.

4
Therefore, while reiterating earlier recommendation, the
Committee desire that more cities should be covered under the Urban
Infrastructure Governance (UIG) component of JNNURM and adequate
allocation should be provided for the same. The Committee further
desire that the note for the approval of Cabinet Committee on
Infrastructure for extension of JNNURM during the 12th Plan and
providing fresh allocation under UIG and UIDSSMT for sanctioning
of fresh projects may be expedited.
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
Delhi Mass Rapid Transit System (DMRTS)
1.8 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that Phase-I and Phase-II of Delhi Mass Rapid
Transit System (DMRTS) have been successfully completed and
commissioned. The Committee have been informed that metro Rail
Projects are among the priority projects which are allocated the
major portion of the current budget provision. The Government of
India has approved the Delhi MRTS Phase-III for 103.05 km. at a
cost of Rs. 35,242 crore. The work of phase-III projects have been
initiated and DMRC is in the process of acquiring more buses to
provide connectivity to new metro stations at Phase-III. However,
in regard to feeder bus service the Secretary, Ministry of Urban
Development during the evidence deposed before the Committee
that the entire feeder service load is to be loaded on the Delhi
Metro Corporation and Delhi Transport Corporation. Further on
the issue of cleanliness in metros and frequent glitches occurred
in metros resulting heavy rush and inconvenience being faced by
daily commuters, Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development have
stated that they will see this issue in a specific way. As far as
glitches are concerned, there are daily 2800 trips of metro and the
system fails occasionally. Where there is signal problem, manual
methods are followed and due to this metro speed should be
restricted. However, they are trying their best and these situations
can be tackled in future. The Committee while appreciating the
action taken by DMRC in this direction, desire the Government to
achieve proper coordination with Delhi Government and Delhi
Transport Corporation to run the feeder bus service efficiently and
made 300 feeder buses functional within the next six months as
per commitment made by the Government.
On the issue of increasing the metro coaches from six to eight, the
Committee were informed by Managing Director, DMRC during

5
the evidence that the average journey in metro is 15 to 16 kilometre
and daily 20 lakh passengers are travelling by metro. Due to this
reason the issue of increasing metro coaches from six to eight will
now be considered before the year 2013. The next lot of coaches
is expected to come from June, 2012. Then metro will be having
eight coaches. While the Committee take note of the initiatives of
the Delhi Metro to ease the metro rush, recommend that apart from
increasing the number of coaches in metro, the Ministry should
also explore the options of other Mass Rapid Transit System like
local trains, monorail, high speed trams etc., to supplement the
metro Transport System to meet the growing requirement of NCR
and integrate them with Delhi Metro to make it a comprehensive
transport system within NCR.”
1.9 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as
follows:—
“Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Ltd.(DMRC) has informed that the
process of selection of clusters of 100 buses each, has been completed
in consultation with Government of National Capital Territory of
Delhi(GNCTD). Letter of acceptance has been issued on 15.05.2012.
Contract period is 10 years. The buses shall be procuered by the
operator conforming to urban buses specification in the name of
DMRC. These buses shall have provision of use of common mobility
card and are expected to become available from December, 2012
onwards.
Public Transportation being a State subject, it is the responsibility
of GNCTD to plan and implement appropriate options of Mass
Rapid Transit Systems(MRTS) like mono rails, high speed trams,
local trains, etc. to supplement the Delhi metro. Delhi Transport
Corporation (DTC) has informed that they are presently operating
around 548 routes with 5800 buses which are providing bus
connectivity to almost all metro stations, thus facilitating integration.
Details of further MRTS proposals are awaited from the GNCTD.”
1.10 The Committee are happy to note that DMRC has taken
initiatives to provide more feeder buses to facilitate the commuters of
Delhi Metro. 300 non-AC buses having common mobility card are
expected to be available from December 2012 onward. However, the
Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Government in regard
to action taken on Mass Rapid Transit system like mono rails, high
speed trams, local trains etc. to supplement Delhi Metro as they have
completely thrown this responsibility to State Government. While
accepting the fact that public Transportation is a State subject, the

6
Committee desire that DMRC should co-ordinate with the Government
of National Capital Territory of Delhi and ensure full operations of
the MRTPS at the earliest. Further the Ministry’s reply is silent in
regard to increasing of existing Metro coaches from 6 to 8 in order to
cater to 20 lakh passengers who are travelling daily by metro. The
Committee desire the Ministry to apprise them on this matter at the
earliest.
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
Central Public Works Department (CPWD)
1.11 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“The Committee note that there are encroachment by Jhuggi/Jhopdi
dwellers in the Government residential colonies all over the country
which causes unhygienic condition, creates law and order problem
by encouraging anti-social element and hence creates inconvenience
to the residents. The Committee have been informed that efforts
are being made by the Ministry for removal of encroachment from
Government land. The encroachment on CPWD land are surveyed
by the local civic authorities and money is deposited by CPWD
with the local authority for the removal/rehabilitation of Jhuggi/
Jhopdi dwellers. Detailed surveys have been undertaken by the
local civil body to know these dwellers eligibility regarding
resettlement/rehabilitation. After receipt of the Bill from local body,
money is deposited by the CPWD for onward action. Apart from
this, ineligible Jhuggis dwellers are removed by CPWD with the
help of police force. The Committee are of the opinion that although
continuous efforts are being made by the Ministry, yet
encroachments in Government residential colonies are still in
progress. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation
given in their earlier report. The Committee also desire that
responsibility of the Officers of various agencies be fixed under
whose nose the encroachment takes place. The Committee may be
apprised of the outcome in this regard from time to time.”
1.12 In their Action Taken Reply , the Ministry have stated as
follows:—
“ As far as Delhi is concerned, for three locations namely Nicholson
Square, Rajiv Gandhi Camp at Aram Bagh and Shankar Camp at
Sector-13, R. K. Puram, amount of Rs. 21.48 lakh, Rs. 13.29 lakh
and Rs. 18.99 lakh respectively was deposited with MCD in Sep.’
2001, Jul’ 2001 and May’ 2003 as per demand raised by them after

7
site survey. Encroachment at Nicholson Square has since been
removed. At that time MCD was the nodal agency for assessment
of eligible settlers and their relocation. MCD, however, could not
complete the job till 2006.
The Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act, 2006 was enacted by the
Parliament to address the issues arising out of the several orders
and directions passed by the Supreme Court and the High Court
of Delhi in cases pending before them regarding contentious issues
which were confronting the National Capital, namely, unauthorized
constructions, commercial use of residential premises, encroachment
on public land by slum dwellers and Jhuggi-jhopri clusters,
problems relating to urban street vendors, which were affecting the
lives of millions of people . This Act remained effective for a period
of one year and lapsed on the 18th May 2007, and required Central
Government with a time period of one year to take all possible
steps to finalize norms, policy guidelines and feasible strategies to
deal with the problem of unauthorized development with regard
to mixed land use not conforming to the Master Plan, construction
beyond sanctioned plans, and encroachment by slum and Jhuggi-
Jhopri dwellers, hawkers and urban street vendors; and also
provided for status quo  as on 1st January 2006 to be maintained
in respect of these categories of unauthorized development, subject
to certain conditions not withstanding any judgement, decree or
order of any court, and that all notices issued by the local bodies
for initiating action against these categories of unauthorized
developments shall be deemed to have been suspended and that
no punitive action shall be taken during the said period of one
year.
Consequent to this, for three years removal and relocation of Jhuggi
dwellers could not be possible. In 2010 an Act was passed by NCTD
and DUSIB came into existence with effect from July, 2010, which
is now the nodal agency in the matter.
Detailed guidelines were issued in 2005 laying down procedures
and fixing responsibilities for detection, reporting and removal of
encroachment by CPWD officials from its properties which have
been again reiterated in the year 2010. No fresh encroachment on
CPWD land in Delhi has been prepared and submitted to DUSIB
for appropriate action. The matter is being pursued vigorously with
DUSIB.
Officers in CPWD are being directed to co-operate with other
agencies like MCD, NDMC and Police and also seek co-operation

8
from the dedicated taskforce already constituted by GNCTD,
involving Revenue Department, Urban Development Department,
land and Building Department, Home Department DUSIB, MCD,
NDMC, CPWD and DDA etc.
Reports from the Chief Engineers who have works located at
Kolkata, Bangalore, Hyderabad, Chennai, Mumbai and Ahmedabad
indicate that there has been no new encroachment during last two
years in these cities. In some old cases matter is under litigations.
However CPWD has been directed to prepare details of existing
encroachment if any on CPWD land in these cities also. This process
is expected to be completed by September end this Year. In this
aspect, a circular has also been issued from this Directorate to curb
encroachment and removal thereof (Copy enclosed).”
1.13 The Committee note that the task of handling the
unauthorised development and encroachment could not complete after
enactment of “The Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act, 2006. The
Committee are also distressed to note that this Act remained effective
only for a period of one year and lapsed on 18th May, 2007. To the utter
surprise of the Committee, the Central Government was asked to take
all possible steps to finalise norms, policy guidelines and feasible
strategies to deal with the problem of unauthorised development and
encroachment by slum and jhuggi-jhopri dwellers, hawkers and urban
street vendors and in the meantime suspended any action against the
unauthorised encroachment despite announcement of any decree or
order of any court and notices issued by the local bodies. In 2010, an
Act passed by NCTD and DSUI came into existence with effect from
July, 2010 which is now the nodal agency in the matter. The Committee
note with disgust that precious three years period from 2007 to 2010,
have lapsed without taking any concrete action to remove the
encroachment of public places. The Ministry did not find it fit to frame
detailed guidelines and fixing responsibility on CPWD officials under
the new law but chose to reiterate the earlier guidelines issued in
2005. The Committee deprecate this casual approach of the Government
and expect it to take essential steps urgently. The Committee are
happy to note that during last three years no fresh case of encroachment
on public land was detected in Delhi and other places like Kolkata,
Bangalore, Hyderabad, Chennai, Mumbai and Ahmedabad.
However, the Committee are pained to find the Ministry’s silence
on their recommendations about fixing the responsibility on the
officials under whose nose such encroachments had taken place. The
Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that they

9
may be apprised of the action taken in respect of removing
encroachment from Government lands and against officials as well on
quarterly basis.
Recommendation (Serial No. 11)
Need for adequate sewerage and sanitation
1.14 The Committee had recommended as under:—
“From the information provided by the Ministry, the Committee
observed that 4861 cities out of 5161 cities/towns in India do not
have even a partial sewerage network. Almost 50% of households
in cities like Bangalore and Hyderabad do not have sewerage
connection. Only 21% of the waste water generated is treated. About
18% of urban households do not have access to any form of latrines.
Of the 79 sewerage treatment plants under State ownership 46 were
operating under very poor condition and less than 20% of the road
network is covered by storm water drains. In view of this, sewerage
system in India is suffering from poor maintenance. The existing
set up simply cannot handle the problems of cities including the
mega cities like Delhi, Kolkata, Chennai and Mumbai.
The Committee note that sewerage, sanitation and drainage are
significant focus sectors under the purview of JNNURM whose
period is from 2005-06 to 2011-12. So far 108 sewerage and 71
drainage(including storm water drainage) projects were sanctioned
under JNNURM. The Committee are distressed to note that even
after completion of the entire mission period i.e. 2011-12 against
the above sanctioned projects only 15 sewerage projects and
8 drainage projects have been completed till date.
Against this backdrop the Committee strongly recommend that the
Ministry should take proactive steps in completing the remaining
projects at the earliest and generate more demands from all the
States about these projects by creating awareness during the 12th
Plan period.
The Committee are given to understand that despite Supreme
Court’s Order, sewerage disposal systems in major cities like Delhi
are still releasing untreated water directly or indirectly into water
bodies without removing the harmful compounds, this causes severe
environmental hazards. In view of this, the Committee further
recommend that time-bound steps should be taken in this direction
to stop releasing of polluted water into the river by strictly adhering

10
to the Supreme Court’s orders and by establishing adequate number
of sewerage treatment plants.”
1.15 In their Action Taken Reply , the Ministry have stated as
follows:—
“ As per 2011 Census, the urban households having latrine facility
within premise is 81.4% and the remaining 18.6% households are
both sharing public latrines (6%) and defecating in open (12.6%).
Out of 81.4% households having latrine facility, 38.2% households
are connected with pipe sewerage system. According to the Report
on Status of water supply, wastewater generation and treatment in
Class - I Cities and Class - II Towns of India (Series: CUPS/70/2009-10)
published by Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) in the year
2009, the country together generates 38,254 million litres per day
(MLD) of sewage, out of which treatment facilities have been
provided for 11,787 MLD which constitute 31% of total sewage
generation and the remaining 26,467 MLD is disposed into the
water bodies without any treatment. Ministry is aware that 75%
of fresh water resources including major rivers in the country are
contaminated due to discharge of untreated domestic waste water.
Since sanitation is a State subject, it is the responsibility of Urban
Local Bodies (ULBs) in planning, design, implementation, operation
and maintenance of sanitation services in the cities and towns. At
the Central level, the Ministry of Urban Development is the nodal
Ministry for formulation of policies, strategies and guidelines and
assists the States by providing financial assistance for development
of urban water supply and sanitation sector in the cities and towns.
With a view to prioritizing the issue of sanitation, the Ministry of
Urban Development formulated the National Urban Sanitation
Policy in 2008. The vision of the policy is that all Indian cities and
towns become totally sanitized, healthy and liveable and ensure
and sustain good public health and environmental outcomes for
all their citizens with a special focus on hygienic and affordable
sanitation facilities for the urban poor and women. Under National
Urban Sanitation Policy States have to prepare State Level Sanitation
Strategies and cities have to prepare model City Sanitation Plans.
So far, 21 States are engaged in the preparation of State Sanitation
Strategies. The Ministry of Urban Development is supporting 124
cities in the development of City Sanitation Plans.
The Government of India, wherever possible, explores possibilities
of providing assistance for funding projects proposed through its

11
schemes like JNNURM, UIDSSMT, 10% lump sum for NE States,
Satellite Township Scheme. The Ministry of Environment and
Forests is implementing various National programmes to prevent
contamination of river water bodies.
So far 112 Sewerage projects and 73 Drainage projects have been
sanctioned under JNNURM, out of which 17 Sewerage projects
and 13 Drainage projects have respectively been reported physically
completed. The remaining projects are at various stages of
implementation.
An advisory has been issued to all States to take necessary steps
for expeditious completion of the ongoing Sewerage and Drainage
projects under Urban Infrastructure Governance (UIG) Sub-
Mission of JNNURM and to issue strict instructions to the
concerned implementing agencies so that all the projects, which
are at various stages of implementation, may be completed
expeditiously and within the stipulated extended period of
JNNURM i.e. 31.03.2014.”
1.16 Keeping in view the grim conditions of sewerage and
sanitation systems in India, the Committee in their earlier
recommendation had desired the Ministry would take proactive steps
in completing all the related projects under JNNURM at the earliest
and generate more demands from all States about these projects by
creating awareness during the 12th Plan period. However, the
Committee are disheartened to note that so far only 112 sewerage
projects and 73 drainage projects have been sanctioned under JNNURM,
out of which 17 sewerage projects and 13 drainage projects have been
physically completed. The remaining projects are at various stages of
implementation and as per Ministry’s expectation these projects have
to be completed within the stipulated extended period of JNNURM
i.e. 31.03.2014. The Committee are not convinced that with this ongoing
pace, the Ministry’s expectation could be fulfilled. For this to happen,
all concerned will have to pool all resources. Hence, the Committee
while reiterating their early recommendation desire the Ministry to
take concrete action to complete all the projects in time and take up
more projects during 12th Plan.
The Committee are surprised at the Government’s silence in
respect of their specific recommendation about releasing of untreated
water directly or indirectly into water bodies without removing the
harmful compounds. The Committee would recall that Hon’ble Supreme

12
Court of India had directed the Government on this issue. Deprecating
the casual approach of the Government, the Committee reiterate their
earlier recommendation for establishing adequate number of sewerage
treatment plants. They would like to be informed of action taken in
this regard periodically.

13
CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Serial No. 1)
Suitable enhancement of plan outlay for Urban Development of the
country
2.1 The Committee note that during the year 2011-12, the projections
made by the Ministry for its three demands were Rs. 14685.67 crore, the
BE was Rs. 8541.46 crore, the RE was Rs. 8646.73 crore and the actual
utilization upto December, 2012 is Rs. 6251.11 crore only. The remaining
amount i.e. Rs. 2395.62 crore (i.e. the difference between the RE and actual
expenditure) has to be spent by the Ministry during the last three months
of the Financial Year of 2011-2012. The overall budget allocation for the
year 2012-2013 is Rs. 9906.26 crore. After anticipated recoveries of
Rs. 222.27 crore, the net BE 2012-13 is Rs. 9685.99 crore. The Plan
expenditure is Rs. 7012.12 crore i.e.  72.39 per cent and non-plan
expenditure is Rs. 2673.87 crore i.e. 27.60 per cent. Over the percentage
variation of BE 2011-12 and BE 2012-13 is only 11.77 per cent and the
percentage variation over of RE 2011-12 and BE of 2012-13 is only 11.80
per cent. The Committee find that the urban population has increased
from 286119689, according to 2001 census to 377105760, according to
2011 census. The number of Urban Areas/Towns in India has been
increasing over decades. The number of towns has increased from 5161
during the census 2001 to 7935 during the census 2011. The Ministry
even after undertaking number of schemes and projects has been
submitting the fact that the transition to quasi-urban society has not been
accompanied by a commensurate increase in the supply of basic urban
services like water supply, sewerage and drainage network, garbage
disposal facilities, city-wide roads, public transport, street lighting and
pedestrian pathways. The supply of land and housing has not kept pace
with the increase in urban population. At current rate of growth, urban
population in India will reach a staggering total of 575 million by 2030
AD. The Committee are distressed to note that keeping in view the plight
of urban condition in India and regular increase in rate of inflation, the
increase of allocation is not more than 5 per cent which is very minuscule
for successful implementation of various schemes undertaken by the

14
Ministry. Even Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development also admitted
the fact that budgetary allocation during the year 2012-13 is inadequate
and assured that the matter of higher allocation will be taken up by the
Ministry at different fora at the RE stage. The Committee also find that
various important projects/schemes of the Ministry are either physically
completed or are under various stages of completion and their period
can be extended during the 12th Five Year Plan for their completion.
Keeping in view all these facts, the Committee recommend that Ministry
should continue its efforts to persuade the Ministry of Finance and
Planning Commission for higher and additional allocation of funds. The
Committee would also like the Government to review the project planning
and monitoring system of various schemes/projects implemented by States/
ULBs with a view to improve the same so as to ensure that funds are
utilized evenly during the 12th Plan period. This would ensure proper
utilization of funds as also achieving the physical targets set for various
schemes/programmes in the urban sector.
Reply of the Government
2.2 The observations of the Committee to impress upon the Ministry
of Finance and the Planning Commission to allocate adequate funds to
various schemes so as to achieve the targets set out for the 12th Five Year
Plan have been noted. As regards budgetary allocation, the Ministry had
proposed a substantial requirement of Rs. 18,553.55 crore, including IEBR
of Rs. 2637.20 crore, to the Planning Commission for the Annual Plan
2012-13 against which the Planning Commission has allocated Rs. 9545.20
crore including IEBR Rs. 2637.20 crore for the Ministry. The Ministry had
taken up the issue of enhancement of the budgetary allocation vide DO
letter dated 10.02.2012 from Secretary (UD) to the M.S., Planning
Commission followed by a DO letter dated 13.2.2012 from UDM to Deputy
Chairman, Planning Commission. Planning Commission vide DO letter
dated 09.02.2012 informed that the entire GBS made available by the
Ministry of Finance for the year 2012-13 has been allocated. However,
any additional demand over and above the Plan allocation might be
considered at the RE stage.
Further based on the report of the Steering Committee on
urbanization set up by the Planning Commission which had recommended
for a significant increase in investment in the urban sector for the 12th
Five Year Plan (2012-17), Hon’ble Minister (UD) has written a DO letter
on 09.05.2012 to Dy. Chairman, Planning Commission with the request
to allocate adequate funds for the M/o Urban Development for the 12th
Five Year Plan (2012-17) so that the schemes and programmes are
effectively implemented (Copy enclosed).

15
As regards allocation for JNNURM, it is submitted that Secretary
(UD) has already stated to the Committee that the budgetary allocation
during the year 2012-13 is inadequate and assured that the matter of high
allocation will be taken up by the Ministry at different fora at the RE
stage. The Ministry of Urban Development in its Working Group of the
Planning Commission had projected a demand of Rs. 1.97 lakh crore for
the 12th Five Year Plan for provision of urban infrastructure and services
under JNNURM. This is based on estimate arrived by the High Powered
Expert Committee (HPEC) which has projected requirement of Rs. 39.2
lakh crore for a period of 20 years for core urban services excluding
Urban Metro Railways. This also excludes Rs. 19.2 lakh crore expected
as requirement by the urban sectors for the operation and maintenance
of the existing and created assets. The Ministry of Finance and Planning
commission may be approached for higher allocation at the RE stage as
assured above by Secretary (UD). The projects under JNNURM are
implemented by the States/ULBs. The progress of projects is also
monitored at Government of India level through QPR submitted by the
State/cities and also through various review/regional meetings. For an
effective monitoring of the projects and reforms, the States have also
been directed to constitute District Level Review and Monitoring
Committee headed by the concerned Members of Parliament to ensure
timely completion of projects.
Recommendation (Serial No. 4)
Adequate funding under Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme
for Small and Medium Towns (UIDSSMT)
2.3 UIDSSMT is meant for improving the overall Urban
Infrastructure in all cities/Towns excluding 65 mission cities covered under
JNNURM. The scheme proposes to cover areas like water supply,
sewerage, storm water drains, solid waste management, construction/up-
gradation of roads, parking on PPP mode etc. The Committee were
informed that during the 7 years period the Budget Estimate for this
component was Rs. 14171.00 crore, Revised Estimate was Rs. 9784.66
crore and actual release was Rs. 8229.86 crore which is not satisfactory.
Out of 1072 projects approved by the State Level Sanctioning Committee
(SLSC) only 142 projects have been completed and 645 projects are at
various stages of implementation. In regard to status of Utilization
Certificates, 374 UCs were due for release of 2nd instalment as on
01.04.2011 and out of which 133 UCs have been received and remaining
241 UCs are yet to be received from the States. Further, the Committee
are informed that due to resource constraints, towns of uncovered
districts may be taken up in the 12th Five Year Plan and the modalities
of next phase of the scheme are under consideration of Planning

16
Commission. Regarding implementation of Reforms, the Committee note
that scarcity of funds is the main hurdle for implementing several reforms
by ULBs. The Committee are happy to note that steps have been taken
by the Ministry to expedite for early submission of UCs by the States.
However, the Committee desire the Ministry that for completion of
remaining 645 projects, the scheme should be extended during the 12th
Five Year Plan. The Committee feel that continuous monitoring of ongoing
projects and Quarterly Progress Reports (QPRs) must be required for
reforms implementation and timely submission of UCs by the States.
Reply of the Government
2.4 Under UIDSSMT as on 30th March, 2012, Rs. 11,358.26 crore
has been committed for 807 projects in 672 towns across the country and
an amount of Rs. 8746.22 crore has been released to 28 States and 04 UTs.
Till 01.04.2012, utilization certificates in 753 projects had become
due against which 589 UCs (78.22%) have been received. 2nd instalment
of ACA amount to Rs. 3051.24 crore have been released for 467 projects
and 122 UCs are under process and remaining 164 UCs are yet to be
received from the States/UTs.
Till date, 175 projects have been reported to be completed. 123
projects have been reported with physical progress with 80% and above,
180 projects having physical progress between 50% to 80%, 95 projects
having physical progress between 30% to 50% and remaining 234 projects
having physical progress less than 30%. The Ministry is seriously pursuing
with the States for early completion of all the projects and implementation
of all the committed Urban Sector Reforms.
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
Urban Transport Planning Scheme
2.5 The Ministry of Urban Development has launched a scheme
namely Urban Transport Planning Scheme for providing central assistance
up to 80% for taking up studies to develop comprehensive traffic and
transportation plans, undertaking feasibility studies/DPRs for individual
Urban Transport projects. The Committee note that out of Rs. 72.90 crore
allocated during the 11th Five Year Plan under this scheme, an amount
of Rs. 63.70 crore have been actually spent till March, 2012. The Ministry
have also informed that the Planning Commission has agreed for
continuation of the existing scheme of Urban Transport Planning and
Capacity Building in Urban Transport in the 12th Five Year Plan. The
Committee feel that whatever may be the claims made by the Ministry

17
over Urban Transport Planning, the facts remains that all over the country
irrespective of middle level cities, big cities or metro cities, the condition
of transport system both public or private is very pathetic. Because of
the failure of public transport system, the pressure on private/personal
transport is increasing day by day. It seems that no serious efforts are
being made by the Government to improve the traffic and transport
situation. As a result of increasing number of private vehicles, the problem
of parking is also becoming more and more acute with every passing
day. Keeping in view all these facts, the Committee strongly feel that
there is a need to tackle the transport and traffic problem at war footing
to save the situation from becoming explosive. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Government to come up with a comprehensive transport
policy without any delay and increase the outlay during the 12th plan
period. The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of the
initiatives being made by the Ministry in this regard.
Reply of the Government
2.6 Urban Transport is inter-twined with urban development which
is a State subject. As such, the responsibility for improving local transport
service in various cities, primarily, rests with the State Government
However, realizing the seriousness of rapidly growing problem of urban
transportation, the Central Government has taken active steps like
formulation of National Urban Transport Policy (NUTP), financing of
buses for Urban Transport, Bus Rapid Transport System Projects, traffic
transit management centres under Urban Transport under JNNURM and
sanction of metro railway projects for various cities.
As far as, outlay during the 12th Plan period is concerned, an
enhanced budget of Rs. 1100 crore has been proposed to meet the
expenditure under the scheme of Urban Transport Planning.
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)
Urban Water Supply and Sanitation
2.7 The Committee note that water supply and sanitation are
important basic needs affecting the quality of life and productive efficiency
of the people. The State Government/Union Territories and urban local
bodies are responsible for providing these services through planning,
design, implementation, and operation and maintenance. In regard to
physical and financial targets and achievements on centralized water
supply system of urban areas, the Committee were informed that out of
157 approved projects for the various mission cities with the approved
cost of Rs. 2047863.92 lakh, only 37 projects on water supply sector have

18
been completed. Further, the Committee have been informed that there
is nil allocation under the head water supply and sanitation during the
years 2011-12 and 2012-13 because now the funds for this head are
allocated under other schemes of the Ministry i.e. JNNURM and UIDSSMT.
The implementation of projects and reforms and their monitoring under
JNNURM is done by the State Government. Therefore, the Committee
strongly recommend that the funds under JNNURM and UIDSSMT should
be increased so as to encourage more such projects from the States. The
Committee also desire the Ministry that concerted efforts should be made
so as to complete the remaining projects in a stipulated time schedule.
Reply of the Government
2.8 Under UIDSSMT out of total 807 projects sanctioned, 599
projects are for Water Supply and Sanitation. The approved cost of these
projects is Rs. 12,114.31 crore and Rs. 7574.98 crore has been released
and ACA to the States so far. Till date, 107 projects (103 water supply,
02 sewerage and 02 solid waste management) have been completed and
remaining projects are at various stages of implementation.
Keeping in view the slow implementation of the projects and
reforms by the States, the Govt. has extended the mission period upto
31st March, 2014 for completion of reforms and projects sanctioned upto
31st March, 2012. As regards observations of the Committee on increase
in allocation under UIDSSMT, it has been noted and being taken up with
the Planning Commission for appropriate decision while formation of
scheme guideline for next phase of the mission.
Recommendation (Serial No. 10)
Projects/Schemes for the benefits of North- Eastern Region and Sikkim
2.9 The Committee note that under this scheme 10% of the budget
allocation is to be made for the projects and schemes for the infrastructure
development of North-Eastern Region and Sikkim. From the year 2001
to March 2011, the Ministry has sanctioned 240 projects for the
development of North Eastern Region at an estimated cost of
Rs. 2079.59 crore. For the year 2012-13 an amount of Rs. 160 crore is
allocated against Rs. 164 crore sanctioned during the financial
year 2011-12. The Committee were informed by the Ministry that various
difficulties are being faced for implementation of Schemes in North-
Eastern Region and Sikkim viz.  difficult geographical conditions,
unwillingness to pay for services and institutional reforms. The Ministry
is taking steps to overcome these problems in North Eastern Region like
activities and property tax surveys have been initiated in Aizawl,

19
Agartala, Shillong, Gangtok and Kohima. The Committee are concerned
to observe as to how the Ministry would ensure the desired results in
North Eastern Region and to overcome difficulties being faced by
Government for implementing the schemes/projects with such a meagre
amount. The Committee feel that there is an urgent need for additional
allocation under this scheme for giving encouraging results in North
Eastern Region and Sikkim. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry
to approach the disbursing Ministry as well as Planning Commission for
additional allocation of funds and apprise them of the outcome thereon.
Reply of the Government
2.10 There are three schemes namely JNNURM (UIG, UIDSSMT),
10% Lump-sum Scheme and North Eastern Region Urban Development
Programme (NERUDP) being implemented by the Ministry for
infrastructure development in North Eastern Region including Sikkim.
Rs. 160.00 crore is only the allocation for the year 2012-13 for 10%
lump-sum scheme. However, the overall commitment for North East
projects under the scheme is much higher and stands at Rs. 2144.53 crore.
The annual allocation is adequate for meeting the absorption capacity of
the States which has ranged between on an average 15% to 25% of the
undrawn commitment for ongoing projects {18% (2009-10); 15%
(2010-11); 25% (2011-12)}. There is no disbursing Ministry for 10% lump-
sum scheme.
In addition to the above, a commitment of Rs. 1371 crore has been
made under North Eastern Region Urban Development Programme
(NERUDP) for Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura. The
annual drawal has been as under:—
Year BE RE Actual
2009-10 1.0 0.50 21.9
2010-11 113.8 23.0 19.8
2011-12 8.0 58.2 43.34
The budget has been kept at Rs. 50 crore for the year 2012-13 keeping
in view the rate of absorption of funds by the States in last three years.
Under NERUDP , the Ministry is taking steps to overcome these
problems in North Eastern Region. Consultants have been appointed for
providing support for construction activities as well as institutional
development. 03 of five cities viz. Gangtok, Agartala and Aizawl have
constituted local bodies and have initiated transfer of functions such as
approval of building by-laws to them. Under NERUDP , assistance is being

20
provided for starting double entry accounting and property tax survey
has been initiated in Aizawl, Agartala, Shillong, Gangtok and Kohima.
To encourage participation by contractors the State authorities have held/
participated in business opportunities seminars.

21
CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES
– NIL –

22
CHAPTER IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Serial No. 2)
Inclusion of more cities under the Urban Infrastructure Governance
(UIG) component of JNNURM
4.1 At present 65 cities are covered under the UIG component of
the JNNURM. The Committee in their earlier Reports have been repeatedly
emphasizing upon for inclusion of 28 more cities having a population
of 5 lakh and above in Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission
(JNNURM) so as to improve their civic infrastructure including roads,
water supply sewage, solid waste management, transport etc. The Ministry
have informed the Committee that inclusion of more cities can be
considered in the next phase of the JNNURM to be launched in 12th
Plan, the strategy of which is yet to be finalized. The Committee, therefore,
desire the Ministry to finalize the strategy at the earliest and pursue this
matter with Planning Commission for inclusion of cities having a
population of 5 lakh and above.
The Committee note that many of the projects are likely to spill
over beyond the present Mission Period i.e. 31.03.2012, the Ministry is
proposing for further extension of Mission Period for 2 years for
completion of projects and reforms by the States/ULBs. However, the
Committee feel that since more and more cities are evincing interest to
be covered under the scheme, the Government may consider to extend
the scheme till the end of 12th Five Year Plan.
Reply of the Government
4.2 The Mission has completed its normal tenure of seven years
on 31.03.2012 and the Government has extended the period for 2 years
i.e. up to 31.03.2014 for completion of reforms and ongoing projects under
JNNURM. It has no mandate now for consideration/sanction of new
projects. Hence, any addition at this stage in the present Mission may
not be fruitful. Further, it has been separately proposed for launching of

23
JNNURM phase-II in the 12th Five Year Plan for which policy and strategy
is under formulation. For the Transition phase, a proposal has been mooted
for fresh allocation under UIG and UIDSSMT for sanctioning of fresh
projects. The Note for the Cabinet has been circulated soliciting comments/
views of the concerned Departments/Ministries before sending the
proposal to the Cabinet Committee on Infrastructure (CCI) for
consideration and approval. This is proposed to be subsumed in the
JNNURM phase-II which would cover the period of the 12th Five Year
Plan.
The directions of the Committee for inclusion of more cities having
a population of 5 lakh and above has been noted for taking up with
Planning Commission while finalizing JNNURM phase-II. However, it
is clarified that all cities, not covered under UIG Sub-Mission are eligible
for consideration of financing under Urban Infrastructure Development
Scheme for Small and Medium Towns (UIDSSMT). However, keeping in
view less allocation for the UIDSSMT it has not been possible to cover
many towns as out of nearly 5000 towns, as per 2011 census, only 764
towns could be covered.
Comments of the Committee
4.3 For comments of the Committee please see Paragraph No. 1.7
of Chapter I of the Report.
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
Delhi Mass Rapid Transit System (DMRTS)
4.4 The Committee note that Phase-I and Phase-II of Delhi Mass
Rapid Transit System (DMRTS) have been successfully completed and
commissioned. The Committee have been informed that Metro Rail
Projects are among the priority projects which are allocated the major
portion of the current budget provision. The Government of India has
approved the Delhi MRTS Phase-III for 103.05 km at a cost of Rs. 35,242
crore. The work of phase-III projects have been initiated and DMRC is
in the process of acquiring more buses to provide connectivity to new
metro stations at Phase-III. However, in regard to feeder bus service the
Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development during the evidence deposed
before the Committee that the entire feeder service load is to be loaded
on the Delhi Metro Corporation and Delhi Transport Corporation. Further
on the issue of cleanliness in metros and frequent glitches occurred in
metros resulting heavy rush and inconvenience being faced by daily
commuters, Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development have stated that
they will see this issue in a specific way . As far as glitches are concerned,

24
there are daily 2800 trips of metro and the system fails occasionally.
Where there is signal problem, manual methods are followed and due
to this metro speed should be restricted. However, they are trying their
best and these situations can be tackled in future. The Committee while
appreciating the action taken by DMRC in this direction, desire the
Government to achieve proper coordination with Delhi Government and
Delhi Transport Corporation to run the feeder bus service efficiently and
made 300 feeder buses functional within the next six months as per
commitment made by the Government.
On the issue of increasing the metro coaches from six to eight, the
Committee were informed by Managing Director, DMRC during the
evidence that the average journey in metro is 15 to 16 kilometre and daily
20 lakh passengers are travelling by metro. Due to this reason the issue
of increasing metro coaches from six to eight will now be considered
before the year 2013. The next lot of coaches is expected to come from
June, 2012. Then metro will be having eight coaches. While the Committee
take note of the initiatives of the Delhi Metro to ease the metro rush,
recommend that apart from increasing the number of coaches in metro,
the Ministry should also explore the options of other Mass Rapid Transit
System like local trains, monorail, high speed trams etc., to supplement
the Metro Transport System to meet the growing requirement of NCR
and integrate them with Delhi Metro to make it a comprehensive transport
system within NCR.
Reply of the Government
4.5 Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Ltd. (DMRC) has informed
that the process of selection of clusters of 100 buses each, has
been completed in consultation with Government of National Capital
Territory of Delhi (GNCTD). Letter of acceptance has been issued
on 15.05.2012. Contract period is 10 years. The buses shall be
procured by the operator conforming to urban buses specification in the
name of DMRC. These buses shall have provision of use of common
mobility card and are expected to become available from December, 2012
onwards.
Public Transportation being a State subject, it is the responsibility
of GNCTD to plan and implement appropriate options of Mass Rapid
Transit System (MRTS) like mono rails, high speed trams, local trains,
etc. to supplement the Delhi metro. Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC)
has informed that they are presently operating around 548 routes with
5800 buses which are providing bus connectivity to almost all metro
stations, thus facilitating integration. Details of further MRTS proposals
are awaited from the GNCTD.

25
Comments of the Committee
4.6 For comments of the Committee please see Paragraph No.1.10
of Chapter-I of the Report.
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
Central Public Works Department (CPWD)
4.7 The Committee note that there are encroachment by Jhuggi/
Jhopdi dwellers in the Government residential colonies all over the country
which causes unhygienic condition, creates law and order problem by
encouraging anti-social element and hence creates inconvenience to the
residents. The Committee have been informed that efforts are being made
by the Ministry for removal of encroachment from Government land. The
encroachment on CPWD land are surveyed by the local civic authorities
and money is deposited by CPWD with the local authority for the removal/
rehabilitation of Jhuggi/Jhopdi dwellers. Detailed surveys have been
undertaken by the local civil body to know these dwellers eligibility
regarding resettlement/rehabilitation. After receipt of the Bill from local
body, money is deposited by the CPWD for onward action. Apart from
this, ineligible Jhuggis dwellers are removed by CPWD with the help of
police force. The Committee are of the opinion that although continuous
efforts are being made by the Ministry, yet encroachments in Government
residential colonies are still in progress. The Committee, therefore, reiterate
their recommendation given in their earlier report. The Committee also
desire that responsibility of the Officers of various agencies be fixed
under whose nose the encroachment takes place. The Committee may
be apprised of the outcome in this regard from time to time.
Reply of the Government
4.8 As far as Delhi is concerned, for three locations namely
Nicholson Square, Rajiv Gandhi Camp at Aram Bagh and Shankar Camp
at Sector 13, R. K. Puram, amount of Rs. 21.48 lakh, Rs. 13.29 lakh and
Rs. 18.99 lakh respectively was deposited with MCD in Sep’2001, Jul’2001
and May’2003 as per demand raised by them after site survey.
Encroachment at Nicholson Square has since been removed. At that time
MCD was the nodal agency for assessment of eligible settlers and their
relocation. MCD, however, could not complete the job till 2006.
The Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act, 2006 was enacted by the
Parliament to address the issues arising out of the several orders and
directions passed by the Supreme Court and the High Court of Delhi
in cases pending before them regarding contentious issues which were

26
confronting the National Capital, namely , unauthorized constructions,
commercial use of residential premises, encroachment on public land by
slum dwellers and Jhuggi-jhopri clusters, problems relating to urban street
vendors, which were affecting the lives of millions of people . This Act
remained effective for a period of one year and lapsed on the 18th May
2007, and required Central Government with a time period of one year
to take all possible steps to finalize norms, policy guidelines and feasible
strategies to deal with the problem of unauthorized development with
regard to mixed land use not conforming to the Master Plan, construction
beyond sanctioned plans, and encroachment by slum and Jhuggi- jhopri
dwellers, hawkers and urban street vendors; and also provided for status
quo as on 1st January 2006 to be maintained in respect of these categories
of unauthorized development, subject to certain conditions not
withstanding any judgement, decree or order of any court, and that all
notices issued by the local bodies for initiating action against these
categories of unauthorized developments shall be deemed to have been
suspended and that no punitive action shall be taken during the said
period of one year.
Consequent to this, for three years removal and relocation of Jhuggi
dwellers could not be possible. In 2010 an Act was passed by NCTD and
DUSIB came into existence with effect from July , 2010, which is now the
nodal agency in the matter.
Detailed guidelines were issued in 2005 laying down procedures
and fixing responsibilities for detection, reporting and removal of
encroachment by CPWD officials from its properties which have been
again reiterated in the year 2010. No fresh encroachment on CPWD land
in Delhi has been prepared and submitted to DUSIB for appropriate
action. The matter is being pursued vigorously with DUSIB.
Officers in CPWD are being directed to co-operate with other
agencies like MCD, NDMC and Police and also seek co-operation from
the dedicated taskforce already constituted by GNCTD, involving Revenue
Department, Urban Development Department, and and Building
Department, Home Department, DUSIB, MCD, NDMC, CPWD and DDA
etc.
Reports from the Chief Engineers who have works located at
Kolkata, Bangalore, Hyderabad, Chennai, Mumbai and Ahmadabad
indicate that there has been no new encroachment during last two years
in these cities. In some old cases matter is under litigations. However
CPWD has been directed to prepare details of existing encroachment if
any on CPWD land in these cities also. This process is expected to be
completed by September end this Year.

27
In this aspect, a circular has also been issued from this Directorate
to curb encroachment and removal thereof (Copy enclosed).
Comments of the Committee
4.9 For comments of the Committee please see Paragraph No. 1.13
of Chapter-I of the Report.
Recommendation (Serial No. 11)
Need for adequate sewerage and sanitation system
4.10 From the information provided by the Ministry, the
Committee observed that 4861 cities out of 5161 cities/towns in India do
not have even a partial sewerage network. Almost 50% of households
in cities like Bangalore and Hyderabad do not have sewerage connection.
Only 21% of the waste water generated is treated. About 18% of urban
households do not have access to any form of latrines. Of the 79 sewerage
treatment plants under State ownership 46 were operating under very
poor condition and less than 20% of the road network is covered by
storm water drains. In view of this, sewerage system in India is suffering
from poor maintenance. The existing set up simply cannot handle the
problems of cities including the mega cities like Delhi, Calcutta, Chennai
and Mumbai.
The Committee note that sewerage, sanitation and drainage are
significant focus sectors under the purview of JNNURM whose period
is from 2005-06 to 2011-12. So far 108 sewerage and 71 drainage(including
storm water drainage) projects were sanctioned under JNNURM. The
Committee are distressed to note that even after completion of the entire
mission period i.e 2011-12 against the above sanctioned projects only
15 sewerage projects and 8 drainage projects have been completed till date.
Against this backdrop the Committee strongly recommend that the
Ministry should take proactive steps in completing the remaining projects
at the earliest and generate more demands from all the States about these
projects by creating awareness during the 12th Plan period.
The Committee are given to understand that despite Supreme
Court’s Order, sewerage disposal systems in major cities like Delhi are
still releasing untreated water directly or indirectly into water bodies
without removing the harmful compounds, this causes severe
environmental hazards. In view of this, the Committee further
recommend that time-bound steps should be taken in this direction to
stop releasing of polluted water into the river by strictly adhering to the
Supreme court’s orders and by establishing adequate number of sewerage
treatment plants.

28
Reply of the Government
4.11 As per 2011 Census, the urban households having latrine
facility within premise is 81.4% and the remaining 18.6% households
are both sharing public latrines (6%) and defecating in open (12.6%). Out
of 81.4% households having latrine facility, 38.2% households are
connected with pipe sewerage system. According to the Report on Status
of water supply, wastewater generation and treatment in Class - I Cities
and Class-II Towns of India (Series: CUPS/70/2009-10) published by
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) in the year 2009, the country
together generates 38,254 million litres per day (MLD) of sewage, out
of which treatment facilities have been provided for 11,787 MLD which
constitute 31% of total sewage generation and the remaining 26,467 MLD
is disposed into the water bodies without any treatment. Ministry is
aware that 75% of fresh water resources including major rivers in
the country are contaminated due to discharge of untreated domestic
waste water.
Since sanitation is a State subject, it is the responsibility of Urban
Local Bodies (ULBs) in planning, design, implementation, operation and
maintenance of sanitation services in the cities and towns. At the Central
level, the Ministry of Urban Development is the nodal Ministry for
formulation of policies, strategies and guidelines and assists the States
by providing financial assistance for development of urban water supply
and sanitation sector in the cities and towns.
With a view to prioritizing the issue of sanitation, the Ministry
of Urban Development formulated the National Urban Sanitation
Policy in 2008. The vision of the policy is that all Indian cities and
towns become totally sanitized, healthy and livable and ensure and sustain
good public health and environmental outcomes for all their citizens
with a special focus on hygienic and affordable sanitation facilities for
the urban poor and women. Under National Urban Sanitation Policy
States have to prepare State Level Sanitation Strategies and cities
have to prepare model City Sanitation Plans. So far, 21 States are engaged
in the preparation of State Sanitation Strategies. The Ministry of
Urban Development is supporting 124 cities in the development of City
Sanitation Plans.
The Government of India, wherever possible, explores possibilities
of providing assistance for funding projects proposed through its schemes
like JNNURM, UIDSSMT, 10% Lump Sum for N-E States, Satellite
Township Scheme. The Ministry of Environment and Forests is
implementing various National programmes to prevent contamination of
river water bodies.

29
So far 11 Sewerage projects and 73 Drainage projects have been
sanctioned under JNNURM, out of which 17 Sewerage projects and
13 Drainage projects have respectively been reported physically completed.
The remaining projects are at various stages of implementation.
An advisory has been issued to all States to take necessary steps
for expeditious completion of the ongoing Sewerage and Drainage projects
under Urban Infrastructure Governance (UIG) Sub-Mission of JNNURM
and to issue strict instructions to the concerned implementing agencies
so that all the projects, which are at various stages of implementation,
may be completed expeditiously and within the stipulated extended period
of JNNURM i.e. 31.03.2014.
Comments of the Committee
4.12 For comments of the Committee please see Paragraph No. 1.16
of Chapter-I of the Report.

30
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)
Slow physical progress under UIG component of JNNURM
5.1 The Committee note that the total allocation under UIG
Sub-mission of JNNURM is Rs. 31,500 crore for its seven years duration
i.e. 2005-2012. Out of this, Rs. 30786.26 crore has been committed for
555 projects and for buses sanctioned under 2nd Economic stimulus
package for various States. The Committee find that out of 555 sanctioned
UIG projects only 127 projects have been physically completed which is
only 40.37%. 423 projects are at various stages of implementation.
However, Ministry is silent about status of remaining 5 projects. Ministry
of Urban Development have furnished various reasons for slow progress
of these projects viz. delay in receipt of permission/clearances from various
authorities, lack of capacity of ULBs, land acquisition issues, high tender
premium, cost escalation, lack of response to tender and re-tender etc.
As JNNURM is a reform linked scheme of Central Assistance, the progress
of the projects is also affected due to non-submission of Utilizations
Certificates by the States on account of non-achievement of reforms as
per committed timelines. The Committee have been informed that the
Ministry is proposing for further extension of mission period for 2 years
for completion of projects and reforms by the States/ULBs. The Committee
are pained to note that after taking effective steps and appointing
Programme Management Unit (PMU) at State level, Project Implementing
Unit (PIU) at ULB level, Independent Review and Monitoring Agency
(IRMA) and State Level Steering Committee (SLSC) for assessing progress
of these projects, the mission Directorate has failed to achieve the targets.
Regarding bearing the cost escalation of these projects, the Committee
were informed that States have to bear any cost escalation of the projects
over and above. The Committee want that the Government should not
burden States for cost escalation and find other way for this. The
Committee also observe that the Grant Thornton India, a mid-term
appraisal agency for JNNURM has brought out certain key findings and
submitted recommendations to the Ministry. The Committee desire that
all the key points of Grant Thorton India should be given due credence

31
and implement the projects in a more meaningful manner. Moreover, the
Committee desire that the Ministry should ensure completion of all
projects of UIG in the extended 2 years period so as to achieve the desired
results by 2014.
Reply of the Government
5.2 As on 31-03-2012, a total of 559 projects have been approved
under UIG Sub-Mission of JNNURM with approved cost of Rs. 67274.90
crore (inclusive of buses sanctioned under JNNURM) and ACA
commitment of Rs. 30971.34 crore (inclusive of buses sanctioned under
JNNURM). 128 projects have so far been completed. Sanction for 5 projects
of GNCTD has been withdrawn on the request of State Government by
the Government of India and the remaining 426 projects are at various
stages of implementation. The Government has extended the period for
2 years beyond the normal tenure which ended on 31.03.2012 i.e. up to
31.03.2014 for completion of reforms and ongoing projects under
JNNURM. The Ministry has been reviewing the progress of ongoing
works. It has been stressing upon the States for completion of works
within the stipulated time. It is expected that some works will be
completed in this Financial Year. Further review of progress of works
would be taken up by the Ministry. States have been impressed upon to
expedite completion and commissioning of projects.
The State Govt./ULB has to bear cost escalation if any, in
implementation of the projects in the present phase of JNNURM. However,
a decision on the issue of cost escalation would be taken in the JNNURM
phase-II which will also take into consideration the findings and
recommendations of the mid-term appraisal report of Grant Thorton and
the learning of the present phase of JNNURM.
Recommendation (Serial No. 5)
Tardy Implementation of Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme
for Satellite Towns around Seven Mega cities
5.3 The Committee note that a pilot scheme for Urban Infrastructure
Development in Satellite Towns around seven mega cities is being
implemented by Ministry of Urban Development. The main objectives
of this scheme are to develop Urban Infrastructure facilities like drinking
water, sewerage and solid waste management etc. at satellite towns around
the seven mega cities and to regulate their future growth so as to reduce
pressure on the mega cities. They further note that total 15 projects worth
Rs. 47203.58 lakh have been sanctioned for Vasai-virar, Sonepat,
Vikarabad, Sanand Pilkhuwa and Sriperumbudur and the amount

32
released till February, 2012 is only 13427.06 lakh which is around 30%.
70% funds are still unutilized resulting in tardy implementation of projects
sanctioned under the scheme. The Committee were informed by the
Ministry that the Planning Commission has sought merger of this scheme
in JNNURM but no final decision has been taken. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the Government to take a decision expeditiously
in this regard so that the scheme could avoid cost escalation and be
implemented in the right earnest.
Reply of the Government
5.4 The decision for the merger of this scheme in JNNURM is
under consideration.
N
EW DELHI; SHARAD YADAV,
30 November, 2012 Chairman,
9 Agrahayana,  1934 (Saka) Standing Committee on
Urban Development.

33
Government of India
DIRECTORATE GENERAL
CENTRAL PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi-110011
Ph. No.: 23062220 Fax No.: 23061125
E-mail Id: dwcpwd@yahoo.co.in
No.PM/DGW/409-A/254 Dated: 15th May, 2012
CIRCULAR
Sub:- 17th Report of the Standing Committee-Discussion and voting on
Demand for (Grants for 2012-13 for Ministry of Urban Development.
Attached herewith please find copy of an order issued by GNCTD
vide No. F-27/SDM/KJ/2010/96. dated: 30.3.2011 regarding constitution of
Task Force for removal of encroachment of public areas.
Removal of encroachment has been an important issue raised in
17th Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development. Prompt
action is required to be taken thereon.
Standing Committee has very categorically observed that:—
“.....At the same time, the committee are of the firm view that
incidents of encroachment cannot happen without the connivance
of higher officials of civic agencies. The committee wants that stern
and deterrent punishment should be awarded to the officials under
whose nose such encroachment has taken place.
These observations have been reiterated in 18th Report also. The
committee also want that they may be apprised of the outcome in this
regard from time to time.
Appendix-I

34
It is therefore enjoined upon all the Chief Engineers to direct
field formations under them to co-operate and co-opt with other agencies
like MCD, NDMC and police and also seek Co-operation from the dedicated
task force already constituted by GNCTD, involving Sub-Divisional
Magistrate of the sub-division. Assistant Commissioner of Police of the
sub-division, Deputy Director/Executive Engineer of DDA. Zonal Assistant
Commissioner of the MCD, Executive Engineer of PWD and BDO of
Panchayat Department, GNCTD."
Field formation may also be, directed to follow up the issue of
relocation removal of Jhuggis/encroachments on CPWD land with DUSIB
which is the nodal authority for this purpose (www.delhisheher.nic.in).
Outside Delhi also similar action is required to be taken in,
coordination with State Administrator.
CEs are required to periodically review the status and keep the
CPWD directorate updated with the quarterly AIR.
Encl : as above
Sd/-
Deputy Director General (W)
To,
1. ADG (NR. WR. SR. ER. BORDER)
2. Chief Engineer NDZ-I/NDZ-II/NDZ-III/NDZ-IV/NZ-I/NZ-II/
NZ-III/CZ /WZ-I/WZ-II/SZ-I/SZ-II/SZ-III/EZ-I/EZ-II/NEZ/BFZ/
BFLZ/IBBZ/RSVY/IBBFLZ/IBBRMZ.
Copy to : PPS to Spl. DG. (S&P . TD)

35
MINISTER OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
INDIA
D.O. No. G-20018/10/2011-Bt-(UD)/3403-F
09 May, 2012
Dear Montek,
I am writing to you in connection with the gross budgetary support
for 12th Five Year Plan (2012-17) for the Ministry of Urban Development.
The requirement of funds for the urban sector today needs to be placed
in the context of India’s pace of urbanisation and the need to significantly
improve the urban infrastructure and service delivery.
We have now a total of 7935 towns which includes 4041 statutory
towns, 468 class-I cities having a population of over one lakh of which
53 cities have a population of more than one million. It is expected that
India will add 700 million new urban residents by 2050. This scale of
urbanization is unprecedented and the urban centres have already emerged
as centres of economic growth – contributing 60% to the GDP and creating
millions of jobs.
While urbanization is key to economic growth, rapid growth of
urban population puts a huge constraint on the physical infrastructure
of our cities. Provision of piped water, adequate sanitation facilities,
improved roads and urban transport as also environmental sustainability
are our major concerns in the urban areas.
Taking into consideration these challenges, the Ministry of Urban
Development had constituted a Committee under Dr. Isher Judge
Ahluwalia to assess the financing needs of cities in the context of India’s
urbanization over the next 20 years, i.e. from 2011 to 2031. This report
has worked out the investment for urban infrastructure over the 20 year
period at Rs. 39.2 lac crore at 2009-10 prices and has recommended that
Appendix-II

36
Government of India provided 0.25% of GDP to Urban Local Bodies
(ULBs) for the next phase of JNNURM.
The Steering Committee on Urbanization set up by the Planning
Commission has also called for a significant increase in investment in
the urban sector. This Committee has assessed the requirement in the
12th Plan (2012-17) at Rs. 180,000 crore from the Central Government for
investment through JNNURM and other programmes.
Further, the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Urban
Development in its 18th Report on Demands for Grants 2012-13 has
recommended that:—
“The Committee are distressed to note that keeping in view the
plight of urban condition in India and regular increase in the rate
of inflation, the increase of allocation is not more than 5% which
is very minuscule for successful implementation of various schemes
undertaken by the Ministry . The Committee recommended that the
Ministry should continue for higher and additional allocation of
funds.”
In line with these recommendations, this Ministry has already
proposed an outlay of Rs. 1,97,000 crore for investment for the next phase
of JNNURM, including funds for a national capacity building programme
and an amount of Rs. 1,57,227 crore for other schemes of the Ministry
for the 12th Five Year Plan.
I shall be grateful if you could kindly look into the matter and
allocate adequate funds for the Ministry of Urban Development for the
12th Five Year Plan (2012-17) so that the schemes and programmes of
the Ministry are effectively implemented.
With regards.
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(KAMAL NATH)
Shri Montek Singh Ahluwalia,
Deputy Chairman,
Planning Commission, Yojana Bhawan,
New Delhi.

37
ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2012-2013)
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 6th November, 2012 from
1100 hrs. to 1430 hrs. in Room No 074, Parliament Library Building,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Sharad Yadav — Chairman
M
EMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ambica Banerjee
3. Shri Kailash Joshi
4. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee
5. Shri Ramesh Kumar
6. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik
7. Shri Ratan Singh
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Anil Desai
9. Shri Parvez Hashmi
10. Shri Faggan Singh Kulaste
11. Shri Avinash Pande
12. Shri Ajay Sancheti
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri D.S. Malha — Director
2. Smt. J.M. Sinha — Deputy Secretary
3. Smt. K. Rangamani N. — Under Secretary

38
Part I
(1100 hrs. to 1130 hrs.)
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed all the Members
to the second sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up for
consideration the draft Report on (i) Action taken by the Government
on the observations/recommendations contained in the 18th Report
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2012-
13) of the Ministry of Urban Development, (ii) Action taken by the
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the 19th
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(2012-13) of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation. After
deliberations, the Committee adopted the reports without any
modification.
3. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to finalise the above
mentioned Reports and to present these to both the Houses of Parliament.
4. *** *** *** *** ***
5. *** *** *** *** ***
A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Sitting has been kept.
The Committee then adjourned.
*** This portion does not relate to the Report

39
ANNEXURE II
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
EIGHTEENTH REPORT OF THE ST ANDING COMMITTEE ON
URBAN DEVELOPLMENT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
I. Total number of recommendations: 11
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 1, 4, 6, 9 and 10
Total: 5
Percentage: 45.45%
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
- Nil -
Total: Nil
Percentage: 00.00%
IV . Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 2, 7, 8 and 11
Total: 4
Percentage: 36.36%
V . Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of
the Government are still awaited:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 3 and 5
Total: 2
Percentage: 18.18%

“All Parliamentary Publications including DRSC Reports are 
available on sale at the Sales Counter, Reception, Parliament House 
(Tel. Nos. 23034726, 23034495, 23034496), Agents appointed 
by Lok Sabha Secretariat and Publications Division, Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New 
Delhi (Tel. Nos. 24367260, 24365610) and their outlets. The said 
information is available on website ‘www.parliamentofindia.nic.in’.
The Souvenir Items with logo of Parliament are also available at Sales 
Counter, Reception, Parliament House, New Delhi. The Souvenir 
items with Parliament Museum logo are available for sale at Souvenir 
Shop (Tel. No. 23035323), Parliament Museum, Parliament Library 
Building, New Delhi. List of these items are available on the website 
mentioned above.”