 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
                                    (2011-2012) 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
THE PUBLIC PREMISES (EVICTION OF UNAUTHORISED OCCUPANTS) AMENDMENT 
BILL, 2011 
 
 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
20 


 TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
THE PUBLIC PREMISES (EVICTION OF UNAUTHORISED OCCUPANTS) AMENDMENT 
BILL, 2011 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 14.05.2012 
 
                                          Laid in Rajya Sabha on  14.05.2012 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
May, 2012/ Vaisakha, 1934(Saka) 
 
 


 
 
 C.U.D. No.: 71 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2012 By Lok Sabha Secretariat  
 
Publish under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by 

 
 
CONTENTS 
                                    PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………………………………………..
 (iii)   
INTRODUCTION…………………………………………. ………………………………  
(v)   
REPORT 
PART-I 
PART    I Background of "The Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised  Occupants)  
  Amendment Bill, 2011"and analysis thereon      1 
 
      
PART    II  Recommendations/Observations of the Committee……………………………  8   
      
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 The Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised  Occupants)     
       Amendment Bill, 2011       12 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Committee held on 
 02.04.2012……………………………………………………….    17   
               
II. Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee held on 9.05.2012…….. 20 
         
 
 
 (ii) 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT(2011-
2012) 
Shri Sharad Yadav         -        Chairman 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2.    Shri J.P. Agarwal 
3.    Shri M. Anandan 
4.    Shri Praveen Singh Aron 
5.    Shri Partap Singh Bajwa 
6.    Shri Ambica Banerjee 
7.    Smt. J. Helen Davidson 
8.    Smt. Priya Dutt 
9.    Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
10.    Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique 
11.  Shri Gorakh Prasad Jaiswal 
12.  Shri Kailash Joshi 
13.  Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
14.  Dr (Prof.) Ramshankar Katheria 
15.  Shri Ramesh Kumar 
16.  Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena 
17.  Shri P.C. Mohan 
18.  Shri Sonawane Pratap Narayanrao 
19.  Shri Rakesh Sachan 
20.  Shri Bhupendra Singh 
21. Shri Umashankar Singh 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
#23. Shri Parvez Hashmi 
24.  Shri Avinash Pande 
 
(iii) 

 
 
25. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar 
26. Shri Kanwar Deep Singh 
27. Shri  Khekiho Zhimomi 
28. Shri Ajay Sancheti 
29. Shri Rajeev Chandrasekhar 
*30. Vacant 
*31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee   -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain    -  Director 
3. Smt. J.M.  Sinha   -  Deputy Secretary 
4 Smt. Rangamani N.   -  Under Secretary 
 
# Retired from Rajya Sabha on 27.01.2012 and renominated w.e.f. 2.02.2012. 
* Vacancy caused consequent upon retirement of Dr. Manohar Joshi and Smt. Hema Malini from 
Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 02.04.2012. 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Urban Development having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the report on their behalf,  present this Twentieth Report (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on "The Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised  Occupants Amendment, Bill 2011" 
pertaining to the Ministry of Urban Development.  
 
2. The Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised  Occupants) Amendment, Bill 2011"  
introduced in Lok Sabha  on 23 November, 2011 was referred to this Committee on 5th January, 
2012 for examination and Report thereon, by the Speaker Lok Sabha under Rule 331 E of the Rules 
of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha. 
 
3. The Committee obtained written information on various provisions contained in the 
aforesaid Bill from the Ministry of Urban Development. 
 
4. The Committee  at their sitting held on 2 nd April, 2012  took evidence of the representatives 
of the Ministry of Urban Development,  Ministry of Home Affairs, DMRC and NDMC on the Bill. 
The Hon'ble Speaker was kind enough to grant extension of time upto 22 nd May, 2012 for 
presentation of the Report. 
 
5. The Committee express their thanks to the officials of the Ministry of Urban Development, 
DMRC and NDMC for placing before them the material and information desired from time to time 
in connection with examination of the Bill.  
 
6. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their sitting held on    9 May, 
2012. 
 
7. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold in Part-II of the Report.   
 
 
New Delhi;                 
May, 2012 
Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) 
SHARAD YADAV  
Chairman 
Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
 
 
(v)  

Report 
Part I 
Background of " The Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised  Occupants) 
Amendment Bill, 2011"and analysis thereon.   
The unauthorized occupancy of public premises is a serious problem prevailing all 
through the country. In spite of various efforts taken by the Government from time to 
time to curb this issue, the problem of unauthorized occupancy continues to exist. 
Though Public premises has been well defined in the Public Premises (Eviction of  
Unauthorized Occupants) Act, 1971, the premises which are meant for public utility or 
for the welfare of public are being occupied by private parties to carry on their own 
business which become very difficult to get evicted.  Similar ly such problem of 
unauthorized occupancy was being experienced by the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation. In 
the above context the Committee were given to understand that some of the properties 
belonging to DMRC which were given on rent a re not being vacated by the tenants even 
on the expiry of authorized period. The properties of DMRC are not covered under the 
provisions of the PPE Act and, therefore, the DMRC is unable to take recourse to the 
provisions of the Act for speedy recovery of its premises from the unauthorized 
occupants.  
1.2 The Solicitor General who was approached by DMRC, has given an advice either 
to amend DMRC Act to provide for powers similar to those enjoyed by Estate Officer 
under the PPE Act or bring about appropriate provisions in comprehensive Bill or add a 
clause under Section 2(3) of the PPE Act which defines the Public premises to include 
the properties belonging to DMRC also as Public Premises.  
1.3 The third advice i.e.  including properties of Metro Rail within the meaning of 
public premises was considered to be more appropriate since metros can come up in 
different part s of the country in future and the unauthorized occupancy  of the metro 

2 
 
property can hamper the process of metro rail construction and cause inconvenience to 
the public. 
1.4 The Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 was enacted 
to provide for speedy machinery for eviction of unauthorized occupants from P ublic 
Premises, including the pre mises of Government companies and those of corporations 
established by or under any Central Act. Since its enactment, this Act has been amended 
thrice. 
1.5  It has been stated that t he Delhi Metro Railway Corporation has requested that 
metro properties be  declared as Public Premises by amending the Public Premises 
(Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 and to confer powers of an Estate 
Officer under the said Act, to the officers of the Delhi Metro Railway Corporation to be 
appointed by the Central Government for dealing with the problem of eviction in a more 
expeditious manner. 
 
1.6  Clause (e) of section 2 of the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised 
Occupants) Act, 1971 contains the definition of public premises. Item (i) of sub -clause 
(2) of clause (e) of section 2 of the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) 
Act, 1971 provides that any premises belonging to, or taken on lease by, or on behalf  of, 
any company as defined in section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956, in which n ot less than 
fifty-one per cent, of the paid-up share capital is held by the Central Government or any 
company which is a subsidiary (within the meaning of that Act) of the first mentioned 
company as 'public premises '. The paid -up share capital held by one or mor e State 
Governments is not included under this item. 
 
1.7 Statement of Objects and Reasons  appended to the Bill states that it is, therefore, 
proposed to include within the meaning of 'public premises' any premises belonging to, or 
taken on lease by, or on behalf of, any company as defined in section 3 of the Companies  

3 
 
Act, 1956 in which n ot less than fifty -one per cent  of the paid -up share capital is held 
partly by the Central Government and partly by one or more State Governments and 
includes a company which is a subsidiary (within the meaning of that Act) of the first -
mentioned company and which carries on business of Metro Railway. 
 
1.8  The public premises, in relation to the National Capital Territory of Delhi means, 
any premises belonging to the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, or any Municipal 
Committee or notified area committee under the provisions as contained in item (i) of 
sub-clause (3) of clause (e) of section 2 of the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised 
Occupants) Act, 1971. An issue was raised in one of the cases before the Hon‟ble High 
Court of Delhi in a civil writ petition No. 9664/2007 as to whether the expression 
„‟Municipal Committee‟‟ or „‟notified area committee‟‟ in the National Capital Territory 
of Delhi would include the Municipal Council as defined in clause (e) of section 2 of the 
Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971. The Hon‟ble High 
Court held that there is no question of an y ambiguity in the expres sion "any Municipal 
Committee or notified area committee" used in relation to any premises held by them and 
dismissed the writ petition. 
 
1.9  To avoid re currence of any litigation in future and to remove any doubts, 
Municipal Council is being brought within the purview of 'public premises' by amending 
section 2 of the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971. 
 
1.10 The Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Bill, 2011 was 
introduced in Lok Sabha on 23.11.2011 and referred to the Standing Committee on Urban 
Development on 5.01.2012 for examination and report thereon to Parliament. 
1.11 The Committee solicited comments from various  stakeholders viz. Ministry of 
Urban Development, DMRC and NDMC on various issues involved in this Bill.  The 

4 
 
Committee took oral evidence of the Ministry of Urban Development, DMRC & NDMC 
who clarified various issues. 
1.12 The Committee deliberated  on the various provisions of the Bill in detail. The 
details about the deliberations have been given in succeeding paragraph. 
 
1.13 As per the information provided by the Ministry the Cabinet gave its nod to the 
Bill on 8 th July 2010 and the Bill was introd uced in Lok Sabha only  on 23.11.2011. 
Apprising the committee as to why so much time was taken in bringing the Bill before 
the Parliament the Ministry in its written reply stated as under: 
 
"After approval by the Cabinet Note on 8.7.2010, draft Notice for introduction of 
the Bill was prepared and submitted for UDM‟s approval on 9 th August, 2010. 
After approval of UDM, the Notice was served to the Secretary General, Lok 
Sabha on 11 th November, 2010. However, Bill could not be introduced in that 
Session. In t he meantime portfolio of the Ministry of Urban Development was 
changed and therefore, a fresh Notice was put up on 12 th January, 2011 for 
approval of the new Minister. Before approval of the Notice by the UDM, 
proposals were received from ASSOCHAM (Associa ted Chamber of Commerce 
and Industry of India) and IMC (Indian Merchants‟ Chamber) seeking further 
amendment in the PPE Act, in effect aiming at linking the provisions of the PPE 
Act with those of the Rent Control Act. The suggestion of ASSOCHAM and 
IMC we re examined in consultation with Law Ministry. Law Ministry did not 
agree with the proposal of the ASSOCHAM and IMC and, thereafter, the fresh 
Notice was approved by the Urban Development Minister on 24 August, 2011 
and served to the Secretary General of t he Lok Sabha on 29 th August, 2011. The 
Urban Development Minister introduced the Bill in Lok Sabha on 23th 
November, 2011." 
 
1.14 On being asked about the numbers of cases languishing in courts for want of this 
Amendment and their period of pendency the Secretary, Urban Development  Ministry 
during deposition before the Committee stated that: 
 
"As per information furnished by DMRC, 96 premises have not been vacated on 
expiry of the authorized period and all these cases are in the Court/Arbitration. 

5 
 
Out of these, two cases are less than one year old, seventy seven cases are more 
than one year old, 16 are more than two years old and one case is more than three 
years old. However, no case is pending in the Court of Law so far as NDMC is 
concerned. " 
 
1.15  When asked about the impact of this Bill in quick disposal of the cases the 
Ministry stated as under: 
 
"After amendment of the Act, the DMRC will be able to get their premises 
vacated through the designated Estate Officer. The cases of unauthorized 
occupation are decided by the Estate Officer, as per provisions in the Act, within 
a period of 3 to 4 months. The appeal against the order of the Estates Officer lies 
in the court of the District Judge, whereas in normal cases petitions have to be 
filed in the Lower Court which takes years for disposal. Thus, under the PPE Act, 
the overall time period of finalization of the cases gets reduced drastically. " 
1.16  In a reply to a question that i t is understood that every decision of the Estate 
Officer can be challenged in the courts of District and Session Judge where the cas es are 
stacked for want of time ,  the Secretary, Ministry Urban Development  during deposition 
before the Committee submitted as under: 
 
"It is true that order of the Estate Officer can be challenged in the Court of the 
District Judge. The time taken by the Court of District Judge in disposal of appeals 
ranges from 3 to 6 months. Thus, the time taken by the District Judge in disposal 
of appeal is much less than the time taken in the norma l procedure. The 
amendment in the PPE Act will, in fact, help DMRC in getting its premises 
vacated in much shorter time. " 
 
1.17 Briefing about the background  of necessity of the amendment regarding inclusion 
of Municipal Corporation , the Chairperson, NDMC during evidence before the 
Committee clarified as under:  
"As per Section -2(e)(3)(i) of the Act in relation to the National Capital Territory 
of Delhi, the premises belonging to the Municipal Corporation of Delhi or any 
Municipal Committee or notified area Committee shall be the public premises. After 
the establishment of New Delhi Municipal Council under the New Delhi Municipal 
Council Act, 1994, which came into force from 25.5.1994, a question was raised in 

6 
 
the Delhi High Court as to wh ether the properties of the New Delhi Municipal 
Council are the public premises as it has not been so defined in Section -2(e)(3)(i) of 
the Act on the main ground that the New Delhi Municipal Council is not a Municipal 
Committee. The Delhi High Court, howev er, upheld that the properties of the New 
Delhi Municipal Council are public premises. However,  to avoid any ambiguity, it 
has been suggested in the Bill that New Delhi Municipal Council, as defined in 
Section-2 Clause-9 of the NDMC Act be specifically in cluded in definition of public 
premises to avoid any further litigation in this regard." 
 
 
1.18 When asked why the suggestion of amending the Delhi Metro Railway (O&M) 
Act, 2002 and bestowing  powers similar to those enjoyed by Estate Officers under the 
PPE Act was not taken into consideration instead of in serting a provision for amending 
the PPE Act, the Ministry in its written reply stated as under: 
 
"The Solicitor General in his opinion dated 10.5.2004 opined that the powers 
provided under the DMR C ACT are not wide enough to cover encroachments of 
various properties and also is not a machinery as effective as the one under the Public 
premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Act, 1971 . He further opined DMRC 
to request the Central Government to make amendment in the PPE Act 1971. The 
above-mentioned opinion was examined and it has been decided to seek amendment 
in Section 2(e)2(i) so as to bring under the PPE Act, the properties of the  companies 
in which the Central Government and one or more State Government (s) jointly hold 
51% or more Share Capital." 
 
1.19 When asked whether this amendment for enabling joint ownership by Central 
Govt. and State Governments can be challenged in the Co urt of Law as it infringes the 
basic tenet of the public sector character i.e. at least 51% holding, the Ministry in its 
written reply clarified as under: 
"The DMRC is joint venture Company between the Central Government and the 
Government. The proposed amendment provides for more than 51% share capital 
jointly held partly by the Central Government and partly by one or more State 
Governments. Therefore, the proposal does not infringe upon the basic tenet of public 
sector character and may not be challenged in the Court of Law." 
 

7 
 
 
 
 
 
1.20 When asked about the safety provisions in the amended PPE Act to prevent 
misuse against the genuine tenants whose t erm has not been expired, the Ministry in its 
written reply stated as under: 
 
 
"The validity of the PPE Act, 1971 has been upheld by the Apex Court of the 
country. Further, with a view to prevent arbitrary use of the powers to evict 
genuine tenants from public premises and to limit the use of powers by the Estate 
Officer appointed u/s 3 of the PPE Act, 1971,  detailed guidelines were circulated 
vide Resolution No. 21013/1/2000-Policy-I dated 13th May, 2002. " 
 
1.21 On being asked whether the PPE Act is more effective than the in vogue judicial 
process, the Ministry stated that: 
 
"The PPE Act is a very effective and fast track process for evacuation of 
unauthorized occupants of the public premises, whereas in normal cases not 
covered under the PPE Act, the eviction case is to be filed first in a Lower Civil 
Court where it takes years for finalization of the case." 

8 
 
Part II 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
2.1 The Committee are in agreement to the proposed amendment s in the Bill. 
They are of the view that legislation in respect of DMRC should have found priority 
and cleared w ithout delay. But the Committee decry the casual approach of the 
Government in this regard. They find that the Bill has been brought forward by the 
government in Parliament after a long gap of 10 months after the Cabinet gave its 
nod to the amendment . The reasons cited by the Ministry that has caused delay do 
not satisfy the Committee. The Committee want the Government to act swiftly at 
least in such matters and do not procrastinate the things unnecessarily.  Procedural 
hassles should not come in way in regard to such matters. 
2.2 The Committee observe that as per the existing provision of the PPE Act, as 
contained in Section2 (e), the properties belonging to, or taken on lease by, or on 
behalf of, any company as defined in Section 3 of the Companies Act,  1956 in which 
not less than 51% of the paid up share capital is held by the Central Government or 
any company which is a subsidiary ( within the meaning of that Act) would be 
categorized as public premises. Therefore, the premises of the DMRC are not 
covered under the definition of public premises. 
 
2.3 The Committee find that the proposed Public Premises(Evic tion of 
unauthorized occupants)Amendment Bill, 2011 seeks to provid e that premises 

9 
 
belonging to DMRC will also fall within the definition of public premises. The 
Committee are convinced with the reply of the Ministry that this amendment does 
not violate the public Sector character since no other party other than Central 
Government and Government of NCT of  Delhi are involved.  The Committee feel 
that thumb rule of 51% holding is not applicable in this case. 
 
2.4 The Committee are given to understand  that after the proposed  amendment, 
the DMRC will be able to get their premises vacated through the designated Estate 
Officer. The cases of unauthorized occupation are decided by the Estate Officer, as 
per provisions in the Act, within a period of 3 to 4 months. The appeal against the 
order of the Estates Officer lies in the court of the District Judge, whereas in normal 
cases petitions have to be filed i n the Lower Court which takes years for disposal. 
Thus, under the PPE Act, the overall time period of finalization of the cases gets 
reduced drastically.  The Committee while agreeing to the proposed amendments 
are of the view  that this time limit of 3 to 4 months should be adhered to otherwise 
the very  purpose of amendment would be defea ted.  For this purpose, t he 
Committee want the Government to make provision for summary trial before the 
Estate Officer in such cases. Similarly, the Committee want that court of District 
and Sessions Judge should also dispose the appeal  in a time bound manner. 
 

10 
 
2.5 The Committee are convinced with  that the Ministry's reply in respect of 
inclusion of New Delhi Municipal corporation in this Bill. They are given to 
understand that it has been necessitated due to a writ petition in Hon'ble High 
Court of Delhi. Though the Hon'ble High Court has dismissed  the writ petition, it 
has become necessary to remove the ambiguity. They are of the view that this 
amendment will remove doubts in this regard and also minimize the chances of 
Government being dragged in unnecessary litigations.  The Committee take note of  
the trifurcation of Municipal Corporation of Delhi. In order to avoid situations 
faced by NDMC, they want the government to take necessary steps by bringing 
amendments in the present bill itself for substitution of Municipal Corporations of 
Delhi with the newly created Corporations. 
 
2.6 The Committee take note to the reply of the Ministry with regard to efficacy 
of PPE Act vis -à-vis in vogue judicial process with skepticism. In the Committee's 
view, the unscrupulous litigants  can take  the advantage of judicial process that is 
applicable to PPE act also and delay the final decision  viz. by challenging every 
order of the Estate Officer in the court of appeal. If this is allowed it  will frustrate 
the very purpose of the amendment. Therefo re, the Committee want the maximum 
time limit to be prescribed for disposal of cases before the Estate Officer.  
2.7 The Committee are given to understand that to prevent the misuse of powers 
to evict genuine tenants from the public premises, the detailed guidelines have been 

11 
 
issued vide resolution No.21013/1/2000 - policy-I dated 30 M ay, 2002. The 
Committee are satisfied with the  safeguards  provided in the guidelines and 
convinced that the provisions of the Bill will not allow the Estate Officers to exerc ise 
their powers arbitrarily against the genuine tenants whose term has not come to an 
end.  
2.8 In view of the above, the Committee approve the Bill for enactment and want 
the Government to take their suggestions into consideration while implementing the 
provisions of the Bill.  
 
 
New Delhi;  
May, 2012 
Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) 
SHARAD YADAV  
Chairman 
Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

12 
 
  
Annexure 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA  
Bill No. 75 of  2011 
THE PUBLIC PREMISES (EVICTION OF UNAUTHORISED 
        OCCUPANTS) AMENDMENT BILL, 2011 
A 
     BILL 
further to amend the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty -second Year of the Republic of India as  follows:- 
 1. (1) This Act may be called the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants)  
 Short title 
and 
commence- 
ment. 
Amendment Act, 2011. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification  
5 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 

13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
2.    In section 2 of the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act,  
1971,— 
 (a) in clause (e),— 
(i) in sub-clause (2), after item (i), the following item shall be inserted,   5 
 “(ia) any company, as defined in section 3 of the Companies Act,  
1956,— 
 1 of 1956. 
10 
(B) which carries on business of metro railway.  
Explanation.—For the purposes of this item, the expression “metro  
railway” has the same meaning assigned to it in clause  (i) of sub-section 
(1) of section 2 of the Delhi Metro Railway (Operation and Maintenance)  
Act, 2002;”; 
(ii) in sub-clause (3), in item (i), for the words “Municipal Corporation”,  
15 
60 of 2002. 
the words, brackets and figures “Council as defined in clause (9) of section 2 of 
the New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994 or Municipal Corporation” shall be  
substituted; 
(b) in clause (fa),— 
 
2044 of 
1994 
(A) in sub-clause (ii), for the words, brackets and figure “in item (i)”, the  
words, brackets, figures and letter “in items (i) and (ia)” shall be substituted;  
(B) in sub-clause (v), for the word “Corporation”, the words “Council,  25 
Corporation” shall be substituted.  
namely:— 
 (A) in which not less than fifty -one per cent. of the paid-up 
share capital is held partly by the Central Government and partly by  
one or more State Governments and includes a company which is a  
subsidiary (within the meaning of that Act) of the first -mentioned 
company; and 
Amendment 
of Act 40 of 
1971. 

14 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 The Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 was enacted to provide for 
speedy machinery for the eviction of unauthorized occupants from public premises, including  the 
premises of Government companies and those of corporations established by or under any Central  Act. 
 2. The Delhi Metro Railway Corporation has requested that metro properties be declared as 
public premises by amending the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 and  
to confer powers of an Estate Officer under the said Act, to the offi cers of the Delhi Metro Railway 
Corporation to be appointed  by the Central Government  for delaying with the problem of eviction in a 
more expenditious manner. 
 3. Clause (e) of section 2 of  the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 
1971 contains the definition of public premises.  Items (i)  of sub -clause (2) of clause (e) of section 2 of 
the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 provides that any premises 
belonging to, or taken on lease by, or on behalf on, any company as defined in section 3 of the Companies 
Act, 1956  in which not less than fifty -one per cent of the paid -up share capital is held by the Central 
Government or any company which is subsidiary (within the meaning of that Act) of the first -mentioned 
company as public premises.  The paid -up share capital held by one or more State Governments is not 
included under this item. 
 4. It is, therefore, proposed to include within the meaning of public premises any premises 
belonging to, or taken on lease by, or on behalf of, any company as defined in section 3 of the Companies 
Act, 1956 in which not less than fifty -one per cent of the paid up share capital is held  partly by the 
Central Government  and partly by one or more State Governments and includes a com pany which is a 
subsidiary (within the meaning of that Act) of the first-mentioned company and which carries on business 
of metro railway. 
 5. The public premises, in relation to the National Capital Territory of Delhi means, any 
premises belonging to the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, or any Municipal Committee or notified area 
committee under the provisions as contained in item (i) of sub -clause (3) of clause (e) of section 2 of the 
Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971.  An issue was raised in one of the cases 
before the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in a civil writ petition No. 9664/2007 as to whether the expression 
"Municipal Committee" or "notified area committee" in the National Capital Territory of Delhi would 
include the Muni cipal Council as defined in clause (e) of section 2 of the Public Premises (Eviction of 
Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971.  The Hon'ble High Court held that there is no question of any 
ambiguity in the expression "any Municipal Committee or notified area c ommittee" used in relation to 
any premises held by them and dismissed the writ petition. 
 6. To avoid  reoccurrence of any litigation in future and to remove any doubts, it is 
proposed to bring Municipal Council within the purview of public premises by ame nding section 2 of the 
Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971. 
 7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
NEW DELHI:          KAMAL NATH 
The 29th August, 2011 

15 
 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE PUBLIC PREMISES (EVICTION OF UNAUTHORISED OCCUPANTS) ACT, 
1971(40OF 1971) 
  *                *     *    *     *     
Definitions. 2. In  this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- 
     *                *     *    *     *    
    (e) "public premises" means- 
     *                *     *    *     *    
     (2) any premises belonging to, or taken on lease by, or on behalf of,- 
     *                *     *    *     *    
     (3) in relation  to the National Capital Territory of Delhi,- 
(i) any premises belonging to the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, or  
any municipal committee or notified area committee, 
   *                *     *    *     *    
  (fa) "statutory authority", in relation to the public premises referred to in clause (e) 
 of this section, means,- 
  *                *     *    *     *    
  (ii) in respect of the public premises referred to in item (i) of sub-clause(2) 
 of that clause, the company or the subsidiary company, as the case may be, 
referred to therein, 
  *                *     *    *     *    
(V) in respect of the public premises referred to in sub-clause (3) of that  
clause, the Corporation, committee or Authority, as the case may be, referred to  
 in that sub-clause; 
  *                *     *    *     *     

16 
 
  
LOK  SABHA 
———— 
BILL 
A 
further to amend the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971.  
———— 
(Shri Kamal Nath, Minister of Urban Development) 
GMGIPMRND—1809LS(S3)—05-09-2011. 

17 
 
Appendices-I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2011-2012) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON         
MONDAY, 2ND APRIL , 2012 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1200 hrs. in Committee Room „D‟, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Sharad Yadav      - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri M. Anandan 
3. Shri Ambica Banerjee 
4. Smt. J. Helen Davidson 
5. Shri Gorakh Prasad Jaiswal 
6. Shri Kailash Joshi 
7. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
8. Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shankar Katheria 
9. Shri Ramesh Kumar 
10. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena 
11. Shri Umashankar Singh 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
13. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar 

18 
 
14. Shri Meghraj Jain 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain   - Director 
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. K. Rangamani N.  -  Under Secretary  
 
List of  Witnesses 
1. Dr. Sudhir Krishna - Secretary, Ministry of Urban 
Development 
 
2. Shri K.K. Pathak - Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home 
Affairs 
3. Shri D. Diptivilasa - Additional Secretary, Ministry of 
Urban Development 
 
4. Shri Mangu Singh - Managing Director, Delhi Metro Rail 
Corporation 
 
5 Ms. Archana Arora - Chairperson, New Delhi Municipal 
Council 
6. Shri K.S. Mehra - Commissioner, MCD 
7. Shri S.K. Lohiya - OSD and Joint Secretary(MRTS) 
 
8. Shri Munish Kumar Garg - Director of Estates 
 
9. Shri R.N. Yadav - Dy. Director of Estates(Policy) 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of Ministry of 
Urban Development to render oral evidence on the „Public Premises (Eviction of 
Unauthorized Occupants) Amendment Bill, 2011 and drew the attention of the 
representatives of the  Ministry towards the provisions of Direction 55(1) of the 
„Directions by the Speaker‟.  The representatives of Ministry briefed the Committee on 
the objectives of Bill and the benefit of inclusion of DMRC properties as public premises 

19 
 
and to confer powers  of an Estate Officer under the said Act to the Officers of the Delhi 
Metro Railway Corporation to be appointed by the Central Government for dealing with 
the problem of eviction in a more expeditious manner. The Members put forth certain 
queries which were later resolved by the representatives of the Ministry.  
 
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Sitting has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
*********** 
 
  

20 
 
Appendices-II 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2011-2012) 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON        
WEDNESDAY, 9TH  MAY, 2012 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. in Main Committee Room, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Sharad Yadav      - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2. Shri Praveen Singh Aron  
3. Shri Pratap Singh Bajwa 
4. Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique 
5. Shri Gorakh Prasad Jaiswal 
6. Shri Kailash Joshi 
7. Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
8. Shri Ramesh Kumar 
9. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena 
10. Shri P.C. Mohan 
11. Shri Umashankar Singh 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
13. Shri Parvez Hashmi  
14. Shri Avinash Pande 
15. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar 

21 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain   - Director 
2. Smt. J.M. Sinha   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Smt. K. Rangamani N.  -  Under Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the  draft report on the Public 
Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Amendment Bill, 2011. 
3. After deliberations the Committee unanimously adopted the draft report  on the 
Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Amendment Bill, 2011 without 
any change. 
 
2. The Committee also authorized the Chairman to finalize the above -mentioned 
Report taking into consideration consequential changes arising out of factual verification, 
if any, by the Ministry and also to present to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
* * * * * 
 
 
 
 