 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2013-2014) 
                                
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
                 MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2013-2014) 
  
 
(Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty Fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Urban Development on Demands for Grants (2013-2014) ) of the Ministry of 
Urban Development) 
 
TWENTY SEVENTH  REPORT 
 
      
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
February,2014/Magha,1935 (Saka) 
 
27 


2 
 
 
 
TWENTY SEVENTH  REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2013-2014) 
 
                                
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty Fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Urban Development on Demands for Grants (2013-2014) of the Ministry of 
Urban Development] 
   
 Presented to Lok Sabha on  17.02.2014 
            Laid in Rajya Sabha on  13.02.2014 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February,2014/Magha,1935 (Saka) 


3 
 
 
 
   C.U.D No. 81 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2014 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and printed by the Indian Press, Delhi-110033. 
 

4 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
                PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .....................……….……................…... (ii) 
INTRODUCTION .........................................…………………………..……………. (iv) 
REPORT  
 
CHAPTER I 
 
1 
CHAPTER II 
Observations/Recommendations which have 
been accepted by the Government  
19 
CHAPTER III Observations /Recommendations which the  
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies 
71 
CHAPTER IV 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration  
72 
CHAPTER V Observations /Recommendations  in respect of 
which final  replies of the Government are still 
awaited 
83 
ANNEXURES  
I. Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Standing C ommittee on Urban 
Development (2013-14) held on 12 th    February, 2014   
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Seventh Report of the Commi ttee (15 th  Lok 
Sabha)…. 
 
 (i) 
  

5 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2013-2014) 
Shri Sharad Yadav         -        Chairman 
  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Praveen Singh Aron 
3. Shri Jayawant Gangaram Awale 
4. Shri T.K.S. Elangovan 
5. Shri Biren Singh Engti 
6. Shri Anant Gangaram Geete 
7. Smt. Kaisar Jahan 
8. Shri Kailash Joshi 
9. Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
10 Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
11. Shri Ramesh Kumar 
12. Shri P.C. Mohan 
13. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
14. Shri Sonawane Pratap Narayanrao 
15. Dr. Ramshankar  
16. Shri Ratan Singh 
17. Shri Anjan Kumar M. Yadav 
18. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Anil Desai 
23. Dr. M.S. Gil 
24. Md. Nadimul Haque 
25. Shri Parvez Hashmi 
26. Dr. Chandan Mitra 
27. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
28. Shri Avinash Pande 
29. Shri Ajay Sancheti 
30. Shri Amar Singh 
31. Shri Khekiho Zhimomi 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 

6 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha   - Director 
3. Smt. J.M.Sinha   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Dr.(Maj.)Jagmohan Khatry  - Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 
 

7 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2013-
2014) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present the Twenty Seventh  Report (15 th  Lok Sabha) on the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty Fourth Report (15 th  
Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban Devel opment on “Demands for 
Grants (2013-2014) " of the Ministry of Urban Development. 
2. The Twenty Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sa bha on 23 rd  April, 2013.  
Replies of the Government to all the recommendation s contained in the Report were 
received in  July, 2013.  
3. The Standing Committee on Urban Development cons idered and adopted this 
Report at their sitting held on 12 February, 2014. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Governmen t on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Fourth Report (Fifteenth Lo k Sabha) of the Committee is 
given at Annexure-II. 
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, t he 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters 
in the body of the Report. 
 
NEW DELHI;   
             SHARAD 
YADAV 12 February, 2014
                                                                                           
Chairman,          23Magha, 1935 (Saka)                              Standing Committee on 
Urban Development 
 
 
  
 
 
(iv) 
 
  

8 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Deve lopment (2013-2014) 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
their Twenty Fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on  Demands for Grants (2013-
2014) of the Ministry of Urban Development which wa s presented to Parliament on 
23 April, 2013. 
1.2 Action Taken Replies have been received from th e Government in respect of 
all the 42 recommendations contained in the Report.   These have been categorized 
as follows: 
(i) Recommendations /Observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government. (Chapter-II): 
RecommendationNos.1,2a,2b,2c,3,4c,4d,4e,4f,4g,4h,4i,4j,4k,5a,5b,5c,5d, 
     5e,5f, 5h, 5i,5j,5k,6b,7a, 7b,8a,8b,9,10,11,12,13,15 and16   
                (Total -36) 
(Chapter-II) 
(ii) Recommendations /Observations, which the Commi ttee does not desire to 
pursue in view of Government's   replies.  (Chapter-III): 
Recommendation No. Nil               (Total -Nil) 
        
(Chapter-III) 
(iii) Recommendations /Observations, in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter-IV): 
Recommendation Nos. 4a, 4b, 5g, 6a, 7c and 14                 (Total -6) 
(Chapter-IV) 
(iv) Recommendations /Observations, in respect of w hich final replies of the 
Government are, still awaited(Chapter-V): 
           Recommendation  No. - Nil            (To tal –Nil ) 
(Chapter-V) 
 

9 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that specific replies to t he comments contained in 
Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case, not 
later than three months of the presentation of this Report. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action tak en by the Government on 
some of their recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.   
RECOMMENDATION (SERIAL NO. 4) 
 
JAWAHAR LAL NEHRU URBAN RENEWAL MISSION 
  
 
A. Eco-friendly green disposal system & solid waste  management in Urban 
Areas:  
 
1.5 The Committee observe that the management of so lid waste is integral to city 
sanitation. Over the last decade, larger cities, es pecially those with financial and 
managerial capacity, have attempted to improve wast e management practices in 
response to the Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) Rules 2 000. In this regard, the 
Committee find that the development of disposal inf rastructure, i.e., sanitary landfills, 
has made the least progress due to factors ranging from land scarcity to lack of 
technical and financial capacity in cities. These challenges are further accentuated in 
smaller Urban Local Bodies (ULBs). There has been a  significant increase in 
Municipal Solid Waste generation in India in the la st few decades. This is largely 
because of rapid population growth and economic dev elopment in the country. Solid 
waste management has become a major environmental i ssue in India. The 
Committee are given to understand that Delhi popula tion will increase from 1.77 
Crore (Year 2010) to 2.45 Crore in the year 2024. T hereby waste generation is 
expected to rise to 19100 (TPD) in year 2024 as com pared to 9200 TPD in year 
2010. Therefore, it is evident that the MSW generat ion in Delhi will be directly 
proportional to increase in population, which is gr owing at fast rate because of rapid 
urbanization of the city. Rapid urbanization has re sulted in great pressure on 
Municipal Corporation of Delhi for its management. The Committee find that there 
are three major Sanitary Land Fill (SLF) sites in D elhi (Ghazipur, Okhla and 
Bhalaswa- Jahangirpuri,) which have turned into hug e mountains of garbage and far 
exceeded their life span. The Committee are dishear tened to note that against the 
total 44 sanctioned projects under UIG components o f JNNURM, till date only 10 
projects have been completed. Another 11 projects a re in their advanced stage of 
completion and rest 23 projects are in various stag es of completion. The Committee 
strongly feel that with the growing number of urban  population and corresponding 
increase in the quantum of garbage, only 10 project s are not adequate to meet the 
requirements. 

10 
 
   
The Committee note that Delhi along with other big cities have limited land 
availability. The mountain of municipal solid waste  that is produced every day has to 
be managed in a manner that will ensure least pollu tion – water table contamination, 
air pollution and zero health and nuisance value to  the human population near the 
dumping sites. Therefore the Committee desire that  Ministry should pursue Eco-
Friendly Green Disposal Systems on the pattern adop ted in developed countries for 
Delhi along with other big cities and sanction more  projects for solid waste 
management and complete the sanctioned projects at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government  
 
1.6 Rapid urbanization and industrialization in Ind ia has resulted in over stressing 
of urban infrastructure including municipal solid w aste management. Due to 
budgetary constraints and the lack of planning, the  door to door collection, 
transportation, treatment and disposal of municipal  solid waste in most of the Urban 
Local Bodies are not satisfactory.  
 
As per Municipal Solid Waste (Management & Handling ) Rules, 2000 notified 
by Ministry of Environment & Forests, every municip al authority is responsible for 
collection, segregation, storage, transportation, processing and disposal of municipal 
solid waste. The deadline for implementation of rul es was December, 2003 but 
hardly any ULB could implement these rules in lette r and spirit. The Rules make it 
mandatory to treat the bio-degradable waste adoptin g composting or other state of 
the art technologies or power generation, etc. with due authorization by the CPCB.  It 
prohibits disposal of organic matter at the landfil l and permits land filling of inert 
material only to reduce the burden on the landfill.  
 
The Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management, 200 0, published by the 
Ministry of Urban Development provides guidelines f or planning, design and 
implementation of solid waste management facilities  in the cities and towns. It also 
provides comprehensive guidelines for processing, v arious eco-friendly treatment 
technologies including composting and waste to ener gy technologies etc. and 
disposal facilities for efficient management of mun icipal solid waste. The Ministry 
also brought out a report on “Integrated Plant Nutr ient Management (IPNM)” in the 
year 2005 with the objective to promote integrated plant nutrient management using 
city compost along with synthetic fertilizers in ev ery areas of agriculture, horticulture, 
plantation crops, forestry and create market demand  and supply mechanism for city 
compost which also recommends eco-friendly green di sposal system including 
conversion of bio-gradable waste into composting fo r municipal solid waste 
management. The Ministry also brought out a report on “Technology Advisory Group 
on Municipal Solid Waste Management” in the year 20 05. The report principally 
covers the details of various technologies available within and outside the country for 

11 
 
the treatment of municipal solid waste and deriving  compost, Refuse Derive Fuel 
(RDF), power, etc. from the waste, their merits, demerits, their limitations, etc.   
 
Thus the MSW Rules 2000 and the Guidelines brought out by the Ministry of 
Urban Development advocate integrated solid waste m anagement system on the 
principle of 3Rs (Reduce, Recycle and Reuse). The t reatment and disposal systems 
such as composting, recycling and reuse of garbage and disposal of inerts and 
residue in the landfill recommended in the Manual a re Eco-friendly Green disposal 
system in nature. 
 The Ministry of Urban Development is in the proces s of revising & updating 
the aforesaid Manual with the technical assistance of Deutsche Gesellschaftfür 
Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), Germany with a  view to incorporate latest 
technologies for treatment and disposal system incl uding Eco-Friendly Green 
Disposal Systems like Decentralized mechanical Comp ost plants, vermin-
composting, recycling and reuse of garbage in decen tralized locations etc. being 
adopted in developed countries.   
 
As on June, 2013, 46 Solid Waste Management (SWM) p rojects have been 
approved at an estimated cost of 2050.47 Crore unde r UIG Sub-Mission of 
JNNURM. Out of which, 10 projects are physically co mpleted and remaining projects 
are at various stages of implementation. Concerned States have been asked to 
expedite implementation of the projects so as to co mplete within the Mission Period. 
They have also been asked to furnish time lines for  completion of ongoing projects. 
The Ministry had also approved 56 no. of solid wast e management projects at an 
estimated cost of Rs. 342.02 crore under UIDSSMT co mponent of JNNURM and the 
projects are at different stages of implementation. 
 
In all the solid waste management projects approved  under JNNURM, 
necessary provision has been made for (i) two bins to each of the households to 
ensure segregation of bio-degradable & non-biodegra dable waste components at 
source, (ii) adequate provision for   storage bins,  tricycles/ auto trippers and vehicles 
for efficient segregated collection and transportat ion of waste. The projects also 
include necessary infrastructure facilities for processing & treatment facilities such as 
composting for bio-degradable matter and also makin g RDF pellets using 
recyclables and sanitary landfills for disposing re jects and inert etc., as per the 
norms laid down in the Manual on Municipal Solid Waste and MSW Rules, 2000.  
 
The Ministry of Urban Development has also forwarded an Advisory note to all 
the State Governments including Delhi to promote de centralised compost plants 
through mechanical composting process. Ministry wou ld consider funding for 
projects for reclamation of existing dump sites wherever found suitable. 
 

12 
 
The status of solid waste management projects appro ved under UIG component 
of JNNURM including operational status of compost a nd a waste-to-energy (WTE) plant 
is given below at ANNEXURE – 4(A) – I.  
 
Status of solid waste management projects approved under UIDSSMT 
component of JNNURM is given below at ANNEXURE – 4(A) – II .  
 
Detail of status of solid waste management projects  approved under other 
programme of the Ministry is given below: 
 
Status of Municipal Solid Waste Management under Ur ban Infrastructure 
Development in Satellite Towns  
(Rs. In Lakh) 
S. 
No. 
State  Town  Projects approved  Approved 
Cost 
1 Uttar Pradesh Pilkhuwa SWM 897.70 
2 Haryana Sonepat SWM 2496.00 
3 Tamil Nadu  Sriperumbudur SWM 443.77 
4 Maharashtra Vasai-Virar SWM 3172.64 
5 Gujarat Sanad SWM 213.62 
 
Note: This programme is monitored by UD Division of  the Ministry. Therefore, the 
data may be got verified by UD Division. 
Status of Municipal Solid Waste Management under 10% Lump-sum Provision 
Scheme for the Benefit of North-Eastern Region including Sikkim  
 
(Rs. In Lakh) 
S. 
No. 
State  Town  Proje cts approved  Approved 
Cost 
1 Manipur  Five Town SWM 431.96 
2 Sikkim Gangtok town SWM 433.27 
3 Tripura Agartala SWM 761.82 
Note:  This programme is monitored by UD Division o f the Ministry. Therefore, the 
data may be got verified by UD Division. 
 
1.7 The Committee are happy to note that the Minist ry of Urban 
Development is in the process of revising & updatin g the aforesaid Manual 
with the technical assistance of Deutsche Gesellsch aftfür Internationale 
Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), Germany with a view to incorp orate latest technologies 
for treatment and disposal system including Eco-Fri endly Green Disposal 
Systems like Decentralized mechanical Compost plant s, vermin-composting, 
recycling and reuse of garbage in decentralized locations etc. being adopted in 

13 
 
developed countries. The committee are given to und erstand that, as on June, 
2013, 46 Solid Waste Management (SWM) projects have  been approved at an 
estimated cost of 2050.47 Crore under UIG Sub-Missi on of JNNURM. Out of 
which, 10 projects are physically complete and rema ining projects are at 
various stages of implementation. This is not accep table to the Committee. 
The Committee again emphasize upon the fact that re maining projects which 
are at various stages of implementation should be expedited at the earliest in a 
time bound manner. 
The Committee note with satisfaction that in all th e solid waste 
management projects approved under JNNURM, necessary provision has been 
made for (i) two bins to each of the households to ensure segregation of bio-
degradable & non-biodegradable waste components at source, (ii) adequate 
provision for   storage bins, tricycles/ auto tripp ers and vehicles for efficient 
segregated collection and transportation of waste. The Ministry of Urban 
Development has also forwarded an Advisory note to all the State 
Governments including Delhi to promote decentralize d compost plants 
through mechanical composting process. Ministry wou ld consider funding for 
projects for reclamation of existing dump sites wherever found suitable.  
However, the Committee are of the firm view that De lhi along with other 
big cities has limited land availability. The mount ain of municipal solid waste 
that is produced every day has to be managed in a m anner that will ensure 
least pollution – water table contamination, air po llution and zero health and 
nuisance value to the human population near the dum ping sites. The 
Committee are of the opinion that as cities are fas t expanding, situation will 
arise when there would be no outskirts where waste material can be dumped. 
Therefore the Committee reiterate that each zone sh ould have a designated 
area for waste disposal and each  zone should have their own zonal plans.  In 
addition,there should be environment service zone s o that no zonal plan can 
be approved for disposal of liquid or solid waste without its approval.  
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SERIAL NO. 4) 
 
B. The locational criteria for dumping of municipal  waste 
: 
 
1.8  The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee find that in India there is no segre gation of waste. Municipal Solid 
Waste is dumped in a mixed form in an unscientific manner on open waste land or 
low lying areas even near creeks, forests, rivers, ponds and other ecological 
sensitive regions. This practice is commonly known as ‘Open dumping’ and does not 
meet the norms of disposal specified in the Manual Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) 
Rules. It is observed that Cities like Mumbai, Vish akapatanam, Kolkatta, Chennai 
situated on the sea coast dump their MSW in the nea rby creeks. Similarly cities like 
Kanpur, Delhi etc., dump their waste near the river banks. Other cities like Bengaluru  
and Jaipur which do not have access to any water bo dy prefer to dump their waste 
near the highways. These dumping grounds adversely affect the environment by air, 

14 
 
water and soil pollution and are thus highly health  hazardous.  They damage the 
property in the vicinity as well. The presence of m oisture and rainwater leach the 
pollutant chemicals produced during degradation to dissolve and flow into the 
groundwater reserve/sea/river thereby affecting the  flora and fauna of the water 
body. The dump sites virtually become a breeding ground for all kinds of diseases. 
 
The Committee note that Ministry of Urban Developme nt has mentioned in 
their reply that landfill site should be constructe d at least 500 meter away from a 
notified habitation area. A zone of 500 meter aroun d a landfill boundary should be 
declared a non-development buffer zone after the la ndfill location is finalized. 
Therefore the Committee again strongly recommend to  implement these guidelines 
of Ministry of Urban Development strictly by Urban Local Bodies. The Committee 
also recommend that the Ministry should institution ize the mechanism to monitor 
regularly and periodically the implementation of gu idelines in all dumping sites 
across the country and punish the guilty involved i n this without fear or favour. They 
should also maintain a central data base for this purpose. 
 
The Committee note that as per the reply of Ministr y, selection of the site for 
landfill should be done in accordance with the Envi ronmental Impact Assessment 
Notification, 2006 of the Ministry of Environment &  Forests. It is mandatory for the 
Urban Local Bodies to conduct an environment impact  assessment for the selection 
of the site for landfill. As a part of environment impact assessment, public 
consultation process needs to be conducted before s election of site. The final 
selection of site should be based on the environmen tal impact assessment, social 
acceptance and cost of disposal. Therefore, the Com mittee emphatically urge upon 
the Ministry to ensure that Urban Local Bodies impl ement this guideline of Ministry 
i.e., land for sanitary landfill site should be ide ntified only after consultation with 
Ministry of Environment & Forests.” 
 
1.9 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“According to the Municipal Solid Wastes (Managemen t and Handling) Rules, 2000, 
the municipal authority or an operator of a facilit y shall make an application in Form-
I, for grant of authorization for setting up waste processing and disposal facility 
including landfills from the State Board or the Com mittee in order to comply with the 
implementation programme laid down in Schedule I. T he MSW rules have specific 
directives to the Local Bodies, District Administra tions and the Urban Development 
Department of the State Governments for proper and scientific management of 
municipal solid waste.  Under these rules, it is ma ndatory for all the urban local 
bodies to provide facilities for collection, transp ortation, treatment & disposal of 
municipal solid waste in a scientific and hygienic manner. The Secretaries to the 
Governments, Urban Development Departments and the District Magistrates are 
made responsible to ensure the implementation of th ese rules in the corporations 
and municipal areas respectively and the State Poll ution Control Board are made 
responsible to monitor the implementation of the ru les and adherence to the 
standards prescribed. Performance of local bodies i s assessed based on the 
progress reported by ULBs on annual basis to the Se cretary-in-charge of Urban 
Development and to the District Magistrates. 
 
In accordance with the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Notification of 
the Ministry of Environment & Forest in September, 2006, the project at Sl. No. 7(i), 

15 
 
“Common Municipal Solid Waste Management Facility” which falls under category 
“B” shall require environmental clearance from Stat e Environment Impact 
Assessment Authority (SEIAA) on the recommendation of a State Level Expert 
Appraisal Committee constituted by the State Govt. Since EIA Notification was 
issued under the Environment Protection Act, 1986, it is mandatory for very ULB to 
identify the land for sanitary landfill with the co nsent of State Environment Impact 
Assessment Authority.    
 
While appraising the DPR for municipal solid waste management by the 
Ministry, the ULBs are advised by the Ministry of U rban Development to obtain all 
the necessary clearances from the respective Statut ory Authority before 
implementing the treatment and disposal system including sanitary landfill.” 
 
1.10 The Committee had recommended the Ministry to institutionalize the 
mechanism to monitor regularly the implementation o f guidelines in all 
dumping sites across the country and punish the gui lty involved in this 
without fear or favour. The Committee had also reco mmended to maintain a 
central data base for this purpose. However, the Co mmittee are distressed to 
note that the Ministry's replies are completely silent about  the  action taken by 
the Ministry of Urban Development to monitor the im plementation of the 
Municipal Solid waste management in a true spirit a nd about maintenance of a  
centralized data base for the above mentioned purpo se. Merely stating that the 
Secretaries to the Governments, Urban Development D epartments and the 
District Magistrates are made responsible to ensure  the implementation of 
these rules in the corporations and municipal areas  respectively and the State 
Pollution Control Board are made responsible to mon itor the implementation 
of the rules and adherence to the standards prescri bed, the Ministry is trying 
to shed its own responsibilitis. The Committee do not approve such an attitude 
of the Ministry. It has been observed that in India , cities like Kanpur, Delhi etc., 
dump their waste near the river banks. Other cities  like Bengaluru  and Jaipur 
which do not have access to any water body prefer t o dump their waste near 
the highways. These dumping grounds adversely affec t the environment by 
air, water and soil pollution and are thus highly h ealth hazardous.  The 
Committee feel that having a data base of such site  would ease the problem to 
a great extent.Therefore, the Committee wish to rei terate their earlier 
recommendation to maintain a central/ state /City w ise data base of the 
information regarding all dumping sites, landfill l evels, solid waste generation 

16 
 
and management across the country and also  to ensure the implementation of 
the guidelines by the State Governments and Urban Local Bodies. 
RECOMMENDATION (SERIAL NO. 4) 
 
J. Funds to be given for bus depots under JNNURM:  -   
  
1.11 The Committee observe that the Govt. has made announcement about plying 
of 10000 buses in different cities under JNNURM. Th e Committee also observe that 
basic infrastructure like bus depots are required f or operating this facility of public 
transport which is lacking in various cities.  In N agpur, 300 buses have been 
sanctioned but there are no bus depots for them. Th ese buses are parked on the 
road side. The Committee strongly feel that money s hould be spent first on basic 
infrastructure like strengthening the road, constru cting the bus depots and then 
buses should be provided to the cities. However, th e Committee are distressed to 
note that allocation has been made for the buses on ly and not for the supporting 
infrastructure. Therefore, the Committee strongly r ecommend for providing higher 
budget allocation under JNNURM for extending basic infrastructure like bus depots, 
and to renovate the conditions of roads in differen t cities before plying the buses. 
The Committee further desire that, instead of provi ding big buses in all the cities, 
small cities having narrow roads should be provided small buses. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
1.12 It is agreed that the programme should not be restricted only to supply of 
buses.  They should play catalytic role in re-defin ing city transport system leading to 
sustainability of buses and transport corporations.   Hence, in the draft EFC Note 
initiated by the Ministry, along with the buses, sa nction of ancillary infrastructure 
such as Bus Depots, workshops, Control Centre etc. is also included without which it 
is impossible to provide and maintain a city bus se rvice of high quality which can re-
define cities transport system.   
 
This time, Ministry is proposing 6 variants of buse s (Mini Bus/ Midi Bus/ 
Standard Bus/ Articulated Bus/ Premium segment Bus/  Hybrid Bus) which include 
standard and mini/ midi buses.  The aim is to intro duce organised modern city bus 
service through mini/ midi buses in various smaller  cities and towns so that the 
availability of quality public transport is provided across the length and breadth of the 
country.  On the other hand it is also proposed to raise the standard of city bus 
transport system in million plus cities with premiu m segment buses, articulated/ bi-

17 
 
articulated buses and hybrid/ electric buses beside s standard buses so as to take 
the city bus service to the level of city bus servi ce in developed countries. The 
suggestions of the Committee to provide smaller bus es to smaller cities have been 
taken care of in the draft EFC Note initiated by th e Ministry for provision of 10000 
buses to all notified municipalities/ municipal cor porations with special emphasis on 
hilly States. 
  
1.13 The Committee are given to understand that Min istry has sanctioned 
ancillary infrastructure such as Bus Depots, worksh ops, Control Centre etc., 
include it in the draft EFC Note. The suggestions o f the Committee to provide 
smaller buses to smaller cities have been taken car e of in the draft EFC Note 
initiated by the Ministry for provision of 10000 bu ses to all notified 
municipalities/ municipal corporations with special  emphasis on hilly States. 
The Committee note that Ministry has proposed 6 var iants of buses (Mini Bus/ 
Midi Bus/ Standard Bus/ Articulated Bus/ Premium se gment Bus/ Hybrid Bus) 
which include standard and mini/ midi buses.  It has also proposed to raise the 
standard of city bus transport system in million pl us cities with premium 
segment buses, articulated/ bi-articulated buses an d hybrid/ electric buses 
besides standard buses so as to take the city bus s ervice to the level of city 
bus service in developed countries. The Committee a ppreciate these positive 
steps of the Ministry of Urban Development. However , the Committee feel 
unless action is initiated in a time bound manner, the entire programme will 
marred by bureaucratic tangles. Hence they again st rongly recommend that 
these projects of basic infrastructure should be op erationalized in smaller and 
million plus cities as early as possible and  in a time bound manner, i.e. 
strengthening the road, constructing the bus depots , under intimation to the 
Committee. 
RECOMMENDATION (SERIAL NO. 5) 
G. Specific Policy on Monorail:   
 
1.14 The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee observe that monorail is a safe, rel iable, economical, quick, 
comfortable and effective mass public transit syste m. The high-speed rail-based 
Regional Rapid Transit Systems (RRTS) would allow p eople living in metropolitan 
suburbs within a radius of 100 km to commute to wor k, thereby easing pressure on 

18 
 
the infrastructure services within the city. Theref ore, there is a need for setting up 
monorail both as a means of feeder system with the bigger metro rail and as an 
independent means of transport in Tier II cities.  Need for Monorail is urgent as the 
urban areas have become very congested due to comin g up of high-rise buildings. 
The Committee also note that the Central Government  encourages all proven 
technologies but do not promote any specific techno logy. They have not framed any 
specific Policy on Monorail. The Committee also fin d that Central Government has 
not approved funding for any Monorail project in an y city.  However, the State 
Government of Maharashtra is constructing Mono Rail  in Maharashtra with its own 
funds. Therefore, the Committee recommend for frami ng policy to provide monorail 
in metropolitan and big cities because the Monorail  would provide further reach and 
depth to the mass transport network. Moreover, it i s also easier and cheaper to lay 
Monorail lines than Metro lines. The Monorail can a lso take sharp curves in contrast 
to the Metro and thus run in densely populated loca lities as it takes lesser area to 
operate. Monorail seems a perfect mode for mass tra nsit in congested areas where 
Metro cannot be constructed and roads are too crowd ed for frequent movement of 
buses.” 
 
1.15 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have  stated as follows: 
 
“As per National Urban Transport Policy 2006, the C entral Government encourages 
all proven technologies and does not promote any sp ecific technology. However, 
Monorail is covered within the definition of Metro Railway under the Metro Acts.  As 
such the Policy on Metro Rail covers Monorail proje cts also. Therefore, no separate 
Policy for Monorail is required presently. A Nation al Workshop on Modal choice was 
held on 11.1.2013 in New Delhi in which the differe nt modes of transportation like 
Monorail, BRT, and LRT were discussed. This Worksho p was attended by the 
representatives of State Governments and the concerned agencies.” 
 
 
1.16 The Committee are anguished with the reply of the Ministry that no 
separate Policy for Monorail is required presently.  As per the version of the 
Ministry, Monorail is covered within the definition  of Metro Railway under the 
Metro Acts.  The Committee are of firm view that a city needs a transport 
system which is not only efficient and accessible, but also allows people to 
live in a healthy environment. There is a need to i dentify more corridors in 
Delhi, Mumbai and other big Metropolitan cities as well as in tier II cities for 
monorail transport system.  Big cities should welco me other means of 
transport which are free from air and noise polluti on and help the citizens to 
live in a healthy environment. Monorail systems can  easily navigate through 
congested and narrow areas and they have a high-car rying capacity and 
moreover, they are being touted as a means of impro ving connectivity, 
especially in those areas where buses and the Metro  cannot reach. Globally, 
monorail is suited for small capacity routes and as feeder to the existing metro 

19 
 
network. Monorails are now a proven technology carr ying hundreds of 
thousands of passengers each day in many of the urb an centers of the world 
and have a safe track record. The Committee while t aking into consideration 
the benefits of monorail reiterate their earlier re commendation for framing a 
separate policy for monorail at the earliest. They are of the view that coverage 
of monorail in the Metro Acts would not serve the p urpose and would rather 
impade its growth. 
RECOMMENDATION (SERIAL NO. 6) 
 
DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
 
 
A. Acquire illegal farmhouses for social infrastruc ture and sick industrial 
plots for residential development :  
 
1.17  The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
"The Committee note that the Govt./ DDA are in the process of formulation of land 
pooling and assembly policy in Public Private Partnership mode, under which various 
housing projects shall be taken up by using the lar ge parcels of land available in the 
urbanisable zones identified for residential use un der various Zonal Development 
Projects. This development shall also include socia l and physical infrastructure. The 
DDA is also considering granting permission for Gro up Housing Developments on 
the industrial plots on the peripheral roads. The C ommittee endorse the land pooling 
concept of DDA and acquisition of illegal farmhouse s for social infrastructure and 
sick industrial plots for housing development and s trongly recommend that DDA 
should envisage a plan of action with a positive be nt of mind under intimation to the 
Committee." 
 
1.18  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry hav e stated as follows: 
 
"The land pooling and assembly policy replaces the present model of acquiring land 
by Govt./ DDA. The new land policy is based on the concept of Land Pooling 
wherein the land parcels owned by individuals or gr oup of owners are legally 
consolidated by transfer of ownership rights to the  designated Land Pooling Agency, 
which later transfers the ownership of the part of land back to the landowners for 
undertaking of development of such areas. The polic y is applicable in the proposed 
urbanisable areas of Urban Extensions for which Zon al Plans have been approved. 
There are two categories of land pooling: Category- I for land measuring 20 Ha and 

20 
 
above, and Category-II for 3 Ha to less than 20 Ha.  While in the Category-I the land 
returned to the landowners to be called Developer E ntity (DE) will be 60% and land 
retained by Govt./ DDA 40%, in the Category- II the  land returned to the DE will be 
40% and land retained by Govt./ DDA is 60%. 
 
The policy on farmhouses notified in October, 2012 is essentially aimed at 
regularization of existing farmhouses, which fall e xclusively in green/ agricultural 
areas and had come up before February 7, 2007.  Bes ides, a policy pertaining to 
development control norms for new farmhouses has al so been formulated in May, 
2013.However, acquisition of illegal farmhouses for  social infrastructure and sick 
industrial plots for housing development do not form part of the land pooling policy." 
 
1.19 The Committee are happy to note from the actio n taken replies of the 
Ministry of Urban Development that the land pooling  and assembly policy 
replaces the present model of acquiring land by Govt. / DDA. As per the replies 
of the Ministry/DDA, it is observed that the policy  on farmhouses notified in 
October, 2012 is essentially aimed at regularizatio n of existing farmhouses, 
which fall exclusively in green/ agricultural areas  and had come up before 
February 7, 2007.  The policy pertaining to develop ment control norms for new 
farmhouses has also been formulated in May, 2013. H owever, the Committee 
are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry th at acquisition of illegal 
farmhouses for social infrastructure and sick indus trial plots for housing 
development do not form part of the land pooling po licy of DDA. The 
Committee strongly feel that by excluding acquisiti on of illegal farmhouses 
after 2007 for social infrastructure and sick industrial plots for housing, DDA is   
indirectly encouraging the illegal occupation of fa rm houses. In Delhi land is 
scarce and allowing further illegal occupation of h uge farm house would  
mean exempting such land from developmental activit ies.The Committee see 
no reason as to why land pooling policy could not b e changed to acquire such 
illegal structures. Therefore, the Committee reiter ate their recommendation for 
acquiring illegal farmhouses for social infrastruct ure and large sick industrial 
plots for housing development at the earliest and t o frame guidelines for the 
above mentioned purposes. 
 
 

21 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SERIAL NO. 7) 
 
C. Residential accommodation for Lok Sabha Employee s 
:  
 
1.20  The Committee are surprised to note that at p resent Lok Sabha Secretariat is 
having 800 residential units to cater to approximat ely 3,000 employees. The Lok 
Sabha Pool was separated from General Pool of Accom modation in the year 1974. 
As per the recommendation of Parliamentary Pay Comm ittee of September, 1974, 
Directorate of Estates is supposed to hand over at least fifty quarters per year.  After 
1988 not a single unit and from 1975 not a single u nit of Type-IV and above have 
been placed in LSS Pool  by the Directorate of Esta tes as a result of which the 
problems of the employees have increased manifold. The Committee fail to 
understand the logic behind such abandonment of Lok  Sabha Pool by Directorate of 
Estates.  
The Committee further note that construction of residential accommodation for 
Lok Sabha is in progress at R. K. Puram, New Delhi and will be completed by 
December, 2013 subject to availability of funds. Mi nistry stated that against the 
projection of Rs. 121.53 crore, the approved BE for  2013-14 is only Rs.44.25 crore. 
The Committee find that Ministry of Urban Developme nt also admitted that allocated 
amount is not sufficient for completion of project in time. Hence, the Committee 
strongly recommend for enhancing the budgetary allo cation for residential 
accommodation for Lok Sabha and release of adequate  number of quarters from 
Directorate of Estates to Lok Sabha Pool to meet the requirements of employees. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
1.21  There are 898 residential units available (as  per Govt. Accommodation 
Management System) with Lok Sabha Secretariat Pool for its approximately 3,000 
employees while there are 61,820 residential units available with General Pool for 
2,03,051 Central Government employees (As per censu s of Central Govt. 
Employees as on 31 
st  March, 2009). The satisfaction levels between Lok Sabha 
Secretariat Pool and General Pool are 29.93% and 30 .44% respectively which is 
approximately equal. Therefore, there is no abandon ment of Lok Sabha Pool by 
Directorate of Estate. 
 
The BE demanded for the year 2012-13 was Rs. 79.92 Crore and final budget 
grant was Rs. 38.48 Crore under 4216-(NP)-Lok Sabha . The BE demanded for the 
year 2013-14 is Rs. 92.03 crore and BE allotted (ap proved) is only Rs. 42.45 Crore 

22 
 
under MH: 4216 Lok Sabha (NP).  This budget has been allocated for construction of 
M. S. Flats at B.D. Marg, construction of 2 Nos M.S . Flats for Rajya Sabha at 
Talkatora Road and construction of LSS at R.K. Pura m. Out of this total budget of 
Rs. 42.45 Crore, the allocated amount for LSS Quart ers is only Rs. 18.67 Crore for 
the financial year 2013-14. Due to continued shorta ge of budget, the construction 
works of LSS Quarters has been delayed. However, th e additional demand shall be 
made in the 1 st  Supplementary 2013-14 and all possible efforts are  being made to 
expedite the progress of work for its timely completion. 
 
1.22 The Committee observed that t he list of applicants waiting for a suitable 
accommodation is very long in Lok Sabha Secretariat . Not only are there 
people who need a house, there are also several fam ilies staying in 
accommodation that is lower than what they are enti tled for. The 
Committee came to know from the action taken replie s of the Ministry that there are 
898 residential units available (as per Govt. Accom modation Management System) with 
Lok Sabha Secretariat Pool for its approximately 3, 000 employees while there are 
61,820 residential units available with General Poo l for 2, 03,051 Central Government 
employees (As per census of Central Govt. Employees  as on 31 st  March, 2009). The 
satisfaction levels between Lok Sabha Secretariat P ool and General Pool are 29.93% 
and 30.44% respectively which is approximately equa l. The Committee note from the 
action taken replies that budget has been allocated  for construction of M. S. Flats at 
B.D. Marg, construction of 2 Nos M.S. Flats for Raj ya Sabha at Talkatora Road and 
construction of LSS at R.K. Puram. Out of this tota l budget of Rs. 42.45 Crore, the 
allocated amount for LSS Quarters is only Rs. 18.67 Crore for the financial year     
2013-14. The Committee appreciate the efforts made by Ministry for the additional 
demand which shall be made in the 1 st  Supplementary 2013-14 to expedite the progress 
of work for its timely completion. Therefore, the Committee strongly reiterate its 
earlier recommendation for providing adequate budge tary allocation for construction 
for residential accommodation for Lok Sabha. They also want the Directorate of Estates 
to help in vacating the houses on time  so that eli gible and needy employees could be 
allocated entitled houses..  
 
 
 
 
 

23 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SERIAL NO. 14) 
 
PREVENTION OF RIVERS FROM BECOMING DRAINS 
  
 
1.23  The Committee had recommended as under:-  
 
Save Yamuna River Banks: “Don’t Let Our Beautiful G eography to Change into 
History”    
 
“Yamuna is dirtier than ever even after a huge amou nt of Rs. 6,500 crore has 
already been spent to clean the river.  The Committ ee note that a project on "Laying 
Interceptor Sewers along the 3 major drains viz. Na jafgarh, supplementary and 
Shahadra for abatement of pollution in Yamuna River  has been approved in 
Government of NCT of Delhi by the Government on 19. 05.2010 under UIG Sub- 
Mission of JNNURM with approved cost of Rs. 1,357.7 1 crore and Additional Central 
Assistance (ACA) commitment of Rs. 475.20 crore.  S o far Rs. 118.80 crore have 
been released as 1st installment of ACA for the pro ject. Till 31.01.2013, there has 
been 35% physical progress with financial utilizati on of Rs. 136.00 crore till 
31.01.2013.  The Committee further note that there has been under-utilization of 
sewage treatment plants in Delhi due to the absence of internal/ peripheral sewers in 
unsewered areas as well as due to inadequate water supply in the command area. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that t he laying of Interceptor 
Sewers along the three major drains viz., Najafgarh , supplementary and Shahdra 
should be expedited at all levels.  The Committee a lso desire that laying of sewage 
networks including appropriate treatment of sewage as per CPCB/ SPCB norms 
before discharging into Yamuna should be taken up b y the Ministry of Urban 
Development with Delhi Government. 
It is pertinent to note that no river exists on its  own strength, but for the 
tributaries that lend its waters to the main river.   For Yamuna, one of the little 
appreciated tragedies is that many of its numerous tributaries today are extinct while 
some are under active threat of conversion into alt ernate uses like agriculture and 
mining.   
The Committee note that in order to prevent the Yam una river banks from 
becoming a garbage dumping site, National green tri bunal had directed all the 
authorities to ensure that no debris of any kind in cluding construction material is 
thrown in any part of the Yamuna river banks. The m ain recommendations of 
National Green Tribunal are as under:  
 
1. "Permanent walls have to be built on both sides of the riverbank 
preventing release of any discharge from the city i nto the river. Cover 
nullahs in which all the small and big drains open.  Covered space can be 
used for commercial and social purposes to recover the costs of running 
the system. This appears a fairly reasonable and workable solution. 
2. Release of a minimum quantity of water into the Yamuna round the year 
from the Hathini Kund Barrage, some 100 km upstream of New Delhi, 
3. Effective checks on drains in the national capit al that dumps pollutants, 
effluents and sewer waste into the river that liter ally turning it into one 
huge drain.  

24 
 
4. To ensure that DDA should prepare a complete pro posal for development 
and beautification of the Yamuna river banks in ter ms of horticulture and 
eco-friendly site free from pollution and other all ied fields  (this is also 
being emphasized by National Green Tribunal) 
 
While endorsing the above recommendation the Commit tee strongly desire 
the Ministry to act expeditiously under intimation to them. 
 
The Committee further observe that 350 to 400 Mld o f sewage generated by 
the Nagpur city is disposed in the Nag river which ultimately pollute the Gosikhurd 
Dam.  In this regard, the Nagpur Municipal Corporat ion has prepared three DPRs 
for treating 100% sewage generated in the city cost ing Rs. 1328.88 Cr. These 
proposals will take care of the pollution load till  the year 2026. The Committee 
desire the Ministry to clear the DPRs at the earlie st to save the river and water 
reservoir.  
 
Thus, the Committee also would like to recommend th at in order to address 
the problem, the Ministry of Urban Development shou ld in collaboration with the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests and other stake holders prepare a separate 
plan for tributaries of Yamuna.  Also, for all the river-bank based cities, the project 
for appropriate treatment of sewage as per CPCB/ SP CB norms before discharging 
into the river should be invariably sanctioned by t he Ministry of Urban Development 
under National Mission on Sustainable Habitat."  
 
1.24 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have  stated as follows:  
 
"Ministry has sanctioned a project on “Interceptor Sewer Project in Delhi” under 
JnNURM which is under implementation. Further in re gard to Yamuna River Front 
development in Delhi, a High powered Committee was constituted under the 
chairmanship of Lt. Governor of Delhi of which this Ministry is also a member." 
 
1.25 The Committee came to know that more than Rs.1 , 500 crore have been 
spent on cleaning the Yamuna river in the last two decades under the Yamuna 
Action Plan (YAP) I and II. By now, the Yamuna 's w ater - polluted and black - 
should have been cleaner. However, that has not hap pened. The Committee 
came to know from the Action Taken Replies of the M inistry that they have 
sanctioned a project on “Interceptor Sewer Project in Delhi” under JnNURM 
which is under implementation. However the Committe e are not satisfied with 
the vague reply. The Committee note that High power ed Committee has been 
constituted under the chairmanship of Lt. Governor of Delhi of which this 
Ministry of Urban Development is also a member. The  Committee are 
disappointed with the casual reply of the Ministry wherein details such as time 
frame, progress etc. about the high powered Committee. They  take it  a ploy to 

25 
 
tackle the demand of the Committee. The Committee f eel the laying of 
Interceptor Sewers along the three major drains viz., Najafgarh, supplementary 
and Shahdra should be expedited at all levels.  The y also stress upon to lay 
down sewage networks including appropriate treatmen t of sewage as per 
CPCB/SPCB norms before discharging into Yamuna so t hat Yamuna river 
banks can be developed rather than turning it into a garbage dumping site. 
The Committee are disappointed with the reply of th e Ministry in which they 
have not even botherd to mention about the Nag Rive r in Nagpur in which it is 
stated that 350 to 400 Mld of sewage generated by t he Nagpur city is disposed 
which ultimately pollute the Gosikhurd Dam.   Therefore, the Committee 
strongly stress upon the Ministry to act expeditiou sly so as to sustain its 
ecology. The Committee also reiterate to give detai led report of stage of 
implementation of “Interceptor Sewer Project in Del hi” and as well as to build 
a canal parallel to the Yamuna which will not allow any sewage to flow into it. 
 
 
 
  

26 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.1) 
 
Suitable Enhancement of Plan-Outlay for Urban Development of the Country 
 
  
2.1 Demand No.101  pertains  to the Department of U rban Development, which  
is responsible for the overall urban development an d implementing various important 
schemes such as urban transport planning, all metro rail projects, NCRPB, JnNURM, 
urban infrastructure development in satellite, coun ter magnet cities, NERUDP, north-
Eastern region and general pool residential accommo dation. The Committee 
observe that under Demand No. 101 there has been a gap between projections and 
budget estimates from 2008-09 to 2012-13, which has  had an adverse effect on 
metro rail projects and general pool residential ac commodation projects under this 
funding.  The BE for the plan scheme during the yea r 2012-13 was 6783.25 crore. 
During 2013-14, the BE is Rs. 7312.50 crore.  There  is an increase of Rs. 529.25 
crore. The percentage variations over BE 2012-13 an d BE 2013-14 is only 7.8%.  
The Ministry has admitted that only 7.8% growth is not sufficient to meet the 
objectives of the Ministry.    Further, the Secreta ry, Ministry of Urban Development 
during deposition before the Committee stated that the investment requirement for 
infrastructure has been estimated as Rs. 40 lakh cr ore as per the rate of the year 
2009-10.  This amount has been increased to Rs. 50 lakh crore.   The allocation for 
this Ministry is still very low.  Besides, all the incomplete projects of JnNURM have to 
be completed within the extended period i.e. upto 2 014. The Ministry has further 
submitted that the process of urbanization has not been accompanied by a 
commensurate increase in the supply of basic urban services.  The supply of land 
and housing has not kept pace with the increase in urban population. Against this 
backdrop, the Committee are distressed to note that  only 7.8% increase in the 
budgetary allocation for the Department of Urban De velopment is not at all sufficient.  
Keeping in view all the above facts, the Committee call upon the Ministry to  continue 
its efforts to persuade the Ministry of Finance and  Planning Commission for higher 
allocations at the RE stage.   
  
Under Demand No. 102 in respect of public works, th e allocation for plan 
scheme at BE of 2011-12 was Rs. 228.87 crore.   At the RE it has been reduced to 
Rs. 193.21 crore.  The Committee have been informed  that the reduction of funds at 
RE stage has been done by the Ministry of Finance c iting reasons of financial 
constraints at pre-Budget discussions held in the M inistry of Finance.  The schemes 
which were under the progress of General Pool Offic e accommodation were got 

27 
 
affected. The allocation during the year 2013-14 is  not sufficient to carry out the on-
going schemes/ new projects.  As a result, the proj ects which were to be completed 
on time got delayed  The Committee have been furthe r informed that the housing 
stock in Delhi and other major cities coming under the  purview of Directorate of 
Estates is totally inadequate to meet the requireme nts of Central Government 
employees, who are the backbone of the system.  In view of this the Committee 
strongly recommend that the Ministry should take up  this matter with the Ministry of 
Finance and Planning Commission at the highest leve l for providing higher allocation 
at the RE stage.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.2 A statement indicating details of BE, RE and Ac tual expenditure (Scheme-
wise) for the year 2012-13 is given below in the TA BLE. As may be seen, the 
expenditure with regard to RE for the year 2012-13 was 99.49%, which is considered 
satisfactory. 
 
However, the observations of the Committee to impre ss upon the Ministry of 
Finance and the Planning Commission to allocate ade quate funds to various 
schemes so as to achieve the targets have been note d. Subsequent to budgetary 
allocation by the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance, the Ministry had 
taken up the issue of enhancement of the budgetary allocation with the Planning 
Commission vide DO letter dated 11.02.2013, 12.03.2 013 and 14.06.2013 from 
Secretary (UD). Secretary (UD) had also written a D O dated 14.06.2013 to Ministry 
of Finance for allocation of additional funds to im plement the schemes effectively. 
Ministry of Finance would be apprised of the Standi ng Committee’s recommendation 
to make higher allocation to the Ministry at RE stage.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
 
NATIONAL CAPITAL REGIONAL PLANNING BOARD 
 
 
A. Need for Budgetary increase to support NCRPB 
  
 
2.3 The Committee note that the NCR Planning Board had projected the 
requirement of budgetary support of Rs.3160 Crore f or 10 th  Plan.  Against this, 
Rs.313.70 Crore had been released. Again during the  11 th  Plan, NCRPB projected 
budgetary support of Rs. 2987 Crore was recommended  by 11 th  Plan Working 
Group.  However, Planning Commission had approved g ross budgetary support of 
Rs.900 Crore, against which total budget of  Rs.300 Crore has been sanctioned and 

28 
 
released by the Govt. During the Twelfth Five year Plan period, Ministry of Urban 
Development has requested Government of India to ap prove and release the 
proposed budgetary allocation of Rs. 500 core. But BE sanctioned during 2012-13 
has been reduced to only Rs.60 crore reportedly due  to assessment of overall fiscal 
position. When the Committee asked to clarify how N CRPB will manage with such 
meagre funds, it is stated that NCRPB raising funds from other sources like domestic 
capital market and multilateral and bilateral agenc ies like Asian Development Bank 
(ADB) & KfW, the German Government owned Developmen t Bank which would 
provide long-terms soft loans to the participating States. Pertaining to physical 
achievements the Committee are informed that out of  277 infrastructure 
development projects only 188 have been completed a nd 89 projects are at various 
stages of implementation by the participating States.  
 
In view of the slow progress of projects and heavy dependence on multilateral 
and bilateral agencies, the Committee desire that t he Ministry should pursue with the 
Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission for higher and additional allocation 
of funds to the NCRPB. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.4 As per the provisions under the NCRPB Act, 1985 , a NCRPB fund has been 
created and the funds of the Board are utilized for  the purpose of providing financial 
assistance for selected development projects and co nducting study & surveys. The 
Board provides long term soft loan to the State gov ernments and their implementing 
agencies upto 75% of the project cost for implement ing infrastructure development 
projects. These schemes/ projects are prepared by P articipating States & their 
implementing agencies and submitted to NCRPB for lo an assistance. Various 
projects financed by Board includes Water sector, S ewerage, Solid Waste 
Management, Power (transmission & distribution), Ro ads, RoB’s, Medical college, 
Irrigation canal, Technical Institutions & Land Development projects etc. The projects 
so financed by the board have different implementat ion period ranging from 2 to 4 
years. Most of the projects are non-remunerative in  nature with a long gestation 
period. In order to meet financing requirements for  the infrastructure development 
projects, in addition to the budgetary support form  Govt. of India, Board has signed 
loan agreements with multilateral agency i.e. Asian  Development Bank and bi-lateral 
agency i.e. KfW. Brief details of loan are as under:- 
 
Asian Development Bank 
 
 
2.5 ADB has approved a loan of US $ 150 million to NCRPB as a multi-tranche 
financing facility for financing infrastructure pro jects in the National Capital Region 
(NCR) and its Counter Magnet Areas (CMAs).  The loa n agreement for the 1 
st  

29 
 
tranche of US $ 78 million has been signed between ADB and NCRPB on 17.3.2011 
which is to be utilized by Dec., 2014. The repaymen t period will be 25 years with a 5 
years moratorium for repayment of the principal amo unt. The loan is being disbursed 
to participating States subject to compliance with ADB procurement guidelines and 
environmental and social safeguards requirements.  As on date, Board has drawn an 
amount of Rs.137.64 crore (US$ 25 million). 
 
KfW- (German Development Bank) 
 
 
2.6 A Loan agreement for Euro 100 million for envir onment friendly schemes in 
the water supply, sewerage, drainage, solid waste m anagement and urban transport 
Sectors to National Capital Region Planning Board w as signed on 9
th  February, 
2012  with KfW. The repayment period will be 15 years wi th a 5 years moratorium for 
repayment of the principal amount.   The loan is at  a fixed rate of Interest @ 1.83% 
p.a. A total amount of Rs.108.45 Crore (Euro 15.77 million)  has been claimed & 
disbursed by KfW to the Board.   
 
The Ministry has taken up the issue of enhancement of budgetary allocation 
with the Planning Commission and Ministry of Financ e vide DO letter dated 
11.02.2013, 12.03.2013 and 14.06.2013. The matter w ould again be taken up the 
Ministry of Finance for allocation of additional funds at RE stage. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
 
B. To provide guarantee and waive the guarantee fee  so as to enable 
NCRPB to raise the requisite loan from the Multilateral Aid Agencies:  
 
2.7 The Committee, in their 3 rd  Report (15 th  Lok Sabha) on action taken on the 
recommendations of the Committee contained in their  35 th  Report (14 th  Lok Sabha)), 
recommended that Govt. should at least provide guar antee and waive the guarantee 
fee so as to enable NCRPB to raise the requisite lo an from the multilateral aid 
agencies and to keep the cost of funds low which ar e to be deployed for the 
development of infrastructure projects in the NCR. The Ministry of Urban 
Development accepted this suggestion and sent a proposal to Ministry of Finance for 
waiving the Guarantee fee. However, the Ministry of  Finance has not agreed to 
waive guarantee  fee . The Committee again reiterate this recommendation and want 
the Ministry of Urban Development to pursue this ma tter more emphatically with the 
Ministry of Finance.  
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.8 The NCR Planning Board has signed a loan agreem ent for US$ 150 with 
Asian Development Bank (ADB) as a multi-tranche fin ancing facility for financing 

30 
 
infrastructure projects in the National Capital Reg ion (NCR) and its Counter Magnet 
Areas (CMAs).  The loan and guarantee agreement for  the 1 st  tranche of US $ 78 
million has been signed between ADB, Govt. of India and NCRPB on 17-3-2011. The 
loan has been made effective from 29.6.2011 and is to be utilized by Dec 2014.  In 
addition, a Loan agreement of Euro 100 million + Eu ro 1 million Grant for 
environment friendly schemes in the water supply, s ewerage, drainage, solid waste 
management and urban transport Sectors to National Capital Region Planning Board 
was signed with the German Government/ KfW on 9 th  February, 2012 & 30.03.2012. 
The loan from KfW is to be utilized upto December, 2015. 
 
NCRPB has already requested Department of Economic Affairs, MOF vide 
letter No. B-20018(3)/ADB/Loan/ 2010-11/NCRPB dated  31.10.2012 to waive the 
guarantee fee for Tranche 1 & Tranche 2 of NCRUIFF (National Capital Region 
Urban Infrastructure Financing Facility) being prov ided by ADB.  Further, the matter 
has been taken up with the Budget Division, MOF vid e letter No. B-20018(3)/ ADB/ 
Loan/ 2010-11/ NCRPB dated 18.6.2013 for waiver of guarantee fee for both ADB 
and KfW loans. 
In case MOF agrees to this, NCRPB would be able to reduce its cost of funds 
which in turn will facilitate provision of concessi onal finance to participating states for 
infrastructure projects. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
 
C. National Capital Region as a unified area in eco nomic terms: need to 
remove fiscal barriers:   
 
2.9 The Committee in their 34 th  Report (14 th  Lok Sabha) and 3 rd  Report (15 th  Lok 
Sabha) had recommended for a need to remove the fis cal barriers and make NCR a 
unified area in economic terms. The Committee had f elt that uniformity in VAT rates 
in the NCR region would encourage business establis hments to shift out of NCT 
Delhi to set up business in NCR region without suffering financial loss.  
 
The Committee also find that the policy related to uniformity in Value Added 
Tax (VAT) rates in the country including National C apital Region falls under the 
domain of Ministry of Finance. There is now a propo sal for Goods and Services Tax 
(GST) which is being discussed by the Ministry of F inance with the States. The 
Committee desire the Ministry to take up with the Ministry of Finance to remove fiscal 
barriers and to make NCR virtually a unified area in economic terms. 
 

31 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.10 In order to implement the VAT successfully, Mi nistry of Finance issued revised 
consolidated instructions for Compensation to the S tates/ UTs in case of loss of 
Revenue on account of introduction of VAT in July, 2005.  Subsequently, additional 
instructions were issued in June, 2009 in this regard. 
 
 In order to introduce GST in the country, Ministry  of Finance has also taken 
several initiatives in this regard.  Empowered Comm ittee of State Finance Ministers 
prepared a model and road map for Goods & Service T ax in India in April, 2008.  
Subsequently, a Joint Working Group was constituted  by Ministry of Finance and a 
draft Constitutional Amendment Bill has also been p repared which has been 
submitted to Empowered Committee for obtaining the views of the States.  Union 
Minister for Finance in his Budget Speech in 2013 m entioned to reach the 
consensus on GST with States and a Budget provision  of Rs.9000 crore has been 
proposed in the current year’s Budget towards the first instalment of Compensation.    
 
 Once proposed GST is implemented at the country le vel by the Ministry of 
Finance, it will help in removing the fiscal barriers in NCR also. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
 
OTHER URBAN DEVELOPMENT SCHEMES 
  
 
2.11 The Committee note that there was budgetary pr ovision of Rs 294.16 Crore in 
BE of 2011-12 for “Other Urban Development Schemes of Department of Urban 
Development” which was reduced by almost half in BE  2012-13.  This was further 
reduced in revised Budget of 2012-13 to only Rs. 10 9.5 Crore. The BE of year 2013-
14 is Rs. 156.04 Crore. The Ministry gave the ratio nale that  funds were released to 
the States to meet the project expenses in 2009-10.   It was envisaged that civil 
works and installation of equipments would commence  in 2010-11 in all the five 
States, viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim, Manipur, As sam Meghalaya but due to 
technical issues, Detailed Projects Reports in 4 St ates could not be finalized and 
actual execution of civil works could not start and  hence estimated expenditure had 
to be reduced and the actual expenditure had been s till lower.   The Committee are 
not convinced with the reasons nor happy at the del ay in execution of the jobs.  The 
Committee also find that civil works for water and solid waste management projects 
could not be started in Kohima, Shillong, Gangtok a nd Agartala due to delay in 
finalization of DPRs on account of various technica l reasons like delay in award of 
contracts due to multiple failures of bids, delay i n initiation of Tranche-II because of 
delay in process to award contracts due to failure of bids, etc. The Committee feel 
there is a lack of willingness on the part of imple menting agencies. The Committee 

32 
 
call upon the Ministry to sort out the issue in thi s financial year itself so that schemes 
could be implemented.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.12 The Ministry has taken steps to resolve the is sues and most of the contracts 
have been awarded.  Under Tranche-II of NERUDP, various projects related to water 
supply, sewerage and solid waste management have be en sanctioned in the five 
States of Tripura, Mizoram, Sikkim, Nagaland and Me ghalaya.  The position as on 
15 th  June, 2013 is that out of total 25 contracts/ proj ects, 15 contracts have been 
awarded, one contract is ready for award, seven con tracts are at various stages of 
processing, one contract is to be rebid due to subs tantially high bids received during 
first bidding, and one contract is to be taken up at a later stage. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
 
C. Upscaling and operationalisation leachate recirc ulation  facility:  
 
 
2.13 The Committee observe that the poorly maintain ed landfill sites are prone to 
ground water contamination because of leachate prod uction. Wells drawing from the 
aquifers will be extracting ground water contaminat ed by the leachate. Such a 
situation is difficult to remedy.  Studies have sho wn that leachete from solid wastes 
may have pollution load up to 15-20 times higher th an domestic waste water. The 
Committee find from the replies of the Ministry tha t there is a proposal of East Delhi 
Municipal Corporation to set up leachate recirculat ion facility under which the 
leachate so generated shall be collected in a water sealed tank and re-circulated into 
the existing garbage. This exercise would result in  reduction of strength of leachate. 
This will prevent polluted water escaping from the site and thus would certainly help 
in addressing the problem of water pollution in the  area. The Committee feel that this 
method could prove highly useful in preventing wate r contamination in the area.  
Landfill tends to predominate as a waste disposal mode because it is regarded as an 
effective but low-cost method of disposal, even  for hazardous waste also.  However, 
such cost calculations take no account of the long term implications.  In the long run, 
landfill of hazardous material may impose a larger financial burden than other 
methods because of the high cost of ensuring that t he site remains secure till waste 
is rendered harmless. Therefore, the Committee woul d  like to emphasize upon the 
Ministry to help Urban Local Bodies financially as well as with capacity building, to 
operationalize  Leachate Recirculation facility across the country.  
 
 

33 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.14 Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management, 20 00 published by the 
Ministry provides guidelines on the leachate manage ment. Various leachate 
management options have been recommended in the manual.  
 
One of the methods for treatment of leachate is rec irculation of leachate 
through existing landfill. Since leachate managemen t is one of the components of 
sanitary landfill as per the guidelines, the ULBs are required to develop infrastructure 
for collection and treatment of leachate as a part of sanitary landfills. Necessary 
funds for collection and treatment of the leachate have been provided as a part of 
sanitary landfills approved in 46 Solid Waste Manag ement (SWM) projects under 
UIG Sub-Mission of JNNURM and 56 nos. of solid wast e management projects 
under UIDSSMT component of JNNURM. The Ministry wou ld also consider funding 
for leachate treatment facilities for the existing landfills, wherever found suitable.   
 
In regard to capacity building, Ministry of Urban D evelopment is supporting 
ULBs for capacity building under Capacity Building programme and imparting 
Refresher Courses on solid waste management under PHE training programme. 
 
Details of capacity building and training programme  under PHE Training 
Programme conducted upto 2012-13 is given below:  
 
The P.H.E. training programme was started in 1956 by the Ministry with the 
objective of providing training to in-service Engineers and Para-Engineering Staff of 
the various State Public Health Engineering Departments, Water Supply and 
Sewerage Boards, Urban Local Bodies etc.  
The Ministry of Urban Development is running following three types of 
trainings:  
1. Post Graduate (M. Tech/ ME) Course 
: The duration of course is 24 months (4 
Semesters) in Public a Engineering OR Environmental  Engineering. Under 
this programme the Ministry is providing training t o in-service Engineers and 
Para-Engineering Staff of the various State Public Health Engineering 
Departments, Water Supply and Sewerage Boards, Urba n Local Bodies etc. 
in 12 recognized institutes.  
 
2. Short Term Course (STC): 
 This programme has been tailored in such a way 
that Diploma Engineers working in State Public Heal th Engineering 

34 
 
Departments/ Water Supply and Sewerage Boards/ Urba n Local Bodies get 
adequate exposure towards the finer points of Publi c Health Engineering, so 
that they can apply the same in the field.  The cou rse is of three months 
duration.  Financial support to the trainees/ insti tutes in the form of stipend, 
tuition fee, expenses on field visits etc.  is exte nded, thus sharing a major 
portion of the expenditure  
 
3.  Refresher Course:   Refresher Courses on various specializations are 
sponsored by the Ministry for the duration of 1 to 4 weeks and conducted 
through different academic, research & professional institutions and State 
Departments for the benefit of in-service Engineers & Para-Engineering Staff 
working in junior, middle & senior levels in various State Public Health 
Engineering Departments, Water Supply & Sewerage Boards & Urban Local 
Bodies etc.  Financial support in the form of honorarium to lecturers, 
expenses on field visits, preparation of lecture materials etc. is extended to 
the institute conducting the training courses.  
 
Number of personnel trained up to March, 2012 and in-service engineers 
expected to have trained in various training courses during 2012-13 are as under:  
 
Sl. Name of Course  Total upto During  Total 
No.     31.3.2012 2012-13 (up to        Cumulative*  
        31.12.2012)                                            
___________________________________________ ______________________ 
_______  
1.  P.G. Course in PHE  2630  08    2,638 
2.  Short Term Course in PHE 2594  Nil **   2,594 
3.  Refresher course in PHE 30314  469                           30,783 
 
** No short terms courses were conducted during thi s FY due to lack of Hostel 
accommodation in the two institutes conducting the courses 
 
 
Similarly the capacity building initiatives organiz ed for ULBs on Solid Waste 
Management under JNNURM is given below: 
• The capacity building programmes under the Mission  have been organized 
through States, ULBs, Training Institutes and RCBHs . Through these 
mechanisms, the Mission Directorate has provided tr aining on solid waste 
management to around532 ULB officials (engineers an d community 
organizers during 2012-13, covering ULBs in States Kerala, Jharkhand and 
Odisha. Another 25 ULB officials were trained from the States of Rajasthan, 
Gujarat, Delhi, Haryana, H.P, Punjab, Uttarakhand, Chandigarh and Uttar 
Pradesh. 

35 
 
• Moreover, MOUD has approved Capacity Building Plan s of J&K, Madhya 
Pradesh, and Mizoram, wherein one of the training p rogramme proposed is 
for the training of ULB staff and elected represent atives inon solid waste 
management. 
• Under the Regional Capacity Building Hub (RCBH) tr aining programs, 78 
officials of Ranchi Municipal Corporation (Jharkhan d) were trained in 
developing City Sanitation Plans, which also includ ed solid waste 
management as one of the key components.  
• Under the RCBH program itself, it has been propose d to provide training in 
the area of SWM to the ULB officials of Udaipur (Ra jasthan) during August 
2013.  
• MoUD now proposes to develop training modules thro ugh RCBHs and one of 
the modules is solid waste management. The RCBHs wi ll be responsible to 
deliver the training programme on this module. 
Note:  This above programme is being implemented by JNNURM. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
 
D. Operationalise more incinerator and waste-to-ene rgy plants and 
compost plant:  
 
2.15 The Committee observe that incineration is a w aste treatment technology that 
involves the combustion of organic materials/substa nces. Incineration of waste 
material converts the waste into incinerator bottom  ash, flue gases, particulates and 
heat, which can in turn be used to generate electri c power. Incineration with energy 
recovery is one of several wastes to energy technol ogy. Incinerators reduce the 
volume of the original waste by 95 to 96% depending  upon the composition and 
degree of recovery of materials such as metals from  the ash for recycling. This 
means that while incineration does not completely r eplace land filling, it reduces the 
necessary volume for disposal significantly.  Incin eration is particularly beneficial for 
the treatment of certain waste type in niche areas such as clinical waste and certain 
hazardous wastes where pathogens and toxins can be destroyed by high 
temperatures. The Committee note that South Delhi M unicipal Corporation is 
operating one Waste to Energy Plant and one compost  plant which is consuming 
approximately 40 per cent of municipal solid waste generated under its jurisdiction. 
The Committee observe that this is not sufficient. More Waste-to-Energy Plants and 
compost plants should have been operationalized and upscaling should be done with 
increased budgetary allocation and capacity buildin g in terms of skill and 
management. The Committee also note that some waste -to-energy (WTE) projects 
including the process of incineration, pelletisatio n and bio-methanation are still in the 
initial stage in India and the viability and sustai nability of the technology process and 
projects, are still being established. Therefore, h igher capital investment is required 

36 
 
and there should be separate budgetary proposal for  this. The Committee note that 
such WTE plants are financially viable in other dev eloped countries mainly because 
of the tipping fees/ gate fees charged by the facil ity for the service of waste disposal, 
in addition to its revenue income from power sales.   At present in India, revenue 
earned by sale of power is the only source of incom e for WTE plants. Therefore, the 
Committee feel that tipping fees/ gate fees should be charged in India as well so that 
these WTE projects can be operationalized in the country also.  
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.16 Ministry agrees with the views of the Committe e that the tipping fee/ gate fee 
should be charged in India as well so that these WT E projects can be 
operationalized in the country. It is pertinent to mention that the Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy is the nodal Ministry for promotin g waste to energy projects 
(WTE projects). During the hearing held on 15 th  May, 2007 in the matter relating to 
the stay on Govt. subsidies for projects on recover y of energy from municipal solid 
waste, Hon'ble Supreme Court has permitted the Mini stry of New and Renewable 
Energy to go ahead with setting up of 5 waste-to-energy projects to study the viability 
of such projects. Hon’ble Supreme Court also direct ed that no projects for waste-to-
energy be taken up till 5 pilot projects are comple ted.  As per the aforesaid direction, 
the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy formulated  “Programme on Energy 
Recovery from Municipal Solid Waste for Setting-up of 5 Pilot Projects”. The 
programme provides central financial assistance @ 2 .00 crore per megawatt limited 
to Rs. 10.00 crore per project for 5 pilot set up by State Nodal Agencies, Urban Local 
Bodies/ Municipal Corporations or entrepreneurs. So  far 5 projects have been 
approved in the cities Bengaluru, Hyderabad, New De lhi and Pune which are as 
under:  
 
S. 
No.  
Project promoters  Location  Capacity 
(MW) 
Technology  Present Status  
1 M/s Srinivasa 
Gayatri Resource 
Recovery Ltd., No. 
303, Shreshta 
Bhumi Complex, 
No. 87, K.R. 
Road, Next to 
Gayana Samaja, 
Bangalore   
Village Mandur, 
Bangalore 
8 Combustion 
 Under 
installation  
2 M/s RDF Power Chinnravulapally 11 Combustion  Under 

37 
 
Projects Ltd., 401, 
Galada Towers, 
Adjacent Lane to 
Pantaloons, 
Begumpet, 
Hyderabad  
Vilage, 
Bibinagar Madal 
in Nalgonda 
District, A.P.  
installation  
3 M/s Timarpur 
Okhla Waste 
Management Pvt. 
Ltd., (TOWMCL), 
Jindal ITF Centre, 
28 Shivaji Marg, 
New Delhi 
(Promoted by 
Jindal Urban 
Infrastructure Ltd.) 
Old NDMC 
Compost plant, 
New Okhla tank, 
New Delhi 
16 Combustion 
 Commissioned  
4 M/s East Delhi 
Waste processing 
Company (P) Ltd., 
New Delhi, 
(promoted by 
DIAL, IL&FS 
Energy Dev. Co. 
Ltd., (IEDCL) and 
SEI CO 
International Ltd.) 
Gazipur, Delhi  12 Combustion 
 Under 
installation  
5 M/s Rochem 
Separation 
Systems (India) 
Pvt. Ltd., 101, 
HDIL Towers, 
Anant Kanekar 
Marg, Bandra (E), 
Mumbai 
Pune 10 Gasification 
 Under 
installation 
These projects will be evaluated by MNRE by their t echnical experts to 
assess the viability of the projects under Indian c onditions and the recommendations 
of the MNRE will be considered by the Ministry.  
 
As per the announcement made by the Finance Minister regarding formulation 
of Waste-to-Energy projects through PPP mode, the P lanning Commission is 
formulating a draft scheme for Waste-to-Energy proj ects. As recommended by the 
Committee regarding tipping fees/ gate fees, necess ary guidelines for charging of 
tipping fees/ gate fees for operationlisation of Wa ste-to-Energy Projects  would be 
suitably incorporated in the draft scheme being formulated by Planning Commission. 
 

38 
 
It is mentioned that a meeting was held under the c hairmanship of Secretary 
(UD) on 15.05.2013 to discuss waste to energy proje cts for ULBs wherein Dy. 
Secretary (DEA) was also present and the decision t aken on the preparation of the 
draft scheme for waste-to-energy projects is reproduced below: 
 
“Model Profile/ Scheme for PPP based Waste to Energ y projects will be 
prepared by DEA, even though full scale project may  be taken only after the Expert 
Committee set up by Planning Commission gives its r ecommendations”. A copy of 
the minutes of the meeting is enclosed below at ANNEXURE – 4 (D).  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
 
E. Recovery of landfill gas produced in landfills a s a source of energy: 
  
 
2.17 The Committee note that Ministry through its p rogramme like JnNURM is 
funding for construction of sanitary landfills as a  part of municipal solid waste 
management projects. However, there are numerous ex isting dumping sites across 
the country that offer immense possibilities for recovering the landfill gas produced in 
landfills as a source of energy. The Committee also  understand that viability of 
recovery and utilization of this gas is directly dependent upon the quantity and nature 
of the waste deposited in the landfill and therefore, not all the existing dumps may be 
techno-economically viable for commercial energy re covery projects. It is for the 
urban local bodies to identify such landfills and initiate action for recovery of gas from 
these landfills. Therefore, the Committee feel that  it is pertinent for urban local 
bodies to identify those landfill sites full of ene rgy. For this, Ministry has to be a hand 
holding partner for the ULBs. This can also be done  on Public Private Partner Basis. 
The Committee strongly recommend that funds needs t o be provided to ULBs for 
expediting these projects. The Committee are happy to note that Municipal 
Corporation of Delhi has already provided a piece o f land to M/s. GAIL (Gas 
Authority of India Ltd.) for setting up a pilot pro ject for extracting the methane and 
other gases from Ghazipur dump site. The gas so ext racted, if found of sufficient 
calorific value, shall be utilized as a fuel in var ious type of vehicles. The construction 
work of this plant is in advanced stage. Keeping in  view all these facts, the 
Committee recommend that these kinds of pilot projects should be operationalized at 
the earliest and up-scaled in other States and ULBs also. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.18 The Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management  published by the Ministry 
provides guidelines for estimation of landfill gas quality and quantity as well as 

39 
 
landfill gas management. It has been recommended in  the Manual that landfill gas 
management will be adopted at all sites and remedial measures be undertaken.  
This Ministry is convening a meeting of all stakeho lders where GAIL will be 
making a presentation on their experience in Ghazip ur dump site. The findings will 
be circulated to all the States to take-up projects of gas recovery from landfill site. 
 
The above recommendations were discussed in a meeti ng taken by Joint 
Secretary (UD) on 1 st  July, 2013 wherein the GAIL India Limited also par ticipated 
and made a presentation on the landfill gas pilot p rojects, implemented at existing 
landfill site at Ghazipur, Delhi aiming to assess t he potential of Methane recovery 
from landfill gas from the active landfill site as an alternative renewable fuel source 
as CNG. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
 
F. Reclamation of landfill sites 
:  
 
2.19 The Committee are pleased to note that East De lhi Municipal Corporation is in 
the process of reclamation of Ghazipur dumpsite. Un der this project the already 
dumped waste/ garbage shall be excavated and will b e segregated into various 
recyclable and non recyclable components. The recyc lables will be sold to various 
industries for their use and inert (non-recyclable)  will be used for filling of low lying 
areas or making road embankments, etc. If EDMC succ eed, the land so reclaimed 
shall be used for setting up an engineered landfill  site or any other waste processing 
facility at Ghazipur dumpsite.  Appreciating this s tep taken by the EDMC, the 
Committee recommend that this kind of projects shou ld also be operationalised in 
other municipal corporations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.20 The Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management  published by the Ministry 
of Urban Development recommends that the old landfi ll sites will be investigated and 
wherever contamination is observed and is expected to continue, the detailed site 
investigation for remediation will be undertaken. H owever, if the findings of the 
project of East Delhi Municipal Corporation is foun d economical & viable, other 
States/ ULBs will also be encouraged by the Ministr y to adopt such type of 
technology for reclamation of landfill sites or any  other waste processing facility at 
dump site. 

40 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SERIAL NO. 4) 
 
G. Incinerator plants should be stopped in all resi dential areas in all 
metropolitan & Big cities across the country:  
 
2.21 The Committee note that the Municipal Solid Wa ste is delivered by NDMC 
and MCD at the Okhla Power Plant site. Although it is claimed that “only non 
Hazardous Municipal Solid Waste will be treated at the facility”, the fact is that 
Delhi’s mixed municipal solid waste has characteris tics of   hazardous waste. MCD, 
Delhi government and Central Government have shown sheer callousness towards 
hazardous emissions from municipal incinerators tha t cause serious environmental 
and health problems to the people living not only n ear them but thousands of 
kilometers away from the source. The Committee feel  anguished and dissatisfied 
with the reply of the Ministry that the soot in the  atmosphere is reported to be within 
norms as it is monitored by Delhi Pollution Control  Board. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that these kinds of Waste Incinerator Pla nts should be stopped in all 
residential areas in all metropolitan & Big cities across the country. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.22 During the hearing held on 15 th  May, 2007 in the matter relating to the stay on 
Govt. subsidies for projects on recovery of energy from Municipal solid waste, 
Hon'ble Supreme Court has permitted the Ministry of  New and Renewable Energy to 
go ahead with setting up of five waste-to-energy projects to study the viability of such 
projects. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has already approved these 
projects (including the projects approved in Delhi)  and is yet to assess the viability of 
these projects.  
 
The Ministry will consider all the facts available regarding incineration 
including those based on evaluation of 5 waste-to-e nergy projects by the Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy. The Manual on Municipal S olid Waste Management 
and the report on Technology Advisory Group on MSW indicate that the flue gas 
generated from waste to energy plants will contain a number of pollutants in various 
concentrations like carbon monoxide, sulphur dioxid e and particulate matter 
containing heavy metals compounds and dioxins. Prop er Environmental Pollution 
control measures have to be incorporated in the des ign and operation of waste to 
energy facilities. It has been recommended in the m anual that the generation of 
these pollutants and their release into the atmosph ere can be effectively reduced or 

41 
 
prevented by incorporating a number of air pollutio n control devices and by proper 
operation of waste to energy facility. 
 
The above recommendations were discussed in a meeti ng taken by Joint 
Secretary (UD) on 1 
st  July, 2013 wherein the GAIL India Ltd. also partic ipated and 
made a presentation on the landfill gas pilot proje cts, implemented at existing landfill 
site at Ghazipur, Delhi aiming to assess the potent ial of Methane recovery from 
landfill gas from the active landfill site as an al ternative renewable fuel source as 
CNG. 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SERIAL NO. 4) 
 
H. Collaboration with foreign countries for solid w aste management:   
 
2.23 The Committee note that the  Ministry of Urban  Development is in the process 
of signing an MoU with Government of the Kingdom of  Sweden in the field of 
sustainable urban development through exchange of k nowledge, institutional 
cooperation including capacity building, research &  development and commercial 
relations for various sectors including integrated solid waste management. The MoU 
has been forwarded to Ministry of External Affairs for approval. The Committee 
strongly feel that this collaboration should be exp edited and Ministry should pursue 
this matter with Ministry of External Affairs on priority.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.24 A draft MoU with Sweden has been finalised. To  carry forward the MoU, a 
meeting has been held with Swedish authorities. Var ious activities have been 
planned for dissemination of knowledge/ technology transfer on Solid Waste 
Management and other areas of urban development. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SERIAL NO. 4) 
 
I. Expedite mandatory and optional reforms as commi tted in JNNURM:    
 
2.25 The Committee note that there is delay in impl ementing mandatory and 
optional reforms in JNNURM as per the commitments m ade in the Memorandum of 
Agreement in the selected States/ UTs as per the re port of CAG. The Committee 
also observe that the Urban Local Bodies still lack  technical and human skill to 
achieve some of the reforms, such as transfer of 12 th  scheduled functions, City plan 
and e-governance etc. Therefore, the Committee reco mmend for strengthening 

42 
 
Urban Local Bodies in order to carry out mandatory and optional reforms. To carry 
out these reforms, local governments need partners, capacity buildings, and financial 
supports. The Committee note that, in November 2012  the Ministry of Urban 
Development had approved a new improved calibration  method wherein 
achievement of reforms could be measured. This has been circulated to all the 
States. The calibration is expected to be handholdi ng and guiding factor for all the 
States and ULBs to know the status of reforms. Ther e has been increase in User 
Charges, Property Tax Collection and transparency i n working of Local Bodies. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend to up-scale this  calibration method in all the 
States and ULBs. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.26 Achievement of reforms is a dynamic process. C alibration of this achievement 
has been done. The calibrated score for all State a nd Local Bodies (except three 
wherein confirmation of such score is yet to come) is given below in the TABLE . This 
has also been reviewed by an independent 3 rd  party i.e. Reform Appraisal Agency 
(RAA). 
 
This calibration brings out an empirical and measur able score of achievement 
of reforms which has been uploaded on the website of JNNURM. 
JnNURM Reforms Implementation Status 
S. No. State 
Achievement (%) 
(As on 31.03.2013)  
Achievement (%)  
(As on 
30.06.2013)  
1 Andhra Pradesh* 93.0% 93.0% 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 38.5% 40.0% 
3 Assam 59.5% 72.0% 
4 Bihar 53.9% 70.0% 
5 Chandigarh 67.0% 68.0% 
6 Chhattisgarh 85.4% 85.0% 
7 Delhi 83.5% 85.0% 
8 Goa* 78.0% 78.0% 
9 Gujarat 87.2% 89.0% 
10 Haryana 70.5% 71.0% 

43 
 
11 Himachal Pradesh 88.0% 92.0% 
12 Jammu and Kashmir 44.3% 78.0% 
13 Jharkhand 50.2% 65.0% 
14 Kerala 82.4% 88.0% 
15 Karnataka 89.6% 94.0% 
16 Madhya Pradesh 82.0% 82.0% 
17 Maharashtra* 91.0% 91.0% 
18 Manipur 47.4% 49.0% 
19 Meghalaya 57.9% 60.0% 
20 Mizoram 57.4% 57.0% 
21 Nagaland 31.5% 32.0% 
22 Puducherry 60.5% 75.0% 
23 Punjab 50.5% 76.0% 
24 Orissa 69.1% 80.0% 
25 Rajasthan 79.9% 87.0% 
26 Sikkim 48.9% 49.0% 
27 Tamil Nadu 74.3% 90.0% 
28 Tripura 71.1% 75.0% 
29 Uttarakhand 70.8% 74.0% 
30 Uttar Pradesh 85.2% 85.0% 
31 West Bengal 82.2% 83.0% 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SERIAL NO. 4) 
 
J. Funds to be given for bus depots under JNNURM:  -   
  
2.27 The Committee observe that the Govt. has made announcement about plying 
of 10000 buses in different cities under JNNURM. Th e Committee also observe that 
basic infrastructure like bus depots are required f or operating this facility of public 
transport which is lacking in various cities.  In N agpur, 300 buses have been 
sanctioned but there are no bus depots for them. Th ese buses are parked on the 
road side. The Committee strongly feel that money s hould be spent first on basic 
infrastructure like strengthening the road, constru cting the bus depots and then 
buses should be provided to the cities. However, th e Committee are distressed to 
note that allocation has been made for the buses on ly and not for the supporting 

44 
 
infrastructure. Therefore, the Committee strongly r ecommend for providing higher 
budget allocation under JNNURM for extending basic infrastructure like bus depots, 
and to renovate the conditions of roads in differen t cities before plying the buses. 
The Committee further desire that, instead of provi ding big buses in all the cities, 
small cities having narrow roads should be provided small buses. 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.28 It is agreed that the programme should not be restricted only to supply of 
buses.  They should play catalytic role in re-defin ing city transport system leading to 
sustainability of buses and transport corporations.   Hence, in the draft EFC Note 
initiated by the Ministry, along with the buses, sa nction of ancillary infrastructure 
such as Bus Depots, workshops, Control Centre etc. is also included without which it 
is impossible to provide and maintain a city bus se rvice of high quality which can re-
define cities transport system.   
 
This time, Ministry is proposing 6 variants of buse s (Mini Bus/ Midi Bus/ 
Standard Bus/ Articulated Bus/ Premium segment Bus/  Hybrid Bus) which include 
standard and mini/ midi buses.  The aim is to intro duce organised modern city bus 
service through mini/ midi buses in various smaller  cities and towns so that the 
availability of quality public transport is provided across the length and breadth of the 
country.  On the other hand it is also proposed to raise the standard of city bus 
transport system in million plus cities with premiu m segment buses, articulated/ bi-
articulated buses and hybrid/ electric buses beside s standard buses so as to take 
the city bus service to the level of city bus servi ce in developed countries. The 
suggestions of the Committee to provide smaller bus es to smaller cities have been 
taken care of in the draft EFC Note initiated by th e Ministry for provision of 10000 
buses to all notified municipalities/ municipal cor porations with special emphasis on 
hilly States. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
 
K.  Tardy implementation of JNNURM projects 
 
 
2.29 The Committee note that JNNURM has been launch ed on 3.12.2005 to be 
implemented within the period of seven years. From the detailed information on the 
details of projects implemented upto 31.3.2012, the  Committee observe that against 
the total projects sanctioned under UIG components only 184 projects have been 

45 
 
physically completed and 40 projects are likely to be completed by the end of this 
Month. The remaining 327 are in various stages of c ompletion under UIDSSMT out 
of 807 projects, only 324 projects have been comple ted. It has been repeated by 
States that there have been delays in completion of  this projects due to court cases, 
land acquisition cases shifting of utilities, delay s of receipt, of permission, lack of 
capacity buildings of ULBs etc. Now that the JNNURM  period has been extended 
upto the end of 2014, the Committee expect the Mini stry to make sincere efforts to 
overcome the problems and implement all the projects in the extended period. 
 
The Committee are given to understand that the Mini stry is interested in 
starting new schemes but there is a constraint due to lack of funds. They have been 
advised by the government to allocate the funds for  new schemes from JNNURM. 
JNNURM has been allocated a sum of Rs 14,000 crore for 2013-14. Keeping in mind 
that the sub-mission under the Mission are fund int ensive, the allocation for 
JNNURM should be increased. There needs to be separ ate funding for the Feeder 
Bus Services proposed by the government as it will be a burden on the JNNURM 
funds and proposed results will not be achieved by the Mission due to paucity of 
funds. 
 
The Committee observe that with regard to JNNURM, s pecial focus needs to 
be given to the procedure of allocation of funds to  states through submission of 
Detailed Project Reports for proposed projects to G OI. Of the total 1093 DPRs 
submitted from the start of the mission to August 2 011, only 51% have been 
sanctioned. In Maharashtra only 46% of the total DP Rs submitted were sanctioned. 
Therefore, the Committee recommend that corrective measures need to be taken in 
this regard to ensure maximum support to the states. 
 
Apart from this, there have been delays in releasin g GOI’s share of funds for 
UIG and UIDSSMT projects which are majorly due to n on-utilization of existing funds 
or non-submission of Utilisation Certificates by th e state and Urban Local Bodies. 
The Committee recommend that measures need to be ta ken in this regard to ensure 
proper responses to the Government for smooth funct ioning of the Mission and 
optimum results. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.30 The progress in projects has been constantly m onitored by Ministry of Urban 
Development at various levels. Review meetings have  been held with all States. 
States have been directed to expedite implementatio n of projects. Presently, 195 
projects under UIG and 390 projects under UIDSSMT h ave reported physical 

46 
 
completion. States have also been asked to give tim elines for completion of projects 
under implementation. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
 
URBAN TRANSPORT 
 
 
A. Under Utilization of funds for Urban Transport P lanning 
 
 
2.31 The Committee note that a highly ambitious scheme w as launched w.e.f.  
August 2008 to cover a gamut of urban transport mat ters for promoting 
comprehensive and integrated urban transport planni ng, studies on integrated land 
use and transport planning, comprehensive mobility means, preparation of DPRs, 
Clean Development Mechanism(CDM) studies intelligen t Transport System Studies 
and launching of awareness campaign in the line wit h National Urban Transport 
Policy 2006. The Committee are distressed to note t hat during the year 2008-09 only   
an   amount of Rs. 3.10 crore could be utilized bec ause of  less number of proposals 
received from the States/UTs. The Ministry could sp end Rs. 22.65 crore against the 
RE of 23.50 crore during 2011-12 and Rs. 10.84 cror e against allocated funds of 
Rs.14.20 crore during 2012-13. The reasons for less  expenditure during 2011-12 is 
because of the DPRs corridors in NCR could not matu re due to involvement of 
multiple stakeholders. This trend of underutilizati on of scarce resources reflects lack 
of will power on the part of  the Ministry to imple ment the scheme. Further, the 
Committee are anguished to note that in all the cit ies, the problem of traffic has been 
increasing. The growth in the number of vehicles on  the road is not matched with 
required infrastructure. In metro cities people spe nd 4 to 5 hrs. on roads because of 
traffic jam. The havoc created by traffic police an d failure of traffic lights also add to 
the problems. In this backdrop the Committee strong ly feel that the ambitious 
projects have remained on paper  only and the prope r plan  for improvement of 
urban transport have not been materialized. The Com mittee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Ministry should make vigorous ef forts and take up this matter 
with the State governments at the highest level and  utilize the allocations made for 
this scheme in order to bring real improvement on urban transport. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.32 For better utilization of  funds  under the sc heme of Urban Transport Planning,  
regular follow up is done with all States/ UTs incl uding  D.O. letter   from Secretary 
(UD) to Chief Secretary of all States/ UTs to submi t the requisite number of 
proposals for  traffic and transportation studies/ CMP/ DPR and  avail the central 

47 
 
financial assistance under the scheme. At various f orums also, states and cities are 
made aware of this scheme by this Ministry.  
 
After launch of the revised scheme of Urban Transpo rt Planning for providing 
80% central financial assistance, preparation of Co mprehensive Mobility Plan in 
Agartala, Chandigarh, Gangtok, Guwahati, Shillong, Tumkur, Devangere, Shimoga, 
Lucknow, Kanpur, Allahabad, Agra, Meerut, Mathura, Bhatinda, Patiala, Pathankot, 
Jalandhar, Tirupati, Chitradurga, Bijapur, Hospet, Raichur, Kalyan, Dombivili, 
Bhopal, Nanital, Mussorie, Haridwar, Dehradun and  Detailed Project Report for 
MRTS projects in Jaipur, Mumbai, Nagpur, Hyderabad (extension), Delhi MRTS 
Phase-IV, Bhopal and Indore etc have been taken up by the concerned States/ UTs 
with support from the Ministry apart from other tra ffic and transportation studies. 
Furthermore, proposals have been received from Guwa hati and Bhubaneshwar for 
funding the DPR for metro rail and are under consideration with the Ministry. 
 
Recommendations of the Committee will be followed vigorously and more and 
more cities/ states will be asked to forward propos als for urban transport related 
studies. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
 
B. Sustainable Urban Transport Project (SUTP): 
 
  
2.33 The Committee note that the Sustainable Urban Transport Project (SUTP) 
was launched in May, 2009 with the assistance from World Bank and UNDP. The 
project aims to provide technical assistance to Min istry to strengthen their project 
management capabilities and enable them to successful manage the implementation 
of SUTP. Ministry in their written reply stated tha t it is complex project with various 
unique features involving multiple cities, multiple  component and multiple financing 
agencies. Since the projects are being undertaken w ith assistance from World Bank 
and UNDP  for the first time and it reportedly took  some time to finalize the 
documents such as Terms of reference, draft contrac ts, etc. and processing the 
technical & financial evaluations of the proposals received.The Committee are 
distressed to note that  there has been delay in ap pointing consultants for various 
consultancy assignments envisaged under Component 1  (1A and 1B) of the project 
on account of the procedural requirements like obta ining approval of various 
agencies (World Bank, UNDP, Internal Finance Divisi on of the Ministry). The  
Committee are not satisfied with reply of the Minis try in this regard. Hence, they 
recommend that the targets be fixed by prescribing clear timeframe for its 
achievement besides fully utilizing the allocation. 

48 
 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.34 It was expected that during the financial year  2012-13 the consultants for 
various consultancies under Component 1B of the Sus tainable Urban Transport 
Project would be in position.  However, due to vari ous procedural requirements, 
there has been delay in finalizing the selection of  the consultants. Now the process 
of selection of 9 consultancy services under Component 1B of SUTP has either been 
completed or is at the final stage. It is expected that with all the consultants in place, 
the targets fixed would be met and the allocation for the financial year 2013-14 would 
be utilized. 
 
The present status of all the 9 consultancies works  under Component 1B of 
Sustainable Urban Transport Project is given below: 
 
S. 
No. 
Consultancy work  Present Status  
1.  PC1B – 1 “Developing 
Operations Documents for 
UMTA and UTF”  
• Final Contract signed on 18 March, 2013. 
(joint venture of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu 
India Pvt. Ltd. and Voyants Solutions 
Private Limited)  
• Inception report submitted on 8 April 2013.  
• Completion Period – 24 Months 
 
Actual Cost - Rs. 2.14 Cr. 
 
2 PC1B – 2 “Operations 
Documents for TMICC and 
NPTH”  
• Final Contract signed on 8 March, 2013 
(DIMTS in association with TRL (UK) and 
Kimley Horn Consulting & Engg. India Pvt. 
Ltd.) 
• Inception report submitted on 2 April 2013.  
• Inception review meeting was held on 10 
April 2013. 
•  Completion Period – 12 Months 
 
Actual Cost - Rs. 1.84 Cr.  
 
3.  PC1B – 3 “Guidance 
Documents for  NMT, Bike 
Sharing and TOD”  
• Under Consideration in the Ministry. 
• Completion Period – 17 Months  
    Actual Cost - Rs. 2.48 Cr. 
 
4.  PC1B – 4 “Develop Urban 
Transport Research 
Program in India”  
• Final contract signed between MoUD & 
CEPT on 15 Jan 2013.  
• Inception report received on 20 Feb 2013 

49 
 
• Completion Period – 10 Months  
Actual Cost - Rs. 0.49 Cr.  
5.  PC1B – 5 Estimation of 
GHG Emission and Energy 
Consumption for SUTP 
cities”  
• Final contract signed on 30 April 2013 
(Emergent Ventures India Pvt. Ltd)  
• Emergent ventures shared the list of data 
sets to start working on the project with 
PMU on 30 April 2013  
• Completion Period – 30 Months 
 
Actual Cost - Rs. 2.55 Cr.  
6.  PC1B – 6 “Capacity 
Building for Leaders in 
Urban Transport Planning”  
Following capacity building programmes have 
taken place: 
• In the 1 
st  batch, 31 Participants underwent 
capacity building programme at CEPT from 
29 July 2012 to 31 March 2013. They had 
visited LTA Singapore & Seoul from 22 
March to 29 March 2013. 
• The 2 
nd  batch of 45 participants is going to 
start in the 2 nd  week of June, 2013. 
•  13 Participants underwent capacity 
building programme at LTA Singapore 
from 15 to 21 January 2012. 
• 9 Participants underwent capacity building 
programme at LTA Singapore from 27 
January 2013 to 2 February 2013 
• 8 Participants underwent capacity building 
programme at KOTI Seoul from 7 to 13 
October 2012 
• Completion Period – 36 Months 
 
Estimated Cost - Rs. 5.5 Cr.  
7.  PC1B – 7 “Impact 
Evaluation Study for Bus 
Procurement under NURM”  
• RFP done. 
• TER approved  
• Financial bid opened on 4 June 2013 
• CER is under finalisation   
• Completion Period – 15 Months  
Estimated Cost - Rs. 5.25 Cr.  
 
8.  PC1B – 8 “Preparing Model 
Contracts for City Bus 
Private Operations”  
• RFP done. 
• TER is under finalisation  
• Completion Period – 8 Months  
Estimated Cost - Rs. 1.75 Cr.  
 
9.  PC1B – 9 “Project 
Preparatory Consultants for 
GEF 5"  
• Proposal for Procurement on CQS is being 
sent to World Bank.  
• Notice for EOI was published in 
newspaper on 17 May 2013  
•  Completion Period – 10 Months  
Estimated Cost - Rs. 1 Cr.  
 
 

50 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
 
C.  Conversion of 6 car trains to 8 car and 4 car t rains in to 6 car in Delhi 
Metro : 
 
2.35 The Committee observe that to meet the future increased demand, 6 car 
trains are being converted into 8 car trains as per  the statement of Delhi Metro Rail 
Corporation. In line no 2, at present 50 trains of 6 cars and 8 trains of 8 cars are in 
service. DMRC stated that by Feb 2014, 37 trains wi ll be converted to 8 cars and 
balance 23 trains of 6 cars will continue. In line no 3, at present 49 trains of 6 car and 
20 trains of 4 cars are in service. First of all the 4 car trains are under conversion to 6 
car trains will be completed by July 2013. From Jul y 2013, 8 car conversion from 6 
car would be taken up and a total of 31 trains of 8  car shall be operational by 
February 2014. As per the plan of DMRC, the above p lan is considered adequate to 
meet the projected traffic. 8 car conversions for the line no 2, has been planned early 
since crowding is more in line no 2. The Committee desire that the Ministry of Urban 
Development & DMRC, should endeavour to convert 37 trains of 6 cars into 8 car in 
line no 2 by Feb 2014 and of  20 trains (4 cars) in  to 6 car train by July 2013 and 
conversion of 6 cars to 8 cars by Feb 2014 in line no 3. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 
2.36 Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Ltd. (DMRC) has a  programme to convert 4 car 
train sets into 6 car train sets and 6 car train se ts into 8 car train sets as per the 
following schedule:- 
 
Line – 2 (Janakpuri – HUDA City Centre) 
 
 
 
Out of 37 trains to be converted to 8 car trains by  February, 2014, 21 trains 
have been converted so far. 
 
Line – 3/4 (Dwarka – NOIDA City Centre) 
 
 
 
Out of 31 train set to be converted to 6 car train sets by July, 2013, 24 trains 
have been converted so far. The target will be met.  Conversion of these 31 trains 
from 6 cars to 8 cars will be achieved by February, 2014. 
 
 
 

51 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
 
D.  Need for adequate provision for High Speed Metr o Rail System in the 
country:  
 
2.37 The Committee welcome the recently announced M etro Railway Policy by the 
Ministry of Urban Development for encouraging citie s with more than two million 
population to plan and implement high-capacity and high-speed metro rail systems.  
However, the Ministry stated that taking up the Met ro project in any city would 
depend upon the overall justification and funds ava ilability. Since these large cities 
would accommodate the bulk of the burgeoning urbani zing population in future and 
Metro has proved a success story, planning for thei r growth and mobility in other 
cities is absolute necessary. The metro rail, which  takes on an average about 10 
years to plan and fully implement, could play a sig nificant role in shaping their 
future.  Therefore, the Committee recommend to plan  and implement high-capacity 
and high-speed metro rail systems in all the target ed cities exditiously and provide 
adequate funds for the same. The Committee also des ire the Ministry to take up the 
matter with all the State Governments to come out w ith proposal for the second line 
cities like Chandigarh, Bhubaneswar, Nagpur, Ahmedabad, etc. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.38 As per National Urban Transport Policy 2006, t he Central Government 
encourages all proven technologies and does not pro mote any specific technology.  
 However, in order to encourage States to plan for metro rail system, a meeting was 
held on 23.7.2012 in which the representatives of S tate Governments of Assam, 
Bihar, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab  and Uttar Pradesh were 
present.  This Ministry can consider proposals only  when the State Government 
submits the same along with Detailed Project Report  (DPR).  So far, the DPR for the 
following Metro Rail proposals have been received f rom the following State 
Governments:- 
  
 
 
S. 
No. 
Name of States/ 
City 
Details of DPR received  
1 Gujarat Ahmedabad- Gandhi Nagar metro corridor.  
However, State had advised MoUD that they would 
be submitting revised DPR which is yet to be 
received. 
 
2 Chandigarh Tricity of Chandigarh, Panchkula and Mohali. 
3 Punjab Ludhiana Metro  
4 Maharashtra Pune Metro  

52 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
 
E. Separate budgetary allocation for feeder buses: 
  
 
2.39 The Committee note that in order to provide la st mile connectivity to metro 
commuters DMRC had decided in the year 2007 to intr oduce feeder buses in limited 
numbers.  Accordingly, non-AC mini buses were purch ased.  Further, the Committee 
are surprised to note that at present to meet the n eed of approximately 2 lakh 
people, only 117 buses are being plying on 14 STA a pproved routes originating from 
11 metro stations carrying on an average 38,000 pas sengers daily by private 
operators. These buses are being run on ‘No profit No loss” basis by DMRC.  During 
discussion on Demands for Grants, the Ministry had assured to make 
operationalisation of 300 feeder buses.  To their u tter surprise, the Committee note 
that till now these buses have not yet been introdu ced.   Pertaining to the steps 
taken in this regard it has been stated that DMRC h ad selected an operator to run 
300 Non-AC semi low floor mini buses in May 2012.  These buses were to be 
procured as per JnNURM specification for urban bus.   Delay in introduction of these 
buses is attributed to non-availability of buses co nforming to urban bus specification.  
Now these buses are expected in September/October, 2013.  These buses shall 
originate from 41 metro stations on 60 STA approved  routes.  The Committee are 
further informed that as an interim measure, operat or has been selected to operate 
and maintain 100 non-AC standard floor mini buses.  These buses are expected in 
August, 2013.  The Ministry is hopeful for operatio nalization of 517 buses by this 
year end. 
 
The Committee strongly feel that the Ministry shoul d adhere to its promise 
without fail so as to mitigate urban transport cong estion and make Delhi Metro a 
successful one. 
 
The Committee  further observe that Delhi Metro’s f eeder bus system, which 
was lauded as a unique feature designed to enable c ommuters to conveniently 
interchange from one mode to another, has come in f or repeated criticism for the 
poor quality of buses it offers. They neither match  up to the service offered by the 
swanky new low-floor DTC buses nor provide the air- conditioned comfort of the 
metro trains. No wonder, commuters demand that the quality of feeder buses should 
match those of DTC if the new fares of metro feeder  buses are to be justified. The 
feeder buses which lack basic features become avail able every 10-12 minutes and 
are also very crowded. Private contractors have bee n put in charge of managing the 
facility and they pack in as many passengers in the bus as possible to maximize their 
profits.  
 

53 
 
The Committee note that under JNNURM, Delhi Metro R ail Corporation 
(DMRC) has been sanctioned 228 feeder buses with th e total estimated project cost 
of Rs.45.01 Crore in which the Government of India share is Rs.15.96 crore as 
Additional Central Assistance. However there is no separate budgetary allocation for 
feeder buses. Keeping all these facts in view, the Committee hereby recommend 
allocating separate funds for feeder buses to provi de quality feeder services for the 
metro network. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.40 The concerns shown by the Committee regarding feeder buses have been 
noted.  Ministry of Urban Development is taking eve ry effort and extending its full 
support to DMRC to make it enable to procure these feeder buses at the earliest.  In 
this regard, Ministry has requested DMRC on 13.06.2 013 to expedite the 
procurement of feeder buses. 
 
The Ministry of Urban Development has sanctioned 22 8 feeder buses (mini/ 
midi) to DMRC under the Jawaharlal Nehru National U rban Renewal Mission 
(JnNURM) with the project cost of Rs.45.01 crore.  The Govt. of India share i.e. 
Additional Central Assistance is Rs.15.96 crore. 1 
st  instalment of ACA amounting to 
Rs.6.23 crore has already been released.  2 nd  instalment will be released on 
procurement of buses/ submission of purchase order to the Ministry. 
 
Funds in respect of projects sanctioned under JnNUR M are released to the 
concerned State Government/ UT Administration by Mi nistry of Finance/ Ministry of 
Home Affairs.  In case of DMRC, the funds are relea sed by the Ministry of Home 
Affairs to DMRC through the Govt. of NCT of Delhi. 
 
A policy decision is required to be taken regarding  feeder buses to be part of 
Metro projects.  As suggested by the Committee, Min istry will take action for having 
a separate Budgetary allocation for feeder buses and making feeder buses as part of 
sanctioning of Metro Rail in future. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
 
F.  Need for expansion of airport-metro link projec ts  in other metropolitan 
and big cities   
 
 2. 41 The Committee note that aeroplane is an important t ransport mode, the 
airports need to be connected by Mass Rapid Transit  System (MRTS). This 

54 
 
connection by MRTS can be accessed through Metro Ra il Link or Bus Rapid Transit 
System (BRTS) or City Bus Service. At present, exce pt Delhi, no other dedicated 
Metro rail link has been taken up in other cities. Hence, the Committee hereby 
recommend for starting these kinds of Airport-Metro  Link projects in other 
metropolitan and big cities in order to reduce traf fic on roads, reduce parking 
problems in Airports and to provide speedy connectivity to the passengers. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.42 The choice of a particular technology whether metro rail/ BRTS or city bus 
service would depend upon the traffic requirement o f a particular city and the overall 
viability of the system.  In Delhi, the Airport lin e is facing viability challenges.  
However, connectivity of Airport with rest of the city is essential.  
  
Accordingly, in the proposal of Mumbai Metro Line-3  (Colaba- Bandra- 
SEEPZ) Corridor, alignment passes through the Airpo rt up to SEEPZ, thus providing 
the much needed connectivity.   
  
Central Government has given ‘in-principle’ approva l for the feasibility study 
and preparation of Detailed Project Report for extension of the Hyderabad Metro Rail 
connectivity from Shilparamam to Faluknuma via Raji v Gandhi International Airport 
(RGIA).  However, taking up of any such capital intensive project would depend upon 
availability of funds and financial viability of the project. 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 5 
 
 
H. Need for expansion of Delhi Metro 
 
  
2.43 The Committee observe that besides giving conn ectivity within Delhi, Delhi 
Metro at present is extending connectivity to NOIDA  and Vaishali in Uttar Pradesh 
and Gurgaon in Haryana.  When asked about providing  connectivity to Sonepat, the 
Committee have been informed that out of eight corr idors, 3 Regional Rapid Transit 
System (RRTS) namely Delhi- Sonepat- Panipat, Delhi - Ghaziabad- Meerut and 
Delhi- Gurgaon- Rewari- Alwar have been prioritized  to be implemented by NCRPB.  
Since the NCRPB is yet to be constituted, the Committee feel that there is no chance 
of starting the work of priortized corridor in the near future.  Further, regarding the 
connectivity of Delhi to Greater NOIDA, the Ministry is stated to have resubmitted the 
proposal in February, 2013. 
  

55 
 
Considering the plight of daily commuters from thes e two cities, the 
Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry shou ld make proposal and get the 
necessary approval for providing metro connectivity  to Sonepat and Greater NOIDA 
in order to facilitate easy connectivity to the peo ple living in metropolitan suburbs to 
commute to work thereby easing pressure on the infr astructure services. For this the 
Committee want the Ministry to hold talks with all the stakeholders like DMRC, Delhi 
and Haryana Governments. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.44 On the request received from the NOIDA Authori ty for metro connection 
between NOIDA City Centre to Greater NOIDA (29.7 Km ), DMRC had prepared and 
submitted a DPR in May, 2010 for a standalone metro  connection between NOIDA 
City Centre Metro Station and Greater NOIDA. The sa me has been updated and 
resubmitted in February, 2013. This connection is s till to be sanctioned by Uttar 
Pradesh Government. 
 
Presently, there is no proposal with DMRC of metro connectivity to Sonipat 
(Haryana). A Regional Rapid Transit System (RRTS) c orridor viz. Delhi – Sonipat – 
Panipat of length 111.20 km is proposed to be taken up. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
 
I.  Regional Rapid Transit System (RRTS) 
 
 
2.45 The Committee note that National Capital Region Pla nning Board (NCRPB) 
had recommended construction of Regional Rapid Tran sit System (RRTS) in their 
Functional Plan for NCR-2032.  The Plan recommended  eight Regional Rapid 
Transit System corridors to connect various towns/ areas of National Capital Region. 
Out of eight corridors, the Government of India has  prioritized the following three 
corridors for implementation in consultation with State Governments: 
 
i. Delhi- Sonipat- Panipat 
ii. Delhi- Gurgaon- Rewari- Alwar 
iii. Delhi- Ghaziabad- Meerut 
 
It has been proposed to implement the project throu gh NCR Transport 
Corporation (NCRTC).   The Committee further note t hat in this regard an MoU 
among Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India, NCR participating 
States and NCR Planning Board was signed for the fo rmation of NCRTC on 
29.06.2011 for NCR in the year 2011.  However, NCRT C has not come into 
existence till date. The Committee feel that the de lay in implementation of projects 

56 
 
on these three prioritized sectors will lead to del ay in implementation of project on 
remaining five corridors, which over the passage of  time might defeat the purpose of 
these RRTS. 
  
Since the Feasibility Reports for all the three cor ridors have been received by 
the Ministry, the Committee recommend that formatio n of NCRTC should be 
completed at the earliest on an urgent basis, so th at the projects can be initiated at 
the earliest.  
   
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.46 The Government have taken steps to the formati on of National Capital Region 
Transport Corporation Ltd. (NCRTC) for taking up RR TS project in National Capital 
Region (NCR). The feasibility study for the followi ng three prioritized corridors under 
Phase-I have been completed to be taken up by NCRTC:- 
 
S. No. RRTS Corridor Length ( Km) 
1 Delhi – Sonipat – Panipat 111.20 
2 Delhi – Gurgaon – Rewari – 
Alwar 
180.00 
3 Delhi – Ghaziabad – Meerut 90.20 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
 
J.  Road traffic management in metropolitan and big  cities: Electronic Road 
Pricing and congestion tax  
 
2.47 The most visible transport problem plaguing ou r cities on a daily basis is traffic 
congestion. The main reason behind this is the incr ease in number of private motor 
vehicles, which is bound to continue its northward trend in near future. This leads to 
decrease in available road space for other modes of  transport. Keeping this in view 
the Committee in their 37 th  Report (14 th  Lok Sabha) had recommended the possibility 
of issuing suitable guidelines for levy of 'congest ion tax' on personal vehicles in the 
congested areas, according to the time of the day s hould be explored by the Ministry 
of urban Development. However, the Ministry forward ed the reasons of absence of 
Intelligent Transport System (ITS) and considered it premature to levy congestion tax 
in India. 
 
The Ministry in their Action Taken Reply had submit ted that the suggestion 
has been noted for future guidance. Also the Minist ry were aware of such steps 
being taken by Singapore and London at that time al so. Those efforts of Singapore 
and London have become a success story now. But Ind ia is still hovering near the 
starting line, even after the passage of  almost fi ve years since the presentation of 
Committee's 37 
th  Report(14th Lok Sabha) on 'Urban Transport'. The C ommittee are 

57 
 
anguished at the indifference shown by the Ministry  towards the recommendation of 
the Committee. Till date, the Central Ministry has not even conducted a single pilot 
study in this regard. The submission of Ministry th at study on such issues falls under 
the purview of States is not acceptable to the Comm ittee. As the Ministry has 
financed many pilot projects in other areas like so lid waste management, 
development of satellite towns etc. Also in the ach ievements of UTTIPEC, the 
Ministry has clearly mentioned that UTTIPEC has bee n involved in planning and 
design of pilot projects to test and ensure effecti ve mechanisms to reduce private 
vehicle congestion on road. Thus, the Committee str ongly recommend that the 
Ministry should  without fail conduct a pilot proje ct in the congested areas of 
metropolitan cities and come out with policy and gu idelines for implementation of  
'congestion tax' by all the States. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.48 Regarding congestion pricing the Ministry has noted the concern of the 
Committee and has already issued an advisory on int roduction of congestion 
charges in core areas/ central business districts ( CBDs) vide letter dated 15 th  
January, 2013, a copy of which is available on the website moud.gov.in . The 
advisory is based on the success stories of London and Singapore.  
In the above referred advisory, the States/ UTs hav e been advised to identify 
the most congested areas in their cities, getting a  proper study done on various 
aspects of congestion charges as per city requireme nt and consider adopting 
‘congestion charges’ as a measure to decongest a pa rticular area/ CBD, increasing 
mode share of cycling as well as public transport a nd increase the mobility of the 
people besides controlling pollution. 
 
Before taking up a pilot project, proper study on c ongestion charging is 
required to be conducted for which the Ministry is ready to pay upto 80% of the cost 
of the study under the UT Planning Scheme. Accordin gly, a DO letter No. K-
14011/7/2007-UT-II (Vol. II) dated 11.07.2013 has b een issued to the Chief 
Secretaries of all the States/ UTs to forward the p roposals for study on congestion 
charging.  
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
 
K.  Cycling Cities 
 
 
2.49  As per the National Urban Transport Policy, 2006 th ere should be equitable 
allocation of road space and greater use of non-mot orized transport.  But not much 

58 
 
happened in the years that followed.  During the ex amination of the subject "Urban 
Transport" by this Committee in the year 2008-09, the Committee had recommended 
that safety concerns of cyclists and pedestrians sh ould be addressed urgently.  The 
Committee further had recommended the serious monit oring of the cycle tracks on 
Bus Rapid Transit System (BRTS) projects. The Commi ttee, however, regret to note 
that the cycling tracks of BRT corridor in Delhi ar e being used by the motorcycle 
riders.  The Committee are disappointed to note tha t even the Central Ministry has 
accepted the fact that the focus of cities is in cr eation of infrastructure for the 
Motorized vehicles at the cost of up-rooting the ex isting infrastructure for cycle.  The 
Committee undoubtedly understand that it is an uphi ll task, but the policies need to 
be formulated and implemented properly, to save the  future.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that while financing any  infr astructure development project 
relating to  urban transport, it should be made man datory to include the bicycle 
inclusive city planning  and encroachments on the e xisting cycling track should be 
removed as soon as possible. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.50 As informed to the Committee earlier, this Min istry is promoting cycling  as a 
part of Non-motorized Transport (NMT) in all cities   as envisaged  in National Urban 
Transport Policy (NUTP), 2006. To promote cycling i n the country, creation of   
dedicated cycle tracks has been mandated as part of  the Bus Rapid Transit System 
(BRTS) projects sanctioned under JnNURM.  Other roa d projects sanctioned   under 
JnNURM have also specific provision for cycle track . User friendly dedicated cycle 
track has been created in Nanded, Ahmedabad and Pun e with support and direction 
of Ministry of Urban Development. 
 
 Draft parameters of the National Mission on Sustai nable Habitat (NMSH) 
provides for design and management of streets that emphasize cyclist safety, 
comfort and convenience. Further Guidelines for pre paration of Comprehensive 
Mobility Plan lay down emphasis on strategy for imp rovement of NMT- pedestrian, 
cyclists and cycle-rickshaw whereas Urban Road Desi gn Code recently developed 
through technical experts by the Ministry outlines designs for equitable allocation of 
road space and infrastructure for cyclists. While a ccording approval to Terms of 
Reference for preparation of Detailed Project Repor t (DPR) for MRTS projects, it is 
ensured that it contains specific provision for ped estrians and cyclists.  The Central 
Government is continuously and constantly laying do wn policies, taking up Capacity 
Building, generating about these aspects by holding  workshops all over the country. 

59 
 
The recommendations of the Committee have been note d for follow up action in 
future more rigorously. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
 
B. Expedite the Process of Master Plan for Indian C ities 
:  
 
2.51 The Committee find that three-fourths of India n cities are functioning without a 
Master Plan, despite the Centre offering funds to c arry out the exercise.  Union 
Urban Development Ministry also claimed that only 2 4 per cent of the total cities and 
towns have a Master Plan. The Committee note that n o funds have been allocated 
by the Ministry of Urban Development for preparing the Master Plan for cities/ towns. 
The Committee note that there are many reasons for not preparing the Master Plan 
for all the cities and towns of India like non-avai lability of latest Base Map and 
attribute data, lack of trained manpower and Town P lanning Department, time 
consuming process for preparing the Master Plan.  
 
The Committee are anguished with the stated reply o f Ministry and they 
recommend expediting the preparation of master plan  for all Indian cities. This 
should be done in a time bound manner and the proce ss of developing GIS 
database for select 152 towns and cities across the  country should be done as fast 
as possible. The Committee further wish to recommend for providing adequate funds 
and technical expertise and capacity building for p reparation for master plan for all 
the cities. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.52 Master Plan provides a spatial framework for t he planned development of 
activities which are to come up in future. It is a statutory document that describes, in 
text and with maps, the overall development concept  including both present uses as 
well as future land uses. The concept of Master pla n is anchored in the T&CP/ 
Development Authority Act with clear cut procedure – right from the preparati on of 
plan, publication of draft, inviting objections and  suggestions from public and 
publication of final Master Plan along with notification. 
As per the data available , 1843 Master Plans  have been prepared and 
master plans for 567 towns are under preparation. M inistry of Urban Development 
has been advising the State Governments to expedite  the process of plan 
preparation. (State wise details are given in ANNEXURE-I
).  Ministry issued an 
advisory in February, 2008 to all the State Governm ent with a request that Master 
Plans for all the cities and towns should be prepar ed within one year. A reminder to 

60 
 
all the States under the signature of JS (UD) - JS (Mission) has been issued on 11 th  
July, 2013. Extract of the advisory is given as under: 
To begin with, the agency responsible for formulati ng the Master Plan may in 
the first instance adopt scientific methods of popu lation projection and identify total 
land area requirement based on proposed overall pop ulation density (in say 3 
months).   Further, delineation of the city region/ metropol itan region/ million plus city 
region taking into account physical and functional linkages may be done using high 
resolution satellite images (in say 6 months).   Subsequently based on analysis of 
other surveys from primary and secondary sources of  data, developable areas, 
transport demand, etc., alternative scenarios may b e developed for proposed 
urbanizable limits taking into account future direc tion of growth (in say 3 months).   
This together with framing appropriate development control will lead to finalization of 
a draft plan which may be discussed with all stakeh olders before notification of the 
same for inviting objections/ suggestions.  
 
There is a need to expedite preparation of master p lan for all the towns by 
using Remote Sensing and GIS. It may be stated that  during the meeting(s) on 
Sectoral Annual Plan 2013-14, discussions with Stat e and UTs held on 9.5.2013, 
13.5.2013, 17.5.2013 and 30.5.2013 under the Chairm anship of Secretary (UD), it 
was emphasized that the State Governments need to t ake steps to expedite the 
preparation of Master Plans. Ministry of Urban Deve lopment has also launched 
National Urban Information System (NUIS) Scheme to develop GIS databases for 
152 towns/ cities in the country. The spatial and a ttribute databases thus generated 
will be useful for preparation of Master/ Developme nt plans, detailed town planning 
schemes and will serve as decision support for e-governance.  
 
Since, preparation of Master Plan is the prerogativ e of State Governments; it 
would be difficult to set timeline for completing t he Master Plans for all the cities and 
towns of the country. However, the State Government s have been time and again 
impressed upon for the planned development of all t he cities and towns and also 
peri-urban areas. 
 
 
 
 

61 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SERIAL NO. 7) 
 
CENTRAL PUBLIC WORK DIVISION 
 
 
A. Providing adequate funds for expansion of Parlia ment House Annexe 
Building:  
 
2.53  The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that the precincts Parliament House has a congestion problem, 
primarily due to the increasing number of offices o pening up along its staircases, 
corridors and passageways. To decongest the Parliament House, a new Annexe - an 
extension of the old one - is under construction in  the Parliament complex. The new 
building is expected to lessen the load on the Parl iament House which is in need of 
proper conservation. The Committee find that the wo rk of extension to parliament 
house Annexe building at Parliament House Complex, New Delhi, amounting of Rs 
261.86 crores has been stopped because of scarcity of adequate funds. Funds have 
not been sanctioned for full completion of the work . This slow work in the Parliament 
House Annexe, reflects very badly on the performance of all Departments and on the 
whole of the nation. The Committee find that head o f account for PHA is itself 
separate and Ministry of Urban Development have rep eatedly asking the Ministry of 
Finance to allocate more funds. The Secretary, Mini stry of Urban Development 
assured the Committee that they will reiterate the matter with Ministry of Finance to 
allot Rs. 73 crore.  The Committee are anguished to  note that Ministry of Urban 
Development had scaled down its demands from Rs.121  crore to Rs. 73 crore. The 
Committee also feel that even Rs. 73 crore will not  meet the requirement of this 
prestigious work. The Committee, hence, strongly re commend for providing 
adequate budgetary allocation for completion of the  expansion of Parliament House 
Annexe building at the earliest so as to ensure tha t the work does not stop and is 
completed within a given timeframe.” 
 
2.54  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry hav e stated as follows: 
 
"In this matter it is stated that for the said buil ding the AA & ES amount of 261.68 
Crore has been sanctioned by Lok Sabha Secretariat on 01.05.2009.  The budget 
has been allocated under 4059(NP) Lok Sabha the details are given below: 
 
(Figures in Crore ) 
Budget 
demands 
2012-13 
 
Budget 
allotment 
2012-13 
RE 
demands 
 
2012-13 
RE 
allotment 
2012-13 
BE 
demands 
2013-14 
BE 
allotment 
2013-14 
77.94 42.00 70.00 43.23 121.53 44.25 
 
Out of the total budget of Rs. 44.25 Crore allotted  for 2013-14, there is a 
provision for Rs. 35.72 Crore for PHA Building. 
 

62 
 
From the above data it is self explanatory that the re is continuous shortage of 
budget during 2012-13 and also during 2013-14. Howe ver sincere efforts have been 
made in this regard to get more funds but the same could not be materialised. In this 
regard, Hon’ble Minister of UD has also written a D O letter vide No. G-
17017/19/2012-Bt. (UD)/ 6086F dated 6 th  March, 2013 to the Finance Minister with 
the request to enhance the budget allocation under MH: 4059- Lok Sabha (NP) but 
even after sincere efforts, Ministry could not get any additional budget for CPWD 
during the financial year 2012-13. 
 
For current financial year 2013-14, the total budge t allotted under 4059-Lok 
Sabha (NP) is Rs. 44.25 Crore out of which CPWD has  spent approx. ` 23.50 Crore 
till the end of May and remaining funds will be uti lised within a short period of 3 
months or so and under the circumstances the work w ill be suffering badly for want 
of funds. 
            
However, the additional demand shall be made in 1 
st  Supplementary 2013-14 
and all possible efforts are being made to expedite  the progress of work for its timely 
completion. " 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
 
B.  Maintenance of Parliament House Complex (PHC)  
 
2.55 In view of that Parliament House is a heritage  building which requires 
maintenance work periodically. The Committee are gi ven to understand that, this 
year many works related to heritage, conservation, fire safety and rehabilitation work 
to keep this whole building in productive use are e ssentially required to be carried 
out. But the budgetary allocation for the year 2013-14 f or such works is too meagre. 
For replacement of old feeder cable from sub-statio n to basement and various other 
direct feeding point at Parliament House only Rs. 7 33000/- has been provided 
against the actual and probable expenditure of Rs. 131180000/- during 2011-12 and 
2012-13. Similarly a small amount of Rs. 80100000/-  has been provided during 
2013-14 for all works costing less than Rs.5 crore.  Thus an amount of just Rs. 
80833000/ - has been earmarked apart from construct ion of extension of Parliament 
House Annexe. The Committee feel that the budgetary  allocation for the year 2013-
14 is not sufficient and adequate for the maintenan ce of this heritage building.  They 
condemn this callous attitude of the Ministry towar ds allocation for maintenance of 
this heritage building. Therefore, the Committee de sire that sufficient funds should 
be allocated for the proper maintenance of Parliament House Complex. 

63 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.56 (i)   The existing Parliament House complex is  a Heritage building which 
requires extensive maintenance work periodically. T he budget allotted to CPWD 
during 2013-14 under the Major Head 2059 M & R OB ( NP) is ` 203.76 crore against 
a demand of `235.13 crore. The allocation of the fu nds under this maintenance head 
is also not sufficient to coup-up such type of extensive maintenance work. 
 
          Since this allocated budget of Rs. 203.76  Crore is for office buildings 
throughout the India and this budget is further red istributed to various budgetary 
units. The actual budget requirement for Parliament House and allotment under 2059 
(M&R) OB (NP) for last three years i.e. 2011-12, 20 12-13 and 2013-14 is given as 
under. 
 
                                                     (Figures in Crore) 
 
          
 
  From the above data, it is clear that required fu nds are not available and hence the 
effective maintenance of such National Importance B uilding is not being fully 
achieved due to lack of funds. 
 
(ii)       As far as replacement of old feeder cabl e is concerned, the same is covered 
under 4059-(NP) and in this head also there is shor tage of funds, However, the 
additional demand shall be made in the 1 
st  Supplementary 2013-14 and all possible 
efforts are being made to expedite the progress of work for its timely completion.  
 
           In order to achieve effective maintenanc e of such National Importance 
Heritage Building and to come out the issue of cont inuous budget shortage, a 
separate proposal to open a separate head of accoun t under 4059-(P) Parliament 
House rehabilitation/ restoration is being initiate d to get required funds so that 
extensive maintenance may be done in the Parliament House Complex. 
 
 
 
Year  Funds required  Funds Provided  
2011-12 19.32 18.67 
2012-13 22.90 21.42 
2013-14 26.29 25.35 

64 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
 
URBAN WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION 
 
 
A. Foreign Collaboration for ‘New Water’ Plants:    
 
2.57 The Committee find that Ministry of Urban Deve lopment has not made any 
collaboration with foreign countries for getting th eir expertise to set up waste water 
treatment plants that will generate ‘new water’ for  the city’s consumption as well as 
for waste water recycling and reuse. Ministry of Ur ban Development facilitates State 
Governments for availing external funding for setti ng up of water supply and 
sanitation projects including recycling and reuse o f wastewater. However, as per the 
information received from the Delhi Jal Board (DJB), it has entered into a partnership 
with Temasek Foundation, Singapore (TF) and Singapo re Cooperation Enterprise 
(SCE) to facilitate the sharing of Singapore’s expe rience in the integration of waste 
water management, and operation & maintenance of th e related treatment facilities 
for New Delhi. The Committee, while endorsing the move by Delhi Jal Board strongly 
recommend that sincere effort may be made to collab orate with foreign countries for 
getting their expertise to set up waste water treat ment plants that will generate ‘new 
water’. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.58 Ministry of Urban Development is making effort s to have collaboration with 
foreign countries such as Sweden, China, Netherland  etc to promote wastewater 
treatment technologies including recycling and reus e of wastewater. A Joint 
Declaration between India and Israel has been signe d on cooperation in the field of 
water technologies. A field visit to Raipur was und ertaken by Joint Working Group 
framed under the aegis of Joint Declaration between  India and Israel on 3-5 
December, 2012 and a meeting was held in New Delhi on 6 th  December, 2012 to 
discuss the outcome of the field visit.  
 
It is also pertinent to mention that a project for “Setting up of a 100 mld Sea 
Water Reverse Osmosis Desalination Plant at Nemmeli , Chennai” with an estimated 
cost of Rs.871.24 crore was approved by the Governm ent of India in 2009 for 
augmentation of 100 mld of water to Chennai city. T he project has been completed 
and partially commissioned in February, 2013. 
 
 
 

65 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
 
B. Public Toilets in Cities 
 
 
2.59 According to National Urban Sanitation Policy,  the State Governments have to 
formulate State Sanitation Strategies and Urban Loc al Bodies (ULBs) have to 
prepare City Sanitation Plans, focusing on 100% san itation across the cities 
including construction of public toilets with emphasis on preventing open defecation.   
  
But the Committee are distressed to note that the I ndian cities have not 
shown any urgency to improve the situation.  For ex ample, Chennai, which needs 
about 6000 public toilets has only 714 and Nagpur w hich needs more than 3000 
toilets has 318 only.  Even the existing ones are p oorly maintained, badly located 
and hardly used.  This persisting neglect has led t o woeful sanitary conditions. The 
situation in other cities is no more encouraging. 
 
 The Committee are well aware of the fact that the Ministry of Urban 
Development is the nodal Ministry for formulation o f broad policy programmes and 
guidelines for water supply and sanitation includin g the norms for public toilets.  But 
the Committee fail to understand the callous attitu de of the Ministry in monitoring the 
proper implementation of National Urban Sanitation Policy (NUSP), or for that matter 
any other policy that has been formulated by Centra l Ministry, by passing on the 
buck to the State Governments under the pretext of it  being a state subject.  The 
Committee would like to recommend in unequivocal te rms that the Central Ministry 
should closely monitor the implementation of NUSP b y States and should also make 
it a pre-requisite for ULBs  to provide or promise to provide public toilets in whole of 
their area before financing any Centrally-sponsored  scheme like JnNURM-II and 
NMSH in future. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.60 With a view to prioritizing the issue of sanit ation, the Ministry of Urban 
Development formulated the National Urban Sanitatio n Policy in 2008. The vision of 
the policy is that all Indian cities and towns beco me totally sanitized, healthy and 
liveable and ensure and sustain good public health and environmental outcomes for 
all their citizens with a special focus on hygienic  and affordable sanitation facilities 
for the urban poor and women. 
 
The goals of the policy are as follows: 
A. Awareness Generation and Behavioural Change 
B. Open Defecation Free Cities 
C. Integrated City Wide Sanitation 

66 
 
The policy requires each state to formulate its own  state sanitation strategies 
and cities to make individual sanitation plans and implement them to meet the 
objective of the goals set under NUSP.  
As per 2011 Census, the urban households having lat rine facility within 
premise is 81.4% and the remaining 18.6% households  are sharing both public 
latrines (6%) and defecating in open (12.6%). Out o f 81.4% households having 
latrine facility, 32.7% households are connected wi th pipe sewerage system,38.2% 
household are using septic tanks, 8.80% households are having pit latrines (single & 
double, etc.) and 1.70% of households are having ot her latrines (connected to open 
drains, night soil removed by human etc.).  
11 States have formulated state sanitation strategi es and 53 cities have 
formulated city sanitation plans. The city sanitati on plan should focus on total 
sanitation including construction of community and public toilets to eliminate open 
defecation. All the State Governments are requested  to furnish the status of action 
taken on the measures envisaged under NUSP. 
In order to improve overall sanitation in the urban  areas of the country, 
Ministry has prepared a draft scheme for “Total Urb an Sanitation Programme” as per 
the decision taken in the Central Monitoring Commit tee headed by the Cabinet 
Secretary on 17.05.2013 and the draft scheme would be forwarded to the Planning 
Commission seeking for in-principal approval. The o bjective of the scheme is to 
provide total sanitation including sewerage system,  provision of individual and 
community toilets to prevent open defecation and pu blic toilets for floating 
population. The Ministry has also prepared a “Schem e for Mechanical Cleaning of 
Sewer and Septic tanks” at an estimated cost of Rs.  14,481 crore with a view to 
complete switch over from manual cleaning to mechan ical cleaning of sewer and 
septic tanks. With the approval of Planning Commiss ion the EFC note has been 
circulated to all the Ministries for their comments . The Ministry has proposed to 
include the aforesaid scheme of mechanical cleaning  of sewers and septic tanks as 
a component under JNNURM. 
 
All State Govt./ UT Administrations have been reque sted vide this Ministry 
letter dated 12 
th  July, 2013 to provide information about the number  of public and 
community toilets constructed in cities/ towns under various schemes. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
 
PROJECTS FOR THE NORTH-EASTERN STATES AND SIKKIM 
 
 
2.61 The Committee find that there is decrease in t he budgetary allocation from 
Rs. 15 Crore in Budget 2012-13 to 8 Crore in curren t years' budget of 2013-14, in 

67 
 
reference to “Lump Sum provision for projects/ sche mes for the benefit of North 
eastern region and Sikkim” under major head 2552 (a ugmentation of water) of 
Department of Urban Development. The Committee also  note that the States are not 
coming up with demand for release of funds (further  installments) for augmentation 
of water because of lack  of technical skills and e xpertise. Keeping in view, of the 
above mentioned reasons, the Committee recommend en hancing adequate 
budgetary provision as well as capacity building of North eastern region and Sikkim. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.62 The Budgetary Allocation (BE) for the year 201 2-13 under the “Lump-sum 
Provision Scheme” was Rs.160.00 crore, which was re vised to Rs. 145.55 crore and 
the actual expenditure incurred during 2012-13 was Rs. 145.55 crore. 
 
The budgetary allocation relates to one of the sub components “Water 
Supply-Urban Water Supply Programme Augmentation of  Water Supply” of the 
overall Budgetary Estimates of Rs.150.00 crore of c urrent year 2013-14.  The total 
budgetary allocation for 2013-14 is kept higher at Rs.150.00 crore than actual 
expenditure incurred during 2012-13. 
 
The overall Budgetary Estimates is divided into var ious components like 
Development of Sewerage System, Solid Waste Disposa l, Urban Infrastructure 
Development projects and Social & Community Develop ment projects depending 
upon the on-going projects as well as the projects sanctions in each financial year for 
NE States.  Budgetary provision under the sub-head “Water Supply- Urban Water 
Supply Programme Augmentation of Water Supply” will  be enhanced on the basis of 
demands received from States. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
 
RAIN WATER HARVESTING SYSTEM 
 
 
2.63 The Committee are perturbed to note that India  is moving towards being 
environmental basket-case marked by dead rivers and  falling water tables. This 
situation has arisen due to continuous extraction o f ground water in ever growing 
urban areas of the country. The simple and effectiv e solution to this problem is rain 
water harvesting. However, it is very disheartening  to note that though the Central 
Ministry is providing huge funds to States through its Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
but has not made it mandatory to all State Governme nts to comply with the 
provisions of the model building bye- laws especial ly with regard to rain water 
harvesting system. 
 

68 
 
The advisory issued by the Ministry has not found f avour with the States and 
ULBs. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that in all the future projects 
to be financed by Central Ministry or to be taken u p for construction by the attached 
offices and P.S.Us of Ministry of Urban Development  like DDA, NBCC, CPWD along 
with HUDCO (the PSU attached to Ministry of Housing  and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation) Rain Water Harvesting System should be made mandatory. 
 
 The Committee further desire that the possibility of incorporating Rain- Water 
Harvesting System in the existing Central and State  Government Offices and 
Residential areas should be explored and implemented in a time bound manner. The 
Committee further recommend that the Research and D evelopment (R&D) in this 
regard should be stressed upon and Central Data Bas e should be maintained by the 
Central Ministry regarding Government and corporate  buildings which have 
implemented Rain Water Harvesting System. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.64 The Ministry of Urban Development has also for warded the guidelines for 
“Roof Top Rainwater Harvesting” to all the States i ncluding CPWD with a request to 
adopt roof top rainwater harvesting in all Governme nt buildings. The Ministry of 
Urban Development issued a gazette notification dat ed 28 th  July 2001, whereby 
modification/ addition to the buildings byelaws of 1983 (which comes into effect from 
the date of its publication in the Gazette of India ) has been made in National Capital 
Territory of Delhi.  
The Town and Country Planning Organisation (TCPO) h as circulated this 
Model Building Bye-Laws, making provision for roof top rainwater harvesting as 
mandatory in all the buildings in a plot area of 10 0 square metre and above and also 
to provide waste water recycle system in buildings discharging more than 10000 
litres of waste water per day. 
 
“Revision of building bye laws – mandatory rainwate r harvesting in all 
buildings” is one of the reforms under JNNURM. Stat e/ ULB should implement the 
three milestones towards achievement of this reform . The milestones of this reform 
are “buildings byelaws to mandatorily provide for r ainwater harvesting, dissemination 
of byelaws through website and start of approval as  per the new building byelaws. 
As on date, 25 out 31 States/ UTs have implemented this reform completely. The list 
of the States/ UTs is given below in the TABLE- I
. Remaining 6 States/ UTs are in 

69 
 
various stages of implementation and details of the same are given below at TABLE-
II . 
Table-I:  List of States/ UTs which have implemente d the Rain Water 
Harvesting reform  
S. No. State/ UT 
1. Andhra Pradesh 
2. Assam 
3. Bihar 
4. Chandigarh 
5. Chhattisgarh 
6. Delhi 
7. Goa 
8. Gujarat 
9. Haryana 
10. Himachal Pradesh 
11. Jammu & Kashmir 
12. Kerala 
13. Karnataka 
14. Madhya Pradesh 
15. Maharashtra 
16. Meghalaya 
17. Mizoram 
18. Puducherry 
19. Orissa 
20. Rajasthan 
21. Tamil Nadu 
22. Tripura 
23. Uttarakhand 
24. Uttar Pradesh 
25. West Bengal 
  
 
Table-II:  List of States/ UTs which are implementi ng the Rain Water 
Harvesting reform  
S. No. State/ UT 
1. Arunachal Pradesh 
2. Jharkhand 
3. Manipur 

70 
 
4. Sikkim 
5. Punjab 
6. Nagaland 
 
As part of Green building norms and in accordance w ith the provisions of 
Section 6A of the CPWD Works manual 2012, CPWD make s provision for Rain 
Water Harvesting in new constructions that are being carried out by CPWD. 
 
CPWD plinth area rates, 2012 include cost of provid ing Rain Water 
Harvesting Scheme. Thus, provision for providing Ra in Water Harvesting is kept at 
the stage of sending Preliminary Estimate to clients. 
 
For Technical guidance, CPWD has published Rain Wat er Harvesting and 
Conservation Manual which is available on CPWD website. 
 
In existing building, Rain Water Harvesting Scheme,  wherever necessary and 
technically & financially feasible, is provided though it is not mandatory. 
 
Citizen Charter of CPWD also makes commitment for a doption of Rain Water 
Harvesting and water management system. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
 
 
DEVELOPMENT OF CENSUS TOWNS  
 
2.65 The Committee note that the number of statutory tow ns (with a municipal 
corporation) has stayed the same since 2001.  In co ntrast to that the number of 
census Towns has increased from 1362 in the year 20 01 to 3894 till now.  These do 
not fall under the jurisdiction of Ministry of Urba n Development.  The Secretary, 
Ministry of Urban Development during deposition before the Committee admitted that 
these Census towns should be declared as towns by n otifying them otherwise 
planned development in these area is not possible.  Neither the schemes for rural 
infrastructure, nor the schemes for urban infrastructure apply for these census Town.  
The Secretary, further informed the Committee that only throwing money for these 
towns will not serve any purpose rather there is a need for legal sanctity and it 
should be backed by planning.  In view of the impor tance of these Census town, the 
Committee strongly desire that the Ministry of Urba n Development in consultation 
with Rural Development and all stakeholders should formulate a policy and plan to 
notify these cities at the earliest so that these a reas can also avail the benefits of 
developmental schemes of Central Ministry of Urban Development. 

71 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.66 For the Census of India 2011, the definition o f urban area is as follows: 
 
1. All places with a municipality, corporation, can tonment board or notified town 
area committee, etc. 
 
2. All other places which satisfied the following c riteria: 
 
(i) A minimum population of 5,000; 
(ii) At least 75 per cent of the male main working population engaged in 
non-agricultural pursuits; and 
(iii) A density of population of at least 400 perso ns per sq. km. 
 
The first category of urban units is known as Statutory Towns. These towns 
are notified under law by the concerned State/ UT Government and have local 
bodies like municipal corporations, municipalities, municipal committees, etc., 
irrespective of their demographic characteristics as reckoned on 31st December 
2009. 
 
It may be stated that there are 3892 Census towns out of a total number of 
7933 towns as per 2011 Census. (State wise details are given in ANNEXURE-II 
). 
The likely implications of large number of census towns may be: 
 
• The Census 2011 for the first time has classified  large number of towns as 
Census Towns (3892). This signifies that the pace o f urbanization has slowed 
down but at the same time large number of rural set tlements has attained 
urban characteristics.  
• These towns do not have any Urban Local Bodies; h ence there may not be 
any Master Plan or any provision for development / building regulations. 
• The immediate task for State Governments would be  to consider the 
constitution of urban local bodies for these census towns. 
• Probably, in census towns unauthorized constructi on in the absence of 
enforcement mechanism will occur and also these tow ns will not be in a 
position to avail the central assistance for creati ng/ upgrading the 
infrastructure.   
 

72 
 
Advisory vide DO No. K-14011/ 11/ 2008-UD-II dated 24 th  May, 2013 have 
been issued to States to notify the census towns as  statutory towns at the earliest. 
Again a reminder to all the States under the signat ure of JS (UD) - JS (Mission) has 
been issued on 11 th  July, 2013. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
 
SATELLITE CITIES/ COUNTER MAGNET CITIES 
 
 
2.67 The Committee note that the Scheme for Urban Infras tructure Development in 
Satellite Towns around Seven Mega Cities was includ ed in the 11 
th  Five Year Plan 
(i.e., 2009). As most of the projects have been app roved in the Fourth year of the 
11 th  Plan, by all probabilities the extension of scheme  into 12 th  Five Year Plan 
appears to be inevitable. 
 
 However, the Committee also note that with the app roved projects the 
timeline for completion of these projects has not b een mentioned even tentatively.  
Also, the Committee note that the funds have been u nder-utilized in this scheme due 
to time taken by the States for tendering and final  award of works. The Committee, 
therefore strongly recommend that irrespective of i nclusion of scheme in JnNURM, 
the projects under the scheme should be clearly giv en a time of completion. In this 
regard, the Committee further desire that the alrea dy sanctioned projects for which 
the physical progresses have been made should be as sessed and a time period for 
completion should be provided in clear terms. 
 
 For new projects that would be sanctioned in futur e the time period for 
completion should be clearly mentioned at the time of sanction or release of first 
installment. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.68 All the 17 projects sanctioned under the Schem e for Urban Infrastructure 
Development in Satellite Towns around seven mega ci ties are under various stages 
of progress.  Normally the projects are to be compl eted within 2 to 3 years from the 
date of sanction. The delay in some projects is due  to time taken by the States for 
tendering and final awards of works.  The expected time period for completion of 
each project is as under: 
 
S. No.  Name of the Project 
Expected time 
period for 
completion of the 
project 
 

73 
 
1 Re-organization of water supply for Pilkhuwa 30.9.2 013 
2 Pilkhuwa Sewerage Scheme 30.9.2013 
3 Municipal Solid Waste Management Scheme for 
Pilkhuwa Town 
31.3.2014 
4 Underground Sewerage Scheme for Vasai-Virar 
Sub Region STP-2 
14.2.2015 
5 Integrated Solid Waste Management for Vasai 
Virar 
14.7.2013 
6 Under Ground Drainage Scheme, Vikarabad 04.1.2014 
7 Water Supply Improvement Scheme, Vikarabad 04.1.201 4 
8 Municipal Solid Waste Management Scheme for 
Sonepat Town  
31.3.2014 
9 Augmentation of Water Supply by Ranney Well, 
Sonepat 
31.3.2014 
10 Sewerage System of Sanand Town  29.9.2013 
11 Solid Waste Management Scheme for Sanand 
Nagarpalika 
29.9.2013 
12 Water Supply System of Sanand Town  29.9.2013 
13 Comprehensive Water Supply Scheme for 
Sriperumbedur 
30.7.2013 
14 Under Ground sewerage Scheme, Sripermbudur 24.7.201 3 
15 Integrated Solid Waste Management Plan, 
Sripermbudur 
30.4.2014 
16 Underground Sewerage Scheme for Hoskote 
Town 
30.9.2013 
17 GIS Base Map & Household survey for Pilkhuwa 
Town 
31.3.2014 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
 
NATIONAL MISSION ON SUSTAINABLE HABITAT (NMSH) 
 
 
2.69 The National Mission on Sustainable Habitat (N MSH) is one of the eight 
missions under national climate change action plan and aims to make cities 
sustainable through improvement in energy efficienc y in buildings, management of 
solid waste and shift to public transport.   
 
The Committee observe that the Mission is under for mulation since the 
financial year 2011-12. But till date the modalitie s have not been finalized.  The 
meeting of the Expenditure Finance Commission (EFC)  for implementation of the 
mission is yet to be held.  Sanction of proposals c an be taken up only after EFC and 
cabinet approval.  Thus, the Committee recommend th at all the due process and 
procedures in this regard should be completed befor e the Monsoon session of 

74 
 
Parliament, this year 2013 so that the implementati on of the Mission can be started 
with any further loss of time.  Otherwise, the proj ects will be delayed in this Mission 
also as has been the case in JnNURM. 
 
Also, the Committee would like to reiterate its ear lier recommendation that 
steps may be taken to simplify the procedure and cr iteria for selection of ULBs/ 
Cities under the mission. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.70 To evolve sustainable habitat parameters under  NMSH, six Sub Committees 
were set up by Ministry in the fields of urban plan ning, urban transport, water supply 
and sewerage, SWM, Storm drainage and Energy effici ency in residential buildings. 
The Reports on Water Supply/ Sewerage, SWM, Storm W ater Drainage and Urban 
Planning have been prepared and uploaded on MoUD’s website. 
A proposal for sanctioning a project of Rs. 24.95 c rore under NMSH has been 
submitted for approval in normal course in the Mini stry. Since, the proposal is below 
Rs. 25 crore, there is no need for appraisal of the project by SFC or EFC. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
 
ENERGY SAVING SOLUTIONS FOR URBAN GROWTH: 
 
 
2.71 The Committee regret to note that the Energy C onservation Building Code, 
meant to reduce energy consumption by about 1.7 bil lion units of electricity a year, 
was launched in the year 2007, but till date this c ode remains a recommendatory 
provision not the mandatory one.  In this regard th e Committee have been informed 
that the adoption of norms of Green Rating for Inte grated Habitat Assessment 
(GRIHA) as norms of Green Building and the Energy C onservation Building Code 
(ECBC) prescribed by BIS is under consideration for adoption by CPWD. 
 
Further, the Ministry have informed the Committee t hat under the National 
Mission for Sustainable Habitat a committee has bee n set up by the Ministry of 
Urban Development to take up the task of harmonizat ion of Energy Conservation 
Building Code with the National Building Code.   
 
The Committee cannot but deplore the fact that the Energy Conservation 
Building Code (ECBC), has not been adopted by the Central and State Governments 
till date in India.  It is likely that the Codes ma y not prove to be a magic wand for the 
energy saving purpose, but it still needs to be ado pted.  The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend that not only CPWD but other cen tral agencies like NBCC and 

75 
 
HUDCO should also adopt these norms and incorporate  them in their existing (if 
possible), ongoing projects, and all future projects. 
 
The Committee are appreciative of the Central Minis try's effort under National 
Mission for Sustainable Habitat, of setting up the Committee for harmonization of 
Energy Conservation Building Code with National Bui lding Code.  The Committee 
would like to recommend further that the adoption o f Energy Conservation  Building 
Code by all the State Governments should be made a compulsory provision by the 
Ministry of Urban Development under National Missio n on Sustainable Habitat 
(NMSH).   
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.72 To evolve sustainable habitat parameters under  NMSH, six Sub Committees 
were set up by Ministry in which Energy efficiency in residential buildings is one and 
the Sub Committee set up under on Energy efficiency  has given its recommendation 
that shall be used in developing/ revising rules an d regulations which will be suitably 
incorporated during project implementation to bring  about energy saving solutions in 
urban areas. 
Ministry of Urban Development has taken various ste ps for promotion of green 
building norms and the usage of material required for construction of green buildings. 
After meeting with different stakeholders such as C PWD, BIS, ADARSH, TERI etc., 
CPWD was asked to study the National Building Code as devised by Bureau of 
Indian Standards (BIS) and GRIHA code developed by TERI and BEE. After 
studying the various codes, CPWD submitted a report  stating that almost all 
provisions of GRIHA code have been accommodated in green building norms as 
adopted by CPWD. 
 
After considering the report submitted by CPWD, it was decided that instead of 
going for star ratings as prescribed by GRIHA syste m, it would be appropriate if the 
norms as prescribed under the CPWD manual, are foll owed for promotion and 
development of green buildings. This will ensure un iformity in gradation of different 
office buildings of central government. CPWD was al so asked to suitably amend the 
schedule of rates from time to time to promote usag e of material required for 
construction of green buildings. 
 
Further, it has also been decided that CPWD manual should be synchronized 
with the GRIHA code and the National Building Code 2005 in such a manner that all 

76 
 
the buildings built under the provisions of CPWD ma nual should comply with at least 
3 star ratings of GRIHA system, besides other similar standards.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16) 
 
COOPERATIVE GROUP HOUSING SOCIETY: 
 
 
2.73   The population of Delhi and other urban citi es is growing rapidly. To provide 
and mitigate the housing problems Cooperative Group Housing Society is a very 
good alternative. The Committee came to know that HUDCO provide finan ces and 
Ministry of Urban Development/ DDA allot land for c onstruction of these societies. 
The Committee are anguished to note that there are certain Cooperative Group 
Housing Societies which are waiting for the land al lotment for the last 30 years. It is 
seen that for the last few years Registrar Cooperat ive Society (Delhi) under Delhi 
Cooperative Society Act has given notices to these Societies despite that they have 
completed all the formalities. The process of compl etion certificate has been 
lingering on for many years. It seems that the Mini stry of urban Development wants 
to promote builders instead of alleviating problems of housing in Delhi.  
  
The Committee is appreciative of the fact that the Govt./ DDA are in the 
process of formulation of land pooling and assembly  policy in PPP mode under 
which various housing projects shall be taken up by  using the large parcels of land 
available in the urabanisable zones identified for residential use under various Zonal 
Development Plans. This development shall also incl ude social and physical 
infrastructure. The DDA is also considering grantin g permission for Group Housing 
Developments on the industrial plots on the peripheral roads.  
 
 Hence, the Committee recommend that Ministry/ DDA s hould expedite the 
process of allotting land to the Cooperative Group Housing Societies so that 
housing problem can be solved in Delhi. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.74    As per provisions of Delhi Cooperative Soci eties Act 2003 and Delhi 
Cooperative Rules, 2007, the Cooperative Societies are registered with the office of 
Registrar of Cooperative Societies on first cum first served basis.  Since DDA neither 
maintains a list of eligible societies nor their li st of seniority, the allotment of land to 
Cooperative Group Housing Societies is made by the Delhi Development Authority 
on the recommendation of the Registrar of Cooperati ve Societies, who also verifies 
the list of members of the Cooperative Group Housing Societies.   

77 
 
 As regards observation of the Committee regarding delay in process of 
Completion Certificates to the Group Housing Societ ies, it is stated that as the 
specific case of the Society is not given, therefor e, it has been observed that where 
the completions are lingering on either these socie ties have not complied with the 
requirements required for issuance of Completion Certificate as per BBL/ MPD-2021.  
Provisions or the society has their own internal pr oblems like unauthorized 
construction in the society which does not qualifie s for the purpose of granting 
Completion Certificate.  Otherwise, completions are  being given expeditiously after 
completing all formalities. 
  
The Ministry/ DDA is in agreement with the recommen dations of the 
Committee for expeditious allotment of land to the Group Housing Societies and 
would like to confirm that no case of allotment of land to CGHS is pending with DDA 
at present.  The issue of allotment of land to wait ing Group Housing Societies by 
DDA will arise only after receipt of recommendations of the Registrar (CS) along with 
verified list of members of the society and confirmation about their eligibility. 
 
  

78 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE 
IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
-Nil- 
  

79 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
RECOMMENDATION (SERIAL NO. 4) 
 
JAWAHAR LAL NEHRU URBAN RENEWAL MISSION 
  
 
A. Eco-friendly green disposal system & solid waste  management in Urban 
Areas:  
 
4.1 The Committee observe that the management of so lid waste is integral to city 
sanitation. Over the last decade, larger cities, es pecially those with financial and 
managerial capacity, have attempted to improve wast e management practices in 
response to the Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) Rules 2 000. In this regard, the 
Committee find that the development of disposal inf rastructure, i.e., sanitary landfills, 
has made the least progress due to factors ranging from land scarcity to lack of 
technical and financial capacity in cities. These challenges are further accentuated in 
smaller Urban Local Bodies (ULBs). There has been a  significant increase in 
Municipal Solid Waste generation in India in the la st few decades. This is largely 
because of rapid population growth and economic dev elopment in the country. Solid 
waste management has become a major environmental i ssue in India. The 
Committee are given to understand that Delhi popula tion will increase from 1.77 
Crore (Year 2010) to 2.45 Crore in the year 2024. T hereby waste generation is 
expected to rise to 19100 (TPD) in year 2024 as com pared to 9200 TPD in year 
2010. Therefore, it is evident that the MSW generat ion in Delhi will be directly 
proportional to increase in population, which is gr owing at fast rate because of rapid 
urbanization of the city. Rapid urbanization has re sulted in great pressure on 
Municipal Corporation of Delhi for its management. The Committee find that there 
are three major Sanitary Land Fill (SLF) sites in D elhi (Ghazipur, Okhla and 
Bhalaswa- Jahangirpuri,) which have turned into hug e mountains of garbage and far 
exceeded their life span. The Committee are dishear tened to note that against the 
total 44 sanctioned projects under UIG components o f JNNURM, till date only 10 
projects have been completed. Another 11 projects a re in their advanced stage of 
completion and rest 23 projects are in various stag es of completion. The Committee 
strongly feel that with the growing number of urban  population and corresponding 
increase in the quantum of garbage, only 10 project s are not adequate to meet the 
requirements. 
   

80 
 
The Committee note that Delhi along with other big cities have limited land 
availability. The mountain of municipal solid waste  that is produced every day has to 
be managed in a manner that will ensure least pollu tion – water table contamination, 
air pollution and zero health and nuisance value to  the human population near the 
dumping sites. Therefore the Committee desire that  Ministry should pursue Eco-
Friendly Green Disposal Systems on the pattern adop ted in developed countries for 
Delhi along with other big cities and sanction more  projects for solid waste 
management and complete the sanctioned projects at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government  
 
4.2 Rapid urbanization and industrialization in Ind ia has resulted in over stressing 
of urban infrastructure including municipal solid w aste management. Due to 
budgetary constraints and the lack of planning, the  door to door collection, 
transportation, treatment and disposal of municipal  solid waste in most of the Urban 
Local Bodies are not satisfactory.  
 
As per Municipal Solid Waste (Management & Handling ) Rules, 2000 notified 
by Ministry of Environment & Forests, every municip al authority is responsible for 
collection, segregation, storage, transportation, processing and disposal of municipal 
solid waste. The deadline for implementation of rul es was December, 2003 but 
hardly any ULB could implement these rules in lette r and spirit. The Rules make it 
mandatory to treat the bio-degradable waste adoptin g composting or other state of 
the art technologies or power generation, etc. with due authorization by the CPCB.  It 
prohibits disposal of organic matter at the landfil l and permits land filling of inert 
material only to reduce the burden on the landfill.  
 
The Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management, 200 0, published by the 
Ministry of Urban Development provides guidelines f or planning, design and 
implementation of solid waste management facilities  in the cities and towns. It also 
provides comprehensive guidelines for processing, v arious eco-friendly treatment 
technologies including composting and waste to ener gy technologies etc. and 
disposal facilities for efficient management of mun icipal solid waste. The Ministry 
also brought out a report on “Integrated Plant Nutr ient Management (IPNM)” in the 
year 2005 with the objective to promote integrated plant nutrient management using 
city compost along with synthetic fertilizers in ev ery areas of agriculture, horticulture, 
plantation crops, forestry and create market demand  and supply mechanism for city 
compost which also recommends eco-friendly green di sposal system including 
conversion of bio-gradable waste into composting fo r municipal solid waste 
management. The Ministry also brought out a report on “Technology Advisory Group 
on Municipal Solid Waste Management” in the year 20 05. The report principally 
covers the details of various technologies available within and outside the country for 

81 
 
the treatment of municipal solid waste and deriving  compost, Refuse Derive Fuel 
(RDF), power, etc. from the waste, their merits, demerits, their limitations, etc.   
 
Thus the MSW Rules 2000 and the Guidelines brought out by the Ministry of 
Urban Development advocate integrated solid waste m anagement system on the 
principle of 3Rs (Reduce, Recycle and Reuse). The t reatment and disposal systems 
such as composting, recycling and reuse of garbage and disposal of inerts and 
residue in the landfill recommended in the Manual a re Eco-friendly Green disposal 
system in nature. 
 The Ministry of Urban Development is in the proces s of revising & updating 
the aforesaid Manual with the technical assistance of Deutsche Gesellschaftfür 
Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), Germany with a  view to incorporate latest 
technologies for treatment and disposal system incl uding Eco-Friendly Green 
Disposal Systems like Decentralized mechanical Comp ost plants, vermin-
composting, recycling and reuse of garbage in decen tralized locations etc. being 
adopted in developed countries.   
 
As on June, 2013, 46 Solid Waste Management (SWM) p rojects have been 
approved at an estimated cost of 2050.47 Crore unde r UIG Sub-Mission of 
JNNURM. Out of which, 10 projects are physically co mpleted and remaining projects 
are at various stages of implementation. Concerned States have been asked to 
expedite implementation of the projects so as to co mplete within the Mission Period. 
They have also been asked to furnish time lines for  completion of ongoing projects. 
The Ministry had also approved 56 no. of solid wast e management projects at an 
estimated cost of Rs. 342.02 crore under UIDSSMT co mponent of JNNURM and the 
projects are at different stages of implementation. 
 
In all the solid waste management projects approved  under JNNURM, 
necessary provision has been made for (i) two bins to each of the households to 
ensure segregation of bio-degradable & non-biodegra dable waste components at 
source, (ii) adequate provision for   storage bins,  tricycles/ auto trippers and vehicles 
for efficient segregated collection and transportat ion of waste. The projects also 
include necessary infrastructure facilities for processing & treatment facilities such as 
composting for bio-degradable matter and also makin g RDF pellets using 
recyclables and sanitary landfills for disposing re jects and inert etc., as per the 
norms laid down in the Manual on Municipal Solid Waste and MSW Rules, 2000.  
 
The Ministry of Urban Development has also forwarded an Advisory note to all 
the State Governments including Delhi to promote de centralised compost plants 
through mechanical composting process. Ministry wou ld consider funding for 
projects for reclamation of existing dump sites wherever found suitable. 
 

82 
 
The status of solid waste management projects appro ved under UIG component 
of JNNURM including operational status of compost a nd a waste-to-energy (WTE) plant 
is given below at ANNEXURE – 4(A) – I.  
 
Status of solid waste management projects approved under UIDSSMT 
component of JNNURM is given below at ANNEXURE – 4(A) – II .  
 
Detail of status of solid waste management projects  approved under other 
programme of the Ministry is given below: 
 
Status of Municipal Solid Waste Management under Ur ban Infrastructure 
Development in Satellite Towns  
(Rs. In Lakh) 
S. 
No. 
State  Town  Projects approved  Approved 
Cost 
1 Uttar Pradesh Pilkhuwa SWM 897.70 
2 Haryana Sonepat SWM 2496.00 
3 Tamil Nadu  Sriperumbudur SWM 443.77 
4 Maharashtra Vasai-Virar SWM 3172.64 
5 Gujarat Sanad SWM 213.62 
 
Note: This programme is monitored by UD Division of  the Ministry. Therefore, the 
data may be got verified by UD Division. 
Status of Municipal Solid Waste Management under 10% Lump-sum Provision 
Scheme for the Benefit of North-Eastern Region including Sikkim  
 
(Rs. In Lakh) 
S. 
No. 
State  Town  Projects approved  Approved 
Cost 
1 Manipur  Five Town SWM 431.96 
2 Sikkim Gangtok town SWM 433.27 
3 Tripura Agartala SWM 761.82 
 
 
Note:  This programme is monitored by UD Division o f the Ministry. Therefore, the 
data may be got verified by UD Division. 
 
4.3  For comments of the Committee please see paragraph 1.7 of Chapter 1 of the 
Report. 
 

83 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SERIAL NO. 4) 
 
B. The locational criteria for dumping of municipal  waste 
: 
 
4.4 The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee find that in India there is no segre gation of waste. Municipal Solid 
Waste is dumped in a mixed form in an unscientific manner on open waste land or 
low lying areas even near creeks, forests, rivers, ponds and other ecological 
sensitive regions. This practice is commonly known as ‘Open dumping’ and does not 
meet the norms of disposal specified in the Manual Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) 
Rules. It is observed that Cities like Mumbai, Vish akapatanam, Kolkatta, Chennai 
situated on the sea coast dump their MSW in the nea rby creeks. Similarly cities like 
Kanpur, Delhi etc., dump their waste near the river banks. Other cities like Bengaluru  
and Jaipur which do not have access to any water bo dy prefer to dump their waste 
near the highways. These dumping grounds adversely affect the environment by air, 
water and soil pollution and are thus highly health  hazardous.  They damage the 
property in the vicinity as well. The presence of m oisture and rainwater leach the 
pollutant chemicals produced during degradation to dissolve and flow into the 
groundwater reserve/sea/river thereby affecting the  flora and fauna of the water 
body. The dump sites virtually become a breeding ground for all kinds of diseases. 
 
The Committee note that Ministry of Urban Developme nt has mentioned in 
their reply that landfill site should be constructe d at least 500 meter away from a 
notified habitation area. A zone of 500 meter aroun d a landfill boundary should be 
declared a non-development buffer zone after the la ndfill location is finalized. 
Therefore the Committee again strongly recommend to  implement these guidelines 
of Ministry of Urban Development strictly by Urban Local Bodies. The Committee 
also recommend that the Ministry should institution ize the mechanism to monitor 
regularly and periodically the implementation of gu idelines in all dumping sites 
across the country and punish the guilty involved i n this without fear or favour. They 
should also maintain a central data base for this purpose. 
 
The Committee note that as per the reply of Ministr y, selection of the site for 
landfill should be done in accordance with the Envi ronmental Impact Assessment 
Notification, 2006 of the Ministry of Environment &  Forests. It is mandatory for the 
Urban Local Bodies to conduct an environment impact  assessment for the selection 
of the site for landfill. As a part of environment impact assessment, public 
consultation process needs to be conducted before s election of site. The final 
selection of site should be based on the environmen tal impact assessment, social 
acceptance and cost of disposal. Therefore, the Com mittee emphatically urge upon 
the Ministry to ensure that Urban Local Bodies impl ement this guideline of Ministry 
i.e., land for sanitary landfill site should be ide ntified only after consultation with 
Ministry of Environment & Forests.” 
 
 
 

84 
 
 
4.5  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have  stated as follows: 
 
“According to the Municipal Solid Wastes (Managemen t and Handling) Rules, 2000, 
the municipal authority or an operator of a facilit y shall make an application in Form-
I, for grant of authorization for setting up waste processing and disposal facility 
including landfills from the State Board or the Com mittee in order to comply with the 
implementation programme laid down in Schedule I. T he MSW rules have specific 
directives to the Local Bodies, District Administra tions and the Urban Development 
Department of the State Governments for proper and scientific management of 
municipal solid waste.  Under these rules, it is ma ndatory for all the urban local 
bodies to provide facilities for collection, transp ortation, treatment & disposal of 
municipal solid waste in a scientific and hygienic manner. The Secretaries to the 
Governments, Urban Development Departments and the District Magistrates are 
made responsible to ensure the implementation of th ese rules in the corporations 
and municipal areas respectively and the State Poll ution Control Board are made 
responsible to monitor the implementation of the ru les and adherence to the 
standards prescribed. Performance of local bodies i s assessed based on the 
progress reported by ULBs on annual basis to the Se cretary-in-charge of Urban 
Development and to the District Magistrates. 
 
In accordance with the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Notification of 
the Ministry of Environment & Forest in September, 2006, the project at Sl. No. 7(i), 
“Common Municipal Solid Waste Management Facility” which falls under category 
“B” shall require environmental clearance from Stat e Environment Impact 
Assessment Authority (SEIAA) on the recommendation of a State Level Expert 
Appraisal Committee constituted by the State Govt. Since EIA Notification was 
issued under the Environment Protection Act, 1986, it is mandatory for very ULB to 
identify the land for sanitary landfill with the co nsent of State Environment Impact 
Assessment Authority.    
 
While appraising the DPR for municipal solid waste management by the 
Ministry, the ULBs are advised by the Ministry of U rban Development to obtain all 
the necessary clearances from the respective Statut ory Authority before 
implementing the treatment and disposal system including sanitary landfill.” 
 
4.6 For comments of the Committee please see paragraph 1.10 of Chapter 1 of the 
Report. 
RECOMMENDATION (SERIAL NO. 5) 
G. Specific Policy on Monorail:   
 
4.7  The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
 
“The Committee observe that monorail is a safe, rel iable, economical, quick, 
comfortable and effective mass public transit syste m. The high-speed rail-based 
Regional Rapid Transit Systems (RRTS) would allow p eople living in metropolitan 
suburbs within a radius of 100 km to commute to wor k, thereby easing pressure on 

85 
 
the infrastructure services within the city. Theref ore, there is a need for setting up 
monorail both as a means of feeder system with the bigger metro rail and as an 
independent means of transport in Tier II cities.  Need for Monorail is urgent as the 
urban areas have become very congested due to comin g up of high-rise buildings. 
The Committee also note that the Central Government  encourages all proven 
technologies but do not promote any specific techno logy. They have not framed any 
specific Policy on Monorail. The Committee also fin d that Central Government has 
not approved funding for any Monorail project in an y city.  However, the State 
Government of Maharashtra is constructing Mono Rail  in Maharashtra with its own 
funds. Therefore, the Committee recommend for frami ng policy to provide monorail 
in metropolitan and big cities because the Monorail  would provide further reach and 
depth to the mass transport network. Moreover, it i s also easier and cheaper to lay 
Monorail lines than Metro lines. The Monorail can a lso take sharp curves in contrast 
to the Metro and thus run in densely populated loca lities as it takes lesser area to 
operate. Monorail seems a perfect mode for mass tra nsit in congested areas where 
Metro cannot be constructed and roads are too crowd ed for frequent movement of 
buses.” 
 
4.8 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“As per National Urban Transport Policy 2006, the C entral Government encourages 
all proven technologies and does not promote any sp ecific technology. However, 
Monorail is covered within the definition of Metro Railway under the Metro Acts.  As 
such the Policy on Metro Rail covers Monorail proje cts also. Therefore, no separate 
Policy for Monorail is required presently. A Nation al Workshop on Modal choice was 
held on 11.1.2013 in New Delhi in which the differe nt modes of transportation like 
Monorail, BRT, and LRT were discussed. This Worksho p was attended by the 
representatives of State Governments and the concerned agencies.” 
 
4.9 For comments of the Committee please see paragraph 1.16 of Chapter 1 of 
the Report. 
RECOMMENDATION (SERIAL NO. 6) 
DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY  
 
A. Acquire illegal farmhouses for social infrastruc ture and sick industrial 
plots for residential development :  
 
4.10 The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
"The Committee note that the Govt./ DDA are in the process of formulation of land 
pooling and assembly policy in Public Private Partnership mode, under which various 
housing projects shall be taken up by using the lar ge parcels of land available in the 
urbanisable zones identified for residential use un der various Zonal Development 
Projects. This development shall also include socia l and physical infrastructure. The 
DDA is also considering granting permission for Gro up Housing Developments on 
the industrial plots on the peripheral roads. The C ommittee endorse the land pooling 

86 
 
concept of DDA and acquisition of illegal farmhouse s for social infrastructure and 
sick industrial plots for housing development and s trongly recommend that DDA 
should envisage a plan of action with a positive be nt of mind under intimation to the 
Committee." 
 
4.11  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry hav e stated as follows: 
 
"The land pooling and assembly policy replaces the present model of acquiring land 
by Govt./ DDA. The new land policy is based on the concept of Land Pooling 
wherein the land parcels owned by individuals or gr oup of owners are legally 
consolidated by transfer of ownership rights to the  designated Land Pooling Agency, 
which later transfers the ownership of the part of land back to the landowners for 
undertaking of development of such areas. The polic y is applicable in the proposed 
urbanisable areas of Urban Extensions for which Zon al Plans have been approved. 
There are two categories of land pooling: Category- I for land measuring 20 Ha and 
above, and Category-II for 3 Ha to less than 20 Ha.  While in the Category-I the land 
returned to the landowners to be called Developer E ntity (DE) will be 60% and land 
retained by Govt./ DDA 40%, in the Category- II the  land returned to the DE will be 
40% and land retained by Govt./ DDA is 60%. 
 
The policy on farmhouses notified in October, 2012 is essentially aimed at 
regularization of existing farmhouses, which fall e xclusively in green/ agricultural 
areas and had come up before February 7, 2007.  Bes ides, a policy pertaining to 
development control norms for new farmhouses has al so been formulated in May, 
2013.However, acquisition of illegal farmhouses for  social infrastructure and sick 
industrial plots for housing development do not form part of the land pooling policy." 
 
4.12  For comments of the Committee please see para graph 1.19 of 
Chapter 1 of the Report. 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SERIAL NO. 7) 
 
C. Residential accommodation for Lok Sabha Employee s 
:  
 
4.13  The Committee are surprised to note that at p resent Lok Sabha Secretariat is 
having 800 residential units to cater to approximat ely 3,000 employees. The Lok 
Sabha Pool was separated from General Pool of Accom modation in the year 1974. 

87 
 
As per the recommendation of Parliamentary Pay Comm ittee of September, 1974, 
Directorate of Estates is supposed to hand over at least fifty quarters per year.  After 
1988 not a single unit and from 1975 not a single u nit of Type-IV and above have 
been placed in LSS Pool  by the Directorate of Esta tes as a result of which the 
problems of the employees have increased manifold. The Committee fail to 
understand the logic behind such abandonment of Lok  Sabha Pool by Directorate of 
Estates.  
The Committee further note that construction of residential accommodation for 
Lok Sabha is in progress at R. K. Puram, New Delhi and will be completed by 
December, 2013 subject to availability of funds. Mi nistry stated that against the 
projection of Rs. 121.53 crore, the approved BE for  2013-14 is only Rs.44.25 crore. 
The Committee find that Ministry of Urban Developme nt also admitted that allocated 
amount is not sufficient for completion of project in time. Hence, the Committee 
strongly recommend for enhancing the budgetary allo cation for residential 
accommodation for Lok Sabha and release of adequate  number of quarters from 
Directorate of Estates to Lok Sabha Pool to meet the requirements of employees. 
Reply of the Government  
 
4.14  There are 898 residential units available (as  per Govt. Accommodation 
Management System) with Lok Sabha Secretariat Pool for its approximately 3,000 
employees while there are 61,820 residential units available with General Pool for 
2,03,051 Central Government employees (As per censu s of Central Govt. 
Employees as on 31 
st  March, 2009). The satisfaction levels between Lok Sabha 
Secretariat Pool and General Pool are 29.93% and 30 .44% respectively which is 
approximately equal. Therefore, there is no abandon ment of Lok Sabha Pool by 
Directorate of Estate. 
 
The BE demanded for the year 2012-13 was Rs. 79.92 Crore and final budget 
grant was Rs. 38.48 Crore under 4216-(NP)-Lok Sabha . The BE demanded for the 
year 2013-14 is Rs. 92.03 crore and BE allotted (ap proved) is only Rs. 42.45 Crore 
under MH: 4216 Lok Sabha (NP).  This budget has been allocated for construction of 
M. S. Flats at B.D. Marg, construction of 2 Nos M.S . Flats for Rajya Sabha at 
Talkatora Road and construction of LSS at R.K. Pura m. Out of this total budget of 
Rs. 42.45 Crore, the allocated amount for LSS Quart ers is only Rs. 18.67 Crore for 
the financial year 2013-14. Due to continued shorta ge of budget, the construction 

88 
 
works of LSS Quarters has been delayed. However, th e additional demand shall be 
made in the 1 st  Supplementary 2013-14 and all possible efforts are  being made to 
expedite the progress of work for its timely completion. 
 
4.15  For comments of the Committee please see para graph 1.22 of Chapter 1 of 
the Report. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SERIAL NO. 14) 
 
PREVENTION OF RIVERS FROM BECOMING DRAINS 
  
 
4.13 The Committee had recommended as under:-  
 
Save Yamuna River Banks: “Don’t Let Our Beautiful G eography to Change into 
History”    
 
“Yamuna is dirtier than ever even after a huge amou nt of Rs. 6,500 crore has 
already been spent to clean the river.  The Committ ee note that a project on "Laying 
Interceptor Sewers along the 3 major drains viz. Na jafgarh, supplementary and 
Shahadra for abatement of pollution in Yamuna River  has been approved in 
Government of NCT of Delhi by the Government on 19. 05.2010 under UIG Sub- 
Mission of JNNURM with approved cost of Rs. 1,357.7 1 crore and Additional Central 
Assistance (ACA) commitment of Rs. 475.20 crore.  S o far Rs. 118.80 crore have 
been released as 1st installment of ACA for the pro ject. Till 31.01.2013, there has 
been 35% physical progress with financial utilizati on of Rs. 136.00 crore till 
31.01.2013.  The Committee further note that there has been under-utilization of 
sewage treatment plants in Delhi due to the absence of internal/ peripheral sewers in 
unsewered areas as well as due to inadequate water supply in the command area. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that t he laying of Interceptor 
Sewers along the three major drains viz., Najafgarh , supplementary and Shahdra 
should be expedited at all levels.  The Committee a lso desire that laying of sewage 
networks including appropriate treatment of sewage as per CPCB/ SPCB norms 
before discharging into Yamuna should be taken up b y the Ministry of Urban 
Development with Delhi Government. 
It is pertinent to note that no river exists on its  own strength, but for the 
tributaries that lend its waters to the main river.   For Yamuna, one of the little 
appreciated tragedies is that many of its numerous tributaries today are extinct while 
some are under active threat of conversion into alt ernate uses like agriculture and 
mining.   

89 
 
The Committee note that in order to prevent the Yam una river banks from 
becoming a garbage dumping site, National green tri bunal had directed all the 
authorities to ensure that no debris of any kind in cluding construction material is 
thrown in any part of the Yamuna river banks. The m ain recommendations of 
National Green Tribunal are as under:  
 
4 "Permanent walls have to be built on both sides o f the riverbank preventing 
release of any discharge from the city into the riv er. Cover nullahs in which all 
the small and big drains open. Covered space can be  used for commercial and 
social purposes to recover the costs of running the  system. This appears a fairly 
reasonable and workable solution. 
5 Release of a minimum quantity of water into the Y amuna round the year 
from the Hathini Kund Barrage, some 100 km upstream of New Delhi, 
6 Effective checks on drains in the national capita l that dumps pollutants, effluents 
and sewer waste into the river that literally turning it into one huge drain.  
7 To ensure that DDA should prepare a complete prop osal for development and 
beautification of the Yamuna river banks in terms o f horticulture and eco-friendly 
site free from pollution and other allied fields  ( this is also being emphasized by 
National Green Tribunal) 
 
While endorsing the above recommendation the Commit tee strongly desire 
the Ministry to act expeditiously under intimation to them. 
 
The Committee further observe that 350 to 400 Mld o f sewage generated by 
the Nagpur city is disposed in the Nag river which ultimately pollute the Gosikhurd 
Dam.  In this regard, the Nagpur Municipal Corporat ion has prepared three DPRs 
for treating 100% sewage generated in the city cost ing Rs. 1328.88 Cr. These 
proposals will take care of the pollution load till  the year 2026. The Committee 
desire the Ministry to clear the DPRs at the earlie st to save the river and water 
reservoir.  
 
Thus, the Committee also would like to recommend th at in order to address 
the problem, the Ministry of Urban Development shou ld in collaboration with the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests and other stake holders prepare a separate 
plan for tributaries of Yamuna.  Also, for all the river-bank based cities, the project 
for appropriate treatment of sewage as per CPCB/ SP CB norms before discharging 
into the river should be invariably sanctioned by t he Ministry of Urban Development 
under National Mission on Sustainable Habitat."  
 
4.14 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have  stated as follows:  
 
"Ministry has sanctioned a project on “Interceptor Sewer Project in Delhi” under 
JnNURM which is under implementation. Further in re gard to Yamuna River Front 
development in Delhi, a High powered Committee was constituted under the 
chairmanship of Lt. Governor of Delhi of which this Ministry is also a member." 
 
4.15 For comments of the Committee please see paragraph 1.25 of Chapter 1 of 
the Report. 
 

90 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Nil  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
                         SHARAD YADAV  
February,  2014 
                                                                                        Chairman,                        
Magha, 1935 (Saka)                                Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
 
            

91 
 
ANNEXURE -I 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON WEDNESDAY,              
12 FEBRUARY, 2014 
       
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee Room  ‘C’ Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT  
Shri Sharad Yadav      - Chairman  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Anant Gangaram Geete 
3. Shri Kailash Joshi 
4. Shri Bapi Raju Kanumuru 
5. Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
6. Shri Ramesh Kumar 
7.  Shri Ratan Singh 
8. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
RAJYA SABHA 
9. Shri Anil Desai 
10. Md. Nadimul Haque  
11. Dr. Chandan Mitra 
12. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
13. Shri Khekiho Zhimomi 
                           SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha  - Director 
3. Smt.  J. M.  Sinha  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. K. Rangamani N.-  Under Secretary  
 
 

92 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members  to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for considera tion the draft  Action Taken 
Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2013-2014)’ of the M inistry of Urban Development. 
After deliberations, the Committee adopted all the report unanimously without any 
change. 
3. ****   ****   *****   ***** 
4. **** *****   *****   ***** 
 
5.  ******   *****   *****   ******* 
6. ******   *****   *****   ******* 
 
7. ******   *****   *****   ******* 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
 
**** these portions do not relate to the report 
  

93 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
                                            [Vide para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON T HE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWEN TY 
FOURTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN 
DEVELOPLMENT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
I.  Total number of recommendations                                          42 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been ac cepted 
by the Government:                 36 
Recommendation Nos. 1,2a,2b,2c,3,4c,4d,4e,4f,4g,4h,4i,4j,4k,5a,5b,5c,5d,5e, 
     5f, 5h, 5i,5j,5k,6b, 7a, 7b, 8a,8b,9,10,11,12,13,15 and 16   
Percentage to total recommendations                                            (85.71%) 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committ ee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:                     
Recommendation Nos.Nil 
Percentage to total recommendations                                     (0%)  
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of whic h replies of                                     
 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation No. 4a, 4b, 5g, 6a,7c and 14                         
(6) 
 
Percentage to total recommendations                                (14.28%) 
                             
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  final       
             
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
-Nil-    
 Percentage to total recommendations                                                  (%) 
            
                      
                    