 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2010-2011) 
                                
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2010-2011) 
  
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on of the Standing Committee on Urban Development on Demands for Grants (2010-2011) of the 
Ministry of Urban Development] 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
      
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
    
12 


 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2010-2011) 
 
                                
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT   
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
 
(Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok 
Sabha) on of the Standing Committee on Urban Development on Demands for Grants (2010-2011) of the 
Ministry of Urban Development ] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 09.12.2010 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  09.12.2010 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, Agrahayana 1932 (Saka) 
 


   C.U.D No. 63 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
  
 
(C) 2010 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and 
printed by …….. 
 
 
 

CONTENTS 
PAGE 
No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .....................……….…………………........ …..                         (iii) 
INTRODUCTION ......................................................................…………………………….                       (v) 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I Report 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government  
 
9 
CHAPTER III Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
 
21 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/ Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee  and 
require reiteration  
 
22 
CHAPTER V Observations /Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited 
 
26 
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Third sitting of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (20 10-11) held on 01st 
December , 2010.                       ….                                                               29 
 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Sixth Report of 
the Committee (15th Lok Sabha)    ….                                                         31 
(i) 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2010-2011) 
 
Shri Sharad Yadav         -        Chairman 
  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.    Shri J.P. Agarwal 
3.    Shri Praveen Singh Aron 
4.    Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
5.    Shri Partap Singh Bajwa 
6.    Shri Ambica Banerjee 
7.    Smt. Priya Dutt 
8.    Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
9.    Shri Sakti Mohan Malik 
10.  Shri Kailash Joshi 
11.  Shri Mohinder Singh Kaypee 
12.  Shri Ramesh Kumar 
13.  Shri Radhe Mohan Singh 
14.  Shri P.C. Mohan 
15.  Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
16.  Shri Sonawane Pratap Narayanrao 
17.  Shri Baijayant Panda 
18.  Prof. Ramshankar 
19.  Shri Kadir Rana 
20.  Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
21.  Shri Adagooru H. Vishwanath 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Parvez Hashmi 
23. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
 24. Shri Surendra Motilal Patel 
 25. Shri Pravin Naik 
 26. Shri Avinash Pande 
 27. Shri Manohar Joshi 
 28. Shri Khekiho Zhimomi 
 29. Shri Shyam Benegal 
 30. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar 
 31. Shri  Kanwar Deep Singh 
 
(iii)  

SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri K.D. Muley   - Director 
3. Ms. Amita Walia   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. Madhu Bhutani  - Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)  

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development ( 2010-2011) having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Twelfth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on the action taken 
by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Sixth Report (14 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Urban Development on the subject “  Demands for Grants (2010 -2011) " of the Ministry of Urban 
Development. 
 
2. The Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 21st April, 2010.  Replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received in July, 2010.  
 
3. The Standing Committee on Urban Development considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 
01st December, 2010. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Sixth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Appendix-II. 
 
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                     SHARAD YADAV 
01 December , 2010                                           Chairman, 
10 Agrahayana,1932 (Saka)                                                            Standing Committee on                               
Urban Development 
(v) 
 

REPORT 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2010 -2011) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in their Sixth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010 -2011) of the Ministry of Urban 
Development which was presented to Lok Sabha on 21 April, 2010.  
 
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all the 10 
recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows: 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government 
 (Chapter – II): 
 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6 and 7                                                                                           
            (Total - 06) 
(Chapter-II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations, which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of Government’s replies (Chapter –III): 
  
 NIL                                                                                                                        (Total - Nil) 
    (Chapter-III)     
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Para No. 3 and, 8                                                                                                            (Total - 02) 
(Chapter-IV) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited  
 
Para Nos. 9 and 10                                                                                                         (Total - 02) 
(Chapter-V)     
 
1.3 The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given by the Ministry to the 
implementation of their Recommendations. In cases, where it is not possible for the 

(2) 
 
Ministry to implement the Recommendation(s) either fully or partially, for any reason, the 
matter may be reported to the Committee with reasons for non-implementation.  
 
1.4 The Committee further desire that action Taken Notes on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and final re plies in 
respect of the Recommendations for which only interim replies have been furnished by the 
Government (included in Chapter -V) may be furnished to them at the earliest and in any 
case, not later than three months of the presentation of this Report.  
 
1.5  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of these 
recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.          
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
 
JNNURM – Need to include more cities 
 
1.6 The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
“The JNNURM, a scheme providing allocation of substantial Central Financial Assistance to 
65 cities for developing their urban infrastructure and enhancing their capacity to undertake 
reforms, has been in existence for the last 4 years, starting from 2 005-06.  The Committee 
have been following the progress of JNNURM all these years.  They feel that the scheme 
has brought focus on the urban sector across the country to the extent that the upgrading 
of urban infrastructure is now on the agenda of most of the states.   They are now aware of 
the range of the issues to be addressed and thus, are undertaking measures to improve 
their city Governance.  However the Committee feel that the State Governments and ULBs 
still need handholding and more support particu larly in the field of capacity building 
measures from the Central Government to reach the level where they are able to sustain 
the momentum for creating habitable cities.  
 
In this backdrop, the Committee are of the view that cities having a population of 5 
lakh and above need to be urgently included in JNNURM as most of these cities have 
become extremely congested and unlivable due to haphazard  and unplanned growth and 
a nearly collapsed infrastructure.  In this connection, the Committee are dismayed to learn 
that the proposal of Ministry of Urban Development to include 28 such cities into JNNURM 
was rejected by the Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission.  Reportedl y, the 
Planning Commission have merely indicated that additional funds for the UIG component of 
JNNURM could be provided on completion of the mid -term appraisal of the 11 th Plan.  
Meanwhile the Committee also note that the Ministry of Housing and Urban Pov erty 
Alleviation, which is the nodal Ministry for BSUP Sub -Component of JNNURM and IHSDP 

(3) 
 
Sub-component of UIDSSMT, has also raised the issue of change in proportion of 
allocation between all the Sub -Components of JNNURM -UIDSSMT.   This, in view of the 
Committee, is likely to further complicate the issue of allocation of funds and thus cause 
avoidable delay in arriving at a decision.  Although the Ministry have informed that out of 
the 28 cities proposed to be included under UIG of JNNURM, 18 cities have got  projects 
sanctioned under UIDSSMT, still, in the opinion of the Committee, there remains a vast gap 
between the demands of 5 lakh -plus cities and the ground reality. They feel that much 
attention has gone to the metropolises in the first phase of JNNURM a nd now more 
attention is required to other cities where urban agglomerations are enlarging. These 
towns, once developed, will spread the benefits of urbanization and economic growth more 
widely. They therefore recommend that the Ministry must pursue the ma tter at the 
Ministerial level so that the need of providing funds for all the eligible remaining uncovered 
cities could be acknowledged and adequate funds could be made available to them.”    
 
1.7 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows :- 
 
“The observations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee that cities having population of 
5 lakh and above need to be urgently included in JNNURM and to pursue the need for 
providing funds for all the eligible remaining uncovered cities has been  brought to the 
attention of the Finance Minister, Government of India and Deputy Chairman, Planning 
Commission by the Urban Development Minister vide his letter dated 11.06.2010.”  
 
 
Comments of Committee 
 
1.8 The Committee are not satisfied with the step s taken by the Ministry for obtaining 
funds for all the remaining uncovered cities having population of 5 lakh or more to cover 
them and provide funds under the JNNURM.  It seems that they have failed in convincing 
the Ministry of Finance and Planning Comm ission to arrange additional and adequate funds 
for these cities. They have also not informed about the response of Planning Commission 
on that during the mid -term appraisal of the schemes under the Ministry of Urban 
Development.  The Committee feel that w ith the spread of  urbanization, many more cities 
must enter under the scheme.  Therefore, the Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and desire that the matter should be pursued vigorously with the Ministry 
of Finance and Planning Commission to obtain adequate funds for the growth and 
upgradation of remaining 10 cities in the shortest possible time.  The Committee also desire 
that they should also identify and include other cities, where population has reached at 5 
lakhs or more under the JNNURM. 
 

(4) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.8) 
 
Need for indigenous production of Metro Rail Coaches to increase the number of coaches 
 
1.9 The Committee had recommended as under :- 
 
“The Committee note that there was a drastic decrease in Grants to BEML (Bharat Earth 
Movers Ltd.) from Rs.10 crore in RE -2009-10 to Rs.50 lakh only in BE 2010 -11 due to non-
approval of the proposal for budgetary support for setting up of National R&D Centre for a 
State of the Art Metro Rail Coaches. 
 
The Committee understand that BEML, a m ini-ratna Company in the field of 
manufacture of rail coaches and other equipment, is in need of support from the 
Government and co-funding from upcoming metros to successfully implement the supply of 
low-cost metro rail coaches for mass rapid transport sy stems in urban areas.  In this 
context,  the committee are of the view that indigenization can lower the cost of metro rail 
coaches substantially, more so since several other cities like Kolkata, Chennai and 
Bangalore too would require a large number of su ch coaches for their metro projects in the 
near future.  In such a scenario, the Committee are at a loss to understand as to why the 
proposal for a R&D Centre for State of the Art Metro Rail Coaches could not obtain the 
requisite approval from the Governme nt despite urgency of the same.  The Committee, 
therefore, would like the Ministry to submit a detailed note to them on the matter indicating 
other options open to the Government, as importing Metro Rail Coaches has already put a 
heavy burden on the Govern ment exchequer.  Being extremely concerned about the 
overcrowding in Delhi Metro Stations and Metro trains due to lack of adequate number of 
coaches that causes severe inconvenience and  sometimes grievous injuries to 
commuters, as well as the pressing nee d for metro rail coaches for the Chennai, Bangalore 
and Kolkata Metro in the near future, the Committee feel that indigenous production of 
coaches needs utmost priority.  They, therefore, recommend that the Ministry must strive to 
get the R&D Centre for in digenous metro coaches started as early as possible. Till such 
time, the Committee also recommend that the Government should urgently provide more 
coaches to the Metro running on overcrowded routes, for instance those covering areas of 
Dwarka, Rajiv Chowk, NOIDA etc.” 
  
1.10 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows :- 
 
“The drastic decrease in Grants to Bharat Earth Movers Ltd. (BEML) for R&D Centre of 
Excellence from Rs. 10 crore in RE 2009 -10 to Rs. 50 lakh in Demand No.100 in BE 2010-
11 is because of the fact that the Government has not yet approved the proposal for 
budgetary support for setting up of National R&D Centre for a State of the Art Metro Rail 
Coaches under the aegis of a registered society with BEML on account of reser vations of 
Ministry of Finance  (MoF) and Ministry of Railways (MoR).  MoF was of the view that 
BEML should set up the R&D Centre with its own funds and it will further its commercial 
interests.  MoR on the other hand is of the opinion that the R&D Centre should be set up in 

(5) 
 
Research Design and Standardization Organisation of Railways.  Hence, a token amount of 
Rs. 50.00 lakhs has been kept for the year 2010-11. 
 
A meeting of the Committee of Secretaries was held on 6 th November, 2009 on the 
subject of approval for budgetary support for setting up of National R&D Centre for state -of-
the-art metro rail coaches under the aegis of a registered society with BEML as a lead and 
founder member.  In the meeting, it was decided that the Planning Commission will re -
examine the proposal for setting up the Centre. If required, Ministry of Urban Development 
will make a fresh reference to Planning Commission, bringing out clearly the allocations 
reported to be available already and the sequencing/timing of funds requiremen t.  The 
required reference followed by details as desired by Planning Commission have been 
furnished.  However, further decisions on the matter is awaited from Planning Commission. 
Matter is being perused with them. 
 
As far as over crowding in Delhi Metro trains is concerned, Delhi Metro Rail 
Corporation has informed that during Phase I projects of DMRC, 280 coaches (70 trainsets) 
were procured, out of which 220 coaches were assembled at BEML, Bangalore.  To meet 
the requirement of Phase II projects of DMRC , additional coaches as per details given 
hereunder are being introduced: 
 
Board Gauge Coaches 
 
Standard Gauge Coaches 
160 additional BG coaches have already 
been inducted in service. 
 
56 additional SG coaches have already 
been inducted in service. 
Additional 378 coaches will be introduced 
in service in a progressive manner before 
December, 2010. 
 
Additional 110 coaches will be 
introduced in service in a progressive 
manner before December, 2010. 
502 coaches out of total of 538 coaches 
are being manu factured in the greenfield 
manufacturing facility set up by M/s. 
Bombardier at Savli in Gujrat. 
 
192 coaches out of total of 196 coaches 
are being manufactured at BEML, 
Bangalore. 
 
In addition to 124 coaches provided during Phase -I project of DMRC, additional 238 
coaches are being introduced as a part of the Phase II project in the line Dwarka – Rajiv 
Chowk – Yamuna Bank – NOIDA/ Anand Vihar.  DMRC fully supports the proposal for 
setting up of the Research and Development Centre under the aegis of BEML to develop 
the expertise for know -how and know -why of the technological developments in the 
manufacturing of modern Metro Rolling Stock.” 
Comments of Committee 

(6) 
 
 
1.11 The Committee in their recommendation had stressed that there is an urgent need 
for setting up of National R&D Centre for a state of the Art Metro Rail Coaches and felt that 
indigenous production of metro rail coaches can reduce the burden on the Governmen t 
exchequer as well as to check the overcrowding in Delhi Metro System. The Committee are 
dismayed to note that the matter was hanging for a long period due to conflict between the 
Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Railways and now after the decision of the Committee of 
Secretaries (COS), it is lying with Planning Commission.  The Ministry has failed in their 
attempt to convince the Planning Commission in this regard.  In view of the rapidly 
increased ridership of the metro service, particularly, after th e successful commissioning of 
DMRC connectivity to Gurgaon and Badarpur -the problem of overcrowding has become 
complex and feel that there is an urgent need to provide more coaches to the Delhi Metro to 
ease the commuters and protect them from any mishappe ning.  The Committee, therefore, 
urge the Government that immediate steps be taken for early finalization of the proposal for 
setting up R&D centre.  Needless to emphasize that Planning Commission should also be 
pursued vigorously to achieve the target.  T he Committee would like to be informed of the 
steps taken in this regard.  
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.10) 
 
Regularisation of unauthorized colonies in Delhi 
 
1.12 The Committee had recommended as under :- 
  
“The Committee note that as per the revised guide lines of the Union Government regarding 
regularization of unauthorized colonies in the year 2007, the DDA had notified regulations 
on 24 th March, 2008.  Accordingly, the Government of NCT - Delhi (GNCTD) issued 
provisional regularization certificates to 122 3 unauthorized colonies on 4 th October, 2008.  
Formal regularization of the same was due on 4 th October 2009, however, as per the 
Ministry, no un -authorised colony was regularized till 28 th February, 2010 due to the fact 
that the applications of such colonies were still under verification process from MCD, DDA, 
ASI and Forest and Revenue Departments of the Delhi Government.  The Committee also 
note from the details provided to them that as p er the Urban Development Department of 
the GNCTD, the total number of applications received from unauthorized colonies was 
1639 including 149 habitations outside the Lal Dora of Delhi Villages, and that an extension 
of time upto 3 rd October, 2010 has been obtained from the competent authority for 

(7) 
 
completing the formalities regarding regularization.  Being aware of the inhuman civic 
conditions and squalor of such colonies in which the urban city dwellers are putting up, the 
Committee hope that the matter would be resolved within the fixed timeline. The Committee 
also desire to be apprised of the status of the same in due course.” 
 
1.13 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows :- 
 
“Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD) has issued Revised  Guidelines for regularization 
of unauthorised colonies on 05.10.2007 (Revised Guidelines -2007). In pursuance to the 
Revised Guidelines-2007, GNCTD invited applications and layout plans from the RWAs of 
unauthorised colonies in the year 2007-08, the last date for which was 30.4.2008.  A total of 
1639 applications were received for consideration of regularization.  Regulations for 
regularisation were notified by Delhi Development Authority (DDA) on 24.3.2008, in 
accordance of which, the applications of 1639 unauthorised colonies were forwarded to 
various agencies i.e. MCD, DDA, Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), Forest and 
Revenue Departments of GNCTD for scrutiny of layout plans / documents.  DDA also 
notified an amendment to the Regulations of 24.3.2008 by another notification on 
16.6.2008, authorizing GNCTD to issue Provisional Regularization Certificates (PRCs) to 
eligible unauthorized colonies on fulfilment of requirements of clause 4 of the Regulations 
dated 24.3.2008 by the residents of the Colonies.   The notifications prescribed a time limit 
of 12 months from the date of grant of PRCs to complete the formalities by the Local 
Bodies/DDA and GNCTD before formal regularization of these colonies. 
 
In accordance with the notification of 16.6.2008, PRCs we re issued to 1218 
unauthorized colonies on 4.10.2008.  As per the Regulations, the agencies are carrying out 
the verification work and were required to complete the verification process by 3.10.2009. 
However, the work could not be completed and an extensio n of time of 12 months has 
been obtained from LG, Delhi, and now the verification work is to be completed by 
3.10.2010.   
 
On the basis of reports being received, a list of 700 unauthorized colonies was 
compiled where the agencies like MCD, DDA, ASI, Fores t and Revenue Departments of 
GNCTD have not found any defects in conformity with the regulations of 24.3.2008.  This 
list has been forwarded to MCD for finalization and approval of layout plans in the first 
phase.  On approval by MCD, the list will be forw arded to DDA for change of land use and 
requisite charges would be recovered from the colonies before final notification of these 
colonies for regularisation in accordance with Regulations of 24.3.2008.  The Government 
has also to approach the High Court/ Supreme Court before final regularisation certificates 
are issued, as the Courts are seized of the matter.  Till date, no approved layout plans of 
colonies out of the list forwarded to it have been received back from MCD. 
 
GNCTD has also informed that it is providing basic civic amenities in unauthorized 
colonies.  An allocation of Rs. 2,800 crore has been earmarked for development of 
unauthorised colonies in the 11 th Plan period.  For the financial year 2009 -10, an allocation 

(8) 
 
of Rs.786.00 Crore was made, and Rs.749.00 Crore in current financial year 2010 -11, as 
under:- 
 
Delhi Jal Board      137 Crore 
Municipal Corporation of Delhi     Rs. 110 Crore 
Industrial Infrastructure Corporation of Delhi   Rs. 400 Crore 
Irrigation and Flood Control Department, GNCTD  Rs. 100 Crore 
Urban Development Department, GNCTD   Rs. 2 Crore” 
 
Comments of Committee 
 
1.14 The Committee note that while describing the status of the regularsiation of 
unauthorized colonies in Delhi, the Ministry of Urb an Development has submitted the 
similar reply which was submitted in February, 2010.  The Committee are not satisfied with 
the progress in this regard.  After an extension of one  year the verification process has not 
shown any significant progress.  Out of the list of 700 unauthorized colonies forwarded to 
MCD for finalization and approval of layout plans not a single layout plan has been 
approved till date.  The Committee strongly condemn the slow progress of work and have a 
apprehension about the comple tion of work during the 11 th Five Year Plan.  If lay out plans 
are not approved then how can the concerned agencies start the developmental work. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry should expedite the process of 
regularization a nd development of colonies and prepare a time -bound programme so that 
the funds already allocated by the Planning Commission may be utilized during the 11 th 
Plan period.  The Committee may  be regularly apprised the progress of the regularization 
and development process in due course.  
  

(9) 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATION THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation Serial No. 1 
 
Unsatisfactory Pace of Schemes despite burgeoning Urban Population  
 
2.1 From the deposition of the Ministry, the Committee note that although India is less 
urbanized as compared to many Asian Countries like China, Indonesia and South Korea,  yet it has 
the second largest population in the world with around 285 million persons living in 5161 cities and 
towns.  Also, they find t hat the Ministry of Urban Development acknowledges the fact that by and 
large these cities and towns lack the funds needed for the requisite infrastructure and amenities for 
such a huge urban population, as according to an estimate, a staggering amount of Rs.8 lakh crore 
is required to provide the basic urban infrastructure alone for Indian cities.  While the Ministry is 
understood to have constituted a High -Powered Committee to figure out the investment 
requirements, the Committee are convinced that the Mi nistry of Urban Development is not likely to 
receive funds as estimated above in view of the Government‟s resource constraints and thus, the 
solution lies in an efficient management and utilization of available funds to the maximum possible 
extent.  For th is they feel that adoption of Service Level benchmarks by the ULBs in States like 
Karnataka, M.P, A.P, and Orissa is a welcome step in the right direction.  At the same time, the 
Committee are unhappy over the lukewarm response, from the other States and t heir Urban Local 
Bodies to several schemes/ initiatives taken by the Ministry, for instance, the UIDSSMT (Urban 
Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small & Medium Towns), the Urban Infrastructure 
Development scheme for Satellite Towns around Seven Mega C ities etc, which have either shown 
unsatisfactory utilization of funds, non -release of States share or non -receipt of adequate 
proposals.  On the other hand, the Finance Ministry has also not supported the proposal sent by 
the Ministry of Urban Development  to include 28 more cities, having a population of 5 lakh and 
above, under the UIG component of JNNURM, citing non -availability of further resources for the 
11th Plan.  The Committee have been informed that an intra -Ministerial discussion would be 
undertaken to evolve a consensus before taking the proposal to the Cabinet Committee.   They 
hope that a mutually agreed solution would be arrived at. Still, in the opinion of the Committee, the 
possibility of getting more funds does not appear to be good.  Theref ore they would urge the 
Ministry to continue in their efforts to encourage States to utilize the available funds and implement 
the Schemes in the best possible manner. 
  
The Committee also hope that the recommendations of the 13 th Finance Commission 
regarding devolution of taxes to ULBs would find favour with the Government and implemented 
soon so that the States ULBs are not at a disadvantage due to restructuring of the grants. They are 
of the view that this devolution must also b e accompanied by a well -managed process of building 
capabilities for urban planning and a professional management of urban services in consultation 
with experts, citizens, government agencies, service providers and the like. 
 
Reply of the Government 

(10) 
 
 
2.2 In so far as projects approved under Urban Infrastructure & Governance (UIG) and Urban 
Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and Medium Towns (UIDSSMT) of Jawaharlal Nehru 
National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) are concerned, the implementation of th e projects is 
done by the State Government/ Urban Local Body (ULB).  It is monitored through State Level 
Steering Committee (SLSC), State Level Nodal Agency (SLNA) and Independent Review & 
Monitoring Agency (IRMA) for the State.  The implementation of the approved projects is also 
constantly monitored by Government of India.  These are reviewed & monitored at the Ministerial 
level as well as by Secretary (UD).  The progress of implementation is also reviewed by the Central 
Sanctioning & Monitoring Committee  (CSMC).  Quarterly Progress Reports (QPRs) are also 
obtained on a regular basis to monitor the progress of the projects. The State Governments are 
repeatedly reminded for expediting implementation of the project and for timely submission of 
utilisation certificate(s).  
 
The Mission is supporting establishment of Program Management Unit (PMU) and Project 
Implementation Unit (PIU) at State and City level, respectively. The PMUs and PIUs are staffed by 
professionals to support the states and cities in impleme nting projects and reforms under 
JNNURM. 
 
In addition, an advisory dated 14.06.2010 has also been issued to the State Governments / 
UTs drawing their attention to the observations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee to utilize 
the available funds and i mplement the schemes under  JNNURM viz. UIG & UIDSSMT in the best 
possible manner. 
  
As regards urban infrastructure development in satellite/ counter magnet cities around 7 
mega cities, it is stated that the scheme was approved by the Cabinet Committee on  Infrastructure 
in July, 2009. The towns under the scheme were identified by the states by December, 2009. Rs. 
5.00 crore was allocated under this scheme during the financial year 2009 -10 and the entire 
amount has been released to State Govt. of Uttar Prad esh for Pilkhuwa Satellite Town during 
2009-10. 
 
 A detailed reply on the same issue may also be referred at Recommendation No. 7. 
 
In respect of recommendations of the 13 th Finance Commission, it is informed that the 
devolution of taxes to ULBs would be d one by Plan Finance Division of Ministry of Finance as per 
the extant procedure. The 13 th Finance Commission has in its recommendations indicated 
devolution of general basic grant and also general performance grant.  While there are no 
conditions for devol ution of funds to the States under general basic grant, for accessing general 
performance grants, the States are required to fulfill and comply with nine (9) conditions which 
relate to putting in place audit system for all local bodies, setting up of indep endent local body 
ombudsman, system for electronic transfer of funds to local bodies, setting up state level Property 
Tax Board, establishing  standards for delivery (service level benchmarks) in respect of water 
supply, sewerage, storm water drainage and solid waste management, preparation of a Fire 
Hazard & Mitigation Plan by all municipalities for cities with population of more than 1 million etc.   

(11) 
 
Necessary action is being taken to guide the States to access the general performance 
grants by fulfilling  the 9 conditions stipulated by the 13 th Finance Commission.  Thus, the States 
are expected to undertake the necessary process for capacity building and also professional 
management of urban services while complying with these 9 conditions for accessing pe rformance 
grants.  Ministry of Urban Development has also written to Ministry of Finance in this regard vide 
Secretary (UD)‟s D.O. letter dated 4th June, 2010. 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No.2  
 
Inadequate funding for Demands except that for Delhi Metro and Commonwealth Games 
 
2.3 The Committee are disappointed to note that out of total Budgetary Allocation (Plan) for 
Financial Year 2010 -2011 of Rs.5457.84 crore, around 54% of the funds are allocated to Delhi 
Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) and Commonwealth Games  2010 (CWG), given the fact that the 
projects need to be completed before the CWG,  2010.  While the justification for enhanced funding 
in respects of DMRC & CWG projects is self -explanatory due to the year 2010 when the CWG 
would be held, the Committee  w onder whether the Ministry would be in a position to do justice to 
the other equally significant issues with hardly any funds in hand.  A case in point is the Major 
Head 2215 on „Water Supply and Sanitation‟ under Demand No.100 (Urban Development) which 
shows a substantial decrease in funding since the Financial Year 2004 -2005 from Rs.191.25 crore 
to Nil funding in the current Financial Year, as the sum of Rs.12.56 crore available under this Head 
has actually been carried forward from the BE 2009 -10 due to its non-utilisation in that year.  The 
Committee further find that the funds under Demands No.101 and 102 this Financial Year have 
also registered an insignificant increase of 2 -3% (approx) and a decrease of -22% (approx)  
respectively, as compared to the Financial year 2009 -10.  This, in the considered opinion of the 
Committee, is a clear indication that urban infrastructure issues are not being given the requisite 
priority.  In such a scenario, the Committee are apprehensive  as to whether the suggestions  of the 
High-Powered Committee to study investment requirements for urban areas or the demand to 
increase fund allocation for the Mission for fast track development of cities would find favour with 
the fund - allotting authorities. The assurance of the Mini stry that based on the progress of the 
schemes, additional funds will be met through Supplementary Demands for Grants is also not 
convincing due to the fact that the large gap between the demand and availability of funds for a 
scheme results in slippages, cost overruns and delay in payments to implementing agencies 
leading to stopping of work too. The Committee, thus, urge the Ministry to convey their strong 
sentiments to the Planning Commission as well as the Cabinet Secretariat/ Ministry of Finance and 
pursue with them to allocate better and timely funding for various Centrally -Sponsored Schemes 
and other activities in the field of urban development in the next financial year. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 The Budget Provision for Ministry of Urban Development under Plan head for the year 
2010-11 is Rs. 5400.00 Crore. The Budget provision in respect of other Ministries/ Deptt. reflected 
in our Demand is Rs.57.84 Crore. Thus, the total Plan Outlay for the Min istry is Rs. 5457.84 Crore. 
Out of this Plan provision, the allocation for DMRC and Commonwealth Games 2010 is as under: - 

(12) 
 
 
DMRC (Total)    - 2780.00 Crore 
Pass Through Assistance (PTA) - 2130.00 Crore 
Equity      -   650.00 Crore 
Commonwealth Games  - 176.90 Crore 
 
Thus, the total allocation under the above two heads is Rs. 2956.90 Crore which 
constitutes 54.17% of the Plan Outlay of the Ministry. 
 
In addition to the above budgetary allocation, an amount of Rs. 8025.83 Crore is 
earmarked for the JNNURM proj ect for infrastructure development in 63 mission cities under UIG 
Component and other small & medium towns. This allocation is reflected in the Demands for 
Grants of Ministry of Finance and M/o Home Affairs and is released by Ministry of Finance as 
Additional Central Assistance (ACA) to the States. 
 
The centrally sponsored Accelerated Urban water Supply Programme (AUWSP) has been 
subsumed with the existing Urban Infrastructure Development Schemes for Small & Medium 
Towns (UIDSSMT) programme since December 2 005. However, budget provisions were made 
during the years 2006 -07, 2007 -08 and 2008 -09 towards committed liabilities for the 
implementation of the said Programme, which had a gestation period of 2 -3 years. Beyond 2009, 
no funds have been earmarked under t his programme. Hence, there is sharp decline in the budget 
estimate of water supply and sanitation. 
 
As desired by the Committee, the Ministry will convey strong sentiments to the Planning 
Commission as well as the Cabinet Secretary/ Ministry of Finance an d pursue with them to allocate 
better and timely funding for additional funds for implementation of the Water Supply and 
Sanitation Scheme under JNNURM as well as UIDSSMT.  
 
In respect of JNNURM, the observations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee 
regarding pursuing with Planning Commission, Cabinet Secretariat / Ministry of Finance for better 
allocation and timely funding for various Centrally Sponsored Schemes and other activities in the 
field of Urban Development in the next Financial Year has been brought to the attention of the 
Cabinet Secretary, Finance Secretary, Expenditure Secretary and Member Secretary, Planning 
Commission by Secretary, Urban Development vide his letter dated 17.06.2010. 
 
Under demand No.101 under Public Works a projection of Rs. 246.00 crore (Rupees 
200.00 crore Plan + Rs. 46.00 crore Non Plan) was made under MH: 4059-Capital Outlay on Public 
Works.  The allotment has however been limited to Rs. 109.00 crore (Rs. 84.00 crore Plan + Rs. 
25.00 crore Non Plan) for the current fin ancial year 2010 -11, which is marginally increased by Rs. 
4.00 crore only over the provision for last year.   
Presently there is immense attention towards the works related to up -gradation & face 
lifting works in respect of Government Office buildings coup led with the street -scaping works in 
view of the Commonwealth Games.  The department would certainly press for more funds required 
for other regular activities/ ongoing GPOA projects.  Keeping in view the scenario and paucity of 

(13) 
 
funds, the department will strive hard to achieve the target within the allotted funds giving 
appropriate priority to the prestigious event the nation is going to stage. 
 
In respect of Metros, the entire network of Phase II of Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) 
Ltd. is required to be completed before Commonwealth Games scheduled in October, 2010 for the 
integrated transport requirement during the said period.  For this, against DMRC‟s requirement of 
funds for the FY 2010-11 of Rs.3654.27 crore (including backlog of GoI‟s equity of R s.416.08 crore 
for FY 2009 -10), Ministry of Finance has allocated Rs.2780 crore (Rs.650 crore as equity and 
Rs.2130 crore as PTA) to DMRC in the M/o UD budget.  The allocated funds are still less by 
Rs.874.27 crore than the funds requested by DMRC.  In add ition to it, DMRC has also requested 
an amount of Rs.758 crore for the Phase III activities, but against the above requirement „Nil‟ 
funding has been provided during FY 2010-11 due to budgetary constraint. 
 
As regards, insignificant increase of 2 -3% and decrease of -22% approximately under 
Demand No. 101 and 102 this Financial Year, it is stated that in the Financial year 2009 -10, 
additional fund was required to meet the payment of 60% arrears to the employees in the wake of 
implementation of 6 th Central Pay Commission. Such payments are no longer payable in the year 
2010-11, therefore the projection in the year 2010 -11 in respect of Demand No. 101 & 102 have 
registered a decrease. 
 
The Committee‟s observation with regard to taking up the issue of enhancem ent of budget 
for the next financial year has been noted for future compliance. However, Secretary (UD) has 
written a DO letter to Secretary, Planning Commission on 02.02.2010 for suitable enhancement of 
budgetary support of this Ministry. 
 
Recommendation Serial No.4 
 
Renewal/ Redevelopment of heritage Connaught Place and Walled City/ Chandni Chowk 
areas in Delhi under Delhi Master Plan-2021/ JNNURM 
 
2.5 Delhi, the Capital City, has two world famous heritage areas namely Connaught Place and 
Chandni Chowk, w hich also house lakhs of urban citizens. These areas are in an urgent need of 
renewal, redevelopment and conservation.  In this connection, the Committee note that a project 
for redevelopment of Connaught Place at a cost of Rs.253.78 core is currently in p rogress and the 
date of completion is August, 2010.  The New Delhi Municipal Corporation (NDMC) would bear 
50% of the cost and out of the rest, 35% funds would come from JNNURM and 15% from 
Government of NCT -Delhi. 
  
At the same time, the Committee are sa d to observe the appalling civic conditions in the 
world-famous heritage area of Chandni Chowk in Old Delhi.  The area is in an urgent need of 
amenities like sanitation, improved pedestrianisation, public utilities, water supply and the same, 
which directly affects the day -to-day lives of its residents.  In this connection, the Committee note 
that the GNCT-Delhi has so far not submitted any proposal for improving the civic infrastructure or 
redeveloping the area under JNNURM to the Ministry.  The Committee further note from the Delhi 
Master Plan 2021 document that Section 10.0 of the same, entitled „Conservation of Built Heritage‟ 

(14) 
 
already indentifies the walled city as heritage area and both the ULBs of Delhi, i.e; NDMC and 
MCD, have been included in the lis t of agencies concerned with its protection.  However, to the 
Committee‟s surprise, no such proposal has been approved so far.  The Committee are of the 
opinion that Delhi, being the Capital City, should be made a model city not only for its citizens but 
also for the tourists visiting the city from India and abroad.  By conserving and developing its 
heritage areas, the city can be at par with other heritage cities of the world and its citizens can 
really take pride in the fact.  From the information submitt ed by the Government, the Committee 
note that the GNCTD shall be preparing an action plan for conservation and redevelopment of its 
heritage areas.  The Committee are aware that the onus lies with the Delhi Government to take 
expeditious action in preparat ion of appropriate proposals to claim funds for the same under 
JNNURM.  The hope that such a plan would take shape soon.  The Committee also expect the 
Ministry to appraise the submitted proposals fast and extend all cooperation to the Delhi 
Government and  vice-versa so that the Chandni Chowk area could be redeveloped like the 
Connaught Place. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6 (a)  Projects for redevelopment of Connaught Place: 
 
 A comprehensive plan incorporating elements of facade restoration, upgradation of 
engineering services such as water supply, drainage, sewerage and fire fighting etc. improvement 
of existing subways and construction of new subways in outer circle, roads, underground utility 
duct/ tunnel, escalators, centralized air conditioning, electri cal system, rainwater harvesting and 
irrigation system has been approved by the Council.  The estimated cost of the above said 
improvement works has been worked out to Rs.671 crore. 
 
A sum of Rs.253.78 crore stands cleared for funding by this Ministry unde r JNNURM 
Scheme.  The first installment of Rs.22.20 crore out of the central share of Rs.88.82 crore has 
been sanctioned and released by Government of India.  NDMC has engaged M/s Engineers India 
Limited as its consultant and executed an agreement with the m for execution of the project on 
turnkey basis. 
 
Traffic and transportation clearance has been accorded by Technical Committee of DDA. 
Environmental clearance has been given by Ministry of Environment & Forests.  Delhi Urban Art 
Commission has approved th e traffic plan and restoration of facade of remaining blocks. The 
restoration of „C‟ block has been completed.  The work of restoration of facade of G -H-K and L-M-N 
Blocks in outer circle is in progress.  Present progress is 57% and 59% respectively.  The work of 
Regal Building is in progress and 55% progress has been achieved.  The works for service corridor 
and construction of new subways (4 nos.) are in progress. 
 
(b) Projects for development of Heritage areas of Chandni Chowk in Old Delhi 
Government of NCT of Delhi (GNCTD) has informed that Shahajahanbad Redevelopment 
Corporation has been constituted for heritage development of Walled City & Chandni Chowk.  
GNCTD has provided funds to the Corporation for execution of development of (i) Jama Masjid (ii) 

(15) 
 
Traffic Management and Civic Centre (iii) Chandni Chowk and (iv) S.P. Mukherjee Marg. The 
Corporation has also set up a sub -committee for each of these projects under the chairmanship of 
Commissioner, MCD to monitor their progress.  
 
MCD has informed that it has processed the technological demonstration project for 
Chandni Chowk road between Fatehpuri Masjid to Lal Quila jointly with CSIR. The Detailed Project 
Report, prepared by M/s Abhimanyu Dalal, Architect, has been approved by Unified Traffic & 
Transportation Infrastructure (Plg. & Engg.) Centre  (UTTIPEC). MCD has approved the draft 
scheme amounting to Rs.18.55 Crore, prepared by the Architect. The MCD is planning to take up 
the work before Commonwealth Games, 2010. It has also inf ormed that presently there is no 
proposal under JNNURM for Walled City & Chandni Chowk area.   
  
To avail assistance under Urban Infrastructure & Governance (UIG) of Jawaharlal Nehru 
National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM), the State Government has to subm it City 
Development Plans (CDP) indicating therein among other things the investment requirement and 
priority projects to be taken up in the admissible sectors. In addition, the States / Cities have to 
submit Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) emanating from the CDP and in conformity with the 
guidelines of UIG of JNNURM for consideration by the Central Sanctioning and Monitoring 
Committee (CSMC) for approval subject to their technical appraisal and availability of funds. 
 
Accordingly, the Ministry may consider  the project of Redevelopment of Chandni Chowk on 
receipt of Detailed Project Report (DPR) on same from GNCTD subject to availability of funds.  
 
Recommendation Serial No.5 
 
Dismal performance of UIDSSMT 
 
2.7 The Committee are extremely concerned at the di smal performance of the UIDSSMT 
scheme, which was intended to improve the overall Urban infrastructure in all Cities/ Towns except 
65 Mission Cities, in particular areas like water supply, sewerage, storm water drains, solid waste 
management, parking on PP P mode, construction/ upgradation of roads etc. Particularly disturbing 
is the fact that during 2009 -10, the Ministry had sought a mandate to sanction one project each in 
all uncovered districts with a maximum Central commitment of Rs.25 crore, which was s ummarily 
rejected by the Ministry of Finance because of the inability of States/ ULBs to complete all the 
committed reforms as per undertaken timelines.  In view of the pressing needs of several small and 
medium towns for clearance of  various projects and  the constraints before the Ministry in clearing 
those projects due to non -availability of additional allocation under UIDSSMT, the Committee 
cannot but conclude that this scenario would definitely have a worsening impact on the crumbling 
infrastructure of  these cities.  As the Government has proposed a mid -term evaluation of the 
scheme in consultation with the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, the Committee, 
while hoping that an expeditious action would be taken on the same, wish to be app rised of the 
outcome of the Mid -term review.  The Committee also desire that the Ministry should work out a 
judicious plan to counsel the State Governments in completing the committed urban sector reforms 
as per fixed timelines so that the available uncomm itted allocation under UIDSSMT could be 
committed for deserving small cities and towns.  The Committee also desire that in addition to 

(16) 
 
circulating letters/ guiding documents of the Ministry of Urban Development to State Governments 
on the matter concerning  reforms, more meetings between Chief Secretaries/ Heads of ULBs and 
the Central Governments representatives and training programs could be convened at regular 
intervals for quicker results.  They, therefore, desire the Ministry to prepare a comprehensive 
proposal on these lines and after its due approval at appropriate level, get it implemented at the 
earliest.  The Committee desire to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard.    
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.8 The overall allocation provided under the scheme so far is Rs.11400 crore of which an 
amount of Rs. 10423.55 crore i.e. more than 91% of allocation has already been committed for 763 
projects of 27  States and 3 UTs.  Of the committed funds, an amount of Rs.6946.91 crore has 
already been released to states/ UTs which is 67% of the total central commitment and 61% of the 
total allocation.  The balance of committed funds is to be provided to States as second and final 
installments for ongoing schemes in the remaining period of the Mission i.e. up to 2011-12.  Out of 
the balance available allocation, some allocation is proposed to be utilized for capacity building of 
ULBs and for the remaining balance M/o UD is working out a criteria for expenditure.   
  
The requirement of funds during 2009 -10 under UIDSSMT was projected to the tune of Rs 
4030.00 Crore which included Rs 2200.00 Crore for 1 st installment for sanctioning projects in the 
uncovered districts and Rs. 1830.00 crore for 2 nd installment of the ongoing projects against which 
Rs. 3082.82 crore wa s provided. The requirement for 1 st installment for sanctioning fresh projects 
in the uncovered district was projected in anticipation of additional allocation to be provided by the 
Planning Commission relying on their formulation for sanctioning at least one project in each 
uncovered district of the country vide their O.M. dated 24.12.08. During 2009 -10, Rs.3082.82 crore 
was provided without the mandate for sanctioning projects to the towns of uncovered districts 
beyond the State-wise initial allocation pr ovided by the Planning Commission.  In the absence of a 
specific decision on the mandate for sanctioning projects to the towns in the uncovered districts 
beyond State-wise allocation for 7 -years initially provided by the Planning Commission, the funds 
earmarked for the fresh projects during 2009 -10 could not be utilized and in December, 2009 
Ministry of Finance revised the outlay under UIDSSMT from Rs.3082.82 crore to Rs.484.89 crore.   
Here, it may be noted that the non -implementation of ULB level reforms were not relevant to 
providing additional allocation for sanctioning new projects.  The progress of implementation of 
reforms by the ULBs as per committed timelines relates to release of 2nd installment of funds for 
ongoing projects. 
  
As regards Mid-term appraisal of the Scheme is concerned, it is submitted that the Agency 
to conduct the appraisal has already been identified and the work has been awarded.   
 Regarding pursuing with the State governments for completing the urban sector reforms as 
per commit ted timelines, progress on reforms is being regularly reviewed and monitored in the 
periodical review meetings undertaken at  the level of Secretary (Urban Development) and UDM 
level, which are also attended by the representatives from the States.  This is sue has also been 
taken up in the D.O. letters written by Secretary (UD) to the States.  This issue is also discussed 
during the CSMC review meetings which are attended by State's representative.   The highest level 

(17) 
 
of review was undertaken in the annual c onference of JNNURM on 03.12.09. Subsequently, all the 
Chief Secretaries of State Governments have been apprised of the overdue reforms committed up 
to 2008-09 at the level of Secretary (UD) with a request to monitor vigorously the implementation of 
overdue reforms as per committed timelines.  Apart from this, Regional Reviews were undertaken 
in the month of April/ May 2010 by Secretary (UD) at Chandigarh, Hyderabad, Kolkata, 
Ahmedabad and Raipur with the States covered in the respective regions wherein Pri ncipal 
Secretaries/ Secretaries of Urban Development attended the review.  In respect of few states, the 
Chief Secretary of the states also attended the review.  In these meetings the overdue reforms 
were identified and State's representatives agreed to take steps to complete the overdue reforms. 
  
The Ministry has proposed to earmark funds for training and capacity building of ULBs 
under UIDSSMT the modalities of which are under finalization in consultation with Ministry of 
Finance and Planning Commission.   The States/ ULBs will be requested to go ahead with the 
training programmes once the same are firmed up. 
 
Recommendation Serial No.6 
 
UIDSSMT – Unsatisfactory performance of Punjab & Uttar Pradesh 
 
2.9 From the details submitted by the Ministry regarding Detailed Projects (DPRs) received/ 
funds released/ State shares released/ Utilisation Certificates (UCs) released for funds allocated 
under UIDSSMT, the Committee observe that the States of Pubjab, West Bengal, Maharashtra and 
Uttar Pradesh are lagging far behind.  They are particularly concerned over the current position in 
Punjab, where out of total 7 year allocation of Rs.395.78 crore, a sum of Rs.159.54 crore only has 
been released and the total numbe r of projects approved remains a meager 25.  The Committee 
are appalled to note that so far only one UC has been received from Punjab and thus, no second 
installment could be released.  Equally alarming is the position in the biggest State of Uttar 
Pradesh, where, according to the Ministry, the number of approved Projects is just 64 and only 14 
UCs have so far been received.  West Bengal is another State with a poor record as only 29 
projects have been approved and only 13 UCs were received.  This speaks vo lumes of the 
insensitivity and less than serious attitude of the State -Governments of even otherwise developed 
states like Punjab, towards a very crucial sector of urban development.  The Committee are of the 
view that as there is hardly any private invest ment in the areas under the preview of urban 
development, except housing, it becomes all the more necessary for the State Governments to 
enhance their quantum of investment in the urban sector so as to ensure a better quality of life for 
their urban popula tion as well as to prevent mass exodus of people from their own cities to a 
handful of mega cities like Delhi and Mumbai.  The Committee therefore desire the Ministry to 
devise ways and means to encourage the State Governments of Punjab and Uttar Pradesh t o 
release their shares as well as expedite their submission of pending UCs so that the next round of 
allocation of funds could be undertaken.  They further desire to be apprised of the steps to be 
taken in this respect.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 

(18) 
 
2.10 The status of utilization of allocation by the States of Punjab, West Bengal, Maharashtra 
and Uttar Pradesh are as below: 
(Rs. in crore) 
Name of 
State 
7 year allocation 
under UIDSSMT 
Funds 
already 
committed 
No. of approved 
projects for which 
funds released 
Amount Released so 
far 
Punjab 226.60 317.85 17 179.36 
West Bengal 315.25 312.00 26 207.78 
Maharashtra 664.76 2166.39 94 1359.89 
Uttar 
Pradesh 
947.92 944.47 64 586.60 
    
From the above table it may be seen that in respect of Punjab, against the allocation of 
Rs.226.60 crore, 17 projects have been sanctioned involving commitment of Rs.317.85 crore and 
an amount of Rs.179.36 crore has already been released.  In the case of West Bengal, against an 
allocation of Rs.315.25 crore 26 projects have been sanctioned involving commitment of Rs.312 
crore of which an amount of Rs.207.78 crore has already been released.  Against an allocation of 
Rs.664.76 crore for Maharashtra, 94 projects have been sanctioned involving commitment of 
Rs.2166.39 crore of which R s.1359.89 crore has already been released.  In the case of Uttar 
Pradesh, against an allocation of Rs.947.92 crore, 64 projects have been sanctioned involving 
commitment of Rs.944.47 crore and an amount of Rs.586.60 crore has already been released.  
Release of 2nd installment of funds requires furnishing of Utilization certificate showing a minimum 
of 70% utilization of the funds released earlier as 1 st installment and a report on the achievement of 
reforms as per committed timelines in MOAs.  Utilization of funds depends on the pace in which the 
ULBs/ Implementing Agencies in different states are able to award the work after due process of 
approvals and tenders and implement the works.   
 
In order to ensure proper implementation, Project Monitoring Units at  SLNA level and 
Project Implementation Units at ULB level are allowed to be established so that skilled manpower 
is available to the ULBs.    Submission of UCs is reviewed and monitored in the periodical review 
meetings undertaken at the level of Secretary (Urban Development) and UDM level, which are also 
attended by the representatives from the States.  This has also been taken up in the D.O. letters 
written by Secretary (UD) to the States.  This issue is also discussed during the CSMC review 
meetings which are attended by State's representative. The highest level of review was undertaken 
in the annual conference of JNNURM on 03.12.09. Subsequently, all the Chief Secretaries of State 
Governments have been apprised of the overdue reforms committed up to 2008 -09 at the level of 
Secretary (UD) with a request to monitor vigorously the implementation of overdue reforms as per 
committed timelines.  Apart from this, Regional Reviews were undertaken in the month of April/May 
2010 by Secretary (UD) at Chandigarh, Hyd erabad, Kolkata, Ahmedabad and Raipur with the 
States covered in the respective regions wherein Principal Secretaries/ Secretaries of Urban 
Development attended the review.  In respect of few states, the Chief Secretary of the states also 
attended the revi ew.  In these meetings overdue reforms were identified and State's 
representatives have agreed to take steps to complete the overdue reforms. 
  

(19) 
 
Regarding Utilisation Certificates, the concerns expressed by the Committee has been 
communicated to the concerned states with the request to expedite implementation of projects and 
submission of utilization certificate. 
 
Recommendation Serial No.7 
 
Slow progress under Scheme of ‘Urban Infrastructure Development for Satellite Towns 
around Seven Mega Cities’ 
 
2.11 From the material furnished to them, the Committee note that another scheme for 
development of satellite towns around seven mega cities of Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Bangalore, 
Kolkata, Ahmedabad and Hyderabad was initiated in the year 2007.  Eight towns name ly 
Vikarabad (A.P.), Sanand (Gujarat), Sonipat (Haryana), Hosakote (Karnataka), Vasai -Virar 
(Maharashtra), Sriperumbudur (Tamil Nadu), Pilkhuwa (U.P.) and New Town (West Bengal) were 
included in the scheme.  An allocation of Rs.200 crore has been made for the same during 
Financial Year 2010 -11.  However, the Committee are dismayed to learn that in the past 3 years, 
only one water supply proposal from Pilkhuwa was received, which is under vetting and thus not 
approved as yet.  The Committee are in doubt as t o how many projects would actually be 
implemented in the scheme as the same is co -terminus with the 11 th Five Year Plan and thus 
would cease to exist, if not extended, in the year 2012.  The Committee feel  that lack of capacity of 
the ULBs in these towns is, perhaps, the reason for non -receipt of proposals.  They have observed 
that even if proposals are received, those are likely to be sent back due to various deficiencies, as 
is the general experience of t he Ministry with towns having modest capabilities.  Lack of funds to 
hire expertise to prepare DPRs could be another deterrent for these towns.  The Committee would 
desire to be apprised as to whether a percentage of allocation could be disbursed as capaci ty-
building assistance to these eight towns under the scheme.  If not so, they would urge the Ministry 
to consider enhancing the capacities of their ULBs to prepare DPRs and extend all possible 
assistance to them lest these towns would fail to get any bene fit from the scheme.  The Committee 
would also like to know the status of the water supply project of Pilkhuwa town. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.12 The scheme has been recently approved by CCI (Cabinet Committee on Infrastructure) in 
July 2009. The towns under this scheme were identified by Dec. 2009.  
 
Rs. 34.38 crore has been allocated for capacity building assistance to these towns under 
the scheme. The Ministry is providing support to the towns for preparing DPRs, CDPs as well as 
implementing reforms. T hrough this support the towns would be able to participate fully in the 
scheme. 
 
DPR for project “Re -organization of water supply for Pilkhuwa” was received in Feb. 2010 
and sanctioned by Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee of Urban Infrastructure Develop ment in 
March 2010 at an estimated cost of Rs. 2167.55 lakh. First instalment of Rs. 5.00 crore was 
released on 31.03.2010. The State has informed that the tenders for this work have been invited by 

(20) 
 
implementing agency U.P. Jal Nigam, which have been opene d on 06.05.2010, 11.05.2010 and 
12.05.2010. 
  

(21) 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF 
THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

(22) 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation Serial No.3 
 
JNNURM – Need to include more cities 
 
4.1 The JNNURM, a scheme providing allocation of substantial Central Financial Assistance to 
65 cities for developing their urban infrastructure and enhancing their capacity to undertake 
reforms, has been in existence for the last 4 years, starting from 2005 -06.  The Committee have 
been following the progress of JNNURM all these years.  They feel that the scheme has brought 
focus on the urban sector across the country to the extent that the upgrading of urban 
infrastructure is now on the agenda of most of the s tates.   They are now aware of the range of the 
issues to be addressed and thus, are undertaking measures to improve their city Governance.  
However the Committee feel that the State Governments and ULBs still need handholding and 
more support particularly in the field of capacity building measures from the Central Government to 
reach the level where they are able to sustain the momentum for creating habitable cities.  
 
In this backdrop, the Committee are of the view that cities having a population of 5 lak h and 
above need to be urgently included in JNNURM as most of these cities have become extremely 
congested and unlivable due to haphazard  and unplanned growth and a nearly collapsed 
infrastructure.  In this connection, the Committee are dismayed to learn that the proposal of 
Ministry of Urban Development to include 28 such cities into JNNURM was rejected by the Ministry 
of Finance and the Planning Commission.  Reportedly, the Planning Commission have merely 
indicated that additional funds for the UIG compo nent of JNNURM could be provided on 
completion of the mid-term appraisal of the 11 th Plan.  Meanwhile the Committee also note that the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, which is the nodal Ministry for BSUP Sub -
Component of JNNURM and IHSDP  Sub-component of UIDSSMT, has also raised the issue of 
change in proportion of allocation between all the Sub -Components of JNNURM-UIDSSMT.   This, 
in view of the Committee, is likely to further complicate the issue of allocation of funds and thus 
cause avoidable delay in arriving at a decision.  Although the Ministry have informed that out of the 
28 cities proposed to be included under UIG of JNNURM, 18 cities have got projects sanctioned 
under UIDSSMT, still, in the opinion of the Committee, there remain s a vast gap between the 
demands of 5 lakh-plus cities and the ground reality. They feel that much attention has gone to the 
metropolises in the first phase of JNNURM and now more attention is required to other cities where 
urban agglomerations are enlargi ng. These towns, once developed, will spread the benefits of 
urbanization and economic growth more widely. They therefore recommend that the Ministry must 
pursue the matter at the Ministerial level so that the need of providing funds for all the eligible 
remaining uncovered cities could be acknowledged and adequate funds could be made available 
to them.    
 

(23) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2 The observations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee that cities having population of                    
5 lakh and abo ve need to be urgently included in JNNURM and to pursue the need for providing 
funds for all the eligible remaining uncovered cities has been brought to the attention of the 
Finance Minister, Government of India and Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission by the Urban 
Development Minister vide his letter dated 11.06.2010.  
 
4.3 For comments of the Committee please see paragraph No.1.8 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
Recommendation Serial No.8 
 
Need for indigenous production of Metro Rail Coaches to increase the number of coaches 
 
4.4 From the notes on Demands for Grants under Demand No.100 (UD), the Committee note 
that there was a drastic decrease in Grants to BEML (Bharat Earth Movers Ltd.) from Rs.10 crore 
in RE-2009-10 to Rs.50 lakh only in BE 2010 -11 due to non-approval of the proposal for budgetary 
support for setting up of National R&D Centre for a State of the Art Metro Rail Coaches.  
 
The Committee understand that BEML, a mini -ratna Company in the field of manufacture                        
of rail coaches  and other equipment, is in need of support from the Government and                                        
co-funding from upcoming metros to successfully implement the supply of low -cost metro rail 
coaches for mass rapid transport systems in urban areas.  In this context,  the committee are of                                              
the view that indigenization can lower the cost of metro rail coaches substantially, more                                           
so since several other cities like Kolk ata, Chennai and Bangalore too would require a                                      
large number of such coaches for their metro projects in the near future.  In such                                                
a scenario, the Committee are at a loss to  understand as to why the proposal for a R&D                               
Centre for State of the Art Metro Rail Coaches could not obtain the requisite approval                                   
from the Government despite urgency of the same.  The Commit tee, therefore, would like the                    
Ministry to submit a detailed note to them on the matter indicating other options open to                                          
the Government, as importing Metro Rail Coaches has already put a heavy bur den on                                       
the Government exchequer.  Being extremely concerned about the overcrowding in Delhi                              
Metro Stations and Metro trains due to lack of adequate number of coaches that                                         
causes severe inconvenience and  sometimes grievous injuries to commuters, as well                                       
as the pressing need for metro rail coaches for the Chennai, Bangalore and Kolkata                                        
Metro in the near future, the Committee feel that indigenous production of coaches needs                         
utmost priority.  They, therefore, recommend that the Ministry must strive to get the                                        
R&D Centr e for indigenous metro coaches started as early as possible. Till such time,                                           
the Committee also recommend that the Government should urgently provide more coaches          
to the Metro running on overcrowded routes , for instance those covering areas of Dwarka, Rajiv 
Chowk, NOIDA etc. 
 
Reply of the Government 

(24) 
 
 
4.5 The drastic decrease in Grants to Bharat Earth Movers Ltd. (BEML) for R&D Centre of 
Excellence from Rs. 10 crore in RE 2009 -10 to Rs. 50 lakh in Demand No. 100 in BE 2010 -11 is 
because of the fact that the Government has not yet approved the proposal for budgetary support 
for setting up of National R&D Centre for a State of the Art Metro Rail Coaches under the aegis of 
a registered society with BEML on accoun t of reservations of Ministry of Finance  (MoF) and 
Ministry of Railways (MoR).  MoF was of the view that BEML should set up the R&D Centre with its 
own funds and it will further its commercial interests.  MoR on the other hand is of the opinion that 
the R &D Centre should be set up in Research Design and Standardization Organisation of 
Railways.  Hence, a token amount of Rs. 50.00 lakhs has been kept for the year 2010-11. 
  
A meeting of the Committee of Secretaries was held on 6 th November, 2009 on the subj ect 
of approval for budgetary support for setting up of National R&D Centre for state -of-the-art metro 
rail coaches under the aegis of a registered society with BEML as a lead and founder member.  In 
the meeting, it was decided that the Planning Commission  will re-examine the proposal for setting 
up the Centre.   If required, Ministry of Urban Development will make a fresh reference to Planning 
Commission, bringing out clearly the allocations reported to be available already and the 
sequencing/timing of funds requirement.  The required reference followed by details as desired by 
Planning Commission have been furnished.  However, further decisions on the matter is awaited 
from Planning Commission.   Matter is being perused with them. 
 
As far as over crowding in Delhi Metro trains is concerned, Delhi Metro Rail Corporation 
has informed that during Phase I projects of DMRC, 280 coaches (70 trainsets) were procured, out 
of which 220 coaches were assembled at BEML, Bangalore.  To meet the requirement of Phase II 
projects of DMRC, additional coaches as per details given hereunder are being introduced:  
 
Board Gauge Coaches Standard Gauge Coaches 
160 additional BG coaches have already been 
inducted in service. 
56 additional SG coaches have already 
been inducted in service. 
Additional 378 coaches will be introduced in 
service in a progressive manner before 
December, 2010. 
Additional 110 coaches will be introduced in 
service in a progressive manner before 
December, 2010. 
502 coaches out of total of 538 coaches are 
being manufactured in the greenfield 
manufacturing facility set up by M/s. 
Bombardier at Savli in Gujrat. 
192 coaches out of total of 196 coaches are 
being manufactured at BEML, Bangalore. 
 
  In addition to 124 coaches provided during Phase -I project of DMRC, additional 238 
coaches are being introduced as a part of the Phase II project in the line Dwarka – Rajiv Chowk – 
Yamuna Bank – NOIDA/ Anand Vihar.  DMRC fully supports the proposal for set ting up of the 
Research and Development Centre under the aegis of BEML to develop the expertise for know -
how and know -why of the technological developments in the manufacturing of modern Metro 
Rolling Stock. 

(25) 
 
 
4.6 For comments of the Committee please see paragraph No.1.11 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
  

(26) 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE 
STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation Serial No.9 
 
Delhi Metro and other Urban transport issues 
 
5.1 The Committee commend  the DMRC‟s resolve to complete their lines in Phase –II as per 
the targets fixed.  They hope that the DMRC would strive their best to check and correct complaints 
like water seepage, gaps between two spans on metro lines, overcrowding etc. as well as to k eep 
their tracks free from any unfortunate mishap.  The Committee have observed that DPR for Phase -
III of the Delhi Metro has already been submitted to the authorities for approval.  As the DMRC 
does not face any fund constraints, the Committee are sure th at the projects would be completed 
on time.  However, they feel that no compromises should be made on safely aspects.  They are 
also of the view that multi -level parking projects, due to be completed in August, 2011 and May, 
2012 at the New Delhi Railway S tation and Rohini (West) should be completed in time for the 
convenience of metro users. 
 
With regard to other means of public transport, the Committee note that the Government 
has provided Rs.1200 crore from the Mission allocation, as a one time measure, to State 
Governments for purchase of buses.  Though it is a welcome move, the Committee observe that 
some of buses being purchased are either overpriced or have faulty systems leading to incidents of 
catching fire on the road.  They note that the latest CA G report has also made similar observations 
on the buses purchased by the Delhi government. There could be other instances too. Therefore, 
the Committee feel that the matter needs to be probed so that accountability is fixed and funds are 
utilized in the best possible manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.2 Delhi Metro has been assigned the construction of 121.78 route km. of Metro corridors 
including the High Speed Metro Express Line in Phase -II (2006 -2011).  The works on all the 
corridors is progressing as per target.  Out of above, Delhi Metro has already commissioned 
Shahdara- Dilshad Garden, Vishwavidyalaya - Jahangirpuri, Indraprastha - Yamuna Bank - NOIDA 
City Centre, Yamuna Bank - Anand Vihar corridors (45.84 km.) as per the target.  In fact, a few 
corridors have been commissioned 5 to 6 months before schedule. 
 
DMRC has taken measures to ameliorate the cases of seepage, gaps between two spans, 
etc. The additional coaches are being procured and with the completion of supplies, the problem of 
overcrowding is expected to be overcome.  DMRC has taken a host of  measures like review of 
design of all cantilever piers by renowned design consultants, strengthening of DMRC Design 
Wing, reinforcing the Safety and Quality Wing, revitalization of Tool box Safety drill and crash 

(27) 
 
course in safety rules & regulations to al l the workers, third party inspection of cranes and 
enhanced supervision of launching operations to avert the possibilities of unfortunate mishaps.  
 
The multi-level parking at New Delhi Railway Station is in progress and shall be completed 
by targeted date s.  The approval of the building plan of the multi -level parking at Rohini (W) is 
awaited by the Developer from DDA.  Work of this parking is targeted to be completed in 2 years 
thereafter. 
 
With regard to other means of public transport, the Govt. of Indi a has been sanctioning 
Additional Central Assistance to State Government for purchasing of Buses under JNNURM. The 
State Govt. agencies are responsible for entire procedure of procurement and operation of these 
buses. The incidents of catching fire took place not in JNNURM buses but in DTC buses. 
 
Delhi Govt./ Department of Transport has conducted enquiry in the matter. As per the 
reference sent to the Ministry of Urban Development, basically the issues were related to 
maintenance and necessary action is being taken by them. 
 
 
Recommendation Serial No.10 
 
Regularisation of unauthorized colonies in Delhi 
 
5.3 The Committee note that as per the revised guidelines of the Union Government regarding 
regularization of unauthorized colonies in the year 2007, the DD A had notified regulations on 24 th 
March, 2008.  Accordingly, the Government of NCT - Delhi (GNCTD) issued provisional 
regularization certificates to 1223 unauthorized colonies on 4 th October, 2008.  Formal 
regularization of the same was due on 4 th October 2009, however, as per the Ministry, no un -
authorised colony was regularized till 28 th February, 2010 due to the fact that the applications of 
such colonies were still under verification process from MCD, DDA, ASI and Forest and Revenue 
Departments of the Delhi Government.  The Committee also note from the details provided to them 
that as per the Urban Development Department of the GNCTD, the total number of applications 
received from unauthorized colonies was 1639 including 149 habitations outside the Lal D ora of 
Delhi Villages, and that an extension of time upto 3 rd October, 2010 has been obtained from the 
competent authority for completing the formalities regarding regularization.  Being aware of the 
inhuman civic conditions and squalor of such colonies in  which the urban city dwellers are putting 
up, the Committee hope that the matter would be resolved within the fixed timeline. The Committee 
also desire to be apprised of the status of the same in due course. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
5.4 Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD) has issued Revised Guidelines for regularization of 
unauthorised colonies on 05.10.2007 (Revised Guidelines -2007). In pursuance to the Revised 
Guidelines-2007, GNCTD invited applications and layout plans from the RWAs of unauthorised 
colonies in the year 2007 -08, the last date for which was 30.4.2008.  A total of 1639 applications 

(28) 
 
were received for consideration of regularization.  Regulations for regularisation were notified by 
Delhi Development Authority (DDA) on 24.3.2008, in accordan ce of which, the applications of 1639 
unauthorised colonies were forwarded to various agencies i.e. MCD, DDA, Archaeological Survey 
of India (ASI), Forest and Revenue Departments of GNCTD for scrutiny of layout plans / 
documents.  DDA also notified an amen dment to the Regulations of 24.3.2008 by another 
notification on 16.6.2008, authorizing GNCTD to issue Provisional Regularization Certificates 
(PRCs) to eligible unauthorized colonies on fulfilment of requirements of clause 4 of the 
Regulations dated 24.3. 2008 by the residents of the Colonies.  The notifications prescribed a time 
limit of 12 months from the date of grant of PRCs to complete the formalities by the Local 
Bodies/DDA and GNCTD before formal regularization of these colonies. 
 
In accordance with the notification of 16.6.2008, PRCs were issued to 1218 unauthorized 
colonies on 4.10.2008.  As per the Regulations, the agencies are carrying out the verification work 
and were required to complete the verification process by 3.10.2009. However, the work could not 
be completed and an extension of time of 12 months has been obtained from LG, Delhi, and now 
the verification work is to be completed by 3.10.2010.   
 
On the basis of reports being received, a list of 700 unauthorized colonies was compiled 
where the agencies like MCD, DDA, ASI, Forest and Revenue Departments of GNCTD have not 
found any defects in conformity with the regulations of 24.3.2008.  This list has been forwarded to 
MCD for finalization and approval of layout plans in the first phase.  On approval by MCD, the list 
will be forwarded to DDA for change of land use and requisite charges would be recovered from 
the colonies before final notification of these colonies for regularisation in accordance with 
Regulations of 24.3.2008.  The Government  has also to approach the High Court/ Supreme Court 
before final regularisation certificates are issued, as the Courts are seized of the matter.  Till date, 
no approved layout plans of colonies out of the list forwarded to it have been received back from 
MCD. 
 
GNCTD has also informed that it is providing basic civic amenities in unauthorized colonies.  
An allocation of Rs. 2,800 crore has been earmarked for development of unauthorised colonies in 
the 11th Plan period.  For the financial year 2009 -10, an all ocation of Rs.786.00 Crore was made, 
and Rs.749.00 Crore in current financial year 2010-11, as under:- 
 
Delhi Jal Board     Rs. 137 Crore 
Municipal Corporation of Delhi    Rs. 110 Crore 
Industrial Infrastructure Corporation of Delhi  Rs. 400 Crore 
Irrigation and Flood Control Department, GNCTD Rs. 100 Crore 
Urban Development Department, GNCTD  Rs. 2 Crore 
 
5.5 For comments of the Committee please see paragraph No.1.14 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi:              SHARAD 
YADAV 

(29) 
 
01 December, 2010             
Chairman 
10 Agrahayana, 1932 (Saka)         Standing Committee on Urban 
Development  
APPENDIX - I 
 
COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT(2010-2011) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON                                        
WEDNESDAY, 01 DECEMBER, 2010 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Room No. „D‟, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Sharad Yadav - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Gajanan D. Babar 
3. Shri Partap Singh Bajwa 
4. Shri Sakti Mohan Malik 
5. Shri Ramesh Kumar 
6. Shri P.C. Mohan 
7. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik 
8. Shri Kadir Rana 
9. Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Surendra Motilal Patel 
11. Shri Shyam Benegal 

(30) 
 
12. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri K.D. Muley  -  Director 
3. Ms. Amita Walia  -   Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee. The 
Committee then took up for consideration the following draft Action Taken Reports:-  
 
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on „Demands 
for Grants 2010-2011 of the Ministry Urban Development. 
 
(ii)  Draft Report on  Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Seventh Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on 
„Demands for Grants 2010 -2011 of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation. 
 
3. The Committee adopted the draft Action Taken Reports without any 
change(s)/modifications. 
 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise both the reports and present the 
same to the Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
* * * * * 
 
 
 
  

(31) 
 
APPENDIX - II 
[vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE SIXTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN 
DEVELOPMENT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
I. Total number of recommendations                                                10 
 
II. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government                 
06 
 
(Para Nos. 1,2,4,5,6 and 7) 
 
Percentage to total recommendations                                          (60%) 
 
III. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue  
in view of Government‟s replies:                        NIL 
  
 
Percentage to total recommendations                                  
(0%) 
 
IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the  
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:                       02 
 
(Para Nos. 3, and 8) 
 
Percentage to total recommendations                       
(20%)  
 
V. Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the                                        
Government are still awaited:                                                                                               0 2  
 
(Para Nos. 9 and 10) 
                                                    
 
Percentage to total recommendations                    (20%) 
 
 