 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2011-2012) 
                                
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
                 MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2011-2012) 
  
 
(Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on of the Standing Committee on Urban Development on Demands for Grants 
(2011-2012) ) of the Ministry of Urban Development] 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
      
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
17 


2 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2011-2012) 
 
                                
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban Development on Demands for Grants 
(2011-2012) of the Ministry of Urban Development] 
   
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  28.03.2012 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  28.03.2012 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March,   Chaitra 1934 (Saka) 


3 
 
   C.U.D No. 68 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2012 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) 
and printed by the Indian Press, Delhi-110033. 
 
 
 

4 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .....................……….…………………..........................….. (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ......................................................................………………………………………. (v) 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
1 
CHAPTER II 
Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
21 
CHAPTER III Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
32 
CHAPTER IV 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration  
33 
CHAPTER V Observations /Recommendations in respect of which final  replies 
of the Government are still awaited 
51 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I. Credentials of M/s Emmar Properties  PJSC and Credentials of M/s MGF 
developments………….53 
II. Fund given by DDA to Project 
Developer…………………………………………………………….……54 
III. Note indicating monitoring activities taken up by 
DDA…………………………………………..……….55 

5 
 
IV. Minutes of the Fourth sitting of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2011-12) held on 
22.03.2012        
………………………………………………………………………………………………..61 
V. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Fourteenth Report of the Committee (15th Lok Sabha)    …. 
………………………………………………………… 63 
(i) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 

6 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2011-2012) 
 
Shri Sharad Yadav         -        Chairman 
  
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.    Shri J.P. Agarwal 
3.    Shri M. Anandan 
4.    Shri Praveen Singh Aron 
5.    Shri Partap Singh Bajwa 
6.    Shri Ambica Banerjee 
7.    Smt. J. Helen Davidson 
8.    Smt. Priya Dutt  
9.    Shri Eknath M. Gaikwad 
10.  Shri Bijoy Krishna Handique 
11.  Shri Gorakh Prasad Jaiswal 
12.  Shri Kailash Joshi 
13.  Shri Mohinder Singh K.P. 
14.  Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shankar Katheria 
15.  Shri Ramesh Kumar 
16.  Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena 
17.  Shri P.C. Mohan 
18.   Shri Sonawane Pratap Narayanrao 
19.  Shri Rakesh Sachan 
20.  Shri Bhupendra Singh 
21.  Shri Umashankar Singh 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22   Shri  Meghraj Jain 
23.  Shri P. Bhattacharya 
 24. Shri Parvez Hasmi 
 25. Dr. Manohar Joshi 
 26. Shri Avinash Pande 
 27. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar 
 28. Shri Kanwar Deep Singh  
 29. Shri Khekiho Zhimomi  
 30. Smt. Hema Malini 
 31. Vacant 
(iii) 

7 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain   - Director 
3. Smt. J.M.Sinha   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Smt. K.Rangamani  N.  - Under Secretary 
5. Shri Sumit Kumar Grover  - Committee Assistant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
  

8 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2011-2012) having been authorized 
by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Seventeenth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on the 
action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report (15th Lok Sabha) of 
the Standing Committee on Urban Development on “Demands for Grants (2011 -2012) " of the Ministry of Urban 
Development. 
 
2. The Fourteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 05 th August, 2011.  Replies of the Government 
to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received in December, 2011.  
 
3. The Standing Committee on Urban Development considered and adopted this Report at their sitting 
held on 22.03.2012. 
  
4. An analysis of the a ction taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Fourteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-V. 
 
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
                  SHARAD YADAV 
22nd  March , 2012                                         Chairman,       
02Chaitra,1934 (Saka)                               Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
 
 
 (v)  
 
 

9 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2011 -2012) deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in their F ourteenth  
Report (Fifteenth Lok  Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2011 -12) of the Ministry of Urban  
Development which was presented to Lok Sabha on 5 August, 2011. 
 
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the  Government in respect of all 14  
recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been categorized as follows: 
(i) Recommendations /Observations, which have been accepted by the Government. 
 (Chapter-II): 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2,5,6,11,13.                     
(Total -6) 
(Chapter-II) 
(ii) Recommendations /Observations, which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
 view of Government's   replies. (Chapter-III): 
 
Recommendation No. Nil               (Total -Nil)
        
(Chapter-III) 
(iii) Recommendations /Observations, in respect of which replies of Government have not 
 been accepted by the Committee (Chapter-IV): 
Recommendation Nos.3, 4,7, 8,9,12,14      (Total -07) 
(Chapter-IV) 
(iv) Recommendations /Observations, in respect of which final replies of the Government 
 are, still awaited (Chapter-V): 
Recommendation  No. -10.       (Total -01) 

10 
 
(Chapter-V) 
 
1.3 The Committee  desire that specific replies to the comments  contained in Chapter -I of 
this Report and final replies in respect of the Recommendation  for which only interim reply has  
been furnished by the Government (included in Chapter -V) may be furnished to them at the 
earliest and in any case, not later than three months of the presentation of this Report. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their 
recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.    
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
Demand No. 102 MH (4059)-Capital Outlay on Public Works  
1.5 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that net budgetary allocation under Demand No.102 is Rs. 1589 crore. 
However, the Committee are not happy to find „nil‟ achievement during the financial year 2009 -
10, in Non-Residential (4059 Plan-UD) due to shortage of funds. During the financial year 2010-
11, Government could complete only remaining left over work of the previous year. Other works 
like construction of General Pool Office Accommodation at INA (51782 sqm) New Delhi, at CBD 
Shahdara (15886 sqm.) New Delhi, and at Kavadiguda, (30000 sqm) at Hyderabad supposed to 
be completed by 31.03.2011 have not yet been completed. The Committee are deeply 
concerned with such state of affairs. The prestigious works are being delayed/ blocked for want 
of funds. The Ministry should have ant icipated this and the demand for necessary funds should 
have been made at the time of Supplementary Demands.  
The Committee are of the view that such delays put question mark on the planning, poor 
management and sincerity on the part of the Ministry beside s such delays lead to cost and time 
overruns and become strain on the financial health of the country. The Committee recommend 
that the Ministry should properly plan the timely execution of its schemes, make effective 
monitoring and also fix responsibility for delay in completion of these projects besides allocating 
sufficient funds for them. " 
1.6 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:  
"The progress of GPOA Projects at INA, New Delhi, CBD Shahdara, Delhi and Kavadiguda, 
Hyderabad suffered due to non-availability of sufficient funds during last two financial years i.e. 
in 2009 -10 and 2010 -11. However sufficient funds have been allotted during 2011 -12 to 
complete these projects.  
 
During the year 2009 -10, the demand for additional funds to the tune of Rs. 59.00 crore under 
MH:4059-UD(P) had been submitted in the 1 st Batch of Supplementary Demand for Grants 
which could not be sanctioned. However, the provision had been augmented to Rs. 81.00 crore 

11 
 
to meet the requirement for ongoing projects by re -appropriating the funds of Rs. 6.00 crore 
from savings under other plan sub-heads of the Grant. 
 
During the year 2010 -11, the demand for additional funds to the tune of Rs. 69.00 crore under 
MH:4059-UD(P) had been submitted in the 1 st Batch of Supplementary Demand for Grants and 
Rs. 34.50 Crore had been sanctioned for meeting the additional requirement to complete the 
works like street scaping of Delhi roads around Stadium and Aesthetic Work, repairs and 
rehabilitation, upgradation & façade i mprovement in the vicinity of Commonwealth Games 
Venues. 
 
In the current financial year (2011 -12), the Budget Grant of Rs. 133.59 crore has been 
sanctioned as per BE demand of the zones which is sufficient for the ongoing works/ project. 
Details of Budget demand, allocation & expenditure under MH: 4059 -UD(P) Year-wise since 
2009-10 have been as under: - 
 
 
 
Further the progress of these projects was also delayed due to other reasons such as site 
conditions, cross departmental issues involving role of other organizations. The status of these 
projects along with reasons for delay is as under:- 
 
1. GPOA at INA: 
 
Out of total area of 51782 sqm. of all five blocks, an area of 36812 sqm. has been completed 
by 2010-11 and balance area is targeted to be completed by 30.9.2011. The position of various 
blocks is as under: 
 
(i) A new building „B‟ Block has been constructed under the General Pool Office 
Accommodation (GPOA) at INA, New Delhi. The total usable area of the building is about 
47,087 sq. ft. (Ground + 6 th floor). This block has already allotted on 24.11.2011 with the 
approval of UDM to the under mentioned Central Govt. offices. 
 
(a) Department of AYUSH, M/o Health & Family Welfare an area of 34,087 sq. ft. (Ground, 
First to third and fifth and sixth floors). 
(b) National Commission for Minorities an area of 13,000 sq. ft (Fourth and fifth floor). 
 
(ii) Block C allotted to NHRC is complete and interior work going on, 
(iii) Block D allotted to ASI is complete and interior work going on, 
(iv) Block E allotted to CGA is complete, 
(v) Block F allotted to NCDRC has been occupied. 
 
 
Year BE 
Demand 
Budget 
Grant 
Supplementary 
Demand 
Supplementary 
Grant 
Final Budget 
Grant 
Actual 
Expenditure 
2009-10 221.30 75.00 59.00 Nil 81.00 79.12 
2010-11 201.13 84.00 69.00 34.50 118.50 116.50 
2011.12 134.59 133.59 -- -- -- 22.09  
(up to 
Aug‟2011) 

12 
 
The project was delayed due to inadequate funds during 2009 -10 and 2010 -11. Further, CVC 
did not allow the construction of block adjacent to CVC building leading to delay of about 6 
months on this account.  There has been delay in certain activities relati ng to external services 
for want of clearance from respective organizations like CVC/ individual client, but these have 
now been resolved except the issue of exit path besides CVC block. Draft scheme with multiple 
alternatives has been submitted to CVC for  approval and whole complex can be made 
functional on implementation of this scheme with the consent of CVC. These blocks have been 
made ready for interior works since 1 st April 2011. Though the project has been delayed due to 
above reasons, there shall be no cost overrun in this project. 
 
 
2. GPOA at CBD Shahdara, Delhi: 
 
Area of land of 1.9 acre was allotted to then Department of Statistics, Ministry of Planning by DDA 
and possession taken on 06.08.1984. Ministry of Statistics & P.I approached CPWD to utilize plot as 
GPOA and allot space to them on 26.09.1986 as adequate funds were not likely to be available for 
them. MOUD approved on 18.11.1987 to CPWD to take up construction as GPOA. CPWD 
completed boundary wall on 30.11.1989 but after that plot was e ncroached upon which was got 
vacated in July 2007 with the help of MCD after payment of re -location charges. Director, Ministry of 
Statistics & P.I inquired on 29.09.1997 about the status of construction. CPWD meanwhile prepared 
the drawings and submitted to DDA for sanction in April 2005 but DDA refused to process till 
encroachment was removed. 
All clearance i.e. CFO, DUAC, AAI, Air Force etc. obtained in July 2008 and DDA completed its 
process for release of plan but asked for latest EOT before release. Cost estimate of Rs. 43.14 crore 
sanctioned on 02.04.2008 by MOUD. Work physically started in July 2008. CPWD pursued EOT and 
DDA granted EOT upto 30.06.2009 but sent the approval to Ministry of Statistic & P.I. in Dec 2009 
being land title holder. Ministry  of Statistic & P.I. asked DDA to stop the construction being carried 
out by CPWD and requested MOUD to decide space allocation. Matter reported to MOUD for 
resolution and construction continued. Several meetings and discussions held starting from May 
2009 in MOUD with AS and DOE.  
Finally, MOUD in March 2011, agreed for space requirement of 40000 sqft to the Ministry of S & P.I 
and offered to allot entire building having 50000 sqft carpet area against the vacation of 10,000 sqft 
existing space. Minister of  S & P.I. wrote Minster of UD to consider requirement of more space. 
Meeting held on 30.08.2011 in the chamber of DOE and in principally agreed for additional space of 
4000 sqft and Ministry of S & P.I. agreed to vacate 6000 sqft existing space. Lastly mee ting held in 
the chamber of AS(UD) on 29.09.2011 but matter could not be formally resolved as MOUD is not 
agreed to give more than 10,000 sqft space.   
Further development in respect of above building is that Director of Estate vide letter no. 10/7/89 -
Ofc.(pt.) dated 18.11.2011 has conveyed to Ministry of Ministry of Statistics  & Programme 
Implementation (MS&PI) that eligible additional office cannot be more than  39,423 sqft and 
accordingly MS&PI has to vacate 10,000 sqft of area before entire building is  allotted. It is learnt 
verbally from Director (Admn.), MS&PI that they have now projected demand of 70,000 sqft in 
response to DOEs letter dated 18.11.2011.  
Building is ready since 31.10.2011 but cannot be made functional in the want of external bulk 
connection of sewer, water and electricity as same can only be obtained after sanction of local body 
drawings which in turn can only happen on authorization by land title holder . Re -revised PE 
amounting to Rs. 62.45 cr has been submitted to Directorate CPWD o n 11.11.2011. Certain 
observations have been received from Director (P&WA) on 19.12.2011 which are being clarified.  

13 
 
We have to provide security on building and inoccupation shall lead to deteriorate with passage of 
time.  It is very important and urgent t o occupy the building to safe guard government interest. It is 
therefore requested that matter please be taken up with MOUD to sort out the impasse on most 
urgent basis. MOUD may please be further requested that in case land title holder is not ready to 
reach for any agreement, matter may please be taken at appropriate level to find out alternate 
solution. 
 
3. GPOA at Kavadiguda, Hyderabad:  
This Project was initially targeted to be completed by 30.10.2011. But, the above project has 
suffered due to non-availability of required funds during last two financial years i.e. 2009 -10 
and 2010 -11. Now the finishing work is in progress and the same has been targeted to be 
completed by February, 2012." 
 
 
1.7  The Committee are pained to note that due to impasse upon space allotment  between 
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation ( MS&PI) and Ministry of Urban 
Development (MoUD), the building of GPOA at CBD Shahdra, Delhi could not be made functional 
for want of external bulk connection of sewer , water and electricity  as same can only be 
obtained after sanction of local body drawings which  are dependent on authorization by title 
holder of the land. 
 The Committee fully agree with the view expressed by MS&PI that non-occupation of 
building shall lead to its deterioration with passage of time. It is very important to occupy the 
building to safeguard government interest.  
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that in case  the title holder  of the land  is not 
ready to reach  any agreement, matter may be taken at appropriate level  to explore an alternate 
solution. The deadlock should be resolved on urgent basis and building made functiona l and 
the Committee be apprised of the progress within 3 months . The Committee are surprised to 
find the silence of the Ministry to their specific recommendation in respect of planning, timely 
execution of the Schemes and fix responsibility  for delays. The Committee want the Ministry to 
make its perception clear on these recommendations and inform them. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
Central Public Works Department 
1.8 The Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The upkeep and ensuring proper maintenance of the Government buildings and residential 
complexes is the responsibility of the C.P.W.D. The Committee are dismayed to note 
widespread encroachment by shopkeepers, motor mechanics, pavement dwellers even in 
organized government residential complexes which not only pollutes the area but also creates 
inconvenience to residents.  It also creates law and order problem besides giving 

14 
 
encouragement to anti-social elements. This is assuming alarming proportions and bec oming a 
threat to the civil society.The Committee are of the opinion that it is inaction on the part of 
administration which encourages such encroachments not only being taking place but also 
prosper in or around every government residential complex.  The Committee note that it has 
become a habit in the Government to always pass the buck from one agency to another. The 
Committee are of the view that it is the Government agencies that allow the flourishing of the 
encroachers. They want the encroachments should be stopped. 
The Committee recommend that strict action needs to be taken against those found 
responsible.  The Committee desire that effective steps should be taken by the Ministry for 
proper coordination among CPWD, M.C.D., N.D.M.C as well as police for removal and checking 
of such encroachments not only in Delhi but also across all the States in  the country. All 
matters pertaining to jurisdiction like area does not come under the control of the Ministry 
should be sorted out so as to free the public pl ace from encroachers. The encroachers should 
not in any way take benefit out of feuding Government agencies entangled on the issue of 
jurisdiction rather they must be crushed. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
outcome of the initiatives taken by the Ministry in this regard and also results achieved." 
1.9 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:- 
"There are encroachments by Jhuggi/ Jhopri dwellers in the Govt. residential colonies.  Efforts 
are being made for the removal of these Jhuggies in coordination with the authorities 
concerned as per guidelines. In some cases, the matter is under litigation in local courts. In 
some eligible cases, correspondence has already been made with MCD for their rehabilitations 
and relocation after joint survey to relocate them. Some of the colonies have already been 
surveyed and as per estimates sent by MCD, a consoli dated amount of Rs. 18.99 lakh has 
already been deposited with the J J Cluster Department on 03.05.2003 in respect of Shankar 
Camp near J & K Block, MS flat, Sec -13, R.K. Puram. The relocation is to be done by Delhi 
Urban Shelter Improvement Board. An amou nt of Rs. 21.45 lacs have been deposited to MCD 
slum wing on 20.09.2001 for removal of 87 Jhuggies in Nicholson Square. Similarly a cheque 
of Rs. 13.2 lakh has been deposited by CPWD to MCD slum wing on 31.07.2001 for 
rehabilitation of 58 Jhuggi at J.J. cl uster Rajiv Gandhi camp, Aram Bagh, New Delhi. Some of 
the encroachments such as in Sriniwaspuri, have already been removed and due care is being 
taken not to allow fresh encroachment.  
Also with regard to the third para of the recommendation, it is to men tion that an advisory has 
been issued to Delhi Development Authority (DDA) vide No. J -13036/2/2011-DDIIB dated 1 st 
July, 2011 to take up the issue of large scale encroachments that are taking place on DDA land 
seriously and not allow any encroachment to co me up on their land.  The Authority has been 
advised to launch a concerted campaign to enable general public to inform about such illegal 
activity on net or telephone through publishing citizen friendly advertisements in the leading 
Hindi and English Newsp apers of Delhi giving details of dedicated phone number and e -mail 
ID.  On the basis of information received, DDA in coordination with police and other concerned 
agencies would carry out a well planned campaign to remove all kinds of encroachments on 
Government land and cordon off their properties in a manner that no encroachment takes place 
in the future.   
The DDA had issued Public Notice in the Hindustan Times and Navbharat Times on 
10.08.2011 soliciting the cooperation from public to intimate the incide nts of encroachment on 
the land of Delhi Development Authority and lodge complaints.  The details of e -mail address 
and phone number through which the complaints can be lodged were indicated in the Public 
Notice.   

15 
 
Secretary (UD) took a meeting on 06.09.20 11 with the officers of Govt. of NCT of Delhi, M/o 
HUPA, NDMC, MCD, DDA, CPWD and DUSIB to review the progress of Rehabilitation/ 
Relocation of Slums and JJ Clusters in Delhi.  In the said meeting, it was decided that DDA, 
CPWD, MCD, NDMC, etc. will coordinate among themselves for implementing the rehabilitation 
programme, which may help in freeing the encroached land by slums and JJ clusters." 
 
1.10 The Committee are not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry of Urban 
Development in regard to t he steps taken to curb encroachment. The Committee have been 
informed by the Ministry that C.P.W.D. has deposited the amount in MCD for removal, relocation 
and rehabilitation of a few selected JJ clusters  only. The Committee are unhappy to note that 
the last amount was deposited by C.P.W.D. way back on 03.05.2003. Since then eight years have 
been passed and the Ministry has not furnished the steps taken in this regard in the recent past. 
The Committee desire the Ministry to apprise the progress made in this regard. 
 
  With regard to maintain proper coordination among various stakeholders like CPWD, 
MCD, NDMC & Police for checking encroachment, the Committee have been informed that only 
DDA has issued public notice in the Hindustan Times and Navbharat  Times on 10.08.2011,  for 
soliciting cooperation from public to intimate the incidents of encroachment on the land of DDA  
and lodge complaints.  The Committee are of the opinion that  other agencies like MCD, NDMC, 
Police and CPWD should also  join hands to seek cooperation from the public to get the 
feedback on encroachment  so that further action for removal  of such encroachment could be 
taken. At the same time, the Committee are of the firm view that incidents of encroachment can 
not happen without the connivance of higher officials of civic agencies like DDA, Police etc. 
Hence, they want that a dedicated task force should be constituted which will ensure co -
ordination among various agencies and see that encroachment does not take place at all. The 
Committee further want that stern and deterrent punishment should be awarded to the officials 
under whose nose such encroachment has taken place. 
 
 The Committee wonder to find that their recommendations in respect of encroachment 
on public land made in the context of the country as a whole has been taken by the Ministry as if 
it relates to D elhi only.  The Ministry 's silence in this regard surprises the  Committee. The 
Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to initiate early action in this regar d under intimation 
to them. 
Effective monitoring system and control over performance of schemes under UIDSSMT 
1.11 The Committee had recommended as under:- 

16 
 
"Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and Medium towns (UIDSSMT) is one of 
the sub-components of JNNURM for 7 years duration beginning from 2005 -06. The Committee 
note that since inception of the scheme and till 31.12.2010, 764 projects in 641  towns involving 
Rs. 12928.93 crore have been approved for release of funds. The Committee have been 
informed that 123 projects in 8 States have been physically completed, 560 projects are at 
various stages of implementation and 415 Utilisation Certificate s (UCs) amounting to Rs. 
2556.75 crore have been received from 23 States.  The Committee find that physical progress 
of projects as reported by the State Governments is far from satisfactory under UIDSSMT.  
Process for furnishing the UC‟s by States is also  very slow.  The Committee further note that 
Ministry have decided that the Independent Review and Monitoring Agency (IRMA) appointed 
for UIG would also be extended to the Urban Local Bodies under UIDSSMT.  State 
Governments/SLNAs have also been advised to  constitute one Project Implementation Unit 
(PIU) each for 15 ULBs.  The Committee, therefore, desire that effective mechanism should be 
devised by the Government to expedite the receipt of UCs and Quarterly Progress Reports from 
State Governments. The Com mittee recommend that process regarding appointing of IRMA 
and constitution of Project Implementation Unit for ULB‟s should be completed at the earliest for 
better monitoring and timely implementation of sanctioned projects under UIDSSMT.  Needless 
to emph asise that strict monitoring is indispensible for speedy implementation of various 
reforms committed by States and ULBs for timely release of ACA. The Committee would like to 
be informed of the results achieved by the steps taken by the Ministry in this regard." 
 
1.12 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:- 
"For monitoring the implementation of projects under UIDSSMT, instructions have already been issued 
to the States/UTs.  The IRMAs appointed under UIG have been entrusted to supervise the work relating 
to UIDSSMT towns.  States/ UTs are being regularly remin ded in the Review Meetings for establishing 
PIUs, timely submission of QPRs and to expedite the submission of Utilization Certificates for released 
funds.   
 
In view of the efforts as indicated above, out of 753 UCs due so far, 516 UCs have been received f rom 
the States and UCs of 177 projects are likely to be received by March, 2012.  Regarding the remaining 
60 UCs it is stated that these projects have been identified as „non -starter‟ due to various compelling 
reasons and the process has been initiated for withdrawal of sanction and to reallocate the money to the 
new projects.   
 
In respect of implementation of Reforms, out of 644 towns/ cities covered under UIDSSMT, the number 
of cities/ towns that have implemented various reforms are given in the table below: 
Achievement of Reforms under UIDSSMT as per QPR Mar / June 2011 
A. Mandatory Reforms No. of ULBs 
achieved 
1 Full migration to double entry accounting system 432 
2 E-Governance (Defining monitorable time table for 
implementation of each e-governance initiative) 465 
3 Full recovery of O&M cost from User Charges 339 
4 Internal Earmarking for basic services to poor 558 
5 Property Tax   

17 
 
5.1 Achieving 85% coverage ratio 471 
5.2 Achieving 90% collection ratio 393 
B. Optional Reforms   
1 Introduction of Property Title Certification system 0 
2 Administrative Reforms 519 
3 Structural Reforms 469 
4 Encouraging Public Private Partnership 516 
5 Revision of By-Laws for Streamlining building approval 
process 574 
6 Simplification of legal procedural framework for conversion 
of agricultural land for non-agricultural purpose 575 
7 Provision of Rain water Harvesting in all buildings 579 
8 Earmarking of 20-25% of developed land for EWS and LIG 
category 516 
9 Introduction of computerized process of registration of land 
and property 504 
10 Byelaws on reuse of reclaimed water 422 
 
 
 
1.13 The Committee note with satisfaction that for effective monitoring the implementation of 
projects under UIDSSMT, instructions have alread y been issued to the States/UTs and t he 
IRMAs appointed under UIG have been entrusted to supervise the work relating to UIDSSMT 
towns. The Committee had also recommended for strict monitoring for speedy implementation 
of various reforms committed by States and ULBs for timely release of ACA. In this regard, the 
Committee note that the Ministry has furnished project wise achievement of completion of 
reforms as per quarterly progress report  for March/June 2011. The Ministry has not furnished 
the data in regard to no. of towns/cit ies which have actually completed the reform process. The 
Committee are surprised  to find that even mandatory reform relating to 'property tax' has not 
been achieved even by a single ULB , so is the case with 'optional reform for introduction of 
property title certification system'. The Committee want the Ministry to make reply in this regard. 
The Committee are extremely disturbed  to note that the Ministry has found 60 projects as non-
starter and the process has been initiated to withdraw the sanction. The  Committee are of the 
view that this is a serious matter and is the result of failure of monitoring mechanism.  They 

18 
 
want that this should be looked into and apprised to the Committee. The Committee while 
reiterating their recommendations for effective monitoring want that accountability be fixed for 
neglect of duty in this regard.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No.8) 
 
Unsatisfactory Progress under Scheme of ‘Urban Infrastructure Development for ‘Satellite 
Towns around Seven Mega cities’          
1.14 The Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee have been informed that the Urban Development Ministry has started a pilot 
scheme of Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Satellite Towns around seven mega 
cities with the objectives to develop urban infrastructure facilities and to enhance the 
sustainability of urban infrastructure facilities by implementing various reforms. Again st an 
allocation of Rs. 200 crore made for seven mega cities and 8 counter magnet towns during the 
year 2010-11 actual disbursed amount was only Rs. 70 crore.  For the financial year 2011 -12 
an amount of Rs. 135.00 crore has been made available for this scheme.  
The Committee note with concern that since approval of this scheme in July, 2009 only 8 towns 
have been identified by States and 11 projects involving Rs. 438.02 crore sanctioned till date. 
The Committee find that most of the projects have been appr oved in the fourth year of the Plan 
and are unlikely to be completed during 11th Plan. The Committee are of the opinion that such a 
scheme should not be wrapped up within a short time. They feel that maximum benefit out of 
the scheme is yet to come. Hence,  it is essential that this scheme is extended in the 12 th Plan 
period. The Committee further feel that financial crunch should not come in way of this scheme. 
The Ministry should take up this matter with the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission. 
At the same time, the Committee want the States to play proactive role with regard to 
implementation of urban reforms and take necessary steps to strengthen ULBs in towns so that 
City Development Plans and Detailed Project Reports could be prepared and submit ted in time 
to harness the benefits of the scheme." 
1.15  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:- 
"Under this pilot scheme, only 8 towns could be taken up, hence selection of eligible towns has 
been completed. Under this scheme, infrastructure projects for provision of water supply, 
sewerage and solid waste management are admissible. In the process of sanctioning 11 
projects, five of the eight towns have been covered. The ministry will take up the issue of 
extension of the scheme in the 12th Plan with the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission 
and monitor the project closely." 
 
1.16 The Committee while are appreciating of the efforts of Ministry of Urban Development  to 
take up the issue of  extension of the scheme in 12 th Plan with the Ministry of Finance and 
Planning Commission fail to understand  as to  why only 5 out of 8 selected towns could be 

19 
 
covered under the scheme.  They want that at least 8 selected towns should be covered under 
the scheme without any delay. 
 The committee, reiterate that the S tates concerned should play proactive role with 
regard to implementation of urban reforms and take necessary steps to strengthen ULBs in 
towns so that City Development Plans could be prepared and submitted in time to harness the 
benefits of the scheme.  If need be,  the Ministry of Urban Development shoul d render all 
necessary help to States as well as cities. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
 
State Sanitation Strategies and City Sanitation Plans  
1.17 The Committee had recommended as under:-  
"The National Urban Sanitation Policy launched in December, 2008 envisages development of 
State Sanitation Strategies and City Sanitation Plans as an integral step towards the 
achievement of its vision that all Indian cities and towns become totally sanitized, healthy and 
livable. 
The Committee are given to understand that out of 5161 cities/towns only 209 cities have 
initiated action for preparation of City Sanitation Plans and 24 States are formulating their State 
Sanitation Str ategies. The Committee note that Ministry has been repeatedly writing to these 
states for preparation of City Sanitation Plans as it is the responsibility of the States and cities to 
design, build, operate and maintain relevant system. The Committee are gi ven to understand 
that the city sanitation plan is envisaged as a document which will not solve all the sanitation 
related problems. Rather it is a first step in addressing the issue of sanitation in an integrated 
manner. While accepting this view, the Com mittee deprecate the allocation of a small sum of 
Rs. 20.05 crore for 5161 towns/cities during the entire plan period. They want the Ministry to 
take up the matter with the Ministries of Finance and Planning Commission so that an ambitious 
plan is not stuck up due to financial constraints. At the same time, they want the Ministry to take 
up this matter with states vigorously to persuade them to prepare state sanitation strategies and 
city sanitation plans so that these states and cities thereof could reap m aximum benefit of the 
scheme.  The Committee also desire that more stringent monitoring mechanism needs to be put 
in place not only at States level but also in the cities so as to ensure its speedy 
implementation." 
 
1.18 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:-  
"The National Urban Sanitation Policy (NUSP) was adopted by the GOI in October, 2008.  Out 
of a total amount of Rs. 52.5 crore earmarked for implementation of the Policy, an amount of 
Rs. 20.05 crore has been set apart for preparation of State Sanitation Strategies (SSS) and City 
Sanitation Plans (CSP). As on date, an amount of Rs. 13.27 crore has been sanctioned to 9 
states for preparation of 85 CSPs.  In addition, 20 CSPs are being prepared with the assistance 
of multilateral and bilateral donors and other sources of funding.  An amount of Rs. 2.47 crore is 
likely to be sanctioned for the preparation of CSPs for 24 cities and an additional amount of Rs.  

20 
 
1.50 crore is likely to be sanctioned to the Govt. of Maharashtra for preparation of CSPs for 15 
cities.  Out of 85 CSPs, 37 have been completed and the Ministry is regularly monitoring the 
completion of the balance.  The Committee has correctly observed that preparation of CSP is 
the first step in addressing the issue of sanitation in an integrated manner.  The view of the 
Committee is that an amount of Rs. 20.05 crore is rather low considering the level of 
urbanisation in the country is also accepted.   Accordingly, a total amount of Rs. 200 crore has 
been proposed under the NUSP for the 12 th Plan period.  Sanitation is a very high priority area 
for the MoUD in view of the significant implications it has from the public health and 
environmental perspectiv es.  The details of the projects sanctioned for sanitation under the 
various schemes of the Ministry are given in the TABLEs below: 
SEWERAGE 
(Rs. in Crore) 
S. 
No. 
Scheme No. of 
Projects 
Sanctioned 
Cost 
1 Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission 
(JNNRUM) – UIG (Urban Infrastructure and Governance) 109 14754.22 
2 Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission 
(JNNRUM) – UIDSSMT (Urban Infrastructure Development 
Scheme for Small and Medium Towns) 
97 2894.04 
3 Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and 
Medium Towns (UIDSSMT) 3 160.10 
 
 
Solid Waste Management 
(Rs. in Crore) 
S. 
No. 
Scheme No. of 
Projects 
Sanctioned 
Cost 
1 Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission 
(JNNRUM) – UIG (Urban Infrastructure and Governance) 43 2052.45 
2 Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission 
(JNNRUM) – UIDSSMT (Urban Infrastructure Development 
Scheme for Small and Medium Towns) 
56 352.02 
3 Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and 
Medium Towns (UIDSSMT) 4 67.79 
4 Scheme of 10% Lump-sum Provision Scheme for North 
Eastern Region including Sikkim 5 17.57 
5 North Eastern Region Urban Development Programme 
(NERUDP) 2 18.91 
 
 

21 
 
 
Storm Water Drainage 
(Rs. in Crore) 
S. No. Scheme No. of 
Projects 
Sanctioned 
Cost 
1 Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission 
(JNNRUM) – UIG (Urban Infrastructure and Governance) 71 8249.03 
2 Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission 
(JNNRUM) – UIDSSMT (Urban Infrastructure Development 
Scheme for Small and Medium Towns) 
64 729.76 
3 Scheme of  10% Lump -sum Provision Scheme for North 
Eastern Region including Sikkim 18 185.33 
 
1.19 The Committee are happy to note that as a result of their recommendation an amount of 
Rs. 200 Crore has been proposed under the NUSP for the 12 th Plan period against a meagre sum 
of Rs. 20.5 Crores allocated earlier . But the Committee observe that the progress with regard to 
preparation of State Sanitation Strategies and City Sanitation Plans is quite slow. Moreover, the 
reply of the government is silent over the issue of monitoring mechanism at both the State and 
City levels. 
The Committee therefore strongly recommend that the Ministry should take up this 
matter with states vigorously to persuade them to prepare State Sanitation Strategies and City 
Sanitation Plans.  The Committee also desire that more stringent monitoring mechanism needs 
to be put in place not only at States l evel but also in the cities, so as to ensure speedy 
implementation of NUSP. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
 
Setting up of National R&D Centre for Metro Rail Coaches 
 
1.20 The Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee in their earlier Report had emphasized the need for setting up of a National 
R&D Centre for state of art Metro Rail coaches under the aegis of Bharat Earth Movers Ltd. 
(BEML). However, due to non support of Ministry of Finance and Planning C ommission, the 
proposal for setting up of this Centre could not be finalized. The CMD, Delhi Metro Rail 
Corporation (DMRC) during the evidence, informed the Committee that they have now modified 

22 
 
the proposal to house this in Bharat Heavy Electrical Ltd. (B HEL) and Bharat Earth Movers Ltd. 
(BEML) will also be involved. Since the Metro rail services have assumed greater significance 
with regard to alleviating the transport woes of the public at large, the Committee want that 
there should not be any laxity in respect of their demand. The setting up of National  R&D 
centre will not only facilitate the building of state -of-the art metro coaches but will reduce the 
cost being incurred on import of coaches for metro rails.  The Committee, however, desire that 
a def inite time frame must be fixed and followed scrupulously for speedy implementation of 
setting up of the centre. 
The Committee appreciate the steps taken by DMRC regarding introduction of metros in all 
those cities having population of more than two million. The Committee have been informed that 
process for preparation of detailed project report have been started in 12 -13 cities out of 20 
such cities and the remaining cities are not entitled as the concerned State Governments did 
not give clearance. The Comm ittee, therefore, desire the Ministry to take up the matter with 
State Governments at the highest level for giving clearance so that Detailed Project Reports 
could be prepared in those cities also so that other related work could be commenced at the 
earliest." 
      
1.21 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:- 
"Earlier the proposal was under consideration before the CoS for Budgetary support of Rs.125 
cr. to BEML for setting up "an R&D Centre of Excellence for Metro Coaches" for r esearch, 
design and development of eco -friendly metro rail technology and rolling stock, auxiliary 
equipment, metro rail system etc. As a follow up action, (i) Ministry of Urban Development 
(Metro Rail Cell) got a new Budget Head for setting up of R&D Cent re for State -of-Art Metro 
Rail Coaches by BEML, (ii) Budget Division also made a provision to the tune of Rs. 30 crore in 
BE of 2009-10 and (iii) Ministry of Defence, Department of Defence Production was requested 
to take further necessary action on the discussions of the meeting dated 21.10.2008.   
  
The amount of Rs. 30 crore could not be utilized as the project could not take off on account of 
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission not agreeing to set up such centre under BEML 
led consortium. As the  metro coaches involve State -of-the art technology, electrical and 
electronic parts, it was decided that the Centre would be set up under the aegis of Bharat 
Heavy Electrical Ltd. (BHEL) led consortium. This has already been discussed in meeting held 
in Planning Commission under Member, Planning Commission while finalizing Annual Plan of 
this Ministry for 2011 -12. Accordingly, in the Financial Year 2011 -2012, a token sum of Rs. 50 
lakh has been kept for BHEL in MoUD Budget.  
 
Now BEML has submitted a concep t paper to Planning Commission for setting up of a Centre 
of Excellence for Metro Rail Coaches and a meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Shri 
Arun Maira, Member, Planning Commission on 12 th September, 2011 at 3:30 P.M. wherein, 
BEML and BHEL made a presentation and representatives of Ministry of Urban Development, 
Railway Board, Ministry of Defence Production and Delhi Metro Rail Corporation were present 
in the meeting.  The minutes of the meeting are awaited. 
 
As per Census: 2001, there are 13 citie s in the country having population of more than 2 
million. With projected annual growth @3.12%, 20 cities will cross the mark of 2 million 
population in 2015. Out of these cities, metro projects are under implementation in 7 cities; 
DPR has been prepared/ under preparation in 5 other cities. Regarding remaining 7 cities also, 

23 
 
the concerned State Govts. were approached by DMRC. However, the State Govt. concerned 
did not clear the proposal for preparation of DPR for Metro Rail Project. Since Urban Transport 
is intertwined with urban development which is a State, the decision of State Govt. is of vital 
importance. The Central Govt. can act only on the proposals that are approved and forwarded 
by the concerned State Govt. to Govt. of India." 
 
1.22 The reply furnished by the Ministry of Urban Development makes the Committee to 
understand that DMRC has put in its sincere efforts in connection with the introduction of 
metro-rail in all twenty cities having population of more than two million. However, seven State 
Governments did not clear the proposal for preparation of Metro Rail Project.  
 The Committee fully agree with the Ministry of Urban Development that Urban Transport 
being a state subject, the decision of State Government is of vital importance . But at the same 
time the Committee strongly feel that in given circumstances only the metro rail could alleviate 
the woes of public transport. Hence, in context of these seven cities, the Committee strongly 
recommend once again that in stead of leaving th e issue in limbo,  the Ministry should again 
take up the matter with State Governments at the highest level  for giving clearance so that 
Detailed Project Reports could be prepared in those seven cities also and  other related work 
commenced at the earliest. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
M/s Emmar MGF as the PPP Project Developer in Commonwealth Games Village 
 
1.23 The Committee had recommended as under:- 
"The Committee have been informed that there was huge delay in the completion of 
Commonwealth Village and due to this Government suffered financial loss also. M/s Emmar 
MGF was selected as a private partner for implementation of this project. The basis of selection 
of M/s Emmar MGF is that Group of Ministers had decided to develop the residential 
apartments in the Commonwealth Games Village on Public Private Partnership mode and DDA, 
after the due process on Request For Quotations (RFQ) and Request For Proposal (RFP), 
selected M/s Emmar MGF as the PPP project Developer. However, despite continuous 
monitoring developer was unable to complete the work within the scheduled time and the 
reason furnished by them was the financial crunch. 
The Committee are dismayed to note that even though DDA had provided an amount of Rs. 
766.89 Crore as a financial help through the purchase of 333 flats of Commonwealth Games 
Village, the developer could not complete the project within extended period. 
The Committee are of the opinion that, awarding of contract to M/s Emmar MGF witho ut 
verifying its financial status is a serious matter and cast doubt on the functioning of DDA.  
The Committee are further informed that the Ministry have levied liquidated damages and 
invoked performance security of Rs.183 crore on M/s Emmar MGF.   Out of  this, only Rs.90 
crore could be realized by the Ministry. The matter regarding recovery of remaining amount is 

24 
 
sub-judice. However, the Committee desire that a thorough inquiry, should be conducted in the 
matter which will ascertain why such a huge contra ct was awarded to a firm who was not 
financially sound enough and complicity of DDA officials therein should also be determined. The 
Committee want the Ministry to fix responsibility on the basis of inquiry and bring the guilty to 
book. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard." 
1.24 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:- 
"DDA has informed that during 9 th meeting of the Group of Ministers held on 4.1.2006, DDA 
was given the mandate for the constru ction of residential apartments to provide 
accommodation for approximately 8000 participants during the CWG 2010 at Delhi.  Various 
options for development of the Village were discussed in the 9 th meeting of Group of Ministers 
and it was decided to develop  the residential apartments on Public Private Participation (PPP) 
mode. 
 
2. The PPP developer was selected through a two -stage transparent open tendering process. 
Stage 1 (RFQ) consisted of short -listing of qualified developers through inviting Expression of 
Interest from interested parties. Stage 2 (RFP) consisted of inviting det ailed proposal from 
shortlisted developers.  
 
3. 15 bidders had submitted their Expression of Interest (EOIs) in response to above RFQ, out 
of whom only 11 bidders who fulfilled the pre-qualification criteria were qualified. 
 
4. While there were numerous r easons as to why the Project Developer was not able to 
complete the project in time i.e. upto 31.03.2010, one of the major factor was the recession 
which happened at the beginning of the year 2009.  The Project Developer was not able to 
generate the finances and it was only due to the help provided to the DDA financially that they 
were able to start the work anew.  Four months from January to April 2009 were lost as no 
work could be undertaken due to financial constraints of the Project Developer.  The work  
suspended for these four months was reflected in the Project Developer completing the work 
by September, 2010 that too with some defects still remaining in the residential complex. 
 
  

25 
 
Capability of the bidder 
 
5. The bidder, Emaar MGF, is a Joint Venture between a world famous global property 
developer viz. M/s Emaar Properties Public Joint Stock Company (PJSC), UAE and a leading 
Indian player in real estate in India viz. M/s MGF Development. Both the groups have 
substantial expertise in real estate development across the globe/ India. Emaar's activities 
include property investment and development, property management services, education, 
healthcare, retail and hospitality sectors, as well as investing in financial service providers. A 
note indicating credentials of M/s Emaar Properties PJSC is placed at ANNEXURE-I. 
 
Purchase of Flats by DDA 
 
6. DDA‟s decision to buy 333 apartments at Rs.766.89 crore was taken keeping in view the 
circumstances which were existing at that period of time i.e. the worldwide recession and the 
inability of the project developer to sell the apartments from which the finances had to be 
generated and the fact that the banks were not advancing any loans in the reality sector.  The 
decision of DDA to provide financial assistance to the developer to purchase apartments, 
helped completion of the project.  In the unlikely event of non -completion of the project which 
actually did not happen, the DDA had the bank guarantee of Rs.300 crore from the de veloper 
in addition to valuable assets created on the project site which duly protected the financial 
interest of the risk taken on by DDA.  It may be reiterated that but for this „out of box solution‟ to 
the problem at that point of time, the Games Villag e could not have been completed. Details 
regarding utilization of funds given by DDA to the Project Developer for purchasing the flats are 
placed at ANNEXURE-II. 
 
Encashment of Bank Guarantee  
 
7. As per the Project Development Agreement M/s Emaar MGF Construction Pvt. Ltd. could not 
meet the 8 th and 9th milestone.  Therefore, liquidated damages as per the agreement were to 
be enforced.  Total liquated damages (LD) of Rs.106.90 crore have been worked out against 
the Project Developer (PD) for delayed completion of the project. DDA encashed the 
performance bank guarantee of Rs.183 crore to adjust this claim. The Hon‟ble High Court of 
Delhi has permitted DDA credit of Rs.90 crore and has stayed the encashment of balance of 
Rs.93 crore. Thus, Rs.16.90 crore of balance LD could not be encashed due to orders of  
Hon‟ble High Court, on which the case is still pending in the High Court of Delhi. Thus, DDA 
has acted in the matter but due to the court case could not realise this amount of Rs.16.90 
crore. 
 
Role of officials in monitoring  
 
8. As per the Project Development Agreement, the project developer was to complete the 
residential facility by March 31, 2010 and hand over to DDA for use as accommodation for 
athletes during the Commonwealth Games 2010. However the Project Developer was unab le 
to complete the project in stipulated time and there were still many finishing works pending 
even till September, 2010.  DDA being a partner in the project and in the right earnest made all 
efforts to ensure completion of the project in time including f inancial assistance. The good faith, 
assistance and spirit of DDA was not reflected by Project Developer, who continued with his 
slow work.  DDA constantly brought to the notice of Project Developer the delay in completion 
of work through various notices i ssued to PD from time to time at all stages in the project. A 
note indicating monitoring activities done by DDA is placed at ANNEXURE-III. 

26 
 
 
9. Regarding the Committee‟s observation that there should be a thorough enquiry to ascertain 
why such huge contract  was given to a firm which was not financially sound and also to 
determine complicity of the DDA officials, it may be stated that Government Constituted a High 
Level Committee (HLC) under the chairmanship of Sh. V.K. Shunglu to look into issues relating 
to the organizing and conduct of Commonwealth Games -2010.  The Committee has since 
submitted six Reports on various aspects relating to organizing and conduct of the Games.   
The 2nd Report of submitted by the Committee is exclusively relating to Commonwealt h Games 
Village.  Ministry of Urban Development/ DDA have examined the Report and submitted the 
response to the findings of the Committee to the Cabinet Secretariat. 
 
10. The Cabinet Secretariat has constituted a Group of Ministers (GoM) on 02.8.2011 to lo ok 
into issues relating to the Reports of the High Level Committee and to consider the views 
expressed on the findings and recommendations by the concerned Ministries/ Departments.  
The terms of reference of the Group of Ministers include: (i) to consider the views expressed by 
the concerned Ministries of the Govt. of India and other agencies on the findings and 
recommendations contained in the Report of HLC and arrive at a considered view on the 
various recommendations of the HLC; (ii) to recommend the fut ure course of action on each of 
the recommendations of the HLC, which would include disciplinary, criminal and civil action 
against persons/ agencies/ contractors indicated in the Report.  MoUD has already submitted 
its findings to the GoM and the GoM is seized with the issue." 
 
1. 25 The Committee are given to understand that the main role of DDA during the 
construction of Commonwealth village was to monitor the project and oversee its timely 
completion. For achieving this objective DDA had put all its ava ilable resources viz.  formation 
of various C ommittees such as Stadia C ommittee, Site Coordination C ommittee and High 
Powered Committee,  the progress of which was constantly  reviewed by Vice Chairman, DDA. 
The Ministry has also informed that higher authorities i.e., Hon'ble Lieutenant Governor, Delhi, 
Committee of Secretaries headed by Cabinet Secretary, Secretary Ministry of Urban 
Development and Secretary Ministry of Youth Affairs a nd Sports did constant monitoring and 
reviewed the progress report. Submission of  various reports such as monthly report, Tata 
Consultancy Services(TCS) report: Initially monthly and later weekly, and weekly reports 
ensured regular progress and quality mo nitoring and facilitation of project at all levels by 
addressing issues faced during the execution of project. For the residential complex , the 
progress was even monitored on a real time basis in each tower by DDA. The Committee are at a 
loss to understand as to why despite such an effective mechanism being in place, the complex 
could not be completed in time. The reasons of recession broken in 2009 along with better 
credentials of project developer  advanced by the Ministry  do not satisfy the Committee. The y 
are of the firm opinion that there was deep -rooted involvement of the officials in awarding the 
contract to M/s EMMAR MGF. The Ministry's claim of sound monitoring sounded hollow when 
the Ministry of Urban Development itself acknowledged that the project  developer had 

27 
 
constructed extra residential units. The question how he could construct extra units remains 
unanswered. The Committee reiterate their earlier observation that M/s EMMMAR MGF was not 
financially strong developer and the award of contract to them was a big mistake.  
The Committee are further informed about the constit ution of Shunglu Committee and 
Group of Ministers in this regard. They want that on the basis of the final report , stringent 
deterrent action should be taken against the officials, firms and other bodies indicted for lapses. 
 
      
  

28 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
Need for adequate budgetary allocation to fulfill growing requirements in Urban Sector 
2.1 The Committee note from the Ministry‟s submission that for the year 2011 -12 against the 
requirement of Rs. 13360.38 crore projected by the Ministry to the Planning Commission, a plan 
allocation of Rs. 6,210 crore was provided to them as Gross Budgetary Sup port (GBS) excluding the 
Internal and External Budgetary Resources (IEBR).  An amount of Rs. 1,844 crore has been allocated 
towards IEBR taking the total allocation to Rs. 8,054 crore.  As per Ministry‟s submission more than 
80% of the plan budget of the M inistry goes towards funding of metro rail projects of Delhi, Bangalore, 
Chennai and Kolkata taken up on DMRC Model of 50:50 joint ownership of Government of India and the 
concerned State Government.  This leaves very small amount at the disposal of the Mi nistry to cater to 
its various programmes/schemes. The Committee are of the view that due to unabated growth of urban 
population which is because of inefficient management of urban areas, urbanization has assumed 
significance and as such there is an urgent  need to give priority to the urban infrastructure issues.  The 
Committee are informed that efforts have been made by the Ministry to initiate certain schemes and 
policies to face various challenges of urbanization. The Committee are of the opinion that th e schemes 
and policies proposed to be undertaken by the Ministry cannot be realized if the Ministry faces financial 
crunch. The Committee feel that inadequate allocation of funds by the Planning Commission vis -à-vis 
Ministry‟s demand are also affecting the  development schemes for urban sector. The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry of Urban Development should vigorously impress upon the  Ministry of 
Finance and the Planning Commission to allocate adequate funds to various schemes so as to achieve 
the targets set out for the 11th Five Year Plan.   
Reply of the Government 
2.2 The observations of the Committee to impress upon the Ministry of  Finance and the Planning 
Commission to allocate adequate funds to various schemes so as to achieve the targets set out for the 
11th Five Year Plan have been noted. As regards budgetary allocation, the Ministry had proposed a 
substantial requirement of Rs.  13,360.38 crore, including IEBR of Rs. 1,844 crore, to the Planning 
Commission for the year 2011 -12 against which the Planning Commission had allocated Rs 8,054.00 
crore for the Ministry. The Ministry had taken up the issue of enhancement of the budgetary  allocation 
vide DO letter dated 03.02.2011 from Secretary (UD) to the M. S., Planning Commission. Planning 

29 
 
Commission vide DO letter dated 04.02.2011 informed that the entire GBS made available by the 
Ministry of Finance for the year 2011 -12 has been allo cated. However, any additionality demand over 
and above the Plan allocation might be considered at the RE stage. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
Review of projects/ schemes and monitoring system on regular basis: 
2.3 The Committee have been informed that in order to improve implementation of projects, NCR 
Planning Board requires State Governments/ implementing agencies to submit Detailed Project Reports 
(DPRs) for Infrastructure Development projects. The implementation of the projects sanctioned by the 
Board is monitored by the Project Monitoring & Coordination wing of the NCR Planning Board through 
monthly and quarterly Reports submitted by the Implementing Agency/ NCR cells. Regular reviews of 
the Projects at the state level and the Board level are followed up by filed visits and interactions with the 
State Implementing Agencies at the time of release of loan installments. Even the second and further 
loan installments are released only after review and verification of financial and physical progress made 
in the project. Despite various efforts made by the Ministry to review the projects/ schemes monitoring 
system and control over the performance of each scheme, the progress of projects/ schemes 
undertaken by various states/ ULBs in not at all satisfactory. 
 The Committee desire that Ministry should introspect its efforts of implementation and 
monitoring and identify the lacunae because even after so many concerted efforts of Ministry the 
progress under various schemes and projects is still not satisfactory. 
Reply of the Government 
2.4 The NCR Planning Board provides loan assistance to constituent State Governments/ Govt. of 
National Capital Territory of Delhi and their development agencies/ Local Bodies (LBs) for selected 
infrastructure development projects that are in compliance with the Regional Plan policies.  The projects 
are prepared and implemented by State Governments and their agencies/ LBs.  The following general 
shortcomings were noticed in the implementation of the projects:- 
1.  Delay in land acquisition. 
2.  Revision of scope due to site constraints and other local factors. 
3.  Delay in obtaining Interdepartmental clearances. 
4.  Land acquisition challenged in Courts etc. 
 
The above factors lead to time and cost overruns in the implementation of the projects. Delays 
and deviations noticed were being brought to the notice of the implementing agencies. The Board 
generally considers above reasons and gets suitable details from the States before release of 
subsequent installments of loan. In addition, the se are also highlighted at the highest levels in the state 
government including in the meetings held by the Chief Secretaries of the concerned states. 
In order to ensure effective implementation and timely completion of the projects, NCRPB has 
taken the following steps:  

30 
 
1. Implementing Agencies are required to prepare Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for the scheme/ 
project for which loan assistance has been sought.  
2. The DPRs are appraised from financial and technical angle with the assistance of outside 
technical agencies.  
3. Loan is sanctioned by the Project Sanctioning & Monitoring Group (PSMG) of the Board subject 
to implementation of project in accordance with approved DPRs. 
4. Before release of loan installments Board ensures that the land required for the imp lementation 
of project is in possession of the Agency and all the statutory permissions required are in place.  
5. Monitoring of project implementation through periodic progress reports. 
6. Incentive Scheme for timely and quality implementation of the projects w ithin approved cost has 
been put in place. 
7. Delays and deviations are being brought to the notice of the highest levels in the state 
government including in the meetings held by the Chief Secretaries of the concerned states. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
 
Slow Progress of Urban Infrastructure and Governance (UIG) Scheme under JNNURM 
 
2.5 The Committee note that an amount of Rs. 31,500 crore as Additional Central Assistance (ACA) 
has been allocated for Urban Infrastructure and Governance (UIG) component of JNNURM for the 
mission period i.e. 2005 -2012. Further, an allocation of    Rs. 3587.00 crore was provided for 11 
approved projects during the year 2010-11 and the total ACA released was Rs. 1026.32 crore as on 28th 
February, 2011 which shows the slow pace of progress under this scheme.  The reasons for slow pace 
attributed by the Ministry are non-completion of various reforms as committed by the State/ Urban Local 
Bodies (ULBs), non -receipt of utilization certificates from States/ Cities and non -release of further 
instalments of ACA for the approved projects. The Committee are not convinced with the justification 
given by the Ministry for slow progress of UIG scheme.  The Committee strongly feel that these 
problems could have been easily solved by having eff ective coordination with States/ ULBs so as to 
check their tendency of not furnishing the Utilization Certificates in time.  There should also be a 
mechanism for taking strict action against those defaulting States. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that Government should devise effective as well as pragmatic ways and means to keep a 
watch on the States/ ULBs and provide every assistance needed for timely implementation of projects/ 
schemes by them.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 

31 
 
2.6 JNNURM is a reform linke d Scheme for provisioning of urban infrastructure and services in 
urban centers. In this, the second and subsequent installment of Additional Central Assistance (ACA) is 
released for projects subject to utilization of 70% of grants and achievement of refor ms according to the 
timelines agreed to as per Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) by the States and Urban Local Bodies.   
The Ministry has laid great emphasis on implementation of the various reforms included in the 
Mission.  These reforms envisage institutiona l, financial and structural changes in the governance 
structure of the Local Bodies to make them efficient, accountable and transparent. The implementation 
of reforms has been a challenge.  Besides, most of the smaller cities have inadequate capacity in te rms 
of finance and human resource, which has led to slow absorption of funds and consequent 
implementation of projects. 
Six years of implementation of JnNURM has brought to focus certain deficiencies among the 
Local Bodies in terms of capacity and resource s which have impeded implementation of the projects 
and reforms.  The Ministry has embarked upon a number of capacity development initiatives to bridge 
this gap.  The Mission Directorate has undertaken a Rapid Training Programme (RTP) on Governance 
and Reforms, extended assistance for preparation of DPRs and supervision and monitoring of project 
implementation.  More than 1800 Local Bodies and parastatal staff and over 2000 elected 
representatives have undergone training across various cities. 
Since funding  of infrastructure projects taken up under JnNURM was linked to satisfactory 
progress on reform implementation and most States slipped on the time lines for the same on account 
of capacity constraints, release of ACA installments for ongoing projects suffe red during 2010 -11 and 
virtually came to a complete halt during the 9 month period from April 2010 to December, 2010.  This in 
turn, led to stoppage of work on the projects,. Recognizing the danger of time and cost over -runs in the 
ongoing projects on acco unt of drying up of the fund flow, the Ministry moved a proposal before the 
Cabinet Committee on Infrastructure (CCI) for relaxing certain reforms conditionalities for release of 
funds.  The CCI vide its decision dated 1.12.2010, agreed for authorizing the  Central Sanctioning and 
Monitoring Committee (CSMC) for release of funds after relaxing reforms conditionalities under UIG.  
However, it was mandated that 10 per cent of the Additional central Assistance (ACA) would be 
withheld till reforms are achieved.  It was only after this decision that the Ministry could process and 
recommend release of ACA amounting to Rs. 2422.22 crore for 198 projects under UIG during the year 
2010-11, out of which Rs. 1930.93 crore was released by Ministry of Finance till 31.03.2 011, against  
Rs. 5291.63 crore (RE) for the year 2010-11. 

32 
 
The Ministry is making efforts to handhold these cities and also to see how best projects can be 
completed by incentivizing reforms.  In the current Financial Year 2011 -12, Rs.2604.70 crore has bee n 
released.  As on 22.12.2011, proposals worth Rs.115.19 crore are in pipeline with MoF. 
The projects are implemented by the Local Bodies (LBs)/ Parastatals. Process of completion of 
projects is at times slow, which is a matter of concern.  State Governmen ts have mentioned about 
various constraints in terms of land acquisition, tendering etc. 
The implementation of Mission is being monitored through different instrumentalities like the 
Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee (CSMC), field visits, Zonal review Meetings.  For each 
State, an Independent Review and Monitoring Agency (IRMA) as w ell as reform appraisal agency has 
been appointed.  Technical support of different wings of the Ministry like the CPHEEO and the TCPO 
are available with the Local Bodies. There is a constant interaction and communication with the State 
Governments to exped ite the progress of reforms and projects.  It is a constant endeavour of the 
Ministry to remove bottlenecks and speed up implementation of projects, so that the same are 
completed at the earliest.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
 
Adequate funding for UIDSSMT to include more cities under JNNURM 
2.7 The Committee in their previous Report on „Demands for Grants‟ 2010-11 and also in the Action 
Taken Report had emphasized upon the need for inclusion of the cities having a population of 5 lakh 
and above in J awaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) so as to improve their 
infrastructure and foster their economic growth.  The Ministry, in response, stated that the need for 
providing funds for all the remaining eligible uncovered cities was brought  to the notice of Ministry of 
Finance and the Planning Commission. The Ministry of Finance did not agree for  inclusion of 28 more 
cities under JNNURM due to lack of Gross Budgetary Support for 11 th Plan while the Planning 
Commission stated that due to con straints of resources, inclusion of more cities may be taken only in 
12th Plan.  The Committee, note that out of 28 cities, 18 cities got projects sanctioned under Urban 
Infrastructure Development Scheme in Small and Medium Towns(UIDSSMT) by the State Leve l 
Sanctioning Committee (SLSC) under the respective State Governments.  As regards, remaining 10 
cities, 2 cities got approval of their projects and for remaining 8 cities, no project has been submitted by 
the State Governments.  The Committee were told th at the approved projects, as well as those likely to 
be submitted by the State Government in future cannot be taken up at present due to inadequate funds 
under UIDSSMT. The Committee feel that it is necessary to take forward the activities and reforms 
initiated under JNNURM into the 12 th Plan.  The gains of JNNURM need to be consolidated and gaps in 

33 
 
reform implementation needs to be addressed.  They also feel that the weakness of programme design 
and problems of implementation needs to be reviewed. The Comm ittee therefore, recommend that 
period of JNNURM Mission should be extended and adequate allocation of funds be made under 
UIDSSMT Scheme so as to include more cities during the 12 th Five Year Plan. The Committee also 
recommend that Ministry should device a mechanism so that each scheme under UIDSSMT could be 
effectively monitored and reviewed on regular basis and problems, wherever identified, could be 
resolved in time. 
Reply of the Government 
2.8 The recommendation of the Committee for inclusion of more cities under UIDSSMT during the 
12th Five Year Plan period has been taken up with the Planning Commission for providing adequate 
financial support. Regarding the recommendation on devising mechanism for effective monitoring and 
review, it is stated that as  per Scheme Guidelines, the SLSC/ SLNA are responsible for periodical 
review and monitoring the implementation of projects and reforms.  However, a periodical review of 
UIDSSMT is being undertaken along with the review of UIG in the CSMC Review Meetings. A part from 
this, review is taken with Secretary/ Principal Secretary (UD) of States/ UTs for proper implementation of 
projects/ reforms and also with Urban Development Ministers of the States during the Annual 
Conference on JNNURM. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
Urban Transport Planning Scheme 
 
2.9 The Committee note that a scheme of Urban Transport Planning was launched in August, 2008 
with the objectives to ensure easily accessible, safe, affordable, quick, comfortable, reliable and 
sustainable mobility for all. It provides central financial assistance, upto 80% for taking up traffic and 
transportation studies/preparation of Detailed Project Reports (DPR) in place of the old scheme for 
providing 40% central assistance. The Committee have been informed that for improving overall mobility 
several measures such as improved integration of land use and transport planning, integration of public 
transport systems and demand restraint measures etc. are required to be undertaken in a coordinated 
manner but a complete understanding of such issues is lacking at both the states and cities level. 
The Committee are happy to note that a new scheme for capacity building in the field of urban 
transport which envisages manpower development was  launched in October, 2009  as Government are 
encouraging public private participation in the urban transport. The Committee find that during the year 
2009-10, 31 proposal were furnished by 21 states and similarly in 2010 -11 only 34 proposals were 
received from these states which cannot be termed as sufficient. The Committee are of the view that the 

34 
 
stakeholders will understand the nuances of the scheme once they are trained through capacity building 
programme.  The Committee also note that central grant is released by Ministry of Urban Development 
in stages according to the terms of reference and progress of the studies. The Committee find that even 
after the lapse of 18 months, neither any review nor any evaluation of this scheme has been made by 
the Ministry. They are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry in this regard that since the scheme has 
recently been launched, the evaluation/ review has not been done. The Committee feel that this is high 
time to undertake the exercise of evaluation as any shortcomings/bottlenecks could b e sorted out. 
Keeping in view, the massive challenge of urban transportation, the Committee desire evaluation of this 
revised scheme be immediately done.  
Reply of the Government 
 
2.10 The scheme funds studies like comprehensive mobility plans, research studies and detailed 
project reports etc. proposed by cities/ LBs through State/ UT Governments.  Representatives of Cities/ 
LBs/ State -UT Governments are interacting with the Ministry of Urban Development and providing 
feedback on regular basis. Therefore , a continuous evaluation is taking place. Since launch of the 
scheme, response from the end users i.e. Cities/ LBs/ UTs/ States has been encouraging which is 
reflected in the increased expenditure under the scheme as given below: 
 
Year Expenditure (Rs. in Crore) Remarks 
2005-06 3.62 Pre-revised 
2006-07 1.98 Pre-revised 
2007-08 3.76 Pre-revised 
2008-09 3.09 Pre-revised as well as revised* 
2009-10 15.76 Revised 
2010-11 22.65 Revised 
2011-12 27.00 (Budgeted) Revised 
 
* The revised scheme was made effective from August, 2008. However, it took some time to 
disseminate the details of the scheme. 
 
A short of evaluation of the scheme has been made  by the Working Group on Urban Transport 
for 12th Five Year Plan set up by the Planning Commission. The Working Group made extensive 
discussions regarding the scheme in context of finalizing policy interventions to realize the goals for 12 th 
Five Year Plan and in its report submitted to the Planning commission, in September, 2011, has 

35 
 
recommended the continuation of the existing schemes of Urban Transport Planning and Capacity 
building in urban transport with additional allocation and scope. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
 
Regularization of unauthorized colonies in Delhi 
2.11 The Committee are given to  understand that Union Government had approved the revised 
guidelines for regularization of unauthorized colonies on 8 -2-2007, DDA notified the Regulations in this 
regard under the Delhi Development Act, 1957 on 24 -3-2008. The work relating to regularizati on, 
including preparation and implementation of development works involving agencies concerned is to be 
undertaken, coordinated, monitored and supervised by the Government of the National Capital Territory 
of Delhi (GNCTD).  As provided in a subsequent not ification issued in this regard on 16 th June 2008, 
time limit of one year has been given for formal regularization of unauthorized colonies after the date of 
issuance of Provisional Regularization Certificates to such unauthorized colonies.   GNCTD has iss ued 
Provisional Regularization Certificates to 1223 unauthorized colonies on 4 th October, 2008 in 
accordance with the notification dated 16th June, 2008. 
The Committee note that a provision of Rs. 697.50 crore was made for providing civic amenities 
to unauthorized colonies during the financial year 2011 -12 and water supply, sewerage, roads, street 
lighting and electrification etc. have already been given to 1033 unauthorized colonies in Delhi.  The 
Committee have been informed that the Urban Development Dep artment of Delhi State has recently 
forwarded a tentative list of 733 unauthorized colonies which have been found eligible for basic 
amenities as per the parameters fixed. The Committee are surprised to find that out of 733 colonies, 
only 90 lay out plans have been scrutinized by  Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD) and sent to 
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) for finalizing the boundaries.  Thereafter, the 
lay-out plan of these colonies will be approved by the Standing Committee o f MCD which is the final 
authority.  The Committee are not satisfied with the progress of regularization and development work 
being undertaken in the unauthorized colonies. The Committee feel that though the regularization of 
unauthorized colonies is a Sta te subject yet the Central Government should ensure that regularization 
of unauthorized colonies in Delhi is done as per their revised guidelines and also to ensure  that  basic 
amenities should be provided to them within 2 years of their authorization so that  the people  do not live 
in inhuman civic conditions.   
 
Reply of the Government 

36 
 
2.12 The Govt. of NCT of Delhi has indicated that a total number of 1639 applications have been 
received from Residents Welfare Association (RWAs) for regularization of unauthorized colonies, and 
Provisional Regularisation Certificates have been issued to 1218 unauthorised colonies.  Clearances 
were received for 1018 unauthorised colonies from agencies like Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD), 
Archeological Survey of India (ASI), Forest Department, and Revenue Department and have been 
forwarded to MCD for scrut iny / approval of layout plans.  MCD supplied scrutinized Layout Plans to 
Govt. of NCT of Delhi for 160 Unauthorised Colonies. Meeting of „Committee constituted for fixation of 
boundaries of Unauthorised Colonies‟ had been convened from 11.7.11 to 15.7.11 to tentatively fix the 
boundaries of 60 unauthorised colonies, and 51 cases have been tentatively finalized and subsequently 
sent to MCD for getting approval of Standing Committee.   
MoUD reviews the progress of regularization of unauthorized colonies from  time to time.  A 
meeting had been taken by Secretary (UD) on 1.6.2011 to review the progress made towards 
Regularization of  Unauthorized Colonies in the NCT of Delhi, which was attended by officers from 
DDA, NDMC, MCD and Govt. of NCT of Delhi.  In the s aid meeting, Secretary (UD) directed all 
concerned to expedite the process of regularization of unauthorized colonies as per Regulations issued 
for the purpose. A meeting had been taken by the Chief Secretary, GNCTD on 12.8.2011 to decide the 
time frame fo r completing the regularization process of 1639 unauthorised colonies, which was 
attended by officers from DDA and MCD.   
 GNCTD has intimated that it is providing basic civic amenities like construction of roads and 
drains, water supply, sewerage, sanitat ion, street lights and electrification in the unauthorized colonies.  
The funds are provided to the agencies since 1998 for development works and augment facilities in 
unauthorized colonies.  An amount of Rs. 3,376 crore has been released to the Municipal Corporation 
of Delhi (MCD), Delhi State Industrial and Infrastructure Development (DSIIDC), Irrigaton & Flood 
Control (I&FC) and Delhi Jal Board (DJB) since 1998 to till date.  An allocation of Rs. 2,800 crore was 
kept for the development of unauthorized c olonies under the Plan scheme of “Provision of Essential 
Services in Unauthorized Colonies” in     the 11 th Five Year Plan.   In the financial year 2010 -2011, an 
allocation of Rs.749 crore has been made.  Estimate amounting to Rs.171.06 crore has been 
sanctioned from April, 2010 to 31.01.2011 for construction of roads and drains, laying of water lines, 
sewerage, street lighting, sanitation, electricity. In the financial year 2011 -12, a provision of Rs.697.50 
crore has been made for providing civic amenities.   
An advisory has been issued to Delhi Development Authority (DDA) vide No. J -13036/2/2011-
DDIIB dated 1 st July, 2011 to take up the issue of large scale encroachments that are taking place on 
DDA land seriously and must not allow any encroachment to com e up on their land.  The Authority has 

37 
 
been advised to launch a concerted campaign to enable general public to inform about such illegal 
activity on net or telephone through publishing citizen friendly advertisements in the leading Hindi and 
English Newspapers of Delhi giving details of dedicated phone number and e -mail ID.  On the basis of 
information received, DDA in coordination with police and other concerned agencies would carry out a 
well planned campaign to remove all kinds of encroachments on Govern ment land and cordon off their 
properties in a manner that no encroachment takes place in the future.   
 Delhi Development Authority issued Public Notice in the Hindustan Times and Nav Bharat 
Times on 10.08.2011 soliciting the cooperation from public to intimate the incidents of encroachment on 
the land of Delhi Development Authority and lodge complaints.  Th e details of e -mail address and 
phone number through which the complaints can be lodged was indicated in the Public Notice.   
 Secretary (UD) also took a meeting on 06.09.2011 with the officers of Govt. of NCT of Delhi, 
Ministry of HUPA, NDMC, MCD, DDA, CP WD and DUSIB to review the progress of Rehabilitation/ 
Relocation of Slums and JJ Clusters in Delhi.  In the said meeting, it was decided that DDA, CPWD, 
MCD, NDMC, etc. will coordinate among themselves for implementing the rehabilitation programme, 
which may help in freeing the encroached land by slums and JJ clusters.  Secretary (UD) also took a 
meeting on 07.9.2011 and 2.11.2011 with the senior officers of Government of NCT of Delhi to review 
the progress made towards regularization of unauthorized colonies as per the existing Guidelines.   
The National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Second Bill, 2011 
The Parliament has passed the National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) 
Second Bill, 2011. The proposed Act under the Bill will provide temporary relief and minimize avoidable 
hardship and irreparable loss to the people of NCT of Delhi, while facilitating realistic revision of Master 
Plan for Delhi (MPD -2021) and ensuring its smooth implementation by maintaining statu s quo in the 
entire National Capital Territory of Delhi.   
As provided in the Bill, no punitive action shall be taken till 31 st December, 2014, in any area of 
NCTD provided compliance is made to such directions, as the Central Government may give from time  
to time, and that any punitive action required to be taken by the local authorities shall be carried only 
with the specific approval of the Administrator of Delhi (i.e. Lt. Governor, Delhi).  However, no relief 
shall be available from encroachment on public land, except where explicitly covered under the Act.   
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 

38 
 
-Nil- 
  

39 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT 
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
Demand No. 102 MH (4059)-Capital Outlay on Public Works 
4.1 The Committee note that net budgetary allocation under Demand No.102 is Rs. 1589 crore. 
However, the Committee are not happy t o find „nil‟ achievement during the financial year 2009 -10, in 
Non-Residential (4059 Plan -UD) due to shortage of funds. During the financial year 2010 -11, 
Government could complete only remaining left over work of the previous year. Other works like 
construction of General Pool Office Accommodation at INA (51782 sqm) New Delhi, at CBD Shahdara 
(15886 sqm.) New Delhi, and at Kavadiguda, (30000 sqm) at Hyderabad supposed to be completed by 
31.03.2011 have not yet been completed. The Committee are deeply conce rned with such state of 
affairs. The prestigious works are being delayed/ blocked for want of funds. The Ministry should have 
anticipated this and the demand for necessary funds should have been made at the time of 
Supplementary Demands.  
 The Committee ar e of the view that  such delays put question mark on the planning, poor 
management and sincerity on the part of the Ministry besides such delays lead to cost and time 
overruns and become strain on the financial health of the country. The Committee recommen d that the 
Ministry should properly plan the timely execution of its schemes, make effective monitoring and also fix 
responsibility for delay in completion of these projects besides allocating sufficient funds for them.  
Reply of the Government 
4.2 The progress of GPOA Projects at INA, New Delhi, CBD Shahdara, Delhi and Kavadiguda, 
Hyderabad suffered due to non-availability of sufficient funds during last two financial years i.e. in 2009 -
10 and 2010 -11. However sufficient funds have been allotted dur ing 2011 -12 to complete these 
projects.  
 
During the year 2009 -10, the demand for additional funds to the tune of Rs. 59.00 crore under 
MH:4059-UD(P) had been submitted in the 1 st Batch of Supplementary Demand for Grants which could 
not be sanctioned. Howe ver, the provision had been augmented to Rs. 81.00 crore to meet the 
requirement for ongoing projects by re -appropriating the funds of Rs. 6.00 crore from savings under 
other plan sub-heads of the Grant. 
 
During the year 2010 -11, the demand for additional funds to the tune of Rs. 69.00 crore under 
MH:4059-UD(P) had been submitted in the 1 st Batch of Supplementary Demand for Grants and Rs. 
34.50 Crore had been sanctioned for meeting the additional requirement to complete the works like 

40 
 
street scaping of Delh i roads around Stadium and Aesthetic Work, repairs and rehabilitation, 
upgradation & façade improvement in the vicinity of Commonwealth Games Venues. 
 
In the current financial year (2011 -12), the Budget Grant of Rs. 133.59 crore has been 
sanctioned as per BE demand of the zones which is sufficient for the ongoing works/ project. Details of 
Budget demand, allocation & expenditure under MH: 4059 -UD(P) Year-wise since 2009 -10 have been 
as under: - 
 
Year BE 
Demand 
Budget 
Grant 
Supplementary 
Demand 
Supplementary 
Grant 
Final 
Budget 
Grant 
Actual 
Expenditure 
2009-10 221.30 75.00 59.00 Nil 81.00 79.12 
2010-11 201.13 84.00 69.00 34.50 118.50 116.50 
2011.12 134.59 133.59 -- -- -- 22.09 (up to 
Aug‟2011) 
 
Further the progress of these projects was also delayed due to  other reasons such as site 
conditions, cross departmental issues involving role of other organizations. The status of these projects 
along with reasons for delay is as under:- 
 
4. GPOA at INA: 
 
Out of total area of 51782 sqm. of all five blocks, an area of 36812 sqm. has been completed 
by 2010-11 and balance area is targeted to be completed by 30.9.2011. The position of various blocks 
is as under: 
 
(i) A new building „B‟ Block has been constructed under the General Pool Office Accommodation 
(GPOA) at INA, New Delhi. The total usable area of the building is about 47,087 sq. ft. (Ground 
+ 6 th floor). This block has already allotted on 24.11.2011 with the approval of UDM to the 
under mentioned Central Govt. offices. 
 
(c) Department of AYUSH, M/o Health & Family Welfare an area of 34,087 sq. ft. (Ground, 
First to third and fifth and sixth floors). 
(d) National Commission for Minorities an area of 13,000 sq. ft (Fourth and fifth floor). 
 
(ii) Block C allotted to NHRC is complete and interior work going on, 
(iii) Block D allotted to ASI is complete and interior work going on, 
(iv) Block E allotted to CGA is complete, 
(v) Block F allotted to NCDRC has been occupied. 
 

41 
 
The project was delayed due to inadequate funds during 2009 -10 and 2010 -11. Further, CVC 
did not allow the construction of block adjacent to CVC building leading to delay of about 6 months on 
this account.  There has been delay in certain activities relating to external services for want of 
clearance from respective organizations like CVC/ individual client, bu t these have now been resolved 
except the issue of exit path besides CVC block. Draft scheme with multiple alternatives has been 
submitted to CVC for approval and whole complex can be made functional on implementation of this 
scheme with the consent of CVC . These blocks have been made ready for interior works since 1 st April 
2011. Though the project has been delayed due to above reasons, there shall be no cost overrun in this 
project. 
 
5. GPOA at CBD Shahdara, Delhi: 
Area of land of 1.9 acre was allotted to then Department of Statistics, Ministry of Planning by DDA 
and possession taken on 06.08.1984. Ministry of Statistics & P.I approached CPWD to utilize plot as GPOA 
and allot space to them on 26.09.1986 as adequate funds were not likely to be available for them. MOUD 
approved on 18.11.1987 to CPWD to take up construction as GPOA. CPWD completed boundary wall on 
30.11.1989 but after that plot was encroached upon which was got vacated in July 2007 with the help of 
MCD after payment of re -location charges. Dire ctor, Ministry of Statistics & P.I inquired on 29.09.1997 
about the status of construction. CPWD meanwhile prepared the drawings and submitted to DDA for 
sanction in April 2005 but DDA refused to process till encroachment was removed. 
All clearance i.e. CF O, DUAC, AAI, Air Force etc. obtained in July 2008 and DDA completed its 
process for release of plan but asked for latest EOT before release. Cost estimate of Rs. 43.14 crore 
sanctioned on 02.04.2008 by MOUD. Work physically started in July 2008. CPWD purs ued EOT and DDA 
granted EOT upto 30.06.2009 but sent the approval to Ministry of Statistic & P.I. in Dec 2009 being land 
title holder. Ministry of Statistic & P.I. asked DDA to stop the construction being carried out by CPWD and 
requested MOUD to decide sp ace allocation. Matter reported to MOUD for resolution and construction 
continued. Several meetings and discussions held starting from May 2009 in MOUD with AS and DOE.  
Finally, MOUD in March 2011, agreed for space requirement of 40000 sqft to the Ministr y of S & P.I 
and offered to allot entire building having 50000 sqft carpet area against the vacation of 10,000 sqft 
existing space. Minister of S & P.I. wrote Minster of UD to consider requirement of more space. Meeting 
held on 30.08.2011 in the chamber of  DOE and in principally agreed for additional space of 4000 sqft and 
Ministry of S & P.I. agreed to vacate 6000 sqft existing space. Lastly meeting held in the chamber of 
AS(UD) on 29.09.2011 but matter could not be formally resolved as MOUD is not agreed to give more than 
10,000 sqft space.   

42 
 
Further development in respect of above building is that Director of Estate vide letter no. 10/7/89 -
Ofc.(pt.) dated 18.11.2011 has conveyed to Ministry of Ministry of Statistics  & Programme Implementation 
(MS&PI) tha t eligible additional office cannot be more than  39,423 sqft and accordingly MS&PI has to 
vacate 10,000 sqft of area before entire building is allotted. It is learnt verbally from Director (Admn.), 
MS&PI that they have now projected demand of 70,000 sqft in response to DOEs letter dated 18.11.2011.  
Building is ready since 31.10.2011 but cannot be made functional in the want of external bulk 
connection of sewer, water and electricity as same can only be obtained after sanction of local body 
drawings which in turn can only happen on authorization by land title holder . Re-revised PE amounting to 
Rs. 62.45 cr has been submitted to Directorate CPWD on 11.11.2011. Certain observations have been 
received from Director (P&WA) on 19.12.2011 which are being clarified.  
We have to provide security on building and inoccupation shall lead to deteriorate with passage of 
time.  It is very important and urgent to occupy the building to safe guard government interest. It is 
therefore requested that matter please be taken up  with MOUD to sort out the impasse on most urgent 
basis. MOUD may please be further requested that in case land title holder is not ready to reach for any 
agreement, matter may please be taken at appropriate level to find out alternate solution. 
6. GPOA at Kavadiguda, Hyderabad:  
This Project was initially targeted to be completed by 30.10.2011. But, the above project has 
suffered due to non -availability of required funds during last two financial years i.e. 2009 -10 and 2010-
11.  
Now the finishing work is in p rogress and the same has been targeted to be completed by 
February, 2012. 
 
4.3 For the comments of the Committee please see paragraph No. 1.7 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
Central Public Works Department 
4.4 The upkeep and ensuring proper maintenance of the Government buildings and residential 
complexes is the responsibility of the C.P.W.D. The Committee are dismayed to note widespread 
encroachment by shopkeepers, motor mechanics, pavement dwellers even in organized government 
residential complexes which not only pollutes the area but also creates inconvenience to residents.  It 
also creates law and order problem besides giving encouragement to anti -social elements. This is 
assuming alarming proportions and becoming a threat to the civil society. 

43 
 
 The Committee are of the opinion that it is inaction on the part of administration which 
encourages such encroachments not only being taking place but also prosper in or around every 
government residential complex.  The Committee note that it has become a habi t in the Government to 
always pass the buck from one agency to another. The Committee are of the view that it is the 
Government agencies that allow the flourishing of the encroachers. They want the encroachments 
should be stopped. 
 The Committee recommend that strict action needs to be taken against those found 
responsible.  The Committee desire that effective steps should be taken by the Ministry for proper 
coordination among CPWD, M.C.D., N.D.M.C as well as police for removal and checking of such 
encroachments not only in Delhi but also across all the States in  the country. All matters pertaining to 
jurisdiction like area does not come under the control of the Ministry should be sorted out so as to free 
the public place from encroachers. The encroachers s hould not in any way take benefit out of feuding 
Government agencies entangled on the issue of jurisdiction rather they must be crushed. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of the initiatives taken by the Ministry in this regard 
and also results achieved. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.5 There are encroachments by Jhuggi/ Jhopri dwellers in the Govt. residential colonies.  Efforts 
are being made for the removal of these Jhuggies in coordination with the authorities concerned as per 
guidelines. In some cases, the matter is under litigation in local courts. In some eligible cases, 
correspondence has already been made with MCD for their rehabilitations and relocation after joint 
survey to relocate them. Some of the colonies have already been surv eyed and as per estimates sent 
by MCD, a consolidated amount of Rs. 18.99 lakh has already been deposited with the J J Cluster 
Department on 03.05.2003 in respect of Shankar Camp near J & K Block, MS flat, Sec -13, R.K. Puram. 
The relocation is to be done b y Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board. An amount of Rs. 21.45 lacs 
have been deposited to MCD slum wing on 20.09.2001 for removal of 87 Jhuggies in Nicholson 
Square. Similarly a cheque of Rs. 13.2 lakh has been deposited by CPWD to MCD slum wing on 
31.07.2001 for rehabilitation of 58 Jhuggi at J.J. cluster Rajiv Gandhi camp, Aram Bagh, New Delhi. 
Some of the encroachments such as in Sriniwaspuri, have already been removed and due care is being 
taken not to allow fresh encroachment.  
Also with regard to th e third para of the recommendation, it is to mention that an advisory has 
been issued to Delhi Development Authority (DDA) vide No. J -13036/2/2011-DDIIB dated 1st July, 2011 
to take up the issue of large scale encroachments that are taking place on DDA lan d seriously and not 
allow any encroachment to come up on their land.  The Authority has been advised to launch a 
concerted campaign to enable general public to inform about such illegal activity on net or telephone 
through publishing citizen friendly advertisements in the leading Hindi and English Newspapers of Delhi 

44 
 
giving details of dedicated phone number and e -mail ID.  On the basis of information received, DDA in 
coordination with police and other concerned agencies would carry out a well planned campai gn to 
remove all kinds of encroachments on Government land and cordon off their properties in a manner 
that no encroachment takes place in the future.   
The DDA had issued Public Notice in the Hindustan Times and Navbharat Times on 
10.08.2011 soliciting the cooperation from public to intimate the incidents of encroachment on the land 
of Delhi Development Authority and lodge complaints.  The details of e-mail address and phone number 
through which the complaints can be lodged were indicated in the Public Notice.   
 Secretary (UD) took a meeting on 06.09.2011 with the officers of Govt. of NCT of Delhi, M/o 
HUPA, NDMC, MCD, DDA, CPWD and DUSIB to review the progress of Rehabilitation/ Relocation of 
Slums and JJ Clusters in Delhi.  In the said meeting, it was de cided that DDA, CPWD, MCD, NDMC, 
etc. will coordinate among themselves for implementing the rehabilitation programme, which may help 
in freeing the encroached land by slums and JJ clusters. 
4.6 For the comments of the Committee please see paragraph No. 1.10 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.7) 
Effective monitoring system and control over performance of schemes under UIDSSMT 
 
4.7 Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and Medium towns (UIDSSMT) is one of 
the sub-components of JNNURM for 7 years duration beginning from 2005-06. The Committee note that 
since inception of the scheme and till 31.12.2010, 764 projects in 641 towns involving Rs. 12928.93 
crore have been approved for release of funds. The Committee have been informed that 123 projects in 
8 States have been physically completed, 560 projects are at various stages of implementation and 415 
Utilisation Certificates (UCs) amounting to Rs. 2556.75 crore have been received from 23 States.  The 
Committee find that physical progress of projects as reported by the State Governments is far from 
satisfactory under UIDSSMT.  Process for furnishing the UC‟s by States is also very slow.  The 
Committee further note that Ministry have decided that the Independent Review and Monitoring Agency 
(IRMA) appointed for UIG would also be extended to the Urban Local Bodies under UIDSSMT.  State 
Governments/SLNAs have also been advised to constitute one Project Implementation Unit (PIU) each 
for 15 ULBs.  The Committee, therefore, desire that effective mechanism should be devised by the 
Government to expedite the receipt of UCs and Quarterly Progress Reports from State Governments. 
The Comm ittee recommend that process regarding appointing of IRMA and constitution of Project 

45 
 
Implementation Unit for ULB‟s should be completed at the earliest for better monitoring and timely 
implementation of sanctioned projects under UIDSSMT.  Needless to empha sise that strict monitoring is 
indispensible for speedy implementation of various reforms committed by States and ULBs for timely 
release of ACA. The Committee would like to be informed of the results achieved by the steps taken by 
the Ministry in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.8 For monitoring the implementation of projects under UIDSSMT, instructions have already been 
issued to the States/UTs.  The IRMAs appointed under UIG have been entrusted to supervise the work 
relating to UIDSSMT towns.  St ates/ UTs are being regularly reminded in the Review Meetings for 
establishing PIUs, timely submission of QPRs and to expedite the submission of Utilization Certificates 
for released funds.   
 
In view of the efforts as indicated above, out of 753 UCs due s o far, 516 UCs have been 
received from the States and UCs of 177 projects are likely to be received by March, 2012.  Regarding 
the remaining 60 UCs it is stated that these projects have been identified as „non -starter‟ due to various 
compelling reasons and the process has been initiated for withdrawal of sanction and to reallocate the 
money to the new projects.   
 In respect of implementation of Reforms, out of 644 towns/ cities covered under UIDSSMT, the 
number of cities/ towns that have implemented various reforms are given in the table below: 
Achievement of Reforms under UIDSSMT as per QPR Mar / June 2011 
 
A. Mandatory Reforms No. of ULBs achieved 
1 Full migration to double entry accounting system 432 
2 E-Governance (Defining monitorable time table for 
implementation of each e-governance initiative) 465 
3 Full recovery of O&M cost from User Charges 339 
4 Internal Earmarking for basic services to poor 558 
5 Property Tax   
5.1 Achieving 85% coverage ratio 471 

46 
 
5.2 Achieving 90% collection ratio 393 
B. Optional Reforms   
1 Introduction of Property Title Certification system 0 
2 Administrative Reforms 519 
3 Structural Reforms 469 
4 Encouraging Public Private Partnership 516 
5 Revision of By-Laws for Streamlining building approval 
process 574 
6 Simplification of legal procedural framework for conversion 
of agricultural land for non-agricultural purpose 575 
7 Provision of Rain water Harvesting in all buildings 579 
8 Earmarking of 20-25% of developed land for EWS and 
LIG category 516 
9 Introduction of computerized process of registration of 
land and property 504 
10 Byelaws on reuse of reclaimed water 422 
 
4.9  For the comments of the Committee please see paragraph No. 1.13 
Recommendation (Serial No.8) 
Unsatisfactory Progress under Scheme of ‘Urban Infrastructure Development for ‘Satellite 
Towns around Seven Mega cities’ 
4.10 The Committee have been informed that the Urban Development Ministry has started a pilot 
scheme  of Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Satellite Towns around seven mega cities 
with the objectives to develop urban infrastructure facilities and to enhance the sustainability of urban 
infrastructure facilities by implementing various reforms. Against an allocation of Rs. 200 crore made for 
seven mega cities and 8 counter magnet towns during the year 2010 -11 actual disbursed amount was 
only Rs. 70 crore.  For the financial year 2011 -12 an amount of Rs. 135.00 crore has been made 
available for this scheme.  
 The Committee note with concern that since approval of this scheme in July, 2009 only 8 towns 
have been identified by States and 11 projects involving Rs. 438.02 crore sanctioned till date. The 

47 
 
Committee find that most of the projects have been approved in  the fourth year of the Plan and are 
unlikely to be completed during 11 th Plan. The Committee are of the opinion that such a scheme should 
not be wrapped up within a short time. They feel that maximum benefit out of the scheme is yet to 
come. Hence, it is essential that this scheme is extended in the 12 th Plan period. The Committee further 
feel that financial crunch should not come in way of this scheme. The Ministry should take up this matter 
with the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission. At the sam e time, the Committee want the 
States to play proactive role with regard to implementation of urban reforms and take necessary steps to 
strengthen ULBs in towns so that City Development Plans and Detailed Project Reports could be 
prepared and submitted in time to harness the benefits of the scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.11 Under this pilot scheme, only 8 towns could be taken up, hence selection of eligible towns has 
been completed. Under this scheme, infrastructure projects for provision of water supply, sewerage and 
solid waste management are admissible. In the process of sanctioning 11 projects, five of the eight 
towns have been covered. The ministry will take up the issue of extension of the scheme in the 12 th 
Plan with the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission and monitor the project closely. 
4.12 For the comments of the Committee please see paragraph No. 1.16 
Recommendation (Serial No.9) 
State Sanitation Strategies and City Sanitation Plans 
 
4.13 The National Urban Sanitation Policy launched in December, 2008 envisages development of 
State Sanitation Strategies and City Sanitation Plans as an integral step towards the achievement of its 
vision that all Indian cities and towns become totally sanitized, healthy and livable. 
 The Committ ee are given to understand that out of 5161 cities/towns only 209 cities have 
initiated action for preparation of City Sanitation Plans and 24 States are formulating their State 
Sanitation Strategies. The Committee note that Ministry has been repeatedly wr iting to these states for 
preparation of City Sanitation Plans as it is the responsibility of the States and cities to design, build, 
operate and maintain relevant system. The Committee are given to understand that the city sanitation 
plan is envisaged as a document which will not solve all the sanitation related problems. Rather it is a 
first step in addressing the issue of sanitation in an integrated manner. While accepting this view, the 

48 
 
Committee deprecate the allocation of a small sum of Rs. 20.05 cror e for 5161 towns/cities during the 
entire plan period. They want the Ministry to take up the matter with the Ministries of Finance and 
Planning Commission so that an ambitious plan is not stuck up due to financial constraints. At the same 
time, they want t he Ministry to take up this matter with states vigorously to persuade them to prepare 
state sanitation strategies and city sanitation plans so that these states and cities thereof could reap 
maximum benefit of the scheme.  The Committee also desire that mo re stringent monitoring mechanism 
needs to be put in place not only at States level but also in the cities so as to ensure its speedy 
implementation. 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.14 The National Urban Sanitation Policy (NUSP) was adopted by the GOI in October, 2008.  Out of 
a total amount of Rs. 52.5 crore earmarked for implementation of the Policy, an amount of Rs. 20.05 
crore has been set apart for preparation of State Sanitation Strategies (SSS) and City Sanitation Plans 
(CSP). As on date, an amount of Rs. 13.27 crore has been sanctioned to 9 states for preparation of 85 
CSPs.   In addition, 20 CSPs are being prepared with the assistance of multilateral and bilateral donors 
and other sources of funding.  An amount of Rs. 2.47 crore is likely to be san ctioned for the preparation 
of CSPs for 24 cities and an additional amount of Rs. 1.50 crore is likely to be sanctioned to the Govt. of 
Maharashtra for preparation of CSPs for 15 cities.  Out of 85 CSPs, 37 have been completed and the 
Ministry is regularly  monitoring the completion of the balance.  The Committee has correctly observed 
that preparation of CSP is the first step in addressing the issue of sanitation in an integrated manner.  
The view of the Committee is that an amount of Rs. 20.05 crore is rat her low considering the level of 
urbanisation in the country is also accepted.   Accordingly, a total amount of Rs. 200 crore has been 
proposed under the NUSP for the 12 th Plan period.  Sanitation is a very high priority area for the MoUD 
in view of the si gnificant implications it has from the public health and environmental perspectives.  The 
details of the projects sanctioned for sanitation under the various schemes of the Ministry are given in 
the TABLEs below: 
 
SEWERAGE 
(Rs. in Crore) 
S. No. Scheme No. of 
Projects 
Sanctioned 
Cost 

49 
 
1 Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission 
(JNNRUM) – UIG (Urban Infrastructure and Governance) 109 14754.22 
2 Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission 
(JNNRUM) – UIDSSMT (Urban Infrastructure Development 
Scheme for Small and Medium Towns) 
97 2894.04 
3 Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and 
Medium Towns (UIDSSMT) 3 160.10 
 
Solid Waste Management 
(Rs. in Crore) 
S. No. Scheme No. of 
Projects 
Sanctioned 
Cost 
1 Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal  Mission 
(JNNRUM) – UIG (Urban Infrastructure and Governance) 43 2052.45 
2 Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission 
(JNNRUM) – UIDSSMT (Urban Infrastructure Development 
Scheme for Small and Medium Towns) 
56 352.02 
3 Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and 
Medium Towns (UIDSSMT) 4 67.79 
4 Scheme of 10% Lump -sum Provision Scheme for North 
Eastern Region including Sikkim 5 17.57 
5 North Eastern Region Urban Development Programme 
(NERUDP) 2 18.91 
 

50 
 
Storm Water Drainage 
(Rs. in Crore) 
S. No. Scheme No. of 
Projects 
Sanctioned 
Cost 
1 Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission 
(JNNRUM) – UIG (Urban Infrastructure and Governance) 71 8249.03 
2 Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission 
(JNNRUM) – UIDSSMT (Urban Infrastructure Development 
Scheme for Small and Medium Towns) 
64 729.76 
3 Scheme of 10% Lump -sum Provision Scheme for North 
Eastern Region including Sikkim 18 185.33 
 
4.15 For the comments of the Committee please see paragraph No. 1.19 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.12) 
Setting up of National R&D Centre for Metro Rail Coaches 
4.16 The Committee in their earlier Report had emphasized the need for setting up of a National 
R&D Centre for state of art Metro Rail coaches under the aegis of Bharat Earth Movers Ltd. (BEML). 
However, due to non support of Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission, the proposal for setting 
up of this Centre could not be finalized. The CMD, Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) during the 
evidence, informed the Committee that they h ave now modified the proposal to house this in Bharat 
Heavy Electrical Ltd. (BHEL) and Bharat Earth Movers Ltd. (BEML) will also be involved. Since the 
Metro rail services have assumed greater significance with regard to alleviating the transport woes of 
the public at large, the Committee want that there should not be any laxity in respect of their demand. 
The setting up of National  R&D centre will not only facilitate the building of state -of-the art metro 
coaches but will reduce the cost being incurred on  import of coaches for metro rails.  The Committee, 
however, desire that a definite time frame must be fixed and followed scrupulously for speedy 
implementation of setting up of the centre. 
 The Committee appreciate the steps taken by DMRC regarding introd uction of metros in all 
those cities having population of more than two million. The Committee have been informed that 
process for preparation of detailed project report have been started in 12 -13 cities out of 20 such cities 
and the remaining cities are n ot entitled as the concerned State Governments did not give clearance. 

51 
 
The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to take up the matter with State Governments at the 
highest level for giving clearance so that Detailed Project Reports could be prepared i n those cities also 
so that other related work could be commenced at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.17 Earlier the proposal was under consideration before the CoS for Budgetary support of Rs.125 
cr. to BEML for setting up "an R&D Centre of Excell ence for Metro Coaches" for research, design and 
development of eco -friendly metro rail technology and rolling stock, auxiliary equipment, metro rail 
system etc. As a follow up action, (i) Ministry of Urban Development (Metro Rail Cell) got a new Budget 
Head for setting up of R&D Centre for State -of-Art Metro Rail Coaches by BEML, (ii) Budget Division 
also made a provision to the tune of Rs. 30 crore in BE of 2009 -10 and (iii) Ministry of Defence, 
Department of Defence Production was requested to take furth er necessary action on the discussions 
of the meeting dated 21.10.2008.   
  
The amount of Rs. 30 crore could not be utilized as the project could not take off on account of 
Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission not agreeing to set up such centre unde r BEML led 
consortium. As the metro coaches involve State -of-the art technology, electrical and electronic parts, it 
was decided that the Centre would be set up under the aegis of Bharat Heavy Electrical Ltd. (BHEL) led 
consortium. This has already been di scussed in meeting held in Planning Commission under Member, 
Planning Commission while finalizing Annual Plan of this Ministry for 2011 -12. Accordingly, in the 
Financial Year 2011-2012, a token sum of Rs. 50 lakh has been kept for BHEL in MoUD Budget.  
 
Now BEML has submitted a concept paper to Planning Commission for setting up of a Centre 
of Excellence for Metro Rail Coaches and a meeting was held under the Chairmanship of Shri Arun 
Maira, Member, Planning Commission on 12th September, 2011 at 3:30 P.M. wherein, BEML and BHEL 
made a presentation and representatives of Ministry of Urban Development, Railway Board, Ministry of 
Defence Production and Delhi Metro Rail Corporation were present in the meeting.  The minutes of the 
meeting are awaited. 
 
As per C ensus: 2001, there are 13 cities in the country having population of more than 2 
million. With projected annual growth @3.12%, 20 cities will cross the mark of 2 million population in 
2015. Out of these cities, metro projects are under implementation in 7 cities; DPR has been prepared/ 
under preparation in 5 other cities. Regarding remaining 7 cities also, the concerned State Govts. were 
approached by DMRC. However, the State Govt. concerned did not clear the proposal for preparation 

52 
 
of DPR for Metro Rail P roject. Since Urban Transport is intertwined with urban development which is a 
State, the decision of State Govt. is of vital importance. The Central Govt. can act only on the proposals 
that are approved and forwarded by the concerned State Govt. to Govt. of India. 
 
4.18 For the comments of the Committee please see paragraph No. 1.22 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.14) 
M/s Emmar MGF as the PPP Project Developer in Commonwealth Games Village 
 
4.19 The Committee have been informed that there was huge delay in the completion of 
Commonwealth Village and due to this Government suffered financial loss also. M/s Emmar MGF was 
selected as a private partner for implementation of this project. The basis of selection of M/s Emmar 
MGF is that Group of Ministers had decided to develop the residential apartments in the Commonwealth 
Games Village on Public Private Partnership mode and DDA, after the due process on Request For 
Quotations (RFQ) and Request For Proposal (RFP), selected M/s Emmar MGF as the PPP project 
Developer. However, despite continuous monitoring developer was unable to complete the work within 
the scheduled time and the reason furnished by them was the financial crunch. 
 The Committee are dismayed to note that even though DDA had provided an amount of Rs. 
766.89 Crore as a financial help through the purchase of 333 flats of Commonwealth Games Village, 
the developer could not complete the project within extended period. 
  The Committee are of the opinion that, awarding of contract to M/s Emmar MGF without 
verifying its financial status is a serious matter and cast doubt on the functioning of DDA.  
The Committee are further informed that the Ministry have levied liquidated damages and 
invoked performance security of Rs.183 crore on M/s Emmar MGF.   Out of this, only Rs.90 crore could 
be realized by the Ministry. The matter regarding recovery of remaining amount is sub -judice. However, 
the Committee desire that a thorough inquiry, should be conducted in the matter which will ascertain 
why such a huge contract was awarded to a firm who was not financially sound enough and complicity 
of DDA officials therein should also be determined. The Committee want the Ministry to fix responsibility 
on the basis of inquiry and bring the guilty to book. The Committee would like t o be apprised of the 
steps taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 

53 
 
4.20 DDA has informed that during 9 th meeting of the Group of Ministers held on 4.1.2006, DDA was 
given the mandate for the construction of residential apartments to provide accommoda tion for 
approximately 8000 participants during the CWG 2010 at Delhi.  Various options for development of the 
Village were discussed in the 9 th meeting of Group of Ministers and it was decided to develop the 
residential apartments on Public Private Participation (PPP) mode. 
 
2.  The PPP developer was selected through a two -stage transparent open tendering process. 
Stage 1 (RFQ) consisted of short -listing of qualified developers through inviting Expression of Interest 
from interested parties. Stage 2 (RFP) consisted of inviting detailed proposal from shortlisted 
developers.  
 
3.  15 bidders had submitted their Expression of Interest (EOIs) in response to above RFQ, out of 
whom only 11 bidders who fulfilled the pre-qualification criteria were qualified. 
 
4. While there were numerous reasons as to why the Project Developer was not able to complete 
the project in time i.e. upto 31.03.2010, one of the major factor was the recession which happened at 
the beginning of the year 2009.  The Project Developer was not a ble to generate the finances and it 
was only due to the help provided to the DDA financially that they were able to start the work anew.  
Four months from January to April 2009 were lost as no work could be undertaken due to financial 
constraints of the Pr oject Developer.  The work suspended for these four months was reflected in the 
Project Developer completing the work by September, 2010 that too with some defects still remaining in 
the residential complex. 
 
Capability of the bidder 
 
5. The bidder, Emaar MGF, is a Joint Venture between a world famous global property developer 
viz. M/s Emaar Properties Public Joint Stock Company (PJSC), UAE and a leading Indian player in real 
estate in India viz. M/s MGF Development. Both the groups have s ubstantial expertise in real estate 
development across the globe/ India. Emaar's activities include property investment and development, 
property management services, education, healthcare, retail and hospitality sectors, as well as 
investing in financial service providers. A note indicating credentials of M/s Emaar Properties PJSC is 
placed at ANNEXURE-I. 
 
 
 
 
Purchase of Flats by DDA 
 

54 
 
6. DDA‟s decision to buy 333 apartments at Rs.766.89 crore was taken keeping in view the 
circumstances which were existing at that period of time i.e. the worldwide recession and the inability of 
the project developer to sell the apartments from which the finances had to be generated and the fact 
that the banks were not advancing any loans in the reality sector.  The decision of DDA to provide 
financial assistance to the developer to purchase apartments, helped completion of the project.  In the 
unlikely event of non -completion of the project which actually did not happen, the DDA had the bank 
guarantee of Rs.300 crore from the  developer in addition to valuable assets created on the project site 
which duly protected the financial interest of the risk taken on by DDA.  It may be reiterated that but for 
this „out of box solution‟ to the problem at that point of time, the Games Vil lage could not have been 
completed. Details regarding utilization of funds given by DDA to the Project Developer for purchasing 
the flats are placed at ANNEXURE-II. 
 
Encashment of Bank Guarantee  
 
7. As per the Project Development Agreement M/s Emaar MGF Construction Pvt. Ltd. could not 
meet the 8 th and 9 th milestone.  Therefore, liquidated damages as per the agreement were to be 
enforced.  Total liquated damages (LD) of Rs.106.90 crore have been worked out against the Project 
Developer (PD) for delayed co mpletion of the project. DDA encashed the performance bank guarantee 
of Rs.183 crore to adjust this claim. The Hon‟ble High Court of Delhi has permitted DDA credit of Rs.90 
crore and has stayed the encashment of balance of Rs.93 crore. Thus, Rs.16.90 crore  of balance LD 
could not be encashed due to orders of Hon‟ble High Court, on which the case is still pending in the 
High Court of Delhi. Thus, DDA has acted in the matter but due to the court case could not realise this 
amount of Rs.16.90 crore. 
 
Role of officials in monitoring  
 
8. As per the Project Development Agreement, the project developer was to complete the 
residential facility by March 31, 2010 and hand over to DDA for use as accommodation for athletes 
during the Commonwealth Games 2010. However th e Project Developer was unable to complete the 
project in stipulated time and there were still many finishing works pending even till September, 2010.  
DDA being a partner in the project and in the right earnest made all efforts to ensure completion of the  
project in time including financial assistance. The good faith, assistance and spirit of DDA was not 
reflected by Project Developer, who continued with his slow work.  DDA constantly brought to the notice 
of Project Developer the delay in completion of wo rk through various notices issued to PD from time to 
time at all stages in the project. A note indicating monitoring activities done by DDA is placed at 
ANNEXURE-III. 
 

55 
 
9. Regarding the Committee‟s observation that there should be a thorough enquiry to asce rtain 
why such huge contract was given to a firm which was not financially sound and also to determine 
complicity of the DDA officials, it may be stated that Government Constituted a High Level Committee 
(HLC) under the chairmanship of Sh. V.K. Shunglu to look into issues relating to the organizing and 
conduct of Commonwealth Games -2010.  The Committee has since submitted six Reports on various 
aspects relating to organizing and conduct of the Games.   The 2 nd Report of submitted by the 
Committee is exclusively relating to Commonwealth Games Village.  Ministry of Urban Development/ 
DDA have examined the Report and submitted the response to the findings of the Committee to the 
Cabinet Secretariat. 
 
10. The Cabinet Secretariat has constituted a Group of Ministers (GoM) on 02.8.2011 to look into 
issues relating to the Reports of the High Level Committee and to consider the views expressed on the 
findings and recommendations by the concerned Ministries/ Departments.   The terms of reference of 
the Group of Ministers include: (i) to consider the views expressed by the concerned Ministries of the 
Govt. of India and other agencies on the findings and recommendations contained in the Report of HLC 
and arrive at a consider ed view on the various recommendations of the HLC; (ii) to recommend the 
future course of action on each of the recommendations of the HLC, which would include disciplinary, 
criminal and civil action against persons/ agencies/ contractors indicated in the Report.  MoUD has 
already submitted its findings to the GoM and the GoM is seized with the issue. 
4.21 For the comments of the Committee please see paragraph No. 1.25 
  

56 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE 
STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation (Serial No.10) 
National Mission on Sustainable Habitat (NMSH) 
5.1 The National Mission on sustainable Habitat is one of the 8 Missions under the National Action 
Plan for climate change announced by the Hon‟ble Prime Minister in June, 2008, with the tenure upto 
the 12 th Plan period i.e. 2017.  The Mission document has been prepared by the Ministry of Urban 
Development on the basis of consultations and discussions with relevant Ministries and other expert 
organizations. The Prime M inister‟s Council on Climate Change has approved the document in its 
meeting held on 18.6.2010.   
 The Committee are informed that the Scheme will be a Central Sector Scheme to be funded 
from funds available under the Plan budget of the Ministry. Financial  support under the NMSH 
programme shall be extended to Cities/ States for implementing the complementary actions and 
capacity buildings measures already identified in the Mission document. The capacity building measures 
would cater to needs related to incr easing energy efficiency in residential and commercial sectors, 
urban transport, waste water management, solid waste management and adaptation. Financial support 
shall be extended in conformity with overall amounts indicated for capacity building and demon stration 
project. The Committee are further informed that it would result in development of Sustainable Habitat 
Parameters in the field of Energy Efficiency, Urban Transport, Water Supply/ Sewerage, Solid Waste 
Management, Storm Water Segment and Urban Planning. 
 The Committee are given to understand the selection of ULBs/cities will depend on the nature 
of proposals received and their consistency with the mandate under the mission. Thus, the formulation 
of proposals and their finalization is dependent on v arious agencies, the Committee find the criteria and 
process of selection of ULBs/ Cities is quite cumbersome. The Committee recommend that on one hand 
steps may be taken to simplify the procedure and criteria for selection of ULBs/Cities under the mission  
while on the other hand awareness may be created about the scheme amongst all the stakeholders 
through all modes of Information, Education and Communication (IEC) so that the maximum ULBs/ 
Cities would take benefit of NMSH.   
Reply of the Government 
5.2 The details of action proposed to be taken under the NMSH are as follows:- 
 

57 
 
(i) Formulation and implementation of National Sustainable Habitat Standards. 
(ii) Implementation of pilot projects and demonstration projects in water and sanitation sector, 
energy efficiency sector, environmentally sustainable roads. 
(iii) Capacity building measures.  
 
The Committee has observed that the criteria for the process of selection of cities are 
cumbersome. The meeting of the Expenditure Finance Commission (EFC) for implementation of th e 
mission is yet to be held.  Sanction of proposals can be taken up only after EFC and cabinet approval.  
However, the observations of the Committee have been taken into account in the draft EFC as well as 
in the guidelines. 
 
 
SHARAD YADAV 
NEW DELHI         Chairman, 
 22 March 2012                                 Standing Committee on Urban Development 
            02 Chaitra, (1934)

58 
 
                                                                                                                                                           Annexure-I 
(vide para 1.24) 
 
Credentials of M/s Emmar Properties PJSC and Credentials of M/s MGF developments 
 
 
I. Credentials of M/s Emaar Properties PJSC 
 
M/s Emaar Properties PJSC (Emaar), a Dubai -based Public Joint Stock Company listed on the Dubai 
Financial Market, is a global property developer and provider of premier lifestyles. Established in 1997 
with an initial paid -up capital of AED 1 bn, Emaar Properties is currently the Persian Gulf region's 
largest land and real estate developer. With over 60 companies, Emaar's activities include property 
investment and development, property management services, education, healthcare, retail and 
hospitality sectors, as well as investing in financial service providers. In 2007 the government of Dubai 
through the Investment Corporation of Dubai took a 32% equity stake in Emaar by exchanging land for 
28 billion AED worth of stock. 
Some of the projects developed by Emaar are: 
a) World‟s tallest tower- Burj Khalifa 
b) Dubai‟s largest Mall- the Dubai Mall 
c) The 500-acre mega-project, Downtown Dubai 
d) Dubai Marina – a luxurious waterfront project  
e) Arabian Ranches – a multi-billion premier desert-themed residential development  
f) Cairo Heights in Egypt 
g) Boulder Hills, a leisure and residential community in Hyderabad, India  
h) Multiple resort projects in Morocco, including Amelkis II & III and Bahia Bay, residential golfing 
communities;  
i) Eighth Gate project in Damascus, the city‟s first master planned community;  
j) Lakeside in Istanbul. 
 
M/s Emaar Properties PJSC was the lead member of the Company during RFQ stage and 
possessed the pre -qualification (technical qualification and financial strength parameters) laid down in 
the bid document.   
II. Credentials of M/s MGF developments 
 
MGF Developments is a leading player in the field of retail real estate and property development in 
India, and has brought in international standards in commercial complexes and shopping malls. MGF 
has over the last 10 years established it self as one of the key players in retail real estate development 
in Northern India. It is one of the largest shopping mall developers in the National Capital Region, with 
almost 3 million sq.ft. of developed retail space.  
 
Some of MGF Developments‟ landmark projects include 
 The Metropolitan, the Plaza and the City Square Mall in Gurgaon in 2003. 
 The Metropoliton Mall – Saket   
 MGF megacity – Saket 
 City Square – Rajauri Garden 
 The Metropoliton Mall – Jaipur 
 Metropolis – Gurgaon 
 Megacity – North Campus  
 
It is evident from the above facts that both the major partners in the bidder‟s company had 
substantial expertise in real estate development not only in India but also globally. 

59 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
(vide para 1.24) 
Funds given by DDA to Project Developer 
 
As per agreement signed with the Project Developer for purchase of 333 apartments 
installments for release of money was fixed as under:- 
 
 a) 1st installment on signing of Agreement Rs.2,00,00,00,000/- 
 b) 2nd installment on or before the 15th June 2009 Rs.1,50,00,00,000/- 
 c) 3rd installment on or before the 31st July 2009 Rs.1,50,00,00,000/- 
 d) 3rd installment on or before the 30th September 2009 Rs.1,50,00,00,000/- 
 e) 4th installment on or before the 13th November 2009 Rs.1,16,89,25,000/- 
 
      Total       Rs.7,66,89,25,000/- 
 
This was with the proviso that DDA would release the money after certifying the progress of 
work by an independent Chartered Engineer and utilization of finance by a Financial Consultant.  In this 
regard DDA appointed Shri Majumdar, ex-D.DG of CPWD as an independent engineer and M/s K. N. 
Goyal & Co.  as Financial Consultant.  On the basis of the rates received from the independent 
chartered engineer and the financial consultant the funds were released by DDA to M/s Emaar MG F 
Constn. Pvt. Ltd. as under :- 
 
a) 6.5.2009, approval of V.C., DDA dt.5.5.09 
through A.O.(Cash)H 
Rs.200.00 crore 
b) 8.7.2009, approval of V.C., DDA dated 6.7.09 
through C.A.U.(CWG) 
Rs.100.00 crore 
c) 1.9.2009, approval of V.C., DDA dated 27.8.09 
through A.O.(Cash)H 
Rs.  50.00 crore 
d) 19.11.2009, approval of V.C., DDA dated 
13.11.09 through A.O.(Cash)H 
Rs.  50.00 crore 
e) 1.1.2010, approval of Hon‟ble L.G. dated 
31.12.2009 through A.O.(Cash)H 
Rs.100.00 crore 
f) 26.3.2010, approval of High Powered Committee 
through A.O.(Cash)H 
Rs.228.89 crore 
 
    Total Funds Released      Rs.728.89 crore 
 
Balance amount yet to be released amounting to   Rs. 38.00 crore 
 
Before the release of above funds due diligence as stated above was got done by DDA to see 
that the  installments given were being utilized for the project only.  The utilization certificate in this 
regard given by M/s K. N. Goyal & Co. and the physical progress as per the reports submitted by the 
independent engineer Shri Majumdar. 
 
Due diligence was do ne by DDA regarding appointment of an independent engineer and a 
financial consultant to verify the utilization of the money spent and the progress on the ground has 
enabled the Residential Complex to be completed in time and appreciated by all concerned. 
 
****** 

60 
 
ANNEXURE-III 
(vide para 1.24) 
 
NOTE INDICATING MONITORING ACTIVITIES TAKEN UP BY DDA 
 
(I) Status Note on Supervision and Delay in Construction 
Despite constant monitoring and facilitation of the project by DDA, the Project Developer was unable to 
complete the work by 31.3.2010.  There were number of reasons for delay in timely completion of the 
Project due to the unforeseen constraints which were faced by the Project Developer as well as by DDA 
and these were:- 
 
1. Initially the preliminary brief of t he Village was given by the Event Knowledge Services (EKS) 
only on 23.1.2007.  The EKS was a consultant appointed by O.C. in consultation with the CWG 
Federation.  The Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) clearance was obtained from the Ministry of 
Environment & Forests on 14.12.06. The DUAC conceptual approval of the layout plan was received in 
May 2007 and DUAC approval for the residential component was received on 2.1.2008. 
 
2. Part of the land i.e. 31.54 acres of Govt. of UP land required for the Games Village was initially 
not made available.  It was only on 4.4.2007 that Govt. of U.P. agreed to hand over the land to DDA on 
cost basis. 
 
3. There is also a rail corridor adjacent to the CWG Village site.  An inspection was held by 
Commonwealth Games Federati on and due to the noise pollution from the rail corridor, O.C. advised 
DDA to shift the site of the residential accommodation from vicinity of the railway line to the present one 
behind Akshardham Temple.  This led to the change in land use to be processed  before construction 
could be taken up at the new site.  Change in land use was finally issued by MOUD on 18.08.2006. 
 
4. Due to the change in the residential location, the Akshardham Temple authorities raised issue 
of height of the residential buildings to b e constructed.  Therefore, changes in design of the apartments 
were also taken up and it consumed a lot of time. 
 
5. The Games Village complex is situated near the Yamuna river. Some environmental activists 
agitated that the construction should not be allowed  on this site.  They filed a PIL in the Hon‟ble Delhi 
High Court.  The matter was agitated by DDA before the Hon‟ble Court. Though the Hon‟ble Delhi High 
Court did not give a stay on construction of the apartments by the Project Developer but stated in the ir 
orders that any construction being undertaken would be at the risk and cost of DDA and the Project 
Developer depending on the final outcome of the case in the Hon‟ble Delhi High Court.  DDA however, 
appealed before the Hon‟ble Supreme Court and after DD A‟s sustained efforts, the Hon‟ble Supreme 
Court stayed vide orders dated 30.07.2009 the orders of the Hon‟ble Delhi High Court and allowed 
DDA/ Project Developer to continue with the work. 
 
6. There was worldwide economic recession in the beginning of year 2 009.  The repercussion on 
the Real Estate industry was the maximum.  Moreover, due to Delhi High Court‟s orders of „construction 
at their peril‟, the existing buyers stopped paying their installments.  There was total reluctance by the 
purchasers to make t he payment and scale down of purchase of flats by the new buyers affecting the 
PD‟s financial resources.  It was at this moment of time that the Project Developer showed his inability 
to finance the project further as there was a cash flow crunch due to wh ich he was not able to pay to 
the sub-contractors and hence the labour force working at the Games Village site was reduced from 

61 
 
9000 approx. to barely 800 within a span of three months.  Hence various options for timely completion 
of project were considere d.  Finally it was decided to exercise the option of purchase of apartments 
from the Project Developer at an agreed price.  This would also ensure additional safety to DDA as 
DDA would acquire the right to enforce performance also as buyer of the apartment s. A valuation 
committee was constituted by DDA for determining the price at which the flats should be purchased 
from Project Developer. Accordingly, it was decided to purchase 333 apartments from the Developer at 
a cost of Rs.767 crore.   
 
7. As per the Proj ect Development Agreement, the project developer was to complete the 
residential facility by March 31, 2010 and hand over to DDA for use as accommodation for athletes 
during the Commonwealth Games 2010. However the Project Developer was unable to complete the 
project in stipulated time and there were still many finishing works pending even till September, 2010.  
DDA being a partner in the project and in the right earnest made all efforts to ensure completion of the 
project in time including financial assist ance. The good faith, assistance and spirit of DDA was not 
reflected by Project Developer, who continued with his slow work.  DDA constantly brought to the notice 
of Project Developer the delay in completion of work through various notices issued to PD fro m time to 
time at all stages in the project.  
 
8. Meanwhile, the Project Developer had achieved milestone 7 in time. This included all civil and 
electrical works except all development works including landscaping and completion of the project in 
terms of Project Development Agreement. But thereafter the progress of the work slowed down. It was 
observed by DDA, that due to the ongoing dispute between Project Developer and his sub -contractor 
the work on site had slowed down considerably. However despite repeated  requests by DDA and to 
resolve the matter and complete the project on time, the dispute continued. 
 
9. Since there were many other works such as furnishing of towers, dry run etc to be done after 
taking over of the residential complex and hence DDA was left with no other option but to take over the 
residential facility with defects which was more in the shape of operational deficiencies, augment the 
resources of Project Developer and even take over some works on behalf of Project Developer.  At the 
time of taking over the flats from Project Developer, it was found that the towers had many operational 
deficiencies. Even glasses were not fixed in many living rooms, windows and balcony railings. The 
deficiency list was provided to Project Developer for rectification.  
 
10. It was decided in the meeting of committee of secretaries held on 17 th Feb. 2009 that furnishing 
of rooms in Games Village will be the responsibility of ITDC.  It was only from June onwards that ITDC 
started placing the furniture in the apartments.  DDA started taking over the towers from the Project 
Developer from 21.6.2010 (with defects as already mentioned above) in order to facilitate ITDC to place 
the furniture in the apartments.  It was on 06.8.2010 that the last 6 towers were handed over by DD A to 
ITDC for furnishing, though simultaneously the rectification work also continued by the Project 
Developer to make-up for the lost time/ delays. 
 
11. Though the initial handover of towers to OC started on 24.07.10 and 9 towers were handed 
over to them by 3 1.07.10, keys of the flats were handed over to OC on 6 th August (Tower 1-9), on 19 th 
August (Tower 10 -17) and 30 th August (Tower 18 -34).  Inadequate staff available with OC could not 
control the work undertaken by multiple agencies and their labour working  in various towers like OC‟s 
own overlays work, technology, security, communication, housekeeping, apart from the labour of 
Project Developer and ITDC.  
 
12. In addition, from August, 2010 onwards the monsoon in Delhi till September were 
unprecedented  which n ot only led to water logging in the residential and other areas of the Games 
Village but also severely hindered completion, rectification and cleaning works. 

62 
 
 
13. To control the situation, with the intervention of Hon‟ble LG office, OC staff was supplemented 
with retired Junior Commissioned Officers (JCOs) to manage the keys on behalf of OC. Security 
agencies were deployed by DDA to control the thefts and unwarranted movement of labour. To 
expedite the rectification work, 60 nos. of Assistant Engineers/Junior E ngineers/Mates along with 3 
Executive Engineers were deployed till 23rd September 2010.  Further about 30 Engineers i.e. Ees, Aes 
& Jes were also engaged by the Chief Engineer (NZ), DDA for helping 3 colonels deputed by Defence 
for the completion of unfinished work, removal of defects and faults in towers. 
 
14. Housekeeping staff of OC was also found inadequate to undertake the work of cleaning of the 
apartments and other areas. To salvage the situation, DDA and the office of Hon‟ble LG again 
supplemented the efforts of OC to clean up the area by employing profes sional agencies. In addition, 
1363 nos. of Beldars/Safai Karamcharis along with supervisory staff were also engaged for surface 
leveling, cleaning of the area and cleaning of basement in the residential zone.   In addition 35 Tractor 
Trolleys, 12 JCBs were employed till September 2010 and for 8 days water sucker machines were also 
used for de -watering from the surface as well as from the basement.  These efforts were further 
supplemented by Delhi Govt., MCD, NDMC, MES for cleaning, rectification and houseke eping of the 
towers to make the stay comfortable for the athletes.  During the games also, skilled labour i.e. 
electricians, plumbers, carpenters and sewermen from MES, PWD, DDA and CPWD were deployed 
apart from the labour of Project developer on the tower s under the overall supervision of senior officers 
of DDA and Delhi Govt. who were nominated as in charge of towers.  
 
15. The coordinated efforts of the entire govt. machinery made the Games Village as one of the 
best Games Village in the history of Commonwea lth Games. It was widely appreciated by the athletes, 
games officials and the guests. 
 
Meanwhile, action has been initiated against the Project Developer under the provisions of the 
Project Development Agreement for non completion of the project in time. L iquidated damages were 
levied and the performance security of Rs.183 Crores was invoked out of which Rs.90 Crores have 
been encashed as the Project Developer approached the Hon‟ble Delhi High Court and obtained 
interim order. The matter is subjudice at pre sent. A Technical & Quality Audit Committee was 
constituted by DDA to ascertain structural and qualitative deficiencies in the execution of the entire 
project. The report has been submitted and remedial measures are being undertaken accordingly. 
 
Role of DDA in Monitoring the construction of the Commonwealth Games Village 
 
The main role of the DDA was to monitor the project and to oversee its timely completion.  
Since the project was stipulated to be completed by March 2010, starting September 2007, very strict 
timelines were given and DDA made all efforts to ensure timely completion of the project. The project 
was monitored regularly at all levels during the entire duration of the contract. Following are the details 
of the monitoring mechanism for the Project: 
i. Monitoring arrangement as per Project Development Agreement 
 
Monitoring committee: As per clause 5 of PDA, a monitoring committee consisting of 1 representative 
each from DDA, Project Developer and a third independent member jointly elected by the tw o members 
(a retired DG (W) of CPWD) was responsible to monitor the progress of the residential project on a 
monthly basis. Accordingly, the committee was constituted on January 30, 2008.  The Monitoring 
committee met every month to review the progress of the project, resolve any issues, facilitate work on 
the project and record completion of milestones. 
 

63 
 
The monitoring committee was also responsible for certifying the completion of Project 
Milestones.  To ensure proper monitoring and timely completion of t his time bound project, the project 
was broken down into 9 discrete milestones. The same was stipulated in the Project Development 
Agreement as at Schedule III.  
 
35 meetings of Monitoring Committee were held during which the Committee constantly 
reviewed the project progress, resolved various issues raised by Project Developer, DDA & certified 
completion of 7 milestones. 
 
ii. Further monitoring by DDA 
 
a) Stadia Committee: Apart from monitoring committee, stadia committees were constituted 
vide office order no F.1[22]/PC/CWG/08/827 dated 24 -12-2008 by DDA to facilitate 
coordination and address any issues between external and site agencies like PD, other 
agencies, contractors, OC, Police, DJB, BSES, MCD, PWD, Telecom, MTNL, TCIL & other 
regulatory bodies. Stadia committee for residential project reviewed the project every 3 
weeks initially and later weekly till August 2010 and afterwards daily reviews were held to 
make the village fully functional. These committees were chaired by Principal 
Commissioner (CWG). 
 
b) Site coordination committee: Site Coordination committee was constituted by DDA to 
address any coordination issues amongst different agencies employed by DDA on site. 
The coordination committee met every week and reviewed the project. However the site 
coordination committee was later integrated into the stadia committee as games drew near 
and close coordination between internal and external agencies was required as the project 
was progressing fast. Since then, stadia committee started meeting every week. 
 
c) High Powered Committee: With a view to  ensure speedy solution to all issues related to 
Commonwealth Games project and to recommend policy decisions to expedite the 
progress, a High Powered Committee under the chairmanship of Finance Member, DDA 
was constituted by DDA on 25.01.06 and revised on 23.11.07. High Powered committee 
meetings were held regularly to facilitate any complex issues arising of the project. Some 
of the complex recommendations made by High Powered Committee include extension of 
milestones 1&  2 and later 3 & 4, rejection of request for extension of milestones 5 & 6, 
recommendation for financial assistance to PD etc. 
 
d) Progress review by Vice Chairman, DDA: Apart from monitoring by  various committees, 
Vice Chairman DDA also conducted periodic re views to address any issue and facilitate 
any decision at higher levels. During the later stages of the project, VC, DDA conducted 
daily reviews to expedite work on the Games Village and make it fully functional.  
 
 
iii. Regular progress review by Higher Authorities 
Apart from the regular progress monitoring, the progress of the report was constantly 
reviewed by – 
 
 Hon‟ble LG 
 Committee of Secretaries chaired by Cabinet Secretary  
 Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development 
 Secretary, Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports 
 

64 
 
 
 
 
iv. Following reports were submitted by DDA to higher authorities 
 
 Monthly report.  
 Tata Consultancy Services (TCS) report: Initially monthly and later weekly was sent to 
Ministry of Sports directly with a copy to all stakeholders. 
 Weekly reports 
 
The monitoring mechanism for the project ensured regular progress & quality monitoring and 
facilitation of project work at all levels by addressing issues faced during the execution of the project. 
The strict monitoring continued throughout the execution o f the contract. During the last quarter before 
the games, close monitoring was taken on a daily basis. For the residential component, the progress 
was even monitored on a real -time basis in each tower by DDA. For this purpose, DDA deployed its 
team of engineers, men and machine under the overall supervision of senior officers of DDA. 
 
Delay in Project Completion:  
 
PD failed to complete the project in time. There were certain unfinished works and pre -completion 
defects. 
 
 Operational deficiencies in flats:  The flats handed over by PD had certain defects in them, 
which were to be rectified before the games in order to make the flats livable. DDA had to 
intervene and supplement PD‟s work to rectify the defects. 
 
 Furnishing by ITDC: - ITDC was entrusted with the responsibility of furnishing of apartments. 
However there were delays in arrival of furniture, issues about quality of furniture and issues 
about dirty conditions of the flats left by ITDC workers.  
 
 Multiple agencies on site and inter dependencies:  There were several agencies working on 
site and there were delays due to late entry of certain agencies like OC overlays, 
Communication, Technology, Dining Facility etc. 
 
 Unprecedented rains:  Year 2010 experienced incessant rains which significantly hampe red 
the project completion work, particularly in the final stages.  
 
DDA’s efforts 
 
The efforts made by DDA to ensure that the residential facility is completed on time. 
 
I. Partner’s role: DDA has played a partner‟s role in the PPP project and supporting PD at all 
steps including providing financial assistance, facilitating the project at various steps, 
undertaking works such as landscaping, site leveling, dewatering of basements on behalf of PD 
etc. DDA‟s crucial support ensured that the project was brought to a livable standard in time for 
the Games. 
 
II. Constant coordination and facilitation between various agencies such as OC, ITDC, Police, 
Delhi Jal Board, BSES, DTC, transport, MCD, TCIL, ECIL, MTNL, Broadcasting, overlays etc 
through weekly and daily meetings  

65 
 
 
DDA played a proactive role in expediting the project by coordinating with BSES and DJB for 
supply of electricity & water and other statutory clearances, with fire department etc to expedite 
licenses for lifts and fire safety clearances etc. 
 
III. Constant monitoring and reporting: As detailed above, the project was constantly monitored 
and reported by DDA. The constant monitoring and reporting by DDA helped expedite the 
project completion and facilitated project progress at all steps. 
 
IV. Human Resource augme ntation: Human Resource Augmentation by DDA includes the 
following: 
 
 Deployment of Security agencies 
 Deployment of engineers, men and machinery to expedite the defects rectification  & 
completion of unfinished works in towers  
 Along with Delhi Govt., MCD, NDMC, MES supplemented OC‟s housekeeping staff  
 During the games, deployed skilled labour i.e. electricians, plumbers, carpenters and 
sewermen from MES, PWD, DDA and CPWD  under the overall supervision of senior 
officers of DDA and Delhi Govt. who were nominated as incharge of towers. 
 
****** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

66 
 
ANNEXURE-IV 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2011-2012) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON      
THURSDAY, 22nd  MARCH, 2012 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1645 hrs. in Main Committee Room 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Sharad Yadav      - Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Praveen Singh Aron 
3. Smt. J. Helen Davidson 
4. Smt. Priya Dutt 
5. Prof. (Dr.) Ram Shankar Katheria 
6. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena 
7. Shri Bhupendra Singh 
8. Shri Umashankar Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
9. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
10. Shri Parvez Hashmi 
11. Shri Avinash Pande 
12. Dr. Bhalchandra Mungekar 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri T.K. Mukherjee   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.K. Jain   - Director 
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Smt. K. Rangamani N.  -  Under Secretary  
 

67 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed all the Members of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft Report on action 
taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the 
14th Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2011 -
12) of the Ministry of Urban Development.  After detailed deliberations, the 
Committee adopted the report  with slight modifications. The Committee, then 
authorized the Chairman to present the Report to the Houses of Parliament.  
3. ***   ***   ***   *** 
 
4. ***   ***   ***   *** 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
*********** 
 
***Matters not related to this Report. 
 
 
 
  

68 
 
ANNEXURE V 
                                            [Vide para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/ 
OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTEENTH  REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON URBANDEVELOPLMENT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
I.  Total number of recommendations                                                     14 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government:                  6 
Recommendation Nos.1,2,5,6,11,13 
 
Percentage to total recommendations                      (42.85%) 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:                                     - Nil - 
        
Percentage to total recommendations                                                          ( 0%) 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of             7                          
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation No. 3,4,7,8,9,12,14 
 
Percentage to total recommendations                                                               (50%) 
                             
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final                   1       
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation No. 10 
Percentage to total recommendations                                                           (0.07%) 