-: 1 :- 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2014-2015) 
                                
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
                 MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN POVERTY ALLEVIATION 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2014-2015) 
  
 
(Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Second 
Report (Sixteenth  Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban Development on 
Demands for Grants (2014-2015) ) of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation) 
 
FOURTH REPORT 
     
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
10 April ,2015/ 20 Chaitra,1937 (Saka) 
    
4 


-: 2 :- 
 
 
 
FOURTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2014-2015) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN POVERTY ALLEVIATION 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
 
(Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Second 
Report (Sixteenth  Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban Development on 
Demands for Grants (2014-2015 ) of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation) 
   
     Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.4.2015   
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.04.2015  
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
10 April,2015/20 Chaitra,1937 (Saka) 


-: 3 :- 
 
 
 
   
 C.U.D No. 89 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2014 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Thirteenth Edition) and printed by the Indian Press, Delhi-110033. 
 

-: 4 :- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
          PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .....................…………....................….. (ii) 
INTRODUCTION ..........................................………………………………………. (v) 
 
REPORT  
 
CHAPTER I  
Report 
1 
CHAPTER II  
Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
15  
CHAPTER III  Observations /Recommendations  which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies 
29  
CHAPTER IV  
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
the Committee and require reiteration  
30  
CHAPTER V  Observations /Recommendations  in respect of which 
final  replies of the Government are still awaited 
41  
ANNEXURES  
I. Minutes of the Tenth  sitting of the Standing Co mmittee on Urban Development (2014-
15) held on 10th    April, 2015 ………………………    
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Second Report of the Committee (16th  Lok Sabha)…..  

-: 5 :- 
 
 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2014-2015) 
Shri Pinaki Misra         -        Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2.  Shri Rajendra Agrawal  
3. Shri Ramesh Bidhuri  
4.  Shri Ram Charan Bohra  
5. Shri Dushyant Chautala  
6.  Shri Ashok Chavan  
7.  Shri Dilip  Kumar Gandhi  
8.  Shri Maheish Girri  
9. Shri R.Gopalakrishnan  
10.  Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua   
11.  Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi  
12. Smt. Poonam Mahajan  
13. Shri P.C. Mohan 
14. 
Shri Kesineni Nani  
15.  Shri K. Parasuraman  
16.  Shri C. R. Patil  
17.  Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil  
18.  Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale  
19. Prof. K. V. Thomas  
20. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma  
21. Dr. Dharam Vira  
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22. Smt. Vandana Chavan 
23. Shri Husain Dalwai 
24. Shri Anil Desai 
25.  Shri Parvez Hashmi  
*26. 
 Shri Mukul Roy 
27.  Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna 
28 Shri Satish Sharma 
29. Shri C.P. Thakur 
30. Shri S.Thangavelu 
31.  Shri Khekiho Zhimomi  

-: 6 :- 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri P. K. Misra                      -            Additional Secretary 
2. Shri D.S Malha   - Director 
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha   - Additional Director 
4. Smt. K. Rangamani N.  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
 

-: 7 :- 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson  of the Standing Committee on Ur ban Development (2014-2015) 
having been authorized by the Committee to submit t he Report on their behalf, present  the 
Fourth Report (16 th  Lok Sabha) on the action taken by the Government o n the 
recommendations contained in the Second Report (16 th  Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Urban Development on “Demands for Grants (2014-2 015) " of the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Poverty Alleviation. 
2. The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 18.12.2015.  Replies of the 
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received in March, 2015.  
3. The Standing Committee on Urban Development cons idered and adopted this Report at 
their sitting held on 10th April, 2015. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Governmen t on the recommendations contained 
in the Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, t he Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
                               PINAKI MISRA  
10 April, 2015
                              Chairperson,                                         
20Chaitra, 1937 (Saka)                                            Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
 
 (iv)  
  

-: 8 :- 
 
CHAPTER-I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Deve lopment (2014-15) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the reco mmendations contained in their 
Second Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2014-15) of the Ministry of  
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation which was pre sented to Lok Sabha on                  
18 December, 2014. 
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all      
20 recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been categorized as follows: 
(i) Recommendations /Observations, which have been accepted by the Government. 
 (Chapter-II): 
Recommendation serial Nos. 3, 5, 8A, 8C,9, 11,12,13, 14,15,16,17              (Total -12) 
(Chapter-II) 
(ii) Recommendations /Observations, which the Commi ttee do not desire to pursue in 
view of Government's   replies. (Chapter-III): 
Recommendation serial No.            (Total -Nil) 
(Chapter-III) 
(iii) Recommendations /Observations, in respect of which replies of Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter-IV): 
Recommendation serial Nos.1, 2, 4,6,7, 8B,8D,10        (Total -08) 
(Chapter-IV) 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations, in respect of wh ich final replies of the 
Government  are, still awaited (Chapter-V): 
          (Total -Nil) 
(Chapter-V) 
 
 
 
 
 

-: 9 :- 
 
 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that specific replies to t he comments contained in Chapter-I 
of this Report may be furnished to them at the earl iest and in any case, not later than 
three months of the presentation of this Report. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action tak en by the Government on some of 
their recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.   
RECOMMENDATION ( SERIAL NO. 1) 
  
UNDER UTILIZATION OF FUNDS  
1.5  The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviat ion (HUPA) has been, inter-alia , entrusted 
with the implementation of programmes of Urban Empl oyment and Poverty Alleviation including 
Housing sector programmes in urban areas.  During t he 12 th  Five Year Plan, the Ministry is in 
the process of revamping some of its old schemes in  addition to introducing new programmes 
for benefits of urban poor.  The Committee observe that from the year 2010-11 to 2013-14, 
there has been a huge difference between the projec tions and allocations at BE stage.  The 
allocations made at BE stage have been reduced at R E stage.  The actual expenditure is also 
less in comparison to the allocation at RE stage.  The overall BE for the year 2014-15 is Rs. 
6008.62 crore which includes both plan and non-plan expenditure.  In comparison to the budget 
estimate of 2013-14, the percentage increase during  2014-15 has been 310.96 per cent.  The 
huge jump in budget allocation during the year 2014 -15 is due to transfer of ACA funds of RAY 
and JnNURM in the Demands of the Ministry of Housin g and Urban Poverty Alleviation, in 
accordance with the instructions of Planning Commis sion.   However, keeping aside the growth 
of budgetary allocation, the real growth is very ma rginal.  The Committee in their earlier reports 
on Demands for Grants have been recommending for en hancing the budgetary allocation for 
the Ministry.  The Committee note that the Ministry  is proposing various ambitious schemes like 
creation of 100 smart cities, providing Housing for  All by 2022, etc.  Keeping in view all these 
factors, the Committee recommend that Ministry shou ld make out all efforts to utilize its budget 
allocations after removing all bottlenecks that com e in the way. They further recommend that 
adequate allocation should be provided to the Minis try so that ambitious schemes should not 
face any fund starvation.  The Committee are of the  view that the changing funding pattern for 
JnNURM and RAY should be supported by an in-built m echanism for their greater 
implementation and timely submission of utilization certificates." 
 
1.6  In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated as follows: 
 
"Ministry has made all out efforts to utilize the b udget allocation made available to it. It has 
expedited the process of fund release to states and  cities. However Progress under Basic 
Services to the Urban Poor (BSUP) and Integrated Housing and Slum Development Programme 
(IHSDP) components of Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) 

-: 10 :- 
 
is constrained because of the fact that these proje cts had been approved in the XIth plan and 
because of subsequent cost escalations, State Govt. / Cities are facing extreme difficulties in 
completing such projects. Ministry has been pursuin g these projects very closely with States / 
Cities for completion and is also persuading State Govts. to enhance their share in the project. It 
is submitted that implementation of projects is ent irely within the purview of State Govts / cities. 
Ministry assists the States/Cities by extending fin ancial assistance under its scheme and in 
facilitating experience sharing, best practices dissemination." 
1.7   The Committee note that there was huge jump in the budgetary allocation during 
the financial year 2014-15 due to transfer of ACA f unds of RAY & JNNURM in the 
Demands of the Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation in accordance with the 
instructions of Planning Commission. Keeping in vie w the proposed ambitious schemes 
like creation of 100 Smart Cities, providing Housin g for all by 2022, the Committee had 
recommended that the Ministry should make all out e fforts to utilize its budget allocation 
after removing all bottlenecks that come in the way and to allocate adequately so that the 
ambitious schemes should not face any fund starvati on. The Committee had further 
stated that funding pattern of JNNURM & RAY should be supported by an in-built 
mechanisms for their greater implementation.  
 However, the Committee are constrained to observe that the Ministry could not 
utilize the allocation because under BSUP & IHSDP c omponents of JNNURM – State 
Govt./ cities were facing extreme difficulties in c ompleting such projects because of 
cost escalation. Although the Ministry had expedite d the process of fund release to 
States & Cities and facilitated the sharing of expe rience & best practices, the desired 
result could not yield. The Committee agree with th e submission of the Ministry that 
implementation of projects is entirely within the p urview of the State Govt. But at the 
same time the Committee strongly feel that by simpl y leaving it to the State 
Governments situation will never improve. Therefore the Committee strongly desire that 
the Centre should extend hundred percent financial support in case of cost escalation to 
the States which are not financially sound and ensu re completion of the projects within 
a time-bound manner. Then only the Ministry can ach ieve the physical targets of its 
ambitious projects. 
 
 
 
 
 

-: 11 :- 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION ( SERIAL NO. 2) 
Better Implementation Strategy be taken up under RRY/ (Gruh Hamara Awas Rinn) GHAR 
Scheme.  
 
1.8  The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
"The Committee note with constraint  that in-spite of the implementation of Interest Subsidy 
Scheme for Housing the Urban Poor since 2008-09 and its subsequent modifications during 12 
th  
Plan as Rajiv Rinn Yojana, till   2013-14 only Rs. 51.46 crore has been spent against the 
revised estimate of Rs. 130.00 crore.  There has been a huge gap between BE and RE vis-a-vis 
actual expenditure since 2008-09.  The BE for this Scheme during the current financial year i.e 
2014-15 is Rs 698.98 crore.  The overall target for  the 12 th  Plan period is 1 million dwellings for 
slum and non-slum dwellers across the country.  Unl ike other schemes, the scheme is target 
oriented.  Hence targets to benefit, 2.5 lakh benef iciaries in each financial year i.e. 2013-14 & 
2014-15 have been assigned.  However, the Committee are constrained to note that as on date 
the central Nodal agencies i.e. NHB and HUDCO have not reported any progress.  The Ministry 
is working on the ways to enhance the progress unde r RRY.  According to the Ministry, the 
reasons for not achieving any progress by CNA are: 
   
(i) General reluctance on part of Banks particularl y and HFCs to lend to the target 
 beneficiaries with informal income and informal ti tles 
(ii) State Government and ULBs were unable to fully  appreciate and communicate  the 
financial benefits accrued to the beneficiaries under the scheme 
(iii) Beneficiaries could not appreciate the financ ial benefits accrued through  reduced EMIs  
(iv) Not enough push to the Primary Lending Institu tions (PLIs) by the Central Nodal 
 Agencies  
(v) State Level Banking Committees (SLBCs) have not  allocated the targets to the Banks 
(thus far only 6 SLBCs have allocated the targets to Banks) 
(vi) Lack of developers in creation of low ticket h ousing in the market 
(vii) Lack of financial inclusion of the urban poor  
(viii) Lack of clarity in the PLIs about the Scheme  
(ix) Intrinsic shortcomings viewed by Banks  
a) Current mode of disbursement of subsidy to the P LIs on a quarterly basis and 
apprehensions about the account turning Non-Performing Assets (NPA) 
b) The mode of calculation of the Subsidy amount is  not clear and hence the PLIs 
are not submitting the claims 
c) The cumbersome reimbursement of subsidy amount o ver 60 installments, or 
more 
  In view of the Government’s proposal for Housing for All by the year 2022, the 
Committee note that there has been an annual defici t of one million houses. The Committee 
urge upon the Ministry to make concerted efforts to  remove all the bottlenecks and implement 
the scheme in true spirit otherwise, the target for Housing for All would remain a distant dream." 
 
 
 

-: 12 :- 
 
1.9 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has sta ted as follows: 
 
"A Central Sector Scheme titled “Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme” (CLSS) as a subcomponent of 
the “Housing for All” Scheme has been considered by the Cabinet and it is under finalization." 
1.10 The implementing agencies for RRY like NHB & H UDCO have not reported any 
progress because of certain difficulties. In order to extend easy credit facilities to Urban 
poor for construction of houses, the Committee had recommended for adopting better 
implementation strategy under Rajiv Rinn Yojana/ Gr uh Hamara Awas Rinn Scheme 
(GHAR Scheme). However, the Committee are constrain ed to note that instead of 
adopting any corrective measures, dedicated timelin e in order to achieve the target, the 
Ministry is simply changing the nomenclature of the  scheme like from Interest subsidy 
scheme for Housing the Urban Poor, then Rajiv Rinn Yojana, then  GHAR and presently a 
Central Sector Scheme titled Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) as a sub-component 
of the “Housing for All” scheme has been considered  by the Cabinet and it is under 
finalization. 
The Committee do not approve this casual approach o f the Ministry for this 
 important sector. Therefore, they strongly desire the Ministry to adopt a positive 
 approach to overcome the difficulties and achieve hundred percent target. 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SERIAL NO. 4)
 
Relocation of slum/ slum development  
1.11 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee observe that in many cities like Mum bai, slum people are being rehabilitated in 
the vertically built buildings.  In Dharavi, people  are staying in tall buildings having 8 to 9 floors .  
In these buildings maintenance is very poor.  The e levators do not work.  The Committee have 
been informed that in some good projects, there is a corpus fund where 15 years maintenance 
cost is provided by the developer as part of the sl um development.  The Committee is 
apprehensive as to what will happen when the period  of 15 years is over.  It will be extremely 
difficult for the inhabitants to bear the cost.  Th e Committee have been informed by the 
Secretary, Urban Development that the Ministry is h aving consultations with the private builders 
who are assigned the task of building houses for sl um dwellers, to take care of maintenance 
mandatorily. 
In the new scheme, with Private sector participation, the Ministry is specifying the things.  The 
Committee appreciate the concern of the Ministry and are hopeful that the situation will improve 
in future. 

-: 13 :- 
 
The Committee also desire the Ministry to ensure th e livelihood of slum dwellers till they are 
rehabilitated in new dwellings. 
Another issue related to relocation of slum is that  people are being shifted to new buildings but 
at the same time the slum areas are not being razed  as a result, the slum dwellers sublet the 
new houses and come back to the slum.  The Committee has been informed by the Ministry that 
in this regard the accountability on the part of th e state government should be fixed to protect 
that vacated land.  Therefore, the Committee strong ly recommend that this fact should be 
brought to the knowledge of all the state governmen ts in clear terms and they should be 
informed of the steps taken in this regard from time to time." 
1.12 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has st ated as follows: 
 
"With respect to the recommendation regarding ensur ing livelihood of slum dwellers till they are 
rehabilitated in new dwellings, it is submitted tha t it is for the State Government to plan and 
ensure livelihood linkage to the slum dwellers unde r relocation. The Ministry through its 
schemes suggest “in situ” redevelopment as the prio rity option to ensure minimal disruption to 
the livelihood. If such “in situ” redevelopment is not possible, then only State/city should 
consider relocation in consultation with slum dwell ers. In such cases, State Government can 
also use our National Urban Livelihoods Mission (NULM) for providing livelihood linkage.  
The Ministry also respectfully submits that it is t he responsibility of the State Government to de-
notify the slum after its redevelopment and guideli nes of our scheme recommends de-
notification after redevelopment." 
1.13 With regard to relocation of slum/ slum develo pment, though the Committee agree 
that it is the responsibility of the State Governme nt to plan and ensure livelihood linkage 
to the slum dwellers under relocation, yet the Comm ittee would like to impress upon the 
Central Government that it is  their duty as well t o ensure livelihood of slum dwellers 
throughout the country. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation 
in this regard to ensure livelihood as well as moni toring of de-notification of slum after 
their redevelopment.   
 
RECOMMENDATION ( SERIAL NO. 5) 
 
Rental Housing  
1.14  The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee observe that the Sardar Patel Nation al Mission for Urban Housing envisages 
creation of sufficient number of rental houses whic h can be made available to migrants as also 
to the homeless and destitute. It is envisaged that  a house upto 30 sq. mtr area for families and 
single room hostels/dormitories be constructed in s ufficient numbers to be let out by the Urban 
Local Bodies or other agencies including Private Se ctor to people who cannot afford to buy a 
house initially.    Such houses are proposed to be given on rent for a period of 5 years and 
thereafter the occupants except homeless and destitute would be expected to move to their own 
houses.   

-: 14 :- 
 
 
But the Committee have serious doubts about family/ individual becoming capable enough to 
buy their own house in a span of five years.  The C ommittee, therefore, recommend that 
government sector organizations and corporate organ izations should be impressed upon to 
create their own stock of housing, which can be rented to a new employee who is migrating into 
the city for job or is not having his own house in the city. This will spare the houses for the 
migrants who come to the cities in search of jobs, or without prior employment opportunity in 
their hands.  The Committee also recommend that suc h houses be rented to the 
individuals/families for either ten years or till becoming a house owner, whichever is earlier.   
 
The Committee observe that the corporate houses und er their Corporate Social Responsibility 
activities would also be allowed to fund these rent al housing.  The Corporate sector can 
promote housing scheme by utilizing the Provident F und.  The New Companies Act has 
proposed to earmark two percent of net profits for Corporate Social Responsibility.  However, 
this scheme is in a nascent stage.  The Committee w elcome the steps initiated by the 
Government in this regard and desire that all the necessary formalities be cleared at the earliest 
and the model Rental Housing Policy formulated at t he earliest and the Committee may be 
apprised of in this regard." 
 
1.15 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has st ated as follows: 
 
"As part of new Mission, Ministry of Housing & Urba n Poverty Alleviation will request 
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP ) to impress industries to make provision 
for accommodation facilities for their employees th rough rental housing or Rent to own 
schemes.  Ministry of Labour and State Governments will also be requested to build rental 
housing stock under their welfare funds.  Such stoc k of housing created by the corporate would 
be rented to new employees who  do not have their o wn houses in the city.  Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs will also be requested to include  ‘housing for their employees’ as one of the 
activities under the corporate social responsibilities.   
 Ministry is in the process of formulation of a rev ised National Urban Housing and Habitat 
Policy which will include rental housing policy as an integral component. " 
1.16 The Committee note that the Ministry of Housin g and Urban Poverty Alleviation is 
in the process of formulation of a revised National  Housing and Habitat Policy which will 
include rental housing policy as an integral compon ent. The Ministry will request the 
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP ), Ministry of Labour, Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs and State Governments to make provision for accommodation facilities 
for the employees of industries, Corporate offices to make provision for accommodation 
facilities for their employees though rental housin g or rent to own scheme. The 
Committee desire the Ministry to expedite the same without any loss of time and apprise 
the Committee about the steps taken in this regard. 

-: 15 :- 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION ( SERIAL NO. 6) 
 
Affordable Housing Partnership (AHP) Scheme  
1.17 The Committee had recommended as under:    
"The Government has approved the scheme of Affordab le Housing in partnership as part of 
Rajiv Awas Yojana on 3 September, 2013 to increase affordable housing stock as part of the 
preventive strategy. 
The Committee observe that a total of 18 projects o f 3 States (5 cities) have been sanctioned 
under the Affordable Housing in partnership Scheme with a central assistance of Rs.112.53 Cr. 
for construction of 20472 Affordable dwelling units. Rs.44.19 Cr has been released till date. Out 
of the 20472 sanctioned DUs, construction of 4628 h as been completed and construction of 
13945 DUs are under progress.   
The Committee, being not satisfied with the progres s under AHP, strongly recommend that 
construction of all the remaining houses be complet ed within one year, so that no spill-over of 
AHP is carried forward in the new Mission on Housin g. The Committee also want that the 
information relating to 1899 DUs may be furnished to them at the earliest." 
1.18 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has st ated as follows: 
"Out of total 25407 DUs approved under AHP, 1899 DU s were those which had not started at 
the time of submission of information to the Standi ng Committee. Construction of these 1899 
DUs have now started. Additionally 3 projects of Gu jarat have been approved in November 
2014 for construction of 3669 houses under the scheme.  
The implementation and execution of the projects is  entirely the responsibility of the State 
Government and its implementing agencies. It is per tinent to mention here that these are all 
multi-storeyed buildings and after approval to the project, start of projects involve invitation of 
bids for consideration, land development and concur rent activities. Ministry, however, persuade 
State Government and its agencies to expedite the p rocess of implementation of these projects 
in a time-bound manner." 
 
1.19 The Committee note that out of 25407 DUs appro ved under AHP on 3 September, 
2013, 4628 DUs have been completed and construction  of 13495 DUs were under 
progress as per information provided to them during  October 2014. Construction of 1899 
DUs have started now. Additionally 3 projects of Gu jurat have been approved in 
November, 2014 for construction of 3669 houses under the scheme. In total, construction  
of 5844 DUs are going on and construction of 3669 D Us are yet to be started against the 
sanctioned units of 25407. The total of completed and ongoing units are 24141. 

-: 16 :- 
 
 
Still there is a shortage of 266 DUs. From the abov e analysis, the Committee draw the 
conclusion that their recommendation for not to car ry forward the spill over DUs of AHP 
to the new mission cannot be implemented in true se nse. Therefore, the Committee wish 
to recommend that the Ministry should seriously mon itor the ongoing projects for their 
timely completion and expedite the process of final isation of bids for construction of 
3669 houses, land development and other concurrent activities and apprise the 
Committee within three months of presentation of this report. 
 
RECOMMENDATION ( SERIAL NO. 7) 
 
Spill-over projects under BSUP and IHSDP  
1.20 The Committee had recommended as under:    
"The JnNURM which was launched on 3 
rd  December, 2005 to implement reform-driven, planned 
development of cities in a mission mode was initial ly for a period of 7 years. This was further 
extended by 2 years upto 31.03.2014. For the BSUP a nd IHSDP components, the period has 
been further extended upto 31.03.2015 only for comp letion of projects sanctioned upto 
31.03.2012. The Committee observe that the assessme nt of the implementation of the Scheme 
shows that with the rise in prices of raw materials , cement, shortfalls in beneficiary contribution, 
the projects are faced with cost and time overrun.  Therefore, the Mission period has been 
extended upto March, 2015. The Committee strongly f eel that the period of extension up to 31 st  
March, 2015 for the projects sanctioned up to 31.03 .2012 is inadequate.  They desire that the 
extended period should run for completion of the pr ojects sanctioned up to 30 th  September, 
2013 for a meaningful impact of the extended period  and to adequately  cover  all the  
incomplete projects. 
The Committee in their earlier reports during 15 
th  Lok Sabha had, time and again, observed that 
the projects under BSUP and IHSDP components of JnN URM were being delayed.  To the 
despair of the Committee, the Ministry did not pay any heed to the Committee's repeated 
anguish and failed to formulate and put in place an y mechanism to avoid these delays. As a 
result of which now spill-over of the projects has surfaced. The Committee want that the spill-
over projects are completed without any further delay."   
1.21 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has st ated as follows: 
 
"Housing is a state subject and accordingly, the implementation/ execution of the projects under 
BSUP and IHSDP components of JNNURM Scheme is veste d with the State Government and 
its implementing agencies. Ministry’s role is limit ed to financing their projects as per policy 
decision under the schemes and in providing technic al guidance, experience sharing and 
dissemination of best practices. 

-: 17 :- 
 
The review meetings undertaken at various levels re vealed that  projects were getting delayed 
due to various reasons, primarily being cost escalation, reluctance of slum dwellers to shift prior 
to in-situ development of projects and availability  of  unencumbered land. To correct the 
process, Ministry has frozen its share in the proje cts at the level of sanctioned costs and states 
have been advised to meet cost escalation from this  end and complete the projects. State 
Governments have also been asked to allot/ arrange encumbrance free land for the approved 
project and in cases where adequate land is not ava ilable, to either curtail the dwelling units or 
not to start the project. Ministry has also curtail ed almost 2 lakh DUs which were yet to 
commence despite the fact that these were sanctione d long back  and their completion was not 
found feasible given limited availability of time and associated cost overrun. All efforts are being 
made to pursue State Governments to complete the DU s which are under progress within the 
available time line limits." 
1.22 In their 2 
nd  Report, the Committee had desired that the extende d period of 
JNNURM should run for completion of the projects sa nctioned up to 30 th  September, 
2013, for  a meaningful impact of the extended peri od and to adequately cover all the 
incomplete projects and the spill over projects are  completed without any further delay. 
However, to the utmost surprise, the Committee note  that the Ministry has curtailed 
almost 2 lakhs sanctioned Dwelling Units, which were yet to commence. This defeats the 
very purpose of extending the period by two years f or completion of the projects under 
JNNURM. The components under JNNURM are languishing  all over India. The projects 
were getting delayed due to various reasons, primar ily being cost escalation, reluctance 
of slum dwellers to shift prior to in-situ developm ent of projects and availability of         
un-encumbered land. The Committee agree with the Mi nistry's submission that housing 
is a State subject and the implementation execution  of the projects of JNNURM is vested 
with the State Government and its implementing agen cies. However, keeping in mind the 
constraints being faced by the State Governments to  bear the cost escalation of the 
projects, the Committee strongly desire that the Mi nistry should extend hundred percent 
financial support to the backward States and ensure  completion of the projects within a 
time-bound manner. 
 
RECOMMENDATION ( SERIAL NO. 8B)
 
Skill Development and Enhancing Employment in Construction Sector (including 
Housing Sector)  
1.23 The Committee had recommended as under:    
"The Committee observe that the Housing sector is t he fourth largest employment generating 
sector in the country and contributes significantly  to the GDP.  The Committee are appreciative 
of the fact that skill development and enhancing employment, which is one of the components of 

-: 18 :- 
 
NULM,  has been included as the focus area under th e NULM Scheme of the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation.  As proposed by the Ministry, the Committee desire that 
if needed, specific percentage of funds be allocate d to this field.  The Committee are given to 
understand that the budgetary support under NULM ha s been enhanced substantially so as to 
provide more support to States for urban poverty al leviation in 790 cities of the country. More 
funds have been allocated under the Information Education Communication (IEC) component of 
the scheme to generate community awareness. Further , dedicated staff to manage the Mission 
has been proposed at the national, state and city l evels. Also there will be one Community 
Organizer (CO) per 3,000 urban poor families. Skill  Gap Analysis is to be undertaken at the city 
level so as to provide linkage between skill develo pment and employment opportunities. Third 
party certification acceptable to the industry has also been introduced. In order to provide better 
credit availability to micro-enterprises, a task fo rce, with lead bank manager as one of the 
members, for short-listing of applications has been  introduced which is likely to reduce the 
rejection rate by banks and other financial institu tions.  The Committee on the basis of above 
observation and keeping in view the fact that need of Urban Housing is immense in our country, 
strongly recommend that special emphasis be laid on  skill development and employment 
enhancement in construction sector (including the h ousing sector), under NULM to fully tap the 
potential of young work force available in the coun try. Steps taken by the Ministry is this regard 
may be intimated to them on regular basis." 
1.24 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has st ated as follows: 
"State Urban Livelihood Missions (SULMs) are requir ed to identify the trades for training under 
EST&P as per local demand of the various industries .  The SULMs shall be requested to 
strengthen then the focus on the construction sector." 
1.25 The Committee are at dismal to note the reply of the Ministry that State Urban 
Livelihood Missions (SULMs) are required to identify the trades for training under EST&P 
as per local demand of the various industries.  In view of the Committee, Central Ministry 
should take the onus of  identifying the trades for  the training under EST&P as per local 
demands and help the SULMs in this regard by bringi ng out one detailed information of 
various trades including construction sector in whi ch training can be provided by 
SULMs.   
 
RECOMMENDATION ( SERIAL NO. 8D) 
 
Skill Training and Placement (EST&P) under NULM  
1.26 The Committee had recommended as under:    
"One of the important components under NULM is Empl oyment through Skill Training & 
Placement (EST&P).  Under this the objective is to target the urban poor who are occupationally 
vulnerable for employment through Skills Training &  Placement and provide training to the 
urban poor as per the skill demand from the market so that they can set up self employment 
venture or secure salaried employment.  In this regard the Committee are informed that National 
Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) has conducted district-wise Skill Gap Analysis (SGA) for 
all the States.  The analysis is being used by some  states, while other states have initiated the 
process of having Skill Gap analyzed through other agencies.  The Committee are of the view 

-: 19 :- 
 
that since this is an important component of NULM, the Ministry should ensure that all the State 
Governments complete the SGA and regularly update the same as per the changing scenario of 
job requirements. 
 The Committee observe that the skill training prov iders will also work towards providing 
job- placement or setting up self-enterprise for al l the successful candidates.  The skill training 
provider is to track the trained persons for a peri od of six months.  It is the responsibility of STP 
to regularly report on progress of training, placem ent and micro-enterprise establishment to the 
ULBs and SULM on a regular basis. 
 Further, as per guidelines it is mandatory for the  STP to provide placement, self-
enterprise set-up support for minimum 50% of succes sfully trained candidates.  However, the 
STPs will have to track all the candidates for a pe riod of 6 months.  The NULM MIS which has 
been designated for tracking of ST&P candidates wil l provide the necessary information 
regarding all the candidates." 
 
 The Committee strongly feel that by stipulating th e requirement of 50% in the guidelines, 
the STPs will never have a track record of all the ST&P candidates.  Therefore, they desire the 
Ministry to revise the guidelines to keep track of all the EST&Ps. They also feel that this period 
of six months is too small a period and after six m onths, there will be no record of such 
candidates. Hence, the Committee desire that this period should be enhanced suitably.  Further 
the ULBs and State Urban Livelihood Missions(SULMs)  should play a proactive role to check 
tracking system of skill training providers and sen d regular reports to the Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Poverty Alleviation." 
1.27 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has st ated as follows: 
"As per the EST&P Guidelines issued by the Ministry, Para 3. Cost & Payment Norms states the 
following – ‘The training cost will include cost of candidate m obilization, curriculum design, 
trainer’s fees, raw materials required for training , assessment & certification, placement linkage, 
MIS and post-placement tracking of the candidates’.   In addition, the para 5.4 – Post Training 
Tracking states that ‘The STP shall be required to track the successful candidates for a period of 
6 months.’;  thus the STP is required to track all the candidat es who have successfully been 
trained under this component irrespective of the po st placement status of the successful 
candidate. The EST&P guidelines mandate provision o f placement or enterprise development 
support to minimum 50% successful candidates and th is is not related to the tracking of 
successful candidates.  
Tracking period has been kept 6 months with the ant icipation that after 6 months the candidate 
will become self reliant." 
1.28  In their reply, the Ministry have stated that track ing period by STP  has been kept 
for a period of six months with the anticipation th at after 6 months the candidate will 
become self reliant. However, the Committee are of the view that under currently 
prevailing circumstances of getting into a job or a vailing a loan of starting one’s own 
business, majority of the trained candidates can’t become self-reliant within such a short 

-: 20 :- 
 
period of six months. Therefore, the Committee once  again strongly reiterate it’s 
recommendation of enhancing the tracking period suitably.  
 
RECOMMENDATION ( SERIAL NO. 10) 
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI)  
1.29 The Committee had recommended as under:    
"The Committee observe that the Government of India  has allowed Foreign Direct Investment 
(FDI) through automation route in construction and development sector.  The FDI covers 
development of townships, housing, built-up infrast ructure and construction-development 
related projects. As per the Department of Industrial Promotion and Policy, the Construction and 
Development Sector secured investments to the tune of Rs. 107,492 (US$ 23,132m) 
cumulatively from April 2000 to February, 2014 which is 11% of the net FDI inflow of equity.  
 
 However, the Committee are dismayed to note that n o survey has been undertaken by the 
Ministry to assess the impact on FDI inflows into housing sector and especially with reference to 
urban poor. Keeping in view the fact that the major ity of urban housing needs in India are 
related to the EWS and LIG segment, the Committee a re of the view that there is an urgent 
need to conduct such study so that the real impact of FDI in housing especially with reference to 
housing for urban poor can be assessed.  The Commit tee, therefore, strongly recommend the 
Ministry to get one such study conducted across the  country urgently.  The Committee further 
believe that allowing FDI through automation route in construction and development sector is a 
very welcome step of the Government.  But, it needs  very vigorous follow up in the sense that 
unless the various loopholes in the laws relating t o construction and housing sector are 
adequately plugged and unless a conducive environme nt for investment in this sector is 
promoted and  widely propagated this FDI Proposal would remain an initiative only on the paper 
and would not benefit the common masses which it is intended to do." 
1.30 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has st ated as follows: 
"Department of Industrial Promotion and Policy (DIP P) under Ministry of Industry & Commerce 
issues guidelines for FDI. DIPP has recently review ed the policy based on directives of the 
Cabinet Committee and issued Press Note No. 10 (201 4 series) with relaxed floor area norms, 
minimum capital requirement and definition of affor dable housing for automatic approval route, 
etc.  The data on  sector-wise FDI inflows in the F act sheet, released by DIPP, which is not 
sufficient to analyze the real impact on the housin g sector.  The observations of the committee 
in this regard are noted." 
 
1.31  The Ministry in their reply has stated that the dat a on sector wise FDI inflows in 
the fact sheet, released by DIPP, is not sufficient  to analyze the real impact on the 
housing sector. The Committee, therefore, reiterate  their earlier recommendation to 
conduct such study so that the real impact of FDI i n housing especially with reference to 
housing for urban poor can be assessed. In this reg ard, they are of the view that if the 

-: 21 :- 
 
data by DIPP is not sufficient to analyze the real impact on housing sector, the Ministry 
can request the DIPP to collect the data exclusivel y on FDI in housing sector within a 
period of three months, so that the impact assessment can be done. 
 
RECOMMENDATION ( SERIAL NO. 13)  
Central Government Employees Welfare Housing Organisation (CGEWHO)  
1.32 The Committee had recommended as under:    
"CGEWHO, is a welfare organization under the Minist ry of Housing and Poverty alleviation for 
construction of dwelling units exclusively for the Central Government Employees on No- profit – 
no loss basis.  The Committee in their 25th Report had recommended for launching new 
projects at regular intervals in almost all importa nt cities to accommodate more and more 
Central Government Employees.  The Ministry had ass ured the committee to plan new projects 
at important cities by conducting demand survey. 
 However, the Committee are constrained to note tha t the Governing Council CGEWHO 
as well as Ministry of HUPA has decided not to proc eed further turnkey projects since there is 
no government land allotment.  CGEWHO could not ful fill the earlier commitments at 6 stations 
for which Demand survey was conducted in 2009.  The  slow performance of CGEWHO is 
attributed to many factors such as non-availability  of land, lukewarm response from the State 
Governments, shortage of funds, etc.  As the Govern ment has announced housing for all by 
2022 and a mission mode approach for “Housing for a ll” is being undertaken by the Ministry, by 
involving all the governmental and private agencies , the Committee strongly feel that the 
Ministry should take pro-active steps to strengthen  its own agencies like CGEWHO and 
eradicate all the bottlenecks being faced by it.  T he Committee further observe that in many 
places government lands are being encroached from t ime to time.  Therefore, the Ministry 
should have consultation with state Government for allocating land to CGEWHO to take up 
more projects and complete the projects in hand in a time bound manner.  The Committee 
strongly feel that these steps will further strengt hen the land holding of Government to 
accomplish its goal of “Housing for All”." 
1.33 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has st ated as follows: 
 
"In order to strengthen the working of CGEWHO in di fferent States, CGEWHO has already 
taken up with Government of Andhra Pradesh and Gove rnment of Chhattisgarh to consider 
allotment of land for construction of affordable ho uses to the Central Government employees 
and other eligible categories in these cities." 
1.34  While the Committee appreciate the initiative taken  up by the Government  with 
the State Governments  of Andhra Pradesh and Chhatt isgarh for allotment of land to 
CGEWHO, they desire that this initiative be taken u p with all the states simultaneously 
and issue necessary instructions in this regard.   
 

-: 22 :- 
 
                                                                             
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDTIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GORERNMENT 
RECOMMENDATION ( SERIAL NO. 3)  
 
Rajiv Awas Yojana/Sardar Patel National Mission for Urban Housing 
 
 The Committee note that Rajiv Awas Yojana is basica lly a slum-redevelopment 
programme, which is budget driven, where financial assistance of 50% to 80% is provided by 
Government of India depending upon State and popula tion of the city with upper cap of           
Rs. 4 lakh and Rs. 5 lakh per house including 25% cap on cost of infrastructure. In pursuance of 
the vision of "slum free India", RAY was launched in two phases. The preparatory phase was for 
a period of two years from June 2011 to June 2013 a nd 195 cities were targeted for this 
purpose.  The Central Government has approved the implementation phase in September 2013. 
 The Committee are distressed to note that the prep aration activities during Phase I of 
RAY were tardy.  Till date preparatory activities h ave been completed only in 50 cities of 15 
states and work is in progress in 124 cities and  i s  at various stages of completion.  55 cities 
have completed slum survey while survey is under pr ogress in 69 cities.  48 cities have also 
completed GIS mapping and integration of slum surve y data.  Even after lapse of three years 
the targeted 195 cities have not been achieved.  Th e implantation Phase of RAY was launched 
in September 2013 and is applicable to all cities/ urban areas of the country.  Till date, 228 cities 
have been included under RAY and projects have been  approved for 145 cities in 22 states.   
The Committee are distressed to note that as on 1.8.2014, 166 DPRs with a total project cost of 
Rs. 6472.06 crore involving Central Share of Rs. 3531.19 crore for construction/ up gradation of 
120912 crore DUs have been approved and  Rs. 120581  crore has been released.  During the 
year 2013-14, the BE of Rs. 2102 crore was reduced to Rs. 1146.41 crore at RE stage but the 
actual expenditure was only 705.73 crore.  The BE f or 2014-15 is Rs.2400 crore.  The 
Committee have been informed that RAY is a reform a nd demand driven scheme for attaining 
slum-free states and it depends upon the level of a spiration of the state, willingness to align 
property rights to slum dweller, undertake reforms for the urban development etc.  Moreover, in-
situ  development of slum is the preferred choice and is  a time consuming process as there are 
various problems in shifting and relocating the slu ms, etc.  The Committee are given to 
understand that the Ministry is undertaking effecti ve monitoring by organizing seminars, field 
visit workshops, video conferencing etc. 

-: 23 :- 
 
 The Committee are further informed that the Minist ry is in the process of developing a 
new scheme to cater to housing for all by 2022.  Th e scheme of RAY is to be discontinued and 
the liabilities created by way of approval of proje cts are proposed to be subsumed in the new 
scheme i.e. Sardar Patel National Mission for Urban Housing. 
 The above facts are indicative of the fact that RA Y is a battle and new mission for Urban 
Housing is a war.  The Committee fail to understand  as to how the war would be won when the 
battle was lost in the preparatory phase itself. 
 Therefore, the Committee recommend that the Minist ry should strive vigorously to 
complete the preparatory activities at the earliest  and carry out effective measures for 
monitoring the scheme and sensitize the state Gover nments at the highest level about the goal 
of the scheme.  They also wish to recommend that th e difficulties experienced in the 
implementation of RAY should be examined carefully while taking up the new mission. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.2 The preparatory phase of RAY envisaged preparat ion of Slum free City Plan of Action 
wherein each city was required to undertake data co llection of all slums irrespective of land 
tenure, entry of data into MIS, GIS Mapping, GIS-MI S integration. Involvement of community 
has also been envisaged at all stages of the progra mme from planning through project 
formulation, implementation and post project operation and maintenance. 
 In order to expedite various preparatory activitie s and streamline the process of 
preparation of SFCPoAs, the Ministry has been revie wing the progress of all the preparatory 
activities at various levels through consultations,  review meetings, workshops, video 
conferencing etc with the States/UTs intensively and hand holding in areas identified to expedite 
the process. Till date, 95 SFCPoAs have been prepar ed. Another 94 cities are at advance 
stages of preparation. The recommendation of the St anding Committee to take note of the 
difficulties in implementing RAY while designing ne w scheme has been accepted and the 
proposed new mission is being designed to provide f lexibility to the States for expediting the 
implementation. It is submitted that Ministry is in the process of launching new Mission. 
  
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION ( SERIAL NO. 5) 
 

-: 24 :- 
 
Rental Housing  
2.3  The Committee observe that the Sardar Patel Nationa l Mission for Urban Housing 
envisages creation of sufficient number of rental h ouses which can be made available to 
migrants as also to the homeless and destitute. It is envisaged that a house upto 30 sq. mtr 
area for families and single room hostels/dormitori es be constructed in sufficient numbers to be 
let out by the Urban Local Bodies or other agencies  including Private Sector to people who 
cannot afford to buy a house initially.   Such hous es are proposed to be given on rent for a 
period of 5 years and thereafter the occupants exce pt homeless and destitute would be 
expected to move to their own houses.   
 
 But the Committee have serious doubts about family /individual becoming capable 
enough to buy their own house in a span of five yea rs.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that government sector organizations and corporate organizations should be impressed upon to 
create their own stock of housing, which can be rented to a new employee who is migrating into 
the city for job or is not having his own house in the city. This will spare the houses for the 
migrants who come to the cities in search of jobs, or without prior employment opportunity in 
their hands.  The Committee also recommend that suc h houses be rented to the 
individuals/families for either ten years or till becoming a house owner, whichever is earlier.   
 
The Committee observe that the corporate houses und er their Corporate Social Responsibility 
activities would also be allowed to fund these rent al housing.  The Corporate sector can 
promote housing scheme by utilizing the Provident F und.  The New Companies Act has 
proposed to earmark two percent of net profits for Corporate Social Responsibility.  However, 
this scheme is in a nascent stage.  The Committee w elcome the steps initiated by the 
Government in this regard and desire that all the necessary formalities be cleared at the earliest 
and the model Rental Housing Policy formulated at t he earliest and the Committee may be 
apprised of in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 
2.4 As part of new Mission, Ministry of Housing & U rban Poverty Alleviation will request 
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP ) to impress industries to make provision for 
accommodation facilities for their employees throug h rental housing or Rent to own schemes.  
Ministry of Labour and State Governments will also be requested to build rental housing stock 
under their welfare funds.  Such stock of housing c reated by the corporate would be rented to new 
employees who  do not have their own houses in the city.  Ministry of Corporate Affairs will also be 
requested to include ‘housing for their employees’ as one of the activities under the corporate social 
responsibilities.   
 Ministry is in the process of formulation of a rev ised National Urban Housing and Habitat 
Policy which will include rental housing policy as an integral component. " 

-: 25 :- 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION ( SERIAL NO. 8A)  
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR NATIONAL URBAN LIVELIHOOD MISSION (NULM) 
 
 
2.5   The Committee observe that the Ministry of Housin g and Urban Poverty Alleviation has 
launched National Urban Renewal Mission (NULM) in t he 12 
th  Five Year Plan w.e.f,                 
24 th  September 2013 by replacing the existing Swarna Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY). 
 
 During the year 2013-14, the allocation at BE was Rs. 950.00.  This allocation has been 
reduced to Rs. 777.53 Crore at RE stage. The actual expenditure was Rs. 720.43 crore.  During 
the year 2014-15 the allocation at BE stage is Rs. 1003 crore, out of which Rs. 105 crore have 
been utilized as on 31.07.2014.  The Ministry is making efforts to spend the balance funds.  The 
Committee are not happy with under utilization of N ULM allocation, which is an ambitious 
mission.  Therefore, they strongly recommend the Mi nistry to make all out efforts to utilize the 
allocated amount to achieve the goal to arrest urba n unemployment. For this, the Committee 
want that targets may be fixed and schemes properly  monitored. They also recommend that 
responsibility of the officials who willfully delay the project should be fixed. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.6 For the current FY 2014-15, an amount of Rs.1003.00  crore has been allocated for 
NULM Scheme. During the current FY 2014-15, Rs. 506 .37 crore have already been released 
as on December 31, 2014. Efforts are on to utilize the allocated funds for NULM. Regular 
reviews of the States/UTs are being held by the Min istry officials, by visiting the states, holding 
Video Conferences with the Secretaries/Mission Dire ctors/Nodal State officers. Regional and 
State-level Workshops are being organized which are  attended by the ULB level officials, 
representative from SLBC Convener Bank, NRLM, NABARD and other concerned Stakeholders 
from the States for resolving the issues being face d at the grass root level. Regular monitoring 
is also being done through Monthly Progress Reports  which are submitted by the States/UTs to 
the Ministry. For effective monitoring on implement ation of National Urban Livelihoods Mission 
(NULM) in States/UTs, computer based MIS has also been designed and developed. 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION ( SERIAL NO. 8C)
 
 

-: 26 :- 
 
GOVERNING COUNCIL OF NULM  
2.7 In connection with the National Urban Livelihood Mi ssion (NULM) the Ministry has 
informed that meeting of the Governing Council at c entral level has not been held till now, 
because the notification regarding constitution of the Governing Council (GC) was issued on 
21 st  February, 2014.  However, in view of the Lok Sabha  election, the meeting of Governing 
Council could not take place.  Necessary action is being taken to hold the meeting of the 
Governing Council.  At the State Level some states/  UTs have already formed the Governing 
Council and some States/ UTs are still in the proce ss for formation of Governing Council.  The 
Committee are finding it hard to understand that wi th this tardy pace, how the Ministry will 
monitor the progress of NULM in an effective way.  Therefore, they recommend the Ministry to 
ensure formation of Governing Council in all States  at the earliest.  The Committee further 
desire that the meeting of the Governing Council sh ould be convened at regular intervals and 
the findings/ outcome thereof should be taken serio usly in making further improvement in the 
implementation of NULM. 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.8 As per the NULM mission document, NULM will hav e a Governing Council (GC) chaired 
by the Minister for Housing & Urban Poverty Allevia tion which will be the policy-making body 
setting overall vision and providing direction to t he Mission, consistent with the national 
objectives. However the Executive Committee (EC), w hich will be constituted under the 
chairpersonship of Secretary, HUPA, GoI, will overs ee the activities of the Mission and monitor 
progress. 
 State level Executive Committees have been constit uted by 25 States and 3 UTs. 
Governing Councils have been constituted by 12 Stat es.   For reviewing the activities of the 
Mission, an Executive Committees meeting was recent ly held on the 29 
th  of December 2014 
under the Chairpersonship of Secretary (HUPA). Meet ing of the Governing Council at the 
Central level would also be convened shortly.  
  
  

-: 27 :- 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION (SERIAL NO. 9)  
 
STUDY ON IMPACT OF INVESTMENT IN THE HOUSING SECTOR ON GDP AND 
EMPLOYMENT IN THE INDIAN ECONOMY  
 
2.9 The Committee observe that a study to understand th e impact of investment in housing 
and construction on both employment and income has been carried out by the Ministry through 
the National Council for Applied Economic Research (NCAER).  The Report has been submitted 
to the Ministry on 25 
th  February, 2014.  Based on the recommendations of t he Report, the 
Ministry has requested the Ministry of Finance for inclusion of “affordable housing” in the 
harmonized master list of infrastructure sub-sectio ns as housing contributes significantly to the 
GDP.  The Committee desire the Ministry of HUPA to appraise them about the outcome thereof.  
The Committee further observe that skill developmen t and enhancing employment has been 
included as focus areas under NULM Scheme of this M inistry.  The Committee also note that 
99.41% of the jobs in housing sector are informal j obs.  Therefore, the Committee strongly 
desire that the Ministry of HUPA should strive to p rovide skill development training on housing 
sector to the urban unemployed youth through NULM t o enable them to avail of the job 
opportunities being provided in the housing sector thereby facilitating in alleviating the urban 
poverty. 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.10  The Ministry, has requested the Ministry of F inance to include affordable housing in the 
harmonized master list of infrastructure sub sector . This request is based on the 
recommendation of a study on “Impact of investment in housing sector on GDP and 
employment in Indian economy". 
 State Urban Livelihood Missions (SULMs) are requir ed to identify the trades for training 
under EST&P as per local demand of the various indu stries. The SULMs shall be requested to 
increase the focus on the housing sector as mentioned above.  
 
 
 
 

-: 28 :- 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION ( SERIAL NO. 11)  
Real Estate and Regulatory Authority (RERA) Bill  
 
2.11  The Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Bill, 2013 was introduced in the 
Parliament by Government on 14 
th  August, 2013 after wide consultations with all the  
stakeholders.  The Bill was referred to the Standin g Committee on Urban Development for 
examination and report. The Committee after having wide consultations with all the stakeholders 
had given an objective report to the Parliament on 17 th  February, 2014.  The Committee were 
also informed by the Ministry that it had consultat ions with the stakeholders, expert bodies, 
Ministries/ Department of Government of India and State and ULBs on 19 th  September, 2014.  It 
is now proposed to finalize the draft Cabinet Note for inter-Ministerial comments on the 
proposed official amendments before moving the Unio n Cabinet for approving the amendments 
in the Bill.  In view of the above perspective, the Committee strongly feel that the Ministry should 
avoid duplication of work resulting in delaying the  re-introduction of Bill in the Parliament 
because real estate sector is highly unregulated and the common man is being harassed by the 
builders and their associations.  Therefore, the Co mmittee strongly recommend the Ministry to 
expedite the matter and to urgently bring this Bill to be passed by the Parliament in order to give 
relief to the common masses who are being continual ly harassed at the hands of unscrupulous 
builders’ lobby. 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.12 Based on the recommendation of Parliament Standing Committee and consultation with 
stake holders, the Ministry of Housing & Urban Pove rty Alleviation had submitted the Note for 
Cabinet, with official amendments proposed to the R eal Estate (Regulation and Development) 
Bill, 2013 for  seeking the approval of Union Cabin et. The Union Cabinet after considering the 
matter on 17 th  December 2014 has deferred the proposed official a mendments to the Bill.  The 
cabinet note is being resubmitted for consideration  of the Cabinet after incorporating the views 
received in this regard. 
 
 
 

-: 29 :- 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION ( SERIAL NO. 12)  
 
Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council (BMTPC) 
 
2.13 The Committee observe that the BMTPC mainly endeavo rs to promote the use of 
innovative and environment- friendly building mater ials and construction technologies and have 
thus initiated services of multifaceted activities for the accomplishment of its objectives 
enshrined in the mandate of the council. 
 The council is also working towards bringing emerg ing technologies from all over the 
world such as disaster mitigation and management, s eismic strengthening Capacity building 
and skill development by working as a training Reso urce Centre, project management, 
consulting etc.  Further the council proposes to fo cus on selection and evaluation of newer 
methods and process, up scaling and modernization o f homegrown production technologies, 
use of bamboo in housing and building construction in bamboo growing regions, etc." 
 The Committee observe that during the last five yea rs starting from the year 2009-10, 
the amount sanctioned for BMTPC has always been les ser than the proposed amount, 
whereas, the actual expenditure has always been in excess to the total of budgetary allocation 
and the revenue generated by the BMTPC.  The Commit tee in their 25 
th  Report on Demands 
For Grants (2013-14) had recommended to increase th e grant-in-aid for BMTPC. The 
Committee are constrained to note that the Ministry  does not intend to increase its budgetary 
support but want the BMTPC to become self-sustained.  The Committee cannot but deplore the 
continuous neglect of BMTPC. 
 The Committee are further informed that at present , the activities of the council have 
been restricted keeping in view the grants sanction ed and the external cash flow generated 
during the relevant years.  Further, the role of BM PTC will be more challenging in Government 
of India’s aim of Housing For All by the year 2022.  The present budgetary support and revenue 
generation by BMTPC is bare minimum and in order to  enhance the activities of BMTPC, there 
is a need to increase the budgetary support. 
  The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterate thei r earlier recommendation made in 25 
th  
Report (15 th  Lok Sabha) that budgetary allocation for BMTPC sho uld be enhanced sufficiently 
not only to meet the current expenses but also to e nable the organisation to take up new 
research and development projects and exercises.  T he Committee further desire that this 

-: 30 :- 
 
enhanced and sufficient allocation should be contin ued for BMTPC, till the organization 
becomes self-sufficient. 
 The Committee would also like the BMTPC and the Mi nistry to formulate the Standards/ 
Specifications for Affordable Housing for different regions, at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.14 BMTPC prepares its action plan every year to t ake up various activities viz building 
material and housing technology development, evalua tion and project appraisal, publications, 
seminars/conferences/training for awareness creatio n etc. Based on the action plan, funding 
requirements are ascertained. Various activities of  the BMTPC are funded through grant-in-aid 
and own revenue generated by the BMTPC. The budgeta ry support for the BMTPC will be 
rationalized depending upon its annual action plan.  
The methods and processes of construction of housing in the real estate/construction sector are 
governed by Development Control Rules and Building Byelaws of respective state or 
Development Authorities. All Government/Non-Governm ent  construction agencies generally 
follow standards prescribed by Bureau of Indian Sta ndards (BIS).  The BIS, the National 
Standards Body of India is a statutory organization  under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 
1986 in all matters concerning Standardization, Cer tification and Quality.   The Ministry will 
request  the BIS to incorporate the standards/speci fications of affordable housing in the new 
National Building Code.   
 
RECOMMENDATION ( SERIAL NO. 14)  
Urban Statistics for HR and Assessment Scheme (USHA)  
2.15 The Committee observe that as per Planning Commissi on initiative, all smaller schemes 
have been merged with umbrella schemes of the Ministries.  Hence, Urban Statistics for HR and 
Assessment (USHA) Scheme has been subsumed with the main scheme of the Ministry namely 
Rajiv Awas Yojana (RAY).  Under RAY, USHA has been continued as a capacity building 
measure and it has been further augmented and stren gthened.  The Scheme has the following 
objectives: 
I. Data centre and MIS on Urban poverty, slums, hou sing, building, construction and 
related Urbanization Statistics. 
II. One time grants to State Governments/UT adminis trations for        computerization. 
III.   Knowledge centre/National resource centre fo r Urban Poverty, slums. 

-: 31 :- 
 
IV. Sample surveys in areas of urban poverty, slums , housing and building construction. 
V. Socio-Economic research studies in areas of Urba n poverty, slums, housing & building 
construction; and 
VI. Capacity building & training in areas of urban poverty, slums, housing & building 
construction statistics. 
 
 However, the Committee note with concern that duri ng the years 2012-13 to 2014-15, 
against the budgetary allocation of Rs. 53 Crore, t he expenditure has been only Rs. 27.72 
Crore. The Committee are distressed to note that th e initial target to undertake preparatory 
activities of RAY like slum survey, GIS Mapping, pr eparation of Slum Free City Plan have not 
been achieved. The Ministry has not undertaken any survey to assess the impact of Foreign 
Direct Investment (FDI) on housing sector, a study to understand the impact of investment in 
housing and construction on both employment  and income has been carried out by the Ministry 
through the National Centre for Applied Economic Research (NCAER). 
 In view of the above, the Committee are compelled to come to the conclusion that the 
full potential of USHA Scheme has not been utilized .  Therefore, the Committee strongly 
recommend that USHA should be strengthened by givin g adequate budgetary provision, 
manpower and other necessary infrastructure.  Its o bjectives should be utilized to its fullest 
extent." 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.16 A. National Building organization’s primary fu nction is to provide required urban data to 
the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviati on on housing, buildings construction, slum 
development, urban poverty alleviation and related activities in the context of the fast changing 
socio-economic developments and also to ensure that the schemes of the Ministry of Housing & 
Urban Poverty Alleviation (Mo HUPA) are supported w ith appropriate database sources, MIS 
and knowledge inputs. 
B. In order to support and strengthen NBO’s activit ies on housing and buildings data collection, 
an amount of Rs.17.38 crore has been released  as g rants-in-aid during  the financial year 
2014-15  to Directorate of Economics and Statistics  (DES) of various  States/UTs for 
undertaking activities connected with collection, collation, compilation and online transmission of 
housing and building construction related data to N BO under USHA Scheme which is now part 
of the capacity building component of RAY. NBO does  not have field unit or any state level 
formation for collecting primary data and therefore , it becomes necessary to take the active 
support from the DES of states/ UTs by providing fi nancial support to strengthen DES in their 
data collection activities. 
C. Grant-in-Aid have been released to state Governm ents/UTs for collection of the following 
statistics during the year 2014-15: 

-: 32 :- 
 
(i) Building Permit for New Residential Units 
(ii) Number of Building Permits and Completion Cert ificates Issued 
(iii) Building Material Price 
(iv) Wages of Building Construction Labour 
(v) Format Schedule for information on dilapidated/ dangerous and 
unauthorized construction 
(vi) Residential Housing Property Circle Rates 
(vii) Residential Housing Property Market Rates 
(viii) Residential Housing Property Rental  Rates 
 
D. In this connection it may be mentioned that on account of persistent efforts on the part of the 
NBO, 16 states have appointed nodal officers respon sible for collection and online 
transmission of this statistics to NBO. Further, da ta is being received from selected cities of 14 
states for building permits and Completion Certific ates issued, 12 states for building material 
prices, 9 states for wages of labour and 5 states f or building permits for new residential unit. 
Necessary action is being taken to bring all states/UTs on board at the earliest. 
E. The Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Allevi ation is in the process of constituting an 
Advisory Committee to review activities carried out  by NBO and ways and means of 
strengthening its current data collection mechanism  in order to meet the data requirement for 
the schemes of MoHUPA.  
 
F. As regards providing additional manpower to NBO,  the concerned carder controlling 
authorities are constantly being reminded to fill t he vacant posts in NBO urgently. Meanwhile, 
Consultants are hired to undertake activities requiring additional manpower.  
 
RECOMMENDATION ( SERIAL NO. 15) 
 
Technical Assistance from Department for International Development for Support to 
National Policies for Urban Poverty Reduction (SNPUPR)  
2.17 The Committee observe that SNPUPR, a joint ini tiative of Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Poverty Alleviation and UK Government had commenced  in July 2010 with a budget of £ 14.5 
million to assist National Programme being implemen ted to benefit the urban poor by providing 
technical support.  The Committee are distressed to  note that during the period 2010-11 to 
2014-15, the BE allocation was Rs. 59.08 Crore, the  RE allocation was Rs. 27.17 Crore, while 
the actual expenditure was Rs. 14.41 Crore.  The less expenditure during the year 2010-11 was 
because of late selection of cities. The delay in t he commencement of PMU and Challenge 

-: 33 :- 
 
Fund resulted in variation in less expenditure duri ng 2012-13 to 2013-14.  The delay in 
commencement of Challenge Fund (CF) has been mainly  due to lukewarm responses of ULBs 
as well as delays in finalizing the concept and ope rational manual.  The Committee are 
distressed to note that the highly ambitious programme remains on paper only due to such type 
of delays and lack of enthusiasm on the part of ULB s and the scarce resources remained 
unutilized.  Therefore, the Committee wish to impre ss upon the Ministry to take concerted steps 
to implement the scheme in letter and spirit in the current financial year. 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.18 The Committee’s observations have been noted.  
RECOMMENDATION ( SERIAL NO. 16)  
NATIONAL SCHEME FOR SUPPORT TO STREET VENDORS  
2.19  The Committee note that the ‘Street Vendors P rotection of Livelihood and Regulation of 
Street Vending Act’, has been passed by Parliament.    It appears that this Act has remained an 
Act only on paper and very few intended benefits of  the Act have actually percolated to the 
street vendors in fact.  However, as per press repo rt street vendors are finding it hard to get 
themselves registered.  The street vendors are bein g harassed by the police and Urban Local 
Bodies.  In many places, vendors are still occupyin g public footpath creating unhygienic 
conditions around their vending places.  The design ated vending zones have not been 
earmarked. Stating the reasons, the Ministry has in formed the Committee that it has already 
advised all the States/ UTs to implement the Act by  framing its rules and scheme under the Act 
within one year and six months.  The Committee agre e with the Ministry that it is the 
responsibility of the concerned State Government to  implement the provisions under the Act.  
However, at the same time the Committee wish to urg e upon the Ministry that it should 
undertake follow up action with the State Governmen ts to ensure its timely implementation, as 
the Ministry through its National Urban Livelihood Mission (NULM) addresses the Livelihood 
concerns of the Urban Street Vendors. 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.20  The Ministry has been following up regularly with States on framing of scheme and rules 
under the Street Vendors Act, 2014. It has been bro ught to our attentions that some States like 
Maharashtra, Punjab, Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Karnata ka, Tamil Nadu etc, are at an advanced 
stage of drafting Scheme and/ or Rules under the Ac t. Government of NCT of Delhi has notified 
the rules for the Street Vendors Act, 2014, and is in the process of framing the Scheme. To help 
the States in this process, Ministry has assigned t he work of frame Model Rules & Scheme to 
AIILSG, Mumbai. The Model Rules & Scheme will be ci rculated to all the States/UTs, so that 
they frame their Rules & Scheme expeditiously. 

-: 34 :- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION ( SERIAL NO. 17) 
 
HINDUSTAN PREFAB LIMITED (HPL)  
2.21  Hindustan Prefab Limited an ISO 9001:2008 is a sche dule ‘C’ Central Public Sector 
Enterprise under administrative control of Ministry  of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation.  It is 
engaged in the execution of projects on Turnkey bas is i.e. from concept to completion on 
Project Management Consultancy. It is a brainchild of first Prime Minister and established with 
the prime objective of providing Prefab houses to t he people, displaced from Pakistan. HPL is 
currently providing Project Management Consultancy (PMC) for construction of projects in 15 
States awarded to it through various State Governments and its agencies.  From the information 
provided by the Ministry, the Committee can easily infer that by using building components and 
other prefab technologies, the time required for co nstruction of projects reduces significantly 
thereby reducing the overall project cost considera bly. Also, the prefab products rate higher on 
durability and eco-friendly in comparison with conv entional methods.  The prefab components 
provide ready answer for replacement of burnt brick s.  They use considerable amount of fly ash 
and other agricultural waste in production of such components, which are environment friendly 
measures.  
 The Committee note with dismay that despite having  the above-mentioned advantages 
and potential to grow, the prefab technologies cost s are comparable to the conventional 
technologies since the demand for prefab technologi es is still limited.  The Committee cannot 
but deplore the fact that the mindset of the people  at large and architects, engineers and policy 
makers in specific, to take up prefab construction on a large scale is limited. Further lack of 
standardization in building dimension and component s coupled with absence of the 
technologies in the schedule rates of Government ag encies at the Centre and States inhibit the 
use of prefab technologies in a large scale.  From the replies of the Ministry on the progress 
made on JNNURM & RAY, the Committee are distressed to note that the Dwelling projects 
under JNNURM & RAY are lagging behind and these are  suffering from time & cost overrun.  
The Committee are happy to note that HPL has signed  an MoU with Construction Industry 
Development Council (CIDC) to promote the adoption of pre-fabricated and pre-engineered 
technologies for achieving fast tract construction especially for the attainment of the goal of 
providing ‘Housing for all by 2022’. The Committee therefore recommend that Ministry of HUPA 
should take concerted efforts and strive vigorously  to change the mind set of all concerned 
engaged with construction agencies and complete all the projects without cost and time overrun 
by adopting Prefab technologies.  The Committee are  of the strong opinion that Prefab 
technologies are the only answer to build smart cities and construction of Houses by 2022. 
   The Committee desire that the Ministry bring nec essary changes in schedule rates of the 
Government agencies. Thus, the Committee would like  to recommend that the Government 
should make an all-out effort through seminars, exh ibitions and advertisements, to make this 
prefab technology popular amongst all the concerned , for the benefit of not only HPL but also, 

-: 35 :- 
 
the common man and the nation as a whole.  In order to promote prefab technologies and arrest 
of cost and time run of various projects, the Commi ttee also wish to recommend that it should 
be made mandatory on the part of all Government and  private agencies to adopt prefab 
technologies. During the study visit of the Committ ee to Pune, the Committee were very 
impressed with the quality of construction and the more importantly the speed of construction 
that was adopted by Hindustan Prefab Limited.  The Committee are of the opinion that with 
increase in the volumes  of  Prefab technology, the  prices of such technology will come down 
significantly and, therefore, the Committee strongl y feel that such attractive and innovative 
options should be keenly considered  and adopted by  all the agencies related to constructions 
and development. 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.21 HPL would organize few stakeholders’ interacti ons and seminars during the next 
financial year to create awareness about prefabrica tion technology, towards which appropriate 
parameters have also been proposed in the MOU for t he year 2015-16.  HPL is also working 
with Bureau of Indian Standards to include this tec hnology in their Codes which shall further 
help in increasing the use of prefabrication techno logy. Further, HPL has entered into an MOU 
with Construction Industry Development Council (CID C) and would jointly work for promotion of 
the prefab sector. HPL would also take all supporti ve actions in close association with Building 
Materials and Technology Promotion Council (BMTPC) an autonomous organization under the 
Ministry for development of low cost technology in Housing. Efforts will be made to bring 
necessary changes in schedule of rates by consultin g with the Government construction 
agencies. 
 
  

-: 36 :- 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW 
OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Nil 
  

-: 37 :- 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE 
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
RECOMMENDATION ( SERIAL NO. 1) 
  
UNDER UTILIZATION OF FUNDS  
 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviati on (HUPA) has been, inter-alia , 
entrusted with the implementation of programmes of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation 
including Housing sector programmes in urban areas.   During the 12 th  Five Year Plan, the 
Ministry is in the process of revamping some of its  old schemes in addition to introducing new 
programmes for benefits of urban poor.  The Committ ee observe that from the year 2010-11 to 
2013-14, there has been a huge difference between the projections and allocations at BE stage.  
The allocations made at BE stage have been reduced at RE stage.  The actual expenditure is 
also less in comparison to the allocation at RE sta ge.  The overall BE for the year 2014-15 is 
Rs. 6008.62 crore which includes both plan and non- plan expenditure.  In comparison to the 
budget estimate of 2013-14, the percentage increase during 2014-15 has been 310.96 per cent.  
The huge jump in budget allocation during the year 2014-15 is due to transfer of ACA funds of 
RAY and JnNURM in the Demands of the Ministry of Ho using and Urban Poverty Alleviation, in 
accordance with the instructions of Planning Commis sion.   However, keeping aside the growth 
of budgetary allocation, the real growth is very ma rginal.  The Committee in their earlier reports 
on Demands for Grants have been recommending for en hancing the budgetary allocation for 
the Ministry.  The Committee note that the Ministry  is proposing various ambitious schemes like 
creation of 100 smart cities, providing Housing for  All by 2022, etc.  Keeping in view all these 
factors, the Committee recommend that Ministry shou ld make out all efforts to utilize its budget 
allocations after removing all bottlenecks that com e in the way. They further recommend that 
adequate allocation should be provided to the Minis try so that ambitious schemes should not 
face any fund starvation.  The Committee are of the  view that the changing funding pattern for 
JnNURM and RAY should be supported by an in-built m echanism for their greater 
implementation and timely submission of utilization certificates." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2 Ministry has made all efforts to utilize the bu dget allocation made available to it. It has 
expedited the process of fund release to states and  cities. However Progress under Basic 
Services to the Urban Poor (BSUP) and Integrated Housing and Slum Development Programme 
(IHSDP) components of Jawaharlal Nehru National Urb an Renewal Mission (JNNURM), 
however, is constrained because of the fact that th ese projects had been approved in the XIth 
plan and because of subsequent cost escalations, St ate Govt./ Cities are facing extreme 
difficulties in completing such projects. Ministry has been pursuing these projects very closely 
with States / Cities for completion and is also per suading State Govts. to enhance their share in 

-: 38 :- 
 
the project. It is submitted that implementation of  projects is entirely within the purview of State 
Govts / cities. Ministry assists the States/Cities them by extending financial assistance under its 
scheme and in facilitating experience sharing, best practices dissemination. 
 4.3 For comments of the Committee please see Parag raph No.1.7 of Chapter-I of the 
Report.  
 
RECOMMENDATION (SERIAL NO. 2) 
 
Better Implementation Strategy be taken up under RRY/ (Gruh Hamara Awas Rinn) GHAR 
Scheme.  
 
4.4 The Committee note with constraint  that in-spi te of the implementation of Interest 
Subsidy Scheme for Housing the Urban Poor since 200 8-09 and its subsequent modifications 
during 12 
th  Plan as Rajiv Rinn Yojana, till   2013-14 only Rs. 51.46 crore has been spent against 
the revised estimate of Rs. 130.00 crore.  There ha s been a huge gap between BE and RE vis-
a-vis actual expenditure since 2008-09.  The BE for  this Scheme during the current financial 
year i.e 2014-15 is Rs 698.98 crore.  The overall t arget for the 12 th  Plan period is 1 million 
dwellings for slum and non-slum dwellers across the  country.  Unlike other schemes, the 
scheme is target oriented.  Hence targets to benefit, 2.5 lakh beneficiaries in each financial year 
i.e. 2013-14 & 2014-15 have been assigned.  However , the Committee are constrained to note 
that as on date the central Nodal agencies i.e. NHB  and HUDCO have not reported any 
progress.  The Ministry is working on the ways to e nhance the progress under RRY.  According 
to the Ministry, the reasons for not achieving any progress by CNA are: 
   
(x) General reluctance on part of Banks particularl y and HFCs to lend to the target 
 beneficiaries with informal income and informal ti tles 
(xi) State Government and ULBs were unable to fully  appreciate and communicate  the 
financial benefits accrued to the beneficiaries under the scheme 
(xii) Beneficiaries could not appreciate the financ ial benefits accrued through  reduced EMIs  
(xiii) Not enough push to the Primary Lending Insti tutions (PLIs) by the Central Nodal 
 Agencies  
(xiv) State Level Banking Committees (SLBCs) have n ot allocated the targets to the Banks 
(thus far only 6 SLBCs have allocated the targets to Banks) 
(xv) Lack of developers in creation of low ticket h ousing in the market 
(xvi) Lack of financial inclusion of the urban poor  
(xvii) Lack of clarity in the PLIs about the Scheme  
(xviii) Intrinsic shortcomings viewed by Banks  
a) Current mode of disbursement of subsidy to the P LIs on a quarterly basis and 
apprehensions about the account turning Non-Performing Assets (NPA) 
b) The mode of calculation of the Subsidy amount is  not clear and hence the PLIs 
are not submitting the claims 
c) The cumbersome reimbursement of subsidy amount o ver 60 installments, or 
more 

-: 39 :- 
 
  In view of the Government’s proposal for Housing for All by the year 2022, the 
Committee note that there has been an annual defici t of one million houses. The Committee 
urge upon the Ministry to make concerted efforts to  remove all the bottlenecks and implement 
the scheme in true spirit otherwise, the target for Housing for All would remain a distant dream. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.5 A Central Sector Scheme titled “Credit Linked S ubsidy Scheme” (CLSS) as a 
subcomponent of the “Housing for All” Scheme has be en considered by the Cabinet and it is 
under finalization. 
4.6 For comments of the Committee please see Paragr aph No.1.10 of Chapter-I of the 
Report.  
RECOMMENDATION (SERIAL NO. 4) 
 
Relocation of slum/ slum development  
4.7 The Committee observe that in many cities like Mumbai, slum people are being 
rehabilitated in the vertically built buildings.  I n Dharavi, people are staying in tall buildings 
having 8 to 9 floors.  In these buildings maintenan ce is very poor.  The elevators do not work.  
The Committee have been informed that in some good projects, there is a corpus fund where 15 
years maintenance cost is provided by the developer  as part of the slum development.  The 
Committee is apprehensive as to what will happen when the period of 15 years is over.  It will be 
extremely difficult for the inhabitants to bear the  cost.  The Committee have been informed by 
the Secretary, Urban Development that the Ministry is having consultations with the private 
builders who are assigned the task of building hous es for slum dwellers, to take care of 
maintenance mandatorily. 
In the new scheme, with Private sector participation, the Ministry is specifying the things.  The 
Committee appreciate the concern of the Ministry and are hopeful that the situation will improve 
in future. 
The Committee also desire the Ministry to ensure th e livelihood of slum dwellers till they are 
rehabilitated in new dwellings. 
Another issue related to relocation of slum is that  people are being shifted to new buildings but 
at the same time the slum areas are not being razed  as a result, the slum dwellers sublet the 
new houses and come back to the slum.  The Committee has been informed by the Ministry that 
in this regard the accountability on the part of th e state government should be fixed to protect 
that vacated land.  Therefore, the Committee strong ly recommend that this fact should be 
brought to the knowledge of all the state governmen ts in clear terms and they should be 
informed of the steps taken in this regard from time to time. 
  

-: 40 :- 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.8 With respect to the recommendation regarding en suring livelihood of slum dwellers till 
they are rehabilitated in new dwellings, it is subm itted that it is for the State Government to plan 
and ensure livelihood linkage to the slum dwellers under relocation. The Ministry through its 
schemes suggest “in situ” redevelopment as the prio rity option to ensure minimal disruption to 
the livelihood. If such “in situ” redevelopment is not possible, then only State/city should 
consider relocation in consultation with slum dwell ers. In such cases, State Government can 
also use our National Urban Livelihoods Mission (NULM) for providing livelihood linkage.  
The Ministry also respectfully submits that it is t he responsibility of the State Government to de-
notify the slum after its redevelopment and guideli nes of our scheme recommends de-
notification after redevelopment. 
4.9 For comments of the Committee please see Paragr aph No. 1.13 of Chapter-I of the 
Report.  
 
RECOMMENDATION ( SERIAL NO. 5) 
 
Rental Housing  
4.10  The Committee observe that the Sardar Patel Nationa l Mission for Urban Housing 
envisages creation of sufficient number of rental h ouses which can be made available to 
migrants as also to the homeless and destitute. It is envisaged that a house upto 30 sq. mtr 
area for families and single room hostels/dormitori es be constructed in sufficient numbers to be 
let out by the Urban Local Bodies or other agencies  including Private Sector to people who 
cannot afford to buy a house initially.    Such hou ses are proposed to be given on rent for a 
period of 5 years and thereafter the occupants exce pt homeless and destitute would be 
expected to move to their own houses.   
 
But the Committee have serious doubts about family/ individual becoming capable enough to 
buy their own house in a span of five years.  The C ommittee, therefore, recommend that 
government sector organizations and corporate organ izations should be impressed upon to 
create their own stock of housing, which can be rented to a new employee who is migrating into 
the city for job or is not having his own house in the city. This will spare the houses for the 
migrants who come to the cities in search of jobs, or without prior employment opportunity in 
their hands.  The Committee also recommend that suc h houses be rented to the 
individuals/families for either ten years or till becoming a house owner, whichever is earlier.   
 
The Committee observe that the corporate houses und er their Corporate Social Responsibility 
activities would also be allowed to fund these rent al housing.  The Corporate sector can 
promote housing scheme by utilizing the Provident F und.  The New Companies Act has 
proposed to earmark two percent of net profits for Corporate Social Responsibility.  However, 
this scheme is in a nascent stage.  The Committee w elcome the steps initiated by the 

-: 41 :- 
 
Government in this regard and desire that all the necessary formalities be cleared at the earliest 
and the model Rental Housing Policy formulated at t he earliest and the Committee may be 
apprised of in this regard. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.11 As part of new Mission, Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation will request 
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP ) to impress industries to make provision 
for accommodation facilities for their employees th rough rental housing or Rent to own 
schemes.  Ministry of Labour and State Governments will also be requested to build rental 
housing stock under their welfare funds.  Such stoc k of housing created by the corporate would 
be rented to new employees who  do not have their o wn houses in the city.  Ministry of 
Corporate Affairs will also be requested to include  ‘housing for their employees’ as one of the 
activities under the corporate social responsibilities.   
 Ministry is in the process of formulation of a rev ised National Urban Housing and Habitat 
Policy which will include rental housing policy as an integral component.  
4.12 For comments of the Committee please see Parag raph No.1.16 of Chapter-I of the 
Report.  
 
RECOMMENDATION ( SERIAL NO. 6) 
 
Affordable Housing Partnership (AHP) Scheme  
4.13 The Government has approved the scheme of Affo rdable Housing in partnership as part 
of Rajiv Awas Yojana on 3 September, 2013 to increase affordable housing stock as part of the 
preventive strategy. 
The Committee observe that a total of 18 projects o f 3 States (5 cities) have been sanctioned 
under the Affordable Housing in partnership Scheme with a central assistance of Rs.112.53 Cr. 
for construction of 20472 Affordable dwelling units. Rs.44.19 Cr has been released till date. Out 
of the 20472 sanctioned DUs, construction of 4628 h as been completed and construction of 
13945 DUs are under progress.   
The Committee, being not satisfied with the progres s under AHP, strongly recommend that 
construction of all the remaining houses be complet ed within one year, so that no spill-over of 
AHP is carried forward in the new Mission on Housin g. The Committee also want that the 
information relating to 1899 DUs may be furnished to them at the earliest. 
 
 
 
 

-: 42 :- 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.14 Out of total 25407 DUs approved under AHP, 189 9 DUs were those which had not started 
at the time of submission of information to the Sta nding Committee. Construction of these 1899 
DUs have now started. Additionally 3 projects of Gu jarat have been approved in November 2014 
for construction of 3669 houses under the scheme.  
The implementation and execution of the projects is  entirely the responsibility of the State 
Government and its implementing agencies. It is per tinent to mention here that these are all 
multi-storeyed buildings and after approval to the project, start of projects involve invitation of 
bids for consideration, land development and concur rent activities. Ministry, however, persuade 
State Government and its agencies to expedite the p rocess of implementation of these projects 
in a time-bound manner. 
 
4.15 For comments of the Committee please see Parag raph No. 1.19 of Chapter-I of the 
Report.  
RECOMMENDATION ( SERIAL NO. 7) 
 
Spill-over projects under BSUP and IHSDP  
4.16 The JnNURM which was launched on 3 rd  December, 2005 to implement reform-driven, 
planned development of cities in a mission mode was  initially for a period of 7 years. This was 
further extended by 2 years upto 31.03.2014. For the BSUP and IHSDP components, the period 
has been further extended upto 31.03.2015 only for completion of projects sanctioned upto 
31.03.2012. The Committee observe that the assessme nt of the implementation of the Scheme 
shows that with the rise in prices of raw materials , cement, shortfalls in beneficiary contribution, 
the projects are faced with cost and time overrun.  Therefore, the Mission period has been 
extended upto March, 2015. The Committee strongly f eel that the period of extension up to 31 st  
March, 2015 for the projects sanctioned up to 31.03 .2012 is inadequate.  They desire that the 
extended period should run for completion of the pr ojects sanctioned up to 30 th  September, 
2013 for a meaningful impact of the extended period  and to adequately  cover  all the  
incomplete projects. 
The Committee in their earlier reports during 15 
th  Lok Sabha had, time and again, observed that 
the projects under BSUP and IHSDP components of JnN URM were being delayed.  To the 
despair of the Committee, the Ministry did not pay any heed to the Committee's repeated 
anguish and failed to formulate and put in place an y mechanism to avoid these delays. As a 

-: 43 :- 
 
result of which now spill-over of the projects has surfaced. The Committee want that the spill-
over projects are completed without any further delay. 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.17 Housing is a state subject and accordingly, th e implementation/ execution of the projects 
under BSUP and IHSDP components of JNNURM Scheme is vested with the State Government 
and its implementing agencies. Ministry’s role is l imited to financing their projects as per policy 
decision under the schemes and in providing technic al guidance, experience sharing and 
dissemination of best practices. 
The review meetings undertaken at various levels re vealed that  projects were getting delayed 
due to various reasons, primarily being cost escalation, reluctance of slum dwellers to shift prior 
to in-situ development of projects and availability  of  unencumbered land. To correct the 
process, Ministry has frozen its share in the proje cts at the level of sanctioned costs and states 
have been advised to meet cost escalation from this  end and complete the projects. State 
Governments have also been asked to allot/ arrange encumbrance free land for the approved 
project and in cases where adequate land is not ava ilable, to either curtail the dwelling units or 
not to start the project. Ministry has also curtail ed almost 2 lakh DUs which were yet to 
commence despite the fact that these were sanctione d long back  and their completion was not 
found feasible given limited availability of time and associated cost overrun. All efforts are being 
made to pursue State Governments to complete the DU s which are under progress within the 
available time line limits." 
4.18 For comments of the Committee please see Parag raph No.1.22 of Chapter-I of the 
Report.  
 
RECOMMENDATION ( SERIAL NO. 8B) 
 
Skill Development and Enhancing Employment in Construction Sector (including 
Housing Sector)  
4.19 The Committee observe that the Housing sector is the fourth largest employment 
generating sector in the country and contributes si gnificantly to the GDP.  The Committee are 
appreciative of the fact that skill development and  enhancing employment, which is one of the 
components of NULM,  has been included as the focus  area under the NULM Scheme of the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation.  As proposed by the Ministry, the Committee 
desire that if needed, specific percentage of funds be allocated to this field.  The Committee are 
given to understand that the budgetary support unde r NULM has been enhanced substantially 
so as to provide more support to States for urban poverty alleviation in 790 cities of the country. 
More funds have been allocated under the IEC compon ent of the scheme to generate 
community awareness. Further, dedicated staff to ma nage the Mission has been proposed at 

-: 44 :- 
 
the national, state and city levels. Also there wil l be one Community Organizer (CO) per 3,000 
urban poor families. Skill Gap Analysis is to be un dertaken at the city level so as to provide 
linkage between skill development and employment op portunities. Third party certification 
acceptable to the industry has also been introduced . In order to provide better credit availability 
to micro-enterprises, a task force, with lead bank manager as one of the members, for short-
listing of applications has been introduced which i s likely to reduce the rejection rate by banks 
and other financial institutions.  The Committee on  the basis of above observation and keeping 
in view the fact that need of Urban Housing is immense in our country, strongly recommend that 
special emphasis be laid on skill development and e mployment enhancement in construction 
sector (including the housing sector), under NULM t o fully tap the potential of young work force 
available in the country. Steps taken by the Minist ry is this regard may be intimated to them on 
regular basis. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.20 State Urban Livelihood Missions (SULMs) are re quired to identify the trades for training 
under EST&P as per local demand of the various indu stries.  The SULMs shall be requested to 
strengthen then the focus on the construction sector. 
4.18 For comments of the Committee please see Parag raph No.1.25 of Chapter-I of the 
Report.  
 
RECOMMENDATION ( SERIAL NO. 8D) 
 
Skill Training and Placement (EST&P) under NULM  
4.19 One of the important components under NULM is Employment through Skill Training & 
Placement (EST&P).  Under this the objective is to target the urban poor who are occupationally 
vulnerable for employment through Skills Training &  Placement and provide training to the 
urban poor as per the skill demand from the market so that they can set up self employment 
venture or secure salaried employment.  In this regard the Committee are informed that National 
Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) has conducted district-wise Skill Gap Analysis (SGA) for 
all the States.  The analysis is being used by some  states, while other states have initiated the 
process of having Skill Gap analyzed through other agencies.  The Committee are of the view 
that since this is an important component of NULM, the Ministry should ensure that all the State 

-: 45 :- 
 
Governments complete the SGA and regularly update the same as per the changing scenario of 
job requirements. 
 The Committee observe that the skill training prov iders will also work towards providing 
job- placement or setting up self-enterprise for al l the successful candidates.  The skill training 
provider is to track the trained persons for a peri od of six months.  It is the responsibility of STP 
to regularly report on progress of training, placem ent and micro-enterprise establishment to the 
ULBs and SULM on a regular basis. 
 Further, as per guidelines it is mandatory for the  STP to provide placement, self-
enterprise set-up support for minimum 50% of succes sfully trained candidates.  However, the 
STPs will have to track all the candidates for a pe riod of 6 months.  The NULM MIS which has 
been designated for tracking of ST&P candidates wil l provide the necessary information 
regarding all the candidates." 
 
 The Committee strongly feel that by stipulating th e requirement of 50% in the guidelines, 
the STPs will never have a track record of all the ST&P candidates.  Therefore, they desire the 
Ministry to revise the guidelines to keep track of all the EST&Ps. They also feel that this period 
of six months is too small a period and after six m onths, there will be no record of such 
candidates. Hence, the Committee desire that this period should be enhanced suitably.  Further 
the ULBs and State Urban Livelihood Missions(SULMs)  should play a proactive role to check 
tracking system of skill training providers and sen d regular reports to the Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Poverty Alleviation. 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.20 As per the EST&P Guidelines issued by the Mini stry, Para 3. Cost & Payment Norms 
states the following – ‘The training cost will include cost of candidate m obilization, curriculum 
design, trainer’s fees, raw materials required for training, assessment & certification, placement 
linkage, MIS and post-placement tracking of the can didates’.  In addition, the para 5.4 – Post 
Training Tracking states that ‘The STP shall be required to track the successful candidates for a 
period of 6 months.’;  thus the STP is required to track all the candidat es who have successfully 
been trained under this component irrespective of t he post placement status of the successful 
candidate. The EST&P guidelines mandate provision o f placement or enterprise development 
support to minimum 50% successful candidates and th is is not related to the tracking of 
successful candidates.  
 Tracking period has been kept 6 months with the an ticipation that after 6 months the 
candidate will become self reliant. 
 
4.21 For comments of the Committee please see Parag raph No.1.28  of Chapter-I of the 
Report.  
  

-: 46 :- 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION ( SERIAL NO. 10)  
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI)  
4.22  The Committee observe that the Government of India has allowed Foreign Direct 
Investment (FDI) through automation route in constr uction and development sector.  The FDI 
covers development of townships, housing, built-up infrastructure and construction-development 
related projects. As per the Department of Industrial Promotion and Policy, the Construction and 
Development Sector secured investments to the tune of Rs. 107,492 (US$ 23,132m) 
cumulatively from April 2000 to February, 2014 which is 11% of the net FDI inflow of equity.  
 
 However, the Committee are dismayed to note that n o survey has been undertaken by the 
Ministry to assess the impact on FDI inflows into housing sector and especially with reference to 
urban poor. Keeping in view the fact that the major ity of urban housing needs in India are 
related to the EWS and LIG segment, the Committee a re of the view that there is an urgent 
need to conduct such study so that the real impact of FDI in housing especially with reference to 
housing for urban poor can be assessed.  The Commit tee, therefore, strongly recommend the 
Ministry to get one such study conducted across the  country urgently.  The Committee further 
believe that allowing FDI through automation route in construction and development sector is a 
very welcome step of the Government.  But, it needs  very vigorous follow up in the sense that 
unless the various loopholes in the laws relating t o construction and housing sector are 
adequately plugged and unless a conducive environme nt for investment in this sector is 
promoted and  widely propagated this FDI Proposal would remain an initiative only on the paper 
and would not benefit the common masses which it is intended to do. 
Reply of the Government 
4.23 Department of Industrial Promotion and Policy (DIPP) under Ministry of Industry & 
Commerce issues guidelines for FDI. DIPP has recently reviewed the policy based on directives 
of the Cabinet Committee and issued Press Note No. 10 (2014 series) with relaxed floor area 
norms, minimum capital requirement and definition of affordable housing for automatic approval 
route, etc.  The data on  sector-wise FDI inflows i n the Fact sheet, released by DIPP, which is 
not sufficient to analyze the real impact on the ho using sector.  The observations of the 
committee in this regard are noted. 
 
4.24 For comments of the Committee please see Parag raph No.1.31  of Chapter-I of the 
Report. 

-: 47 :- 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION ( SERIAL NO. 13) 
 
Central Government Employees Welfare Housing Organisation (CGEWHO)  
4.25 CGEWHO, is a welfare organization under the Mi nistry of Housing and Poverty 
alleviation for construction of dwelling units excl usively for the Central Government Employees 
on No- profit – no loss basis.  The Committee in th eir 25th Report had recommended for 
launching new projects at regular intervals in almo st all important cities to accommodate more 
and more Central Government Employees.  The Ministr y had assured the committee to plan 
new projects at important cities by conducting demand survey. 
 However, the Committee are constrained to note tha t the Governing Council CGEWHO 
as well as Ministry of HUPA has decided not to proc eed further turnkey projects since there is 
no government land allotment.  CGEWHO could not ful fill the earlier commitments at 6 stations 
for which Demand survey was conducted in 2009.  The  slow performance of CGEWHO is 
attributed to many factors such as non-availability  of land, lukewarm response from the State 
Governments, shortage of funds, etc.  As the Govern ment has announced housing for all by 
2022 and a mission mode approach for “Housing for a ll” is being undertaken by the Ministry, by 
involving all the governmental and private agencies , the Committee strongly feel that the 
Ministry should take pro-active steps to strengthen  its own agencies like CGEWHO and 
eradicate all the bottlenecks being faced by it.  T he Committee further observe that in many 
places government lands are being encroached from t ime to time.  Therefore, the Ministry 
should have consultation with state Government for allocating land to CGEWHO to take up 
more projects and complete the projects in hand in a time bound manner.  The Committee 
strongly feel that these steps will further strengt hen the land holding of Government to 
accomplish its goal of “Housing for All”. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.26 n order to strengthen the working of CGEWHO in  different States, CGEWHO has 
already taken up with Government of Andhra Pradesh and Government of Chhattisgarh to 
consider allotment of land for construction of affo rdable houses to the Central Government 
employees and other eligible categories in these cities. 
4.27 For comments of the Committee please see Parag raph No.1.34  of Chapter-I of the 
Report. 

-: 48 :- 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES O F THE GOVERNMENT 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
                                     Pinaki Misra  
10 April, 2015
                                                                                                    Chairperson,                        
 20 Chaitra 1937 (Saka)                               Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
  

-: 49 :- 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE … 
                                           
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2014-2015) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON FRIDAY,  10TH APRIL, 
2015 
       
The Committee sat from 1430 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Co mmittee Room ‘B’ Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT  
Shri Pinaki Misra      - Chairperson  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2.  Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Shri  Ramesh Bidhuri 
4. Shri Ram Charan Bohra 
5. Shri Dushyant Chautala 
6. Shri Maheish Girri 
7. Shri  R. Gopalakrishnan 
8. Shri Chaudhary Mohan Jatua 
9. Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi 
10. 
 Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
11.  Shri Kesineni Nani 
12.  Shri C.R. Patil 
13.  Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil 
14.  Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
15.  Dr. Dharam Vira 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
16. 
 Shri Parvez Hashmi 
17.  Shri Mukul Roy 
18.  Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna 
19.  Shri S. Thangavelu 

-: 50 :- 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri D.S. Malha   - Director 
2. Smt.  J. M.  Sinha   -          Additional Direc tor 
3. Smt. K. Rangamani N. -  Under Secretary  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Memb ers to the sitting of the Committee. 
The Committee then took up for consideration the following draft  Reports:-  
 (i) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government  on the observations/ 
recommendations contained in the 2 
nd  Report on Demands for Grants (2014-15) of Ministry  of 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation;(ii) Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the 
Ministry of Urban Development; and (iii)  Draft Rep ort on Demands for Grants(2015-16) of the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation. 
3. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the D raft Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/ recommendations con tained in the 2 
nd  Report on Demands 
for Grants (2014-15) of Ministry of Housing and Urb an Poverty Alleviation without any change. 
The Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of  the Ministry of Urban Development; and 
Draft Report on Demands for Grants(2015-16) of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation were adopted by the Committee with slight modifications. 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to  finalize the reports taking into 
consideration the consequential changes arising out  of factual verification, if any, by the 
concerned Ministries and also to present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned.  
***** 
  

-: 51 :- 
 
 
[Vide para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON T HE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY FIFTH REPORT OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBANDEVELOPLMENT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
I.  Total number of recommendations          20                  
                        
        
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been ac cepted 
by the Government:                   
Recommendation Nos. 3, 5, 8A, 8C,9, 11,12,13, 14,15,16,17 
Percentage to total recommendations                                         (60 %) 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committ ee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:                                   
Recommendation Nos. Nil 
Percentage to total recommendations                                                  (0 %)  
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of whic h replies of                                       
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 4,6,7, 8B,8D,10 
 
Percentage to total recommendations                                         (40 %) 
    V.  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final                    
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
-Nil-    
Percentage to total recommendations                                                          (%)  