 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2014-2015) 
                                
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
  
 
                 MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2014-2015) 
  
 
(Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban 
Development on Demands for Grants (2014-2015) ) of the Ministry of Urban 
Development] 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
      
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
7 


2 
 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2014-2015) 
 
                                
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the 
First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban 
Development on Demands for Grants (2014-2015) of the Ministry of Urban 
Development] 
           Presented to Lok Sabha on  31.07.2015  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  30.07.2015 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, Ashadha 1937 (Saka) 


3 
 
 
 
   C.U.D No.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2012 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and printed by the Indian Press, Delhi-110033. 
 
 

4 
 
 
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE…………………..........................….. (iii) 
INTRODUCTION .................................................................………………. (v) 
CONTENTS 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT  
1 
CHAPTER II 
Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
16 
CHAPTER III Observations /Recommendations which the  
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies 
46 
CHAPTER IV 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 
52 
CHAPTER V Observations /Recommendations  in respect of 
which final  replies of the Government are still 
awaited 
55 
 
ANNEXURES  
I. Minutes of the Fourteenth sitting of the Standin g Committee on Urban 
Development (2014-15) held on 13 th    July, 2015    
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the First Report of the Committee (16 th  Lok Sabha)…..  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2014-2015) 
Shri Pinaki Misra         -        Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Shri Ramesh Bidhuri 
4.  Shri Ram Charan Bohra 
5. Shri Dushyant Chautala 
6.  Shri Ashok Chavan 
7.  Shri Dilip  Kumar Gandhi 
8.  Shri Maheish Girri 
9. Shri R.Gopalakrishnan 
10. 
 Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua  
11.  Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi 
12.  Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
13.  Shri P.C. Mohan 
14.  Shri Kesineni Nani 
15.  Shri K. Parasuraman 
16.  Shri C. R. Patil 
17.  Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil 
18.  Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
19.  Prof. K. V. Thomas 
20.  Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
21.  Dr. Dharam Vira 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. 
 Smt. Vandana Chavan 
23.  Shri Husain Dalwai 
24.  Shri Anil Desai 
25.  Shri Parvez Hashmi  
26.  Shri Mukul Roy 
27.  Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna 
28 Shri Satish Sharma 
29. 
 Shri C.P. Thakur 
30.  Shri S.Thangavelu 
31.  Shri Khekiho Zhimomi  
 
 
 

6 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi         -            Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S Malha   - Director 
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha   - Additional Director 
4. Dr. Jagmohan Khatry  - Executive Officer 
 
 
 
(iv) 
  

7 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2014-
2015) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present the Seventh Report (16 th  Lok Sabha) on the action taken by the Government 
on the recommendations contained in the First Repor t (16 th  Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Urban Development on “Demands  for Grants (2014-2015) " 
of the Ministry of Urban Development. 
2. The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 1 8 
th  December, 2014 and 
laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on  18 th  December, 2014.  The Replies of the 
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received in 
March, 2015.  
3. The Standing Committee on Urban Development cons idered and adopted this 
Report at their sitting held on 13.07.2015. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Governmen t on the recommendations 
contained in the First Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)  of the Committee is given at 
Annexure-II. 
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, t he 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters 
in the body of the Report. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
                        PINAKI MISRA 
….. July, , 2015 
                                             
          Chairperson,       
…Ashadha ,1937 (Saka )           Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
 
 (v)  
 

8 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Deve lopment (2014-2015) 
deals with the action taken by the Government on th e 
Observations/Recommendations contained in their Fir st Report (Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2014-2015) of the Min istry of Urban Development 
which was presented to Parliament on 18 December, 2014. 
1.2 Action Taken Replies have been received from th e Government in respect of 
all the 24 recommendations contained in the Report.   These have been categorized 
as follows: 
(i) Recommendations /Observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government. (Chapter-II): 
 Recommendation Nos. 1, 2,3,4,5,6,8,10,11,12,13,15, 16,17,19,20, 21 and 24 
               (Total -18) 
(Chapter-II) 
(ii) Recommendations /Observations, which the Commi ttee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government's   replies.  (Chapter-III): 
Recommendation No. 9 and 18              (Total -02 )
        
(Chapter-III) 
(iii) Recommendations /Observations, in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter-IV): 
Recommendation Nos. 7and 14                       ( Total -02) 
(Chapter-IV) 
(iv) Recommendations /Observations, in respect of w hich final replies of the 
Government are, still awaited(Chapter-V): 
           Recommendation  No. -22 and  23           (Total –02 ) 
(Chapter-V) 
 

9 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that specific replies to t he comments contained in 
Chapter-I  and Chapter-V of this Report may be furn ished to them at the earliest and 
in any case, not later than three months of the presentation of this Report. 
1.4 The Committee will now like to comment on the a ction taken by the 
Government on some of their recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.   
Recommendation (Serial No.1) 
 
SUITABLE ENHANCEMENT OF PLAN OUTLAY FOR URBAN DEVEL OPMENT 
OF THE COUNTRY  
1.5 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee observe that under Demand No, 101, t here has been a gap 
between projects and budget estimates from 2008-09 to 2013-14. Also there has 
been gap between allocations at BE and RE stage dur ing the year 2011-12 to 2013-
14. The BE for the year 2013-14 (both plan and non- plan) was Rs. 8296.74 crore. At 
RE stage the allocation was reduced to 7548.33 cror e. The BE for 2014-15 is Rs. 
17628.56 crore. The percentage increase of BE 2014- 15 in comparison to BE 2013-
14 is 125.75 % on the plan side and 13.84 % on the non-plan side. The percentage 
increase of BE 2014-15 in comparison to RE 2013-14 is 151.55 % on the plan side 
and 13.66 % in the non-plan side. The huge jump is due to placing of the funds of 
the JuNNRM under the demand No.103 of Department of  Urban Development. This 
was earlier an ACA scheme and funds were released b y Ministry of Finance and 
Ministry of Home Affairs directly to the States and  Union Territories. Keeping aside 
the growth in the allocation at BE of 2014-15, the allocation is not adequate. This has 
had an adverse effect on metro rail projects and Ge neral Pool Residential 
Accommodation. The Ministry has further submitted t hat the process of urbanization 
has not been accompanied by a commensurate increase in the supply of basic urban 
services. The supply of land and housing has not ke pt pace with the increase in 
urban population. Moreover, the Government is going  to create 100 smart cities and 
500 counter magnetic cities. Keeping in view above facts, the Committee call upon 
the Ministry to continue its efforts to persuade th e Ministry of Finance and Planning 
Commission for higher allocation during the next budget." 
 
1.6 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"The Ministry has been continuously raising issue regarding adequate provisioning of 
funds with Ministry of Finance for ensuring effecti ve implementation of its schemes.   
Ministry had demanded a provision of 
62,654.33 crore under Plan against which 
allocation of 16054.18 crore has been made by Ministry of Finance  for Financial 
Year 2015-16.  Hon’ble Minister of Urban Developmen t vide D.O. letters dated 27 th  
January, 2015 and 16 th  February, 2015 had requested Minister of Finance t o make 
additional allocation to the Ministry for fulfilling the mandate given.   Secretary, Urban 
Development  vide D.O. letter dated 16 th February, 2015  had also taken up the 
matter with Ministry of Finance regarding under pro visioning of funds for various 

10 
 
schemes of the Ministry including 100 Smart Cities,  500 Habitations and non-
allocation of any funds for  Swachh Bharat Mission under the Budget 2015-16 in 
Demand No.104 – Department of Urban Development."  
 
 
1.7  The Committee are  satisfied to note that the Ministry of Urban 
Development is continuously pursuing with the Minis try of Finance for 
allocating adequate provisions for various schemes of the Ministry and 
achieving the mandate of the Ministry. The Ministry  has taken up the matter 
regarding under provisioning of funds at its highes t level for various schemes 
including 100 smart cities and Swachh Bharat Missio n. However, they are 
disappointed with the  fact that Ministry of Financ e has released only 
Rs.16054.18 crore against the demand of Rs.62, 654. 33 crore for the financial 
year 2015-16. The Committee strongly feel that with  this reduced allocation it 
would be difficult to achieve the highly ambitious schemes. Therefore, they 
reiterate their earlier recommendation to the Minis try to  continue efforts to 
pursue with the Ministry of Finance for providing a dequate allocation for 
effective implementation of various schemes. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.4) 
NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION AS A UNIFIED AREA IN ECONOMIC TERMS: 
NEED TO REMOVE FISCAL BARRIERS.  
1.8 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee in their earlier Reports had recomme nded for a need to remove the 
fiscal barriers and make NCR a unified area in econ omic terms. The Committee had 
felt that uniformity in VAT rates in the NCR region  would encourage business 
establishments to shift out of NCT, Delhi to set up  business in NCR region without 
suffering financial loses. 
 The Committee also find that the policy related to  uniformity in VAT rates falls 
under the domain of Ministry of Finance. The Commit tee are surprised to note that 
NCRPB do not have any information about the outcome . Since NCRPB's mandate is 
to decongest the capital city of Delhi, the Committ ee wish that it should take up this 
matter at the highest level i.e., Ministry of Finance. 
 The Committee in their earlier Reports had recomme nded for waiving 
guarantee fee to enable NCRPB to raise the requisit e loan from Multilateral   Aid 
Agencies. The Committee have been informed that the  matter was taken up by the 
Ministry of Urban Development with the Department o f Economic Affairs of the 
Ministry of Finance. The matter is still being disc ussed by the two Ministries. The 

11 
 
Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation an d want the Ministry of Urban 
Development to keep on pursuing this matter vigorously till its logical conclusion." 
1.9  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"In order to implement Value Added Tax (VAT) succes sfully, Ministry of Finance had 
issued revised consolidated instruction in July, 20 05 for compensating the 
States/UTs in case of loss of revenue on account of  introduction of VAT.  
Subsequently, additional instructions were issued b y the Ministry of Finance in June, 
2009 in this regard.  Once VAT is implemented at th e country level by the Ministry of 
Finance, it will help in removing fiscal barrier in NCR also.     
As regards the waiver of Guarantee fee for loans ra ised from 
multilateral/bilateral aid agencies, the matter is being pursued with the Department of 
Economic Affairs (DEA), Ministry of Finance. DEA ha d raised certain queries in this 
regard.  The comments of NCRPB were obtained on the se queries. The same are 
under examination. Reply to DEA, in this regard, will be given shortly." 
1.10  The Committee find that with respect to  waiv er of guarantee fee for 
loans raised from multilateral/bilateral aid agenci es, the matter is being taken 
up with Department of Economic Affairs (DEA). Howev er, they find that the 
Ministry have not specified the queries raised therein and  that the comment of 
NCRPB are under examination. They desire the Minist ry to expedite the 
examination of the replies obtained from NCRPB with  regard to waiver of 
guarantee fee for loans raised from multilateral/bi lateral aid agencies and keep 
the Committee abreast of the same. 
Recommendation (Serial No.5) 
SMOOTH TRAVEL IN NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION 
 
 
1.11 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee came to know that NCRPB pursued with  its constituent States for 
signing of “Reciprocal Common Transport Agreement” for ‘Contract Carriage’ and 
‘Stage & Goods Carriage’ for unrestricted/ seamless  travel in NCR to facilitate 
general public.  When the Committee asked the Minis try of Urban Development 
regarding the delay in implementation of this agree ment  it was found out that its 
implementation is to be done by the NCR participati ng States as per the agreements 
as well as under the provisions of Motor Vehicles A ct, 1988. NCR Planning Board 
had requested Ministry of Road Transport and Highwa ys vide letters dated 
05.09.2013, 27.12.2013 and 23.07.2014 that all the “Contract Carriage” vehicles 
registered in any district of NCR be allowed to ply  in whole of NCR and all be issued 
permits for NCR without paying any additional passe nger tax.  The Committee feel 
that smooth and seamless movement of interstate tra ffic in the National Capital 
Region is the dire need and efforts should be made to make it unrestricted and 
commuter friendly. The Committee also observed that  the NCR Planning Board has 
been making efforts to convince the State Governmen ts for reciprocal agreement to 

12 
 
achieve this objective. Implementation of this poli cy is important to facilitate general 
public to commute between Delhi and the rest of NCR  especially those commuters 
who board/ deboard at the airport, railway stations  and inter-state bus terminals  in 
Delhi and have to take either taxi/auto rickshaw or  bus to reach their desired 
destination  in NCR. The National Urban Transport Policy approv ed by the 
Government of India also envisages seamless travel for the passengers.  The 
Committee appreciate that NCRPB has requested for n ecessary amendments, if 
any, in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.  The Committee came to know that there was a 
cap on the issue of permits for auto-rickshaws in NCT-Delhi by the Supreme Court of 
India.  After lifting of restriction of number of auto-rickshaws by the Supreme Court of 
India, Government of NCT-Delhi has initiated action  in this regard.  The Ministry of 
Urban Development also conveyed to the Committee th at Government of NCT-Delhi 
have issued a public notice to invite applications for 5500 NCR Auto-permits (U.P.-
2750, Haryana-2750) and are taking further action i n the matter to issue the NCR 
Permits in respect of U.P. and Haryana Sub-regions of NCR.  However, the 
Committee are dismayed with the hollowness in the o fficial claims of working out a 
transport plan for smooth connectivity between Delh i and its neighbors –
 GautamBudhNagar (Noida), Ghaziabad and Gurgaon. Buses may have been plying 
between these cities but auto-rickshaws, the prefer red mode for many commuters 
and taxis (except for radio taxis) stay away becaus e of jurisdictional issues and 
harsh penalties. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend to the NCRPB and 
Govt. of Delhi and other adjoining States to take q uick decisions relating to critical 
activities and resolve inter-state issues/matters f or early implementation of this 
agreement i.e., Reciprocal Common Transport Agreeme nt” for ‘Contract Carriage’ 
and ‘Stage & Goods Carriage’ for unrestricted trave l in NCR to facilitate general 
public.   The Ministry of Urban Development may also pursue the matter vigorously."  
 
1.12 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have  stated as follows: 
 
"Board requested the NCR Participating States to pr ovide the status of 
implementation of the “Reciprocal Common Transport Agreement among 
Governments of NCT-Delhi, Haryana, Rajasthan and Ut tar Pradesh for unrestricted 
movement of vehicles in NCR” for ‘Contract Carriage ’ and ‘Stage Carriage’ vide 
letters dated 22.09.2014, 23.09.2014 and 05.01.2015. 
 
Board, vide letters dated 05.09.2013 , 27.12.2013,18.02.2014 , 23.07.2014 and  
13.11.2014, requested the Ministry of Road Transport and Highwa ys (MoRT&H) to 
examine the Recommendations made in the Hundred and  Forty Sixth Report of the 
Rajya Sabha Committee on Petitions and necessary am endments, if any, be made 
in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 as recommended in the said Report.  
 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, vide lette r dated 04.12.2014, 
informed that a copy of the said Report had been fo rwarded by MoRT&H to M/s. 
PLR Chambers requesting them to take into considera tion the recommendations 
made in the Report while drawing of the new Motor Vehicles Act. " 
1.13 The Committee are happy to note the action tak en in regard to 
implementation of reciprocal common transport agree ment among 

13 
 
Government of NCT-Delhi, Haryana, Rajasthan and Utt ar Pradesh for 
unrestricted movement of vehicles in NCR for contra ct carriage and 'stage 
carriage.  The Committee noted that  Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, 
vide letter dated 04.12.2014, informed that a copy of the said Report had been 
forwarded by MoRT&H to M/s. PLR Chambers requesting  them to take into 
consideration the recommendations made in the Repor t while drawing of the 
new Motor Vehicles Act.  The Committee desire that expeditious action may be 
taken and under intimation to the Committee.  
Recommendation (Serial No.7) 
THE REGIONAL RAPID TRANSIT SYSTEM PROJECTS  
1.14  The Committee had recommended as under: 
 "The Committee have been apprised that the three R egional Rapid Transit System 
(RRTS) corridor have been prioritized by the Minist ry of Urban Development for 
implementation in Phase I, i.e Delhi – Sonipat –Pan ipat, Delhi-Gurgaon -Rewari –
Alwar, Delhi-Ghaziabad-Meerut for which estimated c ost till Sept 2011 was 
72170 
crore. These routes have been identified for the RR TS because these towns and 
cities have a large number of people travelling dai ly for economic reasons. The 
Cabinet in its meeting held on 11.07.2013 has appro ved the proposal of formation 
of National Capital Region Transport Corporation Li mited (NCRTC) which is a pre-
requisite for taking up the RRTS projects for provi ding a reliable and efficient Mass 
Commuter System in the NCR. NCRTC has been incorpor ated on 21.08.2013. With 
a seed capital of Rs. 100 crore to be contributed by the Central Govt. and State 
Govts. When enquired about the present status of im plementation of RRTS 
projects, the Committee learnt that the RRTS projects have not still been sanctioned 
till now. The Committee also came to know from the replies given by the Ministry of 
Urban Development that Ministry of Railway has not released its due amount i.e  
22.5 Crore. 
 
  In view of the above, the Committee strongly reco mmend to implement this 
RRTS project expeditiously in a time bound manner s o as to make travel in the 
National Capital Region faster and easier. The Comm ittee feel that the high-speed 
corridors are the need of the hour as this will fac ilitate better commuting in the 
National Capital Region. The Committee call upon th e Ministry of Urban 
development to impress upon Ministry of Railway to release its share of amount." 
 
1.15 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have  stated as follows: 
"Ministry of Railways vide letter dated 10.12.2014 has informed Ministry of Urban 
Development that Ministry of Railways is committed towards the participation in 
National Capital Region Transport Corporation (NCRT C), but as contribution to 
equity participation needs approval of Parliament, funds shall be made available in 
Feb., 2015 only after seeking approval of Parliament in the Supplementary Demands 
for Grants. However, Ministry of Railways sanctione d the release of 1.25 lakhs, to 

14 
 
NCRTC towards subscription amount for participation  of Ministry of Railways in 
NCRTC vide letter dated 10.12.14. "   
1.16 The Committee are not happy with the state of affairs regarding 
Regional Rapid Transit System (RRTS) corridor which  have been prioritized by 
the Ministry of Urban Development for implementatio n in Phase-I. The 
Committee were apprised that the estimated cost of project till September 2011 
was Rs.72170 crore. The Committee are dismayed with  the fact that RRTS 
projects have not been sanctioned till now, and Min istry of Railways  has not 
released its due amount of Rs.22.5 crore. However, the Committee came to 
know that Ministry of Railways is committed toward participation in NCRTC 
and has sanctioned the release of Rs. 1.25 lakhs as  subscription amount for 
participation in NCRTC. The Committee were apprised  that contribution to 
equity participation needs Parliament's approval he nce, funds shall be made 
available in February, 2015 after seeking approval of Parliament in 
Supplementary Demands for Grants. The Ministry of U rban Development have 
however, chosen to remain silent on the release of  equity contribution 
towards participation in NCRTC till now i.e. at the  end of March, 2015. High 
Speed Corridors is the need of the hour to facilita te better commuting in NCR 
region. The Committee strongly express  their displ easure and  therefore, 
emphatically reiterate their earlier recommendation  and recommend to the 
Ministry of Urban Development to pursue  with to Mi nistry of Railways toward 
release of its  entire equity contribution so as to  implement RRTS projects in a 
time bound manner.  
 Recommendation (Serial No.14) 
GREEN BUILDING:  REDUCING ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT 
 
1.17 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Master Plan of Delhi-2021 contains the provisi on for “Green Buildings”.  The 
regulations for incentivizing green buildings and f ormulation of a regulatory 
mechanism to monitor construction, operations, etc.  are under preparation.  Once 
these are finalized, the declaration of Green Build ings in Delhi can be initiated after 
the builders get the necessary certification from t he respective agencies required to 
do so. At present the Rain Water Harvesting System,  which is one of the 
component of green building concept is being implem ented. The Building 
Department of DDA after the promulgation of the Not ification No. SO 730 dated 
28.07.2001 made mandatory the physical construction  of Rain Water Harvesting 
System in the new buildings in a plot of 100sqm and  above.  It is also ensured  
while issuing permits than the Rain Water Harvestin g System is functional.  As per 
available information during the last one year, 41 numbers of Completion 
Certificates have been issued to different type of buildings where Rain Water 
Harvesting System has been provided. Further, all t he buildings now being 
constructed by CPWD under GPRA & GPOA are confirmin g to 3 star rated 
buildings. The Committee strongly recommend the Min istry of Urban Development 
to expeditiously complete the regulations for incen tivizing green buildings and 
formulation of a regulatory mechanism to monitor co nstruction, operations etc. The 

15 
 
Committee also wish to recommend that the Rain Wate r Harvesting system should 
also be enforced in all the existing office and res idential buildings and the 
enforcement should be by way of rain water harvesti ng being made a pre-requisite 
for getting plans sanctioned as well as obtaining completion certificates.  
 
  The Committee Members were given detailed present ation by the NBCC on 
the Kidwai Nagar Redevelopment Project which has be en entrusted to it and which 
promises to be the most environment friendly and gr een compatible colony in the 
country.  The Members were very impressed with the presentation circulated by 
NBCC and felt that it should be replicated in many more congested areas of our 
major cities which are groaning under the pressure of antiquated and dilapidated 
constructions."    
  
1.18 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have  stated as follows: 
 
"In respect of existing office and residential buil dings under jurisdiction of CPWD in 
Delhi as well as rest of India, rain water harvesti ng system has been provided by 
CPWD in 116 non-residential complexes and 144 residential colonies."  
   
1.19 The Committee are not happy with the state of affairs regarding 
implementation of  rain water harvesting system in all the Government 
buildings and Government Residential colonies withi n Delhi and outside 
Delhi. They, therefore, strongly recommend the Mini stry of Urban 
Development to expeditiously chalk out adequate and effective regulations for 
incentivizing green buildings besides formulating o f a regulatory mechanism 
to monitor construction, operations etc. The Commit tee also wish to reiterate 
that the Rain Water Harvesting system should be enf orced in all the existing 
office and residential buildings and the enforcemen t should be by way of rain 
water harvesting being made a pre-requisite for get ting plans sanctioned as 
well as obtaining completion certificates.  
 
  The Committee re-emphasize the urgent need for mo nitoring mechanism 
by the Ministry of Urban Development to oversee imp lementation of rain water 
harvesting system in all the Government buildings a nd Government 
Residential colonies within Delhi and other States all over India. 
Recommendation (Serial No.15) 
 
ELIMINATION OF HAZARDOUS MANUAL CLEANING OF SEWERS 
 
1.20 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"It has been learnt that many sewerage workers have  overcome by noxious fumes 
and drowned in sewage. Even if they survive these w orking conditions, most sewer 
workers suffer debilitating diseases caused by thei r working conditions like typhoid, 
hepatitis and severe skin rashes. These workers are  not given any protective 
equipment, and effectively lack insurance or medica l benefits. The Committee were 

16 
 
apprised that 80 per cent of these workers die befo re retirement. Increasingly, this 
work is contracted out from the municipal authoriti es to private contractors, who are 
barely regulated. This is despite an existing Safet y Code, which the MCD spells out 
in the terms and conditions on which they hire cont ractors. A cluster of municipal 
authorities (Municipal Corporation of Delhi, Govern ment of NCT of Delhi, Delhi 
Development Authority, Union of India, Delhi Jal Bo ard, and New Delhi Municipal 
Council) are responsible for the safety of sewage w orkers in New Delhi. The 
Committee are anguished that while there is a law to ban manual scavenging, it has 
failed to stop the authorities from continuing with  hazardous manual cleaning of 
septic tanks. The Committee also learnt that Minist ry of Urban Development 
(MoUD) has initiated a proposal to formulate a “Sch eme of Assistance for 
Mechanical Cleaning of Sewers and Septic Tanks (SAM CSS)” to assist cities/towns 
through the State Governments for procurement of su ction and suction-cum-jetting 
machines with the objective of eliminating the haza rdous manual cleaning. The 
Ministry has issued an Advisory Note on Septage Man agement in January, 2013 for 
adoption by the States. The Advisory includes guide lines for frequency of de-
sludging of septic tanks, transportation and method s of treatment and safe disposal 
of treated sludge. The facilities for treatment and  disposal of septage have yet to be 
set up by the State Governments and cities from the ir own resources.  The 
Committee came to know that the Ministry of Urban D evelopment proposes to 
include the mechanical cleaning of sewers and septi c tanks and septage 
management as admissible components in the New Urba n Development Mission 
(NUDM) which is being formulated by the Ministry. T he Committee call upon the 
Ministry of Urban Development to do the needful at the earliest and implement the 
“Scheme of Assistance for Mechanical Cleaning of Se wers and Septic Tanks 
(SAMCSS)” by municipal authorities with full vigour  and at the same time the 
Committee proposes to include following clauses in the scheme:  
• Municipal authorities should provide these workers  with machines 
immediately to clean the sewers so that they do not  have to do so 
manually 
• Give full compensation to the families of those wo rkers who have died 
• Provide workers with proper and modern safety equi pment and 
training. 
• Create mechanisms that encourage workers to speak out about safety 
problems. 
• Evolve a system to investigate all work-related ac cidents and hold 
those responsible accountable. 
• Improve safety through Infrastructure improvements  and regular 
maintenance.  
• Comprehensive Safety training must be given  
• Educate the masses about how they can help maintai n sewers  
• Strict Laws should be enforced against the public for illegal dumping of 
waste into the sewers. 
 
 
 
 
 

17 
 
1.21 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has st ated as follows: 
 
"Formulation of New Urban Development Mission and t he Mission Smart City for 
500 cities in which mechanical cleaning of sewers a nd septic tanks will be one of 
the eligible components is under consideration in t he Ministry. The new Mission 
proposes to provide financial assistance for procur ement of modern machinery and 
equipment for cleaning of sewers and septic tanks a s well as construction of 
seepage treatment facilities and also for training of sanitation workers and 
awareness generation. 
 The scheme will be implemented by Urban Local Bodi es. However, it is the 
responsibility of ULBs to provide compensation to t he families of workers in case of 
death and enforce penalty to those who are dumping waste into sewers." 
 
1.22  The Committee note that component of mechanic al cleaning of sewers 
and septic tanks will be one of the part of new Urban development mission and 
mission smart city for 500 cities. The Committee al so note that new mission 
proposes to provide financial assistance for procur ing modern machinery and 
equipments for cleaning of sewers and septic tanks as well as construction of 
septage treatment facilities and also for training of sanitation workers and 
awareness generation. The Committee while reiterati ng their earlier  
recommendation desire that though the scheme will b e implemented by ULBs, 
the Ministry of Urban Development should act as gui de, mentor and facilitator 
for Urban Local Bodies(ULBs) so as to assist them i n implementing the 
schemes and projects in a time bound manner. 
Recommendation (Serial No.16) 
 
SUSTAINABLE SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT 
 
1.23 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"Urban India generates 188,500 tonnes of MSW (or 68 .8 million tones per year) and 
the waste generation increases by 50% every decade.  Some of this waste will be 
recovered by an army of informal recyclers (20% in large cities, lesser in smaller 
cities) leaving more than 80% to reach open dumpsit es where it  damages public 
health, deteriorates the environment and causes cli mate change. Twenty three 
Indian cities will generate more than 1,000 metric tonnes each of municipal solid 
waste per day in the next five years. They will cum ulatively generate 93,000 tonnes 
of MSW every day. In this background, the Committee  also came to know that three 
garbage dumps at Ghazipur, Okhla and Bhalswa landfi lls are far from reality. These 
are monstrous trash mountains, including hazardous waste, leaching out toxic liquids 
and emanating noxious fumes. Thousands of scavengin g birds swarm over them as 
they grow larger every day. The Committee were info rmed by the Ministry of Urban 
development that DDA/ GNCTD have not provided alter native land due to which this 
site is being operated for disposal of MSW.  The Co mmittee were apprised that at 
present, the existing dumping site at Bhalswa has e xceeded its capacity. The 
Committee were also apprised that Ministry have evo lved a concept to consider 

18 
 
landfill reclamation and construction of integrated  municipal solid waste processing 
complex at site available for fresh MSW in near fut ure, so that a goal near to zero 
landfill site may be achieved, because in a city li ke Delhi where land is a scarce and 
highly priced commodity, finding a new site for dev elopment of another landfill is not 
an easy task. Moreover, the expenditure required fo r closure, post closure 
maintenance of exhausted site and development of a new site would be very high. 
The Committee came to know that the department has appointed the consultant M/s 
IRG Systems South Asia Pvt. Ltd. to prepare the DPR  and Bid document, the tender 
will be called for reclamation of Landfill site at SLF Bhalswa. In addition to this, the 
Committee were apprised that Ministry of Urban Deve lopment had published a 
Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management in May, 2000 to assist ULBs in 
management of municipal solid waste in a hygienic a nd scientific manner. The 
Manual provides detailed guidelines/ methodology fo r State Govt./ ULB for planning, 
designing, executing and operation & maintenance of  solid waste management 
schemes. It also provides comprehensive guidelines and suggests various 
technological options for processing, treatment and  disposal and resource recovery 
(compost/ energy) from municipal waste. The Manual is currently under revision. 
Pursuant to the recommendations of the Committee on Solid Waste Management for 
Class-I cities constituted by the Hon’ble Supreme C ourt of India, the Union Ministry 
of Urban Development brought out a Report on Techno logy Advisory Group on Solid 
Waste Management  in May, 2005 and circulated to al l the State Governments for 
adoption. The report principally covers the details  of various technologies available 
within and outside the country for the treatment of  municipal solid waste and deriving 
compost, RDF, power, etc. from the waste, their mer its, demerits, their limitations, 
etc.  In view of the gravity of situation, the Comm ittee strongly recommend that the 
Ministry of Urban Development must design reasonabl e and strong regulatory 
framework for emissions monitoring, and policy for integrating the informal recycling 
sector and simultaneously the Committee reemphasize s upon the DDA/ GNCTD to 
provide land to Municipal Corporation of Delhi so a s to complete landfill reclamation 
and construction of integrated municipal solid wast e processing complex at the 
earliest.  The Committee noted with grave concern t he complete lack of solid waste 
management in large and small cities in all over In dia. The lack of planning is 
manifest in the fact that while a site of MSW plant  is identified by one agency, 
another agency simultaneously gives permission for construction of colonies in the 
neighborhood.  This leads to protests from the publ ic and stalling of the MSW plants.  
This is a serious problem and happens only because of complete lack of planning 
and coordination among various urban agencies all over India. " 
 
1.24 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has st ated as follows: 
 
"As per the Report of Task Force on Waste to Energy , published by NITI Aayog 
(erstwhile Planning Commission), 2014, total waste generation in urban area of the 
country is 1,33,760 TPD, which does not include was te picked up by kabadiwala at 
the doorstep and he rag pickers. Out of the above, only 68% of the waste generated 
in the country is collected of which 28% is treated  by the Municipal authority. Thus, 
merely 19% of the total waste generated is currentl y treated. The remaining waste is 
disposed of at dump sites untreated. 
Government of India has also launched Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM) on 2nd 
October, 2014 with the target to make the country c lean by 2nd October, 2019. The 

19 
 
Mission covers all 4041 statutory towns/cities as p er 2011 census. One of the 
admissible components under SBM is implementation o f municipal solid waste 
management projects in integrated manner.   
Ministry is also taking up matter with Ministry of Power/Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy/Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilis ers to put in place suitable 
policy intervention to facilitate running solid waste management systems sustainably. 
The Ministry of Urban Development has published Man ual on Municipal Solid 
Waste Management in May, 2000 to assist ULBs in pro per and efficient 
management of solid waste. The Manual provides deta iled guidelines / methodology 
for planning, designing, executing and operation & maintenance of solid waste 
management. A separate chapter on “Institutional As pects & Capacity Building”, 
“Legal Aspect”, and “Policy Guidelines” has been gi ven in the Manual which may be 
referred by the States. The Manual is currently under up-dation and revision.  
Ministry of Urban Development has already issued advisory to States vide DO 
No. Z-14013/3/2009-PHE.II, dated March 22, 2010, for inclusion of informal recycling 
sector into the process of solid waste management k eeping in mind the larger goals 
of an environmentally sustainable and decentralized waste management practice.  
State Govts. have to identify the land free from al l encumbrance for waste 
landfill. In case, the land for landfill is not ava ilable for smaller towns, Ministry of 
Urban Development formulated a “Guidance Note – Mun icipal Solid Waste 
Management on a Regional Basis” and circulated to a ll the State Governments for 
reference. The guidance note provides guidance on p olicy, institutional and technical 
aspects for the establishment of integrated facilit y for treatment and disposal of 
municipal waste in sanitary landfill on regional / shared basis to the States and 
ULBs." 
1.25 The Committee note with satisfaction that the Ministry is taking some 
steps like including taking up matter with Ministry  of Power/Ministry of New 
and Renewable Energy/Ministry of Chemicals and Fert ilisers to put in place 
suitable policy intervention to facilitate running solid waste management 
systems sustainably. The Ministry of Urban Developm ent has  also published 
Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management in May, 2000 to assist ULBs in 
proper and efficient management of solid waste. The  Manual provides detailed 
guidelines / methodology for planning, designing, e xecuting and operation & 
maintenance of solid waste management. A separate c hapter on “Institutional 
Aspects & Capacity Building”, “Legal Aspects”, and “Policy Guidelines” has 
been given in the Manual which may be referred to  by the States. The Manual 
is currently under up-dation and revision.  
 The Committee were also apprised that Ministry of Urban Development 
has already issued advisory to States vide DO No. Z-14013/3/2009-PHE.II, dated 
March 22, 2010, for inclusion of informal recycling  sector into the process of 

20 
 
solid waste management keeping in mind the larger g oals of an 
environmentally sustainable and decentralized waste  management practice. 
The Committee observe that this is not adequate and  should focus on the 
implementation. The Committee, therefore, desire th e Ministry of Urban 
Development  to review the progress of implementati on of the guidelines in 
this regard periodically. The Committee find that t he Ministry has remained 
silent in their Action Taken Replies, about their e fforts in planning and 
coordination among various urban agencies all over India. The Committee feel 
that this is the most important aspect of Municipal  Solid Waste. They, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation a nd desire the Ministry to 
focus on co-ordination among various agencies in Mu nicipal Solid Waste 
Management through proper planning. 
Recommendation (Serial No.17) 
SEGREGATION OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE BE FORE 
REACHING LANDFILL SITE:  
 
1.26 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee were informed that in all the dump y ard sites, construction and 
demolition waste (C and D) like bricks, concrete, w ood & rubble are not segregated 
before being dumped in the landfill sites. Most C a nd D waste should be recycled. 
These are the heaviest waste which once mixed canno t be recycled. In New York, C 
and D waste is taxed. UK recycles over 70% of its m alba and Singapore over 90%. 
The Committee came to know that as of now, 3000 met ric tonnes of C and D waste 
are going to the landfills in Delhi. When the Commi ttee asked the Ministry of Urban 
Development to explain the reasons for non-segregat ion, the Committee were 
apprised that Municipal Solid Waste Management Rules, 2000 deal with process and 
management of Construction and Demolition waste whe rein the concerned agency 
has been suggested to segregate the C & D waste for  transportation and recycling 
and reuse. The Committee were appraised by the Mini stry that the matter of 
awareness and enforcement dwells upon the local aut hority, being a state subject. 
As per MSW (Management & Handling) Rules 2000, the daily fresh MSW dumped at 
SLF site has to be covered with about 10 cm of malb a. At present, about 100 MT of 
malba/ C&D waste is being utilized at SLF Bhalswa d aily to cover the dumped MSW 
and about 2000 MT of C&D Waste daily is being proce ssed/ recycled at C&D waste 
plant, Burari.  The Ministry has proposed to set up a C&D waste Plant at site No. 1-4, 
Industrial Area, near Rani Khera, Rohini Phase-IV f or processing/ recycling of 500 
MT per day of C&D Waste, for which feasibility stud y will be done by the Consultant 
to be engaged in this project. The Committee are ha ppy to note that Ministry of 
Urban development has taken interest in this matter . Therefore the Committee 
reemphasizes the need for awareness and enforcement  with regard to segregation 

21 
 
of construction and demolition waste before reachin g landfill site and speedy 
operationalization of C&D waste Plant in a time bou nd manner under intimation to 
the Committee." 
1.27 In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated as follows: 
 
"To promote recycling of C & D waste; 
• Ministry has issued an advisory on solid waste man agement to all State 
Governments vide DO No. Q-15014/2/2009-CPHEO, dated  31st October, 
2013 stating that the C&D waste can be beneficially  used by proper 
processing and recycling to suffice for raw material.  
• A separate chapter on Construction & Demolition Wa ste has given in Manual 
on Municipal Solid Waste Management, published by t he Ministry in May, 
2000, which includes Planning & Management Aspects and Institutional & 
Regulatory Framework for C&D waste.  
• Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Chang e is in process of 
formulating “Construction and Demolition Waste (Col lection, Processing, 
Use& Disposal) Rules” where C&D waste related issue s shall be addressed 
comprehensively.  
• Also, Bureau of Indian Standard (BIS), Ministry of  Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution is in process of formulatio n of standards/ guidelines 
for construction & demolition waste which shall imp rove the market of 
recycled products." 
 
1.28  The Committee were apprised by the Ministry t hat the matter of 
awareness and enforcement dwells upon the local aut hority, being a state 
subject. As per MSW (Management & Handling) Rules 2 000, the daily fresh 
MSW dumped at SLF site has to be covered with about  10 cm of malba. At 
present, about 100 MT of malba/ C&D waste is being utilized  daily at SLF 
Bhalswa to cover the dumped MSW and about 2000 MT o f C&D Waste is being 
processed/ recycled daily at C&D waste plant, Burar i. The Ministry has 
proposed to set up a C&D waste Plant at site No. 1-4, Industrial Area, near Rani 
Khera, Rohini Phase-IV for processing/ recycling of  500 MT per day of C&D 
Waste, for which feasibility study will be done by the Consultant to be engaged 
in this project.  The Committee note that to promot e recycling of C&D Waste 
the Ministry have taken certain steps to promote re cycling of C&D waste such 

22 
 
as issuing advisory on  MSW to all the State Govern ments, adding a separate 
chapter in the manual on MSW Management covering pl anning and 
management aspects and Institutional Regulatory Fra mework for C&D Waste. 
They find that the Ministry of Environment and Fore st and BIS are also in the 
process of formulation of standards/guidelines for construction and 
demolition  to address  waste related issues. The C ommittee, however, feel 
that now the Ministry should focus on the implement ation of their initiatives 
through elaborate awareness campaigns. 
 The Committee, therefore, reiterate the need for a wareness and 
enforcement with regard to segregation of construct ion and demolition waste 
before reaching landfill site and speedy operationa lization of C&D waste Plant 
in a time bound manner under intimation to the Comm ittee and to review the 
progress of implementation of the guidelines at regular intervals. 
 
 
 
 

23 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Serial No.1) 
 
SUITABLE ENHANCEMENT OF PLAN OUTLAY FOR URBAN DEVEL OPMENT 
OF THE COUNTRY  
2.1 The Committee observe that under Demand No, 101 , there has been a gap 
between projects and budget estimates from 2008-09 to 2013-14. Also there has 
been gap between allocations at BE and RE stage dur ing the year 2011-12 to 2013-
14. The BE for the year 2013-14 (both plan and non- plan) was Rs. 8296.74 crore. At 
RE stage the allocation was reduced to 7548.33 cror e. The BE for 2014-15 is Rs. 
17628.56 crore. The percentage increase of BE 2014- 15 in comparison to BE 2013-
14 is 125.75 % on the plan side and 13.84 % on the non-plan side. The percentage 
increase of BE 2014-15 in comparison to RE 2013-14 is 151.55 % on the plan side 
and 13.66 % in the non-plan side. The huge jump is due to placing of the funds of 
the JuNNRM under the demand No.103 of Department of  Urban Development. This 
was earlier an ACA scheme and funds were released b y Ministry of Finance and 
Ministry of Home Affairs directly to the States and  Union Territories. Keeping aside 
the growth in the allocation at BE of 2014-15, the allocation is not adequate. This has 
had an adverse effect on metro rail projects and Ge neral Pool Residential 
Accommodation. The Ministry has further submitted t hat the process of urbanization 
has not been accompanied by a commensurate increase in the supply of basic urban 
services. The supply of land and housing has not ke pt pace with the increase in 
urban population. Moreover, the Government is going  to create 100 smart cities and 
500 counter magnetic cities. Keeping in view above facts, the Committee call upon 
the Ministry to continue its efforts to persuade th e Ministry of Finance and Planning 
Commission for higher allocation during the next budget. 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.2 The Ministry has been continuously raising issu e regarding adequate 
provisioning of funds with Ministry of Finance for ensuring effective implementation 
of its schemes.   Ministry had demanded a provision  of 
62,654.33 crore under Plan 
against which allocation of 16054.18 crore has been made by Ministry of Finance  

24 
 
for Financial Year 2015-16.  Hon’ble Minister of Urban Development vide D.O. letters 
dated 27 th  January, 2015 and 16 th  February, 2015 had requested Minister of Finance 
to make additional allocation to the Ministry for f ulfilling the mandate given.   
Secretary, Urban Development  vide D.O. letter date d 16 th February, 2015  had also 
taken up the matter with Ministry of Finance regarding under provisioning of funds for 
various schemes of the Ministry including 100 Smart  Cities, 500 Habitations and 
non-allocation of any funds for  Swachh Bharat Miss ion under the Budget 2015-16 in 
Demand No.104 – Department of Urban Development. 
2.3  For comments please see para 1.7 of Chapter-I.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No.2) 
 
DEMAND NO.105, STATIONERY AND PRINTING 
 
 
2.4 The Committee are distressed to note that there  have been huge difference of 
allocation between projection and BE stage, BE and RE and between RE and Actual 
Expenditure since 2008-09, under Demand No.105 whic h deals with stationery and 
printing. The Committee further observe that recent ly the Government has proposed 
winding up Directorate of Printing, Government of I ndia's Stationery Office and 
Department of Publications office. In this regard m eeting /discussions are being held 
to discuss the pros and cons. The Committee are giv en to understand that capacity 
utilization of the Government of India Press have rapidly fallen because of: 
 (a) Regular supply of paper was lesser for the num ber of years for which 
indenters have withdrawn their orders. 
(a) The old and defunct machineries are neither updated/repaired nor replaced. 
(b) Permission to fill up essential posts has not b een given. Shortage of skilled 
workers hampered the work seriously  
(c) NOCs are given to Government Departments to get the printing from outside. 
 
 In the event, the above four lacunae are made good .  It is the considered 
opinion of the Committee that the press is renderin g valuable service to the nation, 
with its available limited resource and manpower by  executing orders of Postal, 
Defence, RGI (Census) and others. Moreover, the Pre ss is a reliable source for 

25 
 
printing documents of sensitive and confidential na ture. Recently this press printed 
and supplied Text books of Odisha Education Departm ent before its scheduled time. 
Therefore, it is absolute vital that the above four  lacunae and other handicaps that 
the Press may be facing must be eradicated at the e arliest and this department be 
given the chance to reach its full potential.  This  is the considered view of the 
Committee. 
The printing industry is very sensitive to economic  trends. Data reveals that 
the pace of growth has accelerated and the printing  industry will grow accordingly. 
With the advancement of technology the need of forms will diminish, but the need of 
Text books, WAS, IS and WILL be there. So, there is  a lot of scope of its utilization 
and this industry need to be developed. 
In view of the above, the Committee desire the Mini stry to examine the matter 
in minute details and consider the concerns of all stakeholders before taking a final 
decision in the matter. Till then, the Ministry sho uld endeavour to take into account, 
the difficulties being faced by the Government of I ndia Press and ameliorate them 
for smooth functioning of the press.  The Committee  are of the view that it is very 
easy to shut down any institution which has grown o ver the decades by the dint of 
the hard work and labour and perseverance of thousa nds of workers who are 
working there. The Government should not take recou rse to the easy path of 
closure but instead endeavour to make all out effor ts to modernize the equipments 
and machines and also to ensure that Government Dep artments are instructed to 
use this directorate rather than using an outside a gency, at much higher costs, 
which entails grave losses to this Government depar tment and massive out flow of 
the Government money which is entirely unnecessary. 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.5 There is no proposal to wind up the Directorate  of Printing Office or Govt. of 
India Presses. At present Government is exploring t he modernization of the presses 
by deliberating three pronged approach which includes the following: 
a. Leveraging of land resources to generate revenue  for financing 
modernization.  
b. To undertake modernization on pilot basis on PPP  model and replicate it, if 
found successful.  

26 
 
c. Financing the modernization through budgetary su pport.  
 
 A proposal in this regard was placed before the Com mittee of Secretaries 
(CoS) in its meeting dated 01.04.2014. The Committe e recommended that MoUD 
may either redesign the project in PPP mode as per laid down procedures in 
consultation with M/o Finance/DEA and Planning Comm ission or submit a proposal 
to M/o Finance for Budget allocation as per extant practices. The recommendation of 
CoS is under consideration in MoUD and a final view in this regard is yet to be taken. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.3) 
NATIONAL CAPITAL REGIONAL PLANNING BOARD (NCRPB) 
 
 
2.6 The Committee note that NCRPB has provided loan  assistance for 291 
projects till March, 2014 involving total outlay of  
19738 Cr. They have sanctioned 
total loan amount of 9257 Crore for these projects and out of which  6819 Crore 
loans have  been disbursed up to March, 2014. During the 12 th  Plan the proposed 
budgetary allocation during the last three years wa s 300 crore. Against this the 
sanctioned BE was 200 crore. Till now, the Government of India has re leased 
115 crore. The Committee are  anguished to learn  that out of 291 projects for which 
loan have been sanctioned, only 214 projects have b een completed till March, 2014. 
When the Committee asked the Ministry to state the reasons for such low physical 
and financial targets, the Ministry negated it in i ts written replies stating that there 
was no shortfall in achieving physical and financia l targets. The Committee are well 
conversant with the fact that the NCRPB provides lo ng term soft loan up to 75% of 
the project cost for implementing social and physic al infrastructure development 
projects to the State governments and their impleme nting agencies. The Committee 
agree with the fact that the projects financed by t he board have different 
implementation period ranging from 2 to 4 years and  large number of projects, are 
non-remunerative in nature with a long gestation pe riod. Still, the Committee are not 
satisfied with the reply of the Ministry that there  is no shortfall in achieving physical 
and financial targets as NCPRB has not achieved its  stated target of 291 projects. 
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend NCPRB t o make concerted efforts to 
complete its targets in a time bound manner. 
 
 

27 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
2.7 As stated earlier and noted by the Committee, N CRPB has provided loan 
assistance for 291 projects till March, 2014 involv ing total outlay of 19,738 Cr. 
against which 9,257 Cr. had been sanctioned as loan.  The loan di sbursed against 
this sanctioned amount was  l6,819 Cr. up to March, 2014.   
 
291 is the cumulative number of projects for which loan assistance has been 
sanctioned by NCRPB since its inception in 1985.  O ut of these, 214 projects have 
already been completed whereas 77 are ongoing and a re at various stages of 
implementation.  
Although the loans for these projects have been san ctioned by the Project 
Sanctioning & Monitoring Groups of NCRPB, the proje cts are being implemented by 
the respective State Governments & their implementing agencies. 
The progress of project implementation is monitored  through monthly and 
quarterly progress reports, review meetings by NCRP B, periodic review of progress 
at the level of Chief Secretaries of the respective  State Governments as well as by 
the Project Sanctioning and Monitoring Group of the Board. 
NCRPB is making all possible efforts to ensure the completion of ongoing 
projects within the stipulated time frame by regula r monitoring and co-ordination with 
respective State Govts. & their implementing agencies. 
Recommendation (Serial No.4) 
NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION AS A UNIFIED AREA IN ECONOMIC TERMS: 
NEED TO REMOVE FISCAL BARRIERS.  
2.8 The Committee in their earlier Reports had reco mmended for a need to 
remove the fiscal barriers and make NCR a unified a rea in economic terms. The 
Committee had felt that uniformity in VAT rates in the NCR region would encourage 
business establishments to shift out of NCT, Delhi to set up business in NCR region 
without suffering financial loses. 
 The Committee also find that the policy related to  uniformity in VAT rates falls 
under the domain of Ministry of Finance. The Commit tee are surprised to note that 
NCRPB do not have any information about the outcome . Since NCRPB's mandate is 

28 
 
to decongest the capital city of Delhi, the Committ ee wish that it should take up this 
matter at the highest level i.e., Ministry of Finance. 
 The Committee in their earlier Reports had recomme nded for waiving 
guarantee fee to enable NCRPB to raise the requisit e loan from Multilateral   Aid 
Agencies. The Committee have been informed that the  matter was taken up by the 
Ministry of Urban Development with the Department o f Economic Affairs of the 
Ministry of Finance. The matter is still being disc ussed by the two Ministries. The 
Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation an d want the Ministry of Urban 
Development to keep on pursuing this matter vigoursly till its logical conclusion. 
Reply of the Government  
2.9 In order to implement Value Added Tax (VAT) success fully, Ministry of 
Finance had issued revised consolidated instruction  in July, 2005 for compensating 
the States/UTs in case of loss of revenue on accoun t of introduction of VAT.  
Subsequently, additional instructions were issued b y the Ministry of Finance in June, 
2009 in this regard.  Once VAT is implemented at th e country level by the Ministry of 
Finance, it will help in removing fiscal barrier in NCR also.     
As regards the waiver of Guarantee fee for loans ra ised from 
multilateral/bilateral aid agencies, the matter is being pursued with the Department of 
Economic Affairs (DEA), Ministry of Finance. DEA ha d raised certain queries in this 
regard.  The comments of NCRPB were obtained on the se queries. The same are 
under examination. Reply to DEA, in this regard, will be given shortly. 
2.10  For comments please see para 1.10 of Chapter- I. 
Recommendation (Serial No.5) 
SMOOTH TRAVEL IN NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION  
 
2.11 The Committee came to know that NCRPB pursued with its constituent States 
for signing of “Reciprocal Common Transport Agreement” for ‘Contract Carriage’ and 
‘Stage & Goods Carriage’ for unrestricted/ seamless  travel in NCR to facilitate 
general public.  When the Committee asked the Minis try of Urban Development 
regarding the delay in implementation of this agree ment  it was found out that its 
implementation is to be done by the NCR participati ng States as per the agreements 
as well as under the provisions of Motor Vehicles A ct, 1988. NCR Planning Board 
had requested Ministry of Road Transport and Highwa ys vide letters dated 

29 
 
05.09.2013, 27.12.2013 and 23.07.2014 that all the “Contract Carriage” vehicles 
registered in any district of NCR be allowed to ply  in whole of NCR and all be issued 
permits for NCR without paying any additional passe nger tax.  The Committee feel 
that smooth and seamless movement of interstate tra ffic in the National Capital 
Region is the dire need and efforts should be made to make it unrestricted and 
commuter friendly. The Committee also observed that  the NCR Planning Board has 
been making efforts to convince the State Governmen ts for reciprocal agreement to 
achieve this objective. Implementation of this poli cy is important to facilitate general 
public to commute between Delhi and the rest of NCR  especially those commuters 
who board/ deboard at the airport, railway stations  and inter-state bus terminals  in 
Delhi and have to take either taxi/auto rickshaw or  bus to reach their desired 
destination  in NCR. The National Urban Transport Policy approv ed by the 
Government of India also envisages seamless travel for the passengers.  The 
Committee appreciate that NCRPB has requested for n ecessary amendments, if 
any, in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.  The Committee came to know that there was a 
cap on the issue of permits for auto-rickshaws in NCT-Delhi by the Supreme Court of 
India.  After lifting of restriction of number of auto-rickshaws by the Supreme Court of 
India, Government of NCT-Delhi has initiated action  in this regard.  The Ministry of 
Urban Development also conveyed to the Committee th at Government of NCT-Delhi 
have issued a public notice to invite applications for 5500 NCR Auto-permits (U.P.-
2750, Haryana-2750) and are taking further action i n the matter to issue the NCR 
Permits in respect of U.P. and Haryana Sub-regions of NCR.  However, the 
Committee are dismayed with the hollowness in the o fficial claims of working out a 
transport plan for smooth connectivity between Delh i and its neighbors –
 GautamBudhNagar (Noida), Ghaziabad and Gurgaon. Buses may have been plying 
between these cities but auto-rickshaws, the prefer red mode for many commuters 
and taxis (except for radio taxis) stay away becaus e of jurisdictional issues and 
harsh penalties. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend to the NCRPB and 
Govt. of Delhi and other adjoining States to take q uick decisions relating to critical 
activities and resolve inter-state issues/matters f or early implementation of this 
agreement i.e., Reciprocal Common Transport Agreeme nt” for ‘Contract Carriage’ 
and ‘Stage & Goods Carriage’ for unrestricted trave l in NCR to facilitate general 
public.   The Ministry of Urban Development may also pursue the matter vigorously.  
 

30 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.12 Board requested the NCR Participating States t o provide the status of 
implementation of the “Reciprocal Common Transport Agreement among 
Governments of NCT-Delhi, Haryana, Rajasthan and Ut tar Pradesh for unrestricted 
movement of vehicles in NCR” for ‘Contract Carriage ’ and ‘Stage Carriage’ vide 
letters dated 22.09.2014, 23.09.2014 and 05.01.2015. 
 
Board, vide letters dated 05.09.2013 , 27.12.2013,18.02.2014 , 23.07.2014 and  
13.11.2014, requested the Ministry of Road Transport and Highwa ys (MoRT&H) to 
examine the Recommendations made in the Hundred and  Forty Sixth Report of the 
Rajya Sabha Committee on Petitions and necessary am endments, if any, be made 
in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 as recommended in the said Report.  
 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, vide lette r dated 04.12.2014, 
informed that a copy of the said Report had been fo rwarded by MoRT&H to M/s. 
PLR Chambers requesting them to take into considera tion the recommendations 
made in the Report while drawing of the new Motor Vehicles Act.  
2.13 For comments please see para 1.13 of Chapter-I. 
Recommendation (Serial No.6) 
STRENGTHENING CAPACITY BUILDING IN URBAN TRANSPORT FOR 
SMALLER STATES  
2.14 The Committee have learnt that Ministry of Urb an Development provides 
financial assistance up to 80% for taking up Traffi c and Transportation studies, 
feasibility studies, Comprehensive Mobility Plan (C PM), preparation of DPR (limited 
to 50% in case of MRTS) under the scheme of Urban T ransport Planning launched 
w.e.f., August, 2008. The total outlay for this sch eme in the 12th Five Year Plan was 
99 crore. The BE for 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15 w as Rs.63.25 crore. The 
Committee are surprised to find that the BE for yea r 2014-15 was only Rs. 22 crore. 
When enquired by the Committee for the reasons for less allocation of budget, the 
Committee came to know that in the financial year 2 013-14, funds were not released 

31 
 
as per the schedule due to absence of the correct o bject Head under the Scheme. 
The Committee also came to know that the lukewarm r esponse of the State 
Governments is also responsible for less utilizatio n of funds. The UT Division in 
consultation with the Budget Division has made effo rt for creation of correct Object 
Head “Grant-in-Aid” and it came into existence in t he financial year 2014-15. With a 
view to bring awareness among the States for the sa id scheme, the Ministry has 
written letters to the Chief Secretaries of all the  States about these schemes from 
time to time.  Apart from this, it has also conduct ed several workshops. UT Division 
considers the proposals for taking up Traffic and T ransportation studies, feasibility 
studies, Comprehensive Mobility Plan (CMP), prepara tion of DPR for Mass Rapid 
Transport System (MRTS)/ Light Rail Transit (LRTS) which are originated by the 
State Governments/ Union Territories/ Urban Local B odies. The Committee are 
happy to note that States like Madhya Pradesh (all cities), Itanagar and Pasighat 
Township of Arunachal Pradesh and 18 cities of Andhra Pradesh have come forward 
for CMP preparation in a phased manner. Similarly f or preparation of DPR for 
MRTS/LRT, the Ministry has received the proposals f rom Guwahati, Bhubaneswar-
Cuttack, Vishakhapatnam, Vijayawada-Guntur-Tenali ( VGT MUDA), Kanpur, Agra, 
Varanasi, Meerut, etc.  
 The Committee feel that a piecemeal approach to de al with urban mobility is 
not the correct way to move. The approach has to be  more comprehensive, and 
multi-modal, encompassing on measures both supply s ide and demand 
side. Therefore, the Committee wish to emphasize up on the need to strengthen the 
capacity building of the States vigorously in a han d holding manner especially for the 
smaller States for which adequate budget should be released in a time bound 
manner. 
 
 Reply of the Government 
 
2.15 The Ministry appreciates the concern shown by the Committee regarding 
Capacity Building of the States.  The Ministry will  address the issue in the future 
schemes as a whole under Capacity Building componen t in which sufficient 
provisions for funds will be made. 
 
 

32 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.8) 
 
MAKING INDIAN CITIES MORE LIVEABLE  
 
2.16 The Committee came to know that NCR Planning B oard has prepared a 
Regional Plan-2021 for the harmonized and balanced development of National 
Capital Region. NCR Planning Board has also prepare d Functional Plan on 
Transport for NCR in 2009 based on a detailed Study  on Integrated Transportation 
Plan for NCR which provides for Regional Rapid Tran sit System (RRTS) and Bus 
Based Public Transport System for Commuters in NCR apart from other proposals 
such as Expressways, up gradation of National Highw ays, etc.  Both Regional Plan 
and Functional Plan on Transport for NCR are to be implemented by the NCR 
participating States and other concerned agencies. The Committee are not satisfied 
with reply of the Ministry because they have not gi ven comprehensive reply for the 
management of migrant population from semi urban to  urban cities. During the oral 
evidence, the Ministry informed that basic problem in large cities is due to huge 
migration of population. The Committee feel that In dian cities cannot be compared 
with cites of US or Europe. If we compare these cit ies with European cities or US, 
the basic problem is of population. The implementat ion part needs real engineering. 
Ministry should have given practical solutions.  Th e Committee agree with the fact 
that migration from rural area to urban area is a c ontinuous process and we cannot 
stop it. The Committee recommend that our cities sh ould be made liveable and at 
the same time ensuring  that enough employment opportunities are available  in such 
cities. The Committee recommend for vertical develo pment in Delhi and other cities 
because there is scarcity of land.  
The Committee observe that all major cities of the India have been creating 
"Master Plans” every 10-20 years that are supposed to anticipate how the city’s 
population and boundaries might grow, and what the city needs to do to absorb this 
growth, function effectively and remain liveable. B ut the Committee are distressed to 
note that there is no example of large Indian citie s that have managed to stay ahead 
of the urbanization curve and cope with the growth over the past two decades. More 
so, despite these Master Plans, there is a sharp de cline in the quality of life of urban 
residents over the last few decades. This is manife sted in terms of lack of amenities, 
inadequate infrastructure, high population density,  the inability to maintain cultural 

33 
 
heritage, as well as degradation in environmental a spects such as green cover and 
air and water quality.  
 
The Committee are aware  that the subject of urban development has been 
assigned to the States; the call has to be taken by  the State Governments and the 
urban local bodies; the role of the Government of I ndia is limited, but in spite of that, 
the Government of India is taking huge initiatives in terms of development of 100 
smart cities; in terms of urban renewal of 500 citi es. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry of Urban Development to expe dite the Mission and help the 
States in a hand holding manner so as make all the cities liveable in a sustainable 
manner and as well as to achieve its stated objectives. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.17  The design of the Scheme for developing Smart  Cities is under formulation in 
consultation with State Governments. The guidelines  and criteria will be known only 
after the Scheme design is complete.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No.10) 
 
MONORAIL IN METROPOLITAN SUBURBS  
 
2.18 The Committee have been apprised that Monorail  is a safe, reliable, 
economical, quick, comfortable and effective mass p ublic transit system. The high-
speed rail-based Regional Rapid Transit Systems (RR TS) would allow people living 
in metropolitan suburbs within a radius of 100 km t o commute to work, thereby 
easing pressure on the infrastructure services with in the city. On being enquired 
about the status of Monorail pilot project in big m etropolitan city in India, the 
Committee learnt to know that there has been no bud getary allocation and 
expenditure from the Union Budget for Monorail Proj ects till now. As per the 
statement of Ministry of Urban development, since u rban transport is completely 
intertwined with urban development, the project pro posals of Metro Rail/Monorail are 
not originated by the Central Government as a matte r of policy and have to be 
proposed by the State Government concerned.  Minist ry of Urban Development has 
formulated National Urban Transport Policy (NUTP) i n April 2006.  The NUTP gives 

34 
 
the  broad guidelines on the vision, objectives, in tegrating land use and transport 
planning, priority to the use of public transport, technologies of public transport, 
financing, etc. for an overall development of safe,  affordable, quick, comfortable, 
reliable and sustainable urban transport including Metro rail projects in the country. 
The Committee agree that Metro Rail / Monorail proj ects are to be initiated by the 
State Governments according to the needs of their c ities and not by the Central 
Government. The cities have to prepare the Comprehe nsive Mobility Plan (CMP) 
with alternative analysis for promoting sustainable  transport. But still the Committee 
strongly recommend the Nodal Ministry to help the S tates in formulating their 
Comprehensive Mobility Plan (CMP) and help them in formulating sustainable urban 
transport. The Committee are happy to note that fir st Monorail in India is planned in 
Mumbai from Sant Gadge Maharaj Chowk – Wadala – Che mbur (20 Kms) which is a 
totally State owned Project. Its Phase-1 i.e. Chemb ur to Wadala (around 9 Kms) 
consisting of 7 Stations was inaugurated on 1 st  February 2014 and started 
commercial operation from 2 nd  February 2014. Phase -2 Sant Gadge Maharaj Chowk 
to Wadala (11Kms) consisting of 10 stations will be  in operation by the next year 
end.  The Committee also came to know that as of no w, there is no foreign 
collaboration into Monorail sector. There is no pro posal with Central Government for 
funding of Monorail Projects from foreign countries. Therefore, keeping in view all the 
advantages of Monorail, the Committee strongly reco mmend Ministry of Urban 
Development to act as facilitator, provide budgetary allocation from the Union Budget 
for Monorail Projects and facilitate foreign collab oration, if need be, into Monorail 
sector so as to set up monorail both as a means of feeder system with  in the bigger 
metros and as well as independent means of transport in Tier II cities.  
Reply of the Government  
 
2.19 As per National Urban Transport Policy (NUTP),  2006, Central Government 
supports all types of public transport systems incl uding Monorail and provides 
financial support upto 20% of the capital cost in f orm of equity / Subordinate 
debt/Grants after evaluating various parameters. 
 Govt. of Tamil Nadu (GoTN) had decided to implemen t Phase-1 of Chennai 
Monorail Project covering total length of 57.09 km consisting of three corridors 
namely, Vandalur To Velachery, Poonamallee to Kathi para and Poonamallee to 
Vadapalani at an estimated total cost of Rs.7, 687. 03 crore under Design, Build, 

35 
 
Finance, Operation & Transfer (DBFOT) model and has  not sought any funding from 
the Central Government. 
In the first instance, GoTN has sought “in principl e” approval from Central 
Government for Phase-1 from Poonamallee to Kathipar a with a link from Porur to 
Vadaplani of the length of about 20.68 kms with an estimated cost of Rs.3267 crores 
without any financial support from Government of In dia in the construction as well as 
O&M phase. Central Government has given “in princip le” approval for this phase to 
GoTN on 11.11.2014. 
Govt. of Kerala (GoK) has also proposed to implemen t the following Monorail 
Projects on Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) model: 
Project  Length (in Km)  Estimated Completion 
cost (Rs. In Crore) 
Thiruvananthapuram  
(from Technocity to Karamana) 
22.537 4379* 
Kozhikode  
(from M.C. Hostel to Meenchanda) 
14.200 2310** 
*Including Central taxes (by April, 2019).    ** in cluding Central taxes (by March, 
2017) 
Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD) has requested GoK to prepare the 
Comprehensive Mobility Plan of the above cities and  furnish to MoUD vide letter 
dated 7.4.2014. GoK has also been reminded for furnishing the same vide reminders 
dated 31.7.2014, 5.9.2014 and 31.10.2014. 
Central Government also provides financial assistan ce to the State 
Governments for preparation of Comprehensive Mobili ty Plan (CMP), Feasibility 
Report and Detailed Project Reports (DPRs). 
Metro/Monorail projects are considered in the Centr al Government depending 
upon the proposals received from the State Government.  
Central Government has also advised State Governmen ts vide letter dated 
20 th  November, 2014 that prior approval of the Governme nt of India (GoI) before 
initiating any Metro Rail/Monorail projects in the State is dispensed with in cases 
where there is no financial implication on the part  of GoI, directly or indirectly 
(through sovereign loan or guarantee). It has also been advised that due procedure 
of sanction of Metro Rail/Monorail Projects by GoI need to be followed, after 

36 
 
submitting the Detailed Project Report (DPR), duly accepted by the State 
Government concerned to GoI, before initiating any such Project in the State/Union 
Territory (UT) which has financial implication dire ctly or indirectly (through sovereign 
loan or guarantee) on the part of GoI. 
 The Budget provision for Monorail projects in the Union Budget would be 
made on the basis of the proposal received from the State Governments/UTs. 
Recommendation (Serial No.11) 
 
JNNURM - URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE GOVERNANCE (UIG) 
 
 
 2.20  The Committee have been apprised that no Urban Infr astructure projects 
have been completed in the Seven Mission cities of Uttar Pradesh while only 33 out 
of 71 projects in Gujarat, 16 out of 46 projects in Karnataka and 17 out of 50 projects 
in Andhra Pradesh have been completed. Similarly, the JNNURM projects in all cities 
in the country are lying in the state of incompleti on.  As per the Statement of Ministry 
of Urban Development, the projects sanctioned under  JnNURM are implemented by 
the States through their Urban Local Bodies (ULBs)/  parastatals.  The Ministry has 
no role in the implementation of the projects.  The  major constraints which have 
been identified in general in speedy and timely implementation of projects are:  
/checkbld Capacity constraints by the implementing agencies,   
/checkbld Land acquisition, contract management issues,  
/checkbld Environmental and other clearances,  
/checkbld Litigations,  
/checkbld Shifting of existing utilities,  
/checkbld Coordination between Agencies and Departments at f ield level,  
/checkbld Fund flow which hampers smooth implementation of t he projects and results in delay 
in completion.  
 The Committee came to know that the JnNURM has end ed on 31.03.2014.  The 
Ministry of Urban Development asked the states to e xpedite implementation of the 
projects and complete all the ongoing projects sanc tioned under JnNURM till 
31.03.2012 and which were not completed till the ex tended period up to 31.03.2014 
from their own resources and to furnish completion certificates to the Ministry. The 
Committee have learnt that Ministry has no role to play in implementation of Projects. 
This statement is not acceptable to the Committee. They desire that the Ministry 

37 
 
should act as a facilitator in expeditious implemen tation of projects by promoting 
capacity building and smooth coordination between A gencies and Departments at 
field level. The Committee strongly recommend the i mplementation of at least all 
remaining projects of JNNURM within a time bound ma nner and to be funded by the 
Central Government and the intimation thereof may b e furnished to the Committee.  
In the absence of this, the feedback coming from al l the Members of Parliament from 
all the States, as also the feedback from the study  tour of the Committee to 
Maharashtra and Orissa is that all these projects w ill remain incomplete after 
thousands of crores having been spent on these proj ects.  It would be a monumental 
waste of public money to have expended thousands of crores on incomplete projects 
only due to the lack of coordination and flexibilit y between Central and State 
governments.  This would be a most undesirable stat e of affairs.  Therefore, the 
Committee strongly recommend that the incomplete projects should be completed so 
that these incomplete projects see the light of day  and the public money should not 
go to waste completely and unnecessarily.   
 
Reply of the Government  
2.21        4 of the 33 UIG projects have been completed in Uttar Pradesh. 6 projects 
have achieved 90% or more physical progress. Anothe r 8 have achieved 80% or 
more progress. The remaining are at various stages of completion.  
2. The JnNURM had ended on 31.03.2012. In order to complete the reforms and 
the projects sanctioned up to 31.03.2012 and reform s,the Mission was extended for 
a period of 2 years upto 31.03.2014. The Finance Mi nistry had made it clear that the 
incomplete project would have to be completed by 31 .03.2014. The projects which 
remain incomplete even by 31.03.2014 would have to be completed by the States. 
This Ministry had also mentioned in the sanction or der for release of instalment of 
ACA issued by the Ministry of Finance.  
3. The Ministry is not funding JnNURM projects sanc tioned up to 31.03.2012 
anymore. It is however, pursuing States to ensure t hat they complete the ongoing 
projects at the earliest. Wherever, the States fail  to make progress, the ACA 
extended could even be recovered. 
4. The recommendations of the Parliamentary Standin g Committee have been 
noted and action is being taken to comply with the same. 
 

38 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.12) 
 
NATIONAL MISSION ON SUSTAINABLE HABITAT (NMSH) 
 
 
2.22 National Mission on Sustainable Habitat is one  of the eight missions under 
national climate change action plan and aims to mak e cities sustainable through 
improvement in energy efficiency in buildings, mana gement of solid waste & shift to 
public transport. The Committee have learnt that th e budgetary outlay for the NMSH 
scheme during 2013-14 was Rs.10 crore. During the y ear 2014-15 the BE is Rs.15 
crore. Ministry of Urban Development stated that no  expenditure has been incurred 
under the project so far. The Committee were appris ed by the Ministry of Urban 
Development that there is no approved scheme of NMSH and the activities proposed 
under NMSH are undertaken through programmes under UT Division, JNNURM, 
CPWD& TCPO.  The Committee find that most of the ac tivities proposed under the 
schemes could be funded under JNNURM and in case, a ny of the proposed activity 
is covered by the scheme/ programme of other Minist ries/Deptt, the same could be 
funded by them in coordination with the Ministry of Urban Development. Also that the 
Urban Development Plan Formulation and Implementati on (UDPFI) guidelines may 
be kept in mind while formulating /sanctioning the project under NMSH. Meanwhile, 
under the NMSH, Sustainable Habitat Standards have been developed and 
forwarded to all States in February, 2014 to mainst ream the Standards in Legal/ 
Regulatory framework of States/ ULBs so as to assim ilate the same in 
developmental activities. Ministry has also propose d to conduct a fresh EFC and 
launch a new scheme under NMSH considering the renewed interest & vision of new 
government on Sanitation and Environment protection. It is, therefore, expected from 
the Ministry of Urban Development to have a new sch eme in place in next two 
months to utilize the budget. The Committee are als o in agreement with the Ministry 
of Urban Development for launching National mission  on sustainable habitat keeping 
in view the renewed interest & vision of new govern ment on Sanitation and 
Environment protection. 
 
Reply of the Government  
2.23 As mentioned earlier, it was decided during th e EFC meeting of NMSH held 
on 10 th  February, 2014that “most of the activities propose d under NMSH could be 

39 
 
funded under JNNURM and in case, any of the propose d activity is covered by the 
scheme/programme of other Ministry/ Deptt., the sam e could be funded by them in 
coordination with MOUD.”  As such, no separate fund  allocation is sanctioned under 
NMSH by Competent Authority for spending on envisag ed activities. The same 
status holds good at present also where Ministry ha s launched Swachh Bharat 
Mission (SBM) and Heritage City Development & Augme ntation Yojana (HRIDAY) 
and is in process of formulating “National Urban Re juvenation Mission” for 500 cities 
with population 1 lakh & above and 100 Smart cities . As such, the vision of new 
government on Sanitation and Environment protection  is covered under these 
programmes/ Missions and there is no need for new NMSH scheme.  
Recommendation (Serial No.13) 
 
DEVISE LONG-TERM POLICY AND MANUAL TO CHECK WATER-LOGGING 
 
 
2.24 During the monsoon season rain usually wreak h avoc across Delhi, Mumbai 
and other cities across India. The Committee asked the Ministry of Urban 
Development to explain about long term policy and m echanism to check water-
logging in Delhi and other cities so as to have a p ermanent solution to water-logging 
to solve the recurring problem every year. The Comm ittee were apprised that the 
South Delhi Municipal Corporation hasprepared an Ac tion Plan for carrying out the 
de-silting of drains under its jurisdiction through out the year.  Its implementation is 
being monitored by the senior officers and it is en sured that all the drains are de-
silted well before the onset of monsoon.  Further, South Delhi Municipal Corporation 
has already provided the data in regard to the drai ns under its jurisdiction to IIT, 
Delhi, which is in process of preparing a complete and comprehensive Master Plan 
for storm water drains as a long term solution for problem of water logging in Delhi. 
The Committee strongly recommend the Ministry of Ur ban Development for 
preparation of comprehensive Master Plan for storm water drains as well as the  
manual on storm water drainage, expeditiously. The Committee are also of the view 
that there should be an audit of water logging cont rol measures, all flood control 
measures and the city's drainage system every year.  The Committee also strongly 
recommend that the audit of water logging preventiv e measures should cover the 
following aspects: 

40 
 
/checkbld The survey conducted by the government to identify  vulnerable areas and 
corrective action taken.  
/checkbld Response mechanism devised by the government to me et unforeseen 
situations arising out of water logging. 
/checkbld The steps taken for coordination among various dep artments such as the 
municipal corporations, flood control department, t he New Delhi Municipal Council, 
Public Works Department and the Delhi Jal Board.  
/checkbld Examine the city response to the warnings of the m eteorological department. 
/checkbld Standard operating procedures adopted by the gover nment and the 
mechanism for informing/alerting the public about a ny impending flood or water 
logging challenges. 
 
Reply of the Government  
2.25 Ministry of Urban Development is formulating “Natio nal Urban Rejuvenation 
Mission” for 500 cities with population 1 lakh & ab ove wherein component of storm 
water drainage is also admissible. The storm water drainage projects will originate 
from comprehensive drainage master plan of city to be prepared by State/ULB.   
Ministry of Urban Development has constituted an Ex pert Committee in 
October, 2014 for preparation of a Comprehensive Manual on Storm Water Drainage 
Systems so as to guide the public health engineers across the country in designing, 
operation and maintenance of storm water drainage s ystems. First meeting of the 
Expert Committee has already been held in February, 2015.  
The Committee includes members from different agenc ies of State Govts., 
Central Water Commission, National Institute of Dis aster Management, National 
Disaster Management Authority, Indian Metrological Department etc.  The 
Committee shall focus on the various issues of stor m water drainage and necessary 
preventive measures to reduce the impact of storm w ater drainage in the urban 
areas of the country shall be made in the Manual. 
Further, Ministry of Urban Development has publishe d Manual on Sewerage 
and Sewage Treatment Systems, in November, 2013 whe re a brief description on 
rational approach for design of storm water drainage is given. 

41 
 
Ministry of Urban Development is formulating a new Mission for 500 cities 
wherein the component of storm water drainage is pr oposed to be included. The 
storm water drainage projects will originate from c omprehensive drainage 
masterplan to be prepared by the State/ULB. 
To improve service delivery, Ministry has formulate d a set of Standardized 
Service Level Benchmarks for storm water drainage a s per International Best 
Practices. Any project seeking Central Assistance m ay be appraised with respect to 
these Benchmarks also. 
Indicators for Storm Water 
Drainage 
Benchmarks 
 Average*  
Coverage of storm water drainage 
network 
100% 
 45.8%  
Incidence of water logging/ flooding 0  9.5  
 
The steps suggested regarding audit of water loggin g and consequent 
preventive measures etc. are part of “District Disa ster Plan” and is supported by 
National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA). Mini stry of Urban Development 
support State/ULBs in creation of infrastructure to  minimize the problems due to 
urban drainage/water logging.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No.15) 
 
ELIMINATION OF HAZARDOUS MANUAL CLEANING OF SEWERS 
 
 
2.26 It has been learnt that many sewerage workers have overcome by noxious 
fumes and drowned in sewage. Even if they survive t hese working conditions, most 
sewer workers suffer debilitating diseases caused b y their working conditions like 
typhoid, hepatitis and severe skin rashes. These wo rkers are not given any 
protective equipment, and effectively lack insuranc e or medical benefits. The 
Committee were apprised that 80 per cent of these w orkers die before retirement. 
Increasingly, this work is contracted out from the municipal authorities to private 
contractors, who are barely regulated. This is desp ite an existing Safety Code, 
which the MCD spells out in the terms and condition s on which they hire 

42 
 
contractors. A cluster of municipal authorities (Mu nicipal Corporation of Delhi, 
Government of NCT of Delhi, Delhi Development Autho rity, Union of India, Delhi Jal 
Board, and New Delhi Municipal Council) are respons ible for the safety of sewage 
workers in New Delhi. The Committee are anguished that while there is a law to ban 
manual scavenging, it has failed to stop the author ities from continuing with 
hazardous manual cleaning of septic tanks. The Comm ittee also learnt that Ministry 
of Urban Development (MoUD) has initiated a proposa l to formulate a “Scheme of 
Assistance for Mechanical Cleaning of Sewers and Se ptic Tanks (SAMCSS)” to 
assist cities/towns through the State Governments f or procurement of suction and 
suction-cum-jetting machines with the objective of eliminating the hazardous 
manual cleaning. The Ministry has issued an Advisor y Note on Septage 
Management in January, 2013 for adoption by the Sta tes. The Advisory includes 
guidelines for frequency of de-sludging of septic t anks, transportation and methods 
of treatment and safe disposal of treated sludge. T he facilities for treatment and 
disposal of septage have yet to be set up by the St ate Governments and cities from 
their own resources.  The Committee came to know th at the Ministry of Urban 
Development proposes to include the mechanical clea ning of sewers and septic 
tanks and septage management as admissible componen ts in the New Urban 
Development Mission (NUDM) which is being formulate d by the Ministry. The 
Committee call upon the Ministry of Urban Developme nt to do the needful at the 
earliest and implement the “Scheme of Assistance fo r Mechanical Cleaning of 
Sewers and Septic Tanks (SAMCSS)” by municipal auth orities with full vigour and 
at the same time the Committee proposes to include following clauses in the 
scheme:  
• Municipal authorities should provide these workers  with machines 
immediately to clean the sewers so that they do not  have to do so 
manually 
• Give full compensation to the families of those wo rkers who have died 
• Provide workers with proper and modern safety equi pment and 
training. 
• Create mechanisms that encourage workers to speak out about safety 
problems. 
• Evolve a system to investigate all work-related ac cidents and hold 
those responsible accountable. 

43 
 
• Improve safety through Infrastructure improvements  and regular 
maintenance.  
• Comprehensive Safety training must be given  
• Educate the masses about how they can help maintai n sewers  
• Strict Laws should be enforced against the public for illegal dumping of 
waste into the sewers. 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.27 Formulation of New Urban Development Mission a nd the Mission Smart City 
for 500 cities in which mechanical cleaning of sewers and septic tanks will be one of 
the eligible components is under consideration in t he Ministry. The new Mission 
proposes to provide financial assistance for procur ement of modern machinery and 
equipment for cleaning of sewers and septic tanks a s well as construction of 
septage treatment facilities and also for training of sanitation workers and 
awareness generation. 
 
 The scheme will be implemented by Urban Local Bodi es. However, it is the 
responsibility of ULBs to provide compensation to t he families of workers in case of 
death and enforce penalty to those who are dumping waste into sewers. 
2.28 For comments please see para 1.22 of Chapter-I . 
Recommendation (Serial No.16) 
 
SUSTAINABLE SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT  
 
2.29 Urban India generates 188,500 tonnes of MSW (o r 68.8 million tones per 
year) and the waste generation increases by 50% eve ry decade. Some of this waste 
will be recovered by an army of informal recyclers (20% in large cities, lesser in 
smaller cities) leaving more than 80% to reach open  dumpsites where it  damages 
public health, deteriorates the environment and cau ses climate change. Twenty 
three Indian cities will generate more than 1,000 m etric tonnes each of municipal 
solid waste per day in the next five years. They wi ll cumulatively generate 93,000 
tonnes of MSW every day. In this background, the Co mmittee also came to know 
that three garbage dumps at Ghazipur, Okhla and Bha lswa landfills are far from 
reality. These are monstrous trash mountains, inclu ding hazardous waste, leaching 
out toxic liquids and emanating noxious fumes. Thou sands of scavenging birds 

44 
 
swarm over them as they grow larger every day. The Committee were informed by 
the Ministry of Urban development that DDA/ GNCTD h ave not provided alternative 
land due to which this site is being operated for d isposal of MSW.  The Committee 
were apprised that at present, the existing dumping site at Bhalswa has exceeded its 
capacity. The Committee were also apprised that Min istry have evolved a concept to 
consider landfill reclamation and construction of i ntegrated municipal solid waste 
processing complex at site available for fresh MSW in near future, so that a goal 
near to zero landfill site may be achieved, because in a city like Delhi where land is a 
scarce and highly priced commodity, finding a new s ite for development of another 
landfill is not an easy task. Moreover, the expendi ture required for closure, post 
closure maintenance of exhausted site and development of a new site would be very 
high. The Committee came to know that the departmen t has appointed the 
consultant M/s IRG Systems South Asia Pvt. Ltd. to prepare the DPR and Bid 
document, the tender will be called for reclamation  of Landfill site at SLF Bhalswa. In 
addition to this, the Committee were apprised that Ministry of Urban Development 
had published a Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Man agement in May, 2000 to 
assist ULBs in management of municipal solid waste in a hygienic and scientific 
manner. The Manual provides detailed guidelines/ me thodology for State Govt./ ULB 
for planning, designing, executing and operation & maintenance of solid waste 
management schemes. It also provides comprehensive guidelines and suggests 
various technological options for processing, treat ment and disposal and resource 
recovery (compost/ energy) from municipal waste. Th e Manual is currently under 
revision. Pursuant to the recommendations of the Co mmittee on Solid Waste 
Management for Class-I cities constituted by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, the 
Union Ministry of Urban Development brought out a R eport on Technology Advisory 
Group on Solid Waste Management  in May, 2005 and c irculated to all the State 
Governments for adoption. The report principally co vers the details of various 
technologies available within and outside the count ry for the treatment of municipal 
solid waste and deriving compost, RDF, power, etc. from the waste, their merits, 
demerits, their limitations, etc.  In view of the g ravity of situation, the Committee 
strongly recommend that the Ministry of Urban Development must design reasonable 
and strong regulatory framework for emissions monit oring, and policy for integrating 
the informal recycling sector and simultaneously th e Committee reemphasizes upon 
the DDA/ GNCTD to provide land to Municipal Corpora tion of Delhi so as to 

45 
 
complete landfill reclamation and construction of i ntegrated municipal solid waste 
processing complex at the earliest.  The Committee noted with grave concern the 
complete lack of solid waste management in large an d small cities in all over India. 
The lack of planning is manifest in the fact that w hile a site of MSW plant is identified 
by one agency, another agency simultaneously gives permission for construction of 
colonies in the neighborhood.  This leads to protes ts from the public and stalling of 
the MSW plants.  This is a serious problem and happ ens only because of complete 
lack of planning and coordination among various urban agencies all over India.  
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.30 As per the Report of Task Force on Waste to En ergy, published by NITI 
Aayog (erstwhile Planning Commission), 2014, total waste generation in urban area 
of the country is 1,33,760 TPD, which does not incl ude waste picked up by 
kabadiwala at the doorstep and he rag pickers. Out of the above, only 68% of the 
waste generated in the country is collected of whic h 28% is treated by the Municipal 
authority. Thus, merely 19% of the total waste gene rated is currently treated. The 
remaining waste is disposed of at dump sites untreated. 
Government of India has also launched Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM) on 2nd 
October, 2014 with the target to make the country c lean by 2nd October, 2019. The 
Mission covers all 4041 statutory towns/cities as p er 2011 census. One of the 
admissible components under SBM is implementation o f municipal solid waste 
management projects in integrated manner.   
Ministry is also taking up matter with Ministry of Power/Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy/Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilis ers to put in place suitable 
policy intervention to facilitate running solid waste management systems sustainably. 
The Ministry of Urban Development has published Man ual on Municipal Solid 
Waste Management in May, 2000 to assist ULBs in pro per and efficient 
management of solid waste. The Manual provides deta iled guidelines / methodology 
for planning, designing, executing and operation & maintenance of solid waste 
management. A separate chapter on “Institutional As pects & Capacity Building”, 
“Legal Aspect”, and “Policy Guidelines” has been gi ven in the Manual which may be 
referred by the States. The Manual is currently under up-dation and revision.  

46 
 
Ministry of Urban Development has already issued advisory to States vide DO 
No. Z-14013/3/2009-PHE.II, dated March 22, 2010, for inclusion of informal recycling 
sector into the process of solid waste management k eeping in mind the larger goals 
of an environmentally sustainable and decentralized waste management practice.  
State Govts. have to identify the land free from al l encumbrance for waste 
landfill. In case, the land for landfill is not ava ilable for smaller towns, Ministry of 
Urban Development formulated a “Guidance Note – Mun icipal Solid Waste 
Management on a Regional Basis” and circulated to a ll the State Governments for 
reference. The guidance note provides guidance on p olicy, institutional and technical 
aspects for the establishment of integrated facilit y for treatment and disposal of 
municipal waste in sanitary landfill on regional / shared basis to the States and 
ULBs. 
2.31 For comments please see para 1.25 of Chapter-I. 
Recommendation (Serial No.17) 
 
SEGREGATION OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE BE FORE 
REACHING LANDFILL SITE:  
 
2.32 The Committee were informed that in all the du mp yard sites, construction 
and demolition waste (C and D) like bricks, concret e, wood & rubble are not 
segregated before being dumped in the landfill site s. Most C and D waste should be 
recycled. These are the heaviest waste which once m ixed cannot be recycled. In 
New York, C and D waste is taxed. UK recycles over 70% of its malba and 
Singapore over 90%. The Committee came to know that  as of now, 3000 metric 
tonnes of C and D waste are going to the landfills in Delhi. When the Committee 
asked the Ministry of Urban Developmentto explain t he reasons for non-segregation, 
the Committee were apprised that Municipal Solid Wa ste Management Rules, 2000 
deal with process and management of Construction an d Demolition waste wherein 
the concerned agency has been suggested to segregat e the C & D waste for 
transportation and recycling and reuse. The Committ ee were appraised by the 
Ministry that the matter of awareness and enforceme nt dwells upon the local 
authority, being a state subject. As per MSW (Manag ement & Handling) Rules 2000, 
the daily fresh MSW dumped at SLF site has to be co vered with about 10 cm of 

47 
 
malba. At present, about 100 MT of malba/ C&D waste  is being utilized at SLF 
Bhalswa daily to cover the dumped MSW and about 200 0 MT of C&D Waste daily is 
being processed/ recycled at C&D waste plant, Burar i.  The Ministry has proposed to 
set up a C&D waste Plant at site No. 1-4, Industria l Area, near Rani Khera, Rohini 
Phase-IV for processing/ recycling of 500 MT per da y of C&D Waste, for which 
feasibility study will be done by the Consultant to  be engaged in this project. The 
Committee are happy to note that Ministry of Urban development has taken interest 
in this matter. Therefore the Committee reemphasize s the need for awareness and 
enforcement with regard to segregation of construct ion and demolition waste before 
reaching landfill site and speedy operationalizatio n of C&D waste Plant in a time 
bound manner under intimation to the Committee. 
Reply of the Government  
2.33 
To promote recycling of C & D waste; 
• Ministry has issued an advisory on solid waste man agement to all State 
Governments vide DO No. Q-15014/2/2009-CPHEO, dated  31st October, 
2013 stating that the C&D waste can be beneficially  used by proper 
processing and recycling to suffice for raw material.  
• A separate chapter on Construction & Demolition Wa ste has given in Manual 
on Municipal Solid Waste Management, published by t he Ministry in May, 
2000, which includes Planning & Management Aspects and Institutional & 
Regulatory Framework for C&D waste.  
• Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Chang e is in process of 
formulating “Construction and Demolition Waste (Col lection, Processing, 
Use& Disposal) Rules” where C&D waste related issue s shall be addressed 
comprehensively.  
• Also, Bureau of Indian Standard (BIS), Ministry of  Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution is in process of formulatio n of standards/ guidelines 
for construction & demolition waste which shall imp rove the market of 
recycled products. 
2.34 For comments please see para 1.28 of Chapter-I. 
 
 

48 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.19) 
SWACHCH BHARAT MISSION 
 
 
2.35 The Committee have been apprised about the com ponents of Swachch 
Bharat Mission in which Govt. of India is committed  to make India open defecation 
free by 2019.  This Mission addresses the issues of  sanitation in all 4041 statutory 
towns in the country to achieve Swachh Bharat by 20 19 to mark 150 
th  Birthday of 
Mahatma Gandhiji. The sanitation component proposed  in this Mission includes 
individual household toilets, community toilets, pu blic toilets, solid waste 
management, public awareness and capacity building.   This Mission has got 
basically two parts.  One part is creation of physi cal infrastructure, namely toilets, 
solid waste management etc.  On the other hand, nee d for change in the mindset; 
unless we bring in a change in behaviour and conduc t, this is not going to be 
sustainable.  The total tentative cost of the missi on is about Rs. 62,000 crore out of 
which the Central assistance is Rs. 14,623 crore.  The Committee are happy to note 
that the Ministry has taken a concerted effort in t his regard. Therefore, the 
Committee re-emphasize the operationalization and i mplementation of this mission 
with full vigour in a time-bound manner under intim ation to the Committee.  The 
Committee during their study tour to Pune were give n a presentation by SWACH 
Organisation with regard to the large-scale initiat ive undertaken by them for door to 
door collection and disposal of domestic garbage in  the city.  The Committee were 
vastly impressed with this initiative and seriously  feel that it has merit and strongly 
recommend that this system should be adopted by oth er small and large cities all 
over India. The Citizen-Government partnership mode l as seen in Pune is a very 
good scheme for furthering the laudable idea of the  Swachh Bharat Mission and has 
good chance of success as has happened in Pune municipality.  
Reply of the Government  
 
2.36 The recommendations of the Committee have been  noted and the State 
Governments will be advised to study the Pune model and adopt it, if they so desire. 
 
 

49 
 
 
 Recommendation (Serial No.20) 
NATIONAL URBAN MISSION 
 
 
2.37 According to the Ministry, the JNNURM, which w as started in 2005 came to 
an end on 31 st  March 2014.  Now, the Ministry is in the process o f creating another 
Mission to take care of urbanisation and this is known as the National Urban Mission. 
The Urban Mission, which was started in 2005, has g iven urban development a kick-
start.  Now it is required to take it to the next l evel. 500 habitations are included in 
the new National Urban Mission.  In the JNNURM, there were basically 65 towns. On 
the other hand, in the new Mission, there are 500 t owns. i.e., all towns having a 
population of more than 100,000. The Committee were  apprised of the key 
inadequacies during the implementation of the earli er programme i.e. failure to 
mainstream urban planning, incomplete reforms of go vernance and financial 
systems and slow progress in project implementation .  Delay in securing land for 
projects besides obtaining approval from various re gulatory authorities also led to 
delays in the implementation of the earlier mission . In terms of promoting the PPP, 
the previous mission has had limited successes in u rban infrastructure.  Financing 
from the private partners has not come forth, mainl y because the ULBs have not 
been able to undertake reforms, and demonstrate fin ancial and institutional 
sustainability of initiatives in a convincing manne r.  In the light of above, a new 
strategy is being formulated under the new National  Urban Mission, which is to be 
launched soon. The Committee are happy to note that  new National Urban Mission 
will be launched soon but at the same time it stron gly recommend for 
operationalization  of National Urban Mission with full vigour. The lesson learned 
from the previous mission, should be taken care of in the new Mission and keep the 
Committee apprised on a regular basis. 
Reply of the Government  
  
2.38 The Ministry is formulating a new Urban Rejuve nation Mission (URM) for 
infrastructure development of 500 cities. The State s have been consulted through 
four workshops organised in Hyderabad, Delhi, Mumbai and Kolkata and a conclave 
of State Ministers for Urban Development. The conto urs of the Mission are being 

50 
 
finalized. The lessons learnt from earlier mission are being kept in view during 
design of the new Mission. 
Recommendation (Serial No.21) 
SMART CITIES  
 
2.39 The Committee have been apprised by the Minist ry of Urban Development of 
the vision to promote 100 smart cities. The smart c ities would be engines of growth 
as they would increasingly compete for investments nationally and internationally 
too. Cities must provide world class infrastructure  and services at affordable costs to 
give a competitive edge to the economic activities they host. As an overriding 
principle, ‘people’ would be brought to the heart o f the urban agenda. The 
Committee were apprised that in all earlier initiat ives, there was no serious attempt 
to have the engagement of citizens. So, as an overr iding principle, ‘people’ would be 
brought to the heart of the urban agenda, for both deciding the vision of their city and 
for choosing the process of reaching that goal. The  Committee are happy to note 
about the citizen engagement in terms of taking dec ision for the vision of the city as 
well as for its implementation. Smart cities would be developed on four pillars, that is, 
social infrastructure, physical infrastructure, ins titutional infrastructure and economic 
infrastructure upon which the quality of life would  depend collectively. The smart 
cities would also enhance the interface between the  service providers and citizen 
and enable them to participate actively in terms of  providing feedback on the quality 
of service delivery, condition of infrastructure an d social activities. The Ministry is 
developing the framework for selection and developm ent of smart cities. The 
Committee are strongly in favour of citizen partici pation in terms of taking decision 
for the vision of the city as well as for the imple mentation. Hence, the Committee 
strongly recommend for implementation of this missi on in a time bound manner 
under intimation to them. 
Reply of the Government  
  
2.40 The Mission components are yet to be finalized . However, while preparing the 
City Development Plans, a strong Citizen Consultation will be ensured.  
 
 
 

51 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.24) 
 
HERITAGE CITY DEVELOPMENT  
 
 2.41 The Committee note that India is endowed with rich and diverse natural, 
historic and cultural resources. However, it is yet  to explore the full potential of such 
resources. In order to make these cities vibrant an d competitive, a planned 
approach is necessary for tapping the potential und erlying in tourism and heritage 
sector and unleashing the power of skilled artisans . This will also lead to local 
economic development through locally available know ledge, resources and skills. 
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend for pla nning a scheme that would 
offer tremendous opportunity towards an inclusive a nd sustainable development of 
heritage in India. The scheme should offer a new ap proach to city development by 
bringing together urban planning/economic growth an d heritage conservation in an 
inclusive manner with focus on livelihood, skills, cleanliness, security, accessibility 
and service delivery.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.42 The National Heritage City Development and Aug mentation Yojana - 
(HRIDAY), scheme aimed at preserving and revitalizi ng the soul and unique 
character of the heritage cities in India, has been  approved by the M/o Urban 
Development. The scheme was officially launched on 21 st  January, 2015. 
Initially, following twelve cities have been identi fied for development under the 
scheme:- 
1) Varanasi 2) Amritsar 3) Ajmer 4) Mathura 5) Gaya  6) Kanchipuram 7) Vellankani 
8) Badami 9) Amaravati 10) Warangal 11) Puri 12) Dwarka 
An outlay of  200 crores has been earmarked under HRIDAY for the  current 
financial year out of which  87 lakhs has been released till 28.2.2015. 
The Scheme aims at restoring, reviving and strength ening the soul and 
heritage of the city. For this purpose, the Scheme shall support development of core 
heritage infrastructure projects which shall includ e revitalization of tangible assets 
such as monuments, ghats, temples etc. along with r eviving intangible assets such 
as local art and craft, dance forms, literature etc. 

52 
 
In addition, the Scheme shall also develop linked c ity infrastructure which 
shall link heritage facilities with trunk infrastru cture of the city. These shall include 
development of sanitation facilities, roads, public  transportation & parking, citizen 
services, information kiosks etc. 

53 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE 
IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Serial No.9) 
 
MODERN TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM IN DELHI AND OTHER METROPOLITAN 
CITIES.  
  
3.1 The Committee observe that with rapid urbanizat ion, the pressure on 
transportation systems has increased in most cities  in India. The inadequate 
transport system of cities, accompanied by lack of comprehensive urban transport 
management strategies is promoting the use of priva te individual transport. For 
example, Delhi alone has experienced a nine-fold in crease in its motor vehicle 
population over the last three decades, with public  transport contributing little to this 
increase. Most cities continue to face the problems  of environment pollution, ever 
slowing vehicular speed, and traffic congestion acc ompanied by unacceptable 
accident rates. Keeping this situation in view, the  Committee enquired from the 
Ministry of Urban development about the action plan  to start corridors of High 
Capacity Bus System (HCBS) and Electric Trolley Bus  System (ETBS) in Delhi and 
other big metropolitan cities, but were surprised t o note that there was no proposal 
under consideration in the Ministry. Further, Minis try stated that Urban Transport is 
intertwined with Urban Development which is a State  Subject. The proposals for any 
Mode of Transport are forwarded by State Government  for funding from Govt. of 
India.  However, as per National Urban Transport Po licy (2006), all modes of 
Transport including High Capacity Bus System ETBS etc. are promoted by the Union 
Ministry of Urban Development. The Committee feel t hat there should be a 
preferential right of way for buses along with prio rity for pedestrians and cyclists. 
Therefore, intelligent transport systems, cleaner fuels and vehicle technologies could 
be the way forward for meeting the transport needs of our cities in future. Massive 
traffic congestion and environmental degradation ca ll for innovative, cost effective, 
safe and reliable transport strategies. Modern High  Capacity Bus Systems (HCBS) 
integrated with information and communication techn ologies provide such an option 
for decongesting and improving urban transport situ ations. In most cities, buses are 
still the most widely used mode of conveyance and w ill continue to remain so. 

54 
 
Therefore, the Committee strongly advocate that Min istry of Urban Development 
should start looking at innovative ways by which th e efficiency of the bus transport 
can be improved to cater to the growing urban popul ation and at the same time 
strongly recommend for High Capacity Bus System (HC BS) and Electric Trolley Bus 
System (ETBS) in Delhi and other big/ metropolitan cities because these systems 
utilize modern technologies for optimizing flow of passenger movement, ticketing, 
bus scheduling, etc. Such systems increase the capa city of existing bus systems 
significantly and can be implemented in a relativel y short time span of 1-2 years.  
The absence of adequate number of buses which hampe rs an alternate transport 
culture is the principal handicap in the success fo r instance of the BRTS system.  
The Committee have noted with grave concern about t he abysmal management of 
the BRTS system in a small section of Delhi.  The i ntroduction of the BRTS system 
appears to have been done in a random, thoughtless and impetuous manner rather 
than any vision with detailed planning and execution.  This has caused untold misery 
to lakhs of commuters on the short stretch of BRTS in Delhi.  The Committee feel 
that BRTS system is ideally advisable in green fiel d cities with detailed advance 
planning rather than to forcefully muscle them into  existing cities in a haphazard 
manner.  The Committee have received numerous compl aints from the average 
citizens on their study tour to Pune where the BRTS  system is proposed to be 
introduced.  The Committee did not receive any sati sfactory answers from the 
Government agencies to the problems envisaged by the commuters in Pune. Instead 
it appears that the administration feels it has bee n saddled with a fait-accompli by 
way of the BRTS proposal and now does not know how to disengage from it without 
loss of face. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that any BRTS proposal 
in existing cities must be enforced only with the g reatest caution and after detailed 
planning and consideration and keeping in view the public opinion of the commuters 
who are the main stake holders in this system.  The  Committee are also of firm 
opinion that the BRTS system plan for Pune as well as Pimpari Chinchwad which is 
still at the planning stage must be immediately put  on hold and a further course of 
action should only be taken after detailed consulta tion with the important stake-
holders such as the commuters of the city. 
 
 
 

55 
 
Reply of the Government  
3.2 In compliance of National Urban Transport Polic y (NUTP) objective to move 
people and not vehicle, Ministry of Urban Developme nt has sanctioned more than 
25400 modern intelligent transport enabled buses to  174 cities in two phases with 
the following anticipated benefits of the programme: 
(i) Planned growth and inclusive development of the  cities/ towns. 
(ii) Improvement in urban services particularly urb an transport which is engine 
of the growth of any city/ town. 
(iii) Uplift the image of public transport. 
(iv) Help in reducing pollution levels through chan ges in traveling practices and 
increase road safety aspects including the women and the elderly.  
 
(v) Introduction of organized city bus system.  
(vi) Improved safety through automated doors, on bo ard cameras, ITS on public 
transport system- Audio/ Visual Passenger Information System (PIS). 
(vii) Sustainable services with better organization al backup such as city specific 
SPV, UMTA in million plus cities, creation of Urban Transport Fund etc. 
(viii) Attracting choice riders to use public trans port including people with 
disabilities 
 
During the 2 
nd  phase of sanction of 10000 buses, Ministry has als o sanctioned a 
small no. of buses in the category of hybrid electr ic and articulated buses to some 
cities like Bangalore, Mysore, Navi Mumbai.  Howeve r, due to very high cost and 
non-manufacturing capacity, these cities requested the Ministry to change the 
sanction of these buses to another category of buses. 
As far as Delhi is concerned, in the first phase du ring 2008-09, 1500 buses were 
sanctioned to Delhi.  However, during the 2 nd  phase, due to non-submission of 
request/Detailed Project Report (DPR) within the ti me-limit of 31.3.2014, Delhi could 
not be sanctioned any bus. 
Delhi BRTS Project 
 
The BRTS project in Delhi is purely the Govt. of NCT Delhi project.  Ministry of 
Urban Development has neither approved nor funded the project. 
Pune & PCMC BRTS Projects  
The City Development Plan prepared by PCMC envisage s development of 
roads from public transport point of view. In the C omprehensive Mobility Plan (CMP) 
prepared for implementation of the project, a Bus b ased Rapid Transit System 
(BRTS) was proposed for the commuters. 

56 
 
The World Bank aided Pimpri-Chinchwad project inclu des, amongst other 
components, the improvements in infrastructure of p ublic transport, segregation of 
BRT lanes and rehabilitation of project affected pe rsons for launch of BRTS in four 
corridors, construction aggregating to 44.67 kilome tres on road, which is nearing 
completion. The Comprehensive Development Program ( Common DPR) for 
corridors 1 & 2 was approved in 2007 and Corridors 3 & 4 was approved in 2008 
after due consultations with the public. As on 15 th  January 2015, 38.5 kilometres of 
the corridors (which is equivalent to 86.2%) of the  infrastructure is complete. The 
expenditure on the project thus far, including esca lation element, is about 900 
crores as against  738.18 crores which was the original sanction. Apa rt from this 
sanctioned DPR under JnNURM expenditure on BRT Bus Stations construction, 
BRT Lane dedication work, Terminals/Transfer Statio ns & ITMS is being done by 
PCMC (ULB) and is about  90 Crores. 
Pimpri Chinchwad twin-city of Pune city is a rapidl y growing urban area and 
strain on its transport infrastructure is already b eing felt. The uncontrolled growth of 
personalized transport in the next few years could lead to severe congestion, parking 
problems and pollution as a result of growing motor ization. The BRT system needs 
to be completed and launched early so as to also mi tigate concerns of mobility and 
accessibility . Extensive user surveys carried out in 2014 also i ndicate that 
prospective users of public transport are amenable to and keen on the BRTS project. 
The following are the residual works as of date: 
a. Ongoing construction of bus-stations on corridor s 1&2 (20 on corridor+21 on 
corridor 2)  
b. Completion of 400 meters of road on corridor 3 a nd ramps for access to 
Nashik Phata fly-over (this was inaugurated by Shri  AjitPawar, the then 
Deputy Chief Minister, Maharashtra on 15.02.2014) and 
c. Completion of Empire State fly-over on corridor 4.  
139 buses have already been procured and 200 buses are under procurement 
through JNNURM for PMPML which shall be operating t he BRT system over Pune-
Pimpri-Chinchwad. 
• Four Technical Assistance studies have been undert aken for the 
implementation of BRT  

57 
 
• Monitoring & Evaluation of BRTS (Pre & Post Operat ion) – Period of Study 
(4.5 years) 
• Parking Policy and Its Management 
• Access plan to BRTS by mode of Non-Motorized Trans portation (NMT) & 
pedestrian facility. 
• Promotion & Outreach Program of BRTS.  
These studies components are under taken through GE F (Global Environmental 
Facility) Grant of the World Bank, which is continu ously monitored & advised by the 
World Bank and Project Management Unit of MoUD. 
Since substantial fiscal and physical progress has already been achieved, the 
project is now poised for completion so that the sa me is put to use for the city 
residents. 
Recommendations(Serial No. 18) 
POLICY FOR BUILDING BARRACKS AND HUTMENTS FOR MIGRA NT 
LABOURS  
 
3.3 The Committee were apprised  about  the steps/ projects initiated by DDA 
for earning revenues and building barracks and hutments for migrated labour in Delhi 
so as to prevent urban slums. The Committee came to  know that DDA is a self-
sustaining organization.  It works on ‘no profit no loss’ concept.  The main revenue of 
DDA comes from disposal of houses, disposal of resi dential, industrial and 
commercial plots.  Revenue generated from these act ivities is ploughed back for 
acquisition of land, construction of houses, develo pment of residential, industrial, 
commercial, institutional plots and development and  maintenance of green areas 
and beautification of parks, constructing/ developi ng and maintenance of sports 
complexes/ sports fields/ swimming pools etc. The C ommittee are dismayed that as 
on date, there is no policy for building barracks a nd hutments for migrant labour in 
Delhi.  However, DDA has taken up in-situ  development of existing JJ Clusters on 
DDA land.  Hence, the Committee strongly recommend the Ministry of Urban 
development to formulate the policy/guidelines about building barracks and hutments 
for migrant labours, so as to discourage urban slum s, in a time bound manner under 
intimation to the Committee. 
 
 

58 
 
Reply of the Government  
3.4  Building barracks and hutments for migrant lab ours is not a subject dealt by 
Ministry of Urban Development.  As per the Allocati on of Business Rules, matters 
related to housing are dealt by Ministry of Housing  and Urban Poverty Alleviation 
(HUPA).  Further, Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement B oard (DUSIB), which functions 
under the control of Govt. of NCT of Delhi, deals w ith JJ Squatters 
settlement/clusters, JJ Colonies and night shelters  in Delhi.  It is reiterated that DDA 
is involved in rehabilitation of those slum dwellers who are presently existing on DDA 
land.  As a part of this rehabilitation, DDA has ta ken up in-situ  development of three 
colonies namely (i) Katputli Colony (2,800 DUs), (i i) A-14, Kalkaji Extension (3,000 
DUs in 1st Phase) and (iii) Jailer WalaBagh (1,675 DUs) which are presently under 
progress. 
  

59 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Serial No.7) 
 
THE REGIONAL RAPID TRANSIT SYSTEM PROJECTS  
 
4.1 The Committee have been apprised that the three  Regional Rapid Transit 
System (RRTS) corridor have been prioritized by the Ministry of Urban Development 
for implementation in Phase I, i.e Delhi – Sonipat –Panipat, Delhi-Gurgaon -Rewari 
–Alwar, Delhi-Ghaziabad-Meerut for which estimated cost till Sept 2011 was 
72170 crore. These routes have been identified for the RRTS because these 
towns and cities have a large number of people trav elling daily for economic 
reasons. The Cabinet in its meeting held on 11.07.2 013 has approved the proposal 
of formation of National Capital Region Transport C orporation Limited (NCRTC) 
which is a pre-requisite for taking up the RRTS pro jects for providing a reliable and 
efficient Mass Commuter System in the NCR. NCRTC ha s been incorporated on 
21.08.2013. With a seed capital of Rs. 100 crore to  be contributed by the Central 
Govt. and State Govts. When enquired about the pres ent status of implementation 
of RRTS projects, the Committee learnt that the RRT S projects have not still been 
sanctioned till now. The Committee also came to kno w from the replies given by the 
Ministry of Urban Development that Ministry of Rail way has not released its due 
amount i.e  22.5 Crore. 
  In view of the above, the Committee strongly reco mmend to implement this 
RRTS project expeditiously in a time bound manner s o as to make travel in the 
National Capital Region faster and easier. The Comm ittee feel that the high-speed 
corridors are the need of the hour as this will fac ilitate better commuting in the 
National Capital Region. The Committee call upon th e Ministry of Urban 
development to impress upon Ministry of Railway to release its share of amount. 
Reply of the Government  
4.2 Ministry of Railways vide letter dated 10.12.20 14 has informed Ministry of 
Urban Development that Ministry of Railways is comm itted towards the participation 
in National Capital Region Transport Corporation (N CRTC), but as contribution to 

60 
 
equity participation needs approval of Parliament, funds shall be made available in 
Feb., 2015 only after seeking approval of Parliament in the Supplementary Demands 
for Grants. However, Ministry of Railways sanctione d the release of 1.25 lakhs, to 
NCRTC towards subscription amount for participation  of Ministry of Railways in 
NCRTC vide letter dated 10.12.14.    
4.3 For comments please see para no. 1.16 of Chapte r-I. 
 Recommendation (Serial No.14) 
GREEN BUILDING:  REDUCING ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT  
 
4.4 The Master Plan of Delhi-2021 contains the prov ision for “Green Buildings”.  
The regulations for incentivizing green buildings a nd formulation of a regulatory 
mechanism to monitor construction, operations, etc.  are under preparation.  Once 
these are finalized, the declaration of Green Build ings in Delhi can be initiated after 
the builders get the necessary certification from t he respective agencies required to 
do so. At present the Rain Water Harvesting System,  which is one of the 
component of green building concept is being implem ented. The Building 
Department of DDA after the promulgation of the Not ification No. SO 730 dated 
28.07.2001 made mandatory the physical construction  of Rain Water Harvesting 
System in the new buildings in a plot of 100sqm and above.  It is also ensured   
while issuing permits than the Rain Water Harvestin g System is functional.  As per 
available information during the last one year, 41 numbers of Completion 
Certificates have been issued to different type of buildings where Rain Water 
Harvesting System has been provided.Further, all th e buildings now being 
constructed by CPWD under GPRA & GPOA are confirmin g to 3 star rated 
buildings. The Committee strongly recommend the Min istry of Urban Development 
to expeditiously complete the regulations for incen tivizing green buildings and 
formulation of a regulatory mechanism to monitor co nstruction, operations etc. The 
Committee also wish to recommend that the Rain Wate r Harvesting system should 
also be enforced in all the existing office and res idential buildings and the 
enforcement should be by way of rain water harvesti ng being made a pre-requisite 
for getting plans sanctioned as well as obtaining completion certificates.  
  The Committee Members were given detailed present ation by the NBCC on 
the Kidwai Nagar Redevelopment Project which has be en entrusted to it and which 

61 
 
promises to be the most environment friendly and gr een compatible colony in the 
country.  The Members were very impressed with the presentation circulated by 
NBCC and felt that it should be replicated in many more congested areas of our 
major cities which are groaning under the pressure of antiquated and dilapidated 
constructions.    
Reply of the Government  
  
4.5 In respect of existing office and residential b uildings under jurisdiction of 
CPWD in Delhi as well as rest of India, rain water harvesting system has been 
provided by CPWD in 116 non-residential complexes a nd 144 residential colonies. 
    
4.6 For comments please see para 1.19 of Chapter-I.  
  

62 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation (Serial No.22) 
ISSUE OF LUTYEN’S BUNGALOW ZONE  
 
5.1 The Committee have received a representation fr om Shri Jai Prakash Agarwal 
(Ex-MP 15 
th Lok Sabha) and Shri Naveen Jindal (Ex-MP 14 th  and 15 th Lok Sabha) the 
President and Secretary of Lutyen’s Bungalow Zone R esidents Welfare Association 
respectively, regarding the request for increase in FAR in Lutyen Bungalows.  In their 
representation, they have made several valid points inter-alia stated as below:- 
• The LBZ area in New Delhi contains about 90% of la nd vested with the 
 Government, and only about 10% vested with private  owners. 
• That the present houses in Lutyen’s Bungalow Zone were built in the pre-
independence era and vary greatly in size and facil ities.  Some private properties 
have large built up areas and even have the full FA R such as those at Amrita 
Shergill Marg, etc. and other have only servants qu arters and outhouses as these 
houses were built at that time as per one’s require ment and finances available 
with him.  Moreover, at the time of construction of  these houses, families were 
very small.  Today families have grown and require more accommodation. 
• Delhi being in seismic zone, most of these houses are not earthquake proof and 
are in dilapidated conditions.  Also, they have outlived their lives. Even CPWD has 
identified about 800 buildings as most hazardous in LBZ area. 
• The Government keeps increasing the built-up area of Government bungalows 
from time to time by changing the norms and the gui delines through MOUD 
notifications and orders whereas 10% privately owne d area in this zone have not 
been allowed to increase their built up area so far. 
• This seems to be unfair, and against the principle s of natural justice.  Different 
development guidelines for “bungalow” and “non-bungalow” properties defeats the 
purpose of conserving Lutyens Zone character and ambience. 
• It is also of significance that the LBZ has not be en recognized in the Master Plan-
2021 has a conservation zone.  In this connection, a report was prepared for 
NDMC by IL&FS Eco smart, called the Subcity Develop ment Plan of Delhi for 

63 
 
NDMC Area in 2007 (Report).  The material contained  in this report established 
the unfairness of continuing the application of the  LBZ Rules.  Different 
development guidelines for “bungalow” and “non-bung alow properties defeats the 
purpose of conserving Lutyens’ Zone character and ambience.  
• 31.25% of the entire LBZ area is supposed to be re sidential.  The Report 
recognizes that a large number of anomalies associa ted with the existing 
demarcated boundary of the LBZ have been identified  and this needs to be 
resolved in a participatory manner.  
• Under the Zonal Plan (paragraph 6.4.2.), restricti on has been imposed on a new 
construction limiting it to the same existing area of the old bungalow and of a 
height not exceeding the height of the existing bun galow.  There is absolutely no 
nexus between this limitation imposed, denying the facility of the Unified Bye Laws 
to the plot owners of these colonies, and the objec t of conserving the Lutyen 
imprint.  
• The LBZ guidelines of 1988 were probably relevant at that point of time when the 
rampant unplanned development of plots into large g roup housing needed to be 
stopped.  That objective of the LBZ guidelines has been achieved over the last 26 
years, and the large scale conversion into housing has been arrested. 
• As per Development Control Regulations for Lutyen' s Conservation Precincts in 
NDBP in sub-zones D-11, B-12 & D-8, the Delhi Urban  Art Commission has, in its 
draft Zonal Development Plan for NDMC area of zone D of Master Plan for Delhi – 
2021, recommended that for each of the precincts as  defined in the Zonal 
Development Plan, special development plan regulati ons are required at Local 
Area Plan (LAP) level. 
 
• A comparative statement of FAR/Ground Coverage/Hei ght in respect of 
Residential Plots measuring 3750 sq. mtr. and above in delhi :- 
 
Description As 
recommended 
in the Master 
Plan 2021 for 
rest of Delhi 
Believed to be 
recommended 
by NDMC in 
Draft Zonal 
Development 
Plan-2021 
Proposed 
by DUAC 
Requestged by 
LBZ Association 
Maximum FAR 200** 20%* 20% 33% (to allow the 
first floor to be 

64 
 
constructed as 
many of the old 
private buildings 
have two floors) 
Maximum 
ground 
coverage % of 
net plot 
50** 12.5% 12.5% 20% 
Max. height in 
Mtr. 
15 mtrs 8 mtr 8 mtr 12 mtr ( this would 
not adversely affect 
the skyline, or the 
three line) 
Basement Yes Yes Yes Basement required 
** On 26th November, 2014, Central Government has e nhanced Floor Area Ratio 
(FAR) from 120 to 200 percent and Ground Coverage from 40% to 50%. 
* Basement would be allowed free of FAR, but only under the footprint of the building 
for the purpose of Services, House-hold storage, pa rking, Air-conditioned, 
Library/Book Store. The approach to the basement sh all be through a ramp of slope 
not more than 1:12. 
 
Request 
 
 
• That the height of a building remains within the h eight of two floors (Ground Plus 
First) with a basement below for services etc. 
• That we may be allowed ground coverage – at least 20% of the individual plot 
area, against the present coverage of about 10%. Ev en with 20% coverage, the 
land area around available for greenery would be 80 % - such a coverage would 
not affect the green cover advantage and asset which the LBZ has in New Delhi. 
• That the FAR may also be increased to 33% to allow  the first floor to be 
constructed as many of the old private buildings ha ving two floors.  Hence, 
permitting two floors would not adversely affect the skyline, or the tree line. 
• That exact zoning plans be made for the LBZ area s o that the urban form of the 
LBZ is not disturbed – we want to follow the urban from which was planned 
originally by Sir Edwin Lutyens. 
• The LBZ notification did not prohibit basements ou tright – it restricted their 
construction until such time as a final decision wa s taken.  No decision has been 

65 
 
taken during almost two and a half decades. The iss ue of the permissibility of a 
basement in the LBZ has been pending consideration since 1988.  It is 
indisputable that basements do not, in any way, aff ect the façade of the building 
and there is no logical reason why a basement may n ot be allowed in these 
bungalows.  Therefore, the Development Control Regu lations for these precincts 
be framed to have basements  as they are generally required by the family for use 
as GARAGE, utility room and for storage and fitness  centre etc., because FAR in 
the LBZ is very limited compared to rest of the cit y.   In case of any eventuality, it 
can also be used as bomb shelter.   
 It appears that on 26.11.14, the Central Governmen t   has enhanced Floor Area 
Ratio (FAR) and Ground Coverage for residential plo ts measuring 1000 SqMtr 
and above in Delhi, except for Zone D whose plan is  still at a draft stage.       D-
Plan has been under consideration of the Government for a considerable period of 
time.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the plan for the Zone-D 
may be finalized at the earliest and the suggestion s made by the Lutyen's 
Bungalow Zone Residents Welfare Association for Zon e-D, as stated in their 
representation, set out hereinabove, be considered favourably.  
Reply of the Government  
 
5.2 Various suggestions relating to relaxation of D evelopment Control Norms, 
Boundary of LBZ were received in the Ministry. Delh i Urban Art Commission (DUAC) 
was requested to examine and give recommendations a s per Terms of Reference 
which inter alia includes change in LBZ boundary, development norms,  need of 
urbanization and aesthetic character of LBZ.  The i ssue is still under examination by 
DUAC. Delhi Development Authority (DDA) has informe d that since LBZ is a part of 
Zone ‘D’, they are following the due process in finalizing the Zonal Plan for this Zone. 
5.3 For comments please see para 1.34 of Chapter-I.  
Recommendation (Serial No.23) 
CAP ON HEIGHT INCREASE FOR BUILDING IN DELHI  
5.4 The Committee have been informed that almost a year after Delhi 
Development Authority increased the cap on height o f residential buildings from 15 
metres to 17.5 metres, no one in Delhi has been ben efited from this new policy.  The 

66 
 
Municipal Corporation in the city are unable to san ction building plans with 17.5 
metre height as it would require clearance from Del hi Fire Service (DFS) which 
insists on leaving a six-metre setback around the b uilding.  It appears that under the 
DFS rules, any structure which is more than 15 metr es in height is considered a 
high-rise and for such high-rises, it is mandatory to leave a setback of six metres so 
that there is adequate space for fire tenders to mo ve around in case of an 
emergency.  Therefore, for any structure above 15 m etres in height, an NOC from 
the fire department is required. The Committee have  been further informed that with 
a majority of plots in Delhi being less than 250 sq uare metres in size, it is impossible 
for residents to leave a setback of six metres arou nd the building,  since there will be 
no space left on the plot to build.   The height of  residential buildings was revised 
with a view to accommodate stilt parking which has become mandatory pre-requisite 
for new constructions.  The result of not getting D FS clearance means that new 
constructions with stilt parking have to confine th emselves to 15 m height which 
entails vast reduction in the height of each floor  (since the third floor is permissible 
and all new constructions seek to avail  the same).   The decision to increase the 
height from 15 metre to 17.5 metre was taken so tha t owners would not have to 
compromise on the height of each floor.  The Commit tee feel that this anomaly must 
be corrected at the earliest and new constructions with 17.5 metres height must be 
exempted from fire clearance from DFS. The Committe e recommend that the DDA 
and the Urban Development Ministry should reconside r the Fire NOC policy and 
make necessary amendments so that the people of Del hi can avail the benefits of 
increased height of 17.5 metres.  The Committee rec ommend that the 6 metre set 
back clause should be applicable for buildings high er than 17.5 metres. The 
Committee strongly feel that in any case with the a cute shortage of land in urban 
areas in India and the vast increase in demand for urban housing the vertical growth 
of urban India is the need of the hour.  Low rise h orizontally spread out tenements 
are a criminal waste of valuable land in urban area s and, therefore, the Committee 
strongly believe that all urban cities in India mus t look at the progress of vertical 
development in cities like Dubai and Shanghai, whic h are comparable to cities in 
India, and take a leaf out of the phenomenal growth  of high rise buildings in those 
cities which has greatly benefited the public and g one a long way in conserving 
valuable urban land from wastage. 
  

67 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
5.5 The matter is being examined in consultation wi th DDA keeping in view the 
safety requirements of buildings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
                                                                            Pinaki Misra   
.........., 2015
                                                                                  Chairperson,                        
, 1936 (Saka)                           Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
 
            
  

68 
 
ANNEXURE -I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2014-2015) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON  
MONDAY, 13 th  JULY, 2015 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, the 13 th  July, 2015 from 1430 hrs. to 1645 
hrs. in Committee Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT  
Shri Pinaki Misra   - Chairperson  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2.  Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Shri Ramesh Bidhuri 
4.  Shri Ram Charan Bohra 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
Shri Dushyant Chautala 
Shri Ashok Chavan 
Shri Dilip Kumar Gandhi 
Shri Maheish Girri 
9. Shri R.Gopalakrishnan 
10. 
 
11.  
Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua  
Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
12. 
 Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil 
13.  Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
14.  
15.  
Smt. Vandana Chavan 
Shri Husain Dalwai 
16. 
 Shri Anil Desai 
17.  Shri Mukul Roy 
18.  Shri C.P. Thakur 
19.  Shri S.Thangavelu 
  
 
 

69 
 
-2- 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha   - Director 
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha   - Additional Director 
4. Smt. K. Rangamani N.  -  Under Secretary  
 
 
*****  *****  *****  *****  *****  *****   
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the 
Fourteenth  sitting of the Committee. The Committee  then took up for consideration 
the draft report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/Recommendations contained in the First  Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants (2014-2015) of the Ministry o f Urban Development. After 
deliberations, the Committee adopted the report wit hout any change and authorized 
the Chairperson to present the same to both the Houses of the Parliament.  
3.to 6    ********** ********  ********** ********* * 
 
 The witnesses then withdrew 
 A verbatim record of the proceeding has been kept.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
***** 
 
 
******* These  portions  of the Minutes do not relate to the Report. 
 
 
 
 

70 
 
 
ANNEXURE -II 
                                            [Vide para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON T HE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWEN TY 
FOURTH REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN 
DEVELOPLMENT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
I.  Total number of recommendations            24 
                             
       
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been ac cepted 
by the Government:                  
 Recommendation Nos.         18 
Percentage to total recommendations                                                 (75%) 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committ ee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:                     
Recommendation Nos.        02 
Percentage to total recommendations                                     (8.33%)  
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of whic h replies of                                     
 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation No.        02 
Percentage to total recommendations                                            (8.33%) 
                             
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  final       
             
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
02 
 
Percentage to total recommendations                                     (8.33%) 
           
           
                                
 