1
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT
 
(2016
-
2017)
 
                               
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
 
 
 
                 
MINISTRY OF 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
 
 
       
 
[
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in 
the Twelfth Report (Sixteenth  Lok Sabha) on 
the subject '
Modernization of 
Directorate of Printing, Government of India Stationery Office
 
and 
Department of Publication' ]
 
 
EIGHTEENTH  REPOR
T
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
 
August, 2017/Sravana,1939 (Saka)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18
 


2
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH  REPORT
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT
 
(2016
-
2017)
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
 
       
 
[
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in 
the Twelfth Report (Sixteenth  Lok Sabha) 
on the subject '
Modernization of 
Directorate of Printing, Government of India Stationery Office an
d 
Departme
nt of Publication' ]
 
  
 
     
Presented to Lok Sabha on
 
10
th
 
August, 2017
 
    
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 
10
th
 
August, 2017
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
 
August
,
 
2017/ Sravana,1939 (Saka)
 
 


3
 
 
 
  
 
 
C.U.D No. 
104
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. ….
 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 201
7
 
BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(
Fift
eenth Edition) and printed by 
..............................................
 
 
 
 

4
 
 
 
CONTENTS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)
 
INTRODUCTION
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)
 
 
CHAPTER I
 
Report
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1
 
CHAPTER II
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
 
 
 
by the Government
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
1
 
 
CHAPTER III
 
Observations 
/Recommendations
 
which the Committee do 
 
 
 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies
 
27
 
 
CHAPTER IV
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
 
 
 
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
 
 
and require reiteration
 
 
 
 
 
 
28
 
 
CHAPTER V
 
Observations
/Recommendations
 
in respect of which final 
 
 
 
replies of the Government are stil
l awaited
 
 
 
41
 
 
ANNEXURES
 
I.
 
Minutes of the Fifteenth sitting of 
the Committee 
held on
 
 
 
09
th
 
August, 2017
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44
 
 
II.
 
Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
 
 
recommendations
 
contained in the Twelfth Report of the Committee 
 
 
(16
th
 
Lok Sabha)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (201
6
-
201
7
)
 
Shri Pinaki Misra         
-
        
Chairperson
 
MEMBERS
 
LOK SABHA
 
 
2. 
 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri
 
3.
 
Shri Ram Charan Bohra
 
4. 
 
Shri Charanjeet Singh Rori
 
5.
 
Shri Ashok  Shankarrao Chavan
 
6. 
 
Dr. Dharam Vira Gandhi
 
7.
 
Shri Dilip  Mansukhlal Gandhi
 
8. 
 
Shri Maheish Girri
 
9. 
 
Shri R.Gopalakrishnan
 
10.
 
Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua
 
11. 
 
Shri  Srinivas Kesineni Nani
 
12.
 
Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi
 
13.
 
Shri P.C. Mohan
 
14.
 
Shri K. Parasuraman
 
15. 
 
Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil
 
16.
 
Shri Alok Sanjar
 
17. 
 
Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
 
18. 
 
Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
 
19.
 
Prof. K. V. Thomas
 
20.
 
Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma
 
21.
 
Shri Pradhan Baruah
 
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
22.
 
Shri R.S. Bharathi
 
23.
 
Dr. Subhash Chandra
 
24.
 
Shri Husain Dalwai
 
25.
 
Shri Anil Desai
 
26. 
 
Shri Parvez Hashmi 
 
27.
 
Shri K. G. Kenye
 
28.
 
Shri Mahesh Poddar
 
29.
 
Shri K.C. Ramamurthy
 
30.
 
Shri Ajay Sancheti
 
31.
 
Shri Dharamapuri Srinivas
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
1.
 
Smt. Ab
ha Singh Yaduvanshi
 
-
    
Joint Secretary
 
 
2.
 
Ms. Amita Walia
 
 
 
-
     
Additional Director
 
 
3.
 
Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan
 
-
     
Deputy  Secretary
 
 
4.
 
Sh. Anil Kumar
 
 
 
-
     
Under Secretary
 
 
(iii)
 

6
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
 
I, the Chairperson  of the Standing 
Committee on Urban Development 
       
(2016
-
2017) having been authorized by the Committee
,
 
present  this Eighteenth 
Report 
(16
th
 
Lok Sabha) on action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twelfth Report (16
th
 
Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
on the subject 
'
Modernization of Directorate of Printing, Government of India Stationery Offic
e and 
Department of Publication'.
 
 
2.
 
The 
Twelfth
 
Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 1
2.
8.201
6
.  
The Action 
Taken 
Replies of the Go
vernment to all the recommendations contained in the Report 
were received 
on 27
th 
April, 2017
. 
 
3.
 
The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 
     
09
th 
August, 2017
.
 
4
.
 
An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the 
Twelfth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at 
Annexure
-
II.
 
5.
 
For 
the facility of reference and convenience, the 
Observations/Recommendations of t
he Committee have been printed in bold letters in 
the body of the Report.
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
        
         
 
PINAKI MISRA
,
 
 
09
th
 
August 
,
 
201
7
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                   
Chairperson
,
       
                                  
18
th
Sravana
, 193
9
 
(Saka)                               
    
Standing Committee on Urban Development
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)
 

7
 
 
 
CHAPTER I
 
REPORT
 
 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2016
-
2017) 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in their 
Twelfth
 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)
 
on
 
the subject, '
Modernization 
of Directorate o
f P
rinting, Government o
f India St
ationery Office and Department o
f 
Publication
'
 
which was presented to Parliament on 
12
th
 
August, 
2016.
 
1.2
 
Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the 09 recommendations contained in t
he Report.  These have been categorized as 
follows:
 
(i)
 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepte
d by the Government 
:
 
 
Recommendation Nos.
 
 
4, 5 and  6 
 
 
 
 
                 
(Total 
-
3
)
 
(Chapter
-
II)
 
(ii)
 
Recommendations
/Observations, which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of Gove
rnment's   replies 
:
 
Recommendation : Nil  
                              
 
 
                         
( Total
-
0  
)
 
(Chapter
-
III)
 
(iii)
 
Recommendations /Observations, in respect of which replies of Government 
h
ave not been accepted by the Committee
 
:
 
 
Recommendation No
s
.
1,
 
2,
 
3, 7
 
and 8
    
 
 
                                       
 
                                                                                                
 
                                                                                                     
(Total 
-
 
5
)
 
(Chapter
-
IV)
 
(iv)
 
Recommendations
/Observations, in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are, still awaited :
 
           
Recommendat
ion No
s
.  9
                                                  
            
 
        
(Total 
-
 
1
)
 
(Chapter
-
V)
 
1.3
 
The Committee desire that specific replies to the Comments of the Committee 
contained in Chapter
-
I  and final replies to the recommendations inclu
ded in Chapter
-
V 

8
 
 
of this Report may be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case, not later than 
three months of the presentation of this Report.
 
1.4
 
The Committee will now like to comment on the action taken by the Government 
on some of their reco
mmendations in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
(
Recommendation No
. 1)
 
MODERNISATION OF GOI PRINTING PRESSES 
-
 
AN UTTER NECESSITY 
 
1.5
 
The Committee had recommended as under:
 
 
"
 
The Committee note that the Government of India Presses were established to 
cater 
to the printing requirements of various Ministries at a time when the printing 
technology had old technologies like letter press. Some of these presses are as old as 
150 years, first full
-
fledged press being started at Delhi in 1923. Major responsibilities
 
of  
all Government of India Printing Presses is to execute printing jobs of all 
Ministries/Departments of Government of India, such as, Parliamentary matters, 
Railway Budget, Ballot Papers, Question Papers, Reports of CAG, various forms of 
Defence Ministr
y, Secret work of Ministries/Departments, UPSC work, Cabinet 
Secretariat Reports, 17 types of Gazette Notifications, E
-
Gazette, Economic Survey, 
Export and Export Policy, Annual Reports/Detailed Demands for Grants/Outcome 
Budgets/Different Publications/Rep
orts of Ministries/Departments of Government of 
India and official ceremonies
-
including Republic/Independence Day, etc., etc. The 
Directorate plays a very vital role as the printer and custodian of Government of India 
publications.
 
 
The Committee further n
ote that there has not been any induction of new printing 
machinery/equipment in any of the 12 Government of India  Printing Presses and 3 
Government of India Text Book Presses since last 30 to 40  years and all the 15 
Government of India Printing Presses 
have been functioning day and night in 3 shifts 
with absolutely obsolete and outdated printing machinery/equipments. In recent times 
printing technology has emerged as most compatible for the Information Technology. 
Therefore, with the changing time it has
 
become essential to adopt and update the 
earlier technology by adopting latest technology for quality production, higher 
productivity and better services in a competitive environment. The Committee further 
opine that in spite of the fact that India is goi
ng digital, there are some aspects of 

9
 
 
Government business which are absolutely sacrosanct and where confidentiality is the 
essence and as long as there confidentiality remains, there Government of India 
Printing Presses will never become irrelevant. They w
ill always remain relevant because 
all secret and confidential Government and Parliament Business like General/Railway 
Budgets, CAG Reports and lots of other papers cannot be put into digital domain before 
its presentation to the Parliament. The Committee 
feel that while modernizing the Press 
should adequate steps to keep the confidentiality intact.
 
 
The Committee are of the considered opinion that all Government of India 
Printing Presses and their staff have been instrumental in executing such important 
ta
sks of Government of India while maintaining confidentiality and secrecy of work 
assigned to them since independent Government of India Printing Presses came into 
existence. But irony  is that all the 15 Government of India Printing Presses and their 
press
ing needs have been  grossly ignored by all the concerned Ministries namely 
Nodal Ministry of Urban Development and Ministry of Finance. Since the year 2002 
when the Cabinet took  a decision that Shimla and Gangtok Presses as well as 
Government of India St
ationery Office should be closed down, merged 5 Presses and 
transfer three textbook presses to State Government while all the other 12 Government 
of India Printing Presses should be retained and modernized. However, the decision 
remain unimplemented. 
 
 
The
 
Committee during their study visit to Government of India Text Book Press, 
Bhubaneswar received lots of representations which gave a completely picture as they 
all live and work in state of terror, constant fear of a hanging sword over their heads for 
the
ir unpredictable fate since 2002 onwards when the Cabinet took a decision that all 
the 3 Text Book Presses (Chandigarh, Bhubaneswar and Mysore) may be transferred to 
State Governments; followed by another blowing Cabinet decision in 2006, which stated 
that
 
the 3 Government of India Text Book Presses be privatized. The Committee also 
witnessed that there was extreme shortage of manpower so much so one person was 
multitasking by sweeping, cooking, cleaning and printing. The Committee found that the 
workers mo
rale has been at rock bottom and they feel that they are actually orphans 
where nobody cares for them. They feel that this Press is a dilapidated state which 
might be closed any day leaving their future in lurch. The Committee also aware that not 
only the 
working conditions of the employees is pathetic but also machinery is not in 

10
 
 
working condition and at times spare parts of other similar machines are used to make 
at least one machine work to meet the deadlines.
 
 
 
The Committee, therefore, strongly feel th
at the Nodal Ministry of Urban 
Development and Ministry of Finance, who have failed miserably for the last 15 years to 
take any concrete decision and its implementation regarding modernization of all the 
retained Government of India Printing Presses, shoul
d promptly acted as a guardian to 
all the Government of India Printing Presses, for their ultimate welfare.
 
 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Nodal Ministry of Urban 
Development and Ministry of Finance should not delay, any further, th
e implementation 
for modernization of all the 15 retained Government of India Printing Presses, including, 
3 Text Book Presses and must put an end to their indecisiveness and attitude of delay 
tactics, forthwith. The Committee further recommend that the Mi
nistry of Urban 
Development must invariably highlight the following requirements to obtain adequate 
and timely budgetary grants. 
 
(i) M
odernization and induction of high speed sophisticated, computerized printing 
machinery and allied equipments which has been the inevitable need since long  to 
cope with the ever increasing demand for printing in multi colour at a cheaper rate and 
to adher
e to strict time schedule of Government/Parliament Business besides being 
competitive with Private Sector Presses; (ii) for providing various varieties of printing 
papers and allied printing materials as required by the Government of India Printing 
Presses
 
to meet the demands of the indenting Ministries/Organizations; (iii) for sufficient 
expert manpower to cope with the modernized equipments for time bound Government 
of India / Parliamentary printing jobs; and (iv) for adequate security personnel and for 
c
reation of secret Room/Sections for secret digitalization to keep the secret Government 
of India / Parliament related printing jobs in each of the 15 Government of India Printing 
Presses intact. 
 
 
The Committee are aware of the fact that Minto Road Press i
s being planned to 
be modernized and renovated in I
st
 
Phase as a pilot project with an estimated cost of 
Rs. 125 crore from Budgetary Support spread over two years (2016
-
17) Rs. 25 crore 
renovation by CPWD and Rs. 100 crore (2017
-
19) for modernization. In 
view of this, the 
Committee observe with concern about this phased manner/style of modernization. If it 

11
 
 
takes 3 years per Press for modernization and renovation, then, with this pace, the last 
15
th 
Press will be modernized after 45 years even if we presume
 
that these are 
renovated back to back. This will only add on the grave sufferings of all the Presses in 
queue by passing of each day which is not acceptable to the Committee. The 
Committee, therefore, also recommend that the work of estimation and actual 
modernization of all the remaining 14 Government of India Presses should be taken up 
simultaneously on a war footing so that the works should be taken up promptly
."
 
 
1.6
 
In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:  
 
"It is true that t
he Presses are working hard during day and night in order to 
deliver the printed material in time. The staff strength of the Presses has reduced 
drastically and diminishing day by day, which requires urgent attention. Similarly, 
the machines have become ve
ry old though few indigenous latest machines were 
inducted in the year 2006
-
07 in some of the Presses, but these too have become 
obsolete due to drastic technological development in the field of printing 
technology. Therefore, the induction of state
-
of
-
the
-
art advanced printing 
machines and equipment is the need of hour. If these machines are inducted with 
necessary manpower, the presses will continue to render services to the Govt. 
Departments in future also.
 
The three pronged approach which has been delib
erated in the Ministry includes 
the following:
-
 
a.
 
To start with redevelopment of GIP Minto Road by constructing of a new 
building through CPWD and induction of State
-
of
-
the
-
art modern machinery 
with a budgetary support of Rs. 338 crores (approx.). The propos
al has 
already been given in
-
 
principle approval from Department of Expenditure, 
Ministry of Finance.The SFC Note has now been circulated to other 
stakeholders for their comments.
 
b.
 
In the meantime, Group of Secretaries (set up by the Government for 
undertak
ing a mid
-
term review of policies and programmes of the 
Government on 28
th
 
October, 2016) has recommended the rightsizing of 
printing presses as under:
 
The 17 printing presses owned by Govt. of India use obsolete technology, 
both machinery and equipment 
are outdated, and have outlived their useful 
lifespan. Some of them are around 100
-
150 years old. Given the 
constraints, out of 17 presses, 6 presses have been identified to be 
modernized in the first phase. Redevelopment costs for an entire printing 
press
 
would amount to Rs. 236 crore of which cost of modernization of only 
the machineries is Rs. 100 crores. The principle to be followed is that that 
unused land parcels can effectively contribute towards achieving the twin 
benefit of utilizing land for publi
c use and of monetizing it to self
-
finance the 
modernization of the printing presses
. It is thus recommended that 11 out 
of the present 17 printing presses must be closed down. The remaining 6 

12
 
 
should be modernized by self
-
financing through redevelopment of
 
surplus 
land.
 
 
The draft Cabinet Note was circulated for Inter
-
 
Ministerial consultations. The comments 
have been received from the Ministries. The draft 
Cabinet Note is to 
be referred to PMO 
after incorporating the comments.
”
 
 
1.7
 
The Committee, in their
 
original Report had strongly recommended that the 
nodal Ministry of Urban Development and Ministry of Finance should expedite the 
modernization of all the 15 Government of India Printing Presses, including the 
three Text Book Presses. However, it is learn
t from the action taken reply that the 
Group of Secretaries (set up by the Government for undertaking a mid
-
term 
review of policies and programmes of the Government) has recommended for 
closure of 11 out of the 17 printing presses and modernization of only
 
the 
remaining 6 through redevelopment/monetization of surplus land. The Committee 
are extremely unhappy to note that the Government is going ahead with the 
suggestion of the Group of Secretaries
. 
This decision, according to the 
Committee, is totally unfai
r to the workers of the Government of India printing 
presses whose morale is already at stake and will only add to the insecurity about 
their future. Moreover, the Committee are of the strong opinion that the relevance 
of Government of India Printing Press
es will ever remain as long as 
confidentiality is the essence of some aspects of Government business
 
besides 
being custodian of all relevant and sensitive Govt. of India publications
. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that al
l the 15 
Government of India Printing Presses, including, 3 Text Book Presses must be 
modernized  on  war footing   without any further delay under intimation to this 
Committee.    
 
(Recommendation No. 2)
 
NEED TO ENHANCE BUDGETARY SUPPORT TO THE GOVERNMENT
 
PRINTING 
PRESSES
 
1.8
 
The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Urban Development  in their 22
nd
 
Report had observed that the Directorate of Printing had started earmarking funds for 
renewal and replacement of machinery and equipments in the Govt. of India P
resses 
only from the year 2003
-
04. From the information provided by the Ministry, the 
Committee observe that the allocation at BE stage has been reduced at RE stage since 

13
 
 
2004
-
05. Further, the actual expenditure is also lower than the allocation given at R
E 
stage. During the year 2014
-
15 the allocation at BE stage was Rs. 212.66 crore, which 
has been lowered to Rs. 189.14 crore at RE stage and BE (2015
-
16) of Rs. 198.45 
crore was lowered as RE (2015
-
16) of Rs. 191.16 crore. During the evidence of the 
Employ
ee Association of Minto Road Printing Press, Chandigarh Text Book Press and 
Govt. of India Text Book Press, Bhubaneswar, the Committee were categorically 
informed that since the year 1986 no new machinery were made available to the Minto 
Road Printing Pres
s. There is huge mismatch in demand and supply of papers to the 
Chandigarh and Bhubaneswar Text Book Presses. Although renovation of Building was 
undertaken but improvement in the machinery is yet to take place in the Chandigarh 
Text Book Press. The Commit
tee were further informed that in spite of several 
constraints being faced by these Printing Presses and in spite of all odds, these 
Presses never delayed the work. During the year 2014
-
15, the Directorate of Printing 
and Ministry of Urban Development aske
d the Minto Road Printing Press to achieve the 
target of Rs. 21 crore. Against this the Press could achieve Rs. 24.27 crore. The 
Chandigarh Text Book Press has also been awarded as the best Press for 4 times and 
they have always stood to the expectation of
 
the Ministries/Departments of Govt. of 
India. The Govt. of India Text Book Press also have enough work in their hand and 
workers are fully engaged to meet the requirement of various Ministries and ready to 
take up more work of the Govt. Departments as and
 
when necessary, provided they are 
equipped with required varieties of papers in time. The Committee are also informed by 
the Ministry that they have deliberated on three pronged approach for the modernization 
of  the Directorate of Printing which inter
-
al
ia include leveraging of land resources to 
generate revenue for financing modernization, to undertake modernization on pilot basis 
on PPP model and replicate it. Further, if this was found successful i.e. financing the 
modernization through budgetary suppo
rt till 2015 when the Committee of Secretaries 
under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary took the view that alienating the vacant 
land will not be a good preposition and, therefore, for modernization, the route of 
utilizing budgetary grant should be expl
ored. 
 
 
The Committee further observe that in spite of the decision of the Committee 
of Secretaries in 2015 for providing more budgetary grant in favour of Directorate of 
Printing for modernization of their Printing Presses, the BE (2016
-
17) is only Rs. 22
9.08 
crore which is likely to be reduced considerably at RE stage as per past practice. The 

14
 
 
Committee are not happy with such type of lower allocation as well as lower utilization 
of funds by the Directorate of Printing and all its Printing Presses. Theref
ore, they 
strongly recommend that adequate funding may be provided to the Directorate of 
Printing for executing all their jobs in hand which remain pending for want of varieties of 
more papers required and also for the modernization programme and desire th
at the 
Govt. should simultaneously probe the possibility of leveraging the land resources to 
generate revenue for financing modernization and undertake and apply wherever 
applicable PPP model for making all the 15 Govt. of India Printing Presses se
lf
-
susta
ined in the longer run.
“
 
 
1.9
     
The Ministry stated as follows in their Action Taken Reply:
 
 
 
“The Budget Estimates (BE) for 2017
-
18 is Rs. 226.41 crores i.e. lesser than BE 
of 2016
-
17. The modernization is proposed to be carried by leveraging the land 
t
o finance modernization. After, modernization, 6 presses with state of the art 
technology will have access to the entire budgetary support.”
 
 
1.10
 
 
The Committee are dismayed to see that in the BE (2017
-
18), allocation for 
the Directorate of Printing has been brought down to Rs.226.41 crore from         
Rs. 229.06 core in BE (2016
-
17) despite the recommendation of this Committee 
that adequate funding 
may be provided to the Directorate of Printing for 
executing  all their jobs in hand. They had further desired the Government to 
simultaneously probe the possibility of leveraging the land resources to generate 
revenue for financing modernization and work 
out Public Private Participation 
(PPP) model wherever  feasible, for making all the Government of India Printing 
Presses self
-
sustained in the longer run. The action taken reply of the 
Government has stated that the modernization by leveraging the land to 
finance 
modernization the same is proposed to be carried only for 6 out of the 17 presses 
as 11 would be closed down and the 6 presses modernized with state of art 
technology will have access to the entire budgetary support. The Committee 
deplore the attit
ude of the Nodal Ministry towards the 17 Government of India 
Printing Presses and feel that by denying requisite funds and manpower to these 
units over the years, these Presses 
have
 
been
 
intentionally  pushed to become 
sick units
 
so that they could be clos
ed down. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly 

15
 
 
reiterate that the Ministry concerned should change their present approach and 
provide all the presses with funds in tandem with their actual requirements, 
press
-
wise. They also desire that  the Government of Ind
ia should 
revive
/
modernize all the 17 GoI Printing Presses  through leveraging the vacant 
land resources and make all of them self
-
sustained. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the final decision with regard to the above recommendations of 
the Comm
ittee through the final Action Taken reply of the Government. 
 
(
Recommendation No
. 3)
 
ACUTE SHORTAGE OF STAFF: NEED FOR FILLING UP VACANCIES ON 
PRIORITY BASIS 
 
1.
11
 
The Committee had recommended as under:
 
         
"
The Committee note that the sanctioned strength of the Govt. of India 
Presses/Govt. of India Text Book Presses as on today stand at 7227 against which 
there are only 2619 employees on roll. The vacancies are 4608. The Committee have 
been informed that two 
proposals for the revival of 700 posts and 937 posts are under 
consideration. They have also been informed that most of the posts under direct 
recruitment category are in Group C category and these are under deemed evolution. A 
proposal to revive them with
 
the approval of the Ministry of Finance is under process. 
However, the Govt. is also exploring various options like modernization, re
-
engineering 
of human resources, mergers and strategic re
-
locations to restructure all the 
Government of India Presses. Du
ring evidence of the Employees Associations of 
various Govt. Printing Presses of Minto Road, Chandigarh and Bhubaneswar 
emphatically pointed out that there is severe manpower crisis in their Presses. Since 
1989 there has been no new recruitment in the Mint
o Road Printing Press. Every year 
employees are retiring and these vacancies have not been filled up.  The strength of 
Minto Road Press has been reduced from 861 to 363. Every year 57
-
58 employees are 
retiring. At Chandigarh and Bhubaneswar Text Book Press
es there is shortage of 
Security Staff. In the Bhubaneswar Text Book Printing Press the staff strength is only 
70. And the vacancies being caused by retirement are not being filled up by the fresh 
appointees. In the past also, as per the standing instructi
ons of Department of 
Expenditure, vacant posts lapsed as these were not filled up for a certain period of time. 

16
 
 
In this way, if the Government do not fill up the vacant posts at the earliest, these posts 
would cease to exist and there will be nobody to wor
k in these Presses. 
 
 
   
The Committee further note that the total vacancies in Government of India 
Presses are 64% while in Government of India Text Books Presses, it is 72%. The total 
present vacancies in the Directorate of Printing, Government of India 
Stationery Office 
and Department of Publication are 65%. In some of the Presses the vacancies are more 
than 90% such as Koratty Press (90%), Coimbatore Press 83%, Nilokheri and Temple 
Street and Faridabad Presses have 75% vacancies. Similarly, there is an 
acute 
shortage of staff in both the Government of India Presses, Government of India Text 
Book Presses.
 
 
The Committee need not emphasize that the manpower crisis has had a 
crippling effect on the efficiency and working of the Govt. of India Printing Press
es. 
Moreover, the existing staff of these Printing Presses have to multitask and work in 
multiple shifts and, thus, their morale are at rock bottom today. The Committee are 
concerned about the damaging effects of such high percentage of shortage of human 
r
esources, i.e., increasing frustration, a constant dissatisfaction, confusion and 
uncertainty among existing staff leading to dwindling of their morale. 
 
 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the proposal of the 
Ministry to revive the abolitio
n of direct recruitment in Grade
-
C category and exploring 
various options to restructure the Directorate of Printing, GISO and Department of 
Publication be finalized at the earliest, without losing the precious time and at the cost of 
lowering moral of the
 
existing staff strength. They also recommend that the vacancies in 
other categories, accordingly may also be filled up on emergent and priority basis. The 
Committee may be apprised about the action taken in this direction at the earliest 
possible. 
 
 
The C
ommittee further recommend the Government to conduct a quick audit 
of the basic requirement of the station managers at every Government of India Press 
and Government of India Text Book Press. The Committee feel that it will be only a very 
modest requiremen
t. If the Ministry can fulfill this requirement promptly, that will raise 
the efficiency and morale of the employees enormously which is now at the lowest ebb.
"
 
 

17
 
 
1.12
 
 
In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:  
 
"
The Cabinet Note is
 
still under process of approval. It is proposed that the on
-
roll employees will be redeployed in the retained six presses. Further, based on 
the requirement assessed by the study, the redeployed manpower will be 
provided additional skills through training
 
and if the need be, some additional 
manpower with special skills may be inducted."
 
 
1.
13
 
In view of the acute shortage of
 
manpower in the Government of I
ndia 
Presses, Directorate of Printing, Government of India Stationery Office and 
Department of 
Publication
, the Committee had recommended urgent steps
 
for 
filling up of vacancies and restructuring 
of 
the above 
establishments. 
The
  
action 
taken reply of t
he Government states that the Cabinet Note for
 
rationalization and 
merger of Government of India 
Printing Presses is still under process of approval 
and
 
it is proposed that the on
-
roll employees be redeployed in the retained six 
presses. Further, based on the requirement
s
 
assessed
,
 
the redeployed manpower 
will be provided additional skills through tra
ining and 
if
 
need arise
s
, some 
additional manpower with special skills may be inducted.
 
The Committee, 
are not 
at all convinced by the response of the Government as they are 
seriously 
concerned about the ultimate welfare and well being of all the on
-
roll e
mployees 
of the 
Government
 
of India printing presses
.
 
They also 
wish to point out 
that the 
proposed 
redeploy
ment 
will drastically affect their family life, children's 
education
, etc.
 
bringing in a lot of resettlement issues. The Committee, hence, 
reiterate
 
that instead of
 
closing down the units, the Government should address 
the concerns of the employees and fill up the existing vacancies in all the 
Presses on priority basis. 
 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 4)
 
TRIFURCATION OF CHIEF CONTROLLER OF PRINTING AND STATIONERY 
(CCPS) 
-
 
NEED REVISIT 
 
1.
14
 
The Committee had recommended as under:
 
 
          
"The Committee note that earlier the Directorate of Printing was a part of the 
combined organization comprising Directorate of Printing, Department of Publication 
and Govt. of India Stationery Office headed by Chief Controller of Printing and 

18
 
 
Stationery (C
CPS). The CCPS was trifurcated into three organizations, viz., Directorate 
of Printing, Govt. of India Stationery Office and Department of Publication in 1973, 
under the then Ministry of Works and Housing as PSP Division. This arrangement is 
being continue
d under Ministry of Urban Development. The PSP Division is now headed 
by a Joint Secretary level Officer who supervises the matter of this division. The 
National Federation of Printing, Stationery and Publication in their written Memorandum 
had submitted b
efore the Committee that the abolition of the post  of CCPS and its 
trifurcation into PSP Division is an Organizational death blow from which Department 
was never able to recover owing to the fact that while trifurcation, operational function 
remained vest
ed with the implementing authority, i.e., Directorate of Printing, Controller 
of Stationery and Controller of Publication and the decision making function were vested 
with Joint Secretary in the Ministry. Previously the CCPS was the single point authority 
with whom operational responsibility and administrative  powers were vested. Moreover, 
the post of Joint Secretary in charge of PSP Division has been given other responsibility 
of the Ministry, i.e., additional charge of Deputy Financial Adviser. As a resu
lt, the Joint 
Secretary could not devote the required attention to the PSP Division and the three 
heads of the PSP Division had to report directly to Joint Secretary on all administrative, 
financial issues, they became lame ducks and hence ineffective. The
re was no 
coordinating authority for operational function. Thus, it was an impractical and 
unworkable situation. This led to the steady decline of the three Departments. 
 
 
The Committee fully agree with the facts shared by National Federation of 
Printing, 
Stationery and Publication. Even if the Ministry's reply is silent with regard to a 
question of devoting adequate time by the Joint Secretary to monitor and supervise the 
work of the PSP Division, the present languishing situation of the three Divisions cl
early 
depict the fact that the present arrangement of PSP Division has been relegated. As a 
result most of the jobs are being outsourced to private organizations. Moreover, all the 
three Departments are being encountered with manifold problems, viz., inade
quate 
finance, extreme shortage of manpower, obsolete technology hence higher cost, delays 
and pressure in meeting deadlines, leading to lesser assignments, lesser internal 
resource generation, low morale and efficiency of employees and long delay in carry
ing 
out modernization, etc. 
 

19
 
 
 
As per the Allocation of Business Rules, Directorate is the printer of the Govt. 
of India for all their Budgetary Documents and publications, etc., including forms for Civil 
and Defence Departments. It is also responsible for 
stocking and distribution of various 
forms for Ministries/Departments as per their requirements. The Directorate also 
renders advice to various State Governments and Central Govt. Ministries/Departments 
on technical matters relating to printing and printin
g technology. Keeping in view the 
important assignments of the PSP Division and the deteriorating condition due to 
present administrative arrangements the Committee strongly recommend the Ministry to 
take immediate steps to appoint an exclusive full time J
oint Secretary for PSP Division 
so that the administrative decision about the division can be addressed promptly and 
effectively, the working of this Division can be streamlined and the overall capabilities 
can be improved. The Committee further recommend 
the Government to explore the 
possibility of merging all three  components of PSP Division into one Directorate 
General of Printing, Stationery and Publication as earlier in order to have better and 
smooth functioning and administration. The Committee are 
of the view that it will reduce 
the establishment's overhead cost and also take care of the security of the employees.
"
 
1.
15
 
In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:  
 
"
The modernization of Government of India Presses is being 
carried out 
independently as of now, on the basis of re
port of Group of Secretaries. A 
committee was constituted for considering the merger of Department of 
Publication with Directorate of Printing under the Chairmanship of Director 
(Printing). The proposa
l was part of Review meeting taken by Hon’ble MoS (UD) 
on 16.12.2016. However, no concrete action 
on this has been initiated yet.
"
 
1.1
6
 
The Committee
 
note from the action taken reply of the Government that
 
though a committee was
 
constituted for considering
 
the merger of 
Department of 
Publication with Directorate of Printing under the Chairmanship of Director 
(Printing)
, 
no
 
concrete action i
n this 
regard 
has been initiated 
so far
. 
Moreover
, 
the Government is silent about
 
the recommendation of the Committee t
o appoint 
a 
full time Joint Secretary for PSP Division so that 
various 
administrative 
issues
 
can be add
ressed promptly and effectively.
 
The Committee, therefore, would like 
to reiterate their earlier recommendation and would like 
to 
hear from
 
the Ministry 
the action taken 
on
 
the
ir
 
above concerns at
 
the earliest.
 
 

20
 
 
(Recommendation No. 5)
 
NEED FOR A BETTER ACCOUNTING SYSTEM IN GOVT. OF INDIA PRESSES 
 
1.1
7
 
The Committee had recommended as under:
 
          
"The Committee observed that at present Proforma 
Accounting System is being 
followed by all the Government of India Presses. The Committee are concerned to note 
that this accounting system is being followed since pre
-
independence era based on 
British Federation of Master Printing Costing System. During 1
4
th
 
Lok Sabha while 
examining the subject, Directorate of Printing the then Secretary of Ministry of Urban 
Development had admitted during evidence before the Committee that it is high time 
that the age old system of Accounting and Financing is reviewed in
 
view of the 
modernization programme. The Committee are also informed that the Ministry is now in 
the process of adopting multi pronged approach to modernize the Directorate of Printing 
in order to make them self
-
sustaining mechanism. The present proforma 
accounting 
system is still being followed because the Govt. of India Presses are catering  to printing 
of all the Ministries/Departments of Central Govt. on no profit no loss basis. Moreover, 
the Committee feel that the competitiveness of the Presses is to
 
be ensured so as to 
steer them towards a self
-
sustaining mechanism. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the existing Proforma Accounting need to be replaced with a suitable 
and effective accounting system by all the Presses so as to ensure better fin
ancial 
ma
nagement of the Printing Units."
 
1.1
8
 
In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:  
 
"As per Ministry of UD’s instructions, Directorate of Printing has taken numbers of 
attempts to introduce the Commercial Accounting System in
 
place of Proforma 
Accounts GIPs. In the years 2001
-
02 selected staff of different Presses were 
imparted training at ISTM on CAS and accordingly they prepared annual 
accounts on Commercial Pattern which were submitted to CCA/C&AG for their 
concurrence but 
CCA/C&AG did not concur the proposal. Thereafter a Chartered 
Accountant as consultant was appointed but draft model of Commercial 
Accounting System prepared by the consultant was again not accepted by the 
Ministry. Now, again fresh efforts are being made t
o appoint a consultant for 
implementation of the Proforma Accounts into Commercial pattern 
i.e. 
in the form 
of Manufacturing Account, Profit and Loss Account and Balance sheet in the 
Government of India Presses. In this connection a list of chartered 
Accountants 
firms empanelled with C&AG/RBI from O/o the Comptroller & Auditor General of 
India, 9, Deen Dayal Updhayaya Marg, New Delhi office has been received and 
letters have been issued to them for obtaining the estimated cost to complete the 
tendering
 
formalities as the GFR 2017."
 
 

21
 
 
1.1
9
 
The Committee 
note
 
that the 
p
rocess of 
introducing Commercial 
Accounting System replacing 
Proforma Accounts in Government of India Presses 
(GIPs) and
 
identify
ing the Chartered Accountant
’s
 
firm 
which would function as a 
consultant during the transformation phase have been initiated. 
The
y
, however, 
are
 
not 
happy
 
with the tardy pace 
in
 
which the process of 
replacing the existing 
system 
is
 
taking place. They, therefore, recommend
 
that 
the whole proc
ess of 
changing the old accounting system and implementing the new one be completed 
expeditiously
 
to 
ensure better financial management of all the presses 
concerned
. The Committee may be 
appr
ised
 
about the final outcome within three 
months from the present
ation of this Report to the Parliament.
 
 
(
Recommendation No. 7)
 
RECOVERY OF OUTSTANDING FROM ALL DEFAULTING MINISTRIES/ 
ORGANIZATIONS/ STATE GOVERNMENTS
 
1.
2
0
 
The Committee had recommended as under:
 
 
"The Committee are astonished to observe from the list of
 
Outstanding Printing 
dues from various Ministries/Organizations/State Governments as furnished by the 
Nodal Ministry of Urban Development that as on 30.06.2016, there are Rs. 385.62 
crore outstanding printing charges dues for reco
very. 
They observe that t
here are 54 
Central Ministries, 12 Autonomous Bodies/Statutory/Constitutional Organizations, such 
as, CAG of India, Election Commission of India, erstwhile Planning Commission, 
UPSC, etc., 8 States and one NCT of Delhi among those who have Outstanding 
Prin
ting Charges towards the Government of India Printing Presses. What astonished 
the Committee most that the Nodal Ministry of Urban Development who is responsible 
for the welfare of its attached office, namely, Directorate of Printing and all its Printing 
P
resses and is expected to act as a guardian for the Directorate, is the highest 
defaulter themselves, as they have to pay Rs.91.45 crore against the total outstanding 
printing charges dues of Rs.385.62 crore. Among the next highest defaulters are, 
Ministry
 
of Communication and Information Technology (Rs.73.76 crore), Ministry of 
Defence (Rs.70.45 crore), Ministry of Home Affairs (Rs.31.77 crore), Ministry of 
Finance (Rs. 27.41 crore), Government of Delhi (Rs.17.19 crore), Ministry of Health 

22
 
 
and Family Welfa
re (Rs. 9.56 crore) and Ministry of Human Resource Development 
(Rs.8.53 crore) to name a few.
 
 
 
The Committee feel that the target of recovery of printing charges (dues) needs 
to be monitored by the Directorate scrupulously and recommend that the outstandi
ng 
dues are realized from the concerned quarters within a period of three months. The 
Committee further observe that the target of recovery of printing charges dues have 
been fixed for every press in the start of the financial year and the Directorate moni
tors 
the realization by presses closely by obtaining monthly reports from all the presses. 
They were informed that recovery teams have been constituted in all the presses who 
visit the indenting departments to reconcile and sort out the problems/difficulti
es and to 
fast track the recoveries. If required, details of pending bills and relevant records are 
provided to indenting departments. D.O. letters from the Directorate and Minister of 
State level were also issued to various Ministries/Departments to exped
ite the 
realization of the outstanding dues. 
 
 
The Committee failed to understand from the replies of the Ministry that on one 
hand, they are sending letters from MoS level to all the defaulters, and are expecting 
expedited realization of the outstanding d
ues, on the other hand, they themselves have 
become the highest defaulters by withholding Rs. 91.45 crore which belongs to the  
Government of India Printing Presses. The Committee strongly deplore this kind of 
duality of principles being followed and pract
iced by the Nodal Ministry itself, wherein 
they do not practice what they are trying to preach others.
 
 
The Committee further fail to understand that on the one hand, there have been 
perennial and chronic
-
cum
-
extreme shortage of manpower with the Governmen
t of 
India Printing Presses in all their Sections/Units/Departments as the Presses are 
functioning with merely 10% to 30
-
40 % staff/manpower only out of their required 
sanctioned strength, but on the other hand, the Nodal Ministry have created recovery 
tea
ms in all the Presses who visit the indenting departments to reconcile  and sort out 
the problems/difficulties to fast track the recoveries, thus, creating more shortage of 
manpower to attend the original and main work at Printing Presses by those staff wh
ose 
services have been diverted to recovery teams.
 
 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend to the Nodal Ministry viz., 
Ministry of Urban Development to first set an inspiring example by paying their own 

23
 
 
outstanding Printing charges dues of Rs.91.45 c
rore within a stipulated period  of this 
financial year itself, and, then, create and develop such norms, rules, regulations and 
provisions which are legally and effectively binding on each indenting 
Ministry/Department/State Governments/Organizations to p
ay their printing charges to 
the concerned Printing Presses within a stipulated period of three months or the same 
financial year in which their printing jobs have been executed, even if it requires change 
in accounting system. The Nodal Ministry of Urban 
Development can also discuss the 
issue with the  Ministry of Finance and explore the possibility of developing a 
mechanism wherein Ministry of Finance help the  Government of India Printing Presses 
in recovery of outstanding printing charges from the inden
ters, by using their executive 
powers, deducting the outstanding dues from the next year Budgetary allocation of the 
indenting Ministries/Organizations/State Governments in favour of respective Printing 
Presses.
"
 
1.
2
1
 
In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:  
 
"Vigorous efforts are made to recover the outstanding dues by issuing D.O. letter 
at various levels i.e. Director, Joint Secretary and Minister of State. The recovery 
team has also been 
formed by the respective Presses for making visits to various 
indenters 
–
 
to clear difficulties, give clarifications, to provide copies of the 
bills/challans etc. As a result of these efforts a rise in realization of outstanding 
dues are noticed."
 
 
1.2
2
  
 
 
While
 
noting the huge outstanding dues of Rs.385.62 crore for recovery 
from 
various government departments/
organizations, the Committee had 
observed that 
the nodal M
inistry, i.e.
,
 
the Ministry of Urban Development 
themselves 
is t
he highest defaulter
 
with an outstanding of 
Rs. 91.45 crore
.
 
While 
deprecating this, the Committee had recommended that the 
n
odal 
M
inistry
 
should
 
set an inspiring example by 
re
paying their own dues within a stipulated period
 
and
 
then, 
strive to realize the outstanding from al
l other defaulters. 
They 
had 
further recommended that 
the Ministry of Urban Development may
 
also explore 
the possibility of developing a mechanism wherein M
inistry of Finance
 
help the 
GIPs in recovery of outstanding printing charges from the 
defaulters by 
deducting the same 
from the Budgetary allocations
. 
However, the
 
action taken 
reply of the Government 
is a mere r
epetition of an earlier reply furnished 
to
 
the 
Committee at the tim
e of examination of the subject.
 
Moreover, the Ministry have 
chose to remain 
silent on setting the outstanding due to them.
 
The Committee are 

24
 
 
extremely unhappy about the 
evasive
 
attitude 
of the Ministry by furnishing
 
a
 
routine reply being placed before them even after a span of about one year. 
The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate th
eir earlier recommendation and desire to have 
the updated status of outstanding dues 
along 
with 
the data about the 
recoveries 
made
,
 
P
ress
/
Ministry/Organisation
-
wise
,
 
after the 12th of August, 2016,  the date 
on which the 12th Report of this
 
Parliamentary Committee
 
was presented
 
to the 
Parliament, within three months of the presentation of the Report.
 
(Recommendation No. 8)
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA STATIONERY OFFICE (GISO) BE REVIVED
 
1.
2
3
 
The Committee had recommended as under:
 
 
"The Committee are aware that established in 1850 with its headquarters in 
Kolkata, Government of India Stationery Office (GISO) is subordinate office under the 
Ministry of Urban Development. GISO is responsible for transparent procurement of 
stationery an
d paper made articles at economical cost and supply to the Government 
offices for their use. The Committee have been informed that the procurement is made 
from small scale industries (SSI) registered under MSME Act., which means, it is also 
giving business
 
to some of the tiny but employment intensive industrial units of India, in 
this process. The Committee note that there has been a steady decline in the role of 
GISO after the amendment of rule 140 of GFR, wherein full powers for procurement of 
goods were 
delegated to the Ministries or Departments. They also find that there has 
been a continuous reduction in budgetary allocation and staff strength of GISO after 
2005. However, the Committee was informed that most of the North Eastern States and 
remote areas 
remain heavily dependent on GISO for their stationery requirements. 
 
 
 
The Committee  feel that GISO has an age
-
old expertise in procurement of 
stationery items and paper, it gives business to many small scale business through its 
procurement process and t
here is a need for welfare of its employees. In the current 
context, therefore, the Committee recommend that GISO should be allowed to function 
with increased budget and manpower.
 
 
The Committee note that the Direct Demanding Officer, DDO, procures paper f
or 
the Government of India Stationery Office (GISO). DGS&D finalize  the rate contract 
and GISO only place the supply order on the supplying firms. Even the Ministry 

25
 
 
admitted that often, DGS&D, conclude the rate contract at the belated stage of financial 
y
ears and with the result GISO do not have scope to utilise their Budget in time. They, 
therefore have to place the supply order at the fag end of the financial year, hence, the 
budget remains unutilized. The Committee desire that the intermediaries viz. DG
S&D 
should be kept away and GISO should be allowed to place order directly in time, with 
the power to finalize  the rate contract themselves, so that the suppliers can also supply 
in time. This will enable GISO to spend the entire allocated funds for the y
ear.
 
 
The Committee have been informed by various organizations that some 
indenters from remote places are coming to GISO for stationery but most of the time 
they are not in a position to supply according to their indenters needs simply because of 
hugely i
nadequate budgetary support from the Government. They are not satisfied with 
the reply of the Government that GISO is being provided regular budgetary support for 
day to day functioning. The Committee observe that during 2015 the Government had 
finalize a 
quantity statement to the tune of Rs. 87 crore. The quantity statement is 
prepared on the basis of the indenters and their payments but the Government has 
allocated only 3 crore budget against Rs.87 crore payments recovered. The Committee, 
therefore, recom
mend the Ministry of Urban Development to allocate adequate 
budgetary support so that GISO can emerge as an effective and vibrant organization.
 
 
The Committee further note that earlier GISO used to procure printing paper on 
behalf of the Directorate of Pri
nting, as it has a well
-
equipped procurement system as 
well as quality control system. The Committee recommend the Government to allow 
GISO to procure the printing paper on behalf of the Directorate of Printing so that GISO 
could be revived fully.
"
 
1.2
4
  
 
In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:  
 
"
The Budget for the financial year 2017
-
18 is Rs 14.58 crore and the budget for 
the financial year 2016
-
17 is Rs 13.67 cr. The Expression of Interest (EOI) and 
Terms of Reference (TOR) to 
engage a professional organization to conduct the 
study for revival of GISO including is being finalized in the Ministry."
 
 
1.2
5
    
In view of the expertise of t
he 
Government of India Stationery Office (GISO)
 
in procurement of stationery and the dependence of remote 
S
tates on GISO for 
their stationery requirement, the 
Committee 
had recommended for revival of 
GISO. But, it is seen from the action 
taken repl
y
 
furnished to the Committee on 

26
 
 
27
th
 
April, 2017
 
that
 
ev
en after about 9 months, nothing much has been done by 
the Nodal Ministry 
in this regard
 
except for drafting of 
Expression of Interest 
(EOI) and Terms of Reference (TOR)
 
 
to engage a professional organization 
to 
conduct a study for revival of GISO. 
The  ac
tion taken reply is 
also 
silent about 
the other 
suggestions of
 
the Committee
 
with regard to
 
finaliz
ing
 
the rate 
contract
s
 
exclusively by GISO, 
allow
ing
 
GISO to procure paper on behalf of the 
Directorate of Printing 
and allocating
 
adequate budgetary and man
power 
support 
to enable
 
GISO emerge as an effective and vibrant 
organization
.
 
The Committee, 
therefore, would like to be  apprised on each of the above 
aspects within three 
months from the date of presentation of this Report.
 
 
 

27
 
 
 
CHAPTER II
 
RECOMMENDTIONS 
THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GORERNMENT
 
 
(Recommendation No. 4)
 
TRIFURCATION OF CHIEF CONTROLLER OF PRINTING AND STATIONERY 
(CCPS) 
-
 
NEED REVISIT 
 
2
.
1
 
The Committee note that earlier the Directorate of Printing was a part of the 
combined organization comprising Directorate of Printing, Department of Publication 
and Govt. of India Stationery Office headed by Chief Controller of Printing and 
Stationery (CC
PS). The CCPS was trifurcated into three organizations, viz., 
Directorate of Printing, Govt. of India Stationery Office and Department of Publication 
in 1973, under the then Ministry of Works and Housing as PSP Division. This 
arrangement is being continued
 
under Ministry of Urban Development. The PSP 
Division is now headed by a Joint Secretary level Officer who supervises the matter of 
this division. The National Federation of Printing, Stationery and Publication in their 
written Memorandum had submitted be
fore the Committee that the abolition of the 
post  of CCPS and its trifurcation into PSP Division is an Organizational death blow 
from which Department was never able to recover owing to the fact that while 
trifurcation, operational function remained veste
d with the implementing authority, i.e., 
Directorate of Printing, Controller of Stationery and Controller of Publication and the 
decision making function were vested with Joint Secretary in the Ministry. Previously 
the CCPS was the single point authority w
ith whom operational responsibility and 
administrative  powers were vested. Moreover, the post of Joint Secretary in charge of 
PSP Division has been given other responsibility of the Ministry, i.e., additional charge 
of Deputy Financial Adviser. As a resul
t, the Joint Secretary could not devote the 
required attention to the PSP Division and the three heads of the PSP Division had to 
report directly to Joint Secretary on all administrative, financial issues, they became 
lame ducks and hence ineffective. Ther
e was no coordinating authority for operational 
function. Thus, it was an impractical and unworkable situation. This led to the steady 
decline of the three Departments. 
 

28
 
 
 
The Committee fully agree with the facts shared by National Federation of 
Printing, S
tationery and Publication. Even if the Ministry's reply is silent with regard to a 
question of devoting adequate time by the Joint Secretary to monitor and supervise the 
work of the PSP Division, the present languishing situation of the three Divisions cle
arly 
depict the fact that the present arrangement of PSP Division has been relegated. As a 
result most of the jobs are being outsourced to private organizations. Moreover, all the 
three Departments are being encountered with manifold problems, viz., inadeq
uate 
finance, extreme shortage of manpower, obsolete technology hence higher cost, delays 
and pressure in meeting deadlines, leading to lesser assignments, lesser internal 
resource generation, low morale and efficiency of employees and long delay in carryi
ng 
out modernization, etc. 
 
 
As per the Allocation of Business Rules, Directorate is the printer of the Govt. 
of India for all their Budgetary Documents and publications, etc., including forms for Civil 
and Defence Departments. It is also responsible for s
tocking and distribution of various 
forms for Ministries/Departments as per their requirements. The Directorate also 
renders advice to various State Governments and Central Govt. Ministries/Departments 
on technical matters relating to printing and printing
 
technology. Keeping in view the 
important assignments of the PSP Division and the deteriorating condition due to 
present administrative arrangements the Committee strongly recommend the Ministry to 
take immediate steps to appoint an exclusive full time Jo
int Secretary for PSP Division 
so that the administrative decision about the division can be addressed promptly and 
effectively, the working of this Division can be streamlined and the overall capabilities 
can be improved. The Committee further recommend t
he Government to explore the 
possibility of merging all three  components of PSP Division into one Directorate 
General of Printing, Stationery and Publication as earlier in order to have better and 
smooth functioning and administration. The Committee are o
f the view that it will reduce 
the establishment's overhead cost and also take care of the security of the employees.
 
Reply of the Government
 
2
.
2
 
The modernization of Government of India Presses is being carried out 
independently as of now, on the basis of
 
re
port of Group of Secretaries. A 
committee 
was constituted for considering the merger of Department of Publication with Directorate 
of Printing under the Chairmanship of Director (Printing). The proposal was part of 

29
 
 
Review meeting taken by Hon’ble MoS (U
D) on 16.12.2016. However, no concrete 
action 
on this has been initiated yet.
 
(Comments of the Committee)
 
2.3
 
For Comments of the Committee please see para no. 1.1
6
 
of Chapter I of this 
Report.
 
(Recommendation No. 5)
 
NEED FOR A BETTER ACCOUNTING SYSTEM IN GOVT. OF INDIA PRESSES 
 
2.
4
 
 
The Committee observed that at present Proforma Accounting System is being 
followed by all the Government of India Presses. The Committee are concerned to note 
that this accounting system is being followed since pre
-
independence era based on 
British Feder
ation of Master Printing Costing System. During 14
th
 
Lok Sabha while 
examining the subject, Directorate of Printing the then Secretary of Ministry of Urban 
Development had admitted during evidence before the Committee that it is high time 
that the age old 
system of Accounting and Financing is reviewed in view of the 
modernization programme. The Committee are also informed that the Ministry is now in 
the process of adopting multi pronged approach to modernize the Directorate of Printing 
in order to make them
 
self
-
sustaining mechanism. The present proforma accounting 
system is still being followed because the Govt. of India Presses are catering  to printing 
of all the Ministries/Departments of Central Govt. on no profit no loss basis. Moreover, 
the Committee f
eel that the competitiveness of the Presses is to be ensured so as to 
steer them towards a self
-
sustaining mechanism. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the existing Proforma Accounting need to be replaced with a suitable 
and effective accounting sys
tem by all the Presses so as to ensure better financial 
ma
nagement of the Printing Units.
 
Reply of the Government
 
2.
5
 
As per Ministry of UD’s instructions, Directorate of Printing has taken numbers of 
attempts to introduce the Commercial Accounting System 
in place of Proforma 
Accounts GIPs. In the years 2001
-
02 selected staff of different Presses were imparted 
training at ISTM on CAS and accordingly they prepared annual accounts on 
Commercial Pattern which were submitted to CCA/C&AG for their concurrence bu
t 

30
 
 
CCA/C&AG did not concur the proposal. Thereafter a Chartered Accountant as 
consultant was appointed but draft model of Commercial Accounting System prepared 
by the consultant was again not accepted by the Ministry. Now, again fresh efforts are 
being made
 
to appoint a consultant for implementation of the Proforma Accounts into 
Commercial pattern 
i.e. 
in the form of Manufacturing Account, Profit and Loss Account 
and Balance sheet in the Government of India Presses. In this connection a list of 
chartered Acc
ountants firms empanelled with C&AG/RBI from O/o the Comptroller & 
Auditor General of India, 9, Deen Dayal Updhayaya Marg, New Delhi office has been 
received and letters have been issued to them for obtaining the estimated cost to 
complete the tenderi
ng fo
rmalities as the GFR 2017.
 
(Comments of the Committee)
 
2.
6
 
For Comments of the Committee please see para no. 
1.1
9
 
of Chapter I of this 
Report.
 
(Recommendation No. 6)
 
LEVERAGING OF VACANT LAND WITH GOI PRINTING PRESSES 
 
2.
7
 
The Committee note that as per 
the data provided by the Ministry of Urban 
Development in February, 2015  land resources available with the Government of India 
Printing Presses are to the tune of: (i) Coimbatore Press
-
 
132.70 acre; (ii) Faridabad 
Press 
-
 
100.03 acre; (iii) Nilokheri Pres
s 
-
 
35.01 acre; (iv) Aligarh Press 
-
 
37.39 acre; (v) 
Karatty Press 
-
 
75 acre; (vi) Santragachi Press 
-
 
92.48 acre; (vii) Temple Street Press 
-
 
1.508 acre; (Viii) Nashik Press 
-
 
109.00 acre; (ix) Minto Road Press 
-
 
5.44 acre; (x) Ring 
Road, Maya Puri Press 
-
 
37.161 acre; (xi) Shimla Press 
-
 
5.278 acre; (xii) Chandigarh 
(Text Book Press) 
-
 
11.07 acre; (xiii) Bhubaneswar (TBP) 
-
 
28.928 acre; and (xiv) 
Mysore (TBP) 
-
 
28.6 acre.
 
 
The Committee further note that till 3 February, 2015, the Ministry of Urban 
Develo
pment were considering the financing options for modernization and re
-
engineering of Human Resources of all the Government of India Printing Presses by 
way of (a) Budgetary Support; (b) Land Leveraging Pilot Project; and (c) Modernization 
through Pilot PPP
 
Model. They have also hired the services of National Buildings 
Construction Corporation (NBCC) for conducting the feasibility Study of available land 
resources of the Printing Presses for generating finance for their modernization by way 

31
 
 
of land leveragin
g and NBCC have prepared and submitted their Feasibility Reports for 
8 Government of India Printing Presses and Detailed Project Report (DPR) for Minto 
Road Press as a Pilot Project. 
 
 
However, during evidence the representative of Ministry of Urban Develo
pment 
deposed before the Committee that earlier the method for modernization was to 
leverage the land because these presses are located at very vantage locations. For 
example, a lot of land is attached to Minto Road in Delhi. So, this option was deliberate
d 
at length but then the Committee of Secretaries under the Chairmanship of Cabinet 
Secretary took the view that alienating this land will  not be a good proposition and, 
therefore, for modernization the route of utilizing budgetary grant should be explore
d. 
This took place in 2015. Before that, the Ministry had worked with NBCC to develop a 
comprehensive plan for re
-
development by leveraging the land. But because of this 
decision in 2015, the whole process again went back to the square one.
 
 
The Committee,
 
in view of the above scenario, strongly feel that it may still be 
well worth thinking, if the Ministry of Urban Development could pilot the course of 
thinking to start a redevelopment process whereby the States do not have to pay for the 
land but they can
 
avail of the buildings created by NBCC or CPWD on the vacant land 
available with the Government of India Printing Presses.
 
 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that there  is a greater need for 
reconsidering and firmly adopting the option of land
 
leveraging of the vacant land 
available with the Government of India Printing Presses raising necessary wherewithal 
for their modernization apart from budgetary support wherever necessary as this will 
also solve the grave problem of encroachment of vacant
 
Government land. The 
Committee also warn the Ministry concerned that while considering the option of land 
leveraging, it should be kept in mind that there should not be any commercial 
exploitation of vacant Government land by building malls, cinema halls,
 
etc., and rather 
the State Governments may be involved for exploring their perpetual needs of buildings 
on rental basis, would be a better way of monetizing land without at
tracting criticism of 
any sort.
 
 
 

32
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
2
.
8
 
The draft Cabinet Not
e proposes to make efficient utilization of land resources. 
The total available land with all the Presses as on date is approximately 677.95 acres, 
out of which 56.67 acres of the land occupied by GITBPs will be returned to the 
respective state governments
. The land occupied by the Presses (excluding GIP, 
Rashtrapati Bhawan which is stationed at the President House) to be retained is 
approximately 285.90 acres. Out of this, the GIP, Minto Road having an area of 5.44 
acres is proposed to be re
-
 
developed thr
ough budgetary support, after parting away 25 
% of land for construction of O/o CGA. The balance 4 presses will be re
-
 
developed and 
modernized by monetizing the requisite land measuring about 280.46 acres. The 
remaining land of 335.38 acres of GIP, Farida
bad, Aligarh, Nilokheri, Shimla, Koratty, 
and Santragachi which will be freed after merger, is to be handed over to Land and 
Development Office.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

33
 
 
 
CHAPTER III
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF THE 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
 
 
-
Nil
-
 
 
 

34
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
 
(Recommendation No. 1)
 
 
MODERNISATION OF GOI PRINTING PRESSES 
-
 
AN UTTER NECESSITY
 
4
.1
 
The Committee 
note that the Government of India Presses were established to 
cater to the printing requirements of various Ministries at a time when the printing 
technology had old technologies like letter press. Some of these presses are as old as 
150 years, first full
-
fledged press being started at Delhi in 1923. Major responsibilities of  
all Government of India Printing Presses is to execute printing jobs of all 
Ministries/Departments of Government of India, such as, Parliamentary matters, 
Railway Budget, Ballot Paper
s, Question Papers, Reports of CAG, various forms of 
Defence Ministry, Secret work of Ministries/Departments, UPSC work, Cabinet 
Secretariat Reports, 17 types of Gazette Notifications, E
-
Gazette, Economic Survey, 
Export and Export Policy, Annual Reports/De
tailed Demands for Grants/Outcome 
Budgets/Different Publications/Reports of Ministries/Departments of Government of 
India and official ceremonies
-
including Republic/Independence Day, etc., etc. The 
Directorate plays a very vital role as the printer and cus
todian of Government of India 
publications.
 
 
The Committee further note that there has not been any induction of new printing 
machinery/equipment in any of the 12 Government of India  Printing Presses and 3 
Government of India Text Book Presses since last 
30 to 40  years and all the 15 
Government of India Printing Presses have been functioning day and night in 3 shifts 
with absolutely obsolete and outdated printing machinery/equipments. In recent times 
printing technology has emerged as most compatible for 
the Information Technology. 
Therefore, with the changing time it has become essential to adopt and update the 
earlier technology by adopting latest technology for quality production, higher 
productivity and better services in a competitive environment. The
 
Committee further 
opine that in spite of the fact that India is going digital, there are some aspects of 
Government business which are absolutely sacrosanct and where confidentiality is the 

35
 
 
essence and as long as there confidentiality remains, there Gover
nment of India 
Printing Presses will never become irrelevant. They will always remain relevant because 
all secret and confidential Government and Parliament Business like General/Railway 
Budgets, CAG Reports and lots of other papers cannot be put into digi
tal domain before 
its presentation to the Parliament. The Committee feel that while modernizing the Press 
should adequate steps to keep the confidentiality intact.
 
 
The Committee are of the considered opinion that all Government of India 
Printing Presses a
nd their staff have been instrumental in executing such important 
tasks of Government of India while maintaining confidentiality and secrecy of work 
assigned to them since independent Government of India Printing Presses came into 
existence. But irony  is 
that all the 15 Government of India Printing Presses and their 
pressing needs have been  grossly ignored by all the concerned Ministries namely 
Nodal Ministry of Urban Development and Ministry of Finance. Since the year 2002 
when the Cabinet took  a decisi
on that Shimla and Gangtok Presses as well as 
Government of India Stationery Office should be closed down, merged 5 Presses and 
transfer three textbook presses to State Government while all the other 12 Government 
of India Printing Presses should be retain
ed and modernized. However, the decision 
remain unimplemented. 
 
 
The Committee during their study visit to Government of India Text Book Press, 
Bhubaneswar received lots of representations which gave a completely picture as they 
all live and work in state 
of terror, constant fear of a hanging sword over their heads for 
their unpredictable fate since 2002 onwards when the Cabinet took a decision that all 
the 3 Text Book Presses (Chandigarh, Bhubaneswar and Mysore) may be transferred to 
State Governments; fol
lowed by another blowing Cabinet decision in 2006, which stated 
that the 3 Government of India Text Book Presses be privatized. The Committee also 
witnessed that there was extreme shortage of manpower so much so one person was 
multitasking by sweeping, coo
king, cleaning and printing. The Committee found that the 
workers morale has been at rock bottom and they feel that they are actually orphans 
where nobody cares for them. They feel that this Press is a dilapidated state which 
might be closed any day leavin
g their future in lurch. The Committee also aware that not 
only the working conditions of the employees is pathetic but also machinery is not in 

36
 
 
working condition and at times spare parts of other similar machines are used to make 
at least one machine work
 
to meet the deadlines.
 
 
 
The Committee, therefore, strongly feel that the Nodal Ministry of Urban 
Development and Ministry of Finance, who have failed miserably for the last 15 years to 
take any concrete decision and its implementation regarding moderniza
tion of all the 
retained Government of India Printing Presses, should promptly acted as a guardian to 
all the Government of India Printing Presses, for their ultimate welfare.
 
 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Nodal Ministry of Urban 
D
evelopment and Ministry of Finance should not delay, any further, the implementation 
for modernization of all the 15 retained Government of India Printing Presses, including, 
3 Text Book Presses and must put an end to their indecisiveness and attitude of d
elay 
tactics, forthwith. The Committee further recommend that the Ministry of Urban 
Development must invariably highlight the following requirements to obtain adequate 
and timely budgetary grants. 
 
(i) M
odernization and induction of high speed sophisticate
d, computerized printing 
machinery and allied equipments which has been the inevitable need since long  to 
cope with the ever increasing demand for printing in multi colour at a cheaper rate and 
to adhere to strict time schedule of Government/Parliament Bu
siness besides being 
competitive with Private Sector Presses; (ii) for providing various varieties of printing 
papers and allied printing materials as required by the Government of India Printing 
Presses to meet the demands of the indenting Ministries/Orga
nizations; (iii) for sufficient 
expert manpower to cope with the modernized equipments for time bound Government 
of India / Parliamentary printing jobs; and (iv) for adequate security personnel and for 
creation of secret Room/Sections for secret digitaliza
tion to keep the secret Government 
of India / Parliament related printing jobs in each of the 15 Government of India Printing 
Presses intact. 
 
 
The Committee are aware of the fact that Minto Road Press is being planned to 
be modernized and renovated in I
st
 
Phase as a pilot project with an estimated cost of 
Rs. 125 crore from Budgetary Support spread over two years (2016
-
17) Rs. 25 crore 
renovation by CPWD and Rs. 100 crore (2017
-
19) for modernization. In view of this, the 
Committee observe with concern abou
t this phased manner/style of modernization. If it 

37
 
 
takes 3 years per Press for modernization and renovation, then, with this pace, the last 
15
th 
Press will be modernized after 45 years even if we presume that these are 
renovated back to back. This will onl
y add on the grave sufferings of all the Presses in 
queue by passing of each day which is not acceptable to the Committee. The 
Committee, therefore, also recommend that the work of estimation and actual 
modernization of all the remaining 14 Government of I
ndia Presses should be taken up 
simultaneously on a war footing so that the works should be taken up promptly.
 
Reply of the Government
 
4.2
 
It is true that the Presses are working hard during day and night in order to 
deliver the printed material in time. T
he staff strength of the Presses has reduced 
drastically and diminishing day by day, which requires urgent attention. Similarly, the 
machines have become very old though few indigenous latest machines were inducted 
in the year 2006
-
07 in some of the Presse
s, but these too have become obsolete due to 
drastic technological development in the field of printing technology. Therefore, the 
induction of state
-
of
-
the
-
art advanced printing machines and equipment is the need of 
hour. If these machines are inducted wi
th necessary manpower, the presses will 
continue to render services to the Govt. Departments in future also.
 
The three pronged approach which has been deliberated in the Ministry includes 
the following:
-
 
c.
 
To start with redevelopment of GIP Minto Road by 
constructing of a new 
building through CPWD and induction of State
-
of
-
the
-
art modern machinery 
with a budgetary support of Rs. 338 crores (approx.). The proposal has 
already been given in
-
 
principle approval from Department of Expenditure, 
Ministry of Fina
nce. The SFC Note has now been circulated to other 
stakeholders for their comments.
 
d.
 
In the meantime, Group of Secretaries (set up by the Government for 
undertaking a mid
-
term review of policies and programmes of the 
Government on 28
th
 
October, 2016) has re
commended the rightsizing of 
printing presses as under:
 
The 17 printing presses owned by Govt. of India use obsolete technology, 
both machinery and equipment are outdated, and have outlived their useful 
lifespan. Some of them are around 100
-
150 years old. 
Given the 
constraints, out of 17 presses, 6 presses have been identified to be 
modernized in the first phase. Redevelopment costs for an entire printing 
press would amount to Rs. 236 crore of which cost of modernization of only 
the machineries is Rs. 100 c
rores. The principle to be followed is that that 
unused land parcels can effectively contribute towards achieving the twin 
benefit of utilizing land for public use and of monetizing it to self
-
finance the 

38
 
 
modernization of the printing presses. It is thus r
ecommended that 11 out 
of the present 17 printing presses must be closed down. The remaining 6 
should be modernized by self
-
financing through redevelopment of surplus 
land.
 
 
 
The draft Cabinet Note was circulated for Inter
-
 
Ministerial consultations. The 
comments have been received from the Ministries. The draft Cabinet Note is to be 
referred to PMO after incorporating the comments.
 
(Comments of the Committee)
 
4.3
 
For C
omments of the 
Committee 
please see para no.
1.7
 
of Chapter
-
I of this 
Report.
 
(Recommenda
tion No. 2)
 
NEED TO ENHANCE BUDGETARY SUPPORT TO THE GOVERNMENT PRINTING 
PRESSES
 
4.4
    
The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Urban Development  in their 22
nd
 
Report had observed that the Directorate of Printing had started earmarking funds for 
renewal and replacement of machinery and equipments in the Govt. of India Presses 
only from the year 2003
-
04. From the information provided by the Ministry, the 
Committe
e observe that the allocation at BE stage has been reduced at RE stage since 
2004
-
05. Further, the actual expenditure is also lower than the allocation given at RE 
stage. During the year 2014
-
15 the allocation at BE stage was Rs. 212.66 crore, which 
has be
en lowered to Rs. 189.14 crore at RE stage and BE (2015
-
16) of Rs. 198.45 
crore was lowered as RE (2015
-
16) of Rs. 191.16 crore. During the evidence of the 
Employee Association of Minto Road Printing Press, Chandigarh Text Book Press and 
Govt. of India Tex
t Book Press, Bhubaneswar, the Committee were categorically 
informed that since the year 1986 no new machinery were made available to the Minto 
Road Printing Press. There is huge mismatch in demand and supply of papers to the 
Chandigarh and Bhubaneswar Tex
t Book Presses. Although renovation of Building was 
undertaken but improvement in the machinery is yet to take place in the Chandigarh 
Text Book Press. The Committee were further informed that in spite of several 
constraints being faced by these Printing P
resses and in spite of all odds, these 
Presses never delayed the work. During the year 2014
-
15, the Directorate of Printing 
and Ministry of Urban Development asked the Minto Road Printing Press to achieve the 

39
 
 
target of Rs. 21 crore. Against this the Press 
could achieve Rs. 24.27 crore. The 
Chandigarh Text Book Press has also been awarded as the best Press for 4 times and 
they have always stood to the expectation of the Ministries/Departments of Govt. of 
India. The Govt. of India Text Book Press also have en
ough work in their hand and 
workers are fully engaged to meet the requirement of various Ministries and ready to 
take up more work of the Govt. Departments as and when necessary, provided they are 
equipped with required varieties of papers in time. The Com
mittee are also informed by 
the Ministry that they have deliberated on three pronged approach for the modernization 
of  the Directorate of Printing which inter
-
alia include leveraging of land resources to 
generate revenue for financing modernization, to un
dertake modernization on pilot basis 
on PPP model and replicate it. Further, if this was found successful i.e. financing the 
modernization through budgetary support till 2015 when the Committee of Secretaries 
under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary too
k the view that alienating the vacant 
land will not be a good preposition and, therefore, for modernization, the route of 
utilizing budgetary grant should be explored. 
 
 
The Committee further observe that in spite of the decision of the Committee 
of Secret
aries in 2015 for providing more budgetary grant in favour of Directorate of 
Printing for modernization of their Printing Presses, the BE (2016
-
17) is only Rs. 229.08 
crore which is likely to be reduced considerably at RE stage as per past practice. The 
Co
mmittee are not happy with such type of lower allocation as well as lower utilization 
of funds by the Directorate of Printing and all its Printing Presses. Therefore, they 
strongly recommend that adequate funding may be provided to the Directorate of 
Print
ing for executing all their jobs in hand which remain pending for want of varieties of 
more papers required and also for the modernization programme and desire that the 
Govt. should simultaneously probe the possibility of leveraging the land resources to 
g
enerate revenue for financing modernization and undertake and apply wherever 
applicable PPP model for making all the 15 Govt. of India Printing Presses self
-
sustained in the longer run. “
 
4.5
    
 
 
The Budget Estimates (BE) for 2017
-
18 is Rs. 226.41 crores 
i.e. lesser than 
BE of 2016
-
17. The modernization is proposed to be carried by leveraging the land to 
finance modernization. After, modernization, 6 presses with state of the art technology 
will have access to the entire budgetary support.
 

40
 
 
(Comments of the
 
Committee)
 
4.6
 
For Comments of the Committee please see para no.1.
10
 
of Chapter
-
I of this 
Report.
 
(
Recommendation No
. 3)
 
ACUTE SHORTAGE OF STAFF: NEED FOR FILLING UP VACANCIES ON 
PRIORITY BASIS 
 
4.7
 
The Committee note that the sanctioned strength of the Govt. of India 
Presses/Govt. of India Text Book Presses as on date stand at 7227 against which 
there are only 2619 employees on roll. The vacancies stand at 4608. The Committee 
have been informed that 
two proposals for the revival of 700 posts and 937 posts are 
under consideration. They have also been informed that most of the posts under direct 
recruitment category are in Group C category and these are under deemed 
deputat
ion. A proposal to revive them
 
with the approval of the Ministry of Finance is 
under process. However, the Govt. is also exploring various options like 
modernization, re
-
engineering of human resources, mergers and strategic re
-
locations 
to restructure all the Government of India Presse
s. During evidence, the Employees 
Associations of various Govt. Printing Presses of Minto Road, Chandigarh and 
Bhubaneswar emphatically pointed out that there is severe manpower crisis in their 
Presses. Since 1989 there has been no new recruitment in the M
into Road Printing 
Press. Every year employees are retiring and these vacancies have not been filled up. 
The strength of Minto Road Press has been reduced from 861 to 363. Every year 57
-
58 employees are retiring. At Chandigarh and Bhubaneswar Text Book Pre
sses there 
is shortage of Security Staff. In the Bhubaneswar Text Book Printing Press the staff 
strength is only 70. And the vacancies being caused by retirement are not being filled 
up by the fresh appointees. In the past also, as per the standing instruc
tions of 
Department of Expenditure, vacant posts lapsed as these were not filled up for a 
certain period of time. In this way, if the Government do not fill up the vacant posts at 
the earliest, these posts would cease to exist and there will be nobody to w
ork in these 
Presses. The Committee further note that the total vacancies in Government of India 
Presses are 64% while in Government of India Text Book Presses, it is 72%. The total 
present vacancies in the Directorate of Printing, Government of India Stat
ionery Office 

41
 
 
and Department of Publication are 65%. In some of the Presses the vacancies are 
more than 90% such as Koratty Press (90%), Coimbatore Press 83%, Nilokheri and 
Temple Street and Faridabad Presses have 75% vacancies. 40 Similarly, there is an 
a
cute shortage of staff in all the Government of India Presses, and the Government of 
India Text Book Presses. The Committee need not emphasize that the manpower 
crisis has had a crippling effect on the efficiency and working of the Govt. of India 
Printing 
Presses. Moreover, the existing staff of these Printing Presses have to 
multitask and work in multiple shifts and, thus, their morale are at rock bottom today. 
The Committee are concerned about the damaging effects of such high percentage of 
shortage of hu
man resources, i.e., increasing frustration, constant dissatisfaction, 
confusion and uncertainty among existing staff leading to dwindling of their morale and 
efficiency. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the proposal of the 
Ministry to rev
ive the abolition of direct recruitment in Grade
-
C category and exploring 
various options to restructure the Directorate of Printing, GISO and Department of 
Publication be finalized at the earliest, without losing precious time and at the cost of 
lowering 
moral of the existing staff strength. They also recommend that the vacancies 
in other categories, accordingly may also be filled up on emergent and priority basis. 
The Committee may be apprised about the action taken in this direction at the earliest 
possi
ble. The Committee further recommend the Government to conduct a quick audit 
of the basic requirement from the station managers at every Government of India 
Press and Government of India Text Book Press. The Committee feel that it will be 
only a very modes
t beginning. If the Ministry can fulfill this audit promptly, that will give 
them some hope and raise the efficiency and morale of the employees enormously 
which is now at the lowest ebb.
 
4.8
 
The Cabinet Note is still under process of approval. It is propo
sed that the on
-
roll 
employees will be redeployed in the retained six presses. Further, based on the 
requirement assessed by the study, the redeployed manpower will be provided 
additional skills through training and if the need be, some additional manpower
 
with 
special skills may be inducted.
 
(Comments of the Committee)
 
4.
9
 
For Comments of the Committee please see para no.1.
13
 
of Chapter
-
I of this 
Report.
 

42
 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 7)
 
RECOVERY 
OF OUTSTANDINGS FROM ALL DEFAULTING 
MINISTRIES/ORGANIZATIONS/STATE 
GOVERNMENTS
 
4.
10
 
The Committee are astonished to observe from the list of Outstanding Printing 
dues from various Ministries/Organizations/State Governments as furnished by the 
Nodal Ministry of Urban Development that as on 30.06.2016, there are Rs. 385.62 
crore 
outstanding printing charge
s dues for recovery.  
They observe that there are 54 Central 
Ministries, 12 Autonomous Bodies/Statutory/Constitutional Organizations, such as, CAG 
of India, Election Commission of India, erstwhile Planning Commission, UPSC,
 
etc., 8 
States and one NCT of Delhi among those who have Outstanding Printing Charges 
towards the Government of India Printing Presses. What astonished the Committee 
most that the Nodal Ministry of Urban Development who is responsible for the welfare of 
i
ts attached office, namely, Directorate of Printing and all its Printing Presses and is 
expected to act as a guardian for the Directorate, is the highest defaulter themselves, as 
they have to pay Rs.91.45 crore against the total outstanding printing charge
s dues of 
Rs.385.62 crore. Among the next highest defaulters are, Ministry of Communication and 
Information Technology (Rs.73.76 crore), Ministry of Defence (Rs.70.45 crore), Ministry 
of Home Affairs (Rs.31.77 crore), Ministry of Finance (Rs. 27.41 crore),
 
Government of 
Delhi (Rs.17.19 crore), Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Rs. 9.56 crore) and 
Ministry of Human Resource Development (Rs.8.53 crore) to name a few.
 
 
 
The Committee feel that the target of recovery of printing charges (dues) needs 
to be 
monitored by the Directorate scrupulously and recommend that the outstanding 
dues are realized from the concerned quarters within a period of three months. The 
Committee further observe that the target of recovery of printing charges dues have 
been fixed f
or every press in the start of the financial year and the Directorate monitors 
the realization by presses closely by obtaining monthly reports from all the presses. 
They were informed that recovery teams have been constituted in all the presses who 
visit t
he indenting departments to reconcile and sort out the problems/difficulties and to 
fast track the recoveries. If required, details of pending bills and relevant records are 
provided to indenting departments. D.O. letters from the Directorate and Minister 
of 

43
 
 
State level were also issued to various Ministries/Departments to expedite the 
realization of the outstanding dues. 
 
 
The Committee failed to understand from the replies of the Ministry that on one 
hand, they are sending letters from MoS level to all th
e defaulters, and are expecting 
expedited realization of the outstanding dues, on the other hand, they themselves have 
become the highest defaulters by withholding Rs. 91.45 crore which belongs to the  
Government of India Printing Presses. The Committee st
rongly deplore this kind of 
duality of principles being followed and practiced by the Nodal Ministry itself, wherein 
they do not practice what they are trying to preach others.
 
 
The Committee further fail to understand that on the one hand, there have been
 
perennial and chronic
-
cum
-
extreme shortage of manpower with the Government of 
India Printing Presses in all their Sections/Units/Departments as the Presses are 
functioning with merely 10% to 30
-
40 % staff/manpower only out of their required 
sanctioned str
ength, but on the other hand, the Nodal Ministry have created recovery 
teams in all the Presses who visit the indenting departments to reconcile  and sort out 
the problems/difficulties to fast track the recoveries, thus, creating more shortage of 
manpower 
to attend the original and main work at Printing Presses by those staff whose 
services have been diverted to recovery teams.
 
 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend to the Nodal Ministry viz., 
Ministry of Urban Development to first set an inspiring e
xample by paying their own 
outstanding Printing charges dues of Rs.91.45 crore within a stipulated period  of this 
financial year itself, and, then, create and develop such norms, rules, regulations and 
provisions which are legally and effectively binding 
on each indenting 
Ministry/Department/State Governments/Organizations to pay their printing charges to 
the concerned Printing Presses within a stipulated period of three months or the same 
financial year in which their printing jobs have been executed, eve
n if it requires change 
in accounting system. The Nodal Ministry of Urban Development can also discuss the 
issue with the  Ministry of Finance and explore the possibility of developing a 
mechanism wherein Ministry of Finance help the  Government of India P
rinting Presses 
in recovery of outstanding printing charges from the indenters, by using their executive 
powers, deducting the outstanding dues from the next year Budgetary allocation of the 

44
 
 
indenting Ministries/Organizations/State Governments in favour of
 
respective Printing 
Presses.
 
Reply of the Government
 
4.
11
 
Vigorous efforts are made to recover the outstanding dues by issuing D.O. letter 
at various levels i.e. Director, Joint Secretary and Minister of State. The recovery team 
has also been formed by th
e respective Presses for making visits to various indentors 
–
 
to clear difficulties, give clarifications, to provide
 
copies of the bills/challans etc. As a 
result of these efforts a rise in realization of outstanding dues are noticed.
 
(Comments of the Comm
ittee)
 
4.
12
 
For Comments of the Committee please see para no. 
1.2
2
 
of Chapter I of this 
Report.
 
 
(Recommendation No. 8)
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA STATIONERY OFFICE (GISO) BE REVIVED
 
4
.1
3
 
The Committee are aware that established in 1850 with its headquarters in 
Kolkata, Government of India Stationery Office (GISO) is subordinate office under the 
Ministry of Urban Development. GISO is responsible for transparent procurement of 
stationery and
 
paper made articles at economical cost and supply to the Government 
offices for their use. The Committee have been informed that the procurement is made 
from small scale industries (SSI) registered under MSME Act., which means, it is also 
giving business 
to some of the tiny but employment intensive industrial units of India, in 
this process. The Committee note that there has been a steady decline in the role of 
GISO after the amendment of rule 140 of GFR, wherein full powers for procurement of 
goods were d
elegated to the Ministries or Departments. They also find that there has 
been a continuous reduction in budgetary allocation and staff strength of GISO after 
2005. However, the Committee was informed that most of the North Eastern States and 
remote areas r
emain heavily dependent on GISO for their stationery requirements. 
 
 
 
The Committee  feel that GISO has an age
-
old expertise in procurement of 
stationery items and paper, it gives business to many small scale business through its 
procurement process and th
ere is a need for welfare of its employees. In the current 

45
 
 
context, therefore, the Committee recommend that GISO should be allowed to function 
with increased budget and manpower.
 
 
The Committee note that the Direct Demanding Officer, DDO, procures paper fo
r 
the Government of India Stationery Office (GISO). DGS&D finalize  the rate contract 
and GISO only place the supply order on the supplying firms. Even the Ministry 
admitted that often, DGS&D, conclude the rate contract at the belated stage of financial 
ye
ars and with the result GISO do not have scope to utilise their Budget in time. They, 
therefore have to place the supply order at the fag end of the financial year, hence, the 
budget remains unutilized. The Committee desire that the intermediaries viz. DGS
&D 
should be kept away and GISO should be allowed to place order directly in time, with 
the power to finalize  the rate contract themselves, so that the suppliers can also supply 
in time. This will enable GISO to spend the entire allocated funds for the ye
ar.
 
 
The Committee have been informed by various organizations that some 
indenters from remote places are coming to GISO for stationery but most of the time 
they are not in a position to supply according to their indenters needs simply because of 
hugely in
adequate budgetary support from the Government. They are not satisfied with 
the reply of the Government that GISO is being provided regular budgetary support for 
day to day functioning. The Committee observe that during 2015 the Government had 
finalize a q
uantity statement to the tune of Rs. 87 crore. The quantity statement is 
prepared on the basis of the indenters and their payments but the Government has 
allocated only 3 crore budget against Rs.87 crore payments recovered. The Committee, 
therefore, recomm
end the Ministry of Urban Development to allocate adequate 
budgetary support so that GISO can emerge as an effective and vibrant organization.
 
 
The Committee further note that earlier GISO used to procure printing paper on 
behalf of the Directorate of Prin
ting, as it has a well
-
equipped procurement system as 
well as quality control system. The Committee recommend the Government to allow 
GISO to procure the printing paper on behalf of the Directorate of Printing so that GISO 
could be revived fully.
 
Reply of 
the Government
 
4.14
 
The Budget for the financial year 2017
-
18 is Rs 14.58 cr and the budget for the 
financial year 2016
-
17 is Rs 13.67 cr. The Expression of Interest (EOI) and Terms of 

46
 
 
Reference (TOR) to engage a professional organization to conduct the st
udy for revival 
of GISO including is being finalized in the Ministry. 
 
 
(Comments of the Committee)
 
4.15
 
For Comments of the Committee please see para no. 1.2
5
 
of Chapter I of this 
Report.
 
 
 
 
 

47
 
 
CHAPTER V
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
 
 
(Recommendation No. 9)
 
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLICATION: NEED TO MODERNIZE, UPGRADE AND 
REVIVE
 
 
5.1
 
The Committee note that Department of Publication was established in 1924, 
with its headquarters in Delhi and 6 other Depot cum 
sales counters. Now, it is a 
subordinate office under the Ministry or Urban Development. Its main functions are 
publishing, stocking, sale and distribution of the Gazette of India, Delhi Gazette, 
Supreme Court Reports, Defence publications, Indian Trade Jo
urnal, Low priced 
Publications, Railway publications, Election Commission Reports, etc. Being the 
publisher and custodian of Government of India publications, the Department has the 
role of custodian regarding Gazette publications. It is also the depositor
y of Government 
publications, which includes 6949 titles of civil publications and 2964 Army Publications, 
excluding all periodicals and Gazette notifications. Thus, it is performing vital functions 
of publishing, stocking, sale & distribution of important
 
Government documents which 
can neither be transferred to private publishers nor is advisable to do so. It is also not 
feasible to undertake these activities by any private publishers on no profit no loss basis 
as is done by this Department. The Committee 
further note that the Department of 
Publications has a staff strength of 333, out of which only 206 are on roll (as on 
01.07.2016). Taking into consideration the multifarious functions Department of 
Publications undertake, and the role it is assigned to pl
ay the Committee recommend 
that it should be upgraded, modernized and allowed to function with adequate staff and 
funding.
 
 
The Committee further observe that the 10
th 
Report of Expenditure Reforms 
Commission under the Ministry of Finance had recommended t
hat the entire receipt, 
dispatch, stock holding, billing and accounting should be computerized. For this 
purpose, professional help should be hired. Digitalization/Computerization of the 
Department should be taken up on priority basis and completed within 
six months.
 

48
 
 
 
The Committee have been informed that Govt. Departments offer only selected 
publications to this Department for sale, whereas they sell or distribute other 
publications on their own. Those departments tend to pass on only low cost publications
 
for sale. According to the Committee, distribution of only low cost publications 
continuously reflects on the image of the Department. The Committee recommend that 
just as all the departments should have the freedom to decide whether they would 
utilize th
e services of Department of Publication, it should also have the right to refuse 
to undertake the jobs sought to be given to it, if it finds that only some low priced items 
are being offered, while the higher priced items being given for distribution to ot
her 
agencies. In addition to the above, they also recommend that it should be made 
mandatory for all the Government Ministries/Departments to get their each and every 
publication published through the Department of Publications.
 
 
Keeping in view the needs 
of changing publishing methods and technology, the 
Committee recommend that there should be speedy computerization and modernization 
of the Department of Publication in a time bound manner. 
 
 
The Committee further observe and recommend that the vacant post
 
of the 
Controller of Department of Publication which is lying vacant for quite some time, should 
also be filled up immediately.
 
Reply of the Government
 
5.2
 
A meeting was conducted by Department of Publication in consultation with NIC/ 
NICSI regarding Rede
velopment and re
-
designing of two official websites for 
Department of Publication viz; 
www.deptpub.nic.in
 
and 
www.egazette.nic.in
 
as per 
Government of India guidelines for web
sites is being proposed. e
-
 
Publishing of all 
publications has been initiated. Further, NIC networking is proposed to establish the e
-
office system in the department.
 
 
A tender was floated regarding procurement of hardware equipments, but the 
same couldn’t
 
be materialized in the last financial year. A Notice Inviting Tender has 
been floated by the department and is proposed to be published for e
-
procurement by 
May, 2017.
 

49
 
 
 
Department of Publication has already got starte the renovation/ modernization of 
its 
sales counter
-
 
Kitab Mahal, Baba Kharag Singh Marg, New Delhi through CPWD 
with a view to make it a unique outlet of Government Publications with modern facilities.
 
 
The vacant post of Controller of Publications has already been advertised in the 
Employmen
t News/ Rojgar Samachar (21
-
27
th
 
January, 2017) with stipulated time of 
two months from the date of publications. The file for selecting the Controller of 
Publications from the applicants is under process.
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                       
     
 
    
Pinaki Misra
,
 
 
09
th
 
August,
 
201
7
 
           
                                                                           
     
  
  
Chairperson,          
             
 
18
th
 
Sravana
,
 
193
9
 
(Saka)                         
      
  
Standing Committee on 
Urban Development
.
 
 
 
 
 

50
 
 
ANNEXURE I
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2016
-
2017)
 
 
MINUTES OF THE 1
5
th 
SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 
_______
 
 
 

51
 
 
 
ANNEXURE II
 
[Vide para 
4
 
of the Introduction]
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOV
ERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/
OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
TWELFTH
 
REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN
 
DEVELOPLMENT (
SIXTEENTH
 
LOK SABHA)
 
I.
 
 
Total number of recommendations    
 
 
 
 
 
 
09
 
                                         
 
 
   
 
 
 
II.
 
Recommendations/Observations
 
which have been accepted
                       
 
by the Government:
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation Nos. 
4,
5
 
and 
6
                                                                  
(Total : 3)
 
Percentage to total recommendations
 
 
                          
                              
(
33.33
%)
 
 
     
 
 
                             
 
III.
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:                   
 
 
             
 
Recommendation No
. 
Nil
                                                                                
(Total:0)
 
Percentage to total recommendations
  
                                                          
 
(
0
%)
 
                
                           
 
 
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
IV.
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of          
 
                           
 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
 
Recommendation No
s
. 
1
, 2, 3, 7 
and
 
8
  
                                                       
(Total:05)
                                                          
Percentage to total recommendations 
                                                        
 
(
55
.
5
5
%)
 
                           
 
 
 
         
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
V. 
      
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
 
 
    
 
           
 
 
replies of the Government are still awaited:
 
 
 
Recommendation No
s
. 
9
                                                                      
        
 
(Total:0
1
)
 
Percentage to total recommendations  
                                                        
 
(
11.11
%)
 
                                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
           
                        
 
   
 