 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2017-18) 
                   
   
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
          
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
                                            
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Seventeenth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the Subject 'Functioning of Directorate of Estates, 
Construction and Maintenance of Government Residential Buildings and other Buildings by 
CPWD and NBCC'] 
 
 
TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
      
 
                                   LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                                 NEW DELHI 
 
 
January, 2018/ Pausha 1939 (Saka) 
21 


TWENTY FIRST  REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2017-18) 
 
                                
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on  the Subject 'Functioning of Directorate of Estates, Construction and 
Maintenance of Government Residential Buildings and other Buildings by CPWD and NBCC'] 
   
 
   Presented to Lok Sabha on .......... 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ............ 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
January, 2018/ Pausha 1939 (Saka) 
 
 
 


 
    
C.U.D No.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2018 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth 
Edition) and printed by ................ 
 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
P.No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE...........................................................................        (iii) 
INTRODUCTION..............................................................................................................        (v) 
CHAPTER I Report...................................................................................................                  
                                                                                            
   1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government..........................................................................................                          
 
   15 
CHAPTER III Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not desire 
to pursue in view of the Government’s replies...................................... 
 
   28 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee .................... 
 
   29 
CHAPTER V Observations /Recommendations in respect of which final  replies of 
the Government are still awaited.......................................................... 
 
   32 
APPENDICES 
I. Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Committee held on 02.01.2018 .....................................       33 
 
II. Analysis of the action taken by the Government on  the recommendations contained in            
 Seventeenth Report (16th Lok Sabha)...................................................................................       35          
III. Ministry of Urban Development Order No-248/Dir.(W)2014, dated 15.05.2015            
 Constitution of Committee of experts for assessing medium and long term requirement  
 of residential  accommodation in General Pool. ...................................................................       36    
                         
IV. CPWD OM No- 7/20/2016-W-II/DGNO-I, dated 24.11.2015 to all ADGs Chief Engineers          
 for holding one Meeting per month with RWAs.....................................................................       37 
 
V. CPWD OM No-02/01/2016/PG/M-DG/14, dated 20.01.2014 to all ADGs for Third Party         
  Audit for quality of maintenance related work in Government  accommodation ..................       38 
 
VI. CPWD OM No-7/20/2016-WII/358, dated 12.05.2017 regarding giving sufficient            
 hearing to  residence and involving Police and Video graphing before demolition drives.           39 
 
VII. CPWD OM No-7/20/2016/W-II/23B dated 04.05.2017 regarding proper maintenance of          
  Bungalows, Guest Houses and Holiday Homes so that Government Officers stay there  
  during official duties............................................................................................................         40 
 

 
VIII. Ministry of Urban Development OM No-JS/Works/OM/2016 dated 30.05.2016 regarding   
 Adoption of New and Emerging Technologies in construction work of value not less than 
  Rs. 100crores  in Metropolitan cities, undertaken by CPWD, DDA and NBCC.      41 
 
IX. DG, CPWD OM No- DG/DSR/011 dated 17.08.2016 regarding Adoption of New &            
 Emerging Technologies in projects/Works of value not less than 100 crores in  
 Metropolitan Cities............................................................................................................     42 
 
X. CPWD Om No-DG/TAS/Misc/06 dated 16.02.2017 regarding Specific recommendations/           
 Plans of Action on Air Pollution and Green House in Delhi..............................................           44 
 
XI. Ministry of Urban Development OM No-28012/7/2016-W-3 dated 28.12.2016 regarding            
 Adoption of New and Emerging Technologies in construction work of value not less  
 than Rs. 100 crores in Metropolitan cities undertaken by CPWD, DDA and NBCC.       45 
 
XII. CPWD OM No-17/SE(TAS)/BMTPC/2016-17/78E dated 21.04.2017 regarding Adoption             
 of  new and emerging technologies in construction works of CPWD................................      46 
 
 
  

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2017-18) 
Shri Pinaki Misra         -        Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
      Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Pradan  Baruah 
 
3. Shri Ramesh Bidhuri 
 
4. Shri Ashok  Shankarrao Chavan 
 
5. Shri Dilipkumar  Mansukhlal Gandhi 
 
6. Dr. Dharam Vira Gandhi 
 
7. Shri Maheish Girri 
 
8. Shri R.Gopalakrishnan 
 
9. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
 
10. Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi 
 
11. Shri P.C. Mohan 
 
12. Shri  Srinivas Kesineni Nani 
 
13. Shri K. Parasuraman 
 
14. Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil 
 
15. Shri Charanjeet Singh Rori 
 
16. Shri Alok Sanjar 
 
17. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
 
18. Shri Anil Shirole 
 
19. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
 
20. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
 
21. Prof. K. V. Thomas 
 
 
 
 
 

Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri R.S. Bharathi 
 
23. Shri Husain Dalwai 
 
24. Shri Anil Desai 
 
25. Dr. Tazeen Fatma 
 
26. Shri Parvez Hashmi 
 
27. Shri K.C. Ramamurthy 
 
28. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna 
 
29. Vacant* 
 
30. Shri Ajay Sancheti 
 
31. Shri Devender Goud T. 
 
 
(* Shri Mukul Roy, MP resigned from Rajya Sabha Membership w.e.f  
11/10/2017.) 
 
 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi- Joint Secretary 
 
2. Sh. A.K. Shah                           - Director 
 
3. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan   - Deputy Secretary 
 
4. Dr. (Maj.) Jagmohan Khatry    - Committee Officer 
 
 
  

 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson  of the Standing Committe e on Urban Development (201 7-18) having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Twenty First Report (16th Lok Sabha) on the action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) 
of the Committe e on the subject ' Functioning of Directorate of Estates, Construction and Maintenance of 
Government Residential Buildings and other Buildings by CPWD and NBCC'. 
2. The Seventeenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 12.04.2017 and laid on the table of Rajya 
Sabha on same date. The Action Taken Replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained 
in the Report  were received on 28.07.17. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on  02.01.2018. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Seventeenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Appendix-II. 
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
                          Pinaki Misra 
2nd January, 2018                                  Chairperson,       
12 Pausha,1939 (Saka)                                Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
 
 
  

 
REPORT 
CHAPTER I 
 
This Report of the Standing Committ ee on Urban Development (2017-18) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in their Seventeenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject 
'Functioning of Directorate of Estates, Cons truction and Maintenance of Gover nment 
Residential Buildings and other Buildings by CPWD and NBCC ' which was presented to 
Parliament on 12th April, 2017. 
 
2. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the 13 recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been categorized as 
follows: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the   
Government: 
  Recommendation Nos. 1, 2,3,4,6,7,9,10,11,12 and 13 
               (Total -11) 
(Chapter-II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations /Observations, which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government's replies: 
Recommendation No.  Nil                                       (Nil) 
(Chapter-III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations /Observations, in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
  Recommendation Nos. 5 and 8                                                                                                                                                
                    (Total - 2) 
(Chapter-IV) 
 
(iv) Recommendations /Observations, in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are, still awaited: 
             Recommendation No.  Nil                                                                     (Nil) 
(Chapter-V) 
 
3. The Committee desire that  specific replies to the comments contained in 
Chapter-I  may be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case, not later than 
three months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
4. The Committee will now like to comment on the action taken by the Government 
on some of their recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.   
 

 
Exploring a system for time b ound completion of on -going works by NBCC and 
CPWD w.r.t GPRA- reiterated. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.1) 
 
 5. The Committee had recommended as under: 
         
   “The number of residential accommodations (General Pool) available with 
DoE is 61643 in Delhi and 34634 in other Regional Stations, which are not 
adequate to meet the requirement of Government officials against their demand of 
85314 houses in Delhi and 5085 2 houses in other Regional Stations, as no major 
construction is carried out for Government quarters during the past several years. 
Since, there is acute shortage of houses in Delhi and other areas, the Government 
officials have to wait for long period to get their residential accommodation allotted. 
The Committee have been informed that 16033 additional houses would be made 
available under General Pool Residential Accommodation(GPRA) to meet the gap 
in demand and supply of Government accommodation after th e redevelopment of 
Kidwai Nagar (East), Sarojini Nagar, Naroji Nagar, Kasturba Nagar, Thyagraj, 
Sriniwaspuri and Mohamadpur in three years by NBCC and CPWD. Similar other 
measures by the Ministry of Urban Development such as maintenance of 
departmental poo l by constructing residential accommodation, reoccupation of 
unauthorised land allotted for the purpose to others are expected to supplement 
the stock. 
  
The Committee note the steps taken by the Government to meet residential 
demand of Government official s. They would like the Ministry to explore a system 
for completing the desired work expeditiously in time bound manner and minimize 
the financial burden on the Government. The Committee desire that department 
should make real time assessment of requirement  so that availability of houses to 
Government officials is made by taking requisite measures for completion. They 
also desire that entire redevelopment process of existing housing colonies should 
adopt green building norms and in house solid and liquid was te management 
facilities as envisaged in the master plan of Delhi-2021 (MPD).”     
 
6. In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:   
 
"The Cabinet Committee on accommodation asked the Ministry of Urban 
Development to assess the medium  and long term requirement of residential 
accommodation for government officials, especially in NCT of Delhi and other 
metropolitan cities/town, and to suggest viable options including public private 
partnership to meet the shortfall. 
 
-2- 
 
 

 
The Ministry of Urban Development constituted a Committee of Experts vide 
order number 248/Dir (W)/2014 dated 15.05.2015 (Appendix-III). The 
Committee is headed by Director General, CPWD and its members are 
Director of Estates, L&DO, Director (Works) and DDG (Works). On 
15.05.2017, the committee has approved the long -term requirement of GPRA 
i.e. upto 2027 and is being submitted to MoUD.  The department has issued 
green building norms under section - 6A of CPWD Works Manual 2014. 
Under these norms, all CPWD constructions are executed as green buildings 
and with specification of three star building. In all new redevelopment colonies 
green building norms are also being followed including Rain Water Harvesting 
& Sewerage Treatment Plant."        
 
7.  The Committee while noticing that as against the huge demand 1.36 
lakh accommodation for Government officials in General Pool, the actual 
availability was only 97, 000 with likely availability of  over 16,000 
accommodation through a re -development process going on in various 
Government colony areas like Ki dwai Nagar, Sarojini Nagar, etc. by NBCC, 
the Committee had recommended the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs for exploring a system for expeditious  and time bound completion 
of on-going works by NBCC and CPWD and to have a real time requirement 
of accommodation. The Committee had also desired that entire re -
development process of existing housing colonies should adopt green 
building norms and in house solid and liquid waste management facilities 
as envisaged in the Master Plan of Delhi-2021 (MPD). 
 
The Committee a re constrained to note that their  recommendation 
regarding exploring a system for time bound completion of on-going works 
by NBCC and CPWD has not b een addressed at all by the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs in their  action taken reply.  In the absence  of 
any plausible explanation,  the C ommittee strongly reiterate that a system 
be evolved for time b ound completion of on -going works by NBCC and 
CPWD expeditiously for partially meeting the shortag e of huge gap 
between demand vis -a-vis supply of accommodation for Gove rnment 
officials in Government Pool. With respect to their recommendation 
regarding assessment of real time requirement of accommodations in 
Government Pool, the Committee note the work done by a Committee of 
Experts headed by DG, CPWD, for approving a medium and long term 
requirement o f residential accommodation upto 2027  which is being 
submitted to Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs.  The Committee would 
like to be a pprised about the salient features of the said medium and long 
term requirement and also about the progress of work done thereon so far 
so as to arrive at logical conclusions.  On their recommendation regarding  
-3- 
 

 
adoption of green norms and in house solid and waste management 
facilities in Master Plan of Delhi 2021 for entire redevelopment process  
including housing colonies , the Committee welcome the Govern ment's 
directions issued in this behalf for all CPWD constructions for co mpliance.  
However, the Committee would lik e to know whether these norms are  
applicable for construction by NBCC also. 
  
Sub-standard CPWD works, quality audit of all CPWD works and fixing 
responsibility of AE/JE/Contractors for poor quality of works- reiterated. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
 
          8.   The Committee had recommended as under: 
               
 The Committee feel that efficient and effective functioning of CPWD has a 
direct bearing on the quality of maintenance and upkeep of prime public 
properties on one hand and efficient use of public money and resources on the 
other. They are aware of the poor ma intenance of accommodation of 
Government colonies though there has been a perceptible improvement in 
response time and basic services by CPWD through implementation of citizen 
charter, its helpline and feedback services. However, this improvement is far 
below expectations of the residents of those colonies especially with respect to 
quality of work done and the sub-standard workmanship. 
                
 As regards the monitoring mechanism of CPWD to check the quality of 
work of contractors, the Committee have been apprised that CPWD has a quality 
assurance and technical audit wing at headquarters and separate quality 
assurance units in Superintendent Engineers (SE) office and Director General 
(DG) office. The CPWD also informed the Committee that technical c hecks are 
performed by supervisory officials during the execution of work. The quality 
assurance teams from circle and other offices regularly inspect the site to monitor 
quality. On specific complaints Headquarter quality assurance unit carries out 
periodical inspections and third party quality assurance (TPQA) is employed for 
projects more than Rs. 20 crores. The Committee are, however, surprised to note 
that despite this system in place, no centralized data is maintained for all such 
checks and inspections by various units of CPWD. The Committee are of the firm 
view that despite so many layers of checks by the CPWD, the quality of work 
being done by contractors is of very poor quality and anybody guess. 
  
           The Committee strongly recommend the Mi nistry to have a strict and 
vigorous internal quality audit of all its projects carried out by the contractors. The 
AE/JE, performing very well should be deployed from time to time to 
-4- 

 
 
inspect and audit the quality of works from where there are regular complaints 
and a time bound report be submitted for correctives. The responsibility should 
be fixed at the level of AE/JE/Contractor level if the substandard workmanship 
and poor quality of works  are found or complained by the allottees in 
maintenance of building as this not only leads to unnecessary waste of time for 
the allottees and workers but also leads to multiple expenditure in doing -
undoing-doing again of work. At the same time, centralize d data should also be 
maintained for all the inspections. 
  
         A mechanism should be developed to incentivize/penalize the officials 
through performance based transfers should be provided to the officials. Also 
adequate administrative and financial p owers should be provided to the field 
officers of CPWD so that, if they so decide, they can take up measures and 
steps to take up works which are of 'preventive safeguard' for maintenance of 
Government accommodation/ building. The senior officer from the r ank of 
Executive Engineer of CPWD onwards should inspect the maintenance/ 
construction of Govt. quarters in areas under their jurisdiction periodically and 
regularly, personally and take a view including all preventative steps regarding 
its maintenance etc . These senior Officers should be made liable for 
maintenance and updation of facilities as per the norms and guidelines. This 
field participation by senior officers will surely bring coordination and 
seriousness in handling the Government/ official quarte rs while bringing 
contentment among allottees. 
    
9. In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:   
 
"The inspections of various maintenance divisions are carried out at alternate 
year. The inspection reports of such inspection are issued to the concerned 
division with copy to vigilance unit, CE & SE concerned. All data of 
inspections & replies and follow -up action is maintained by the office of SE 
(QA).  In this connection a detailed OM has also been issued for third party 
quality c ontrol on maintenance works by SE & EE of Circle/ Division other 
than circle / division executing the work vide no. 02/01/2016/PG/M -DG/14 
dated: 20.01.2017( Appendix-V).  The concerned divisions are pursued for 
rectification of any defect pointed out in the  inspections and all such data for 
rectification is maintained and quarterly reports are prepared for such action." 
 
10.  While observing that quality of constructions carried out by CPWD  
had been below expectations even after implementation of measures like 
citizen charter, helpline, feedback etc., the Committee had recommended 
various measur es like strict and rigorous quality audit of all projects 
carried out by contractors, fixing of responsibility at the level of AE/JE and  
-5- 

 
 
 
 contractors, developing a centralised data base, developing a system of 
punishment and reward based on individual performance  of officials, 
equiping the officials with adequate administrative and financial powers, 
periodic inspection s by senior level officials of CPWD, etc.   In response 
thereto the Committee find that action taken repl y merely speaks about 
periodic inspections of CPWD works that too a t alternate year,  sending 
inspection reports to Vigilance Unit, maintenance of centralised data of 
inspections done,  holding of T hird Party Quality Control on maintenance 
works etc.  Thus, th e Committee find that the thrust  of their 
recommendation is comp letely missing  in action taken reply of the 
Government in as -much-as it does not reveal Government view  on 
prominent issues  referred to above.  The Ministry has conveniently kept 
quiet on issues such as poor quality works and workmanship, inspections 
and l iabilities of senior officers, fixing of responsibilities etc.  Thus, the 
Committee feel that unless the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs reveal 
their view point as well as willingness on these important issues, the 
improvement in functioning of CPWD i s unachievable.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate that quality audit of CPWD works and other issues  like 
fixing of responsibility of the level of AE/JE and contractor, equipping the 
officials with adequate administrative and financial powers, etc.  should be 
fully addressed in final action taken reply.  
 
Facilitating allottees/residents to post pictures/videos of work carried out 
by CPWD contractors on web portal/mobile app of CPWD- reiterated. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8 ) 
 
11. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
The Committee feel that the satisfaction level of contractors or CPWD 
officials cannot be gauged unless it is corroborated by residents of Government 
residential colonies. Further, as of now, there is no facility available to allotte es 
on CPWD web -portal or 'Mobile App' to post photograph/videos of work carried 
out by CPWD contractors. 
  
The Committee are of the considered view that it is very pertinent to 
empower residents so that they can give grading or otherwise of the work 
carried out by CPWD contractors and at the same time corroborate their 
grievance/dissatisfaction by uploading photographs/videos on CPWD web-portal 
and CPWD Mobile App. as many a times the quality of work done is very poor 
-6- 

 
 
 
and without application of  mind and acumen. It is also seen that the 
AE/JE/Contractors deploy workers who do not have adequate 
qualification/expertise/acumen to attend work and they are paid much below 
 
 the norms. These workers then perform wrong and below standard works. It 
leads to incurring heavy expenditure and becomes wasteful for the CPWD 
resources. 
  
The Committee desire that there should be a dedicated audit unit in 
CPWD to monitor such pictures/videos etc. and to initiate action against erring 
officials/contractors, if found negligent. The Committee feel that empowering 
residents/RWAs will infuse more transparency, accountability in functioning of 
CPWD and at the same time will stop contractors' whims and fancies in carrying 
out the work promptly, prevent deploying sub -standard workers and will bring 
real grass-root situations to the notice of top officers of the organization. 
 
12. In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:   
 
 "An online system is already available as a part of CPWD Sewa  to facilitate 
residents to grade the work done by CPWD as very good, good or poor. 
Residents’ feedback on each complaint is also taken by the call centre and 
recorded in the system for analysis and corrective measures. The residents 
too have facility to g ive feedback by SMS on each repair work carried out by 
CPWD. Facility to upload photographs/videos of the work done by CPWD on 
the portal will be added by August 2017." 
  
13.  The Committee while apprehending that CPWD works are not 
generally verified by r esidents/allottees of Government colonies in the 
absence of web monitoring mechanism like e -portal or mobile app, had 
recommended for empowering RWAs for bringing about transparency in 
CPWD works and for setting up dedicated audit in CPWD in the light of 
reports of poor quality of works done by CPWD due to reasons like 
deployment of workers without adequate qualifications and experience. 
The Committee feel that although on -line monitoring system would have 
started by August, 2017, as stated by the Ministry,  yet the issue of 
empowering RWAs and setting up audit of CPWD works is still to be 
complied with. They therefore reiterate the same leaving no room for any 
complaint of poor quality of CPWD works.   
 
 
 
-7- 

 
 
 
Adequate funds and manpower for maintenance of  Inspection 
Bungalows/Guest houses and Holiday Homes and early framing of 
Guidelines for upkeep of furniture items- reiterated. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
 
14. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
The Committee observe that guest houses of DoE are  in prime locations 
of towns and are spacious and well laid out. However, their maintenance is not 
done regularly which leads to their deterioration and are presently in pathetic 
condition. This compels the Central Government Employees to stay in private 
hotels and this facility of no use to employees. They have been informed that 
earlier, there was no separate budget allocation for maintenance of guest 
houses but this year Rs. 5 crore is allotted as RE, out of which Rs. 2.69 crore 
has been spent for mainte nance of guest houses in the year 2015 -16. The 
Committee also notice that there is no separate manpower and machinery for 
maintenance of guest houses. Rather they are maintained by respective service 
centers as per available resources. There are also no se parate guidelines and 
timeframe for changing the furniture, mattresses and carpets of guest houses. 
They are replaced on the basis of guidelines available in CPWD manual. 
  
         The Committee strongly recommend for a separate and adequate 
budget under the head MH -2059/M&R (other building) for maintenance/upkeep 
of inspection bungalows with separate manpower and machinery. At the same 
time separate guidelines should be provided for changing furniture, mattress 
and carpets of the guest houses utmost care should be taken to maintain them 
with updated accessories and facilities. The upkeep and maintenance of Govt. 
Guest Houses should be regularly maintained and recorded.  
 
15. The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in the action taken reply have  stated 
as under: 
"As per records, there are 65 Holiday Homes/ Touring Officers’ Hostel 
throughout the country which are maintained and run by CPWD on outsource 
basis except in Delhi and Mumbai which are outsourced by Directorate of 
Estates. 
  
In this connection, i t is submitted that even after rationalisation of several 
Budgetary heads from 2017-18, a separate head for Maintenance / Upkeep of 
Inspection Bungalows, Guest Houses & Holiday Homes has been retained 
with separate budgetary allocation. The last three year s’ budgetary allocation/ 
expenditure and allocation for the 2017-18 is given below: 
-8- 

 
 
 
2059- Maintenance / Upkeep of Inspection Bungalows, Guest Houses & 
Holiday Homes (Non- Plan)                                                  
 
                                           (Rupees in crores) 
  
Years BE RE Expenditure 
2014-15 8.00 3.00 3.55 
2015-16 5.00 5.00 4.43 
2016-17 5.00 5.00 4.24 
2017-18 5.00     
  
In view of the above, Standing Committee’s recommendation has been noted 
and every effort shall be taken for the best possible maintenance / Upkeep of 
Inspection Bungalows / Guest Houses with separate manpower and machinery. 
            
Revision of CPWD maintenance manual -2012 is under process in the 
directorate. The issues rel ated to separate guidelines regarding furniture will be 
placed before the committee of revision of maintenance manual. New guidelines 
will be issued alongwith revision of maintenance Mannual -2012.  However to 
improve the general maintenance, direction have  been issued to fields unit, 
through OM no 238 dated 04.05.2017 (Appendix-VII) 
  
 In Mumbai, Touring Officers’ Hostel at N.S. Road and M.V. Kurve Road, 
having 36 and 11 rooms respectively, are maintained for Civil and Electric work 
(including providing all  types of furniture & allied item) by CPWD and for 
caretaking and hospitality service by the Directorate of Estates. For caretaking 
and hospitality services, the work is awarded through open tender. At present, 
the cost of such services is Rs.91,425/- per month and the payment is made from 
OE (office expenses) Head from the Budget granted for the office of Estate 
Manager, Mumbai. 
  
 In Delhi, there are 7 Holidays Homes/ Touring Officers ‘Hostels, having 
234 rooms. The overall administration/day to day manag ement/allotment & 
hospitality service are under the control of the Directorate of Estates and 
maintenances (Civil & Elect.) including providing furniture, mattresses, pillows 
etc. is looked after by CPWD. 
  
 The Directorate of Estates has already initiated  to improve the 
housekeeping and hospitality services by directly outsourcing the services 
through open tender.  
 
 
 
 
-9- 

 
 
 
 
At present, the housekeeping and hospitality services are being met from Office 
Expenses and there is no budgetary provision. However, every year, 
Supplementary Budgetary provision is obtained to meet the expenses. For 
Financial year 2018-19, a separate budgetary provision shall be obtained." 
 
16. Expressing concern over for poor maintenance of Bungalows, Guest 
Houses, Holiday Homes located in prominent places in towns by reason of 
non availability of adequate funds and manpower, absence of Guidelines  
for changing of furniture being supplied therein, compelling government 
officials to stay in private hotels, the Committee had r ecommended 
adequate budget and manpower for maintenance purposes and framing of 
Guidelines for replacing furniture items in Guest Houses, inspection 
bungalows. 
 
The Committee welcome the move of the Government to outsource 
maintenance of Guest Houses for e nsuring their every day upkeep. 
However on the issue of inadequacy of funds, the Committee are 
constrained to find that level of allocations in 2014 -15 of Rs. 8 crore has 
gone down to Rs. 5 crore each year from 2015 -16 onwards. Besides there 
had been under  utilization in all these years. The Committee find that all 
this does not augur  well with the over -all availability of funds and the 
utilization on this account. The Committee, therefore, reiterate adequate 
allocation of funds for maintaining of Bungalow s, Guest houses and 
Holiday House,  at the same time caution the Government for optimal 
utilization of available funds. 
 
On the issue of framing Guidelines for making available furniture 
items in Guest Houses, the Committee are constrained to note that the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs is still managing with five year old 
Maintenance Manual of 2012 and Ministry had taken ordinarily long time in 
revising the same which is currently underway.  The Committee feel that 
the Ministry of Housing and Urban A ffairs has not kept pace with changing 
times.  They, therefore, reiterate that the Maintenance Manual of 2012 be 
expeditiously finalized and implemented. 
 
 
 
 
 
-10- 
 

 
 
Status quo  regarding adoption of dust free technologies in construction activity 
criticized and popularizing these through video conferencing and seminars-
reiterated. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
 
17. The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
The Committee are aware that major source of pollution in the cities is 
dust particles. Dust contributed approximately 52% of particulate matter in the 
air. There are huge amount of dust generated in construction business. The role 
of CPWD, NBCC in construction of Government residential and other buildings 
are indispensable. They have been informe d that CPWD is using ready mixed 
concrete and precast material which has reduced dust at construction sites. The 
Committee feel that dust particles continue to contribute to rising pollution levels, 
create health problems, particularly for those with respi ratory problems, cause 
environmental degradation, including air and water pollution, create problems 
with visibility, create unsafe working conditions and increase costs associated 
with the loss of materials or additional work involved. They are also aware  that 
dust emissions from construction and other civil engineering activities are a 
common and well -recognized problem and nuisance. Once construction and 
demolition particles are airborne, it is very difficult to prevent them from 
dispersing into the surr ounding area. The Committee feel that dust and fine 
particle generation from construction and demolition activities can be 
substantially reduced through carefully selected mitigation techniques and 
effective management. The most effective technique is to c ontrol dust at source 
and prevent it from becoming airborne. The Committee in this back drop, 
decided to scrutinize the issue of implementation of ‘dust -free’ technology in the 
construction sector by various agencies of Ministry of Urban Development in the  
construction and maintenance of Govt. residential and other buildings. 
  
 In-fact the Committee strongly feel that large paneled buildings can be 
built very fast and this could be one of the methods for solving the housing 
problem in the country. These buildings do not require elaborate up -keep 
expenditure. The use of precast co ncrete elements for roofing and flooring can 
greatly accelerate the pace of construction and make site supervision relatively 
easier, resulting in saving of essential raw materials, thus economizing on the 
overall construction costs.The Committee reiterate  their earlier recommendation 
that the Ministry of Urban Development should take concerted efforts and strive 
vigorously towards completion of all the construction projects without cost and 
time overrun by adopting Prefab technologies without any adverse 
environmental consequences and dust pollution. For this the Committee desire  
-11- 

 
 
the Ministry to bring necessary changes in schedule rates of the Govt. agencies 
and strive vigorously to popularize these technologies though seminars, video 
conferencing and advertisements. The Committee expect the Hindustan Prefab 
Ltd. to act as a technology hub and incubation centre for prefab technologies. 
The Committee desire that dust free technology should be mandatorily adopted 
by all construction agencies of Ministr y of Urban Development viz., CPWD, 
MCD, NDMC, NBCC so as to reduce dust generated out of construction and 
maintenance work to prevent air pollution and making the environment clean 
and safe for the citizens under Swachh Bharat Mission. They also emphasize 
that while undertaking construction at any site, it should be properly cordoned 
off and daily sweeping should be done preceding by sprinkling of water failing 
which adequate penal action should be taken against the concerned. 
 
18. In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:   
 
  "MoUDvide OM No. F. No. JS/Works/OM/2016 dt: 30.05.2016 
(Appendix-VIII) has decided to Mandatorily adopt 3 (three) technologies by 
CPWD, DDA & NBCC at all construction site in Metropoli tan cities of India & 
value of work should be 100 crore& above and also invariably obtain third 
party certification related to Green building concept from agencies recognized 
by MOEF apart from installing roof top solar power plants, waste water 
recycling and rain water harvesting all such projects the 3 technologies are as 
following:- 
  
• Monolithic Concrete Construction system using Aluminium Formwork. 
• Industrialized 3-S system using Cellular Light weight Concrete Slabs and 
Precast Columns (Precast/prefab). 
• Monolithic Concrete Construction System using Plastic -Aluminium 
Formwork. 
  
 DG, CPWD vide OM No.DG/DSR/011 dated: 17.08.2016 (Appendix-IX) 
issued an Office Memorandum regarding guideline for adopting the above 3 
technologies, a turnkey project item with Scope and payment schedule to be 
added in DSR-2016. 
  
 An OM No.DG/TAS/Misc/06 dated 16.02.2017 (Appendix-X) issued by 
DG, CPWD regarding specific recommendation and plan of action on air 
pollution and green house for implementation in Delhi. 
  
 MoUD vide OM No. F. No. 28012/7/2016 - W-3 dated: 28.12.2016 
(Appendix-XI) issued a OM to adopt these new technologies across the 
country, irrespective of location and project cost with effect from 01.04.2017, 
which was endorsed by DG, CPWD vide letter No.17/SE( TAS)/BMTPC/2016-
17/78-E dated: 21.04.2017 (Appendix-XII). 
 
-12- 

 
 
 
                         A. Construction & Demolition 
                        B. Concrete batching 
                        C. Road dust & Soil Dust 
  Incorporating of prefab technology (New Items) in DSR is under process 
. 
 NBCC shall strive to reduce dust generated out of construction and 
maintenance work to prevent air pollution and making the environment clean 
and safe for the citizens under Swachh Bharat Mission." 
 
19.  The Committee whi le pointing out that dust particles 
contribute approximately 52% of air pollution largely through 
construction business creating health problems particularly respiratory 
problems, the Committee had inter -alia suggested adoption of prefa b 
technologies without any adverse environmental consequence s and dust 
pollution and had desired to the Ministry to bring necessary changes in 
schedule of rates of the Government agencies,  vigorously popularizing 
these technologies through seminars, video conferencing, etc.  The 
Committee had also desired mandatory adoption of dust free technology 
by all construction agencies under the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs, viz, CPWD, MCD, NDMC, NBCC and cordoning off daily sweeping, 
sprinkling of water etc. violation of which result in penal action. 
 The Committee find that in the action taken reply, the Ministry have 
outlined before the Committee different O.M’s issued by the then Ministry 
of Urban Development/ D.G, CPWD, conveying Government decision 
making three dust free technologies mandatory for CPWD, DDA and 
NBCC in all metropolitan cities , (O.M of Ministry of Urban Development 
dated 30.05.2016 Appendix-VIII), issuing necessary guidelines for such an 
adoption (O.M of Ministry of Urban Development dated 17.08.2016  
Appendix-IX), widening such an adoption across the country irrespective 
of location and project cost w.e.f. 1 st April, 2017 (O.M of Ministry of Urban 
Development dated 28.12.2016  Appendix-XI), conveying specific 
recommendation and plan of action on air poll ution and green house 
implementation in Delhi (O.M of Ministry of Urban Development dated 
16.02.2017 Appendix-X).  The Committee al so find that incorporating 
prefab technology (New items) is under process and NBCC is working for 
reducing dust generated con struction and maintenance work for 
preventing air pollution. 
 
 The Committee find that the Ministry has merely submitted before 
the Committee a resume of work done prior to presentation of the Report  
 
-13- 

 
 
 
of the  Committee on 12.04.2017 and there is nothing new for perusal of 
the Committee.  The Committee, therefore, feel that action taken reply is 
nothing but re -collection of work done in the past. It does not reflect the 
work done and implementation at grou nd level after presentation of the 
Report of the Committee on important issues like bringing about 
necessary changes in Schedule of rates of the Govern ment agencies for 
adopting prefab technologies in construction, vigorously popularizing  
three dust free technologies through seminars, video conferencing, etc. 
as recommended by the Committee.  The Committee expect ear ly action 
on incorporating prefab technology (New item) and tangible work done by 
NBCC on reducing dust generated pollution.  The Committee, t herefore, 
reiterate that actual work done on changing of schedule of rates of 
Government agencies for adopting prefa b technologies in construction, 
popularizing of three dust free technologies by holding seminars etc. be 
done expeditiously and the Committee be kept apprised of the same. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-14-  

 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Exploring a system for time bound completion of on-going works by NBCC and CPWD w.r.t GPRA 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.1) 
     
The number of residential accommodations (General Pool) available with DoE is 61643 in Delhi 
and 34634 in other Regional Stations, which are not adequate to meet the requirement of Government 
officials against their demand of 85314 house s in Delhi and 50852 houses in other Regional Stations, 
as no major construction is carried out for Government quarters during the past several years. Since, 
there is acute shortage of houses in Delhi and other areas, the Government officials have to wait for 
long period to get their residential accommodation allotted. The Committee have been informed that 
16033 additional houses would be made available under General Pool Residential 
Accommodation(GPRA) to meet the gap in demand and supply of Government acc ommodation after 
the redevelopment of Kidwai Nagar (East), Sarojini Nagar, Naroji Nagar, Kasturba Nagar, Thyagraj, 
Sriniwaspuri and Mohamadpur in three years by NBCC and CPWD. Similar other measures by the 
Ministry of Urban Development such as maintenance of departmental pool by constructing residential 
accommodation, reoccupation of unauthorised land allotted for the purpose to others are expected to 
supplement the stock. 
  
The Committee note the steps taken by the Government to meet residential demand of 
Government officials. They would like the Ministry to explore a system for completing the desired work 
expeditiously in time bound manner and minimize the financial burden on the Government. The 
Committee desire that department should make real time assessment of requirement so that availability 
of houses to Government officials is made by taking requisite measures for completion. They also 
desire that entire redevelopment process of existing housing colonies should adopt green building 
norms and in house s olid and liquid waste management facilities as envisaged in the master plan of 
Delhi-2021 (MPD).   
    
Reply Of The Government 
 "The Cabinet Committee on accommodation asked the Ministry of Urban Development to assess 
 the medium and long term requirement of residential accommodation for government officials, 
 especially in NCT of Delhi and other metropolitan cities/town, and to suggest viable options 
 including public private partnership to meet the shortfall. 
  
The Min istry of Urban Development constituted a Committee of Experts vide order number 
248/Dir (W)/2014 dated 15.05.2015 (Appendix-III). The Committee is headed by Director General,  
CPWD and its members are Director of Estates, L&DO, Director (Works) and DDG (Works). On 
15.05.2017, the committee has approved the long -term requirement of GPRA i.e. upto 2027 and is 
being submitted to MoUD.  The department has issued green building norms under section - 6A of  
 
-15- 
 

 
 
CPWD Works Manual 2014. Under these norms, all CPWD constructions are executed as green 
buildings and with specification of three star building. In all new redevelopment colonies green  
building norms are also being followed including Rain Water Harvesti ng & Sewerage Treatment     
 Plant. "      
(Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No 01/10/2017-CDN-I dated 28.07.2017). 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
               (See para No. 7 of Chapter-I) 
  
MANAGEMENT OF GENERAL POOL RESIDENTIAL  ACCOMODATION 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.2) 
 
    Directorate of Estates (DoE) has linked E -Awas and E -Sewa database of DoE & CPWD 
respectively for accuracy of data regarding housing stock. The Committee understand through inputs 
from RWA that several houses are occupied by contractors, labourers and unknown persons for repair 
work and there is no inspection of Government colonies by DOE officials to ensure proper maintenance 
of general pool Government house and colonies by CPWD, NDMC and MCD. 
 
            The Committee were apprised by the DoE that status of Government houses is ascertained by 
checking records in E-Sewa of CPWD, personal visits to CPWD service centre and also inspection of 
individual quarters where required. The Committee believe that ascertaining of records through E-Sewa 
and E -Awas would not suffice the purpose of regular inspection of Governm ent colonies including 
garages by DoE and would not give clear picture on maintenance, verification of occupants, instances 
of subletting. They should also hold periodical meetings with the representatives of RWAs so as to take 
their suggestions to help maintenance of Government houses in better way. 
  
          The Committee, therefore, desire that while verifying/inspecting the houses the DoE official 
should not only show their valid identity but should also have written authorisation before any 
Government house/garages/SQs and inspection thereof should be carried out with due intimation to 
allottees and respective RWAs. The DoE officials should also share contents of such 
verification/inspection report with allottees like other statutory authorities i.e. police share a copy of FIR 
to the concerned persons. The inspection report may also be brought to the knowledge of allottees and 
RWA's before action is initiated. The Committee are of the considered view that these measures will 
help in efficient management of Government properties by the DoE. 
  
Reply of The Government 
  
"To have effective co-ordination of field staff with RWAs, directions have been issued to field staff 
vide O.M. no. 7/20/2016 -WII/DG/Vol-I/1069 dated 24.11.2016 (Appendix-IV) for holding 
meetings with RWAs at regular intervals and to ensure by the senior officers that the decisions 
taken in the meetings are implemented.     
-16- 

 
 
In pursuance of recommendations of Standing Committee on “Functioning of Directorate of 
Estates”, panel of officials have been formed vide O.M.No.DE/3/16/Misc/E/16 dated 08 th 
November 2016, wherein inspection teams are comprised of officials from Ministry of Urban 
Development and attached offices of Ministry, including Directorate of Estates, Directorate of 
Printing and L&DO, and are selected from programme developed by NIC. T he officials selected 
from computerised programme are deputed for inspections on basis of subletting complaints. 
  
The teams visiting quarters for inspections are handed over authority letter and they are given 
quarters for inspection and are asked to phot ograph the persons found and documents shown to 
them, to form basis of their reports as per O.M. No.12032/1/2015 -Pol.II dated 16 th June 2016. 
The authority letter is issued with signatures of Deputy Director wherein it is mentioned to carry 
ID cards (issued by MHA) and officials attending the inspections carry their ID cards while visiting 
the quarters. 
 
 The facts recorded in inspection reports are conveyed to allottees, during enquiry/hearing by 
Deciding Authority as well as by Appellate Authority. Photog raphs taken for quarter and 
occupants found during inspection are shown to allottees and accordingly they are asked to 
produce documents, witness and supporting proof for occupants to verify their credentials. The 
inspection reports are part of record of E states Officers who act after enquiry is completed by 
Deciding Authority and appeal is heard by Appellate Authority. The inspection report and 
photograph enclosed are provided to allottees with the order of cancellation/debarment order. 
  
No prior intimation for inspections could be given to allottee, it clearly eliminates surprise element 
and inspections would be futile and a failure as these inspections are conducted on complaints." 
  
  
REPORTING FORMAT FOR TYPE-V ALLOTTEES AND ABOVE FOR SERVANTS 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.3) 
 
            The Committee have come to know that Directorate of Estates (DoE) has specified forms 
for reporting of 'Members of family' and 'immediate relations' of the allottees in compliance of notification 
dated 10.06.2015. However, there is no reporting format for servant under SR 317-B-20 for Type V 
accommodation and above. The Committee have been apprised by the DoE that type V accommodation & 
above are provided with in-built servant quarters. Since the servant quarters are part and parcel of such 
accommodations, all provisions under allottment of Government Residences (General Pool in Delhi) Rules, 
1963 hold for such servant quarters also. Verification of servants kept by the allottees is their responsibility. 
The concerned allottees are responsible to engage servants in their attached servant quarters duly verified 
by themselves. The Committee are surprised to note that DoE has no role in verification of servant 
quarters. DoE may have no role in engaging servants but they may ask for verified report of servants 
through allottees. This may help in prevention of subletting of servant quarters. The Committee are of the 
opinion that maintaining a common yard stick for both senior Government officials (All India Services & 
Group-A) and as well as junior level officials will prevent any conflict in the minds of junior level employees 
of the Government that senior level officials of the Government are spared from the verification process. 
Verification of domestic servants and reporting to DoE should be specified so as not to spare any senior All 
India Services officials and Group- A allottees from misusing the Govt. houses and its premises in terms of  
 
-17- 

 
 
 
Commercial use/subletting etc. Reporting Rules, verification and adjudication procedure adopted by DoE 
should be fair and transparent for every Government allottees irrespective of their hierarchy in the Govt. 
Uniform format of reporting will remove the stigma that DoE adopts the rule which is protective and 
selective for senior officials and discriminatory, opaque and humiliating for lower rank Government 
allottees. Adoption of Uniform format for reporting will enhance transparency, objectivity and accountability 
in the functioning of DoE. 
  
Reply of The Government 
  
"An online module has been provided  for filling up of ‘Details of servants” under the heading 
Application Forms in www.gpra.nic.in.  An allottee shall fill the details of servants to whom servant 
quarter(s) has been allotted after login into his account in www.gpra.nic.in. This requirement is for 
all GPRA occupants of higher level accomodations which have se rvant quarter provisions 
irrespective of level/service of the allottee." 
   
  
SINGLE WINDOW SYSTEM FOR RESOLUTION OF COMPLAINTS REGARDING ALLOTMENT AND 
MAINTENANCE OF RESIDENTIAL ACCOMMODATIONS: COORDINATION BETWEEN DIRECTORATE 
OF ESTATES, CPWD AND LOCAL BODIES.  
  
Recommendation (Serial No.4) 
  
The Committee have been informed that regional stations of DoE have no role in the matters of 
maintenance of GPRA colonies as it is the exclusive domain of CPWD. They feel that the problem of 
non co-ordination between construction agencies and maintenance agencies is quite old, perennial and 
common in India. There are many programs/projects which are shared between various agencies viz. 
PWD, CPWD, MCD, NDMC Delhi Jal Board, Local Municipal Bodies, Local police and DoE etc. Good 
co-ordination and cooperation  between the relevant agencies and departments is very necessary to 
optimize the necessary results and for enhancing the satisfaction level of service users i.e. 
Residents/allottees. The Committee note that there is no single window system for attending th e 
complaints of both Estates office (Allotment Matters) and CPWD (Maintenance Matters)/ NDMC/MCDs 
etc., in all regional stations of DoE regarding allotment, maintenance of residential accommodations in 
regional stations of DoE Mumbai, Chennai & Kolkata. Th e Committee are of the considered view that 
communication, co -operation, co -ordination and one window system for redressal of complaints of 
allottees regarding allotment and maintenance of Government residential accommodation is essential 
to have a robust complaint redressal mechanism for CPWD & DoE and other concerned agencies. 
  
          The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends to create Single Window System for resolution 
of complaints regarding DoE & CPWD and other agencies regarding issues pertaining to Government 
allotment and maintenance of residential accommodation in a time bound manner under intimation to 
the Committee. 
  
  
-18- 

 
 
Reply of The Government 
 
"This recommendation for all regional stations of DoE  involves co-ordination and integration of 
services offered by various local bodies throughout the country with DoE and CPWD. It may be 
added that allotment of quarters by DoE is online, and allotment report issued by CPWD is also 
online and integrated with e -Awas. Similarly, the vac ation report of quarter and the time 
required to make it habitable are issued online by CPWD. The vacation report is also 
integrated with e-Awas. Thus allotment of quarters by DoE and maintenance by CPWD have a 
single window system." 
  
 Setting up separate body for comprising of AE, CPWD and RWA for deciding conversion of 'Minor 
Works' into 'Major Works'. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.6) 
 
        The Committee find that contractors of Central Work Public Department(CPWD) have a 
tendency to neglect complaints of residents regarding minor maintenance works in Govt. residential 
colonies. Instead, they have more interest/inclination for 'major works' which obviously gives them more 
margin of profit. They also note that these contractors have a tendency to convert or exaggerate minor 
works into major works many a times deliberately so as to extract more funds from the Government. All this 
is done with the concurrence of JEs/AEs of the concerned localities in a well-designed manner. 
  
          It appears there is an  endemic problem in CPWD wherein contractors identify only those works in 
government residential colonies which are beneficial and money intensive. Heavy ticket work contracts tend 
to keep coming back to CPWD and hence routine maintenance works become a ca usalty and gets 
neglected. It seems that there is minimum margin in routine maintenance work in Govt. residential Building 
for contractors and, hence, they do not prefer to opt for routine maintenance work. Their priority works are 
new major works. 
  
           Regarding, tendency of the conversion of minor routine work into 'major work' by contractors, the 
Committee urge the Ministry that senior officials of CPWD must visit the sites along with representative of 
RWAs to ascertain the facts about quality of work as given by contractor so as to assess the correct picture 
of the quantum of work to be done. They recommend that a separate body to decide the conversion of work 
from 'minor' to ' major', consisting of senior officers of CPWD, Ministry of UD and RWA  representatives 
should be created so that proper check could be put on such contractors who are habituated to doing such 
'minor' to 'major' work business. 
  
Reply of The Government 
  
"Redressal of complaints and action taken report on feed backs of allott ees of residential 
quarters/apartments have been monitored through CPWD  e-sewa/Mobile Apps. However, 
there is a system of direct interface between senior officers of CPWD wherein regular meetings 
are held by Senior Officers of CPWD with respective RWA for resolving the issues/problems  
 
-19- 

 
 
 
faced by residents. CPWD maintains residential accommodation in 51 cities through 649 
residential service centres. As per CPWD Sewa  record, nearly 417 complaints out of 4850 
complaints received per day are converted from minor to major, which is less than 10% of the 
total complaints received per day. Considering the large number of service centres, it is not 
feasible to create a commi ttee comprising CPWD, MoUD& RWA. It is suggested to create a 
Committee at the level of AE & RWA or Area Welfare officers to decide on the issue." 
  
 DEDICATED UNIT FOR REGULAR INTERACTION OF SENIOR OFFICIALS OF CPWD WITH 
REPRESENTATIVE OF RWA's AT PERIODIC INTERVALS (MONTHLY/BIMONTHLY BASIS). 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.7) 
 
 The Committee observed that there is least interaction of officials of CPWD/ Directorate of Estates 
with residents for prompt and effective resolution of grievances of residents in Government residential 
buildings. Senior officials are generally inaccessib le and junior level officials (JE, AE) are neither found in 
their offices and fields nor responsive and responsible enough. Moreover adding to the apathy of residents, 
phones of these JE's/AE's are always found to be switched off/not attended and Senior of ficer seldom 
attend their phone calls or are available to address the grievances especially the recurring ones. 
  
 The Committee find that information regarding schedule of periodical maintenance and services 
and up -gradation work are readily available on webportal CPWD E -SEWA and http:// www.cpwd.gov.in 
However, this information is not displayed in their enquiries. Further, the guidelines specifying the facilities 
and entitlements to allottees at each level of accommodation is not available and displayed at the enquiries. 
                 
 The Committee note that, primarily CPWD is responsible for proper maintenance and upkeep of 
General Pool Government Accommodation all over the country. For ensuring all these, there should be 
regular interface between ser vice provider and service user so that proper feedback can be given back to 
improve the services of service provider i.e, CPWD in this case. CPWD informed the Committee that they 
have launched mobile app six months back for online registration of complaint s for effective resolution for 
which every allottee is supposed to register his/her mobile number and get a password and once an 
allottee makes a complaint, the same is attended and is accordingly informed about the status of the 
complaints. The Committee welcome such move of the Ministry. 
  
 The Committee are, however, concerned about the awareness of this mobile app in residents. 
Even the Members of Parliament are not aware of this App./mechanism. They feel that service users i.e. 
residents must be appris ed about this initiatives of CPWD by aggressive advertisements, Radio/TV 41 
announcements and other means too. Moreover, accountability should also be fixed for breaching the 
timeline for non redressal of complaints. 
  
            Keeping all these facts in view, the Committee are of the considered opinion that there should be a 
regular interface between representatives of RWA i.e., service users and Service providers i.e.,  
 
-20- 

 
 
 
CPWD/DoE at regular monthly/bimonthly basis so that CPWD can have first hand information of residents' 
grievances that will help in prompt /efficient resolution of complaints. It will also help improving its credibility 
in the eyes of Government Servants besides bringing transparency. The guidelines specifying the facilities 
to be provided by CPWD in the Government accommodation category wise should be uniform throughout 
the Country and prominently displayed in enquiries so that the Residents remain aware of the same and 
seek their rightful remedies only. 
  
Reply of The Government 
 
"An O.M. was issued vide no. 1069 dated 24.11.2016 ( Appendix-IV) wherein directions have 
been issued to field staff for holding regular meetings with RWAs to redress their issues and to 
ensure by the senior officers that the decisions taken in the meetings are implemented." 
 
  
VIDEO RECORDING WHILE CARRYING OUT DEMOLITION EXERCISE BY CPWD OF 
ENCROACHMENT/ILLEGAL CONSTRUCTIONS IN GOVERNMENT RESIDENTIAL COLONIES 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.9) 
 
 The Committee have been told about many instances of high handedness, misbehavior of CPWD 
officials with allottees while removal of encroachments and illegal construction in Government Residential 
Colonies without even hearing them properly or giving them a chance to remove it themselves. They have 
been informed that notices have been issued to allottees of illegal encroachments, unauthorized 
constructions and subletting well in time. On the other hand, CPWD refuted allegations of misbehavior or 
mishandling of the residents by their officials. 
  
          The Committee are of the view that for carrying out such an exercise, CPWD/DoE must give 
sufficient hearing to the residents to the satisfaction of both parties i.e., CPWD and 
residents/representatives of RWAs. The CPWD must involve representativ es of RWAs and local police 
(ladies police in case of handling women in the colonies) during such exercises. The Committee desire that 
to prevent any uncalled for situation, the entire exercise should be videographed and monitored by senior 
officials of CP WD/DoE including representatives of RWAs and local police. These videographs/recordings 
of the demolition exercise should be submitted to DoE within 3 days of the exercise. 
      
Reply of The Government 
 
"Directions have been issued vide O.M. no. 7/201/2016 -WII/258 dated 12.05.2017 (Appendix-
VI) to all field units for compliance." 
  
  
 
-21- 
 

 
 
 
SEPARATE MAINTENANCE BUDGET HEAD AND WING FOR GOVERNMENT RESIDENTIAL 
COLONIES. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.10) 
 
  The Committee note that there are 4480 houses in Delhi & 2068 houses in Mumbai which 
have been declared dangerous by CPWD. They are surprised to note that there is no separate budgetary 
head for maintenance of old housing colonies. Maintenance of Govt. hou se comes under total budget 
allotted for construction and maintenance, which is very meager. The BE for maintenance/repair for 2016 -
17 is Rs. 728 crore out of which Rs. 450 crore has been expended till now. The Committee are unhappy to 
note such a pathetic  situation of the Government residential accommodation. They are equally appalled to 
know that there are instances of uncovered water tanks in colonies from which potable water is being 
supplied to residents of Government colonies. In these uncovered water  tanks maintained by CPWD, 
residents have found out carcasses of pigeons and such other animals. The residents of Government 
colonies have to drink this water which causes dangerous water borne diseases. The Committee feel that it 
is inhumane to supply thi s kind of water to residents of Govt. colonies. They are unhappy with the state of 
affairs of cleanliness efforts by CPWD in these water tanks. They are of the considered opinion that 
cleanliness and providing clean, safe & potable water either to Governme nt servants or MPS should be the 
top and utmost priority of any Government agency. The Committee are very concerned about the living 
conditions of Government employees. If living conditions are not good, high morale and motivation can 
never be expected from these officials of the Government. The Committee strongly recommend the Ministry 
of Urban Development for providing adequate budget for maintenance, upkeep, repair, cleanliness 
including supply of clean and potable water in every Government residential c olony. Needless to say, to 
achieve this, the maintenance head should be separate from the Construction Head. 
      
Reply of The Government 
 
            "Maintenance Head is already separate from Construction Head. Maintenance and 
Repairs works of the houses are done under the head 2216 –Housing –Maintenance & 
Repairs and major Maintenance & Repairs work of the houses has been done under the 
upgradation schemes under the head 4216- Upgradation. 
   
 The last three years budgetary allocation / expenditure and allocation for 2017 -18 is given 
below:  
      (Rs. in Crores) 
2216- Housing- Maintenance and Repairs (Ordinary Repairs, Special Repairs, Furnishing) 
Years BE RE Expenditure 
2014-15 196.30 177.00 190.88 
2015-16 305.75 227.35 226.00 
2016-17 247.00 219.00 231.39 
2017-18 246.00 - - 
      
-22- 

 
 
                                                             (Rs. in Crores) 
4216- General Pool Accommodation – (Up-gradation) 
Years BE RE Expenditure 
2014-15 400.00 331.00 306.20 
2015-16 500.00 400.00 393.46 
2016-17 430.00 426.50 389.06 
2017-18 (including 
Buildings)   600.00 
- - 
  
The complaints of covering of water tanks are dealt on priority. As per the data available on 
CPWD Sewa, 6348 complaints of missing tank covers were received in past one year and 
action was taken on 6268 complaints and this is an ongoing process." 
 
Adequate funds and manpower for maintenance of Inspection Bungalows/Guest houses 
and Holiday Homes and early framing of Guidelines for upkeep of furniture items. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
 
 The Committee observe that guest houses of DoE are in prime locations of towns and are spacious 
and well laid out. However, their maintenance is not done regularly which leads to their deterioration and 
are presently in pathetic condition. This compels the Central Government Employees to stay in private 
hotels and this facility of no use to employees. They have been informed that earlier, there was no 
separate budget allocation for maintenance of guest houses but this year Rs. 5 crore is allotted as RE, out 
of which Rs. 2.69 crore has been spent for maintenance of g uest houses in the year 2015 -16. The 
Committee also notice that there is no separate manpower and machinery for maintenance of guest 
houses. Rather they are maintained by respective service centers as per available resources. There are 
also no separate gui delines and timeframe for changing the furniture, mattresses and carpets of guest 
houses. They are replaced on the basis of guidelines available in CPWD manual. 
  
         The Committee strongly recommend for a separate and adequate budget under the head M H-
2059/M&R (other building) for maintenance/upkeep of inspection bungalows with separate manpower and 
machinery. At the same time separate guidelines should be provided for changing furniture, mattress and 
carpets of the guest houses utmost care should be taken to maintain them with updated accessories and 
facilities. The upkeep and maintenance of Govt. Guest Houses should be regularly maintained and 
recorded.  
 
Reply of The Government 
 
 "As per records, there are 65 Holiday Homes/ Touring Officers’ Hostel throughout the 
country which are maintained and run by CPWD on outsource basis except in Delhi and 
Mumbai which are outsourced by Directorate of Estates. 
  
  
-23- 

 
 
In this connection, it is submitted that even after rationalisation of several Budgetary  heads 
from 2017 -18, a separate head for Maintenance / Upkeep of Inspection Bungalows, Guest 
Houses & Holiday Homes has been retained with separate budgetary allocation. The last three 
years’ budgetary allocation/ expenditure and allocation for the 2017-18 is given below: 
 
2059- Maintenance / Upkeep of Inspection Bungalows, Guest Houses & Holiday Homes 
(Non- Plan)                                                  
 
                                           (Rupees in crores) 
  
Years BE RE Expenditure 
2014-15 8.00 3.00 3.55 
2015-16 5.00 5.00 4.43 
2016-17 5.00 5.00 4.24 
2017-18 5.00     
  
In view of the above, Standing Committee’s recommendation has been noted and every effort 
shall be taken for the best possible maintenance / Upkeep of Inspection Bungalows / Guest 
Houses with separate manpower and machinery. 
            
Revision of CPWD maintenance manual -2012 is under process in the directorate. The issues 
related to separate guidelines regarding furniture will be placed before the committee of 
revision of maintenance manual. New guidelines will be issued alongwith revision of 
maintenance Mannual -2012.  However to improve the general maintenance, direction have 
been issued to fields unit, through OM no 238 dated 04.05.2017 (Appendix-VII) 
  
 In Mumbai, Touring Officers’ Hostel at N.S. Road and M.V. Kurve Road, having 36 and 11 
rooms respectively, are maintained for Civil and Electric work (including providing all types of 
furniture & allied item) by CPWD and for caretaking and hospitality serv ice by the Directorate 
of Estates. For caretaking and hospitality services, the work is awarded through open tender. 
At present, the cost of such services is Rs.91,425/ - per month and the payment is made from 
OE (office expenses) Head from the Budget granted for the office of Estate Manager, Mumbai. 
  
 In Delhi, there are 7 Holidays Homes/ Touring Officers ‘Hostels, having 234 rooms. The 
overall administration/day to day management/allotment & hospitality service are under the 
control of the Directorate of Estates and maintenances (Civil & Elect.) including providing 
furniture, mattresses, pillows etc. is looked after by CPWD. 
  
 The Directorate of Estates has already initiated to improve the housekeeping and 
hospitality services by directly outsourcing the services through open tender.  
  
 At present, the housekeeping and hospitality services are being met from Office Expenses 
and there is no budgetary provision. However, every year, Supplementary Budgetary provision 
is obtained to meet the expenses. For Fin ancial year 2018-19, a separate budgetary provision 
shall be obtained. 
-24- 

 
 
Adequate funds and manpower for maintenance of Disputation Bunglows, Guest Houses and 
Holiday Homes and early framing of Guidelines for upkeep of furniture reiterated." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 (See para No. 16 of Chapter-I) 
 
Status quo  regarding adoption of dust free technologies in construction activity criticized and 
popularizing these through video conferencing and seminars- 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
 The Committee are aware that major source of pollution in the cities is dust particles. Dust 
contributed approximately 52% of particulate matter in the air. There are huge amount of dust generated in 
construction business. The role of CPWD, NBCC in construction of Gover nment residential and other 
buildings are indispensable. They have been informed that CPWD is using ready mixed concrete and 
precast material which has reduced dust at construction sites. The Committee feel that dust particles 
continue to contribute to rising pollution levels, create health problems, particularly for those with respiratory 
problems, cause environmental degradation, including air and water pollution, create problems with 
visibility, create unsafe working conditions and increase costs associa ted with the loss of materials or 
additional work involved. They are also aware that dust emissions from construction and other civil 
engineering activities are a common and well -recognized problem and nuisance. Once construction and 
demolition particles a re airborne, it is very difficult to prevent them from dispersing into the surrounding 
area. The Committee feel that dust and fine particle generation from construction and demolition activities 
can be substantially reduced through carefully selected mitig ation techniques and effective management. 
The most effective technique is to control dust at source and prevent it from becoming airborne. The 
Committee in this back drop, decided to scrutinize the issue of implementation of ‘dust -free’ technology in 
the construction sector by various agencies of Ministry of Urban Development in the construction and 
maintenance of Govt. residential and other buildings. 
  
 In-fact the Committee strongly feel that large paneled buildings can be built very fast and this could  
be one of the methods for solving the housing problem in the country. These buildings do not require 
elaborate up-keep expenditure. The use of precast concrete elements for roofing and flooring can greatly 
accelerate the pace of construction and make site  supervision relatively easier, resulting in saving of 
essential raw materials, thus economizing on the overall construction costs. 
  
           The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Ministry of Urban Development 
should take concert ed efforts and strive vigorously towards completion of all the construction projects 
without cost and time overrun by adopting Prefab technologies without any adverse environmental 
consequences and dust pollution. For this the Committee desire the Ministry  to bring necessary changes in 
schedule rates of the Govt. agencies and strive vigorously to popularize these technologies though 
seminars, video conferencing and advertisements. The Committee expect the Hindustan Prefab Ltd. to act  
 
-25- 
 

 
 
as a technology hub and incubation centre for prefab technologies. The Committee desire that dust free 
technology should be mandatorily adopted by all construction agencies of Ministry of Urban Development 
viz., CPWD, MCD, NDMC, NBCC so as to reduce dust gen erated out of construction and maintenance 
work to prevent air pollution and making the environment clean and safe for the citizens under Swachh 
Bharat Mission. They also emphasize that while undertaking construction at any site, it should be properly 
cordoned off and daily sweeping should be done preceding by sprinkling of water failing which adequate 
penal action should be taken against the concerned. 
 
Reply of The Government 
 
  "MoUDvide OM No. F. No. JS/Works/OM/2016 dt: 30.05.2016 (Appendix-VIII) 
has decided to Mandatorily adopt 3 (three) technologies by CPWD, DDA & NBCC at all 
construction site in Metropolitan cities of India & value of work should be 100 crore& above and 
also invariably obtain third party certification related to Green building concept from agencies 
recognized by MOEF apart from installing roof top solar power plants, waste water recycling 
and rain water harvesting all such projects the 3 technologies are as following:- 
  
• Monolithic Concrete Construction system using Aluminium Formwork. 
• Industrialized 3-S system using Cellular Light weight Concrete Slabs and Precast Columns 
(Precast/prefab). 
• Monolithic Concrete Construction System using Plastic-Aluminium Formwork. 
  
 DG, CPWD vide OM No.DG/DSR/011 dated: 17.08.2016 (Appendix-IX) issued an Office 
Memorandum regarding guideline for adopting the above 3 technologies, a turnkey project item 
with Scope and payment schedule to be added in DSR-2016. 
  
 An OM No.DG/TAS/Misc/06 dated 16.02.2017 (Appendix-X) issued by DG, CPWD 
regarding sp ecific recommendation and plan of action on air pollution and green house for 
implementation in Delhi. 
  
 MoUDvide OM No. F. No. 28012/7/2016 - W-3 dated: 28.12.2016 (Appendix-XI) issued a 
OM to adopt these new technologies across the country, irrespective of location and project 
cost with effect from 01.04.2017, which was endorsed by DG, CPWD vide letter 
No.17/SE(TAS)/BMTPC/2016-17/78-E dated: 21.04.2017 (Appendix-XII). 
                         A. Construction & Demolition 
                        B. Concrete batching 
                        C. Road dust & Soil Dust 
  Incorporating of prefab technology (New Items) in DSR is under process. 
  
 NBCC shall strive to reduce dust generated out of construction and maintenance work to 
prevent air pollution and making the environment clean and safe for the citizens under Swachh 
Bharat Mission." 
 
  
-26- 
 

 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
  (See para No. 19 of Chapter-I) 
 
MONITORING OF WORK BY NBCC 
                
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
 
  
 The Committee note that the Government has approved the Redevelopment of 7 colonies in Delhi 
to overcome the shortage of housing for central Government employees. Redevelopment plan includes 
redevelopment of Netaji Nagar, SarojiniNagar, Nauroji Nagar, Kast urba Nagar, Thyagraj Nagar, 
Sriniwaspuri and Mohammadpur. While NBCC will re-develop Netaji Nagar, Sarojini Nagar &Nauroji Nagar 
and construct 15510 flats in various categories, CPWD will redevelop Kasturba Nagar, Thyagraj Nagar, 
Sriniwaspuri&Mohammadpur a nd construct 10157 flats in various categories. The Committee find that 
NBCC sub-contracts the work to other agencies to complete their projects in time. The Committee desire 
that the NBCC should put a structured monitoring mechanism to oversee the quality  of work being 
delivered by such agencies. Further, NBCC should be very prompt with regard to the scheduled 
progress/implementation of the redevelopment of these above mentioned colonies. 
  
               However, the Committee further recommend that NBCC should ensure that all the above stated 
redevelopment construction projects should be fully equipped with Rain Water Harvesting System and 
disaster-resistance system extensively in place. They also desire that in all the above redevelopment 
construction projects dust-free construction norms must be strictly adhered to and fly ash bricks, tiles and 
pavement stones should also be extensively and mandatorily used as per the recommendations of the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Urban Development in their various Reports. 
    
 Reply of The Government 
  
"Recommendations of the Committee have been noted and NBCC shall ensure 
implementation of all recommendations in its redevelopment projects at Netaji Nagar, 
Sarojini Nagar and Nauroji Nagar." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-27-  

 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
--------------------------------------NIL------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-28- 

 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT HAVE 
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Sub-standard CPWD works, quality audit of all CPWD works and fixing responsibility of 
AE/JE/Contractors for poor quality of work. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
                        
 The Committee feel that efficient and effective functioning of CPWD has a direct bearing on the 
quality of maintenance and upkeep of prime public properties on one hand and efficient use of public 
money and resources on the other. They are aware of the poor maintenance of accommodation of 
Government colonies though there has been a perceptible improvement in response time and basic 
services by CPWD through implementation of citizen charter, its helpline and feedback services. However, 
this improvement is far below expectations of the residents of those colonies especially with respect to 
quality of work done and the sub-standard workmanship. 
                
 As regards the monitoring mechanism of CPWD to  check the quality of work of contractors, the 
Committee have been apprised that CPWD has a quality assurance and technical audit wing at 
headquarters and separate quality assurance units in Superintendent Engineers (SE) office and Director 
General (DG) of fice. The CPWD also informed the Committee that technical checks are performed by 
supervisory officials during the execution of work. The quality assurance teams from circle and other 
offices regularly inspect the site to monitor quality. On specific compl aints Headquarter quality assurance 
unit carries out periodical inspections and third party quality assurance (TPQA) is employed for projects 
more than Rs. 20 crores. The Committee are, however, surprised to note that despite this system in place, 
no centr alized data is maintained for all such checks and inspections by various units of CPWD. The 
Committee are of the firm view that despite so many layers of checks by the CPWD, the quality of work 
being done by contractors is of very poor quality and anybody guess. 
  
           The Committee strongly recommend the Ministry to have a strict and vigorous internal quality audit 
of all its projects carried out by the contractors. The AE/JE, performing very well should be deployed from 
time to time to inspect and a udit the quality of works from where there are regular complaints and a time 
bound report be submitted for correctives. The responsibility should be fixed at the level of 
AE/JE/Contractor level if the substandard workmanship and poor quality of works are f ound or complained 
by the allottees in maintenance of building as this not only leads to unnecessary waste of time for the 
allottees and workers but also leads to multiple expenditure in doing -undoing-doing again of work. At the 
same time, centralized data should also be maintained for all the inspections. 
  
         A mechanism should be developed to incentivize/penalize the officials through performance based 
transfers should be provided to the officials. Also adequate administrative and financial powers should be 
provided to the field officers of CPWD so that, if they so decide, they can take up measures and steps to  
 
-29- 
 

 
 
take up works which are of 'preventive safeguard' for maintenance of Government accommodation/ 
building. The senior officer from the rank of Executive Engineer of CPWD onwards should i nspect the 
maintenance/ construction of Govt. quarters in areas under their jurisdiction periodically and regularly, 
personally and take a view including all preventative steps regarding its maintenance etc. These senior 
Officers should be made liable for maintenance and updation of facilities as per the norms and guidelines. 
This field participation by senior officers will surely bring coordination and seriousness in handling the 
Government/ official quarters while bringing contentment among allottees. 
    
 Reply of The Government 
 
"The inspections of various maintenance divisions are carried out at alternate year. The 
inspection reports of such inspection are issued to the concerned division with copy to 
vigilance unit, CE & SE concerned. All data of inspe ctions & replies and follow -up action is 
maintained by the office of SE (QA).  In this connection a detailed OM has also been issued for 
third party quality control on maintenance works by SE & EE of Circle/ Division other than 
circle / division executing the work vide no. 02/01/2016/PG/M -DG/14 dated: 
20.01.2017(Appendix-V).  The concerned divisions are pursued for rectification of any defect 
pointed out in the inspections and all such data for rectification is maintained and quarterly 
reports are prepared for such action." 
 
 Comments of the Committee 
 
  (See para No. 10 of Chapter-I) 
 
Facilitating allottees/residents to post pictures/videos of work carried out by CPWD 
contractors on web portal/mobile app of CPWD- reiterated. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8 ) 
 
 The Committee feel that the satisfaction level of contractors or CPWD officials cannot be gauged 
unless it is corroborated by residents of Government residential colonies. Further, as of now, there is no 
facility available to allottees on CPWD web -portal or 'Mobile App' to post photograph/videos of work carried 
out by CPWD contractors. 
  
The Committee are of the considered view that it is very pertinent to empower residents so that 
they can give grading or otherwise of the work carried out by CPWD contractors and at the same time 
corroborate their grievance/dissatisfaction by uploading photographs/videos on CPWD web -portal and 
CPWD Mobile App. as many a times the quality of work done is very poor and without application of mind 
and acumen. It is als o seen that the AE/JE/Contractors deploy workers who do not have adequate 
qualification/expertise/acumen to attend work and they are paid much below the norms. These workers 
then perform wrong and below standard works. It leads to incurring heavy expenditu re and becomes 
wasteful for the CPWD resources. 
-30- 

 
 
 
The Committee desire that there should be a dedicated audit unit in CPWD to monitor such 
pictures/videos etc. and to initiate action against erring officials/contractors, if found negligent. The 
Committee feel that empowering residents/RWAs will infuse more transparency, accountability in 
functioning of CPWD and at the same time will stop contractors' whims and fancies in carrying out the 
work promptly, prevent deploying sub -standard workers and will b ring real grass -root situations to the 
notice of top officers of the organization. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
"An online system is already available as a part of CPWD Sewa  to facilitate residents 
to grade the work done by CPWD as very good, good or poor. Residents’ feedback on each 
complaint is also taken by the call centre and recorded in the system for analysis and 
corrective measures. The residents too have facility to g ive feedback by SMS on each repair 
work carried out by CPWD. Facility to upload photographs/videos of the work done by CPWD 
on the portal will be added by August 2017." 
 
 Comments of the Committee 
 
  (See para No. 13 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-31- 

 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
--------------------------------------NIL------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NEW DELHI; PINAKI MISRA 
January, 2018 Chairperson, 
Pausha, 1939 (Saka) Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
 
-32- 
  

Appendix-I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2017-18) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON TUESDAY,  2ND 
JANUARY, 2018. 
The Committee sat from 1000 hrs. to 1030 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’,  Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Pinaki Misra      - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Ramesh Bidhuri 
3. Shri Dilipkumar Mansukhlal Gandhi 
4. Shri Charanjeet Singh Rori 
5. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
6. Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi 
7. Shri Brijbhushan Sharna Singh 
8. Shri Alok Sanjar 
9. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
 
 
        Rajya Sabha 
 
 
14. Shri Anil Desai 
15. Shri K.C. Ramamurthy 
16. Shri  Rangasayee Ramakrishna 
17. Shri Ajay Sancheti 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi   - Joint Secretary     
2.        Sh. A.K. Shah                          - Director 
-33- 

 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble  Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption of the draft Report on 
action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Seventeenth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sab ha) on the subject 'Functioning of Directorate of Estates, Construction and 
Maintenance of Government Residential Buildings and other Buildings by CPWD and NBCC.'   
The Committee adopted the Draft Report without any modifications. 
3. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Draft Report and present 
the Report to both Houses of Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-34-  

 
 
Appendix-II 
                                            [Vide para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTEENTH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPLMENT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
I.  Total number of recommendations                             13 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government:                               11 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13   
Percentage to total recommendations                                             (84.6%)                                     
          
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:                                                             0 
Percentage to total recommendations                                                         (0%)                
                                         
     
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of                                       
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:            02 
Recommendation Nos. 5 and 8 
Percentage to total recommendations                                                (15.3%) 
                             
 
V.         Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final                    
replies of the Government are still awaited:                                          0 
Recommendation No.  Nil    
Percentage to total recommendations                                                       (0%) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-35- 
 

 
 
                                                                                                                               Appendix-III 

Appendix-IV 

Appendix-V 

Appendix-VI 

Appendix-VII 

Appendix-VIII 

Appendix-IX 

Appendix-X 

Appendix-XI 

                                                                                                                             Appendix-XII 
 