 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
 
(2016
-
 
2017)
 
                  
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
 
 
 
 
       
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN POVERTY ALLEVIATION
 
 
                           
 
 
              
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Sixteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Urban Development on Demands for Grants (2017
-
2018)]
 
 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
                      
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
         
 
 
 
 
                    
NEW DELHI
 
 
 
August, 2017/ Sravana 1939 (Saka)
 
 
20
 


 
 
TWENTIETH  REPORT
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT
 
(2016
-
2017)
 
 
                               
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN POVERTY ALLEVIATION
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Sixteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Urban 
Development on Demands for Grants (2017
-
2018)]
 
  
 
 
   
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.08.2017
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.08.2017
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
August, 2017/ Sravana 1939 (Saka)
 


 
 
   
C.U.D No. 106
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. ….
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2017 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by ................
 

 
 
CONTENTS
 
 
PAGE
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                       
                                              
(i
v)
 
 
INTRODUCTION             
                            
                                  
                              
(v)
 
CHAPTER I
 
Report                                                                                              
 
  
1
 
CHAPTER II
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government  
 
10
 
CHAPTER III
 
Observations 
/Recommendations
 
which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies
 
30
 
CHAPTER IV
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration  
 
31
 
CHAPTER V
 
Observations /Recommendations
 
i
n respect of which final  
replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
37
 
 
 
ANNEXURES
 
I.
 
Minutes of the  Fifteenth  Sitting of the Committee held on  10.08.2017.                              
38
 
II.
 
Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Sixteenth Report  (16
th
 
Lok Sabha).     
                                                                                     
39
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2016
-
2017)
 
Shri Pinaki Misra         
-
        
Chairperson
 
MEMBERS
 
 
 
 
 
                    
 
LOK SABHA
 
 
2.
 
 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri
 
3.
 
Shri Ram Charan Bohra
 
4. 
 
Shri Charanjeet Singh Rori
 
5.
 
Shri Ashok Shankarrao Chavan
 
6. 
 
Dr. Dharam Vira Gandhi
 
7.
 
Shri Dilip  Mansukhlal Gandhi
 
8. 
 
Shri Maheish Girri
 
9. 
 
Shri R.Gopalakrishnan
 
10.
 
Shri Choudhury Mohan 
Jatua
 
11. 
 
Shri  Srinivas Kesineni Nani
 
12.
 
Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi
 
13.
 
Shri P.C. Mohan
 
14.
 
Shri K. Parasuraman
 
15. 
 
Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil
 
16.
 
Shri Alok Sanjar
 
17. 
 
Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
 
18. 
 
Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
 
19.
 
Prof. K. V. 
Thomas
 
20.
 
Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma
 
21.
 
Shri Pradan  Baruah
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
22.
 
Shri R.S. Bharathi
 
23.
 
Dr. Subhash Chandra
 
24.
 
Shri Husain Dalwai
 
25.
 
Shri Anil Desai
 
26. 
 
Shri Parvez Hashmi 
 
27.
 
Shri K. G. Kenye
 
28.
 
Shri Mahesh Poddar
 
29.
 
Shri K.C. Ramamurthy
 
30.
 
Shri Ajay Sancheti
 
31.
 
Shri Dharamapuri Srinivas
 

SECRETARIAT
 
 
1.
 
Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi            
-
      
Joint Secretary
 
 
2.
 
Ms. Amita Walia
 
                
 
      
-
 
Additional Director
 
 
3.
 
Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan
 
      
-
      
Deputy Secretary
 
 
4.
 
Sh. Mukesh Kumar
 
                   
-
 
Executive Asstt.
 
 
(iv)
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2016
-
2017) having been authorized by the Committee, present this Twentieth 
Report (16
th
 
Lok Sabha) on the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report (16
th
 
Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on 'Demands for Grants (2017
-
2018)' of the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Poverty Alleviati
on.
 
2.
 
The Sixteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 17
th
 
March, 2016 
and laid 
on the table of Rajya Sabha on 
same date
. The Action Taken Replies of the 
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report  were received on 18
th
 
July, 2017.
 
3
.
 
The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on  9
th
 
August, 2017.
 
4.
 
An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Sixteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at 
Annexure
-
II.
 
5.
 
For the facility of reference and convenience, the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in 
the body of the Report.
 
 
EW DELHI; 
 
9 
th
 
August
, 
2017
 
 
 
 
  
18
th
 
Sravana
,
1939 
(Saka
) 
 
 
       
 
 
 
Pinaki 
Misra
 
 
Chairperson
 
Standing Committee on Urban 
Development
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v)
 
 

CHAPTER I
 
REPORT
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2016
-
17) 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in their Sixteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2017
-
18) of the Ministry of  Housing 
and Urban Poverty Alleviation which was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 17
th
 
March, 2017.
 
1.2
 
Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of 
all the 14 recommendations contained in the Report. These have been 
categorized as follows:
 
(i)
 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government:
 
 
Recommendation Serial Nos.1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12 ,13 and 14
  
 
(Total 
-
11)
 
(Chapter
-
II)
 
(ii)
 
Recommendations/Observations, which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view 
of Government's replies:
 
Recommendation Serial No. Nil    
 
 
 
 
              
(Total 
-
0)
 
(Chapter
-
III)
 
(iii)
 
Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
 
  
Recommendation Serial Nos. 5, 7 an
d 8
 
                        
  
 
 
 
     
(Total 
-
03)
 
(Chapter
-
IV)
 
(iv)
 
Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which final replies of the 
Government 
 
are still awaited:
 
  
 
  
Recommendation Serial No.  Nil                                        
 
          
     
(Total 
-
  
0)
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Chapter
-
V)
 

1.3
 
The Committee desire that specific replies to the Comments of the 
Committee as  contained in Chapter
-
I  of this Report may be furnished to them at 
the earliest and in any case, not later than three months from the pre
sentation of 
this Report.
 
1.4
 
The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.   
 
Recommendation No.5
 
 
ALLOCATION FOR CREDIT LINKED SUBSIDY SCHEME (CLSS) FOR 
ECONOMICALLY 
WEAKER SECTION (EWS) AND LOWER INCOME GROUP (LIG)
 
 
1.5
 
The Committee in their 16
th
 
Report had recommended as under:
 
 
"
The Committee while examining the DFG (2017
-
18) of M/o HUPA, observe that 
the BE(2017
-
18) under CLSS(EWS/LIG) has been reduced to Rs. 400.00 crore 
from the BE/RE(2016
-
17) of Rs.475.00 crore. Moreover, a new sub
-
component, 
named, CLSS for Middle Income Grou
p (MIG) under Pradhan Mantri Awas 
Yojna(Urban)
-
PMAY(U) has been introduced pursuant to the address to the 
nation by the Hon'ble Prime Minister  on 31.12.2016, and it is to be implemented 
w.e.f. 01.01.2017. However, detailed guidelines will be issued after 
clearance is 
received from the Election Commission of India (ECI). Nevertheless, the BE 
(2017
-
18) for CLSS (MIG) has been kept at Rs. 1000.00 crore.
 
 
Having observed the above, the Committee feel that the very purpose and 
objective of PMAY (U) with all its
 
4 components, which has been primarily meant 
to cater to the needs of EWS/LIG segment of the urban areas,  who are homeless 
or living in slums and in inhuman living  conditions, has seemingly and prima
-
facie 
diverted its focus and attention from original 
EWS/LIG segment to MIG segment 
of the urban society now. However, the M/o HUPA has assured the Committee 
that there is no diversion of funds or dilution of intent as the target groups are 
distinct and the income segments are different. A large outlay for t
he MIG only 
points to the fact that the income segment and, as a corollary, the loan amounts 
are higher. A reduced outlay for CLSS for EWS/LIG has been kept only as a 
matter of caution at the BE Stage.
 
 
The Committee are well aware that the Ministry, year 
after year, has been 
invariably getting drastically reduced outlay at the RE Stage. In spite of this hard 
fact, they seems to have ignored it and their statement that they have every 
intention to seek more funds, at the RE stage, is hardly satisfactory and
 
acceptable.
 

 
The Committee, in view of the above stated intentional reduced outlay provisions 
of CLSS for EWS/LIG by the Ministry, would like to caution them that this sort of 
unfair allocation in disfavour of EWS/LIG segments, who have been deprived of 
e
ven fundamental and basic amenities and necessities of human life for ages, is 
not acceptable to the Committee.
 
 
The Committee, therefore, urge and recommend to the M/o HUPA as well as M/o 
Finance to provide higher allocations in favour of EWS/LIG segments
 
under CLSS 
for EWS/LIG and for all the relevant Schemes meant for real upliftment of urban 
poors at RE/BE stages, henceforth, to justify and live upto the very nomenclature 
of the Ministry concerned."
 
1.6
 
In their written reply, the Ministry have stated a
s follows:
 
 
"It may be mentioned here that under the PMAY(U) mission guidelines, 
Economically Weaker Section (EWS) category of beneficiaries is eligible for 
assistance in all four verticals of the Missions whereas Low Income Group (LIG) 
& Middle Income Gro
up category is eligible under only CLSS component of the 
Mission. The funds of Rs. 400.00 cr. allocated under PMAY(U) mission for CLSS 
would entirely be utilized to support the construction of EWS/LIG houses. 
 
Also, the Ministry has every intention to seek
 
more funds at the RE stage under 
CLSS component as per requirement projected at the appropriate time by the 
Central Nodal Agencies (CNAs)."
 
1.7
 
 
The Committee had observed in their original recommendation that the 
Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme  (CLSS) for 
Economically Weaker Section (EWS) 
category of beneficiaries  has been reduced to Rs. 400.00 crore from Rs.475.00 
crore in  BE (2017
-
18). At the same time, a new sub
-
component, named, CLSS for 
Middle Income Group (MIG) has been introduced with an allocation
 
of Rs. 1000.00 
crore. In view of this, the Committee had recommended that the focus of PMAY(U) 
scheme should not shift away from the EWS segment to MIG segment as this 
would ultimately result in depriving the economically  weaker segments of their 
right t
o basic amenities. In reply, the Ministry have stated that the EWS category 
of beneficiaries is eligible for assistance in all four verticals of the Missions 
whereas Low Income Group (LIG) & Middle Income Group category is eligible 
under only CLSS componen
t of the Mission. However, the Committee is 
apprehensive whether the EWS segment would be able to compete with the MIG 
segment in obtaining funds. The Committee is of the considered opinion that with 
increasing urban migration, the need for affordable hous
ing in cities for EWS 

sections is all the more felt and to achieve the mission ‘Housing for All by 2022’, 
Government support is indispensable for EWS and LIG segments. Any 
reduction/diversion of funds from EWS component of PMAY(U) would be 
detrimental to t
he fulfillment  of its goals. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that 
sufficient funds for EWS/LIG components of PMAY(U), should be provided for at 
BE stage itself and a focused approach  on disbursal of the same to the needy in 
this segment be ensured.
 
R
ecommendation (Serial No.7)
 
TEAM OF WELL TRAINED AGENTS FOR THE PROMOTION AND SUCCESS OF 
PMAY(U)
 
1.8 The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under:
 
 
“
The Committee observe that the number of EWS/LIG houses provided under 
Credit Linked 
Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) during 2015
-
16 to 21 States(other than 
NE States) is 5907 houses; to 7 NE States is 24 houses; and to 7 UTs is 70 
houses. Similarly, during 2016
-
17 (till 13th February, 2017), 13875 EWS/LIG 
houses have been provided to 21 States; 52 s
uch houses to 7 NE States; and 72 
houses to 7 UTs. Thus, in total 6001 EWS/LIG houses were provided under 
CLSS during 2015
-
16 and a total of 13999 EWS/LIG houses have been provided 
till 13.2.2017.
 
 
The Committee are aware that although CLSS is one of the f
our components of 
PMAY(U), yet, the progress of this important component is very low and far 
below the high expectation of the M/o HUPA as well as this Committee. Even if, 
the year 2015
-
16 is considered  as the initial year of launching of PMAY(U) and 
its 
4 components and the lower figure of 6001 EWS/LIG houses under CLSS is 
put aside, and the figure of about 14000 EWS/LIG houses provided during 2016
-
17 is taken as an average annual achievement in  a year's time, it may be 
presumed that about 70000(
+
) EWS/LIG houses may be provided throughout 
India in the remaining period of 5 years for implementation of PMAY(U)
-
Housing 
for All by 2022 Mission. And, the actual requirement or shortage of houses as per 
initial estimates, is of 18.78 million or about 2 c
rore houses, subject to final 
assessment being estimated by States/UTs.
 
 
The Committee are very much apprehensive of the success of PMAY(U) 
and its 4 components, including, CLSS, with the above pace of progress, viz., 
only about  14000 EWS/LIG houses  have
 
been provided in the current year.
 
 
The Committee, in view of the above, therefore, urge the M/o HUPA to 
explore the feasibility of developing  some initiatives which may be taken at their 
end at the earliest, for the optimum level of achievements in each
 
of the 4 

components of PMAY(U). One such initiative could be that a strong team of Well 
Trained Agents  may be created and developed, who may be provided with all 
the information and inputs relating to CLSS and other 3 components of PMAY(U) 
viz., (i) "In 
Situ" Slum Redevelopment(ISSR); (ii) Affordable Housing in 
Partnership with public or private sector(AHP); and (iii) Beneficiary
-
led individual 
houses construction/enhancements(BLC), and they are trained to canvass and 
convince the urban poor and homeless 
about the benefits provided by the 
Government of India through its PMAY(U)
-
HFA by 2022 Mission and bring in the 
applications of those interested to avail the benefits under CLSS to their local 
PLIs, and like
-
wise become instrumental in promoting other thre
e components of 
the PMAY(U) among the concerned urban clients. And, for this service of theirs, 
they may be provided certain fixed commission or incentive per
-
application or 
per
-
beneficiary, similar to the age old established Agent System working for LIC 
a
nd GIC companies in India. The Committee are of the view that rather than 
always be at the waiting end for would be customers to reach to the PLIs who are 
seldom interested for providing EWS/LIG loans to the poorer sections of the 
vulnerable urban society,
 
the enthusiastic team of well trained agents should 
reach to the prospective applicants under CLSS, BLC and AHP, etc. Other 
aggressive awareness campaign should also be taken up through audio, video 
and print media to create awareness amongst the EWS/LIG/
MIG target groups to 
avail of the benefits of this scheme in large numbers."
 
1.9
 
In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:
 
 
"In the FY 2016
-
17, PMAY (U) Mission has provided approval to 10,27,350 
dwelling units upto 31.03.2017, of which 
22,607 beneficiaries have been 
provided interest subsidy under CLSS of Rs. 418.89 crores. 
 
State Level Technical Cells and City Level Technical Cells manned with different 
competencies like planning, engineering, social mobilization, financial planning 
etc
. have been set up in different States/UTs to enhance capacity in operational 
areas in partnership with Urban Local Bodies who canvass and spread 
awareness at ward level. The provision of fixed commission agents may not be 
implementable to curtail any spec
ulation or false promises to potential 
beneficiaries. CNAs and PLIs are actively involved in reaching out to potential 
beneficiaries through their existing marketing networks. 
 
Further MoHUPA has devised an integrated media strategy through audio, video, 
T
V, print media, social media etc. to create awareness amongst the 
EWS/LIG/MIG target groups to avail of the benefits of this scheme."
 
Comments of the Committee
 
1.10
 
The Committee, while noting that only about  14000 EWS/LIG houses  have 
been provided in th
e financial year  2016
-
17, had expressed their apprehension 
about  the success of PMAY(U) Mission and its 4 components, including, Credit 

Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS). They, therefore, had recommended that  a strong 
team of well trained agents be establish
ed to popularize the scheme and act as a 
link between the needy urban poor and the  government. But, the Ministry have 
stated in their reply that the provision of fixed commission agents may not be 
implementable and instead, they have set up State Level/ C
ity Level Technical 
Cells for canvassing purpose along with an integrated media strategy to 
popularize the scheme. However, the Committee are of the opinion that these 
steps of the Ministry may succeed in  popularizing this scheme but are not 
sufficient to
 
bring the needy poor to the government, as they are unaware of 
whom to contact and how to make an application to avail benefits under this 
scheme. Therefore, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation that  an 
enthusiastic team of well trained F
ield Agents who could act as the bridge 
between the needy urban poor and the government may be created for effective 
fulfillment of the vision of ‘Housing For All by 2022’.  Commission for such a Field 
Agent may be linked with the successful closure of a b
eneficiary's case. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.8)
 
COMPLAINTS REGARDING COLLECTION OF CASH FROM THE POOR FOR 
PROVIDING EWS/LIG HOUSES 
 
1.11 The Committee had recommended as under:
 
"The Committee are perturbed to note cases of fraud and cheating taking place
 
in many cities including NCR of Delhi for allocation of houses under Pradhan 
Mantri Awas Yojana(Urban) with fake propaganda that a house could be booked 
by just paying Rs. 150 by unscrupulous  elements and  fraud NGOs etc. The 
Committee are of the conside
red opinion that such cases should be immediately 
investigated and deterred so that poor people are not cheated.
 
 
The Committee further noted that a lot of bogus builders/developers are  
apparently registering and enlisting a lot of consumers for allotment
 
of EWS/LIG 
house in the name of Affordable Housing Scheme under the mission  "Housing 
For All by 2022."  
 
 
The Committee strongly caution and recommend  that the M/o HUPA 
should immediately swing into action and get such complaints thoroughly 
investigated
 
in all States and UTs as one of their  prime scheme, named , 
PMAY(U) is being misused for illegal money
-
making by some corrupt
-
minded 

anti
-
social elements. Any delay in catching those involved, will give them liberty 
to rob millions of more poors and have
-
nots of the society. If unchecked, poor 
and homeless masses will feel cheated and betrayed and  also it will be difficult  
for them to trust any of the Government schemes  henceforth.
 
 
The Committee also recommend that M/o HUPA should ensure that no fraud
 
is 
executed by the fake developers/builders in the name of Affordable Housing  
Scheme/Land Pooling Policy in various States of India.   
 
 
The Committee desire that aggressive awareness programmes through visual 
and print media should be launched immediate
ly to educate and inform common 
people to beware of such fraudulent persons/NGOs, on the lines of the 
awareness drive relating to non
-
divulgence of any of the personal bank A/c, ATM 
card, PIN/CVV number, password of email, etc., to any unknown person askin
g 
for such details."
 
 
1.12
 
In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:
 
 
"The suggestions of the Committee have been noted. Following actions have 
been taken by this Ministry to avoid fraud and cheating by fake developers/builders 
in the name of affordable housing scheme: 
 

 
A disclaimer has been posted on the website of the Mini
stry intimating general 
public that this Ministry has not authorized any private entity or person to collect 
money as a consideration for availing of any benefit under the PMAY (U) 
Mission.
 

 
State/UT Governments have been requested to issue disclaimer/publi
c notice 
cautioning the general public about unscrupulous individuals/ entities from 
cheating the general public.
 

 
This Ministry is in the process to publish public notice in leading newspapers 
cautioning the general public about unscrupulous individuals/ e
ntities from 
cheating the general public.
 

 
This Ministry has also requested to all States/UTs to propagate and promote the 
facility of online application using the platform of Common Service Centre for 
registration under the Scheme to citizens. Further CSC 
through its weekly 
newsletter has also published the matter for awareness of the citizens. CSC has 
also written to all District Collectors to monitor online applications through CSC 
so that more people may avail the benefit under PMAY(U)."
 
 
Comments of the
 
Committee
 
1.13
 
In view of the proliferation of incidents of fraud and cheating by fake 
developers/builders in the name of Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana(Urban), the 
Committee had recommended that the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation should ge
t all such complaints investigated and ensure that no poor is 

betrayed by bogus developers/builders in the name of affordable housing 
scheme. It is observed that the Ministry have taken an array of steps to spread 
awareness about fraud being committed in t
he name of PMAY(U) viz., posting a 
disclaimer on the website of the Ministry; requesting the States/UTs to issue 
public notice cautioning the general public; urging the States/UTs to promote the 
facility of online application for registration under the Sch
eme; initiating the 
process to publish public notice in leading newspapers cautioning the general 
public about unscrupulous individuals/ entities, etc. However, the Committee feel 
that a lot more needs to be done and it is extremely important to identify/p
unish 
those bogus builders/developers or anybody else who have misused the name of 
this flagship programme of the Government for illegal monetary gain. They, 
therefore, desire that the Ministry should take strict punitive action against those 
found guilty 
which may act as a deterrent in the recurrence of such incidents and 
uphold the faith of the poor  in government schemes.
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.12)
 
SHELTERS FOR URBAN HOMELESS UNDER DAY
-
NULM
 
1.14 The Committee had recommended as under:
 
"
The Committee observe that one of the component under DAY
-
NULM is 
'Shelters for Urban Homeless'. Under this component, a total of 1340 shelters 
were planned by the States/UTs for two years, i.e., 2014
-
15 and 2015
-
16, out of 
which 846 shelters for urban hom
eless were
 
sanctioned by the States/UTs. 
Further, during 2016
-
17, a total of 761 shelters were planned by the States/UTs, 
out of which only 390 shelters have been sanctioned by them. As on 31.01.2017, 
a total of 658 shelters in various States/UTs are opera
tional under DAY
-
NULM 
since the inception of this programme. As is evident from the above, that in the 
year 2014
-
15 and 2015
-
16, the percentage of sanctioned shelters is 63.13 % and 
36.87 % of planned shelters, remained un
-
sanctioned. Similarly, the percen
tage 
of sanctioned shelters is even lower during 2016
-
17, i.e., only 51.24% shelters 
sanctioned and 49.76 % planned shelters 
 
remained un
-
sanctioned. However, 
the percentage of operational shelters is only 31.31% out of the total planned 
2101 shelters sinc
e 2014
-
15 to 2016
-
17 (till 31.01.2017). Whereas, the 
percentage of operational shelters against the total sanctioned shelters during 
2014
-
17, is only 53.23%, viz., 1236 sanctioned shelters vs. 658 operational 
shelters. 
 
 
The Committee, in view of the low p
ercentage of achievement so far the 
operational shelters are concerned during 3 years time, strongly urge and 
recommend the nodal M/o HUPA to pursue vigorously  and persuade all the 
States/UTs concerned for opening and maintaining more and more shelters fo
r 

urban Homeless to reach the 100% achievement level at least against the 
sanctioned Shelters every year, in the fulfillment of the very objective of the 
scheme, i.e., to provide shelters to urban Homeless, for their Welfare."
 
1.15
 
In their written reply, 
the Ministry have stated as follows:
 
"Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation has been taking up the matter 
consistently with the states/ UTs
 
to improve the rate of operationalization of 
shelters sanctioned. Video conferences have been held with 
all states where the 
requirement of achievement of targets in terms of shelters was emphasized. The 
states have been requested to conduct survey of urban homeless and prepare 
annual action plans to accommodate them in new/ refurbished shelters
 
as per 
the m
ission guidelines.
 
One of the reasons for slow rate of operationalization of shelters
 
is
 
ongoing 
construction of majority of shelters. To address this, the M/o HUPA has placed 
on its website the model designs of shelters for construction and has
 
advised 
th
em to consider
 
adoption of
 
pre
-
fab technology for
 
faster construction.
 
 
Albeit this, the recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
compliance."
 
Comments of the Committee
 
1.16
 
The Committee, in view of the low percentage of achievement in the 
'Shelters for Urban Homeless' component under DAY
-
NULM during the last three 
years had recommended the nodal Ministry to persuade all the States/UTs for 
opening and maintaining more and mor
e shelters for urban homeless towards 
fulfilling the very objectives of the scheme. 
 
It is observed that the Ministry have 
been consistently taking up this matter with the States/UTs through video 
conferencing, etc., to speed
-
up the construction of urban s
helters. However, the 
efforts do not seem to bear much fruit and the ra
te of operationalization of 
shelters
 
is
 
very slow
. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to focus on 
States/UTs which are lagging behind in the construction/operationalization of 
shelters by devising a time bound targeted approach and intimate this Committee 
about the achievements made in this regard within three months from the date of 
presentation of this Report. 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER II
 
RECOMMENDTIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GORERN
MENT
 
 
Recommendation  (Serial No.1)
 
SYMBOLIC INCREASE OF BUDGET  ESTIMATES(2017
-
18) OF M/O HUPA
 
 
The Committee note that the BE (2016
-
17) of Rs. 5411.00 crore was provided to 
M/o HUPA which has been said to increase to Rs. 6406.00 crore
 
as BE (2017
-
18), i.e., 
an increase of Rs. 995.00 crore from the current year Budget Estimates. In terms of 
percentage, the increase is claimed to be of 18.38%.
 
 
The introduction of the new Sub
-
Component CLSS for MIG, under existing CLSS 
has provision of Rs. 1000.00 crore in BE
 
(2017
-
18) which led to an increase of BE (17
-
18). This amount of Rs.1000 crore will exclusively be used for this Scheme and only 
Rs.5504 cr
ore will be left with the Ministry, which is lesser than Rs.5411 crore of 
previous year, for all practical purposes viz., current schemes/sub
-
schemes of the 
Ministry. This increase will not have any advantage to overall Ministry of HUPA budget. 
This increa
se is merely due to introduction of new component.  
 
 
 
The Committee, therefore, disagree with the facile statement of the 
representative of Ministry of HUPA that there is an increase of 18.38% in BE(2017
-
18) 
over BE(2016
-
17), as this kind of increase is n
othing but a token increase which is of 
little use for any of the existing and ongoing Schemes/sub
-
schemes of the Ministry. It is 
intended for a new and yet to be made operational sub
-
component under the main 
scheme which appear more speculative in nature 
than anything substantive.
 
 
The Committee, therefore, strongly urge the Ministry of Finance and Ministry of 
HUPA to depart from such Budgeting practices in which not even 10 to 12 per cent 
minimum inflation rate/trends or devaluation of money is considered
 
to be added in the 
next year Budget Estimates over the current year BE and have in fact actually reduced 
budget over previous year. They unanimously recommend for a real increased 
Budgetary provisions to be provided henceforth in favour of Ministry of  HU
PA, 

responsible for fulfilling aspirations and expectations of millions of urban poor and 
homeless. They also emphasize that Rs. 1000 crore earmarked for CLSS for MIG 
should be utilized for the stated purpose. The Ministry should proactively create 
awarene
ss among the target group/potential beneficiaries so that they come forward 
and take advantage of the Scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government
 
2.2
 
In the FY 2016
-
17, an amount of Rs. 4400.00 crore was allocated for PMAY (U) 
scheme (except CLSS component of PMAY (U
) for which additional allocation of Rs. 
475.00 crore was made). Taking into consideration of liabilities of FY 2016
-
17, HFA 
Directorate proposed to enhance the Budget for the FY 2017
-
18 by 10% (i.e   Rs. 
4840.00) of the allocation of FY 2016
-
17.  However,
 
an amount of Rs. 4550.90 crore 
has been allocated for PMAY (U) scheme for the FY 2017
-
18 (except CLSS component 
of PMAY (U) for which additional allocation of Rs. 1400.00 crore (Rs. 400.00 crore for 
EWS/LIG and RS. 1000.00 crore for MIG) has been made).
 
F
urther, as the extended period of JNNURM was upto 31.03.2017, no budgetary 
allocation has been made for this scheme in FY 2017
-
18.
 
With regard to creation of awerness among the target group/potential 
beneficiaries, it is stated that meetings and workshops 
are regularly held at City and 
State levels to explain the salient features of the PMAY (U) Mission. The personnel of 
the Project Management Unit set up under the Mission and other senior officers of the 
Ministry also visit States/UTs to interact with the 
various stakeholders. Regular 
interactions also take place with the State/UT officials through Video Conferencing, 
review meetings and meetings of Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee etc. To 
publicise the Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) compon
ent of the mission, radio 
spots have been broadcast in eleven languages, including Hindi. Social media, printed 
booklets/leaflets and the medium of street plays have also been used effectively to 
disseminate information to various stakeholders so that the 
target group/potential 
beneficiaries can take the advantage of the scheme.
 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.2)
 
REDUCTION OF BUDGETARY PROVISIONS AT THE  RE STAGE
 
2.3
 
The Committee observe that the BE(2012
-
13) of Rs.1155.00 crore, BE(2013
-
14) 
of Rs. 1460.00 
crore, BE(2014
-
15) of Rs.6000.00 crore, BE(2015
-
16) of Rs.5625.30 
crore, and BE(2016
-
17) of Rs.5411.00 crore have been reduced at Revised Estimates 
stage as RE(2012
-
13) of Rs.950.00 crore, RE(2013
-
14) of Rs. 1200.00 crore, RE(2014
-
15) of Rs.3400.00, RE(201
5
-
16) of Rs. 1952.00 crore, and RE(2016
-
17) of Rs.5285.00 
crore, respectively. Thus, the  reduction of Rs.205.00 crore in(2012
-
13), Rs.260.00 
crore in (2013
-
14), Rs. 2600.00 crore in  (2014
-
15), of Rs. 3673.00 crore in (2015
-
16), 
and of Rs. 130.00 crore in
 
(2016
-
17), has been recorded. It can be clearly seen that 
Budget Estimates as proposed and presented by the MoF in favour of M/o HUPA every 
year and  also passed by the Parliament year after year, gets massively reduced. This 
indicates that the entire bud
getary process and planning needs serious rethinking.
 
 
The Committee are of the considered view that this unhappy practice of reducing 
the Budget Estimates of M/o HUPA every year at the RE stage by the MoF, adversely 
affects the pace and progress of the on
going Schemes/Programmes of the Ministry. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend and disapprove of this practice of sharp 
reduction of the BE at the RE stage, on the Ministry concerned and strongly recommend 
that M/o Finance should henceforth practice to hono
ur their own committed BE and 
ensure that cut, if required should be an  exception and not the rule. Even if there is 
necessity for reduction of BE at RE, specific, justified and concrete reasons should be 
spelt out. In fact with the pre
-
ponement in date o
f the budget and other budgetary 
reforms the MoF should be able to plan and rationally allocate budget to the Ministries, 
specifically to this Ministry as priority areas including the scheme 'Housing for All' fall 
under jurisdiction of HUPA at BE stage its
elf so that it does not affect the smooth 
implementation of the ongoing schemes and projects. The Committee desire that the 
views of the Committee be duly conveyed to MoF by HUPA.
 

 
 
Reply of the Government
 
2.4
 
Ministry of Finance is the nodal Ministry in s
o far as budgetary procedures and 
ceiling of Budget Estimates are concerned. 
 
In the FY 2016
-
17, an amount of Rs. 4,400.00 crore was allocated for PMAY (U) 
scheme which was reduced to Rs. 4342.43 crore at RE stage according to the funds 
provided to this Mi
nistry at RE stage by 
M/o Finance
.
 
During the FY 2016
-
17, an additional requirement of Rs. 1000.00 crore for 
PMAY (U) scheme was submitted to 
M/o Finance
 
in 
the 2
nd
 
Batch of Supplementary/ 
RE stage
 
but the same was not considered by 
M/o Finance, although F
inance Ministry 
was
 
requested at the highest level to enhance the budgetary provision so as to avoid 
financial crunch in achieving the objectives of the PMAY (U)
-
HFA Mission. 
 
In the FY 2017
-
18, an amount of Rs.4550.90 crore has been allocated for three 
ve
rticals (except CLSS) of the PMAY (U) scheme.
 
Further enhancement in allocation will be sought at supplementary stages/RE 
stage based on requirement. Views of the Committee about reduction of budget every 
year at the RE stage by M/o Finance for priority 
areas of schemes being run by Ministry 
of HUPA have also been conveyed to M/o Finance.
 
Recommendation (Serial No.3)
 
M/O HUPA REQUIRES UPGRADATION OF EXISTING BUDGETARY SKILLS AND 
MANAGEMENT
 
 
2.5
 
The Committee observe that the M/o HUPA have been regularly getting less than 
their proposed outlay. There is always a huge gap between what they asked for and 
what they got as BE from 2012
-
13 till 2017
-
18. It is evident from the fact that in 2012
-
13 
they 
got Rs. 1581.00 crore less than what they had requested for, in 2013
-
14, 
Rs.261.00 corre less, in 2014
-
15, Rs. 862.56 crore less, in 2015
-
16, Rs. 1508.88 crore 

less than proposed. However, trend got reversed in the year 2016
-
17 and 2017
-
18 
when they got a 
BE of Rs.913.00 crore and 677.34 crore more than what they 
proposed, respectively.
 
 
The Committee are of the considered view and recommend that this phenomena 
is indicative of the emerging need of introspection and a better evaluation of existing 
Budgetary
 
Skills and Management strategies and certainly requires an upgradation of 
the same at the end of M/o HUPA. The Committee would like M/o HUPA to propose a 
realistic outlay in future so that the MoF is convinced  about  the Ministry’s requirement. 
 
Reply of
 
the Government
 
2.6
 
The recommendation of the Committee about realistic outlay in future is noted.  
Programme Division prepares the Budget Estimates on the basis of liabilities created/ to 
be created in the concerned financial year under the on
-
going schem
es being run by 
this Ministry. On this basis, budget proposals are forwarded to Ministry of Finance for 
approval.
 
Recommendation (Serial No.4)
 
EXPENDITURE CAPACITY OF M/O HUPA 
 
2.7
 
The Committee find that actual expenditure has been consistently less than 
the 
Revised Estimates.  The actual expenditure of Rs. 930.11 crore (2012
-
13) was against 
the RE of Rs. 950.00 crore(97.99%); Rs. 1078.79 crore (2013
-
14) against the RE of 
Rs.1200.00 crore(89.8%); Rs. 2715.42 crore (2014
-
15) against the RE of Rs. 3400.00 
cr
ore(79.8); Rs.1750.64 crore (2015
-
16) against the RE of 1952.00 crore(89.69); and 
Rs. 4794.59 crore (2016
-
17
-
 
upto 29.1.2017) against the RE of Rs. 5270.10 
crore(90.9%). As the RE has been slashed in almost all of these years the gap between 
BE and actual 
expenditure is much more. The point of concern for the Committee is that 
if the Ministry is not able to spend even the reduced RE to its fullest level, then what is 
the use of seeking more funds at BE level. In fact, in case the Ministry is unable to 
spend
 
their RE it brings out a clear case for the MoF to reduce the allocations for the 

next year as  instead of  blocking scarce resources in this Ministry it could be utilised 
elsewhere.
 
 
 
 
The Committee, in view of the above, urge and recommend the Ministry 
to 
enhance their actual expenditure capabilities by proving their merits with optimum and 
100% utilization of their meager RE with a Zero financial and physical shortfall in any of 
their Schemes, every year to dispel the doubts about their financial and co
rresponding  
physical achievement capabilities. The Committee are hopeful that the Ministry, with 
pre
-
ponement of budget and budgetary process (as is the objective) will be able to 
utilize their funds fully.
 
Reply of the Government
 
2.8
 
In the FY 2016
-
17, a
n amount of Rs. 4,400.00 crore was allocated for PMAY (U) 
scheme which was reduced to Rs. 4342.43 crore at RE stage  of which Rs. 4335.10 
crore (around 98.5%) was released. 
Besides, funds allocated under the CLSS of PMAY 
(U) which is a Central Sector Schem
e was 100% utilized. Out of Rs. 4936.10 crore  
provided in RE 2016
-
17  for PMAY (U) Umbrella scheme, Rs. 4882.5746 crore was 
spent which works out to 98.9%.  The Ministry is taking steps to utilize the budget 
allocation in FY 2017
-
18 in full. 
 
Recommendati
on (Serial No.6)
 
STRENGTHENING THE ROLE OF THE PUBLIC SECTOR BANKS(PSBS) FOR 
IMPLEMENTATION OF CLSS FOR EWS/LIG/MIG UNDER PMAY(U)
 
2.9
 
The Committee observe during examination of DFG (2017
-
18) of M/o HUPA that 
many of the States are languishing badly so far
 
as the  details of houses provided to 
EWS/LIG during 2015
-
16 and 2016
-
17, till 13.02.2017, under CLSS is concerned. 
States of Bihar, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Jharkhand, Odisha, 
Uttrakhand, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland Sikk
im etc., have either 
been provided less than 10 EWS/LIG houses during 2016
-
17 and remaining States of 
the above have been provided less than 50 such houses during 2015
-
16 and 2016
-
17. 
Further, States of Arunachal Pradesh, Tripura have zero allocation among
 
UTs while  
Andaman & Nicobar Island, Daman & Diu and  Lakshadeep have zero EWS/LIG under 
CLSS; Chandigarh and Puducherry having less than 5 and Delhi and Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli are having  less than 50 figures at their credit.
 

 
The Committee are concerned w
ith respect to the less than satisfactory 
performance of both the Central Nodal Agencies (CNAs), namely, National Housing 
Bank(NHB) and HUDCO  associated with the task of sanctioning and releasing housing  
loan subsidy to the PSBs/PLIs/HFCs under CLSS comp
onent of PMAY(U), and desired 
to be apprised about the reasons for less number of EWS/LIG houses or NIL number of 
such houses in the above stated States/UTs.
 
 
The Committee are apprised by the Representative of the M/o HUPA during 
evidence that as the CLSS
 
is a Central Sector Scheme and the State Government's role 
is actually more in mobilizing the beneficiaries and approaching the financial institutions 
for this assistance. Whereas about 80 to 90 per cent of   the funding under CLSS being 
made by the Housi
ng Finance Companies(HFCs), the Public Sector Banks(PSBs) are 
still 9 to 10 per cent. Since the PSBs are more largely present and  prevalent in the 
States with a larger coverage, there arises the need for the greater support of PSBs to 
address the aspirati
ons of the urban poor (EWS/LIG) and homeless people. 
 
 
The Committee in this regard also wish to point out that they have already 
recommended in their 10th Report on DFG(2016
-
17) of M/o HUPA last year that the 
M/o HUPA, HUDCO and NHB should vigorously purs
ue all the issues with DFS, i.e,(i) at 
least 3% of the priority Sector Lending for loans of dwelling units costing not more than 
Rs. 16 lakh; (ii) inclusion, with due weigtage, of lending of home loans  less than Rs. 15 
lakh under CLSS component, as a part
 
of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) of the 
banks; and (iii) Monitoring of the progress of the scheme through State Level Bankers 
Committee(SLBC). The Committee feel that to obtain positive outcome in this regard for 
better performance of CLSS, which will
 
not only safeguard the interest of the weaker 
sections but also prove a landmark in promoting PMAY(U)
-
HFA(U) by 2022. However, 
the first two issues recommended and reiterated above are reported to be still pending 
with the Department of Financial Services
.
 
 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend and  urge the HUPA to take up 
the matter with MoF
 
to intervene and issue immediate directions in this regard to all its 
PSBs/PLIs to play a proactive role and  lend all their support and cooperation in 
disbursement of  more and more housing loans to EWS/LIG/MIG applicants under 

CLSS of PMAY(U). They desi
re M/o HUPA to pursue MoF/DFS to provide approval and 
clearance to both the  aforesaid  earlier recommendations of the Committee namely, (i) 
at least 3% of the Priority Sector Lending for loans of dwelling units costing not more 
than Rs. 16 lakh; and  (ii)
 
inclusion, with due weigtage, of lending of home loans  less 
than Rs. 15 lakh under CLSS component, as a part of Key Performance Indicators 
(KPIs) of the Banks so as  to strengthen the role of PSBs in a big way to make CLSS
-
PMAY(U) a grand success. The Co
mmittee also advise the M/o HUPA and both the 
CNAs, namely, NHB and HUDCO to vigorusouly pursue all the above stated and 
recommended issues with the DFS/MoF in their favour for quicker implementation of the 
same without wasting any further time.
 
Reply of t
he Government
 
2.10
 
The Ministry is actively pursuing the recommendations made by the Committee. 
These issues were discussed in a meeting in the PMO on 07.03.2017. Record of 
Discussions (RoD) has also been circulated to DFS.
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.9)
 
VE
NDING POLICY FOR CLARITY AND TRANSPARENCY
 
2.11
 
The Committee observe that 'No Vending Zones' have been demarcated in many 
places/areas of NCR of Delhi and other cities of the States/UTs. Unfortunately, there 
has been a constant violation of No Vending Zone
s. Thus, this violation and presence of 
vendors causes great deal of encroachment of footpaths/pavements on both sides of 
the roads. Moreover, presence of vendors on both sides of roads wherever little 
footpaths/pavements are there, can be frequently witne
ssed throughout the city/walled
-
city of NCR of Delhi and other cities. At most of the places, more than half of the PWD 
roads have been encroached by the Street Vendors, causing huge traffic jams and 
consequent air/noise pollution, wasting of millions of m
an
-
hours per annum due to being 
trapped in traffic jams by commuters/passers
-
by, and above all, total infringement of the 
Right to Passage of one and all, i.e., whether residents of the area or people passing 
through that area, besides, adversely affecting
 
the business of local shopkeepers.
 

 
The Committee apprehend that large
-
scale corrupt practices are  going on, 
especially in NCR of Delhi and other Metropolitan Cities, wherein,  class of 'Thekedars' 
and 'Touts' have been freely and actively indulging in o
wning at least 10 to 20 Street 
Vendors spots/places in the names of some false or fabricated persons/individuals 
shown as street vendors in the Municipalities'/ULBs records and, then, offer/sell those 
street vendors' spots/places to the Street Vendors on w
eekly/monthly rental basis, thus, 
making a hefty  illegal income out of street vending Business based on corrupt/illegal 
practices.
 
 
The Committee also note that composition of the Town Vending Committee 
consists of 50% official Members, 40% street vendors
 
duly elected among total street 
vendors of the area, and 10 % representatives of the NGOs.
 
 
The Committee are of the considered opinion that these NGOs involved are 
actually the vendors' groups with vested interests who actually promote street vending. 
Th
e Committee desire that traders of the area should also be given due representation 
in the composition of the Town Vending Committee so that they can safeguard and 
protect the rights of the existing market to avoid a 'market outside the market' situation 
a
t present.
 
 
The Committee, in view of the above scenario, strongly recommend that there is 
an immediate need for comprehensive rework/in
-
depth relook/review of the Vending 
Policy and the relevant Acts, etc., by the M/o HUPA, in order to bring more clarity 
and 
transparency  in the Vending Policy and in the relevant Acts thereon, putting a 
legitimate ending/settlement to issues, such as: (i) constant violation of no vending 
zones, (ii) encroachments of footpaths/pavements/PWD Roads, etc., meant for 
pedestrian
s to walk by  and  for traffic to pass by; (iii) infringement of Right to 
Passage;(iv) change in the composition of the Town Vending Committee giving due  
representation to the local traders of  the area; and (v) illegal benami or bogus holding 
and capturi
ng of 10 to 20 Street Vendors places/thallas/spots by the thekedars/touts, 
who are collecting and making money out of the legitimate income of the actual 
vendors, as rent/fees, etc., along with all the relevant issues involved therein and 
incidental theret
o. 
 

Reply of the Government
 
2.12
 
The Street Vendors Act, 2014 provides for states/UTs to form Town Vending 
Committee which will ensure that all existing street vendors, identified in the survey, are 
accommodated in the vending zones subject to the laid down norm in accordance with 
the pla
n for street vending and the holding capacity of the vending zones. Further, 
where any area or space has been earmarked as no
-
vending zone, no street vendor 
shall carry out any vending activities in that zone. Every local authority shall in 
consultation wi
th the planning authority and on the recommendation of the Town 
Vending Committee, once in five years, prepare a plan for Street Vending. The 
provisions of Act are implemented by the concerned State Government. 
 
To
 
facilitate the
 
right of commuters to move
 
freely and use roads without any 
impediments, the provisions of Act are to be implemented by the State Government/ 
local authorities
 
as per the street vending plan. 
 
To
 
implement the provisions of the Act, the State Governments are to frame a 
Scheme layin
g down the criteria for issuing certificate of street vending. The M/o HUPA 
has circulated a Model Scheme which, inter
-
alia, provides that the certificate of vending 
can’t be leased, rented or sold to any other person. An undertaking in this respect shall 
be submitted by the street vendor to the TVC. Further, the certificate of vending shall 
have photograph of the
 
 
vendor and of the spouse and/or dependent children provided 
that they are engaged in
 
 
vending. These provisions are to ensure that
 
only the genu
ine 
vendors get the certificate of vending. However, keeping in view the recommendations 
of Standing Committee, this Ministry proposes to issue an advisory to the States/ UTs 
reiterating the provisions
 
to ensure that the vending certificates are issued to 
only
 
the 
genuine vendors. 
 
As regards giving representation to the local traders of the area, appropriate 
provisions are already contained in the Street Vendors Act which mandates that the 
Town Vending Committee will, 
inter
-
alia
, consist of members represe
ntative of market 
associations, traders associations, etc. Therefore, the representation of the traders 

association in the Town Vending Committee has duly been taken care of by the 
provisions of the Act.
 

Recommendation (Serial No.10)
 
POOR 
PERFORMANCE/PHYSICAL PROGRESS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF 
HOUSES
 
2.13
 
The Committee observe that the number of houses sanctioned for construction 
since 2007 till 15th February, 2017, under various Schemes being implemented by M/o 
HUPA is reported to be 28,04,070 i
n all the States/UTs except in UTs of A&N Islands 
and Lakshadeep,  where no house have been sanctioned during the  aforesaid period. 
The total number of houses constructed is reported to be 11,35,055; the total number of 
houses occupied is 9,54,034 and the
 
total number of houses under construction is 
5,64,172.
 
 
The Committee further observe that in case, out of total number of houses 
sanctioned, the total number of houses constructed, are  subtracted, vz., 28,04,070(
-
)11,35,055(=)16,69,015 houses. Further, 
in case, the total number of houses 
constructed, and, the total number of houses under construction are added together, 
viz., 11,35,055(+)5,64,172 (=)16,99,227 houses. Thus, in case, the figure of 16,69,015 
is subtracted from the figure of 16,99,227, a dif
ference of 30212 houses is evident 
which are neither completed, nor are under construction out of the total number of 
houses sanctioned during the above stated period. 
 
 
The Committee would like to be apprised about these 30212 houses along with 
the justif
ication of such a poor performance/physical progress for construction of  
houses under various Schemes being implemented by M/o HUPA since 2007, till date. 
 
 
The Committee, in view of the above, recommend that M/o HUPA whose prime 
task/mandate is to get th
eir housing Schemes meant for urban poor and homeless, 
implemented in the States/UTs, should relook at their unsatisfactory performance 
relating to sanctioned housing projects and introspect in
-
depth to improve and enhance 
their existing pursuing and persu
asion skills to achieve better implementation 
outcome/responses from the concerned States/UTs. They are also advised to 
contemplate to do some comprehensive overhauling of their usual practice of 
working 
 
and develop some innovative ways to handle the prim
e task of getting their 

Centrally Sponsored Urban Housing and Poverty Alleviation Schemes implemented in 
and by all the States/UTs with optimum achievement level achieved in a time bound 
manner.
 
Reply of the Government
 
2
.
14
 
It is submitted that in case, 
out of total number of houses sanctioned (28,04,070) 
and the total number of houses constructed (11,35,055), are subtracted, the figure of 
16,69,015 is the number of houses which are either under construction or not yet 
started. Whereas, addition of the to
tal number of houses constructed (11,35,055) and 
the total number of houses under construction (5,64,172) will give the figure of number 
of houses for which work has been started under different schemes irrespective of their 
present status i.e. completed/u
nder
-
construction.
 
 
For clarity about number of housing units constructed, under
-
construction and yet 
to be started under various schemes being implemented by M/o HUPA since 2007 to till 
date.. 
 
The Ministry reviews status of ongoing projects including bas
ic infrastructure 
development under the scheme through Quarterly and Monthly Progress Reports, in the 
meetings of Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee (CSMC) and review 
meetings at the level of Secretary (HUPA). Through these reviews, State/UT 
Gove
rnments are advised to complete the ongoing projects with basic infrastructure as 
early as possible  and within the project gestation period. While considering projects 
under PMAY (U) scheme for a city, availability of encumbrance free land and progress 
of
 
old schemes is also taken into account invariably. 
 
Also, at the time of claiming the third and final installment of 20 % of the Central 
assistance for the projects accepted under the PMAY(Urban) mission, the State 
Government is also required to give an u
ndertaking to the effect that the houses have 
been completed with the requisite infrastructure, particularly (i) power supply (ii) water 
supply and (iii) drainage/sanitation.
 
 

 
Recommendation (Serial No.11)
 
PLACEMENT OF TRAINED CANDIDATES UNDER EST&P COMPO
NENT OF DAY
-
NULM
 
2.15
 
The Committee observe that under Employment through Skill Training and 
Placement (EST&P) component of Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana
-
 
National Urban 
Livelihoods Mission(DAY
-
NULM), the number of candidates Trained is reported to be 
3,54,82
7 against a target of 3,30,684 candidates. That means the percentage
-
wise 
achievement is 107.30% during the year 2016
-
17. However, on analyzing statistics of 
candidates trained and placed, it was found that except for J&K, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, 
Andaman & Ni
cobar Islands, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Daman & Diu, NCT of Delhi 
and 
 
Puducherry, where no candidate has been trained during 2016
-
17, in remaining 
States/UT where 3,54,827 candidates have been trained, only 61,656 candidates,  
against a target  of 2,48,379, 
have been placed for employment in the concerned 
States/UT with the exception of Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Haryana, Manipur, Mizoram, 
Punjab, Rajasthan and Sikkim, where no candidate has been placed against their 
respective number of trained candidates. The 
percentage
-
wise achievement comes to 
only 24.62% for candidates placed during 2016
-
17.
 
 
The Committee are concerned to observe the very low percentage of placement 
of the trained candidates indicating that only about 25 candidates out of every 100 
candidat
es who got skill training under various activities of their choice got an 
opportunity to earn their livelihood during the said period of the current financial year.
 
 
The Committee urge the M/o HUPA to look into this low percentage of placement 
of Trained candidates under EST&P component of DAY
-
NULM and take all possible 
steps and measures to improve upon the existing low level of employment generation of 
Skilled and Tr
ained Candidates. The Committee further recommend that the M/o 
 
HUPA 
must have a thorough review of the various fields/activities in which the Candidates 
have been/are being trained, in order to know about the relevance of that skill and 
training as per th
e peculiarity and needs of the States/UTs. 
 

 
The Committee recommend that the Ministry may modify their skill training 
programmes, based on the principle of demand, relevance and needs in a particular 
area, for obtaining better level of achievements in pla
cement of trained candidates.
 
Reply of the Government
 
2.16
 
 
The problem of poor placement has been recognized by the Ministry 
and
 
amendments have been carried out in DAY
-
NULM guidelines from time to time to 
improve placement. The last instalment
 
of funds to Skill Training Providers (STPs) is 
linked to their placement performance. Financial incentives are provided to Skill Training 
Providers (STPs) for higher placement. Similarly, guidelines provide
 
for penalizing STPs 
on poor placement performanc
e. Post placement support is being offered to enable the 
newly skilled
 
candidates to settle in their new jobs/vocations. 
 
 
 
The matter of poor placement has also been taken up regularly with the 
States/UTs. The Ministry has sent advisories to States/UTs to
 
undertake skill training 
based on the Skill Gap Analysis (SGA) done by National Skill Development Corporation 
(NSDC) and/or Ministry of Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) (vide letters No. K
-
14014/99/2014
-
UPA (FTS
-
14054) dated 6
th
 
May 2016 and K
-
14012/
-
2/2016
-
UPA (FTS
-
14980) dated 26th February 2016), so that candidates would be trained in sectors with 
higher gap
 
leading to higher placement. 
 
 
 
 
Views of other Ministries have also been sought regularly in meetings of the 
Executive 
Committee of DAY
-
NULM for improving placement of trained candidates.
 
 
 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for further efforts.
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.12)
 
SHELTERS FOR URBAN HOMELESS UNDER DAY
-
NULM
 
2.17
 
The Committee observe that one of
 
the component under DAY
-
NULM is 
'Shelters for Urban Homeless'. Under this component, a total of 1340 shelters were 
planned by the States/UTs for two years, i.e., 2014
-
15 and 2015
-
16, out of which 846 
shelters for urban homeless were
 
sanctioned by the Stat
es/UTs. Further, during 2016
-

17, a total of 761 shelters were planned by the States/UTs, out of which only 390 
shelters have been sanctioned by them. As on 31.01.2017, a total of 658 shelters in 
various States/UTs are operational under DAY
-
NULM since the i
nception of this 
programme. As is evident from the above, that in the year 2014
-
15 and 2015
-
16, the 
percentage of sanctioned shelters is 63.13 % and 36.87 % of planned shelters, 
remained un
-
sanctioned. Similarly, the percentage of sanctioned shelters is ev
en lower 
during 2016
-
17, i.e., only 51.24% shelters sanctioned and 49.76 % planned 
shelters 
 
remained un
-
sanctioned. However, the percentage of operational shelters is 
only 31.31% out of the total planned 2101 shelters since 2014
-
15 to 2016
-
17 (till 
31.01.
2017). Whereas, the percentage of operational shelters against the total 
sanctioned shelters during 2014
-
17, is only 53.23%, viz., 1236 sanctioned shelters vs. 
658 operational shelters. 
 
 
The Committee, in view of the low percentage of achievement so far 
the 
operational shelters are concerned during 3 years time, strongly urge and recommend 
the nodal M/o HUPA to pursue vigorously  and persuade all the States/UTs concerned 
for opening and maintaining more and more shelters for urban Homeless to reach the 
10
0% achievement level at least against the sanctioned Shelters every year, in the 
fulfillment of the very objective of the scheme, i.e., to provide shelters to urban 
Homeless, for their Welfare.
 
Reply of the Government
 
2.18
 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Pov
erty Alleviation has been taking up the matter 
consistently with the states/ UTs
 
to improve the rate of operationalization of shelters 
sanctioned. Video conferences have been held with all states where the requirement of 
achievement of targets in terms of 
shelters was emphasized. The states have been 
requested to conduct survey of urban homeless and prepare annual action plans to 
accommodate them in new/ refurbished shelters
 
as per the mission guidelines.
 
 
 
One of the reasons for slow rate of operationaliza
tion of shelters
 
is
 
ongoing 
construction of majority of shelters. To address this, the M/o HUPA has placed on its 

website the model designs of shelters for construction and has
 
advised them to 
consider
 
adoption of
 
pre
-
fab technology for
 
faster construction
.
 
 
Albeit this, the recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
compliance. 
 
2.19
 
For comments of the Committee please see para No. 1.16  of Chapter
-
I of the 
Report.
 
Recommendation (Serial No.13)
 
NEED FOR CREATION AND IMPLEMENTATION OF A NATIONAL PO
LICY ON 
MANDATORY USE OF FLY ASH BRICKS IN ALL GOVERNMENT AND PRIVATE 
CONSTRUCTION
 
2.20
 
The Committee are aware that around 17000 tonnes of fly Ash is generated from 
nearly 20 different industries, including, power plants, steel plants, pharma
 
companies 
among other. However, only about 30 to 40% of the generated fly ash is being used for 
manufacturing fly ash bricks for construction. Ministry of Environment and Forests have 
published a Notification on 3
rd
 
November, 2009, under
 
Environment(Prote
ction)Act, 
1986 wherein the Central Government, issued directions for restricting the excavation of 
top soil for manufacture of bricks and promoting the 100% utilization of fly ash in 
the 
 
manufacture of building materials and in construction activity with
in a specified 
radius of one hundred kilometers from coal or lignite based thermal power plants.
 
 
 
The Committee observe that despite, the above Notification, which says that the 
provisions of this Notification shall be applicable to all construction agenc
ies of Central 
or States or Local Government and private or public sector...; the implementation of the 
same is far below the desired level and needs to be enhanced.
 
 
The Committee are of the considered opinion that since fly ash is being 
accumulated as wa
ste material in large 
 
quantity near thermal power plants, steel 
plants, etc., and creating serious environmental pollution problems, its utilization as 
main raw material in the manufacture of fly ash bricks and pavement tiles, etc., will not 
only create a
mple opportunities for its proper and useful disposal, but also, help in, 
environmental pollution control to a greater extent in the surrounding areas of power 

plants. Further, apart from the above environmental problems, the brick industry has 
also been p
osing other serious problems, owing to more than 180 billion tonnes of 
common burnt clay bricks being consumed annually, approximately over 340 billion 
tones of clay
--
 
about 5000 acres for bricks manufacture of top layer of soil dug out, 
making that much l
and unfertile for a long period, soil erosion, emission from coal 
burning or fire woods which causes deforestation, etc., are some of the serious 
problems, which will invariably affect the food security of the country.
 
 
The Committee also feel that there 
is genuine need for popularizing the 
 
use of 
fly ash bricks in the public and private construction sector and among the masses with 
relevant information as there is a misconception among buyers that conventional clay 
bricks are better, though  in fact fly 
ash bricks are much stronger than clay bricks and 
are cost effective too.
 
 
The Committee, in view of the above scenario strongly recommend that M/o 
HUPA should come up with a National Policy with provisions of mandatory use of fly 
ash bricks and other prod
ucts in all the Government and Private construction projects, 
in all the States/UTs and impress upon M/o UD that they should immediately issue 
necessary directions among others to CPWD, NBCC and DDA for mandatory use of fly 
ash bricks in all their construc
tion projects, henceforth. They also recommend that M/o 
HUPA should include a relevant clause/section in all of their MoUs signed with 
States/UTs in all of their urban housing projects, with respect to mandatory use of fly 
ash bricks in those projects. The
y further recommend that organizations like BMTPC 
and Hindustan Prefab Limited(HPL) must play a proactive role in doing 
 
necessary R&D 
to develop better technologies, and cost effective techniques and methods for producing 
environment and human
-
friendly st
ronger fly ash bricks/products for use in all 
construction projects. They can also educate and inform the urban managers, 
Government construction agencies, builders, realtors, as well as 
 
common man with 
factual details about the durability and low cost be
nefits accrued by using fly ash bricks 
and products in building/housing construction.
 
Reply of the Government
 

2.21
 
In this regard, it may kindly be noted that Ministry of Environment and Forest 
Principal Notification of 1999, as amended vide notification d
ated 27
th
 
August, 2003
 
has, 
vide, specified the use of 100% Fly ash based bricks/ products in construction projects 
within 100 kms
 
radius of Coal or Lignite based Thermal Power Plants. This 100% use of 
Fly ash bricks/products of total brick requirement by construction agencies was to be 
achieved latest by August 31, 2007.  This Principal notification has recently been 
amended vide no
tification dated 25
th
 
January, 2016 to extend the mandatory use of Fly 
ash based products in construction projects to 300 kms radius of Thermal Power Plants 
(TPP). The time line to comply with provisions of recent notification is December 31, 
2017. The con
cerned State Govt. is the enforcing and monitoring agency for ensuring 
compliance as per the Notification.
 
 
All State Public and Private Construction agencies of various States/UTs and 
Central Construction Agencies including CPWD, NBCC & DDA are covered un
der the 
provisions of this notification.  In view of this, it is felt that a separate policy by M/o 
HUPA, GoI may not be required. Use of Fly Ash based products beyond 300 kms radius 
may not be viable. Further, Technology Sub
-
Mission set up under PMAY faci
litates 
adoption of green materials & technologies & Fly Ash brick is one of the green 
materials. 
 
 
Further, as regards the construction of houses under PMAY, M/o HUPA envisage 
use of new alternate technologies for fast delivery of houses. It recommended e
ight 
prospective emerging technologies for mass housing during launch of HFA, for use of 
same by various States/UTs. In all these technologies, there is no use of bricks.  
 
 
In this regard, Ministry of Urban Development, GoI has issued Office 
Memorandum da
ted 28
th
 
December, 2016 specifying that the three new technologies 
may be mandatorily adopted for all projects across the country by CPWD, DDA and 
NBCC, irrespective of location & project cost with effect from 1st April, 2017. The three 
technologies are na
mely; 
 
 
i) Monolithic concrete construction system using Aluminium formwork
 

ii)
 
Industrialized 3
-
s system using Cellular light weight concrete slab & Pre cast 
coloumns (Precast/Prefab), and
 
 
iii) Monolithic concrete construction system using Plastic
-
Alumin
ium formwork.
 
 
The three technologies are out of eight prospective technologies recommended 
by M/o HUPA, GoI with no use of bricks.
 
 
Under technology Sub mission, the green materials as Fly Ash are also being 
promoted. Further, CPWD in its Schedule of Rate
 
(DSR) has included the Rate & 
specification for Fly Ash bricks & Clay
-
Fly Ash bricks for facilitating the use of such 
bricks by it and other construction agencies.
 
 
Regarding recommendation of the Committee to include a relevant 
clause/section in all its 
MoUs with States/UTs, w.r.t. mandatory use of Fly Ash bricks, 
the matter would be examined for appropriate action in this regard.
 
 
Further, In the Urban housing projects, States need to ensure the compliance of 
all mandatory provisions which also includes 
the mandatory use of Fly Ash bricks/ 
products as per the provision of the MoEF Notification. 
 
 
BMTPC has been engaged in the promotion of fly ash bricks/ products. However, 
as recommended by the Committee, BMTPC would be advised to lay more focus in this 
a
rea.
 
 
BMTPC has also conducted several workshops, training programmes in the past 
for construction agencies, ULBs, builders etc. regarding advantages of Fly Ash bricks/ 
products. 
 
HPL does not undertake R&D work to develop technologies, however, it does 
or
ganize various events like exhibitions, workshops for various stakeholders to 
propagate the technologies for wider adoption.  Although, use of fly ash has been part 
of the discussion exercises organized by HPL, specific thrust would be given by 
informing t
he stakeholders on the benefits of using fly ash bricks and products in the 
construction.
 
Recommendation (Serial No.14)
 

Envisaging active Private Sector participation and Investmentment in Affordable 
Housing Scheme under PMAY(U)
 
2.22
 
The Committee find that Government has approved construction of over 16 lakh 
affordable houses under PMAY(Urban). The construction of houses will have an 
investment of about Rs. 90,000 crore for which an assistance of Rs. 25,000 crore has 
been approved. Th
e Government in 2016
-
17 Budget had granted infrastructure status to 
affordable housing so as to motivate participation of builders. The Government have 
also announced two new slabs of interest subvention under PMAY(U). Earlier the 
subsidy was allowed to pe
ople earning upto Rs. 6 lakhs per annum only but now it has 
been extended to cover people with annual income of upto Rs. 18 lakh. Further, home 
buyers in income bracket upto Rs.12 lakh and 18 lakh will be eligible for 4% and 3% 
interest rate subsidy, respe
ctively. The Committee, however, gather that the private 
sector participation is totally missing and that not a single proposal has come from 
private builder so far. The Committee are of the firm opinion that the M/o HUPA will 
have to make efforts to draw 
and include the private sector participation not only to 
meet their ambitious target of constructing 16 lakh affordable houses under PMAY(U) 
but also to finance the required investment for the same (Rs. 90,000 crore of which only 
Rs.25,000 crore Central as
sistance would be provided). A big role for private sector in 
PMAY(U) is definitely  needed to be envisaged. The Committee, therefore, urge the M/o 
HUPA to consult developers, bankers and housing finance companies to investigate 
glitches in private partici
pation under PMAY(U), delve on the reasons thereof such as 
density norms, aligning State Housing Policies with definition of the Central Government 
affordable housing policy, proximity to the main cities, etc. They emphasize and 
recommend that the Ministry
 
should try and address these issues for inclusive 
participation and investment from the private sector.
 
Reply of the Government
 
2.23
 
The framework for private sector participation under PMAY(U) mission in PPP 
mode is already detailed in the scheme guideli
nes. To seek enhanced participation of 
private developers, the idea of privately owned land proponents under the PMAY(U) is 
being explored. The matter is under consideration essentially to ensure that a uniform 

and consistent stand is evolved which would b
e applicable to all States / UTs 
participating in the mission. 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER III
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
 
NIL
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER IV
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.5)
 
ALLOCATION FOR CREDIT LINKED SUBSIDY SCHEME(CLSS) FOR 
ECONOMICALLY WEAKER SECTION(EWS) AND LOWER INCOME GROUP(LIG)
 
 
 
The Committee while examining the DFG (2017
-
18) of M/o HUPA, observe that 
the BE(2017
-
18) under CLSS(EWS/LIG) has been reduced to Rs. 400.00 crore from the 
BE/RE(2016
-
17) of Rs.475.00 crore. Moreover, a new sub
-
component, named, CLSS 
for Middle Income Group (MIG) under Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojna(Urb
an)
-
PMAY(U) 
has been introduced pursuant to the address to the nation by the Hon'ble Prime Minister  
on 31.12.2016, and it is to be implemented w.e.f. 01.01.2017. However, detailed 
guidelines will be issued after clearance is received from the Election Com
mission of 
India (ECI). Nevertheless, the BE (2017
-
18) for CLSS (MIG) has been kept at Rs. 
1000.00 crore.
 
 
Having observed the above, the Committee feel that the very purpose and 
objective of PMAY (U) with all its 4 components, which has been primarily mea
nt to 
cater to the needs of EWS/LIG segment of the urban areas,  who are homeless or living 
in slums and in inhuman living  conditions, has seemingly and prima
-
facie diverted its 
focus and attention from original EWS/LIG segment to MIG segment of the urban
 
society now. However, the    M/o HUPA has assured the Committee that there is no 
diversion of funds or dilution of intent as the target groups are distinct and the income 
segments are different. A large outlay for the MIG only points to the fact that the 
income 
segment and, as a corollary, the loan amounts are higher. A reduced outlay for CLSS 
for EWS/LIG has been kept only as a matter of caution at the BE Stage.
 
 
The Committee are well aware that the Ministry, year after year, has been 
invariably getting 
drastically reduced outlay at the RE Stage. In spite of this hard fact, 

they seems to have ignored it and their statement that they have every intention to seek 
more funds, at the RE stage, is hardly satisfactory and acceptable.
 
 
The Committee, in view of 
the above stated intentional reduced outlay provisions 
of CLSS for EWS/LIG by the Ministry, would like to caution them that this sort of unfair 
allocation in disfavour of EWS/LIG segments, who have been deprived of even 
fundamental and basic amenities and 
necessities of human life for ages, is not 
acceptable to the Committee.
 
 
The Committee, therefore, urge and recommend to the M/o HUPA as well as M/o 
Finance to provide higher allocations in favour of EWS/LIG segments under CLSS for 
EWS/LIG and for all the 
relevant Schemes meant for real upliftment of urban poors at 
RE/BE stages, henceforth, to justify and live upto the very nomenclature of the Ministry 
concerned.
 
Reply of the Government
 
4.2
 
It may be mentioned here that under the PMAY(U) mission guidelines, 
Economically Weaker Section (EWS) category of beneficiaries is eligible for assistance 
in all four verticals of the Missions whereas Low Income Group (LIG) & Middle Income 
Group category i
s eligible under only CLSS component of the Mission. The funds of Rs. 
400.00 cr. allocated under PMAY(U) mission for CLSS would entirely be utilized to 
support the construction of EWS/LIG houses. 
 
Also, the Ministry has every intention to seek more funds a
t the RE stage under 
CLSS component as per requirement projected at the appropriate time by the Central 
Nodal Agencies (CNAs). 
 
4.3
 
For comments of the Committee please see para No. 1.7 of Chapter
-
I of the 
Report.
 
Recommendation (Serial No.7)
 
TEAM OF WELL 
TRAINED AGENTS FOR THE PROMOTION AND SUCCESS OF 
PMAY(U)
 

4.4
 
The Committee observe that the number of EWS/LIG houses provided under 
Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) during 2015
-
16 to 21 States(other than NE 
States) is 5907 houses; to 7 NE States is 24 ho
uses; and to 7 UTs is 70 houses. 
Similarly, during 2016
-
17 (till 13th February, 2017), 13875 EWS/LIG houses have been 
provided to 21 States; 52 such houses to 7 NE States; and 72 houses to 7 UTs. Thus, 
in total 6001 EWS/LIG houses were provided under CLSS 
during 2015
-
16 and a total of 
13999 EWS/LIG houses have been provided till 13.2.2017.
 
 
The Committee are aware that although CLSS is one of the four components of 
PMAY(U), yet, the progress of this important component is very low and far below the 
high exp
ectation of the M/o HUPA as well as this Committee. Even if, the year 2015
-
16 
is considered  as the initial year of launching of PMAY(U) and its 4 components and the 
lower figure of 6001 EWS/LIG houses under CLSS is put aside, and the figure of about 
14000
 
EWS/LIG houses provided during 2016
-
17 is taken as an average annual 
achievement in  a year's time, it may be presumed that about 70000(
+
) EWS/LIG 
houses may be provided throughout India in the remaining period of 5 years for 
implementation of PMAY(U)
-
Hou
sing for All by 2022 Mission. And, the actual 
requirement or shortage of houses as per initial estimates, is of 18.78 million or about 2 
crore houses, subject to final assessment being estimated by States/UTs.
 
 
The Committee are very much apprehensive of t
he success of PMAY(U) and its 
4 components, including, CLSS, with the above pace of progress, viz., only about  
14000 EWS/LIG houses  have been provided in the current year.
 
 
The Committee, in view of the above, therefore, urge the M/o HUPA to explore 
the 
feasibility of developing  some initiatives which may be taken at their end at the 
earliest, for the optimum level of achievements in each of the 4 components of 
PMAY(U). One such initiative could be that a strong team of Well Trained Agents  may 
be create
d and developed, who may be provided with all the information and inputs 
relating to CLSS and other 3 components of PMAY(U) viz., (i) "In Situ" Slum 
Redevelopment(ISSR); (ii) Affordable Housing in Partnership with public or private 
sector(AHP); and (iii) B
eneficiary
-
led individual houses 
construction/enhancements(BLC), and they are trained to canvass and convince the 

urban poor and homeless about the benefits provided by the Government of India 
through its PMAY(U)
-
HFA by 2022 Mission and bring in the applic
ations of those 
interested to avail the benefits under CLSS to their local PLIs, and like
-
wise become 
instrumental in promoting other three components of the PMAY(U) among the 
concerned urban clients. And, for this service of theirs, they may be provided c
ertain 
fixed commission or incentive per
-
application or per
-
beneficiary, similar to the age old 
established Agent System working for LIC and GIC companies in India. The Committee 
are of the view that rather than always be at the waiting end for would be cu
stomers to 
reach to the PLIs who are seldom interested for providing EWS/LIG loans to the poorer 
sections of the vulnerable urban society, the enthusiastic team of well trained agents 
should reach to the prospective applicants under CLSS, BLC and AHP, etc.
 
Other 
aggressive awareness campaign should also be taken up through audio, video and print 
media to create awareness amongst the EWS/LIG/MIG target groups to avail of the 
benefits of this scheme in large numbers.
 
Reply of the Government
 
4.5
 
In the FY 2016
-
17, PMAY (U) Mission has provided approval to 10,27,350 
dwelling units upto 31.03.2017, of which 22,607 beneficiaries have been provided 
interest subsidy under CLSS of Rs. 418.89 crores. 
 
State Level Technical Cells and City Level Technical Cells manned w
ith different 
competencies like planning, engineering, social mobilization, financial planning etc. 
have been set up in different States/UTs to enhance capacity in operational areas in 
partnership with Urban Local Bodies who canvass and spread awareness at
 
ward level. 
The provision of fixed commission agents may not be implementable to curtail any 
speculation or false promises to potential beneficiaries. CNAs and PLIs are actively 
involved in reaching out to potential beneficiaries through their existing ma
rketing 
networks. 
 
Further MoHUPA has devised an integrated media strategy through audio, video, 
TV, print media, social media etc. to create awareness amongst the EWS/LIG/MIG 
target groups to avail of the benefits of this scheme. 
 

4.6
 
For comments of the 
Committee please see para No. 1.10 of Chapter
-
I of the 
Report.
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation No.8
 
COMPLAINTS REGARDING COLLECTION OF CASH FROM THE POOR FOR 
PROVIDING EWS/LIG HOUSES 
 
4.7
 
The committee are perturbed to note cases of fraud and cheating taking place in 
m
any cities including NCR of Delhi for allocation of houses under Pradhan Mantri Awas 
Yojana(Urban) with fake propaganda that a house could be booked by just paying Rs. 
150 by unscrupulous  elements and  fraud NGOs etc. The Committee are of the 
considered o
pinion that such cases should be immediately investigated and deterred so 
that poor people are not cheated.
 
 
The Committee further noted that a lot of bogus builders/developers are  
apparently registering and enlisting a lot of consumers for allotment of E
WS/LIG house 
in the name of Affordable Housing Scheme under the mission  "Housing For All by 
2022."  
 
 
The Committee strongly caution and recommend  that the M/o HUPA should 
immediately swing into action and get such complaints thoroughly investigated in a
ll 
States and UTs as one of their  prime scheme, named , PMAY(U) is being misused for 
illegal money
-
making by some corrupt
-
minded anti
-
social elements. Any delay in 
catching those involved, will give them liberty to rob millions of more poors and have
-
nots
 
of the society. If unchecked, poor and homeless masses will feel cheated and 
betrayed and  also it will be difficult  for them to trust any of the Government schemes  
henceforth.
 

 
The Committee also recommend that M/o HUPA should ensure that no fraud is 
executed by the fake developers/builders in the name of Affordable Housing  
Scheme/Land Pooling Policy in various States of India.   
 
 
The Committee desire that aggressive awareness 
programmes through visual 
and print media should be launched immediately to educate and inform common people 
to beware of such fraudulent persons/NGOs, on the lines of the awareness drive 
relating to non
-
divulgence of any of the personal bank A/c, ATM card
, PIN/CVV number, 
password of email, etc., to any unknown person asking for such details.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
4.8
 
The suggestions of the Committee have been noted. Following actions have 
been taken by this Ministry to avoid fraud and cheating by fake 
developers/builders in 
the name of affordable housing scheme: 
 

 
A disclaimer has been posted on the website of the Ministry intimating general 
public that this Ministry has not authorized any private entity or person to collect 
money as a consideration for 
availing of any benefit under the PMAY (U) 
Mission.
 

 
State/UT Governments have been requested to issue disclaimer/public notice 
cautioning the general public about unscrupulous individuals/ entities from 
cheating the general public.
 

 
This Ministry is in the 
process to publish public notice in leading newspapers 
cautioning the general public about unscrupulous individuals/ entities from 
cheating the general public.
 

 
This Ministry has also requested to all States/UTs to propagate and promote the 
facility of onli
ne application using the platform of Common Service Centre for 
registration under the Scheme to citizens. Further CSC through its weekly 
newsletter has also published the matter for awareness of the citizens. CSC has 
also written to all District Collectors
 
to monitor online applications through CSC 
so that more people may avail the benefit under PMAY(U).
 

 
 
4.9
 
For comments of the Committee please see para No. 1.13 of Chapter
-
I of the 
Report.
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER V
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF
 
THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
 
 
 
-
Nil
-
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
 
 
 
 
                            
 
                
Pinaki Misra
 
 
 
9
th
 
August, 
2017
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
Chairperson,          
                                                                                        
18
th 
Sravana, 1939 (Saka)                     
Standing Committee on Urban Development
 
 

ANNEXURE 
-
I
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2016
-
2017)
 
 
MINUTES OF 
THE FIFTEENTH  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON
 
 
WEDNESDAY,  9
TH
 
AUGUST, 2017.
 
      
 
The Committee sat from 1000 hrs. to 1055 hrs. in Committee Room No.4, A Block,  
Extension to Parliament  Annexe Building, New Delhi.
 
 
PRESENT
 
Shri Pinaki Misra     
 
-
 
Cha
irperson
 
MEMBERS
 
LOK SABHA
 
2.
 
Shri Maheish Girri
 
3.
 
Shri P.C. Mohan
 
4.
 
Shri K. Parasuraman
 
5.
 
Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil
 
6.
 
Shri Alok Sanjar
 
7.
 
Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
 
8.
 
Prof. K. V. Thomas
 
9.
 
Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
10.
 
Shri
 
Anil Desai
 
11.
 
Shri Mahesh Poddar
 
12.
 
Shri K.C. Ramamurthy
 
13.
 
Shri Ajay Sancheti
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
1.
 
Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi
 
-
 
Joint Secretary
 
 
2.
 
Ms.  Amita Walia
 
 
 
-
 
Additional Director
 
 
3.
 
Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan
 
-
 
Deputy Secretary
 

 
2.
 
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee. 
 
3.
 
The Committee then took up for consideration the following draft  Reports :
 
 
(i)  Eighteenth Report  on Action Taken on  the  
12
th 
Report (16
th
 
Lok  Sabha) on 
 
'
Modernization  of Directorate of  Printing, Government of India Stationery Office 
 
and Department of Publication'
 
 
 
(ii) 
Nineteenth Report on Action Taken on  the  
15
th
  
Report (16
th 
Lok Sabha) on 
 
'Demands for Grants (2017
-
18)' of the Ministry of Urban 
Development,
 
and;
 
 
 
(iii) 
Twentieth Report on
 
Action Taken on 
16
th 
Report (16
th
 
Lok  Sabha) on 
 
'Demands for Grants (2017
-
18)' of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
 
Alleviation.
 
4.
 
After some deliberation, t
he Committee adopted the above  draft Rep
orts without  
any modifications and authorized the Chairperson to finalize them and  present the 
Reports to Parliament.
 
The Committee then adjourned.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE
-
II
 
                                            
[Vide para 4 of the Introduction]
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTEENTH REPORT 
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBANDEVELOPLMENT (SIXTEENTH LOK 
SABHA)
 
 
I.
 
 
Total number of recommendations                 
 
 
   
 
   
14
 
 
II.
 
Reco
mmendations/Observations which have been accepted
 
by the Government:
 
 
 
 
 
                         
11
 
Recommendation Nos. 
1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and 14.
  
 
Percentage to total recommendations                                       (78.57 %)         
                            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
III.
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:                           0
 
Percentage to total recommendations                                              (
0%)                
 
 
                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IV.
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of          
 
 
                          
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:         03
 
Recommendation Nos. 5,7 an
d 8
 
Percentage to total recommendations                                         (21.42%)
 
                            
 
 
V.         Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
 
 
    
 
           
 
replies of the Government are still awaited:        
                               
0
 
Recommendation No.  Nil   
 
Percentage to total recommendations                                             (0%)
 
 