1 
 
 
        STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
          URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
                   (2016-2017) 
           SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
                                      MINISTRY OF  HOUSING AND URBAN POVERTY ALLEVIATION 
 
 
                                          DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
                                      (2016-2017) 
  
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Tenth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban Development on Demands for 
Grants (2016-2017)  of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation} 
 
 
                                      THIRTEENTH  REPORT 
 
      
 
 
                                   LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                                 NEW DELHI 
 
13 


2 
 
 
THIRTEENTH  REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2016-2017) 
 
                                
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF  HOUSING AND URBAN POVERTY ALLEVIATION 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Tenth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban Development on Demands for 
Grants (2016-2017)  of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation} 
   
   Presented to Lok Sabha on  ………. 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  …………... 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
23 December, 2016,02 Pausa 1937 (Saka) 


3 
 
 
 
   C.U.D No. 99 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2016 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Fifteenth 
Edition) and printed by ............................................ 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .....................……….…………………..........................…..         (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ......................................................................……………………………………….         (v) 
 
  
CHAPTER I  
 
REPORT......................................................................................... 
 
1 
CHAPTER II 
Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
 
CHAPTER IV 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration  
 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final  
replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
I. Minutes of the 5 th Sitting of the Standing Committee on Urban Development(2016 -17) held on 
23.12.2016.  
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations is contained in the Tenth  
Report(16th Lok Sabha). 
 

5 
 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2016-2017) 
Shri Pinaki Misra         -        Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
      LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Ramesh Bidhuri 
3. Shri Ram Charan Bohra 
4.  Shri Charanjeet Singh Rori 
5. Shri Ashok  Shankarrao Chavan 
6.  Dr. Dharam Vira Gandhi 
7. Shri Dilip  Mansukhlal Gandhi 
8.  Shri Maheish Girri 
9.  Shri R.Gopalakrishnan 
10. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
11.  Shri  Srinivas Kesineni Nani 
12. Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi 
13. Shri P.C. Mohan 
14. Shri K. Parasuraman 
15.  Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil 
16. Shri Alok Sanjar 
17.  Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
18.  Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
19. Prof. K. V. Thomas 
20. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
21. Shri Pardhan Baruah 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri R.S. Bharathi 
23. Dr. Subhash Chandra 
24. Shri Husain Dalwai 
25. Shri Anil Desai 
26.  Shri Parvez Hashmi  
27. Shri K. G. Kenye 
28. Shri Mahesh Poddar 
29. Shri K.C. Ramamurthy 
30. Shri Ajay Sancheti 
31. Shri Dharamapuri Srinivas 
 
 
  

6 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi            -      Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri D.S Malha         - Director 
 3. Ms. Amita Walia                     - Additional Director 
 4. Shri Anil Kumar             - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
  

7 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2016 -2017) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the 13th  Report (16th Lok Sabha) 
on the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendat ions contained in the Tenth 
Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban Development on “Demands for Grants (2016-
2017) " of the Ministry of Urban Development. 
2. The Tenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 25 April, 2016  and laid on the table of Rajya  
Sabha on  25 April, 2016.  Replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report 
were received in August 2016. 
3. The Standing Committee on Urban Development considered and adopted this Report at their  
sitting held on 23 December, 2016 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Eleventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
5. For the facility of reference and convenience , the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
                         PINAKI MISRA 
23 December, 2016                                    Chairperson,       
02 Pausa,1937 (Saka)                                             Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
 
 (v)  
 

8 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Comm ittee on Urban Development (201 6-17) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in their 
Tenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (201 6-17) of the Ministry of  
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation which was presented to Lok Sabha on  25 April, 
2016. 
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all      
the 18 recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as 
follows: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Gove rnment. 
 (Chapter-II): 
 Recommendation Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4,5, 6,7, 9, 11,12,13,14,15,17 and 18      
(Total -15) 
(Chapter-II) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations, which the Committee do  not desire to pursue in 
view of Government's  replies. (Chapter-III): 
Recommendation Serial Nos. 8 and 10                         (Total -02) 
(Chapter-III) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which replies of Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter-IV): 
   Recommendation Serial No. 16                                   (Total -01) 
(Chapter-IV) 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which final replies of the 
Government  are still awaited (Chapter-V): 
     Recommendation Serial Nos. Nil                                               (Total -Nil) 
     Chapter-V) 
1.3 The Committee desire that specific replies to the C omments of the Committee as  
contained in Chapter -I  and also final action taken replies to all  the recommendations 
placed under Chapter-V of this Report may be furnished to them at the earliest and in any 
case, not later than three months of the presentation of this Report. 

9 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their 
recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.    
Recommendation (Serial No.2) 
NEED TO CHECK HUGE REDUCTIONS IN ALLOCATIONS OF MINISTRY OF HUPA AT RE 
STAGE.   
1.5 The Committee have recommended as under: 
"The Committee observe that there are huge reductions in the Revised Estimates vis -a-vis 
corresponding Budget Estimates (BE) of Ministry of HUPA continuously from the first year of 
12th Five Year Plan (2012-17), viz., 2012-13 to the fourth year of the Plan, i.e., 2015-16. The BE 
(2012-13) of Rs.1155.00 crore had been reduced to Rs.950.00 crore at RE stage, (17% decline) 
BE (2013 -14) of Rs. 1460.00 crore has been reduced as RE of Rs. 1200.00 crore (17.8 % 
decline); BE (2014 -15) of Rs. 6000.00 crore was reduced to Rs. 3400.00 crore  at RE (43% 
decline), and  BE (2015-16) of Rs. 5625.30 crore has been reduced to Rs. 1952.00 crore at RE 
stage (65% decline). 
The Committee are dismayed to note this kind of perennially inconsistent budgeting done by 
Ministry of HUPA and/or Ministry of Finance year after year. They are also pained to see that all 
their earlier recommendations to get enhanced funding to the Ministry of HUPA not  only fall on 
deaf ears, but also go into the dustbin without yielding any positive outcome. The Committee 
also feel that the Ministry of HUPA and at times Ministry of Finance in exercise of th eir financial, 
executive powers are solely responsible for such higher, unrealistic and misformed 
projections/allocations made at the time of presenting General Budget before the Parliament 
year after year for the urban poor and homeless by providing Rs. 6 000.00 crore or even more 
as Budget Estimates of Ministry of HUPA. The Committee further observe that the attractive and 
rosy higher allocations made in favour of the Ministry of HUPA ironically fades away just after 
six months of presentation of the General Budget to the Parliament at Revised Estimates stage. 
As a matter of fact, the allocation of Rs.6000.00 crore or Rs.5625.30 crore which were 
committed by the Government and duly passed by Parliament, only remains as a token piece of 
paper as it gets dras tically reduced to Rs.3400.00 crore or Rs. 1952.00 crore, i.e., reduced by 
43% and 65%, respectively, at the RE stage which comes at the middle of every financial year. 
The Projections for allocations actually reflect the underlying policy and the plan of the Ministry 
emphasing the focal areas. These deviations in allocation at RE stage compels the Ministry to 
redraw the contours. Since half the year is already gone  and much of their  valuable time is 
lost, the Ministry has to replan, leading to slowdown i n implementation of the policies/schemes. 
This in turn leads to non-achievement of targets. 
The Committee, in view of the paradoxical and ironical, budgeting practices practised by the 
Ministry of HUPA/Ministry of Finance, which depicts a complete voltefac e from the financial 
commitments of Ministry of HUPA and Ministry of Finance  towards homeless and poor human 
resources of the country before the Parliament, strongly urge the Government to depart from 
such unhealthy  Budgeting practice year after year. 
The Committee also recommend that the Ministry of HUPA should focus to enhance their 
budgeting skills to avoid making of such unforeseen Budget Estimates in their favour which 
force them to back out from their own projections after every six months at RE stage, year  after 
year, and also urge the Ministry of Finance not  to slash the BEs, upto 40 to 65% arbitrarily at 
RE stage every year, against the pressing needs of the Ministry of HUPA. In the instant case, 

10 
 
the Ministry of HUPA should actively pursue the M inistry of Finance for enhanced allocation at 
RE stage to meet their projected targets during the year.” 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.6 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"Ministry of Finance is the nodal Ministry in so far as budgetary procedures are concerned.  
In FY 2015 -16, reduction of allocation was made by M/o Finance at RE stage based on the 
expenditure incurred upto Sep, 2015. In fact, PMAY (U) was launched in June, 2015 and the 
Ministry started receiving proposals for central assistance only from Oct-Nov, 2015.  
Due to larger demand, Ministry requested for enhancement of RE allocation and M/o Finance 
allowed enhancement of Rs. 500.00 crore from  Rs. 1452.00 crore to Rs. 1952.00 crore, as 
against Ministry‟s request  for restoration of BE 2015-16  or at least Rs. 2500.00 crore for PMAY 
(U). Due to insufficient provision at RE 2015 -16, there was a committed liability of Rs. 2397.00 
crore for the projects considered under PMAY (U) during FY 2015 -16 for release of 1 st 
installment. 
In the Current year, against a demand of Rs. 3650.00 crore for PMAY (U), an enhanced 
allocation of Rs. 5075.00 crore has been made.  In June, 2015, the plan expenditure was only 
0.23% of BE 15 -16; in June 2016, plan expenditure has reached 21.43% of the plan budget.  
Hence, MoHUPA is taking active steps to ensure utilization of its plan budget in 2016-17. 
Further enhancement will be sought at supplementary stages/RE stage based on requirement." 
Comments of the Committee 
1.7  In order to meet the shortage of funds in Ministry of Housing and Poverty 
Alleviation, the Committee would like to be apprised as to whether the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation has actively pursued with the Ministry of Finance 
for enhanced allocation at RE stage to meet their projected targets during the year as 
had been recommended by the Committee along with details of its final outcome 
achieved. 
Recommendation (Serial No.3) 
NEED TO CHECK UNDER-UTILIZATION OF FUNDS BY ENHANCING THE CAPACITY TO 
HAVE 100% UTILIZATION 
1.8 The Committee have recommended as under: 
"The Committee observe that the Actual Expenditure of the Ministry of HUPA is showing under -
utilization trend as there is never 100% financial targets achieved by them during ea ch of the 
last three years. The percentage of Actual Expenditure against BE is reported to be 73.88% 
(2013-14), 45.25 % (2014-15) and 31.21% (2015-16), whereas, it is 89.89% (2013 -14), 79.86% 
(2014-15) and 89.95% (2015-16) against RE of each of the three y ears, respectively. Thus, the 
percentage of shortfall is 10.11% (2013 -14), 20.14% (2014 -15) and 10.05% (2015 -16) against 
the respective Revised Estimates. 

11 
 
The Committee are not satisfied with the Actual Expenditure capacity of the Ministry which has 
been running vital mega projects/programmes, namely PMAY (U) - Housing For All by 2022, In -
Situ slum development, pending project of JNNURM and RAY, CLSS for housing and DAY -
National Urban Livelihood Mission (NULM), etc., meant for upliftment of Economically Weak er 
Section/Below Poverty Line, Urban Population. 
The Committee also observe that the Revised Estimates of the Ministry are already reduced by 
40 % to 60 % from the Budget Estimates initially allocated in favour of the Ministry and yet they 
are not able to spend 100% of the 40% to 60% reduced RE. This trend indicates the scope for 
enhancing financial management skills of all these concerned and engaged in implementation of 
the Projects at Centre, State/UT and ULBs level under the guidance of the representati ves of 
the Ministry. The Committee are aware that there is a considerable time lag involved in the 
implementation of schemes right from the stage of conceptualisation to identifying the various 
components/beneficiaries and obtaining approval. The Committee , however, do not approve of 
the 60 per cent of the time of the Plan period being consumed for formulating the major 
schemes, leaving just two years for implementation. They are, therefore, of the considered view 
that the vast time lag between the identification and approval of the schemes conceptualized be 
curtailed substantially so that adequate time is left for their implementation within the stipulated 
timelines so as to achieve the intended goals. 
The Committee in view of the above observation, urge th e Ministry to improve upon the 
utilization of their allocated funds for achievement of 100% financial targets of the very meager 
RE. The Committee feel that it is high time the Ministry streamlined their Plan of expenditure on 
major schemes and made endeav our to maximize the  utilization of the earmarked funds every 
year so that they have a  strong ground to get the desired enhanced allocation from Ministry of 
Finance to give much needed thrust on housing and urban poverty alleviation. 
The Committee feel that it is high time that the Ministry of Finance sets up a task force to study 
the advisability of continuance of the time honoured procedure of BE/RE projections. A historic 
analysis of the financial as well as performance targets and achievements can be m ounted to 
study whether some changes could be introduced in the periodicity of estimates (BE and RE) as 
well as provisioning of the required flexibility to the administrative ministries for pooling the 
budgeted grants and strategising the pace of performan ce across sectors such that a totality of 
large unutilised funds and under performance do not continue to plague the whole exercise of 
budgeting." 
Reply of the Government 
1.9 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"The recommendation of the Committee is noted.  For enhanced allocation, the Ministry will take 
up with M/o Finance at appropriate stage.  MoHUPA has taken active steps to utilize its plan 
budget.  This is evidenced by the fact that 21.43% of the planned budget has been spent till 
June, 2016 as compared to 0.23% upto June, 2015." 
 
 

12 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
1.10 The Committee note that while responding about the underutilization of funds, the 
Ministry has remained silent about setting up a taskforce to study the advisability of 
continuance of the time honoured procedure of BE/RE projection and whether some 
changes could be introduced in the periodicity of estimates (BE/RE) as well as 
provisioning of the required flexibility to the administrative Minis tries for pooling the  
budgeted grants and strategizing the pace of performance across sectors such that a 
totality of large unutilised funds and underperformance do not continue to plague the 
whole exercise of budgeting . The Committee would like to reiter ate their earlier 
recommendation in this regard and be apprised of the status so far. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.4) 
NEW FUNDING PATTERN AND ITS ADVERSE IMPACT ON THE ACHIEVEMENT OF 
FINANCIAL/PHYSICAL TARGETS OF THE SCHEMES OF THE MINISTRY OF HUPA 
1.11 The Committee have recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that JNNURM as well as RAY Schemes of HUPA have been subsumed 
into Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana, all these schemes intend to provide housing for poor. They 
also find that the period of JNNURM was from December, 2005 to March, 2012. The Mission 
period was extended till 31 st March, 2015 for completion of on -going projects. The concern of 
the representatives of people about the completion of on -going projects was addressed with 
approval for further extensi on of Mission upto 31 st March, 2017 to complete on -going projects 
approved till 31.03.2012. This approval was received in May 2015 itself. However, the concern 
of the Committee in completion of the on-going projects under these Schemes, subsumed under 
PMAY(U) is the funding pattern.  
The Committee  note that the there is a marked change in the funding pattern from the financial 
year 2015-16 as per the instructions issued by Ministry of Finance with regard to Central: State 
share for implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes of the Ministry. The Committee 
further observe that the old funding pattern, as per Scheme guidelines for Central: State under 
RAY [Subsumed under Housing for All (Urban)] were stated to be 75:25 for Cities/UAs with 
population of less than 5 lakh which has been changed to 60:40 as per New Funding Pattern. 
Similarly, the funding pattern with regard to BSUP component of JNNURM which was 90:10 for 
Cities/Towns in NE States and 80:20 for other Cities with less than one million popula tion has 
been replaced as 80:20 and 50:50, respectively. So far IHSDP (JNNURM) is concerned, it has 
been changed to 50:50 from the old one as 80:20 for all States/UTs and has become 80:20 for 
NE and Special Category States from the earlier pattern of 90:10. 
The Committee during examination of the DFG (2016 -17) of the Ministry of HUPA were 
informed that one of the major reasons for having continuous shortfall in achievement  of 
financial targets during last three years, i.e., from 2013 -14 to 2015-16 is that "at time States are  
unable to raise anticipated fund requirement due to implementation bottlenecks." Further, the 

13 
 
Ministry also highlighted among other reasons of having financial shortfall, that actual releases 
against projects were further reduced due t o change in funding pattern (50:50) for States and 
80:20 for NE States against  80:20 and 90:10, respectively in Financial Year 2015-16. 
 The Committee strongly feel that both the above stated reasons for financial shortfall as per the 
statement of the Min istry of HUPA may act as an  eye -opener for the Central 
Government/Ministry of Finance as to how the States, which were, already unable to raise their 
anticipated fund requirement towards their share as per old funding pattern are further burdened 
with imp osition of new funding pattern which demands 30% more funds by the concerned 
implementing States. 
The Committee consisting of Representatives of various States, UTs as Member of Parliament 
are very well aware of the financial conditions of their respective  States/UTs and the adverse 
impact this new imposed funding pattern  that has been created on the implementation of the 
on-going Schemes in their States/UTs as they are finding it extremely difficult to cope up with 
this new funding pattern for it is addin g on the financial burden on them and has become an 
example of further burdening the already over burdened. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Ministry of Finance to reconsider their decision on changing the old funding pattern with the new 
one and  should issue fresh instructions at the earliest regarding restoration and continuation of 
the old funding pattern with retrospective effect, viz., from the date of change of the old funding 
pattern, for smooth and hurdle -free implementation of on -going projects of JNNURM and RAY 
under present PMAY (U)-HFA (U) now,  by the concerned States/UTs, as this will certainly be in 
favour of the Centrally Sponsored Schemes and implementing States/UTs as well.  This will 
support the State Governments to expeditiously comple te such projects. The Committee desire 
the Ministry of HUPA should enthusiastically pursue the matter of getting the old funding pattern 
restored with the Ministry of Finance till positive outcome achieved in this regard under 
intimation of the progress ma de in this regard, to the Committee. The Committee also strongly 
recommend that the Ministry should try not to make frequent change of schemes relating to 
same objectives/beneficiaries since it leads to confusion and lack of focus and direction." 
Reply of the Government 
1.12 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
 
"The Ministry has already taken up the matter with Ministry of Finance for restoration of old 
funding pattern, however, the same could not materialize as yet. As advised by the committee, 
Ministry will pursue the matter with M/o Finance." 
Comments of the Committee 
1.13 The Committee would like to reiterate their  recommendation regarding restoration 
and continuation of the old funding pattern with retrospective effect, viz., from the date of 
change of the old funding pattern for smooth and hurdle-free implementation of on-going 
projects of JNNURM and RAY under PMAY(U) -HFA(U) now, by the concerned States/UTs 
and desire that the Ministry of HUPA  should enthusiastically pursue the  Ministry of 
Finance till positive outcome  are achieved in this regard . T he Committee be kept 
apprised. 

14 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.5) 
COMPLETION OF ALL PENDING JNNURM PROJECTS IRRESPECTIVE OF THEIR 
COMPLETION STAGE 
1.14 The Committee have recommended as under: 
"Jawaharlal Nehru Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) was launched on  3 rd December, 2005 
for assisting State Governments in providing housing and basic services to urban poor/slum 
dwellers in 65 select cities under the sub mission - Basic Services to Urb an Poor(BSUP) and 
Integrated Housing and Slum Development Programme (IHSDP) in other cities. This mission 
was launched for a period of 7 years from 2005 -06, however, it was extended upto  31 st March, 
2017 for completion of ongoing work only in projects sanctioned upto 31st March, 2012. 
Time and again, the Committee have emphasized on the fact that hundreds of projects 
approved under this mission, have not been able to be completed because Centre has stopped 
the funds. The Committee does not concur with the explanations of the Ministry, in its 
depositions, that the funds have been stopped owing to the inability on the part of the States to 
carry out municipal reforms and several projects were less than 50% completed. The 
Committee are of the considered view t hat any amount invested in projects under this mission, 
by the States, is out of public money. If we allow those partly completed projects to die for want 
of funds, then it amounts to sheer national wastage of scarce resources. 
The Committee further opine that Urbanization is an inevitable process. Cities act as magnets, 
attracting capital, resources, talent and labour from all around. As urban population increase, 
the size of cities in India will swell even more. The need of revitalization of urban infrast ructure 
today, is therefore, felt all the more. JNNURM was an important scheme for ensuring creation of 
urban infrastructure. In this context, the Committee recommend that all viable projects, 
approved under JNNURM, at whichever stage of completion, must b e allowed to be completed 
under the same funding pattern as it was earlier approved. 
The Committee also note that JNNURM had both housing and infrastructure components. While 
the housing component has been taken care of by PMAY(Urban) scheme, infrastructur e 
component has not been taken care of. Urban population is increasing by leaps and bounds. 
The need of urban infrastructure creation is more than ever before. Keeping this in view the 
Committee recommend that a new scheme for urban infrastructure creation  should be initiated 
and all viable pending JNNURM projects, other than housing, be allowed to be completed." 
Reply of the Government 
 
1.15 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"On-going projects sanctioned upto 31.03.2012 under JN NURM which include basic 
infrastructure are being allowed to be completed by 31.03.2017.  
Under the schemes of PMAY(U), central assistance is provided for housing only on per unit 
basis and not for infrastructure. States are required to provide infrastructure under PMAY(U) 

15 
 
either through their own fund/ Finance Commission grant or through convergence with other 
schemes of the State/UT Govts or Central Government." 
Comments of the Committee 
1.16 The Committee are not satisfied with reply of the Government which is merely 
repetition of the old replies furnished by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation at the t ime of examination of their DFG (2016-17) before the Committee in 
March-April, 2016. Moreover, the reply of the Government do es not indicate any action 
being taken/efforts being made by the concerned Ministry on both the points/issues 
covered under recommendation of the Committee.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate 
their earlier recommendation regarding completion of all the pe nding JNNURM projects 
irrespective of their completion stage under the same funding pattern as it was earlier 
approved. The Committee further reiterate that a new scheme for urban infrastructure 
creation should be initiated and all viable pending JNNURM pr ojects, other than housing 
be allowed to be completed. The Committee would like to be apprised about the final 
action taken by the Government on both the aspects of the recommendation of the 
Committee through final action taken replies of the nodal Ministry. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.6) 
HOUSING LOANS UNDER CLSS COMPONENT OF PMAY(U) NEED TO BE AS A PART OF 
KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS (KPIs) OF THE BANKS, HFCs/PLIs 
1.17 The Committee have recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that Credit Linked Subsidy Sc heme (CLSS) under the Pradhan Mantri 
Awas Yojana (Urban) is an important component of the Mission, which is being implemented as 
a Central Sector Scheme right from the start of the Mission across the country in all statutory 
towns. Under CLSS, the benefici aries of Economically Weaker Section (EWS) having 
household annual income upto Rs. 3.00 lakh and Low Income Group (LIG) having household 
annual income between Rs. 3.00 lakh and Rs. 6.00 lakh, subject to their being otherwise eligible 
under the scheme, can avail of interest subsidy at the rate of 6.5% on the housing loans upto 
Rs. 6.00 lakh from Banks, Housing Finance Companies and other such institutions for a tenure 
of 15 years or actual tenure of loan whichever is earlier. The Net Present Value (NPV) of t he 
interest subsidy will be calculated at a discounted rate of 9%. 
The Committee further note that in terms of PMAY(Urban) Scheme guidelines, Housing and 
Urban Development Corporation Ltd., (HUDCO) and National Housing Bank(NHB) have been 
the Central Nodal  Agencies (CNAs) for implementation of CLSS and these CNAs have signed 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with 177 Primary Lending Institutions (PLIs).  
 The Committee are unhappy to observe that as per NHB, banks are not very active in providing 
small scale loans. Reduction in outstanding housing loans to the low income segments reflects 
that the housing loans to weaker sections is decreasing every year upto Rs. 2 Lakh -from 2% to 
1% upto Rs. 5 Lakh -from 14% to 9% upto Rs. 10 Lakh from 34% to 26% during 2012 -13 to 
2013-14, and should be a matter of concern for all the implementing Ministries/CNAs. 
Consequently, Ministry of HUPA has been taking up the issue of giving special attention to 
loans to lower segment. It had requested for earmarking of at least 3% of  Priority Sector 
Lending for loans of dwelling units costing not more than Rs. 16 lakh. 

16 
 
Furthermore, the Steering Committee for monitoring the progress of the Credit Linked Subsidy 
Scheme, at its meeting held on 8 th October, 2015 noted that the home loan p ortfolio allocation 
by PLIs to the below Rs. 10 lakh category is less than 2%. The need for banks to cater to this 
segment was noted by the Committee.  In order to increase banks‟ lending towards low ticket 
loans,  the Committee desire that the Department of Financial Services (DFS) would examine 
the issue of inclusion (with due weightage) of lending of home loans less than Rs. 15 lakh or 
loans under CLSS component, as a part of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) of the banks. 
The Committee are of the opinion that unless implementation and execution of the scheme by 
PLIs/HFCs is included in the mandatory list of Key Performer Indicators (KPIs) of the banks, 
there may be very little hope to reverse the decreasing trends of loans to EWS/LIG segments. 
The  Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of HUPA, HUDCO and NHB should 
vigorously pursue all the issues, i.e, (i) at least 3% of Priority Sector Lending for loans of 
dwelling units costing not more than Rs. 16 lakh; (ii) inclusion, with due weightage, of lending of 
home loans less than Rs. 15 lakhs under CLSS component, as a part of Key Performance 
Indicators(KPIs) of the banks; and  (iii) Monitoring of the progress of the scheme  through State 
Level Bankers Committee (SLB C), with the DFS and obtain positive outcome in this regard for 
better performance of CLSS which will not only safeguard the interest of the weaker sections 
but also prove a landmark in promoting PMAY (U) -HFA (U). The Committee desire to be 
apprised of the outcome in this regard within three months time from the date of presentation of 
this Report." 
Reply of the Government 
1.18 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"MoHUPA has noted the recommendations. It is, however, to be noted th at Department of 
Financial Services (DFS) is the administrative Ministry to take up with the Reserve Bank of India 
(RBI) with regard to earmarking at least 3% of Priority Sector Lending for loans of dwelling units 
costing not more than Rs. 16 lakhs. As regards, inclusion of lending of home loans less than Rs 
15 lakhs under Credit -Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) component as a part of Key 
Performance Indicators of the banks, it would be for DFS being the administrative Ministry to 
take up the matter. These issu es have already been taken up by MoHUPA with Department of 
Financial Services (DFS) .DFS has informed the MoHUPA that monitoring of the progress of 
CLSS has been included as an agenda of State Level Bankers‟ Committee (SLBC) meetings." 
Comments of the Committee 
1.19  The Committee observe from the reply of the Government that the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation has already taken up the issues of (i) earmarking 
at least 3% of priority sector lending for Loans of dwelling units costing not m ore than 
Rs. 16 lakh; and, (ii) inclusion of lending home loans, less than Rs. 15 lakh under Credit - 
Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) component as a part of Key Performance Indicators of 
the Banks; with the Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance , who is the 
administrative Ministry to take up the issues with Reserve Bank of India (RBI) for 
implementation as per the recommendation of the Committee. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the further progress and final outcome achieved in both th e issues 
through the final action taken replies of the Government. 

17 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.12) 
TAX EXEMPTION AND THE COST OF AFFORDABLE HOUSES 
1.20 The Committee have recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that in order to boost the sluggishness in t he construction sector in 
addition to exemption from levy of service tax, one of the measures taken is 100% deduction for 
profits to an undertaking from a housing project  for flats up to 30 square meters in four metro 
cities and 60 square meters in other cities,  subject to  Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT). On the 
apprehension of the Committee, if this provision could be misused by the builders, the Ministry  
reasoned that since the developers would  be tax exempted (except paying MAT), they  may,  in 
all possibility pass on a certain portion of tax saved to  ultimate buyers in the  form of reduced 
cost of dwelling units. The Committee further note that the final cost of flats built under Pradhan 
Mantri Awas Yojana (PMAY) has not been capped and the cap is only  on the area of  dwelling 
unit.  
The Committee are not convinced with assumption of the Ministry, and are of the firm opinion 
that unless there is a strict conditions imposed by law, builders are not likely  to pass on the tax 
exemption profit to the buyers. The Committee desire, it should be made mandatory for the 
builders to pass on some pre -decided part of the tax exemption benefit to the buyers. The 
Committee further recommend that some provision should be made to cap the final cost of the 
flat as per area or else, the builders may charge the buyers whimsically and the scheme of 
affordable housing will be no longer affordable for the poorer sections of the society,  thus, 
defeating the very purpose and intention  of the scheme." 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.21 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"The recommendations have been noted and forwarded to Ministry of Finance." 
Comments of the Committee 
1.22  The Committee are not satisfied with the stereotyped one liner action taken reply 
of the Government wherein they have stated the recommendations have been noted and 
forwarded to Ministry of Finance. The Committee in their original recommendation ha ve 
stated that the Committee are not convinced with assumption of the Ministry , and are of 
the firm opinion that unl ess there is a strict condition  imposed by law, builders are not 
likely to pass on the tax exemption profit to the buyers. That they desire, it should be 
made mandatory for the builders to pass on some pre -decided part of the tax -emption 
benefit to the buyers. The Committee had further recommend ed that some provision 
should be made to cap the final cost of the flat as per area or else, the builders may 
charge the buyers whimsically and the Scheme of affordable housing w ill be no longer 
affordable for the poorer sections of the society, thus defeating the very purpose and 
intention of the Scheme. The Committee feel that as more than 7 months have already 
passed since the above recommendation was presented to the Parliamen t, the 

18 
 
Committee be apprised of the actual outcome of this "noted by the Min istry  and 
forwarded to the M/o  Finance, recommendation", through the final action taken reply of 
the Government. 
 Apart from the above appraisal to be provide d  to the Committee, they wish to 
point out that although the Ministry of Finance has provided tax -exemption to an 
undertaking builders  under the housing project for flats up to 30 square meters in four 
metro cities and 60 square meters in other cities, yet , it may also be well within the 
domain of the Nodal Ministry of HUPA, who are the Apex Body to frame policies for the 
welfare of the urban poorer peoples' housing and livelihood needs, to decide, to frame 
the suitable rule with regard to making it mandatory for the builders to pass on some pre-
decided part of the tax -exemption benefit to the buyers and also making some provision 
to cap the final cost of the flat as per area, as have been recommended by the Committee 
in their original recommendation in this regard.  
 The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier r ecommendations and urge the 
M/o HUPA and M/o Finance to expedite the implementation of the same at the earliest 
under intimation to the them for not only the actual welfare and benefits of the p oorer 
sections of the society but also, saving their own scheme of affordable housing from 
getting it defeated by the very purpose and objective its nomenclature stands for. 
Recommendation (Serial No.15) 
PMAY- (URBAN)- HOUSING FOR ALL BY 2022 
1.23 The Committee have recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that PMAY -(Urban) launched on 25 th June, 2015, is a novel scheme for 
ensuring housing for all in urban areas by 2022. States/UTs will have flexibility to include in the 
Mission the cities and areas of th eir choice. This mission supports construction of EWS houses 
upto 30 sq. meters carpet area with basic civil infrastructure. It defines EWS as a family with 
annual income upto Rs. 3 lakh and LIG as a family with annual income between Rs. 3 to 6 lakh.  
The Committee further note that this mission has also subsumed 183 project of Rajiv Awas 
Yojna and Rajiv Rinn Yojana under one of its components named Credit Linked Subsidy 
Scheme (CLSS). The objective of the PMAY (Urban) Mission is to assist the State/UT 
Governments through their implementing agencies in providing pucca houses to all eligible 
families/beneficiaries by 2022.    As per deposition of the Ministry, the housing shortage is 
estimated at 2 crore by the year 2022. 
The Committee are perplexed to note t hat the revised PMAY guidelines, defines a beneficiary 
family as "A beneficiary family will comprise husband, wife, unmarried sons or unmarried 
daughters. The beneficiary family should not own a pucca house either in his/her name or in the 
name of any memb ers of his/her family in any part of India to be eligible to receive Central 
assistance under the Mission".  They are of firm view that this stipulation might rule out a 
majority of needy people in urban areas from benefits of this scheme, because most of the 
persons have a house in some form in their village or remote areas from where they have 
migrated. Further the bulk of immigrating population (to the cities), constitute labourers, non 

19 
 
skilled and semi-skilled workers whose income is much less than the house rent in any decent 
colony of a city. In this scenario, such immigrating population is forced to live in slums and 
squatter settlements, thereby aggravating the problem of slums. Thus, the entire objective of 
this Mission might be defeated owing to this rule. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should explore the feasibility of doing away/dilute this condition of ” Pucca House". In 
the opinion of the Committee non -allotment of house to a person owning any pucca house or 
land within the  limits of that city or any city, might be a better proposition provided that a 
beneficiary is not allotted more than one house anywhere in India, under this mission. 
The Committee also recommend that the Ministry may put adequate emphasis in popularizing 
this scheme, through visual media, print media, hoarding, etc., so that the intended beneficiaries 
are made aware about this scheme and it becomes a success, in all States/UTs, on the line of 
'Swachh Bharat Abhiyan'. Keeping in view the objective of Housin g for All by 2022 in Urban 
areas, the Committee agreeing with the view of the Ministry,  recommend that the BE of Rs. 
4875 crore  allocated for PMAY(U) and its four components may be enhanced suitably at the 
RE stage so that this mission fructifies. The Co mmittee also express its apprehension that this 
ambitious Mission of "Housing for All by 2022" in urban areas does not meet the same fate as 
that of an earlier popular Mission, namely, "Health for All by 2014" for want of necessary funds, 
proper execution of the Scheme at the States/UTs level and generation of its awareness among 
intended beneficiaries as well as other stakeholders. The Committee also caution the Ministry to 
monitor regularly and curb the practice that the beneficiary should not sublet thei r pucca house 
and start living in squatter and slum settlements. 
The Committee further note that National Urban Rental Housing Policy, 2015, is in offing. They 
desire that finalization and implementation of this policy should be expedited so that urban poo r 
could afford to stay in good environment and the problem of slums also could be addressed to 
some extent. The Committee are aware that for example, Punjab has 14.02% of slums in the 
urban areas. Out of the total statutory towns, 71 have reported slums in  various districts of the 
state and the Punjab government has forwarded the Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) regarding 
construction of Dwelling Units for Slum Dwellers in Bhatinda and other cities of Punjab which 
have not been taken cognizance of by the Min istry. Similarly, in case of Haryana as per 2001 
Census, 49 of the Statutory Towns have reported to have slums which have increased to 75 as 
per 2011 Census, i.e., an increase of 26 Statutory towns reported to have slums mushroomed 
over a decade indicating  about 33 % increase of slum population in urban Haryana. The 
Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry should consider all the DPRs received from 
the state of Punjab, Haryana as well as the other states expeditiously in interest of Urban 
Poor/Slum Dwellers. 
Reply of the Government 
1.24 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"The observations and concerns raised by the Committee regarding PMAY(U) mission have 
been noted. As regards DPRs pertaining to Bhatinda are concerned, it is  stated that one 
proposal relating to In -situ Slum Redevelopment (ISSR) in Bhatinda for construction of 1280 
EWS houses has been accepted by the Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee in its 
meeting held on 28.04.2016, at a total project cost of Rs. 12.80 crore.   Apart from the proposal 

20 
 
already considered by the CSMC, the State Government of Punjab has also written to the 
Ministry indicating that actions have been initiated at the State level under the different verticals 
of the PMAY(Urban) Mission.  As and when further proposals are received from the State, these 
will be considered in terms of the scheme guidelines. 
It is clarified that no proposal has been received from the State Government of Haryana as on 
08.07.2016.  
MoHUPA has drafted a National Urban Rental Housing Policy, 2016 which will facilitate creation 
of rental housing for various segments of income through Social Rental Housing and Market 
Driven Rental Housing.  The special focus is on affordability of vulner able groups and urban 
poor through providing such facilities for most vulnerable and need based rental housing for 
special target groups.  The policy also envisages to address the issues related to informal 
sector rental housing and looks forward for insti tutionalisation of informal rental housing by 
creating a conducive environment for gradual shift from informal to semi formal and eventual 
merger with formal rental housing market.   
A National Consultation with all stakeholders was held on 04.12.2015 and comments/ 
suggestions received so far, have been incorporated in the National Rental Housing Policy. The 
process of Inter-ministerial consultations is underway." 
Comments of the Committee 
1.25 The Committee are not satisfied with the tendency and habit of the Ministry 
concerned to give incomplete and half -hearted submission of their action taken reply as 
therein they have totally ignored and left out first four vital recommendations on various 
aspects/issues out of total six issues recommended in the origin al recommendation No. 
15 of the 10th Report of the Committee (2015-16). The first four vital issues recommended 
by the Committee and totally ignored by the concerned Ministry are, namely, (i) the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry should explore the fea sibility of doing 
away/dilute the condition of "Pucca House," as in their opinion non -allotment of a house 
to a person owing any Pucca house or land within the limits of that city or any city, might 
be a better proposition provided that a beneficiary is no t allotted more than one house 
anywhere in India, under PMAY (U) Mission;  (ii) The Committee also recommend that the 
Ministry may put adequate emphasis in popularizing this Scheme, through visual media, 
print media, hoarding, etc., so that the intended be neficiaries are made aware about this 
scheme, and it becomes a success, in all  the States/UTs, on the line of 'Swachh Bharat 
Abhiyan,; (iii) The Committee recommend that the BE of Rs . 4875 crore allocated for 
PMAY(U) and its four components may be enhanced  suitably at the RE stage so that this 
mission fructifies; and, (iv) the Committee also caution the Ministry to monitor regularly 
and curb the practice that the beneficiary should not sublet their Pucca house and start 
living in squatter and slum settlements. 
 In view of the above, the Committee desire the Government to furnish and provide 
complete action taken/final action taken replies covering each and every issue 
recommended by the Committee . The Committee, therefore, reiterate their original 
recommendation demanding complete reply on all the four left out recommended issues 

21 
 
as well as updated reply on the remaining two other recommended issues through the 
final action taken replies of the Government. 
Recommendation (Serial No.16) 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES WELFARE HOUSING ORGANISATION (CGEWHO)  
1.26 The Committee have recommended as under: 
"The objective of CGEWHO is to undertake social welfare schemes on 'No Profit -No Loss' 
basis, for the Central Government Employees serving and retired both, spouses of the 
deceased Central Government employees and employees in service of this Society, and 
spouses in case of deceased employees, by inter -alia promoting the construction of houses, 
and providing all possible help and required inputs, to achieve this object. 
The Committee further note that organisation derives its funds from non -plan expenditure of the 
Ministry and the proposed budget for the year 2013 -14 onwards was Rs. 10 lakh per year. The 
Committee was informed that the beneficiaries under the CGEWHO ho using schemes are 
categorized under three Priority lists, i.e., Priority- I, II & III and are accorded priority in allotment 
accordingly, thereby autonomous bodies of the Government, are kept in 2 nd Priority. Lok Sabha 
Secretariat and Rajya Sabha Secretariat being the Autonomous Bodies are also kept under the 
2nd Priority.  
The Committee are of the opinion that the Central Govt. Employees, after retirement, have to 
vacate their Govt. allotted flats and have to look for an alternate home thereafter.  CGEWHO 
housing schemes can certainly provide an opportunity to own a first home and support retiring 
Govt. employees/ autonomous bodies/PSUs employees in their old age which is a good welfare 
measure.  
The Committee are aware that a number of complaints/representations have been addressed to 
the Chief of CGEWHO by the employees of Lok Sabha Secretariat/Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
whenever they were deprived of a chance to apply under the announced scheme of the 
CGEWHO in the NCR of Delhi and other places durin g last decade and half, as the Scheme 
was opened for Priority-I category only, and all their representations were rejected by the office 
of CGEWHO on the ground of ineligibility under Priority-I.  
The Committee are of the considered view that the Constitut ion of India brings the Indian 
Parliament on equal basis as the Executive, viz., the Central Government under the 
Parliamentary Democratic System which also confers all financial powers to Lok 
Sabha/Parliament who authorise the Executive/Central Government to incur expenses from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. The Committee, therefore, unanimously recommend that the 
Ministry should ensure that all the three Secretariats of the Parliament, namely, all the 
employees of President Estate Secretariat, Rajya Sabha Secretariat and Lok Sabha Secretariat, 
should be given equal treatment as that of the Central Government employees and should be 
included under Priority -I category at the earliest, under appraisal of the progress in the 
implementation of the recommendation, to the Committee." 
 

22 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.27 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"The matter of including employees of all the three Secretariats of the Parliament, viz. President 
Estate Secretariat, Lok Sabha Secretariat and Rajya Sabha Secretariat in the eligibility -I 
Category of CGEWHO will be taken up as per existing Rules and Regulation of CGEWHO." 
Comments of the Committee 
1.28 The Committee are dismayed to observe from the highly unsatisfactory action 
taken reply of the Government wherein virtually neither any action has been taken at all 
by them, nor, the crux of the original considered view and unanimous recommendation 
of this Committee have been heeded to for its actual implementation, as the ir action 
taken reply have stated that the matter of including employees of all the three 
Secretariats of the Parliament, viz., President Estate Secretariat, Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
and Lok Sabha Secretariat in the eligibility-I category of CGEWHO will be taken up as per 
existing Rules and Regulation of CGEWHO. The Committee had already observed the age 
old injustice being done on all the employees of all the three Secretariats of the 
Parliament  as stated above because of the biased and unfair age old existing Rules and 
Regulations which do not cover them under eligibility -I category of CGEWHO and had 
recommended to reverse the injustice so caused by modifying the Rules and 
Regulations, accordingly, in tune with the recommendation of the Committee. The 
Committee once again and most emphatically reiterate their earlier recommendation that 
the Ministry should ensure that employees  of all the three Secretariats of the Parliament, 
namely, all the employees of President Estate Secretariat, Rajya Sabha Secretariat and 
Lok Sabha Secretaria t, should be given equal treatment as that of the Central 
Government employees and should be included under Priority -I category, immediately, 
without any further delay, by making necessary amendments/modifications in the 
existing Rules and Regulations of t he CGEWHO in order to Honour the Constitution of 
India which brings the Indian Parliament on equal basis/standing as the Executive, viz., 
the Central Government under the Parliamentary Democratic System which also confers 
all the financial powers to Lok Sa bha/Parliament who authorise the Executive/Central 
Government to incur expenses from the Consolidated Fund of India. The Committee also 
wish to be apprised about the final favorable outcome in this regard. 
Recommendation (Serial No.18) 
HINDUSTAN PREFAB LIMITED 
1.29 The Committee have recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that Hindustan Prefab Limited  was incorporated in 1953. In the  61 
years of its existence, it has built a wide spectrum of civil engineering structures using both 
conventional in-situ as well as prefab techniques.  HPL thus became a fully integrated company 
with modern prefabrication facilities. HPL is currently providing Project Management 
Consultancy (PMC) for construction of projects in 15 States awarded to it through various State 
Governments and its agencies. One of the mandates of HPL is dust free construction through 
prefab technologies.  

23 
 
The Committee strongly feel that dust particles continue to largely contribute to rising pollution 
levels, create health problems, particularly for those with respiratory problems, cause 
environmental degradation, including air and water pollution, create host  of problems including 
visibility, create unsafe working conditions and increase costs associated with the loss of 
materials or additional work involved.  The Committee came to know that dust and fine particle 
generation from construction and demoliti on activities can be substantially reduced through 
carefully selected mitigation techniques and effective management. The most effective 
technique is to control dust at source and prevent it from becoming airborne. The Committee 
are apprised that HPL uses (a) large panel fully prefab system, composite roofing system using 
precast beams, partial prefab system using cast -in-site walls and precast roofs and totally cast -
in-situ system using small precast elements.  Although HPL has used the large panel fully 
prefab system, it believes in economizing costs further by using partial prefab system to suit the 
economy of the country. The Committee note that HPL is currently engaged as a Project 
Management Consultant (PMC) for undertaking projects using both conventional and prefab 
technologies and they have built  a wide spectrum of civil engineering structures and has also 
supplied components for the building industry and the national railways.  
During the recent study tour to Trivandrum in Jan 2016, the Comm ittee had observed that HPL 
are executing the Housing projects under Rajiv Awas Yojna with traditional construction 
methods like brick and mortar. The Committee were surprised to note that they were not using 
any prefab technology for construction of those  housing projects which was desired from them. 
In-fact the Committee are of the considered opinion that large paneled buildings can be built 
very fast and this could be one of the methods for solving the housing problem in the country. 
These buildings do n ot require elaborate up -keep expenditure.  The use of precast concrete 
elements for roofing and flooring can greatly accelerate the pace of construction and make site 
supervision relatively easier, resulting in saving of essential raw materials, thus econom izing on 
the overall construction costs. 
The Committee strongly recommend that Ministry of HUPA should make concerted efforts and 
strive proactively to complete all the construction projects without cost and time overrun by 
adopting Prefab technologies and  minimizing environmental consequences including dust 
pollution. They, therefore, desire the Ministry to create awareness and popularize these 
technologies through seminars, video conferencing and advertisements. The Committee 
expects the Hindustan Prefab Ltd. to act as a technology hub and incubation centre for prefab 
technologies. 
The Committee are well aware that there is a large scale construction in cities like Dubai, 
Shanghai, New York, London, Singapore and Beijing, etc., and the sky scrapers come up  within 
no time while being dust free and completely safe. The Committee appreciate such dust free, 
eco-friendly technology which leads to such expeditious construction. The Committee are of the 
firm view that India should also adopt such dust free technol ogy in all their Government 
constructions. They strongly recommend that henceforth, all Government buildings, where the 
Government is a vendor, should adopt prefab technology, use of precast elements for roofing 
and flooring as a role model. This will grea tly accelerate the pace of construction and minimise 
adverse environmental consequences including heavy reduction in dust pollution. They also 
desire that the Government should be pro -active in introducing this technology and replace 
traditional construction method like brick and mortar. The Ministry should also take care about 
the use of eco -friendly technologies at the time of demolition activities by controlling dust at 
source preventing it from becoming air borne." 
 
 

24 
 
Reply of the Government 
1.30 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"Hindustan Prefab Limited provides PMC for construction projects using both conventional and 
prefab technologies. The decision to use the technologies rests with the clients. However HPL 
on its part ha s been advocating adoption of prefab technologies in the respective projects. 
Based on aggressive initiative for propagating prefab technology and with the support of the 
Ministry, the acceptability of the users has gone up significantly in recent past. HP L has been 
receiving several requests from different stakeholders for incorporating the same in their 
projects. HPL is executing pre -engineered building project for construction of hostel and staff 
quarters for NIT, Jote in Arunachal Pradesh where pre -engineered structure is made of Steel 
Members with EPS Panel being provided as walls and PUF insulated sandwich panels are used 
as corrugated roof sheets. In the current year also HPL has taken up construction of Motor 
Training Institute at Rewa for MPPWD and police camp at Kolkata for Coal India Limited using 
prefab technology. The organization has also used prefab technologies in works for construction 
of over 10500 schools toilets under “Swachh Bharat Abhiyaan”. The company is hopeful of 
getting major prefab works in the coming year. 
Being the premier organization in Prefab, HPL has been actively taking up Government 
agencies, manufacturers and other stakeholders in the sector regularly towards promotion of 
prefab sector.  
Towards sensitizing the stakeholders on the emerging technologies for mass housing to support 
„Housing For All by 2022‟, a number of events including conferences, round tables, exhibitions 
were organized during 2015-16 which witnessed a wide participation from all stakeholders. HPL 
has also put up demonstration units in various exhibitions in Delhi, Bhopal and Jaipur towards 
showcasing prefab technology as an option in the ambitious agenda of „Housing For All by 
2022‟. HPL intends to organise such seminars and workshops at regular intervals t o create 
awareness towards increasing use of prefab technology in construction industry. 
Besides a housing technological park inside the office complex is being set up consisting of 
sample flats displaying and promoting different technologies like precast, EPS, GRFC, LGS etc. 
which are economical as well as reduces the construction time drastically. This will also act as a 
technology hub for prefab technologies. 
Dust emissions from construction and other civil engineering activities are common in case of 
construction through conventional technology. The problem can be reduced substantially by 
adopting prefab technology in construction wherein the manufacturing process is done in 
controlled environment of factory and only a small component is executed at site . Prefab 
techniques are environmental friendly way of building with optimum use of materials, recycling 
of waste products, less noise and dust etc. 
HPL’s efforts towards prefab development as under:  
Being the premier organization in Prefab, HPL is mandated by its Memorandum of Association 
to perform the distinct role for advocacy and promotion of prefab technology. During the year 
2015-16, HPL has been engaged towards fulfilment of its role as a secto ral leader in prefab 
sector:  
I. Through advocacy role towards becoming a knowledge hub for the sector.  
II. Through taking up construction projects using prefab and other emerging 
technologies. 

25 
 
I. Through advocacy role 
The Prefab Sector is going to play a very significant role for the success of the Government‟s 
Mission of “Housing for All by 2022” towards addressing the challenge of construction of over 
two crores houses in the next seven years since achieving such high  levels of housing delivery 
would not be feasible through conventional construction technologies alone. Towards 
sensitizing the stakeholders on the emerging technologies for mass housing, a number of 
events including conferences, round tables, exhibitions were organized with a wide participation 
from all stakeholders which gave a fillip of the sector towards contributing to the  mission of 
“Housing for All by 2022”.  
a. Seminars on Prefab 
 
 HPL with the support of BMTPC organised a seminar on the Role of Prefab  Sector in 
“Housing for All by 2022” on 12th October, 2015.   The seminar show cased large 
number of emerging technologies, which could be effectively implemented for increasing 
housing delivery in our country besides providing a platform to the stakeholder s to share 
the experience of these emerging technologies.  
 The next event in the series was held on 22nd January, 2016 wherein the focus was on 
RCC precast construction, which has emerged as one of the most appropriate solutions 
for mass housing. The interactive session was followed  
by site visit to enable the stakeholders in the prefab sector to have a first -hand 
experience on the actual construction and the fabrication units deploying the precast 
technologies on a very large scale.   
 To address lack of a wareness amongst planners, architects, engineers and user 
community at large etc. on standardization in building dimension and components 
coupled with absence of the technologies, a Brain Storming Session was held on 8th 
February, 2016 towards compiling an  action plan for possible policy framework that 
could help the growth of prefab sector.  
 On 11 th March 2016 CBRI and HPL have jointly organised a round table on “Structural 
issues in prefab housing” at Roorkee for detailed deliberations on the structural issues in 
prefab housing and works towards resolving the issues.  
These seminars received a very enthusiastic response from the participants and HPL has been 
able to create awareness towards the need of synergetic action by all stakeholders of the 
emerging technologies for achieving the Govt.‟s goal of „Housing For All by 2022‟.  
b. Exhibitions on Prefab 
Besides above HPL has also participated in exhibitions for demonstration of prefab 
technology: 
 HPL had set up a demonstration unit at the India International Trade Fair – 2015 
showcasing prefab technology as an option in the ambitious agenda of „Housing F or All 
by 2022‟ from 14th to 28th November 2015.  Various innovative technologies and cost 
effective and sustainable building materials were also displayed.   
 Similar display was also made in the Jaipur Municipalika Meet from 9th to 11th 
December 2015 where HPL also bagged the “Award of Excellence in Best outdoor 
pavilion” category. 
 
HPL participated in 5 th Vigyan Mela in Bhopal showcasing its activities in science & technology 
and Sustainable growth with the theme of „Swachh Bharat‟ from 19th to 22nd February 2016. 
 A permanent exhibition displaying various prefab technology options for supporting the 
„Housing For All‟ is being put up in HPL‟s office at Jangpura, New Delhi. 

26 
 
 
II. Through taking up major construction projects  
HPL has significantly increas ed its focus on prefab activities in the last one year. Besides 
playing its advocacy role for prefab, HPL has also continued to pursue more projects to be 
undertaken using prefab and other emerging technologies in the projects awarded to HPL. For 
this the organization has taken up with various potential clients for adoption of prefab 
technologies in their respective projects. Based on these efforts, HPL is executing pre -
engineered building project for construction of hostel and staff quarters for NIT, Jote in 
Arunachal Pradesh for a cost of nearly Rs. 60 cr. Pre -engineered structure is made of Steel 
Member with EPS Panel being provided as walls and PUF insulated sandwich panels are used 
as corrugated roof sheets. 
Further HPL has used partial prefab technology in construction of nearly 10500 toilets in schools 
under Swatch Bharat Abhiyaan across the country for various CPSEs under their CSR with a 
cost of approx. Rs. 200 cr. where construction up to plinth level has been taken up through 
conventional method an d superstructure is constructed by using Prefab Sandwich Concrete 
Panels & PPGI roof with MS doors.  
Besides discussions with many State Level Agencies like Jharia Rehab Development Authority, 
Andhra Pradesh State Housing Board, Government of Bihar, etc, a nd Public Sector 
undertakings like Central Coal Fields Limited, Northern Coal Fields etc. are already underway. 
HPL expects to undertake significant quantum of housing projects using prefab technology.  
By organizing these seminars and exhibitions, HPL has  been able to develop for itself in the 
prefab sector, where it is now recognized as an Industry leader, bringing together all 
stakeholders and leading the sector.  
E-Course 
In order to create awareness and capacity building on new technologies, Govt. of I ndia 
has proposed to develop E-course highlighting the need for new and emerging technologies. In 
line with this, HPL has undertaken the responsibility to develop a module on „Prefabricated 
Concrete Construction‟ in association with IGNOU.  
Prefab Technology park in HPL Premises 
As a step towards promoting the prefab technology, a „Prefab Technology Park‟ is being set up 
in HPL premises, New Delhi for disseminating information on emerging construction technology, 
sustainable building material for cost eff ective and faster construction. Spread in the area of 
approx. two acres, the technology park will provide a platform to various Innovative 
prefabricated technologies namely PEB, Monolithic EPS, Polypropylene Honeycomb, Precast 
Technology, Production on Sit e Precast Concrete, PUF Wall & Roof Pane, GFRG, K -Span 
Technology, LGSF, Monolithic Concrete Shear Wall, EPS with Speed Floor, LGS and Wooden 
Construction have been demonstrated at one platform in the Technology Park.  
A brochure giving a glimpse of the technologies showcased in the technology Park is attached. 
Future Plans for prefab sector.  
HPL shall continue to enhance its focus on prefab sector towards making HPL a predominantly 
prefab company through its sectoral leadership and projects to be undertaken through the 
following activities: 
 Taking up PMCs for prefab works; 
 

27 
 
 Leveraging CSR for promotion of Prefab, e.g. toilets in schools etc.; 
 To play an active role in Central Govt. agenda of “Providing Housing For All by 2022”; 
 Playing advocacy role  through associations with industry bodies, professional 
organizations, State Governments, BIS, etc;  
 Exploring options for getting into manufacturing of housing components through JV 
route.;  
 Through skill upgradation in prefab sector in association with various academic and 
training institutions. ; 
 Taking up effective role in disaster mitigation, transit shelter, and rehabilitation colonies 
through prefab housing in association with the Ministry of HUPA, NDMA, SDMAs and 
State Governments.   
 
Eco-Friendly Technologies 
Prefab construction is recommended for energy efficiency and sustainable construction and the 
use of prefab/precast technology can easily increase the construction pace and make site 
supervision relatively easier, resulting in saving of essent ial construction raw material and yet 
cost effective.  Traditional construction methods require extra materials that lead to increased 
waste.  However, since prefabricated sub -assemblies are constructed in a factory, extra 
materials can be recycled in -house.  This is a considerable improvement over sending waste 
directly to a landfill from a traditional construction site.  Also, the controlled environment of a 
factory allows for more accurate construction, tighter joints and better air filtration, which in turn 
allows for better wall insulation and an increase in energy efficiency. 
Prefab construction is famous for its capacity to use recycled products.  The recycled or 
reclaimed projects are mostly used in interior decoration of any prefab construction.  Us ing the 
surplus steel, metals or CDW (Construction and Demolition Waste) for recycling, the prefab 
construction scores extra pollution free goals.  Entire prefab construction takes place in the 
closed factory giving complete freedom to adapt the recycling process for maximum times. 
Use of prefab technologies can be delivered in a much shorter duration with better quality, being 
environmental friendly.  They are eco -friendly as cement and other raw materials used at site 
are reduces dust level which is norma lly associated with construction resulting in reduction of 
dust, air pollution and increases the air quality for human consumption." 
Comments of the Committee 
1.31 The Committee are concerned with the casual and lackadaisical submission of the 
action taken  replies of the Government with regard to major issues/matters/remedial 
measures urged/adviced and recommended by the Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Urban Development through their vital recommendations as contained in their various 
Reports. Corroborating this factual position and the above observation of the Committee, 
they once again wish to point out that there are five major sub -recommendations as 
contained in their original Recommendation No. 18 of their 10th Report (2015 -16) on 
scrutiny of DFG (2 016-17) of M/o HUPA. However, the action taken reply of the 
Government only covers extensively on HPL,  its various activities/roles, its future plans, 
and about the benefits of the prefab-technologies. Thus,  completely over-looking at least 
four vital su b-recommendations, namely, (i) that the Ministry of HUPA should make 
concerted efforts and strive proactively to complete all the construction projects without 
cost and time overrun by adopting prefab technologies and minimizing environmental 

28 
 
consequences including dust pollution; (ii) that they strongly recommend that 
henceforth, all Government buildings, where the Government is a vendor, should adopt 
prefab technology, use of precast elements for roofing and flooring as a role model as 
this will greatly accelerate the pace of construction and minimize adverse environmental 
consequences including heavy reduction in dust pollution; (iii) that the Government 
should be pro -active in introducing this technology and replace traditional construction 
method like brick and mortar; and, (iv) that the Ministry should also take care about the 
use of eco-friendly technologies at the time of demolition activities by controlling dust at 
source preventing it from becoming air borne.  
 As the above stated four sub -recommendations remained untouched and 
unanswered in the action taken reply of the Government, the Committee reiterate their 
earlier recommendation and demand urgent attention of the Ministry concerned over the 
above stated left out sub-recommendations and desire to be apprised of the action taken 
by the Government on each of the issues recommended by them through the final action 
taken reply of the Government. 
  

29 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDTIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GORERNMENT 
Recommendation (Serial No.1) 
NEED TO PROVIDE ENHANCED BUDGET TO THE MINISTRY OF HUPA AT RE STAGE 
2.1 The Ministry of HUPA is entrusted with responsibility of formulation of housing policy and 
programmes, implementation of urban employment and urban poverty alleviation and policy, 
planning and monitoring matter related to human settlements and urban development including 
slum clearance schemes. To support these endeavors of the Ministry Rs. 5411 crore have been 
allocated for 2016 -17 out which Rs. 5400 crore are under Plan head and Rs. 11 crore  are for 
non-plan. 
The Committee observe that there is a marked reduction in the Plan allocations made to 
Ministry of HUPA  at Budget Estimates stage from the year 2014 -15 when their allocation was 
Rs.6000 crore  which got reduced in the year 2015 -16 to Rs . 5625.00 crore, i.e., Rs. 375.00 
crore less  than the previous year allocation which further got reduced in the year 2016 -17 to 
Rs.5400.00 crore, viz., Rs. 225.00 crore less than the previous year (2015-16). 
The Committee feel that this kind of reduced al location is not in harmony with the thrust 
Government seems to want to provide to its ambitious project  'Housing for All by 2022' and 
other programmes of the Ministry which are meant for urban poverty reduction/alleviation. They 
also observe that Housing sector is fourth largest employment generating sector and for every 
lakh invested in the housing 2.69 to 4.06 new jobs are created in the economy with its induced 
effect. The Committee strongly feel Government should use all their powers to practically 
eradicate the curse of poverty and homelessness to provide real freedom to the million of its 
people from the clutches of poverty and state of homelessness. 
The Committee were also given to understand during evidence by the representatives of the 
Ministry of HUPA that there is a potential demand of 50 lakh houses next year for which about 
20000 housing loans are expected to be provided. There is a committed liability of Rs.2400 
crore for the already sanctioned/accepted projects, so practically only Rs. 2000 cr ore can be 
utilized for Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana during 2016-17. Therefore, Rs. 4400.00 crore provided 
for Pradhan Mantry Awas Yojna (PMAY) Urban - Housing for All -(HFA)- Urban may not be 
adequate at all and the Ministry in their evidence before the Comm ittee has in fact stressed that 
they actually require Rs.8815.00 crore as an enhanced budget. 
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend and urge the Ministry of Finance to provide an 
enhanced budget at the Revised Budget stage,  in addition to the earli er allocated BE of 
Rs.5400.00 crore, so that, the vital schemes/programmes of Ministry of HUPA which are also 
the thrust areas of the Govt., may not suffer for want of required wherewithal. This will ensure 
that the Ministry of HUPA successfully implements their Schemes/Programmes and achieve the 
desired objectives. 
 
 

30 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.2 The Ministry agrees with the recommendation of the committee and supplementary 
demand will be made during current financial year, after assessing requirement of fund at RE 
2016-17 stage. 
The potential demand in 2016-17 is estimated at 15 lakh (fifteen lakh) dwelling units and not 50 
lakhs as noted above. 
Recommendation (Serial No.2) 
NEED TO CHECK HUGE REDUCTIONS IN ALLOCATIONS OF MINISTRY OF HUPA AT RE 
STAGE.   
2.3 The Committee observe that there are huge reductions in the Revised Estimates vis -a-
vis corresponding Budget Estimates (BE) of Ministry of HUPA continuously from the first year of 
12th Five Year Plan (2012-17), viz., 2012-13 to the fourth year of the Plan, i.e., 2015-16. The BE 
(2012-13) of Rs.1155.00 crore had been reduced to Rs.950.00 crore at RE stage, (17% decline) 
BE (2013 -14) of Rs. 1460.00 crore has been reduced as RE of Rs. 1200.00 crore (17.8 % 
decline); BE (2014 -15) of Rs. 6000.00 crore was reduce d to Rs. 3400.00 crore  at RE (43% 
decline), and  BE (2015-16) of Rs. 5625.30 crore has been reduced to Rs. 1952.00 crore at RE 
stage (65% decline). 
The Committee are dismayed to note this kind of perennially inconsistent budgeting done by 
Ministry of HUPA and/or Ministry of Finance year after year. They are also pained to see that all 
their earlier recommendations to get enhanced funding to the Ministry of HUPA not  only fall on 
deaf ears, but also go into the dustbin without yielding any positive outcome.  The Committee 
also feel that the Ministry of HUPA and at times Ministry of Finance in exercise of their financial, 
executive powers are solely responsible for such higher, unrealistic and misformed 
projections/allocations made at the time of presenting Ge neral Budget before the Parliament 
year after year for the urban poor and homeless by providing Rs. 6000.00 crore or even more 
as Budget Estimates of Ministry of HUPA. The Committee further observe that the attractive and 
rosy higher allocations made in fa vour of the Ministry of HUPA ironically fades away just after 
six months of presentation of the General Budget to the Parliament at Revised Estimates stage. 
As a matter of fact, the allocation of Rs.6000.00 crore or Rs.5625.30 crore which were 
committed by the Government and duly passed by Parliament, only remains as a token piece of 
paper as it gets drastically reduced to Rs.3400.00 crore or Rs. 1952.00 crore, i.e., reduced by 
43% and 65%, respectively, at the RE stage which comes at the middle of every fi nancial year. 
The Projections for allocations actually reflect the underlying policy and the plan of the Ministry 
emphasing the focal areas. These deviations in allocation at RE stage compels the Ministry to 
redraw the contours. Since half the year is alre ady gone  and much of their  valuable time is 
lost, the Ministry has to replan, leading to slowdown in implementation of the policies/schemes. 
This in turn leads to non-achievement of targets. 
The Committee, in view of the paradoxical and ironical, budgeti ng practices prac tised by the 
Ministry of HUPA/Ministry of Finance, which depicts a complete volteface from the financial 
commitments of Ministry of HUPA and Ministry of Finance  towards homeless and poor human 
resources of the country before the Parliamen t, strongly urge the Government to depart from 
such unhealthy  Budgeting practice year after year. 
The Committee also recommend that the Ministry of HUPA should focus to enhance their 
budgeting skills to avoid making of such unforeseen Budget Estimates in their favour which 

31 
 
force them to back out from their own projections after every six months at RE stage, year  after 
year, and also urge the Ministry of Finance not  to slash the BEs, upto 40 to 65% arbitrarily at 
RE stage every year, against the pressing needs of the Ministry of HUPA. In the instant case, 
the Ministry of HUPA should actively pursue the  Ministry of Finance for enhanced allocation at 
RE stage to meet their projected targets during the year. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 Ministry of Finance is the nodal Ministry in so far as budgetary procedures are 
concerned.  
In FY 2015 -16, reduction of a llocation was made by M/o Finance at RE stage based on the 
expenditure incurred upto Sep, 2015. In fact, PMAY (U) was launched in June, 2015 and the 
Ministry started receiving proposals for central assistance only from Oct-Nov, 2015.  
Due to larger demand,  Ministry requested for enhancement of RE allocation and M/o Finance 
allowed enhancement of Rs. 500.00 crore from  Rs. 1452.00 crore to Rs. 1952.00 crore, as 
against Ministry‟s request  for restoration of BE 2015-16  or at least Rs. 2500.00 crore for PMAY 
(U). Due to insufficient provision at RE 2015 -16, there was a committed liability of Rs. 2397.00 
crore for the projects considered under PMAY (U) during FY 2015 -16 for release of 1 st 
installment. 
In the Current year, against a demand of Rs. 3650.00 crore f or PMAY (U), an enhanced 
allocation of Rs. 5075.00 crore has been made.  In June, 2015, the plan expenditure was only 
0.23% of BE 15 -16; in June 2016, plan expenditure has reached 21.43% of the plan budget.  
Hence, MoHUPA is taking active steps to ensure utilization of its plan budget in 2016-17. 
Further enhancement will be sought at supplementary stages/RE stage based on requirement. 
2.5 For comments of the Committee please see para No. 1.7 of Chapter-I of the Report.     
 
Recommendation (Serial No.3) 
NEED TO CHECK UNDER-UTILIZATION OF FUNDS BY ENHANCING THE CAPACITY TO 
HAVE 100% UTILIZATION 
2.6 The Committee observe that the Actual Expenditure of the Ministry of HUPA is showing 
under-utilization trend as there is never 100% financial targets achieved by th em during each of 
the last three years. The percentage of Actual Expenditure against BE is reported to be 73.88% 
(2013-14), 45.25 % (2014-15) and 31.21% (2015-16), whereas, it is 89.89% (2013 -14), 79.86% 
(2014-15) and 89.95% (2015-16) against RE of each of  the three years, respectively. Thus, the 
percentage of shortfall is 10.11% (2013 -14), 20.14% (2014 -15) and 10.05% (2015 -16) against 
the respective Revised Estimates. 
The Committee are not satisfied with the Actual Expenditure capacity of the Ministry whic h has 
been running vital mega projects/programmes, namely PMAY (U) - Housing For All by 2022, In -
Situ slum development, pending project of JNNURM and RAY, CLSS for housing and DAY -
National Urban Livelihood Mission (NULM), etc., meant for upliftment of Econo mically Weaker 
Section/Below Poverty Line, Urban Population. 

32 
 
The Committee also observe that the Revised Estimates of the Ministry are already reduced by 
40 % to 60 % from the Budget Estimates initially allocated in favour of the Ministry and yet they 
are not able to spend 100% of the 40% to 60% reduced RE. This trend indicates the scope for 
enhancing financial management skills of all these concerned and engaged in implementation of 
the Projects at Centre, State/UT and ULBs level under the guidance of the representatives of 
the Ministry. The Committee are aware that there is a considerable time lag involved in the 
implementation of schemes right from the stage of conceptualisation to identifying the various 
components/beneficiaries and obtaining approval. T he Committee, however, do not approve of 
the 60 per cent of the time of the Plan period being consumed for formulating the major 
schemes, leaving just two years for implementation. They are, therefore, of the considered view 
that the vast time lag between the identification and approval of the schemes conceptualized be 
curtailed substantially so that adequate time is left for their implementation within the stipulated 
timelines so as to achieve the intended goals. 
The Committee in view of the above observat ion, urge the Ministry to improve upon the 
utilization of their allocated funds for achievement of 100% financial targets of the very meager 
RE. The Committee feel that it is high time the Ministry streamlined their Plan of expenditure on 
major schemes and made endeavour to maximize the  utilization of the earmarked funds every 
year so that they have a  strong ground to get the desired enhanced allocation from Ministry of 
Finance to give much needed thrust on housing and urban poverty alleviation. 
The Committee feel that it is high time that the Ministry of Finance sets up a task force to study 
the advisability of continuance of the time honoured procedure of BE/RE projections. A historic 
analysis of the financial as well as performance targets and achieveme nts can be mounted to 
study whether some changes could be introduced in the periodicity of estimates (BE and RE) as 
well as provisioning of the required flexibility to the administrative ministries for pooling the 
budgeted grants and strategising the pace of performance across sectors such that a totality of 
large unutilised funds and under performance do not continue to plague the whole exercise of 
budgeting." 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.7 The recommendation of the Committee is noted.  For enhanced allocation, the Ministry 
will take up with M/o Finance at appropriate stage.  MoHUPA has taken active steps to utilize its 
plan budget.  This is evidenced by the fact that 21.43% of the planned budget has been spent 
till June, 2016 as compared to 0.23% upto June, 2015. 
2.8 For comments of the Committee please see para No. 1.10 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.4) 
NEW FUNDING PATTERN AND ITS ADVERSE IMPACT ON THE ACHIEVEMENT OF 
FINANCIAL/PHYSICAL TARGETS OF THE SCHEMES OF THE MINISTRY OF HUPA 
2.9 The Committee note that JNNURM as well as RAY Schemes of HUPA have been 
subsumed into Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana, all these schemes intend to provide housing for 
poor. They also find that the period of JNNURM was from December, 2005 to March, 2012. The 

33 
 
Mission period was extended till 31 st March, 2015 for completion of on -going projects. The 
concern of the representatives of people about the completion of on -going projects was 
addressed with approval for further extension of Mission upto 31 st March, 2017 to complete on-
going projects approved till 31.03.2012. This approval was received in May 2015 itself. 
However, the concern of the Committee in completion of the on -going projects under these 
Schemes, subsumed under PMAY(U) is the funding pattern.  
The Committee  note that the there is a marked change in the funding pattern from the financial 
year 2015-16 as per the instructions issued by Ministry of Finance with regard to Central: State 
share for implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes of the Minis try. The Committee 
further observe that the old funding pattern, as per Scheme guidelines for Central: State under 
RAY [Subsumed under Housing for All (Urban)] were stated to be 75:25 for Cities/UAs with 
population of less than 5 lakh which has been change d to 60:40 as per New Funding Pattern. 
Similarly, the funding pattern with regard to BSUP component of JNNURM which was 90:10 for 
Cities/Towns in NE States and 80:20 for other Cities with less than one million population has 
been replaced as 80:20 and 50:5 0, respectively. So far IHSDP (JNNURM) is concerned, it has 
been changed to 50:50 from the old one as 80:20 for all States/UTs and has become 80:20 for 
NE and Special Category States from the earlier pattern of 90:10. 
The Committee during examination of th e DFG (2016 -17) of the Ministry of HUPA were 
informed that one of the major reasons for having continuous shortfall in achievement  of 
financial targets during last three years, i.e., from 2013 -14 to 2015-16 is that "at time States are  
unable to raise ant icipated fund requirement due to implementation bottlenecks." Further, the 
Ministry also highlighted among other reasons of having financial shortfall, that actual releases 
against projects were further reduced due to change in funding pattern (50:50) for States and 
80:20 for NE States against  80:20 and 90:10, respectively in Financial Year 2015-16. 
 The Committee strongly feel that both the above stated reasons for financial shortfall as per the 
statement of the Ministry of HUPA may act as an  eye -opener for the Central 
Government/Ministry of Finance as to how the States, which were, already unable to raise their 
anticipated fund requirement towards their share as per old funding pattern are further burdened 
with imposition of new funding pattern which dem ands 30% more funds by the concerned 
implementing States. 
The Committee consisting of Representatives of various States, UTs as Member of Parliament 
are very well aware of the financial conditions of their respective States/UTs and the adverse 
impact this new imposed funding pattern  that has been created on the implementation of the 
on-going Schemes in their States/UTs as they are finding it extremely difficult to cope up with 
this new funding pattern for it is adding on the financial burden on them and ha s become an 
example of further burdening the already over burdened. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Ministry of Finance to reconsider their decision on changing the old funding pattern with the new 
one and  should issue fresh instructions at the earlies t regarding restoration and continuation of 
the old funding pattern with retrospective effect, viz., from the date of change of the old funding 
pattern, for smooth and hurdle -free implementation of on -going projects of JNNURM and RAY 
under present PMAY (U)-HFA (U) now,  by the concerned States/UTs, as this will certainly be in 
favour of the Centrally Sponsored Schemes and implementing States/UTs as well.  This will 
support the State Governments to expeditiously complete such projects. The Committee desire 

34 
 
the Ministry of HUPA should enthusiastically pursue the matter of getting the old funding pattern 
restored with the Ministry of Finance till positive outcome achieved in this regard under 
intimation of the progress made in this regard, to the Committee. The  Committee also strongly 
recommend that the Ministry should try not to make frequent change of schemes relating to 
same objectives/beneficiaries since it leads to confusion and lack of focus and direction." 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.10 The Ministry has al ready taken up the matter with Ministry of Finance for restoration of 
old funding pattern, however, the same could not materialize as yet. As advised by the 
committee, Ministry will pursue the matter with M/o Finance." 
2.11 For comments of the Committee please see para No. 1.13 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
  
 
Recommendation (Serial No.5) 
COMPLETION OF ALL PENDING JNNURM PROJECTS IRRESPECTIVE OF THEIR 
COMPLETION STAGE 
2.12 Jawaharlal Nehru Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) was launched on  3 rd December, 
2005 f or assisting State Governments in providing housing and basic services to urban 
poor/slum dwellers in 65 select cities under the sub mission - Basic Services to Urban 
Poor(BSUP) and Integrated Housing and Slum Development Programme (IHSDP) in other 
cities. This mission was launched for a period of 7 years from 2005 -06, however, it was 
extended upto  31st March, 2017 for completion of ongoing work only in projects sanctioned upto 
31st March, 2012. 
Time and again, the Committee have emphasized on the fact that  hundreds of projects 
approved under this mission, have not been able to be completed because Centre has stopped 
the funds. The Committee does not concur with the explanations of the Ministry, in its 
depositions, that the funds have been stopped owing to t he inability on the part of the States to 
carry out municipal reforms and several projects were less than 50% completed. The 
Committee are of the considered view that any amount invested in projects under this mission, 
by the States, is out of public money . If we allow those partly completed projects to die for want 
of funds, then it amounts to sheer national wastage of scarce resources. 
The Committee further opine that Urbanization is an inevitable process. Cities act as magnets, 
attracting capital, resour ces, talent and labour from all around. As urban population increase, 
the size of cities in India will swell even more. The need of revitalization of urban infrastructure 
today, is therefore, felt all the more. JNNURM was an important scheme for ensuring creation of 
urban infrastructure. In this context, the Committee recommend that all viable projects, 
approved under JNNURM, at whichever stage of completion, must be allowed to be completed 
under the same funding pattern as it was earlier approved. 
The Committee also note that JNNURM had both housing and infrastructure components. While 
the housing component has been taken care of by PMAY(Urban) scheme, infrastructure 

35 
 
component has not been taken care of. Urban population is increasing by leaps and bounds. 
The need of urban infrastructure creation is more than ever before. Keeping this in view the 
Committee recommend that a new scheme for urban infrastructure creation should be initiated 
and all viable pending JNNURM projects, other than housing, be allowed to be completed." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.13 On-going projects sanctioned upto 31.03.2012 under JNNURM which include basic 
infrastructure are being allowed to be completed by 31.03.2017.  
Under the schemes of PMAY (U), central assistance is provided for housing only on per unit 
basis and not for infrastructure. States are required to provide infrastructure under PMAY (U) 
either through their own fund/ Finance Commission grant or through convergence with other 
schemes of the State/UT Govts or Central Government." 
2.14 For comments of the Committee please see para No. 1.16 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.6) 
HOUSING LOANS UNDER CLSS COMPONENT OF PMAY(U) NEED TO BE AS A PART OF 
KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS (KPIs) OF THE BANKS, HFCs/PLIs 
2.15 The Committee note that Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) under the Pradhan 
Mantri Awas Yojana (Urban)  is an important component of the Mission, which is being 
implemented as a Central Sector Scheme right from the start of the Mission across the country 
in all statutory towns. Under CLSS, the beneficiaries of Economically Weaker Section (EWS) 
having househo ld annual income upto Rs. 3.00 lakh and Low Income Group (LIG) having 
household annual income between Rs. 3.00 lakh and Rs. 6.00 lakh, subject to their being 
otherwise eligible under the scheme, can avail of interest subsidy at the rate of 6.5% on the 
housing loans upto Rs. 6.00 lakh from Banks, Housing Finance Companies and other such 
institutions for a tenure of 15 years or actual tenure of loan whichever is earlier. The Net Present 
Value (NPV) of the interest subsidy will be calculated at a discounted rate of 9%. 
The Committee further note that in terms of PMAY(Urban) Scheme guidelines, Housing and 
Urban Development Corporation Ltd., (HUDCO) and National Housing Bank(NHB) have been 
the Central Nodal Agencies (CNAs) for implementation of CLSS and these CNA s have signed 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with 177 Primary Lending Institutions (PLIs).  
 The Committee are unhappy to observe that as per NHB, banks are not very active in providing 
small scale loans. Reduction in outstanding housing loans to the lo w income segments reflects 
that the housing loans to weaker sections is decreasing every year upto Rs. 2 Lakh -from 2% to 
1% upto Rs. 5 Lakh -from 14% to 9% upto Rs. 10 Lakh from 34% to 26% during 2012 -13 to 
2013-14, and should be a matter of concern for all  the implementing Ministries/CNAs. 
Consequently, Ministry of HUPA has been taking up the issue of giving special attention to 

36 
 
loans to lower segment. It had requested for earmarking of at least 3% of Priority Sector 
Lending for loans of dwelling units costing not more than Rs. 16 lakh. 
Furthermore, the Steering Committee for monitoring the progress of the Credit Linked Subsidy 
Scheme, at its meeting held on 8 th October, 2015 noted that the home loan portfolio allocation 
by PLIs to the below Rs. 10 lakh cate gory is less than 2%. The need for banks to cater to this 
segment was noted by the Committee.  In order to increase banks‟ lending towards low ticket 
loans,  the Committee desire that the Department of Financial Services (DFS) would examine 
the issue of in clusion (with due weightage) of lending of home loans less than Rs. 15 lakh or 
loans under CLSS component, as a part of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) of the banks. 
The Committee are of the opinion that unless implementation and execution of the scheme by 
PLIs/HFCs is included in the mandatory list of Key Performer Indicators (KPIs) of the banks, 
there may be very little hope to reverse the decreasing trends of loans to EWS/LIG segments. 
The  Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of HUPA, HUD CO and NHB should 
vigourously pursue all the issues, i.e, (i) at least 3% of Priority Sector Lending for loans of 
dwelling units costing not more than Rs. 16 lakh; (ii) inclusion, with due weightage, of lending of 
home loans less than Rs. 15 lakhs under CL SS component, as a part of Key Performance 
Indicators(KPIs) of the banks; and  (iii) Monitoring of the progress of the scheme  through State 
Level Bankers Committee (SLBC), with the DFS and obtain positive outcome in this regard for 
better performance of C LSS which will not only safeguard the interest of the weaker sections 
but also prove a landmark in promoting PMAY (U) -HFA (U). The Committee desire to be 
apprised of the outcome in this regard within three months time from the date of presentation of 
this Report. 
Reply of the Government 
2.16 MoHUPA has noted the recommendations. It is, however, to be noted that Department 
of Financial Services (DFS) is the administrative Ministry to take up with the Reserve Bank of 
India (RBI) with regard to earmarking at least 3% of Priority Sector Lending for loans of dwelling 
units costing not more than Rs. 16 lakhs. As regards, inclusion of lending of home loans less 
than Rs 15 lakhs under Credit -Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) component as a part of Key 
Performance Indicators of the banks, it would be for DFS being the administrative Ministry to 
take up the matter. These issues have already been taken up by MoHUPA with Department of 
Financial Services (DFS) .DFS has informed the MoHUPA that monitoring of the progress of 
CLSS has been included as an agenda of State Level Bankers‟ Committee (SLBC) meetings. 
2.17 For comments of the Committee please see para No. 1.19 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.7) 
FAILURE OF THE MINISTRY OF HUPA IN PROVIDING BASIC DATA RELATING TO THEIR 
OWN SCHEME-CLSS, TO THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMITTEE 
2.18 The Committee observe that Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) is a component 
under Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojna (Urban)- Housing for All (Urban)-PMAY (U)-HFA (U) Mission 

37 
 
of the Minis try of HUPA launched on 26.06.2015. National Housing Bank (NHB) and Housing 
Urban Development Corporation (HUDCO) are the Central Nodal Agencies (CNAs) for CLSS 
under which an eligible EWS/LIG applicant can avail of interest subsidy @ of 6.5% on housing 
loans upto Rs. 6.00 lakh from Banks, Housing Finance Companies (HFCs) and other such 
institutions.  
The Committee during examination of DFG (2016 -17) of M/o - HUPA desired to know some 
basic data with regard to the No. of applications received, rejected, gran ted loans, pending and 
since when and the reasons for rejection/pendency for a longer time, if any, etc., under CLSS 
since the day of its implementation. Contrary to the desire of the Committee, the Ministry 
submitted that the data related to the total No.  of applications received, rejected, pending and 
the reasons for rejections and pendency, etc. by Banks/PLIs is not available with NHB and 
HUDCO as this information is spread over all the PLIs across the Country and this information is 
not maintained by the CNAs. The Committee are also informed by the Ministry that CLSS  is not 
being operated as a separate scheme by the PLIs but rather it is a subset of the whole set of 
housing loan applications received by the PLIs. There is, thus, no electronic database 
maintained separately for CLSS related housing loan application. Eligible beneficiaries under 
CLSS are filtered from the overall loan applications received by the banks. However, on the 
request of the Ministry, Indian Bank Association (IBA) has simplified a nd circulated to all the 
Public Sector Banks (PSBs) the application form and documentation required for availing the 
housing loan under CLSS so that the EWS/LIG categories do not face hardships while applying 
for housing loans with the PLIs.  
The Committee are not satisfied with  the explanation of the Ministry in this regard and  are 
pained to acknowledge that in spite of the Ministry being an apex authority of GOI at the 
national level for formulation of housing policy and programme, administering of Plan  Scheme, 
collection and dissemination of data on housing etc., not only, has the Ministry failed to 
administer their own Central Sector Plan Scheme, namely, CLSS, but also, do not have 
mechanism to collect basic data on one of the component (CLSS) of their  Primary Housing 
Scheme, PMAY (U) - HFA(U).  
The Committee are of the view that although PLIs are considering CLSS applications as a 
subset of the whole set of housing loan applications received by them, it is wrong to say that 
PLIs are not operating CLSS as a separate scheme. As a matter of fact, the moment eligible 
beneficiaries under CLSS are filtered from the overall loan applications received by the Banks, 
the filtered ones automatically have come under a separate housing loan scheme having 
different eligibility criteria and entirely different set of norms regarding interest subsidy, capping 
of loan amount, tenure, area of the house, etc. Moreover, as per the submission of the Ministry, 
a simplified application form and documentation required for availi ng the housing loan under 
CLSS have also said to be circulated to all the PSBs by the IBA which also proves beyond 
doubt that PLIs are supposed to obtain a separate application form and documentation from an 
eligible beneficiary who wishes to have housing loans under CLSS. 
The Committee, in view of the above, not only disagree with the justification of the Ministry for 
not maintaining and providing the desired information on CLSS, but also, feel unhappy at the 
lackadaisical and careless approach and tendency of the Ministry in administering their Plan 
Schemes and recommend that they should exercise their power in the direction of passing 

38 
 
immediate instructions/guidelines to CNAs/IBA/DFS/PLIs and all concerned for implementation 
of CLSS that now onwards, all the desired data, such as, (i) No. of CLSS applications received  
(with date), No. of loan sanctioned with amount out of total applications received, No. of 
applications rejected, No. of applications pending on a given date and since when, reasons for 
rejecting applications  after confirming the eligibility of the beneficiaries under CLSS  and 
reasons for longer pendency of applications for more than 2 months, etc., should be maintained 
and forwarded by PLIs/HFCs concerned to CNAs in a form of a quarterly progress report on 
CLSS. The delinquency, if any, in this regard, be made accountable and penalized. The 
Committee advice the Ministry to get a uniformly suitable software developed and circulated in 
this regard to all concerned for better administering and monitoring of CLSS, so that the present 
failure of the Ministry in this regard is converted into success.  The progress in the matter may 
be brought before the Committee within a period of 3 months. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.19 As pointed out by the Hon‟ble Committee in p aragraph 4 (last line), data of the eligible 
beneficiary who wishes to have housing loans under CLSS, is maintained by the Central Nodal 
Agencies (CNAs). Once an applicant under CLSS is considered eligible for interest subsidy 
further tracking of the appli cation filled up for the purpose is available with the respective PLIs.  
This process is part of the due diligence process of the PLIs.  Subsequently, when the claim is 
raised by the PLI with the CNA for release of interest subsidy, from that stage onwards , data is 
tracked electronically by the CNAs. 
Tracking of the status from the stage an application is submitted to the PLI where the eligibility 
of the individual for the housing loan under CLSS is being determined, would require the DFS to 
issue appropriate instructions.  
National Housing Bank, which is one of two CNAs under Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme, is 
working on developing suitable software to enable tracking of applications received by Primary 
Lending Institutions(PLIs) under Credit Linked Subsidy S cheme. Department of Financial 
Services has also been addressed on the issue to ensure that a system is in place for data entry 
at branch level of the PLIs, once the software is in place. 
Recommendation (Serial No.9) 
SUPPORT TO URBAN STREET VENDORS 
2.20 The Committee note that one of the component of DAY -NULM scheme is to provide 
support to Urban Street Vendors for carrying their vocational activities. After the promulgation of 
the 'Street Vendors (Protection of Livelihood and Regulation of Street Vending ) Act, 2014', the 
States/UTs have started vendor identification survey in their respective States/UTs. As informed 
by the Ministry, out of 475 cities that started the survey, 277 cities have already completed the 
survey and out of 5,85,485 street vendors i dentified, only 1,50,521 ID cards have been issued. 
The Committee further observe that the States/UTs of Assam, Goa, Gujarat, Sikkim, Tripura, 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu, Puducherry and Delhi 

39 
 
have not started the sur vey even in a single city. The Committee feel that this is a most 
regrettable state of affairs. 
 The Committee appreciate that Ministry have been regularly pursuing with the 
States/UTs for implementation of the provisions of the said Act, however,  they are concerned to 
find that the some States/UTs have not taken up the issue  at all  and the work of conducting 
survey  and the process of issuing the ID cards is not going on the required pace. With a view to 
meeting the requirement of target, it is imperati ve that all the ground work relating to survey for 
identification of street vendors and issuance of ID cards to them are completed within a definite 
time-frame so as to avoid time and cost overrun. The Committee desire that the Ministry pursue 
the non -participating and non -responsive States to clearly spell out their 
difficulty/apprehension/priorities in non-implementation of the scheme/survey in identification of 
vendors/issuance of ID cards. The Committee impress upon the Ministry to initiate urgent 
requisite measures and pursue States/UTs so as to ensure the timely completion of survey and 
issuance of ID cards to the Street Vendors, thereafter moving further for credit enablement, skill 
development and micro-enterprise development for them. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.21 The recommendation of the Committee is noted  The Ministry will constantly pursue with 
the States/UTs for framing Rules and Scheme under the Street Vending Act, 2014 and 
completion of street vendors‟ survey at the earliest. 
Recommendation (Serial No.11) 
BUILDING MATERIALS AND TECHNOLOGY PROMOTION COUNCIL (BMTPC) 
2.22 The Committee note that the  Building Material and Technology Promotion Council 
(BMTPC), an autonomous organization under the aegis of Ministry of HUPA, has expertise in 
identification, promotion and dissemination of new building materials and construction 
technologies for housing. This Council has been allocated a sum of Rs. 5.00 crore. In the 
Budget Estimate of 2016-17 as against the Revised Estimates of Rs. 13.00 crore and BE o f Rs. 
5.00 crore during 2015 -16. The Committee also observe that the entire amount of Rs. 13 crore 
has been spent by BMTPC during 2015-16 and they had proposed an outlay of Rs. 15 crore for 
2016-17. 
The Committee fail to understand that in the era of eco -friendly and energy efficient 
technologies to achieve dust free construction why the allocation for the Council has been 
reduced to only 38%, i.e., Rs. 5 crore for 2016 -17 from Rs. 13 crore (2015 -16) even with 100% 
utilization. 
Since BMTPC has also been des ignated as Secretariat of Technology sub -mission under 
Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (PMAY)(U) to provide support in identification, evaluation and 
adoption of new technologies by States, it definitely requires more funds to perform its duties. 
Moreover, the last  self assessment  review by the Council conducted in 2003 and a Board 
review in February, 2016 reflects the positive impact  in the construction and building materials 
industry and assessment suggest that the BMTPC fully qualifies for Expenditure Refo rms 
Commission(ERC) type of assistance. The Committee, therefore, desire that the allocation to 

40 
 
BMTPC should be increased to  at least Rs. 15 crore at RE stage 2016-17 as proposed by them 
initially so as to achieve the objective of bridging gap between the  laboratory development and 
large scale field application of cost effective, environment -friendly and energy -efficient, 
innovative building materials and disaster  resistant construction technology. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.23 The original Budget Estimates for the year 2015-16 was Rs. 5.00 crore. It was, however, 
revised to Rs.13 crore with an additional grant of Rs. 8.00 crore to undertake specific activity of 
constructing Demonstration Housing Projects in various States with new/emerging eco -friendly 
and energy efficient technologies. Since there are no pending requests received from the States 
for the year 2016 -17 to undertake demonstration housing projects, the allocation for BMTPC 
has been kept Rs. 5.00 crore. However, as and when BMTPC undertakes new  demonstration 
projects and other technical activities requiring financial support, Ministry of HUPA is committed 
to extend the support. 
Recommendation (Serial No.12) 
TAX EXEMPTION AND THE COST OF AFFORDABLE HOUSES 
2.24 The Committee note that in order to boost the sluggishness in the construction sector in 
addition to exemption from levy of service tax, one of the measures taken is 100% deduction for 
profits to an undertaking from a housing project  for flats up to 30 sq uare meters in four metro 
cities and 60 square meters in other cities,  subject to  Minimum Alternate Tax (MAT). On the 
apprehension of the Committee, if this provision could be misused by the builders, the Ministry  
reasoned that since the developers would  be tax exempted (except paying MAT), they  may,  in 
all possibility pass on a certain portion of tax saved to  ultimate buyers in the  form of reduced 
cost of dwelling units. The Committee further note that the final cost of flats built under Pradhan 
Mantri Awas Yojana (PMAY) has not been capped and the cap is only on the area of  dwelling 
unit.  
 The Committee are not convinced with assumption of the Ministry, and are of the firm 
opinion that unless there is a strict conditions imposed by law, builders are not likely  to pass on 
the tax exemption profit to the buyers. The Committee desire, it should be made mandatory for 
the builders to pass on some pre -decided part of the tax exemption benefit to the buyers. The 
Committee further recommend that some pro vision should be made to cap the final cost of the 
flat as per area or else, the builders may charge the buyers whimsically and the scheme of 
affordable housing will be no longer affordable for the poorer sections of the society,  thus, 
defeating the very purpose and intention  of the scheme." 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.25 The recommendations have been noted and forwarded to Ministry of Finance. 
2.26 For comments of the Committee please see para No. 1.22 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
 

41 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.13) 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS No. 13 URBAN MIGRATION 
2.27 The Committee note that one of the mandate given to Ministry of HUPA is the planning 
and monitoring of matters related to slum clearance schemes  and the Jhuggi and Jhopri 
Removal Schemes, except for NCT of Delhi. As per Census of India 2001 and 2011, the slum 
population has been enumerated at 52.37 million and 65.49 million, respectively. The  growth 
percentage of urban population which was 31.51 in 2001 over 1991, has slightly increased to  
31.80 in 2011 over  200,  whereas, Total Population and its growth during the same period has 
come down considerably, i.e., from 21.54 growth percentage in 2001 over 1991 which came 
down to 17.68 growth percentage in 2011 over 2001. One of the very signif icant reasons for 
increasing urban population and thereby increase in slums may be attributed to urban migration. 
The Committee have been informed during the evidence that a working group on migration with 
13 Members has been set up in July, 2015. The Comm ittee are of the considered view that 
without seriously  looking into urban migration from rural areas its actual causes and remedial 
measures found to check the same,  we are only engaging in ad hoc patch work. Therefore, this 
issue should be taken on top  priority basis. The Committee further recommend that appropriate 
measures need to be taken to address the existing data gaps in the surveys conducted by 
NSSO, since the Committee feel that much of the data offered during evidence, for instance 
with regard to Delhi, appears to be prime facie incorrect. The Ministry of HUPA should take up 
the matter with Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation to collect relevant data 
about education and skills of the labour and out migrants to deploy them appropriately on skilled 
works. The Committee feel that only after understanding the reasons for migration and 
analyzing  its fallout and assessing the impacts of migration on housing, slums and 
infrastructure, the  Ministry can work in a better way to ameliorat e otherwise deplorable 
conditions  of millions of urban poor." 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.28 The Working Group on Migration has noted the existing data gaps.  It appreciates that 
availability of credible data is critical to develop a robust understanding a bout migration, 
including, inter alia, the reasons people migrate, major sources and destinations, sectors of 
employment, conditions of living. The Working Group is examining data and data collection 
processes from the Census of India, as well as the Natio nal Sample Survey Office and will 
make specific suggestions in this regard. 
Further, Ministry of HUPA has issued an OM (No. O-17034/18/2015-H / FTS –12940 dated 10th 
February 2016- copy enclosed at Annexure) with a request to provide inputs as listed by 20 th 
Feb 2016 Notes on survey frame of NSS employment unemployment survey and queried 
whether it covers households living at work sites, whether any modifications to survey design 
are contemplated to capture short -term migration at destination and/or source.  Response from 
National Sample Survey Organisation, MoPSI is awaited.  

42 
 
In view of the recommendation given by the Standing Committee (SC), Ministry of HUPA shall 
accordingly made a request to MOPSI to take necessary action to collect relevant data about 
education and skills of the labour and out migrants. 
Recommendation (Serial No.14) 
UNOCCUPIED DWELLING UNITS UNDER JNNURM SCHEME 
2.29 The Committee have been informed that under BSUP and IHSDP missions of JNNURM, 
Rs.6243.09 crore including Central share of Rs.3212.19 crore has been spent on constructing 
Dwelling Units under this Mission. Further, altogether 12,48,501 Dwelling Units (DUs) have 
been sanctioned thus far, of which 10,05,949 have been constructed out of which 8,07,656 have 
been occupied by the be neficiaries, which means that 2,28,925 DUs,  i.e., 23% of total 
constructed DUs are unoccupied despite the fact that there are  lakhs of homeless people in 
urban areas who are struggling to get a roof over their head. The Committee are not satisfied by 
the explanation of the Ministry that this is a dynamic/fluctuating figure which keeps changing, 
allotment of DUs is the prerogative of States, etc. The issues of livelihood near the residence, 
infrastructure, transportation, beneficiary share have also been o ther impediments. The 
Committee are of the view that infrastructure development and distant location of the dwelling 
units are the main reasons for non -occupancy. Therefore, they recommend that locality issues 
may be taken into consideration before selecti ng/approving the site for construction. And also 
infrastructure should be developed before offering the occupancy. 
 The Committee desire that all constructed DUs, after overcoming these impediments,  
are disbursed to the needy beneficiaries, at the earliest possible, else it might degenerate owing 
to disuse, for example, what has happened to the dwellings at Faridabad, Haryana which is 
highly regrettable. The unoccupied DUs may also fall in the hands of criminal 
elements/miscreants who might misuse it, ther eby leading to sheer wastage of public 
money/shelter to antisocial activities. The Committee further recommend that the lessons learnt 
from JNNURM scheme in context of unoccupancy may be applied to while constructing houses 
under PMAY(U) as well. 
Reply of the Government 
2.30 It is humbly submitted that in the earlier schemes of the Ministry including JNNURM, the 
States/UTs were invariably advised to go in for in situ slum redevelopment as the first option.  It 
is only where in situ redevelopment was not pos sible, States/UTs were to explore the option of 
relocation.  This focus on in situ redevelopment was essentially to ensure that the livelihoods of 
the beneficiaries was not adversely affected. 
Under the PMAY (Urban) Mission also, the focus continues and th e Ministry gives primary 
consideration to in situ slum redevelopment as the first option rather than relocation.  Even in 
cases where relocation is opted for by the States/UTs, the ULBs/city Governments are advised 
to ensure that livelihood issues are suit ably addressed including by leveraging benefits from 
other schemes of the Ministry, where possible. 
It is also submitted that the identification of beneficiaries and allotment of houses under the 
PMAY (Urban) is the responsibility of the States/UTs concern ed.  Also, at the level of Ministry 
while considering proposals for Central assistance, States/UTs are invariably required to commit 

43 
 
availability of requisite infrastructure in the project proposals approved by them, so that 
possibility of livelihoods being affected is precluded. 
Recommendation (Serial No.15) 
PMAY- (URBAN)- HOUSING FOR ALL BY 2022 
2.31 The Committee note that PMAY -(Urban) launched on 25 th June, 2015, is a novel 
scheme for ensuring housing for all in urban areas by 2022. States/UTs will have  flexibility to 
include in the Mission the cities and areas of their choice. This mission supports construction of 
EWS houses upto 30 sq. meters carpet area with basic civil infrastructure. It defines EWS as a 
family with annual income upto Rs. 3 lakh and LIG as a family with annual income between Rs. 
3 to 6 lakh.  
The Committee further note that this mission has also subsumed 183 project of Rajiv Awas 
Yojna and Rajiv Rinn Yojana under one of its components named Credit Linked Subsidy 
Scheme (CLSS). The obj ective of the PMAY (Urban) Mission is to assist the State/UT 
Governments through their implementing agencies in providing pucca houses to all eligible 
families/beneficiaries by 2022.    As per deposition of the Ministry, the housing shortage is 
estimated at 2 crore by the year 2022. 
The Committee are perplexed to note that the revised PMAY guidelines, defines a beneficiary 
family as "A beneficiary family will comprise husband, wife, unmarried sons or unmarried 
daughters. The beneficiary family should not own a pucca house either in his/her name or in the 
name of any members of his/her family in any part of India to be eligible to receive Central 
assistance under the Mission".  They are of firm view that this stipulation might rule out a 
majority of needy peo ple in urban areas from benefits of this scheme, because most of the 
persons have a house in some form in their village or remote areas from where they have 
migrated. Further the bulk of immigrating population (to the cities), constitute labourers, non 
skilled and semi-skilled workers whose income is much less than the house rent in any decent 
colony of a city. In this scenario, such immigrating population is forced to live in slums and 
squatter settlements, thereby aggravating the problem of slums. Thus, t he entire objective of 
this Mission might be defeated owing to this rule. Therefore, the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should explore the feasibility of doing away/dilute this condition of ” Pucca House". In 
the opinion of the Committee non -allotment of house to a person owning any pucca house or 
land within the limits of that city or any city, might be a better proposition provided that a 
beneficiary is not allotted more than one house anywhere in India, under this mission. 
The Committee also recom mend that the Ministry may put adequate emphasis in popularizing 
this scheme, through visual media, print media, hoarding, etc., so that the intended beneficiaries 
are made aware about this scheme and it becomes a success, in all States/UTs, on the line of  
'Swachh Bharat Abhiyan'. Keeping in view the objective of Housing for All by 2022 in Urban 
areas, the Committee agreeing with the view of the Ministry,  recommend that the BE of Rs. 
4875 crore  allocated for PMAY(U) and its four components may be enhanced  suitably at the 
RE stage so that this mission fructifies. The Committee also express its apprehension that this 
ambitious Mission of "Housing for All by 2022" in urban areas does not meet the same fate as 
that of an earlier popular Mission, namely, "Healt h for All by 2014" for want of necessary funds, 
proper execution of the Scheme at the States/UTs level and generation of its awareness among 

44 
 
intended beneficiaries as well as other stakeholders. The Committee also caution the Ministry to 
monitor regularly and curb the practice that the beneficiary should not sublet their pucca house 
and start living in squatter and slum settlements. 
The Committee further note that National Urban Rental Housing Policy, 2015, is in offing. They 
desire that finalization and implementation of this policy should be expedited so that urban poor 
could afford to stay in good environment and the problem of slums also could be addressed to 
some extent. The Committee are aware that for example, Punjab has 14.02% of slums in the 
urban areas. Out of the total statutory towns, 71 have reported slums in various districts of the 
state and the Punjab government has forwarded the Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) regarding 
construction of Dwelling Units for Slum Dwellers in Bhatinda and other ci ties of Punjab which 
have not been taken cognizance of by the Ministry. Similarly, in case of Haryana as per 2001 
Census, 49 of the Statutory Towns have reported to have slums which have increased to 75 as 
per 2011 Census, i.e., an increase of 26 Statutory  towns reported to have slums mushroomed 
over a decade indicating about 33 % increase of slum population in urban Haryana. The 
Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry should consider all the DPRs received from 
the state of Punjab, Haryana as well as  the other states expeditiously in interest of Urban 
Poor/Slum Dwellers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.32 The observations and concerns raised by the Committee regarding PMAY(U) mission 
have been noted. As regards DPRs pertaining to Bhatinda are concerned, it  is stated that one 
proposal relating to In -situ Slum Redevelopment (ISSR) in Bhatinda for construction of 1280 
EWS houses has been accepted by the Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee in its 
meeting held on 28.04.2016, at a total project cost of R s. 12.80 crore.   Apart from the proposal 
already considered by the CSMC, the State Government of Punjab has also written to the 
Ministry indicating that actions have been initiated at the State level under the different verticals 
of the PMAY(Urban) Mission.  As and when further proposals are received from the State, these 
will be considered in terms of the scheme guidelines. 
It is clarified that no proposal has been received from the State Government of Haryana as on 
08.07.2016.  
MoHUPA has drafted a National Urban Rental Housing Policy, 2016 which will facilitate creation 
of rental housing for various segments of income through Social Rental Housing and Market 
Driven Rental Housing.  The special focus is on affordability of vulnerable groups and urban 
poor through providing such facilities for most vulnerable and need based rental housing for 
special target groups.  The policy also envisages to address the issues related to informal 
sector rental housing and looks forward for institutionalisation of informa l rental housing by 
creating a conducive environment for gradual shift from informal to semi formal and eventual 
merger with formal rental housing market.   
A National Consultation with all stakeholders was held on 04.12.2015 and comments/ 
suggestions received so far, have been incorporated in the National Rental Housing Policy. The 
process of Inter-ministerial consultations is underway. 

45 
 
2.33 For comments of the Committee please see para No. 1.25 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.17) 
 
REAL ESTATE (REGULATION & DEVELOPMENT) ACT, 2016 
2.34 The Committee are happy to note that Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act, 
2016 has come into force, which is expected to help consumers move towards an accountable, 
transparent and fair deals in a sector well known for delays, frauds, overpricing and even worse 
with innocent consumers/buyers. This legislation aims at protecting the interest of buyers by 
creating State level "Real Estate Regulatory Authorities" to whom buyers can complain. The 
authorities have been empowered to punish or prosecute developers. 
The Committee are concerned about the fate of all the Affordable Housing Schemes which have 
been sanctioned during the past years and are yet to be completed and they apprehend that 
those bui lders/promoters who have already started/initiated some work on the above said 
sanctioned projects, might try to get away by stating that this Act has come into force after the 
commencement of their projects. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Mi nistry 
should ensure that this Act is implemented retrospectively with respect to all affordable housing 
projects initiated at any time in the past but not completed. Bringing these affordable housing 
projects within the ambit of this Act will ensure prote ction of interest of Economically Weaker 
Section and Low Income Group home buyers. The Committee also desire the Ministry to ensure 
that this Act is brought into force as soon as possible and the States/UTs Governments may be 
incentivised suitably for enacting their own State Acts on the basis of the Model Central Act and 
for timely constitution of Real Estate Regulatory Authority, as required under this Act. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the Action Taken in this regard at the earliest." 
Reply of the Government 
2.35 The Ministry of HUPA has already notified the relevant sections of the Act for making of 
rules and establishment of Regulatory Authority and Appellate Tribunal with effect from 1 st May, 
2016.  As a consequence, rules under this Act will have to be made within maximum six months 
and the Real Estate Authority and Tribunal established within one year from the above 
mentioned date.  It is further informed that this is not a model Act but a Central law of 
Parliament." 
Recommendation (Serial No.18) 
HINDUSTAN PREFAB LIMITED 
2.36 The Committee note that Hindustan Prefab Limited  was incorporated in 1953. In the  61 
years of its existence, it has built a wide spectrum of civil engineering structures using both 
conventional in-situ as well as prefab techniques.  HPL thus became a fully integrated company 
with modern prefabrication fa cilities. HPL is currently providing Project Management 
Consultancy (PMC) for construction of projects in 15 States awarded to it through various State 
Governments and its agencies. One of the mandates of HPL is dust free construction through 
prefab technologies.  

46 
 
The Committee strongly feel that dust particles continue to largely contribute to rising pollution 
levels, create health problems, particularly for those with respiratory problems, cause 
environmental degradation, including air and water pollution , create host  of problems including 
visibility, create unsafe working conditions and increase costs associated with the loss of 
materials or additional work involved.  The Committee came to know that dust and fine particle 
generation from construction and  demolition activities can be substantially reduced through 
carefully selected mitigation techniques and effective management. The most effective 
technique is to control dust at source and prevent it from becoming airborne. The Committee 
are apprised that HPL uses (a) large panel fully prefab system, composite roofing system using 
precast beams, partial prefab system using cast -in-site walls and precast roofs and totally cast -
in-situ system using small precast elements.  Although HPL has used the large pane l fully 
prefab system, it believes in economizing costs further by using partial prefab system to suit the 
economy of the country. The Committee note that HPL is currently engaged as a Project 
Management Consultant (PMC) for undertaking projects using both  conventional and prefab 
technologies and they have built  a wide spectrum of civil engineering structures and has also 
supplied components for the building industry and the national railways.  
During the recent study tour to Trivandrum in Jan 2016, the Com mittee had observed that HPL 
are executing the Housing projects under Rajiv Awas Yojna with traditional construction 
methods like brick and mortar. The Committee were surprised to note that they were not using 
any prefab technology for construction of thos e housing projects which was desired from them. 
In-fact the Committee are of the considered opinion that large paneled buildings can be built 
very fast and this could be one of the methods for solving the housing problem in the country. 
These buildings do not require elaborate up -keep expenditure.  The use of precast concrete 
elements for roofing and flooring can greatly accelerate the pace of construction and make site 
supervision relatively easier, resulting in saving of essential raw materials, thus econo mizing on 
the overall construction costs. 
The Committee strongly recommend that Ministry of HUPA should make concerted efforts and 
strive proactively to complete all the construction projects without cost and time overrun by 
adopting Prefab technologies an d minimizing environmental consequences including dust 
pollution. They, therefore, desire the Ministry to create awareness and popularize these 
technologies through seminars, video conferencing and advertisements. The Committee 
expects the Hindustan Prefab  Ltd. to act as a technology hub and incubation centre for prefab 
technologies. 
The Committee are well aware that there is a large scale construction in cities like Dubai, 
Shanghai, New York, London, Singapore and Beijing, etc., and the sky scrapers come u p within 
no time while being dust free and completely safe. The Committee appreciate such dust free, 
eco-friendly technology which leads to such expeditious construction. The Committee are of the 
firm view that India should also adopt such dust free techno logy in all their Government 
constructions. They strongly recommend that henceforth, all Government buildings, where the 
Government is a vendor, should adopt prefab technology, use of precast elements for roofing 
and flooring as a role model. This will gre atly accelerate the pace of construction and minimise 
adverse environmental consequences including heavy reduction in dust pollution. They also 
desire that the Government should be pro -active in introducing this technology and replace 
traditional construction method like brick and mortar. The Ministry should also take care about 
the use of eco -friendly technologies at the time of demolition activities by controlling dust at 
source preventing it from becoming air borne. 
 
 

47 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.37 Hindustan Prefab Limited provides PMC for construction projects using both 
conventional and prefab technologies. The decision to use the technologies rests with the 
clients. However HPL on its part has been advocating adoption of prefab technologies in the  
respective projects. Based on aggressive initiative for propagating prefab technology and with 
the support of the Ministry, the acceptability of the users has gone up significantly in recent past. 
HPL has been receiving several requests from different stakeholders for incorporating the same 
in their projects. HPL is executing pre -engineered building project for construction of hostel and 
staff quarters for NIT, Jote in Arunachal Pradesh where pre -engineered structure is made of 
Steel Members with EPS Panel being provided as walls and PUF insulated sandwich panels are 
used as corrugated roof sheets. In the current year also HPL has taken up construction of Motor 
Training Institute at Rewa for MPPWD and police camp at Kolkata for Coal India Limited using 
prefab technology. The organization has also used prefab technologies in works for construction 
of over 10500 schools toilets under “Swachh Bharat Abhiyaan”. The company is hopeful of 
getting major prefab works in the coming year. 
Being the premier organization in Prefab, HPL has been actively taking up Government 
agencies, manufacturers and other stakeholders in the sector regularly towards promotion of 
prefab sector.  
Towards sensitizing the stakeholders on the emerging technologies for mass housing to support 
„Housing For All by 2022‟, a number of events including conferences, round tables, exhibitions 
were organized during 2015-16 which witnessed a wide participation from all stakeholders. HPL 
has also put up demonstration units in various exhibitions in Delhi, Bhopal and Jaipur towards 
showcasing prefab technology as an option in the ambitious agenda of „Housing For All by 
2022‟. HPL intends to organise such seminars and workshops at regular intervals to create 
awareness towards increasing use of prefab technology in construction industry. 
Besides a housing technological park inside the office complex is being set up consisting of 
sample flats displaying and promoting different technologies like precast, EPS, GRFC, LGS etc. 
which are economical as well as reduces the construction time drastically. This will also act as a 
technology hub for prefab technologies. 
Dust emissions from construction and other civil engineering activities are common in case of 
construction through conventi onal technology. The problem can be reduced substantially by 
adopting prefab technology in construction wherein the manufacturing process is done in 
controlled environment of factory and only a small component is executed at site. Prefab 
techniques are env ironmental friendly way of building with optimum use of materials, recycling 
of waste products, less noise and dust etc. 
HPL’s efforts towards prefab development as under:  
Being the premier organization in Prefab, HPL is mandated by its Memorandum of Asso ciation 
to perform the distinct role for advocacy and promotion of prefab technology. During the year 
2015-16, HPL has been engaged towards fulfilment of its role as a sectoral leader in prefab 
sector:  
III. Through advocacy role towards becoming a knowledge hub for the sector.  
IV. Through taking up construction projects using prefab and other emerging 
technologies. 

48 
 
I. Through advocacy role 
The Prefab Sector is going to play a very significant role for the success of the Government‟s 
Mission of “Housing for All by 2022” towards addressing the challenge of construction of over 
two crores houses in the next seven years since achieving such high levels of housing delivery 
would not be feasible through conventional construction technologies alone. Towards 
sensitizing th e stakeholders on the emerging technologies for mass housing, a number of 
events including conferences, round tables, exhibitions were organized with a wide participation 
from all stakeholders which gave a fillip of the sector towards contributing to the  mission of 
“Housing for All by 2022”.  
c. Seminars on Prefab 
 
 HPL with the support of BMTPC organised a seminar on the Role of Prefab Sector in 
“Housing for All by 2022” on 12th October, 2015.   The seminar show cased large 
number of emerging technologies, which could be effectively implemented for increasing 
housing delivery in our country besides providing a platform to the stakeholders to share 
the experience of these emerging technologies.  
 The next event in the series was held on 22nd January, 2016 wherein the focus was on 
RCC precast construction, which has emerged as one of the most appropriate solutions 
for mass housing. The interactive session was followed  
by site visit to enable the stak eholders in the prefab sector to have a first -hand 
experience on the actual construction and the fabrication units deploying the precast 
technologies on a very large scale.   
 To address lack of awareness amongst planners, architects, engineers and user 
community at large etc. on standardization in building dimension and components 
coupled with absence of the technologies, a Brain Storming Session was held on 8th 
February, 2016 towards compiling an action plan for possible policy framework that 
could help the growth of prefab sector.  
 On 11 th March 2016 CBRI and HPL have jointly organised a round table on “Structural 
issues in prefab housing” at Roorkee for detailed deliberations on the structural issues in 
prefab housing and works towards resolving the issues.  
These seminars received a very enthusiastic response from the participants and HPL has been 
able to create awareness towards the need of synergetic action by all stakeholders of the 
emerging technologies for achieving the Govt.‟s goal of „Housing For All by 2022‟.  
d. Exhibitions on Prefab 
Besides above HPL has also participated in exhibitions for demonstration of prefab 
technology: 
 HPL had set up a demonstration unit at the India International Trade Fair – 2015 
showcasing prefab technology as an option in the ambitious agenda of „Housing F or All 
by 2022‟ from 14th to 28th November 2015.  Various innovative technologies and cost 
effective and sustainable building materials were also displayed.   
 Similar display was also made in the Jaipur Municipalika Meet from 9th to 11th 
December 2015 wher e HPL also bagged the “Award of Excellence in Best outdoor 
pavilion” category. 
 
HPL participated in 5 th Vigyan Mela in Bhopal showcasing its activities in science & technology 
and Sustainable growth with the theme of „Swachh Bharat‟ from 19th to 22nd February 2016. 
 A permanent exhibition displaying various prefab technology options for supporting the 
„Housing For All‟ is being put up in HPL‟s office at Jangpura, New Delhi. 

49 
 
 
II. Through taking up major construction projects  
HPL has significantly increased i ts focus on prefab activities in the last one year. Besides 
playing its advocacy role for prefab, HPL has also continued to pursue more projects to be 
undertaken using prefab and other emerging technologies in the projects awarded to HPL. For 
this the orga nization has taken up with various potential clients for adoption of prefab 
technologies in their respective projects. Based on these efforts, HPL is executing pre -
engineered building project for construction of hostel and staff quarters for NIT, Jote in 
Arunachal Pradesh for a cost of nearly Rs. 60 cr. Pre -engineered structure is made of Steel 
Member with EPS Panel being provided as walls and PUF insulated sandwich panels are used 
as corrugated roof sheets. 
Further HPL has used partial prefab technology in construction of nearly 10500 toilets in schools 
under Swatch Bharat Abhiyaan across the country for various CPSEs under their CSR with a 
cost of approx. Rs. 200 cr. where construction up to plinth level has been taken up through 
conventional method and su perstructure is constructed by using Prefab Sandwich Concrete 
Panels & PPGI roof with MS doors.  
Besides discussions with many State Level Agencies like Jharia Rehab Development Authority, 
Andhra Pradesh State Housing Board, Government of Bihar, etc, and P ublic Sector 
undertakings like Central Coal Fields Limited, Northern Coal Fields etc. are already underway. 
HPL expects to undertake significant quantum of housing projects using prefab technology.  
By organizing these seminars and exhibitions, HPL has bee n able to develop for itself in the 
prefab sector, where it is now recognized as an Industry leader, bringing together all 
stakeholders and leading the sector.  
 
E-Course 
In order to create awareness and capacity building on new technologies, Govt. of India 
has proposed to develop E-course highlighting the need for new and emerging technologies. In 
line with this, HPL has undertaken the responsibility to develop a module on  „Prefabricated 
Concrete Construction‟ in association with IGNOU.  
Prefab Technology park in HPL Premises 
As a step towards promoting the prefab technology, a „Prefab Technology Park‟ is being set up 
in HPL premises, New Delhi for disseminating information on emerging construction technology, 
sustainable building material for cost effective and faster construc tion. Spread in the area of 
approx. two acres, the technology park will provide a platform to various Innovative 
prefabricated technologies namely PEB, Monolithic EPS, Polypropylene Honeycomb, Precast 
Technology, Production on Site Precast Concrete, PUF Wa ll & Roof Pane, GFRG, K -Span 
Technology, LGSF, Monolithic Concrete Shear Wall, EPS with Speed Floor, LGS and Wooden 
Construction have been demonstrated at one platform in the Technology Park.  
A brochure giving a glimpse of the technologies showcased in the technology Park is attached. 
Future Plans for prefab sector.  
HPL shall continue to enhance its focus on prefab sector towards making HPL a predominantly 
prefab company through its sectoral leadership and projects to be undertaken through the 
following activities: 
 

50 
 
 Taking up PMCs for prefab works; 
 Leveraging CSR for promotion of Prefab, e.g. toilets in schools etc.; 
 To play an active role in Central Govt. agenda of “Providing Housing For All by 2022”; 
 Playing advocacy role through associations with industr y bodies, professional 
organizations, State Governments, BIS, etc;  
 Exploring options for getting into manufacturing of housing components through JV 
route.;  
 Through skill upgradation in prefab sector in association with various academic and 
training institutions. ; 
 Taking up effective role in disaster mitigation, transit shelter, and rehabilitation colonies 
through prefab housing in association with the Ministry of HUPA, NDMA, SDMAs and 
State Governments.   
 
Eco-Friendly Technologies 
Prefab construction is recommended for energy efficiency and sustainable construction and the 
use of prefab/precast technology can easily increase the construction pace and make site 
supervision relatively easier, resulting in saving of essential construction raw material and yet 
cost effective.  Traditional construction methods require extra materials that lead to increased 
waste.  However, since prefabricated sub -assemblies are constructed in a factory, extra 
materials can be recycled in -house.  This is a considerable imp rovement over sending waste 
directly to a landfill from a traditional construction site.  Also, the controlled environment of a 
factory allows for more accurate construction, tighter joints and better air filtration, which in turn 
allows for better wall insulation and an increase in energy efficiency. 
Prefab construction is famous for its capacity to use recycled products.  The recycled or 
reclaimed projects are mostly used in interior decoration of any prefab construction.  Using the 
surplus steel, metals or CDW (Construction and Demolition Waste) for recycling, the prefab 
construction scores extra pollution free goals.  Entire prefab construction takes place in the 
closed factory giving complete freedom to adapt the recycling process for maximum times. 
Use of prefab technologies can be delivered in a much shorter duration with better quality, being 
environmental friendly.  They are eco -friendly as cement and other raw materials used at site 
are reduces dust level which is normally associated with constructi on resulting in reduction of 
dust, air pollution and increases the air quality for human consumption." 
2.38 For comments of the Committee please see para No. 1.31 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
 
  

51 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW 
OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.8) 
BUDGET ALLOCATION FOR DAY-NULM 
3.1 A scheme, 'Deendayal Antodaya Yojana  (DAY)- National Urban Livelihoods Mission  
(NULM)' was launched by Ministry of HUPA in the 12 th Five Yea r Plan  replacing the then,  
'Swarn Jayanti Shahari Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY)'. Budget Estimate under this scheme for 2016 -
17 is Rs. 300.00 crore as against RE(2015 -16) of  Rs. 261.30 crore. The Committee note that 
during 2013-14, Rs. 720.45 crore and in 2014-15, Rs. 697.34 crore were utilized and during last 
year i.e., 2015 -16, the Ministry could spent Rs. 239.72 crore as against RE of Rs. 250 crore 
which amount to 95.89% expenditure. The Committee fail to understand as why this flagship 
scheme which has seven components to address,  is receiving such a meager amount and why 
the allocation under DAY -NULM has been reduced by more than 65% for the year 2016 -17 in 
comparison to 2013 -14 and 2014 -15. In fact the allocations to a particular sector/scheme is 
indicative of the underlying policy and thrust areas of Government. On one hand providing 
employment is one of the focal areas of the Government and on the other hand the allocation to 
the concerned area is being drastically slashed from 1003.00 crore in 2014 -15 to a mere Rs. 
510.00 crore in 2015-16 and further allocation stands at a mere Rs.300 crore for 2016 -17. This 
only reflects the vague and confused strategy of Government in dealing with such a vital 
parameter of the economy. The Committee exhort the Ministry to get the support for this 
scheme in terms of greater resource allocation so that multifarious activities to be undertaken in 
this premier scheme are facilitated and encouraged in the interest of millions of urban 
unemployed people. 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.2 Total allocation for the DAY-NULM has been downsized to Rs 300.00 crores in 2016-17, 
as against Rs 510.00 crores in 2015-16 and Rs 1003.00 crores in 2014-15 due to huge unspent 
balance lying with the States/UTs.  Around Rs 735 crores is the estimated unspe nt balance 
available with the States as on 1 April 2016.  Thus, including the budgetary allocation of Rs 300 
crore during 2016-17, a total of Rs 1029 crore is available with States for spending during 2016-
17.  
Besides, the share of central funding under D AY-NULM has been reduced from 75% to 60% 
(except Non – NER States and 3 Himalayan States) which has reduced requirement of central 
funds.     
 
 
 
 

52 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.10) 
SLUGGISH/NO PROGRESS FOR SOME STATES UNDER DAY-NULM-COMPONENT- 
SHELTER FOR URBAN HOMELESS (SUH)  
3.3 The Committee observe that one among the seven components of "Deendayal 
Antyodaya Yojana (DAY) -NULM" is 'Scheme of Shelter for Urban Homeless (SUH)'. The very 
objective and purpose of SUH is to ensure availability and access of the Urb an homeless 
population to permanent shelters equipped with the basic infrastructure facilities like water 
supply, sanitation, safety and security. The No. of shelters sanctioned under NULM, since 
inception of the Mission, is 770 in 20 States against which only 270 shelters are operational in 
as few as 9 States. In remaining 11 states, namely, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Himachal 
Pradesh, Jharkhand, Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala, Odisha, Punjab, Uttarakhand and Uttar 
Pradesh none of the SUH is reported to be ope rational and thus there is a shortfall of 500 SUH 
at the time of examination of DFG (20 16-17) of the Ministry.  
 The Committee are not satisfied with the explanation of the Ministry that construction of 
new shelters involves tendering process, constructio n phase, engaging staff for management 
the project is to be decided by the States/UTs and the Ministry have no say in this regard except 
for pursuing the States/UTs by writing letters to CMs and CSs of all States/UTs for timely 
completion of the sanctioned projects. 
 The Committee feel that the progress of the SUH scheme is extremely sluggish in the 
remaining 11 States in which SUH have been sanctioned. On the other hand rest of the 16 
States/UTs have also not sanctioned any project proposals for SUH till 3 1st March, 2016. In 
spite of 29 State level workshops, 20, video conferences with States/UTs for effective 
implementation of NULM including SUH and writing a number of letters, 16 States/UTs have not 
responded at all, 20 States responded and 11 States out of those 20 States are  not showing 
even a single shelter operational even after more than two and a half years time has passed 
from the day of implementation of the SUH.  
 The Committee have come across many such instances during examination of the DFGs 
of Ministry of HUPA where various schemes/programmes, namely, PMAY(U)-HFA(U) with all its 
four verticals/components or whether it is conducting survey for identification of street vendors, 
issuing them ID cards, constitution of Vendor Committee, etc., or ev en implementation of 
National Policy and its  various aspects by States/UTs, there is no legal provision(s) or a full 
proof mechanism/safeguard available with the Central Ministry, in the instant case, Ministry of 
HUPA with respect to getting their Central Sector/Centrally Sponsored Schemes implemented in 
a time bound manner by all the States/UTs who have actually got the projects sanctioned by the 
Centre/Ministry of HUPA. The Committee has been apprised that so much so the rules of some 
Schemes/Acts/Policies are yet to be framed by many States/UTs, without which the survey of 
street vendors, is held up. Thus, in the absence of any such legal provisions/full proof 
mechanism in the MoUs/MoAs with regard to timelines and commitment to adhere to the 
decided tim eline for implementation/completion of any Project/Scheme of the Ministry, many 
States/UTs either sleep over various aspects of implementation or proceed too sluggishly and 
half-heartedly in implementation of the sanctioned scheme in their States/UTs. The Ministry has 
no say with regard to getting time -bound implementation of their own sponsored schemes in 

53 
 
which they own 50% or even more financial powers/share to contribute. The Committee find that 
release of funds depend on Utilization Certificate but do n ot fulfil the purpose of implementation 
of schemes at ground level. In fact in few cases unspent balances of previous releases are with 
States/UTs but no progress is reported in implementation. 
 The Committee, in view of the above, and considering the professed helplessness of the 
Ministry in this regard,  strongly recommend that the Ministry should constitute a High Power 
Action Committee of Experts (HPACE) and the prime task of the HPACE should be to explore 
and suggest the  remedial ways and means and sa feguards including legal, financial and 
administrative powers and its proper execution by the Ministry concerned for getting their 
Central Sector Schemes as well as Centrally Sponsored Schemes, implemented by the 
States/UTs in a  time -bound manner. The tim elines must be decided fairly by the Central 
Ministry concerned as the propounder and controller of the Schemes, in consultation with 
respective participating States/UTs, so that the Ministry is not feeling 'Helpless' with regard to 
the timely completion of their sanctioned projects as well as achievement of the set financial and 
physical targets for a financial years, by all States/UTs. The HPACE may also analyze the 
reasons for non -implementation of the schemes, State -wise, explore remedies by addressing 
those issues for those States/UTs which simply sleep over the implementation/unable to 
implement various provisions of the Central Acts/Policy in a time -bound manner which in turn 
becomes detrimental for the timely implementation of various schemes/program mes of the 
Ministry, as is in the case of Street Vendors Act, 2014 and setting up of SUHs. The Committee 
desire that the Ministry should pursue the matter with the concerned States/UTs at the highest 
level and impress upon them the utility of the Schemes t o their States/UTs. The Committee 
would like to be apprised about the action taken by the Ministry in this regard at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.4 Apart from NULM, the States/UTs are also running shelters for urban homeless from 
their own funds/schemes.  
 Since inception of the Mission, 815 shelters have been sanctioned under NULM in 20 
States. Out of which, 336 shelters are operational in 13 States.  Rest of the shelters are in 
different stages of construction. Out of 14 States/UTs where shelters have not been sanctioned, 
6 States/UTs namely Goa, Sikkim, A & N Islands, Chandigarh, D & N Haveli and Daman & Diu 
have informed that no shelters are require d under DAY -NULM. Rest of the 8 States have 
informed that they are under process of sanctioning the shelters under NULM. 
In regard to the recommendation made by the Committee regarding constitution of High Power 
Action Committee of Experts (HPACE), it is m entioned that the Governing Council of DAY -
NULM is in effect a HPACE.  In the wake of restructuring of various Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes, progress regarding implementation of flagship Missions is being reviewed regularly in 
NITI Aayog.  Also, mechanism r egarding monitoring Departmental Action Plan of respective 
Ministries is being put in place by NITI Aayog.  In view of this, adding another tier of Committee 
like HPACE does not appear necessary at this stage.  

54 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE 
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.16) 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES WELFARE HOUSING ORGANISATION (CGEWHO)  
4.1 The objective of CGEWHO is to undertake social welfare schemes on 'No Profit -No 
Loss' basis, for the Central Government Employees serving and retired both, spouses of the 
deceased Central Government employees and employees in service of this Society, and 
spouses in case of deceased employees, by inter -alia promoting the construction o f houses, 
and providing all possible help and required inputs, to achieve this object. 
The Committee further note that organisation derives its funds from non -plan expenditure of the 
Ministry and the proposed budget for the year 2013 -14 onwards was Rs. 10 lakh per year. The 
Committee was informed that the beneficiaries under the CGEWHO housing schemes are 
categorized under three Priority lists, i.e., Priority- I, II & III and are accorded priority in allotment 
accordingly, thereby autonomous bodies of the G overnment, are kept in 2 nd Priority. Lok Sabha 
Secretariat and Rajya Sabha Secretariat being the Autonomous Bodies are also kept under the 
2nd Priority.  
The Committee are of the opinion that the Central Govt. Employees, after retirement, have to 
vacate their Govt. allotted flats and have to look for an alternate home thereafter. CGEWHO 
housing schemes can certainly provide an opportunity to own a first home and support retiring 
Govt. employees/ autonomous bodies/PSUs employees in their old age which is a g ood welfare 
measure.  
The Committee are aware that a number of complaints/representations have been addressed to 
the Chief of CGEWHO by the employees of Lok Sabha Secretariat/Rajya Sabha Secretariat 
whenever they were deprived of a chance to apply under th e announced scheme of the 
CGEWHO in the NCR of Delhi and other places during last decade and half, as the Scheme 
was opened for Priority-I category only, and all their representations were rejected by the office 
of CGEWHO on the ground of ineligibility under Priority-I.  
The Committee are of the considered view that the Constitution of India brings the Indian 
Parliament on equal basis as the Executive, viz., the Central Government under the 
Parliamentary Democratic System which also confers all financial po wers to Lok 
Sabha/Parliament who authorise the Executive/Central Government to incur expenses from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. The Committee, therefore, unanimously recommend that the 
Ministry should ensure that all the three Secretariats of the Parlia ment, namely, all the 
employees of President Estate Secretariat, Rajya Sabha Secretariat and Lok Sabha Secretariat, 
should be given equal treatment as that of the Central Government employees and should be 
included under Priority -I category at the earliest , under appraisal of the progress in the 
implementation of the recommendation, to the Committee." 
 

55 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2 The matter of including employees of all the three Secretariats of the Parliament, viz. 
President Estate Secretariat, Lok Sabha  Secretariat and  Rajya Sabha Secretariat in the 
eligibility-I Category of CGEWHO will be taken up as per existing Rules and Regulation of 
CGEWHO. 
4.3 For comments of the Committee please see para No. 1.28 of Chapter-I of the Report. 
  

56 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
ARE STILL AWAITED 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
                                               Pinaki Misra   
23December, 2016             Chairperson,                                                                                                   
02 Pausa, 1936 (Saka)                     Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
 

57 
 
ANNEXURE -I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2016-2017) 
 
MINUTES OF THE 5th  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY,            
23rd DECEMBER, 2016. 
 
The Committee sat from 1430 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee  Room 'D' 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Pinaki Misra      - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Sh. Ram Charan Bohra 
3. Sh.Ramesh Bidhuri 
4. Sh. Dilip Mansukhlal Gandhi 
5. Sh. Maheish Girri 
6. Sh. R. Gopalakrishnan 
7. Sh. Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
8. Sh. Charanjeet Singh Rori 
9. Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi 
10. Sh. Alok Sanjar 
11. Sh. Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
12. Sh. Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
RAJYA SABHA 
13. Sh. R. S. Bharthi 
14. Sh. Anil Desai 
15. Sh. Ajay Sancheti 
16. Sh. Mahesh Poddar 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha   - Director 
3.  Ms. Amita Walia   - Additional Director 

58 
 
 
2. ****  ****  ****  ****  ****  
3.  ****  ****  ****  ****  **** 
4. ****  ****  ****  ****  ****  
5. Thereafter, Hon'ble Chairperson and the Members  of the Committee considered 
and adopted  Action Taken Reports on Demands for Grants (2016-17) of Ministries of 
Urban Development and Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation unanimously without any 
changes. 
 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the Committee has been 
kept.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
**** These portions of the Minutes do not relate to the Report of the Committee. 
  

59 
 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
                                            [Vide para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOV ERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TENTH REPORT OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBANDEVELOPLMENT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
I.  Total number of recommendations                                                    18 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government:                  15 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4 ,5, 6 ,7, 9, 11,12,13, 14,15,17 and 18   
Percentage to total recommendations                                                        (83.33%) 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:                                  02 
Recommendation Nos.8 and 10 
Percentage to total recommendations                                                  (11.11%)  
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of             01                          
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation No. 16 
Percentage to total recommendations                                        (5.55%) 
                             
V.          Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final                    
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
Recommendation No.             Nil    
Percentage to total recommendations                                                                (0 %) 