-: 1 :- 
 
 
           STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
      (2014-2015) 
                               SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
   MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN POVERTY ALLEVIATION 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS(2015-2016)  
  
 
(Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Urban Development on Demands for Grants (2015-2016) ) of the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation) 
 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
      
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
8 


-: 2 :- 
 
 
                        
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2014-2015) 
                                
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
                      MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN POVERTY ALLEVIATION 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
 
(Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Urban Development on Demands for Grants (2015-2016) ) of the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation) 
   
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.08.2015 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.08.2015 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, Shravana, 1937 (Saka) 


-: 3 :- 
 
 
   C.U.D No.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2012 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and printed by the Indian Press, Delhi-110033. 

-: 4 :- 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.…………………..........................….. (iii) 
INTRODUCTION .....................................………………………………………. (v) 
 
REPORT  
CONTENTS 
CHAPTER I  
REPORT  
1 
CHAPTER II  
Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
11  
CHAPTER III Observations /Recommendations which the  
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies 
40 
CHAPTER IV 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 
41 
CHAPTER V Observations /Recommendations  in respect of 
which final  replies of the Government are still 
awaited 
46 
ANNEXURES  
*I. Minutes not appended with the cyclostyled copy.   
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Report of the Committee (16 th  Lok Sabha)  
 
 
 
  

-: 5 :- 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2014-2015) 
Shri Pinaki Misra         -        Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA  
2.  Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3.  Shri Ramesh Bidhuri  
4.  Shri Ram Charan Bohra 
5.  Shri Dushyant Chautala  
6.  Shri Ashok Chavan 
7.  Shri Dilip  Kumar Gandhi  
8.  Shri Maheish Girri 
9.  Shri R.Gopalakrishnan  
10.  Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua  
11.  Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi 
12.  Smt. Poonam Mahajan  
13.  Shri P.C. Mohan 
14.  Shri Kesineni Nani  
15.  Shri K. Parasuraman 
16.  Shri C. R. Patil  
17.  Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil 
18.  Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale  
19.  Prof. K. V. Thomas 
20.  Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma  
21.  Dr. Dharam Vira 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
22.  Smt. Vandana Chavan  
23.  Shri Husain Dalwai 
24.  Shri Anil Desai  
25.  Shri Parvez Hashmi  
26.  Shri Mukul Roy 
27.  Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna 
28 Shri Satish Sharma 
29.  Shri C.P. Thakur  
30.  Shri S.Thangavelu 
31.  Shri Khekiho Zhimomi  
 
 
 

-: 6 :- 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi         -           J oint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S Malha        - Director 
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha        - Additional Director 
4. Smt. K. Rangamani N.       - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

-: 7 :- 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Urb an Development (2014-
2015) having been authorized by the Committee to su bmit the Report on their behalf, 
present the Eighth Report (16 th  Lok Sabha) on the action taken by the Government o n 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in the S ixth Report (16 th  Lok Sabha) of 
the Standing Committee on Urban Development on “Dem ands for Grants (2015-2016) " 
of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation. 
2. The Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the table of Rajya 
Sabha on 27 th  April, 2015.  Replies of the Government to all the  recommendations 
contained in the Report were received in June, 2015.  
3. The Standing Committee on Urban Development cons idered and adopted this 
Report at their sitting held on 4 th  August,  2015. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Governmen t on the recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha)  of the Committee is given at 
Annexure-II. 
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, t he 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in 
the body of the Report. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
              PINAKI MISRA 
 5  August, , 2015 
                                          
                         Chairperson,               
14 Shravana ,1937 (Saka )                 Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
 
 (v)  
  

-: 8 :- 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Deve lopment (2014-15) 
deals with the action taken by the Government on th e recommendations 
contained in their Sixth Report (Sixeenth Lok Sabha ) on Demands for Grants 
(2015-16) of the Ministry of  Housing and Urban Pov erty Alleviation which was 
presented to Lok Sabha on  27 April, 2015. 
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of 
all      22 recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been categorized 
as follows: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been a ccepted by the 
Government.          (Chapter-II): 
Recommendation serial Nos. 1,2,3,5,6,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,22               
               (Total -19) 
(Chapter-II) 
(ii) Recommendations /Observations, which the Commi ttee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government's   replies. (Chapter-III): 
Recommendation serial No. Nil        (Total -0) 
(Chapter-III) 
(iii) Recommendations /Observations, in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter-IV): 
Recommendation serial Nos. 4, 7 and 21                           (Total -3) 
(Chapter-IV) 
(iv) Recommendations /Observations, in respect of w hich final replies of the 
Government are, still awaited                                                          (Chapter-V): 
          (Total -Nil) 
(Chapter-V) 

-: 9 :- 
 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that specific replies to t he comments contained in 
Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished to them a t the earliest and in any case, 
not later than three months of the presentation of this Report. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action tak en by the Government on 
some of their recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.    
Recommendation (Serial No.1) 
 
NEED TO ARREST UNDER UTILIZATION OF BUDGETARY ALLOC ATION FOR 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN POVERTY ALLEVIATION:  
1.5 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviat ion has been entrusted with the 
implementation of programmes of Urban Housing, Urba n Employment and Urban 
Poverty alleviation. The Committee observe that  st arting from the year 2010-11 till 
2014-15, there has been a huge difference between t he projections and allocations at 
BE stage. The allocations made at BE stage have bee n reduced at RE stage. The 
actual expenditure is also less in comparison to th e allocation at RE stage. The overall 
allocation at BE Stage for the year 2014-15 i.e. Rs .6008.62 crore has been reduced to 
Rs. 3413.44 Crore. The reduction is Rs. 2595.18 cro re. The main reasons for such 
reduction adduced by the Ministry are because of ab ysmal performance under BSUP 
and IHSDP components of JNNURM, Rajiv Rinn Yojana, Rajiv Awas Yojana and 
NULM. So far as JNNURM is concerned the State Gover nments could not perform well 
because of cost escalation of the projects. In spit e of regular follow up and constant 
guidance by the Ministry, State Governments took ti me to take approval of competent 
authorities for implementation of NULM. Empanelment  of Skill Training Provider (STPS) 
and Certification Agencies required issue of RFP, a ssessment of technical bids, etc., 
which are time consuming process.  Under RAY during  the year 2014-15 few proposals 
were considered for approval. The scheme of Rajiv R inn Yojana did not take off due to 
issues associated with lending to the informal sect ors, absence of clear land titles, 
authenticated income certifications, non-availabili ty of houses at the rates prescribed 
under the scheme, etc. The BE for the year 2015-16 is Rs. 5634.47 crore both for plan 
and non-plan. The Committee observe that there has been reduction of Rs. 374.15 
crore during the year 2015-16 in comparison to BE of 2014-15.  
 Keeping in view the wide gaps between the projecti on and allocation and 
between the BE and RE during the last five years an d consequential impact on major 
schemes of the Ministry, the Committee in their ear lier reports on Demands for Grants 
have been recommending the Ministry to tone up its machinery for meaningful utilization 

-: 10 :- 
 
of the resources. The Committee observe that the ac tual demand survey is to be done 
by the Ministry. They  propose to be in touch with those States which have been 
extremely pro-active  in Housing & Urban sector to send the housing action plan and 
planning to build partnership with either private s ector, the ULBs, the development 
authorities and some public authorities which  have  land and would try to take a pro-
active dynamic approach and then prepare the plan. After that it will release the fund. 
The Committee are constrained to note that nine mon ths have already been passed 
since the last budget i.e., 2014-15, the Government  has not moved an inch in achieving 
its objectives in any of its laudable schemes. Ther efore, instead of increasing the 
allocation, the Ministry of Finance has reduced the allocation for Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Poverty Alleviation. At this pace, the Commit tee are apprehensive about the 
implementation of their ambitious schemes like Hous ing for All by 2022, NULM, Rajiv 
Rinn Yojna etc. Therefore, they strongly desire the  Ministry to undertake advance 
planning and concrete action so that there is 100% utilization of allocation and the 
ambitious schemes are translated into reality. The Committee may be apprised of the 
action taken in this regard." 
 
1.6 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"It is stated that in 2015-16, there is an allocati on of Rs.5083 crore for housing 
schemes. Though the Cabinet has approved the scheme , the scheme is yet to be 
launched for finalisation of details as directed by  the Cabinet. While the Ministry has 
taken all steps in anticipation of the launch of th e mission, there is a possibility that the 
State and UT Governments who implement the scheme m ay not be able to forward 
adequate proposals in accordance with the yet to be  issued scheme guidelines in the 
year. Since, this is a new mission with different g uidelines, it will take time to percolate 
down the guidelines up to the City level. Thereafte r, Cities and State Governments 
would be able to plan and take up projects. By the time projects are taken up by the 
States for implementation under Housing For All (HF A), considerable period of the 
financial year would have been completed and making  100 % utilization of funds 
allocation would be extremely difficult. But it is felt that utilization of funds would improve 
from next year onwards. Nevertheless, Ministry will  make all the efforts to utilize 
available resources. As advance planning, Ministry will request States/UTs to select 
cities and prepare the Housing for All action plan." 
 
1.7 The Committee are appreciative of the fact that  the Ministry have taken all 
steps in anticipation of the launch of the Mission and are in agreement that with 
different guidelines under the new Mission, 100% ut ilization of funds may not be 
possible.  The Committee hope that utilization of f unds would improve from next 
year onwards. They, however, desire that the Minist ry should impress upon the 
States/UTs to improve upon the current situation so  that the ambitious schemes 
of the Government are put to reality.  
 

-: 11 :- 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.4) 
RENTAL HOUSING 
 
1.8 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee observe that Sardar Patel National M ission for Urban Housing 
envisages creation of sufficient number of rental houses which can be made available to 
such homeless migrants and destitute. This rental housing is proposed to be primarily of 
2 types (a) for families and (b) for single person –dormitory.  It is envisaged that a house 
upto 30 sq. mtr area for families and single room h ostels/dormitories be constructed in 
sufficient numbers to be let out by the Urban Local  Bodies or other agencies including 
Private Sector to people who cannot afford to buy a house initially. The Committee have 
been informed that this scheme has been approved by  the Cabinet and the details are 
being fine-tuned by a Committee of Ministers.  The New Mission will be launched as 
soon as details are fine tuned. The Committee have been further informed that as part 
of new Mission, Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation will request Department 
of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP) to impres s industries to make provision for 
accommodation facilities for their employees throug h rental housing or Rent to own 
schemes.  Ministry of Labour and State Governments will also be requested to build 
rental housing stock under their welfare funds.  Su ch stock of housing created by the 
corporate entities would be rented to new employees who do not have their own houses 
in the city.  Ministry of Corporate Affairs will al so be requested to include ‘housing for 
their employees’ as one of the activities under the  corporate social responsibilities.   In 
the above backdrop, the Committee hope that the Min istry would complete all the 
formalities at the earliest and implement the same in letter and spirit. The Committee 
would also wish to reiterate their earlier recommen dation given in their 2 
nd  Report on 
Demands for Grants (2014-15) that such houses be re nted to the individuals/ families 
for either ten years or till becoming a house owner  whichever is earlier. Necessary 
provisions may be made in the new Mission accordingly." 
1.9 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"It is brought to the attention of the Committee th at Rental housing is not a component 
of the Housing for All mission as approved by the C ompetent Authority. In view of the 
factual position submitted above, it is submitted t hat it is not possible to make provision 
for Rental housing in the new mission for Housing for All." 
 
1.10 During examination of Demands for Grants(2014- 15), the Committee had 
observed that Rental Housing a sub-component was to  be included in the 
proposed new mission of Housing for All by 2022. Ho wever, the Committee are 
shocked to note that now Rental Housing is not a co mponent of the Mission 

-: 12 :- 
 
Housing for All by 2022 as approved by the Competen t Authority. Therefore, it is 
not possible to make provision in the new Mission f or Housing for All. The 
Committee understand that it is not possible for all the urban inhabitants to own a 
house. People migrate from rural areas to urban are as in search of jobs. In many 
places, the wage labourers working in factories and industries reside in a pathetic 
conditions. It was the proposed  aim of the Governm ent to provide a house upto 
30 square metre area for families and single room h ostels/dormitories for single 
persons. Keeping in view the plight of homeless mig rants/destitutes in urban 
areas and the promise of the Government to provide houses to all by 2022, the 
Ministry was consulting various Ministries and indu stries to provide housing to 
their employees as a part of Corporate Social Responsibility(CSR) The Committee 
strongly feel that the scheme of Rental Housing wil l complement the 
Government's efforts for providing housing to all. By not approving this 
innovative and practical approach to mitigate the h ousing shortage the Ministry 
has closed one of the important avenues. While reit erating their earlier 
recommendations on this issue the Committee strongl y recommend the 
Government to reconsider this issue to include "Ren tal Housing " as the 
component of Housing for All. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.7) 
SLUM REHABILITATION  
1.11 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee observe that as per 2011 census, the  total slum population in India is 
6.549 crore and the no. of slum households are 1.4 crore. The Committee have noted 
that the slum areas, get 65.3 per cent of tap water  from treated sources and 56.7 per 
cent drinking water is available within the premise s. Electricity facilities are 90.5 per 
cent. Latrine facility within the premises is 66 pe rcent, flush latrine is 57.7 percent and 
closed drainage is 36.9 percent. The Ministry feels  that further improvements are 
required with respect to provision of basic sanitar y facilities and other infrastructure. 
Within the available resources, efforts are being m ade to provide infrastructure in the 
slum re-development projects. The Committee have be en informed that it is the 
responsibility of the State Government to conduct s urvey about the numbers of Jhugi 
Jhopri clusters and the number of JJ clusters rehab ilitated. When enquired about the 
details of development plans submitted by States/UT s/ULBs in respect of housing and 

-: 13 :- 
 
development infrastructure  in slums, the Committee were informed that Slum Free Plan 
of Action is required to be submitted in terms of  guidelines for the schemes of the 
Ministry and as on date 107 FPOAs have been receive d in the Ministry. The Committee 
feel that against 6.549 crore slum population as pe r population 2011 census, only 107 
SFPOAs are too meager. The Committee agree with the Ministry that Housing and slum 
are State subjects, but at the same time wish to im press upon the Ministry that it should 
take proactive steps and help the State Governments  in preparing SFPOAs to 
encompass the entire slum population in a phased manner. The Committee also wish to 
insist the fact that the SFPOAs should be comprehen sive to include basic facilities like 
housing, electricity, water supply, sanitation and drainage system. 
During examination of Demands for Grants (2014-15),  the Committee had 
observed that slum people are being rehabilitated i n the vertical buildings. In these 
buildings, maintenance is very shoddy. It is very d ifficult for the inhabitants to bear the 
cost of maintenance. The Secretary, Ministry of Hou sing and Urban Poverty Alleviation 
further informed that Ministry is having consultati ons with private builders who are 
assigned the task of building houses for slum dwell ers to take care of maintenance 
mandatorily. The Committee are distressed to note t hat the responsibility for ensuring 
maintenance of the houses lies with the beneficiari es and State/ULBs can assist them 
as per their policy.  People living in the slums ar e shifting to multi-storied building and 
are losing their livelihood and finding it hard to maintain the buildings. Therefore, it 
would be unfair to leave the maintenance charge to the beneficiaries. During the study 
visit of the Committee   to Pune and Mumbai, the Co mmittee had observed that slum 
redevelopment is being done on PPP models.  Since t he private developers are given 
the task of redevelopment of slums, the Ministry an d the State Governments should 
insist on them to take charge of maintenance mandat orily instead of leaving it to the 
beneficiaries. 
Another issue related to relocation of slum is that people are being shifted to new 
buildings but at the same time the slum areas are n ot being razed as a result the slum 
dwellers sublet the new houses and come back to the  slums. About the action taken in 
this regard, the Committee have been informed that it is the responsibility of the State 
Governments to de-notify the slum after its redevel opment. The action to de-notify the 
slum after its redevelopment by the State governmen t would ensure that problems of 
subletting of the new houses and returning to the s lum by the beneficiary can be 
avoided. In this regard, the Committee wish to recommend that Ministry should regularly 
monitor the progress in this regard and ask the State Government to submit the physical 
status of the vacant land after the slum rehabilita tion. This will further help to stop 
encroachment of government land.  It is also felt t hat sometimes there is strong nexus 
among mafia groups who are working in tandem with t hose dwellers with their malafide 
intentions and help those dwellers for facilitating  subletting. Therefore, the Committee 
desire that the person found guilty of subletting s hould be debarred and their allotment 
should be cancelled with immediate effect. The Comm ittee also desire that the Ministry 
should allot the house in the joint name of husband  & wife or in the sole name of the 
wife so that the male members cannot dispose it off  and harass the family member with 
any malafide intentions. "  
 
 
 
 

-: 14 :- 
 
 
 
1.12 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have  stated as follows: 
"The Ministry wish to state that the SFPOAs have be en prepared by States with regard 
to the earlier scheme of the Ministry. The SFPoAs are prepared essentially to determine 
the extent of housing shortage. In so far as the provision of basic facilities like electricity, 
water supply, sanitation and drainage are concerned , these come under urban 
infrastructure and have not been covered under SFPo As. Out of 228 cities which were 
preparing SFPoA, 112 have completed the plans and r est are in progress. It is not 
possible to include additional information at this juncture. Information on electricity, 
water supply, sanitation & drainage are available as per Census 2011.  
 It is clarified that in response to Question no. 2 4 of the List of points on the 
Demands for Grants (2014-15), the Ministry had stat ed that the responsibility for 
ensuring maintenance of the houses built under the scheme of the Ministry is with the 
beneficiaries and State/ULBs can assist them as per  their policy. Insisting on private 
developers to take over the maintenance of slums re developed on PPP basis may 
make the project unviable to the private developer as Central assistance to the project 
is fixed. Private developers would not like to cont inue their association with the project 
beyond completion and reasonable time of post completion needs. Maintenance of such 
houses should, therefore, be the responsibility of owners individually or through 
Associations (RWAs). States have been requested to promote formation of RWA for 
such work.  
 In-situ slum redevelopment is the first option sug gested to the State 
Governments under the schemes of the Ministry. Ther e is no vacant land released in 
such cases. As observed by the Committee, it is the  responsibility of the State 
Government to de-notify the slum after its redevelo pment. Ministry always recommends 
de-notification of slums after redevelopment. Minis try completely supports and accept 
the recommendation of the Committee that the person  found guilty of sub-letting should 
be debarred and their allotment should be cancelled with immediate effect. 
 Under the guidelines of the earlier schemes of the  Ministry as well as in the 
proposed new mission on Housing for All, the allotm ent of the house is proposed in the 
joint name of the husband and wife or in the sole n ame of the women head of the 
family." 
1.13 The Committee note that the Ministry have acce pted their recommendation 
that the person found guilty of sub-letting should be debarred and their allotment 
should be cancelled with immediate effect. The reco mmendations for allotting  
house in the joint name or in the sole name of the women head of the family has 
been proposed to include in the new Mission on Housing for All. 
 However, the Ministry has not accepted the followi ng recommendationss under 
the head Slum Rehabilitation, 

-: 15 :- 
 
(i) The Ministry should taken pro-active steps and help the State Governments in 
preparing SFPOA to encompass the entire slum popula tion in a phased manner 
and the SFPOAs should be comprehensive to include basic facilities like housing, 
electricity, water supply, sanitation and drainage system.  The Committee are 
constrained to note that out of 228 cities which we re preparing SFCPOA only 112 
have completed and rest are in progress. The Committee do not approve the reply 
of the Ministry for not including additional inform ation on electricity, water 
supply, sanitation and drainage at this juncture as  these are available as per 2011 
census. Since 4 years have been passed after declar ation of 2011 census, data 
needs updation for preparation of a realistic slum free plan of action. Therefore, 
the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendatio n to complete  the 228 
SFCPOA at the earliest and make it more comprehensive.  
(ii) The Committee further recommended that the Min istry should  monitor 
persistently the denotification of slum after it's development by the State 
Governments and ask the State Government to furnish  physical status of the 
vacant land. The Committee note that the Ministry's  reply has been silent with 
regard to their recommendation to ask the State Gov ernment  to furnish physical 
status of the vacant land after the re-development of slum.  While reiterating their 
earlier recommendation on the subject the Committee  desire the Ministry to 
initiate prompt action in this regard. 
   
Recommendation (Serial No.21) 
 
BMTPC  
1.14 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that the National Urban Housing  and Habitat Policy 2007 stresses 
the need for construction of demonstration houses i n order to provide thrust to the 
technology dissemination activities in different re gions of the country. Therefore, the 
Council besides providing technical assistance to l arge housing projects using cost 
effective housing technologies, proposes to showcas e Innovative, Green and Disaster 
Resistant Technologies through Demonstration Construction in different region. 

-: 16 :- 
 
Under the proposed new Housing Mission, BMTPC would  be working in these 
areas. Its role would be to enable construction wit h speed and quality and with due care 
towards structural, functional and environmental re quirements under housing for all. 
During the year 2014-15 the grants-in aid received from the Ministry was Rs.4.99 crore. 
The internal revenue generation is Rs. 3.46 crore. The total expenditure is Rs. 7.65 
crore. The BE for the year 2015-16 is Rs. 5.00 cror e only. The Committee are 
constrained to note that at present, the activities  of the Council have been restricted 
keeping in view the grants sanctioned and the exter nal cash flow generated during 
relevant year. Further, the role of BMTPC will be m ore challenging in view of the 
Housing for All by 2022. 
  
The present budgetary support and revenue generatio n by BMTPC is bare 
minimum to enhance the activities of BMTPC. In this  connection, the Committee in their 
earlier Reports have been recommending to enhance t he budgetary support. The 
Committee are distressed to note that Ministry has not enhanced the budgetary 
allocation during the current financial year. There fore, the Committee reiterate their 
earlier recommendation to strengthen BMTPC by providing sufficient financial support." 
 
1.15 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"During the budgetary demand for 2015-16, the Minis try had proposed budgetary 
allocation of Rs.11.50 crore for the BMPTC.  Govern ment has sanctioned Rs.5.00 crore 
for the organization for the FY 2015-16." 
 
1.16 In their earlier recommendations, the Committe e had desired to enhance 
the budgetary support to strengthen BMTPC so that i t can perform the 
challenging jobs in view of the Housing for All by 2022. The Committee are 
constrained to observe that during the year 2015-16 , against the proposed 
allocation of 11.50crore, the Government has sanctioned only Rs. 5.00 crore. With 
this meagre allocation this organisation cannot per form the gigantic role 
assigned to it. The Ministry's reply has also remai ned silent about its efforts to 
impress upon the Ministry of Finance to enhance the  allocation at RE stage. 
Therefore, the Committee once again emphasize upon  the Ministry to pursue 
with the Ministry of Finance for higher allocations  for BMTPC at RE stage or for 
providing supplementary grants. The Committee may be kept abreast of the steps 
taken by the Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Al leviation and the response of 
the Ministry of Finance in the matter. 
 
 

-: 17 :- 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDTIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Serial No.1) 
 
NEED TO ARREST UNDER UTILIZATION OF BUDGETARY ALLOC ATION FOR 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN POVERTY ALLEVIATION:  
2.1 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Allev iation has been entrusted with 
the implementation of programmes of Urban Housing, Urban Employment and Urban 
Poverty alleviation. The Committee observe that  st arting from the year 2010-11 till 
2014-15, there has been a huge difference between t he projections and allocations at 
BE stage. The allocations made at BE stage have bee n reduced at RE stage. The 
actual expenditure is also less in comparison to th e allocation at RE stage. The overall 
allocation at BE Stage for the year 2014-15 i.e. Rs .6008.62 crore has been reduced to 
Rs. 3413.44 Crore. The reduction is Rs. 2595.18 cro re. The main reasons for such 
reduction adduced by the Ministry are because of ab ysmal performance under BSUP 
and IHSDP components of JNNURM, Rajiv Rinn Yojana, Rajiv Awas Yojana and 
NULM. So far as JNNURM is concerned the State Gover nments could not perform well 
because of cost escalation of the projects. In spit e of regular follow up and constant 
guidance by the Ministry, State Governments took ti me to take approval of competent 
authorities for implementation of NULM. Empanelment  of Skill Training Provider (STPS) 
and Certification Agencies required issue of RFP, a ssessment of technical bids, etc., 
which are time consuming process.  Under RAY during  the year 2014-15 few proposals 
were considered for approval. The scheme of Rajiv R inn Yojana did not take off due to 
issues associated with lending to the informal sect ors, absence of clear land titles, 
authenticated income certifications, non-availabili ty of houses at the rates prescribed 
under the scheme, etc. The BE for the year 2015-16 is Rs. 5634.47 crore both for plan 
and non-plan. The Committee observe that there has been reduction of Rs. 374.15 
crore during the year 2015-16 in comparison to BE of 2014-15.  
 

-: 18 :- 
 
Keeping in view the wide gaps between the projectio n and allocation and between the 
BE and RE during the last five years and consequential impact on major schemes of the 
Ministry, the Committee in their earlier reports on  Demands for Grants have been 
recommending the Ministry to tone up its machinery for meaningful utilization of the 
resources. The Committee observe that the actual de mand survey is to be done by the 
Ministry. They  propose to be in touch with those S tates which have been extremely 
pro-active  in Housing & Urban sector to send the h ousing action plan and planning to 
build partnership with either private sector, the U LBs, the development authorities and 
some public authorities which  have land and would try to take a pro-active dynamic 
approach and then prepare the plan. After that it w ill release the fund. The Committee 
are constrained to note that nine months have alrea dy been passed since the last 
budget i.e., 2014-15, the Government has not moved an inch in achieving its objectives 
in any of its laudable schemes. Therefore, instead of increasing the allocation, the 
Ministry of Finance has reduced the allocation for Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Poverty Alleviation. At this pace, the Committee ar e apprehensive about the 
implementation of their ambitious schemes like Hous ing for All by 2022, NULM, Rajiv 
Rinn Yojna etc. Therefore, they strongly desire the  Ministry to undertake advance 
planning and concrete action so that there is 100% utilization of allocation and the 
ambitious schemes are translated into reality. The Committee may be apprised of the 
action taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.2 It is stated that in 2015-16, there is an alloc ation of Rs.5083 crore for housing 
schemes. Though the Cabinet has approved the scheme , the scheme is yet to be 
launched for finalisation of details as directed by  the Cabinet. While the Ministry has 
taken all steps in anticipation of the launch of th e mission, there is a possibility that the 
State and UT Governments who implement the scheme m ay not be able to forward 
adequate proposals in accordance with the yet to be  issued scheme guidelines in the 
year. Since, this is a new mission with different g uidelines, it will take time to percolate 
down the guidelines up to the City level. Thereafte r, Cities and State Governments 
would be able to plan and take up projects. By the time projects are taken up by the 
States for implementation under HFA, considerable p eriod of the financial year would 

-: 19 :- 
 
have been completed making 100 % utilization of fun ds allocated extremely difficult. But 
it is felt that utilization of funds would improve from next year onwards. Nevertheless, 
Ministry will make all the efforts to utilize avail able resources. As advance planning, 
Ministry will request States/UTs to select cities a nd prepare the Housing for All action 
plan. 
 
2.3  For comments please see paragraph no. 1.7 of C hapter-I 
Recommendation (Serial No.2) 
 
URBAN HOUSING 
 
2.4 The Committee observe that Housing stock requir ed in the next 16 years is 60 
million. The required additional annual housing is 3.4 million, while the current annual 
supply is 2.4 million. Thus the annual deficit in h ousing stock creation is 1 million. The 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation i s dealing with urban housing 
through various scheme, viz. Rajiv Awas Yojana/ Sar dar Patel Urban Housing Mission 
Housing for All by 2022, Affordable Housing, JNNURM  and Rajiv Rinn Yojana/GHAR. 
The proposed Umbrella scheme of "Housing to All by 2022" in 7 years will replace all 
the schemes being implemented in the 12 th  five year Plan to address various aspects 
of Housing for the Urban poor and will be implement ed from the year 2015-16.  During 
the year 2015-16, Rs. 4000 crore have been allocate d for this scheme. The Ministry 
has informed that the new mission has been approved  by the Cabinet and the details 
of the scheme are being fine tuned. The Committee a re informed that housing 
requirement is expected to be two crore by 2022. Sl um population (1.4 crore in 2011) 
expected to go upto 1.8 crore in 2021. Non slum Urban poor are expected to grow upto 
0.2 crore. The actual demand would depend on the su rvey. Two crore houses require 
Rs. 12 lakh crore at the rate of Rs. 6 lakh per hou se. Resources required are 
substantial in terms of land, finances and other capabilities. Therefore it is imperative to 
mobilize all stakeholders  viz. State Governments, ULBs, Banks, HFCs, Private Sector, 
industry, civil society etc.  In this connection, i f land is to be used as a resource, there 
is a need to remove supply side constraint through policy intervention and to use 
innovative/sustainable technology and material in c onstruction. The proposed options 
for Housing for All are Slum Redevelopment, Afforda ble Housing through Credit Linked 

-: 20 :- 
 
Subsidy, Affordable Housing in partnership and subs idy for beneficiary led individual 
house construction/ enhancement. Beneficiary can ta ke advantage under one 
component only. 
 As per the scheme large sums of funds would be pla ced at the disposal of State 
Governments with a free hand to design and implemen t their own schemes suited to 
their population. The experience so far in implemen ting the old scheme by the States 
has not been upto the mark which has resulted in hu ge underutilization without 
benefitting the target groups. In this background, the Committee recommend that (i) the 
Ministry should strive hard  to finalise the detail s of the new scheme 'Housing for All ‘ at 
the earliest, share the details of the scheme with the State Governments  and provide 
necessary funds to them at the earliest i.e. by Jul y 2015, (ii) the Ministry should indicate 
to the State Governments to design and finalise the ir schemes well in advance of the 
release of funds so that the schemes take of immedi ately, (3) the States should be 
asked to put in place the requisite dedicated techn ical experts to implement the scheme 
efficiently in a time bound manner.  
Reply of the Government  
 
2.5 Ministry is in the process of launching of the Mission with the approval of 
competent authority.  The recommendation of the Com mittee is noted.  Details of the 
schemes will be shared with States as soon as possi ble on finalization of the scheme.  
States would be requested to expedite the planning and project formulation at their end. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.3) 
RAJIV AWAS YOJANA  
2.6 The Ministry has been implementing Rajiv Awas Y ojana (RAY) since 2011. The 
preparatory phase of RAY was from 2011 to September  2013. RAY is a reform and 
demand driven scheme for attaining slum-free States  which depends upon the level of 
aspiration of the states concerned, willingness to align property rights to slum dweller, 
undertake reforms for the urban development, etc. T he preparatory phase of RAY 
envisaged preparation of Slum Free City Plan of Act ion wherein each city was required 
to undertake data collection of all slums irrespect ive of land tenure, entry of data into 

-: 21 :- 
 
MIS Mapping, GIS-MIS integration. The Committee are  perturbed to note that against 
the slum population of 6.549 crore as per 2011 cens us till date (Slum Free City Plan of 
Action) SFPOAs have been completed in 107 Cities ou t of 228 cities. In the remaining 
cities work is under progress. 
 The implementation phase of RAY started from Septe mber 2013. Financial 
support has been extended to States/UTs/Urban Local  Bodies and Central Government 
agencies for providing housing and improvement of b asic civic infrastructure and social 
amenities in slums. The Committee note that against  the budgetary allocation of 
Rs.6024 crore from 2012-13 to 2014-15, the allocati on at RE stage is only Rs. 2650 
crore. The actual utilization is Rs. 1815.55 crore.  The Committee further note that 
against the 12 
th  Plan target for construction of 10 lakhs dwelling units only 2501 units 
have been constructed. The reasons for such low phy sical and financial achievements 
as submitted by the Ministry are (i) The guidelines  to the State Governments were 
issued September 2013 as a result States submitted the projects after the issue of the 
guidelines (ii) The Election Code of Conduct came i nto force w.e.f.,  March, 2014 and a 
new Government was sworn in May, 2014. Since, the f ocus of the new Government 
was on a new Mission on providing Housing for All, there has been a slowdown in 
taking up new projects under RAY The BE for the yea r 2015-16 for RAY has been kept  
at nill as the liabilities are proposed to be relea sed under the proposed ‘Housing for All 
by 2022’. The Committee are informed that Housing f or all by 2022 Mission has been 
approved by the Cabinet and the details of the sche me are being fine tuned by a 
Committee of Ministers as per the decision of Cabin et. New Mission will be launched as 
soon as details are fine tuned.   
 The Committee note that the Ministry has not indic ated any time frame for the 
same. Further, in view of the proposed inter-projec t flexibility being given to the states 
for efficient use of funds  and decide on the appro val and implementation mechanism, 
the Committee desire that some monitoring mechanism  should be put in place to 
enforce  proper implementation of the projects. 
 The Committee are given to understand that in the proposed new mission, the 
provision for lump sum release of funds will be made instead of project wise release and 
State level instead of Central Govt. level within o verall budget available to States. 

-: 22 :- 
 
Further cost escalation with regard to projects has  to be borne by the States for which 
States have been advised to take up only such proje cts for which encumbrance free 
land is available. The Committee feel that Centre h ardly has any power left with it 
except for monitoring process. Since the funds are to be released from the Centre, the 
Committee desire that some inbuilt monitoring mecha nism should be set up by them to 
ensure meaningful utilization of its funding. The C ommittee also desire the Ministry to 
ensure that the incomplete projects under RAY and t he financial liabilities thereof are 
subsumed in the new Mission. 
 The Committee in their earlier reports have been r ecommending for the early 
completion of the preparatory activities in respect  of Preparation of Slum Free City Plan 
of Action.  They wish to reiterate their earlier re commendation to complete the same 
without any further delay.  
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.7 It is submitted that proposal for subsuming in the new scheme, liabilities of RAY 
projects which have started on the ground, has been  approved by the competent 
authority. Liabilities would be met as per the deci sion of the competent authority. 
Ministry will be monitoring and reviewing the scheme through inter-ministerial committee 
headed by Secretary, various review meetings and through utilization certificates.  
 
Ministry has been pursuing States to complete prepa ration of Slum Free City 
Plan of Action and in year 2014-15, 72 SFCPoAs have  been completed. In addition to 
this, 36 SFCPoAs have been completed till 31.3.2014 . RAY has come to an end and 
therefore no more SFCPoAs are to be formulated.  Da ta so collected however would be 
used by States to prepare HFAPoA under new Mission.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No.5) 
 
AFFORDABLE HOUSING  PARTNERSHIP(AHP)SCHEME 
 
2.8 The Government has approved the scheme of Affor dable Housing in Partnership 
as part of Rajiv Awas Yojana on 3 September 2013 to  increase affordable housing 

-: 23 :- 
 
stock. As part of preventive strategy, AHP was dove tailed as RAY is being replaced by 
Housing for All by 2022 which is under formulation.  The Committee observe from 
information provided by the Ministry that a total o f 18 projects of 3 States (5 cities) have 
been sanctioned under the Affordable Housing in Par tnership Scheme with a Central 
assistance of Rs. 112.53 Cr. for construction of 25 407 Affordable dwelling units. Rs. 
44.19 Cr have been released till date. Out of 25407  dwelling units, during the years 
2010-11 to 2014-15 only 4968 dwelling units have be en completed. The Ministry has 
stated that under the Affordable Housing in Partner ship (AHP) Scheme, 22 projects of 3 
States (Karnataka, Rajasthan & Gujarat) have been s anctioned for construction of 
25,407 DUs. The 1 st Installment of Rs.44.19 crore has been released for  this purpose. 
The implementation and execution of the projects is  entirely the responsibility of the 
State Government and its implementing agencies. It is pertinent to mention here that 
these are all multi-storied buildings and after DPR  approval grounding of projects 
involve floating of tenders to clearing the land, e tc. These are time consuming process 
and as such cannot be completed in one year or so.  The Ministry would persuade State 
Governments and their agencies to expedite the proc ess of implementation of these 
projects in a time-bound manner.  
 The Committee are however anxious about completion  of the remaining dwelling 
units before the start of the proposed new Mission on Housing. The Committee being 
not satisfied with the progress under AHP, had earl ier  recommended that construction 
of all the remaining houses be completed within one year, so that no spill-over of AHP is 
carried forward in the new Mission on Housing. The Committee would like to reiterate 
their earlier recommendation in this regard and des ire the Ministry to expedite the 
necessary process in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.9 Recommendation of Committee has been noted and Ministry will make efforts for 
the same.  
 
 
 

-: 24 :- 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.6) 
JNNURM  
2.10 The JNNURM was launched on 3 rd  December, 2005. The duration of the Mission 
was seven years from 2005-06 to 31.3.2012 and was e xtended upto 31.3.2015 only for 
completion of projects sanctioned upto 31.3.2012. D uring the 12 th  plan, against the 
allocation of Rs.8126.61 crore, the expenditure had  been only 4281.76 crore. In 
percentage term it was only 52.69 percent. Against the approved dwelling units of 
122278 dwelling units, 883771 dwelling units have b een constructed. The shortfall is 
343907 dwelling units. The main reasons for shortfa ll in both physical and financial 
achievement adduced by the Ministry are cost escalation, reluctance of slum dwellers to 
shift to in situ development of projects and availa bility of unencumbered land. The 
Committee’s recommendation to provide financial ass istance to States to facilitate them 
to meet cost escalation has not been accepted by th e Planning Commission. The 
Committee are perturbed to note from the reply that  successful implementation of the 
projects is the sole responsibility of the State Go vernment/ULBs. Shortfalls are a direct 
consequence of the institutional weakness of the St ate agency entrusted with the work. 
The Committee conclude that the main objectives of the JNNURM i.e. up-gradation of 
Urban infrastructure and strengthening of urban local bodies has failed miserably.  
 The Committee further observe that JNNURM has come  to an end w.e.f. 31 
March 2015. The Government of India will not provid e any fund to the projects where 
the DPR has been approved but the State Government has not initiated the project and 
have not availed the first installment. The Committ ee agree with the Ministry in this 
regard. Now the Ministry is preparing the guideline s for Housing for All Mission and it is 
planning to subsume the remaining projects in the n ew Scheme. The matter is under 
inter-Ministerial consultation. In this backdrop, t he Committee desire the Ministry to 
finalise the guidelines at the earliest as precious  time has already been lost to achieve 
the target for Housing for All. They further desire  to subsume the incomplete projects of 
JNNURM in which some action has already been taken on ground in the new mission 
i.e.  Housing for All, so that the huge allocations , time and other resources already 
spent do not go waste. 

-: 25 :- 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.11 The Ministry proposes to release the guideline s immediately upon the launch of 
the mission.  It is, also brought to the attention of the Committee that subsequent to the 
submissions made before the Committee, the competen t authority has taken a decision 
to further extend the period of JNNURM for a furthe r period of two years beyond 
31.03.2015, that is, upto 31.03.2017 only for compl eting those projects that had been 
sanctioned upto 31.03.2012.  
Recommendation (Serial No.7) 
SLUM REHABILITATION  
2.12 The Committee observe that as per 2011 census,  the total slum population in 
India is 6.549 crore and the no. of slum households  are 1.4 crore. The Committee have 
noted that the slum areas, get 65.3 per cent of tap  water from treated sources and 56.7 
per cent drinking water is available within the pre mises. Electricity facilities are 90.5 per 
cent. Latrine facility within the premises is 66 pe rcent, flush latrine is 57.7 percent and 
closed drainage is 36.9 percent. The Ministry feels  that further improvements are 
required with respect to provision of basic sanitar y facilities and other infrastructure. 
Within the available resources, efforts are being m ade to provide infrastructure in the 
slum re-development projects. The Committee have be en informed that it is the 
responsibility of the State Government to conduct s urvey about the numbers of Jhugi 
Jhopri clusters and the number of JJ clusters rehab ilitated. When enquired about the 
details of development plans submitted by States/UT s/ULBs in respect of housing and 
development infrastructure  in slums, the Committee were informed that Slum Free Plan 
of Action is required to be submitted in terms of  guidelines for the schemes of the 
Ministry and as on date 107 FPOAs have been receive d in the Ministry. The Committee 
feel that against 6.549 crore slum population as pe r population 2011 census, only 107 
SFPOAs are too meager. The Committee agree with the Ministry that Housing and slum 
are State subjects, but at the same time wish to im press upon the Ministry that it should 
take proactive steps and help the State Governments  in preparing SFPOAs to 
encompass the entire slum population in a phased manner. The Committee also wish to 

-: 26 :- 
 
insist the fact that the SFPOAs should be comprehen sive to include basic facilities like 
housing, electricity, water supply, sanitation and drainage system. 
  
During examination of Demands for Grants (2014-15),  the Committee had 
observed that slum people are being rehabilitated i n the vertical buildings. In these 
buildings, maintenance is very shoddy. It is very d ifficult for the inhabitants to bear the 
cost of maintenance. The Secretary, Ministry of Hou sing and Urban Poverty Alleviation 
further informed that Ministry is having consultati ons with private builders who are 
assigned the task of building houses for slum dwell ers to take care of maintenance 
mandatorily. The Committee are distressed to note t hat the responsibility for ensuring 
maintenance of the houses lies with the beneficiari es and State/ULBs can assist them 
as per their policy.  People living in the slums ar e shifting to multi-storied building and 
are losing their livelihood and finding it hard to maintain the buildings. Therefore, it 
would be unfair to leave the maintenance charge to the beneficiaries. During the study 
visit of the Committee   to Pune and Mumbai, the Co mmittee had observed that slum 
redevelopment is being done on PPP models.  Since t he private developers are given 
the task of redevelopment of slums, the Ministry an d the State Governments should 
insist on them to take charge of maintenance mandat orily instead of leaving it to the 
beneficiaries. 
 
Another issue related to relocation of slum is that people are being shifted to new 
buildings but at the same time the slum areas are n ot being razed as a result the slum 
dwellers sublet the new houses and come back to the  slums. About the action taken in 
this regard, the Committee have been informed that it is the responsibility of the State 
Governments to de-notify the slum after its redevel opment. The action to de-notify the 
slum after its redevelopment by the State governmen t would ensure that problems of 
subletting of the new houses and returning to the s lum by the beneficiary can be 
avoided. In this regard, the Committee wish to recommend that Ministry should regularly 
monitor the progress in this regard and ask the State Government to submit the physical 
status of the vacant land after the slum rehabilita tion. This will further help to stop 
encroachment of government land.  It is also felt t hat sometimes there is strong nexus 
among mafia groups who are working in tandem with t hose dwellers with their malafide 

-: 27 :- 
 
intentions and help those dwellers for facilitating  subletting. Therefore, the Committee 
desire that the person found guilty of subletting s hould be debarred and their allotment 
should be cancelled with immediate effect. The Comm ittee also desire that the Ministry 
should allot the house in the joint name of husband  & wife or in the sole name of the 
wife so that the male members cannot dispose it off  and harass the family member with 
any malafide intentions.    
Reply of the Government  
 
2.13 The Ministry wish to state that the SFCPOAs ha ve been prepared by States with 
regard to the earlier scheme of the Ministry. The S FCPoAs are prepared essentially to 
determine the extent of housing shortage. In so far as the provision of basic facilities like 
electricity, water supply, sanitation and drainage are concerned, these come under 
urban infrastructure and have not been covered unde r SFCPoAs. Out of 228 cities 
which were preparing SFCPoA, 112 have completed the  plans and rest are in progress. 
It is not possible to include additional informatio n at this juncture. Information on 
electricity, water supply, sanitation & drainage are available as per Census 2011.  
 
 It is clarified that in response to Question no. 2 4 of the List of points on the 
Demands for Grants (2014-15), the Ministry had stat ed that the responsibility for 
ensuring maintenance of the houses built under the scheme of the Ministry is with the 
beneficiaries and State/ULBs can assist them as per  their policy. Insisting on private 
developers to take over the maintenance of slums re developed on PPP basis may 
make the project unviable to the private developer as Central assistance to the project 
is fixed. Private developers would not like to cont inue their association with the project 
beyond completion and reasonable time of post completion needs. Maintenance of such 
houses should, therefore, be the responsibility of owners individually or through 
Associations (RWAs). States have been requested to promote formation of RWA for 
such work.  
 In-situ slum redevelopment is the first option sug gested to the State 
Governments under the schemes of the Ministry. Ther e is no vacant land released in 
such cases. As observed by the Committee, it is the  responsibility of the State 

-: 28 :- 
 
Government to de-notify the slum after its redevelo pment. Ministry always recommends 
de-notification of slums after redevelopment. Minis try completely supports and accept 
the recommendation of the Committee that the person  found guilty of sub-letting should 
be debarred and their allotment should be cancelled with immediate effect. 
 Under the guidelines of the earlier schemes of the  Ministry as well as in the 
proposed new mission on Housing for All, the allotm ent of the house is proposed in the 
joint name of the husband and wife or in the sole n ame of the women head of the 
family.  
Recommendation (Serial No.8) 
RAJIV RINN YOJANA  
2.14 The Committee observe that the Ministry has be en implementing the scheme to 
channelize institutional credit to the poorer segments of the urban  areas and to address 
the housing shortage RRY has been formulated by mod ifying the Interest Subsidy 
Scheme for Housing the Urban Poor(IHSDP) piloted in  the 11 th  Plan period with 
enhanced scope and coverage. The overall target for  the 12 th  Plan period is 1 million 
dwelling units across the country including slum an d non-slum dwellers. Since 2011-12 
till 2014-15, against the BE of Rs. 808.78 crore, t he RE is Rs. 164.74 crore only. The 
actual release is only Rs. 60.23 crore.   The BE fo r 2015-16 is Rs. 450.00 crore. The 
Committee are perturbed to note that RRY did not take off due to issues associated with 
lending to the informal sectors e.g. high risk perc eption with respect to the beneficiaries; 
banking procedures calling for mortgageable titles to land, approved plans, 
authenticated income certificates, stringent know- your- customer’s norms, etc. Further, 
the mode of reimbursements to the Banks and financi al institutions was also 
complicated.  
  The Committee have been informed that the Governm ent is in the process of 
launching the new Housing mission namely Housing fo r All. It is felt that it would be 
appropriate to make the interest subsidy scheme nam ely Credit Linked Subsidy 
Scheme (CLSS) a sub component of the Housing Missio n for better implementation.  
From the experience of earlier schemes   like ISHUP and RRY, it is proposed to release 
upfront interest subsidy which would make the schem e more attractive to the financial 

-: 29 :- 
 
institutions. It is also proposed to include more f inancial institutions like cooperative 
banks, housing financial institutions, micro financ ial institutions, etc. in the gambit of the 
scheme to make it more successful. In the new inter est subsidy scheme, it is proposed 
to do away with income certification procedure by s elf-certification, which will be 
beneficial for people in the unorganized sector. In  the proposed CLSS, Interest 
subvention is proposed to be increased from Rs.5 lakh  (provision under RRY) as well as 
to provide for additional loans at unsubsidized rat es. Similarly, the maximum cost of the 
dwelling units has been proposed to be increased fr om Rs.8 lakh as provided under 
RRY. 
 In view of the above, the Committee desire that th e CLSS subcomponent of the 
Housing Mission be finalized and implemented at the  earliest. The Committee also 
desire that all the stakeholders like State Governm ents, ULBs, Financial institutions and 
beneficiaries should be encouraged to take advantage of the scheme in a big way. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.15 In this connection, it is informed that the Cr edit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) 
is one of the components of the “Housing for All by  2022” Mission.  Ministry is in the 
process of launching of the mission with the approval of competent authority. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.9) 
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE FROM DEPARTMENT FOR INTERNATIO NAL 
DEVELOPMENT FOR SUPPORT TO NATIONAL POLICIES FOR UR BAN POVERTY 
REDUCTION (SNPUPR)  
 
2.16 The Committee observe that SNPUPR, a joint ini tiative of the Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Poverty Alleviation and UK Government had  commenced in July 2010 with a 
budget of £ 14.5 million to assist National Program me being implemented to benefit the 
urban poor by providing technical support.  The Com mittee are distressed to note that 
during the period 2010-11 to 2014-15, the BE alloca tion was Rs. 59.08 Crore, the RE 
allocation was Rs. 27.17 Crore, while the actual ex penditure was just Rs. 14.41 Crore. 
There is nil allocation during the year 2015-16 as the proposed allocation of Rs. 19.67 

-: 30 :- 
 
crore was not agreed  to by the Ministry of Finance .  The less expenditure during the 
year 2010-11 was because of late selection of citie s, delay in the commencement of 
PMU and Challenge Fund. lukewarm responses of ULBs as well as delays in finalizing 
the concept and operational manual. On a query of t he Committee about the advance 
planning for meaningful implementation of the schem e, the Ministry has assured that 
while planning for Housing for All by 2022, steps w ould be taken to incorporate lessons 
learnt from earlier schemes to consider stake holde rs’ recommendations and to plan 
adequately so that implementation is ensured in a seamless fashion. It is however noted 
at the same time, that the states/UTs being the imp lementing agencies, proactiveness 
and dynamism of States is essential to put the plan s and guidelines of Government of 
India into action. Therefore, the Committee wish to  impress upon the Ministry to take 
concerted steps to finalize the new mission at the earliest and take proactive role for 
meaningful implementation of the schemes. 
Reply of the Government  
2.17 Ministry is in the process of launching of the  Mission with the approval of 
competent authority. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.10) 
Study on impact of investment in the Housing Sector on GDP and employment in 
the Indian Economy  
2.18 The Committee observe that a study to understa nd the impact of investment in 
housing and construction on both employment and inc ome has been carried out by the 
Ministry through the National Council for Applied E conomic Research (NCAER).  The 
Report has been submitted to the Ministry on 25 th  February, 2014.  Based on the 
recommendations of the Report, the Ministry has req uested the Ministry of Finance for 
inclusion of “affordable housing” in the harmonized  master list of infrastructure sub-
sections as housing contributes significantly to the GDP. The response of the Ministry of 
Finance is still awaited. Therefore, the Committee desire the Ministry to pursue this 
matter with the Finance Ministry at the highest lev el. The Committee further observe 
that skill development and enhancing employment has  been included as focus areas 
under NULM Scheme of this Ministry.  The Committee also note that 99.41% of the jobs 

-: 31 :- 
 
in housing sector are informal jobs.  The Committee   in their 2 nd  Report  had desired 
that the Ministry of HUPA should strive to provide skill development training on housing 
sector to the urban unemployed youth through NULM t o enable them to avail of the job 
opportunities being provided in the housing sector thereby facilitating in alleviating the 
urban poverty. When asked about the progress made i n this regard the Committee are 
given to understand that State Urban Livelihood Mis sion(SULM) are required to identify 
the trades for training under ESTP as per local dem and of the various agencies. The 
Committee are not in agreement with the plea of the  Government in this regard. They 
desire that the Centre should identify the trade an d bring out detailed information of 
various States including construction sector in whi ch training can be provided by 
SULMS which would subsequently help in providing job opportunities. 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.19 The Ministry will identify the trades and give  detailed information to the States. 
The Ministry is already holding consultations with Construction Skill Development 
Council of India (CSDCI)/Sector Skill Council for C onstruction Sector, National 
Buildings Construction Corporation Ltd. (NBCC), Cen tral Public Works Department 
(CPWD), Building Materials and Technology Promotion  Council (BMTPC), Housing & 
Urban Development Corporation Ltd. (HUDCO) and othe r organisations/ agencies in 
construction/ housing sector for increasing skill development. 
Recommendation (Serial No.11) 
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI)  
2.20  The Committee observe that the Government of India has permitted Foreign 
Direct Investment (FDI) through automation route in  construction and development 
sector.  The FDI covers development of townships, h ousing, built-up infrastructure and 
construction-development related projects.  The Min istry has stated that Department of 
Industrial Promotion and Policy (DIPP) under Minist ry of Industry & Commerce, issues 
guidelines in regard to Foreign Direct Investment ( FDI). DIPP also publishes various 
data on sector-wise FDI inflows in their Fact sheets regularly. Statement on Sector-Wise 
FDI Equity Inflows from April 2000 to December 2014 shows that inflows in Construction 

-: 32 :- 
 
Development: Townships, Housing, Built-Up Infrastru cture and Construction-
Development Projects are 112,821.03 crore and it is  10.06% of total inflows.  The 
Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation, on  its part, has not undertaken any 
survey to assess the impact on FDI inflows into housing sector. 
           The Committee were apprised that the data on sector wise FDI inflows in the fact 
sheet, released by DIPP, is not sufficient to analyze the real impact on the housing 
sector. 
           The Committee are dismayed to note that even after knowing this fact no survey 
has been undertaken by the Ministry to assess the i mpact on FDI inflows into housing 
sector and especially with reference to urban poor.  Keeping in view the fact that the 96 
per cent of shortage in India are related to the EW S and LIG segment, the Committee 
are of the view that there is an urgent need to con duct such study so that the real 
impact of FDI in housing especially with reference to housing for urban poor can be 
assessed. 
 In this regard, they are of the view that if the d ata by DIPP is not sufficient to 
analyze the real impact on housing sector, the Mini stry should request the DIPP to 
collect the data exclusively on FDI in housing sector, so that the impact assessment can 
be done. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.21 The data published by the Department of Indust rial Policy & Promotion (DIPP), 
shows total inflow for Construction development, to wnships, housing, built-up 
infrastructure etc. It doesn’t separately indicates  the inflows to housing sector.  Ministry 
of HUPA has, therefore, requested the DIPP to colle ct FDI inflow for housing sector 
projects separately so that impact assessment can be done.  
Recommendation (Serial No.12) 
REAL ESTATE AND REGULATORY AUTHORITY (RERA) BILL  
2.22 The Real Estate (Regulation and Development) B ill, 2013 was introduced in the 
Parliament by Government on 14 th  August, 2013 after wide consultations with all the  

-: 33 :- 
 
stakeholders.  The Bill was referred to the Standin g Committee on Urban Development 
for examination and report.  The Committee after ha ving wide consultations with all the 
stakeholders had given an objective report to the Parliament on 17 th  February, 2014. 
  The Committee had earlier recommended that reintr oduction of the Bill in the 
Parliament should be expedited because real estate sector is highly unregulated and 
the common man is being harassed by the builders an d their associations.  The 
Committee have been apprised by the Ministry that a  Cabinet Note has been 
resubmitted after incorporating amendments. In this  regard stakeholders and the 
Attorney General have been consulted. During oral d eposition, the Secretary Ministry of 
HUPA  has apprised the Committee that the Ministry has adopted a policy structure 
which includes Real Estate and Regulatory Authority  Bill to ensure good governance, 
greater flow of FDI in Housing Sector and thereby f acilitating to increase the supply of 
Housing. The Committee hope that the Ministry would  push through this proposal and 
get it passed in the current budget Session of the Parliament which would go a long way 
in giving  relief to the common people who are bein g continually harassed at the hands 
of unscrupulous builders’ lobby and increase the su pply of Housing to the urban 
population. 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.23 The Official Amendments to the Real Estate (Re gulation and Development) Bill, 
2013, based on Standing Committee recommendations a nd stakeholders suggestions, 
was approved by the Union Cabinet on 7th April, 2015. The Real Estate Bill, 2013 along 
with the approved Official Amendments were listed f or business of the Rajya Sabha for 
consideration and passing in the current budget ses sion 2015. However, the Bill along-
with the proposed amendments have been sent to a Se lect Committee of the Rajya 
Sabha for examination with instructions to submit the report to the Rajya  Sabha by the 
last day of the first week of the next session. 
 
 
 

-: 34 :- 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.13) 
Central Government Employees Welfare Housing Organisation (CGEWHO)  
2.24 CGEWHO, is a welfare organization under the Mi nistry of Housing and Poverty 
alleviation for construction of dwelling units excl usively for the Central Government 
Employees on No- profit – no loss basis.   
 The Committee are constrained to note that the Gov erning Council CGEWHO as 
well as Ministry of HUPA has decided not to proceed further turnkey projects since there 
is no government land allotment.  CGEWHO could not fulfil  the earlier commitments at 
6 stations for which demand survey was conducted in  2009 and no demand survey has 
been conducted after that.   
Pertaining to the poor performance of CGEWHO, the C ommittee have been 
apprised that the projects taken up by CGEWHO could  not progress as planned due to 
financial constraints, delay in obtaining approvals  from various statutory authorities 
including (Environmental Impact Assessment) EIA and  shortage of manpower and 
materials at various stations.  CGEWHO had taken up various measures and completed 
7 projects during 2012- 2014.  CGEWHO is also putting up all its efforts to complete two 
projects at Greater NOIDA and Sahebzada Ajit Singh Nagar, Mohali where planning 
permission, EIA clearances, etc., are under process. 
 
 With regard to taking up new projects in various S tates, Governing Council, 
CGEWHO had decided not to take up turnkey projects.  Letters have been written to 
Chief Secretaries of Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Uttrak hand, Bihar, Kerala, Chhattisgarh, 
Andhra Pradesh as well as Administrator, of Chandigarh for allotment of suitable land at 
different locations.  However, no response for allotment of land has yet been received.  
 While appreciating the initiatives taken by the Go vernment in this regard the 
Committee desire that the allotment of encumbrance free land for CGEWHO should be 
taken up with all the States throughout the country  simultaneously and also issue 
necessary instructions in this regard at the earliest.  

-: 35 :- 
 
 The Committee strongly feel that these steps will help in augmenting availability 
of land either through further acquisition or removal of encroachment of the Government 
land. This would accomplish its goal of "Housing for All by 2022." 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.25 As suggested, CGEWHO will request concerned la nd authorities for allotment of 
land to CGEWHO to take up more projects.  Suggestio ns of the Committee have been 
noted to make all efforts to complete the projects in a time bound manner.  
Recommendation (Serial No.14) 
NATIONAL SCHEME FOR SUPPORT TO STREET VENDORS  
2.26 The Committee note that the ‘Street Vendors Pr otection of Livelihood and 
Regulation of Street Vending Act’, has come into ef fect in May, 2015. As per the 
provision of the Act, it is statutory responsibilit y of the States and UTs to notify rule and 
scheme to implement the Act. The Minister for Housi ng and Urban Poverty alleviation 
had requested all the States to take immediate acti on for implementation of the Street 
Vendors Act in their States. Besides, the Ministry has discussed this matter in all video 
conference meetings with the States and field visit s, workshops held in the States. So 
far 19 States/UTs have furnished their information.  Out of 35 States /UTs except for 
Andhra Pradesh, Chhatisgarh, J&K, Karnataka, Madhya  Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, 
Maharashtra, Telengana vendors survey has been star ted in few cities. The position 
with regard to other cities is distressing.  
As per the Operational Guidelines of Support to Urban Street Vendors (SUSV), financial 
support will be provided to the ULBs for conducting  of survey for identification and 
enlisting of street vendors. The ULB may also choos e to complete the survey in a 
phased manner, covering one area (ward/ zone/ speci fied part of city) at a time. In this 
case, the area identified should be sufficiently large to accommodate mobility of vendors 
within the area. As per Monthly Progress Reports (M PRs) received from the States/ 
UTs, at present 182 cities of 11 States have comple ted the survey. The Ministry has 
awarded the work of drafting Model Rules, Scheme and Bye-laws to All India Institute of 

-: 36 :- 
 
Local Self Government (AIILSG), Mumbai so that Mode l Rules, Scheme and Bye-laws 
are available to help the States. 
 Keeping in view the vulnerability of this section of society to harassment, the 
Committee desire that the concerned States/UT Gover nments should be impressed 
upon the urgency to be attached to this important legislation. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.27 Noted. States/UTs are being impressed upon in all interactions through Video 
Conferences, meetings, field visits etc. to expedit e the notification of Rules and Scheme 
under the National Street Vendors’ Act 2014. The Mi nistry will further follow up with the 
States/UTs Governments as per advice of the Committee.  
Recommendation (Serial No.15) 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR NATIONAL URBAN LIVELIHOOD MISSION 
(NULM)  
2.28 The Committee observe that the Ministry of Hou sing and Urban Poverty 
Alleviation has launched National Urban Renewal Mis sion (NULM) in the 12 th  Five Year 
Plan w.e.f., 24 th  September 2013 by replacing the existing Swarna Ja yanti Shahari 
Rozgar Yojana (SJSRY). 
Against the total allocation of 3604.00 crore at BE  from 2011-12 to 2014-15, the 
allocation at RE is 3015.49 crore and the actual ex penditure is 2868.98 crore. 
Pertaining to such low financial and physical achie vement, the Committee are apprised 
that NULM was launched in September 2013 to replace  SJSRY. As a result many new 
features were added to NULM guidelines to ensure th at the benefits of the scheme 
reach the urban poor more effectively. Consequently  States took time to take approval 
of competent authorities for implementation of NULM  as per new guidelines. 
Empanelment of resources organizations skill traini ng provided and Certification 
Agencies (C.A.s) required issue of Request for Prop osals(RFPs) and assessment of 
technical bids etc., are the time consuming process. 

-: 37 :- 
 
 In view of the above, the Committee desire the Min istry to impress upon the 
State Governments to complete all the procedural fo rmalities in a prescribed time-frame 
and achieve the physical and financial target without any further delay. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.29 Noted. The States/UTs are being advised regula rly through Video Conferences, 
letters, meetings, field visits etc. to ensure that  empanelment of Resource 
Organisations, Skill Training Providers and Certifi cation Agencies etc. is done timely so 
that the targeted physical and financial progress can be achieved under NULM. 
Recommendation (Serial No.16) 
Governing Council of NULM  
 
2.30    As per the NULM mission document, NULM will  have a Governing Council(GC) 
chaired by the Minister of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation which will be the policy 
making body setting overall vision and providing direction to the mission, consistent with 
national objectives. However, the Executive Committee (EC) under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary, Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, G overnment of India will oversee the 
activities of the mission and monitor progress. For reviewing the activities of the mission 
an executive Committee meeting was held on 29 Decem ber, 2014. Meeting of the 
Governing Council at the central level would also be convened shortly. 
 
 
 With regard to status of meetings of the Governing  Councils, the Ministry stated that at 
the National Level, 3 State Ministers and 3 Represe ntatives from Civil Society /Industry 
Associations/Livelihood Experts are to be nominated . After the completion of 
nominations, the meeting of GC will be fixed. At th e State Level, Governing Councils 
have been constituted in 12 states. Other States ha ve been asked to form GC’s at the 
earliest.   
The Committee are finding it hard to understand, th at with this tardy pace, how 
the Ministry will monitor the progress of NULM in an effective way. The Committee also 

-: 38 :- 
 
note that there is a shortfall in achievement of ph ysical and financial progress of 
NULM. In view of the above, the Committee wish to e mphasise that the Ministry should 
impress upon the State Governments to complete all the formalities to constitute GCs 
in all the States and convene the meetings at regul ar interval. The Committee also 
desire that the findings/outcome thereof should be taken seriously in making further 
improvement in the implementation of NULM. 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.31 States will be further impressed upon to const itute the Governing Councils (GCs) 
and convene meeting at the earliest. 
The meeting of the national level GC is scheduled to be held in June 2015. 
Recommendation (Serial No.17) 
Skill Training and Placement (EST&P) under NULM  
 
2.32 One of the important components under NULM is Employment through Skill 
Training & Placement (EST&P).  Under this the objective is to target the urban poor who 
are occupationally vulnerable for employment throug h Skills Training & Placement and 
provide training to the urban poor as per the skill  demand from the market so that they 
can set up self employment venture or secure salari ed employment.  In this regard the 
Committee have been informed that National Skill De velopment Corporation (NSDC) 
has conducted district-wise Skill Gap Analysis (SGA ) for all the States.  The analysis 
was being used by some States, while other States h ave initiated the process of having 
skill gap analyzed through other agencies. The Committee are of the view that since this 
is an important component of NULM, the Ministry sho uld ensure that all the State 
Governments complete the SGA and regularly update t he same as per the changing 
scenario of job requirements. 
 The Committee are perturbed to note that despite t heir repeated 
recommendations to amend the EST&P guidelines to en hance the period of tracking to 
include all the successful candidates, the Ministry  has not initiated any steps. In its 
reply, the Ministry has stated that tracking period  by STP has been kept for a period of 

-: 39 :- 
 
six months with the anticipation that after 6 month s the candidates will become self-
reliant. However, the Committee are of the view tha t under prevailing circumstances of 
getting into job or availing a loan for starting on e’s own business, majority of the trained 
candidates cannot become self reliant within such a  short period of six months. 
Therefore, the Committee once again recommend the M inistry to enhance the tracking 
period and to track all the successful candidates. 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.33 The recommendation of the Committee is accepte d. The Hon’ble Minister, M/o 
HUPA has approved the modification of the EST&P gui delines to increase the period of 
tracking of successful candidates from six months to one year.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No.18) 
Skill Development and Enhancing Employment in Construction Sector (including 
Housing Sector).  
2.34 The Committee in their 2 nd  Report (16 th  Lok Sabha) had  observed that the 
Housing sector is the fourth largest employment gen erating sector in the country and 
contributes significantly to the GDP.  The Committe e are appreciative of the fact that 
skill development and enhancing employment, which i s one of the components of 
NULM,  has been included as the focus area under the NULM Scheme of the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation.  As proposed  by the Ministry, the Committee 
desire that, if needed, specific percentage of fund s be allocated to this field.  The 
Committee are given to understand that the budgetar y support under NULM has been 
enhanced substantially so as to provide more suppor t to States for urban poverty 
alleviation.  
 The Committee were given to understand that third party certification acceptable 
to the industry has also been introduced. In order to provide better credit availability to 
micro-enterprises, a task force, with lead bank man ager as one of the members, for 
short-listing of applications has been introduced w hich is likely to reduce the rejection 
rate by the banks and other financial institutions.   The Committee on the basis of above 
observation and keeping in view the fact that need of Urban Housing is immense in our 

-: 40 :- 
 
country, had strongly recommended that special emph asis be laid on skill development 
and employment enhancement in construction sector ( including the housing sector), 
under NULM to fully tap the potential of young work  force available in the country and 
apprised them the steps taken by the Ministry is this regard. 
 The Committee note that State Urban Livelihood Mis sions (SULMs) are required 
to identify the trades for training under EST&P as per local demand of the various 
industries.  The SULMs shall be requested to focus on the construction sector.  
 As various schemes of the Ministry are lagging beh ind because of lack of 
capacity building of ULBs and fund constraints, by simply leaving it to SULMs, will 
further delay the task. Therefore the Committee str ongly  feel that  Central Ministry 
should take the onus of  identifying the trades for  the training under EST&P as per local 
demands and help the SULMs in this regard by bringi ng out detailed information of 
various trades including construction sector in whi ch training can be provided by 
SULMs.  
Reply of the Government  
 
2.35 The Ministry will identify the trades and give  detailed information to the States. The 
Ministry is already holding consultations with Cons truction Skill Development Council of 
India (CSDCI)/ Sector Skill Council for Construction Sector, National Buildings Construction 
Corporation Ltd. (NBCC), Central Public Works Depar tment (CPWD), Building Materials 
and Technology Promotion Council (BMTPC), Housing &  Urban Development Corporation 
Ltd. (HUDCO) and other organisations/ agencies in  construction/ housing sector for 
increasing skill development. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.19) 
PROJECTS/SCHEMES FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH EASTERN STATES, 
INCLUDING SIKKIM UNDER 10% LUMP-SUM PROVISION FOR THIS PURPOSE  
2.36 The Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Allevi ation is concerned with the project 
proposals for the North Eastern States in the following identified areas; 

-: 41 :- 
 
i) Housing projects (predominantly for the urban po or) 
ii) Poverty alleviation projects 
iii) Slum improvement/upgradation projects 
 
The Committee observe that during the year 2014-15,  the budgetary allocation was 
slashed from Rs. 50.00 crore to 40.00 crore while t he actual expenditure was Rs. 30.92 
crore upto 31 January 2015. The Committee have been  informed that the following 
reasons are attributed for less allocation at RE and less actual expenditure: 
“(i) The budgetary allocation under NULM was slashe d for the FY 2014-15 
from Rs 1003 crore to Rs 733 crore, as a consequenc e of which the allocation 
to 10% Lumpsum Scheme to NE States for the year was  proportionally 
reduced. 
(ii) The DPRs submitted by the States were found wa nting in many details 
and lot of modifications are required to be done after first appraisal. This delays 
sanction of new projects.  
(iii)  It has been instructed by Ministry of Financ e that for executing agencies 
other than State Governments, no funds shall be rel eased if UC is pending in 
any of the Projects. For projects being executed by  NBCC, this has become a 
constraint in release of funds. This has further led to lower utilisation of funds.” 
The Committee further observe from the reply of the  Ministry that the projects of the 
North-Eastern States are demand driven and as such no targets are fixed. In order to 
have a meaningful utilization of the budget and to motivate the State Governments for 
improving the living conditions of people in North- Eastern States, the Committee desire 
the Ministry to strive hard to bring in awareness a mong the target groups through audio 
visual  medium and advertisements. It could also co nsider re-modelling the financing 
pattern if that is an impediment and also identify different local needs falling within the 
scheme. 
 
 

-: 42 :- 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.37 It is informed that infrastructure projects ar e proposed by the ULBs/Governments 
who are well aware about the Scheme/guidelines.  Su ggestions of the State Governments 
will be invited on how to improve the 10% lump sum scheme further.   
Recommendation (Serial No.20) 
HINDUSTAN PREFAB LIMITED (HPL)  
 
2.38 Hindustan Prefab Limited an ISO 9001:2008 is a  scheduled 'C' Central Public 
Sector Enterprise under administrative control of M inistry of Housing & Urban Poverty 
Alleviation. It is engaged in the execution of projects on Turnkey basis, i.e. from concept 
to completion on Project Management Consultancy. HP L is currently providing Project 
Management Consultancy (PMC) for construction of pr ojects in 15 States awarded to it 
through various State Governments and its agencies.  
  HPL has signed an MoU  with Construction Industry  Development Council 
(CIDC) to promote the adoption of prefabricated and  pre-engineered technologies for 
achieving fast track construction especially for th e attainment of the goal of providing 
'Housing for all by 2022'.  
 The Committee are happy to note HPL is currently e ngaged as a Project 
Management Consultant (PMC) for undertaking project s using both conventional and 
prefab technologies. The decision to use the techno logies rests with the clients. HPL on 
its part has been advocating adoption of prefab tec hnologies in the respective projects.  
In the current year, HPL has taken up works of cons truction of schools toilets under 
“Swachh Bharat Abhiyaan”, where the construction is  being undertaken using prefab 
technologies.  Under the scheme, HPL is executing t he works on behalf of major PSUs 
like Power Grid Corporation of India Limited (PGCIL ), Power Finance Corporation 
(PFC), Northern Coalfields Limited (NCL), MSTC Limi ted, etc wherein nearly 15,000 
toilets are being taken up.  
Further, HPL has also been advocating rapid constru ction technologies using 
prefab options. In the current year, HPL is executi ng various construction projects for 

-: 43 :- 
 
NIT Jote, in Arunachal Pradesh by using pre-engineered building (PEB) concept costing 
about Rs.65 crore.  HPL has been taking up with its  clients and stakeholders for 
extensive use of prefab technologies and is hopeful  of getting major prefab works in the 
coming year. 
 Towards promoting HPL technology the Committee are  happy to  note that, HPL 
in coordination with the BMTPC is planning to set u p an Integrated Prefab Technology 
Park at HPL Campus, New Delhi for displaying techno logies and materials and also 
disseminating information on emerging construction technology, disaster resistance, 
sustainable building materials for cost effective a nd faster construction primarily 
focusing on prefab. This could act as a technology hub and incubation centre for prefab 
technologies. Further HPL would also take all suppo rtive actions in close association 
with Building Materials and Technology Promotion Co uncil (BMTPC) an autonomous 
organization under the Ministry for development of low cost technology in Housing. 
Efforts will be made to bring necessary changes in schedule of rates by consulting with 
the Government construction agencies. Towards promo ting the prefab would be taking 
up of the activities such as organizing seminars an d exhibitions which is also one of the 
parameters in the MOU to be signed with the Ministry of HUPA for the year     2015-16. 
 The Committee hope these steps would definitely pr omote the HPL technology in 
a right direction to minimize time and cost overrun . However, the Committee are 
constrained to note that still the cost of prefab technologies are significantly higher when 
compared to the conventional technologies since their demand is still very low, and only 
with increased volumes the cost will come down in the long run. 
 The Committee therefore wish to reiterate their ea rlier recommendation that the 
Ministry of HUPA should take concerted efforts and strive vigorously to change the mind 
set of all concerned engaged with construction agen cies and complete all the projects 
without cost and time overrun by adopting Prefab te chnologies. For this the Committee 
desire the Ministry to bring necessary changes in s chedule rates of the Govt. agencies 
and strive vigorously to popularize these technolog ies though seminars, video 
conferencing and advertisements. 
 
 

-: 44 :- 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.39 The Committee’s recommendation about creating awareness about Prefab 
technology and inclusion of rate in SOR has been noted. 
Recommendation (Serial No.22) 
HUDCO  
2.40 The Committee are given to understand that und er Corporate Social Responsibility 
(CSR) activities HUDCO has undertaken  initiative t o provide community toilet and have 
sanctioned CSR assistance worth Rs. 237.72 lakh out  of which CSR assistance of  only128.63 
lakh has been disbursed to the implementing agencie s and further instalments would be 
released after receipt of Utilization Certificates for the CSR assistance already released. In this 
regard, the Committee desire that HUDCO should vigo rously pursue such projects where the 
physical targets are not achieved, which would go a  long way under the Government of India's 
Swachh Bharat Abhiyan and also towards ending open defecation. 
 In respect of Night Shelters under HUDCO CSR activ ities, out of the sanctioned CSR 
assistance of Rs.1782.18 lakh, CSR assistance of Rs .540.86 lakh has been disbursed for due 
installments and further instalments shall be released after receipt of utilization certificate for the 
CSR assistance already disbursed and physical progr ess report from the concerned agencies. 
However, in few proposals, agencies concerned could  not achieve required physical/financial 
progress and submit the utilization certificate for  the CSR assistance released due to delay in 
obtaining required approvals, finalization of tende rs etc. resulting in delay in implementation of 
the proposals and consequent release of subsequent instalments of the CSR assistance.  
 Out of the 55 Night Shelters sanctioned in 16 stat es, 14 night shelters have been 
completed, works for 16 night shelters are in different stages of execution and construction work 
for 25 night shelters is yet to be taken up. 
The Committee desire that HUDCO should take proacti ve measures in this regard to monitor 
the projects for their timely implementation and release the sanctioned CSR assistance on time. 
 
 
 
 

-: 45 :- 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
2.41 HUDCO Regional Offices are being requested to pursue with the concerned agencies on 
priority for implementation of the proposals of Com munity Toilets and Night Shelters in a time 
bound manner and release of CSR assistance in a timely manner. 

-: 46 :- 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Nil 
 
  

-: 47 :- 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Serial No.4) 
 
RENTAL HOUSING  
4.1 The Committee observe that Sardar Patel Nationa l Mission for Urban Housing 
envisages creation of sufficient number of rental houses which can be made available to 
such homeless migrants and destitute. This rental housing is proposed to be primarily of 
2 types (a) for families and (b) for single person –dormitory.  It is envisaged that a house 
upto 30 sq. mtr area for families and single room h ostels/dormitories be constructed in 
sufficient numbers to be let out by the Urban Local  Bodies or other agencies including 
Private Sector to people who cannot afford to buy a house initially. The Committee have 
been informed that this scheme has been approved by  the Cabinet and the details are 
being fine-tuned by a Committee of Ministers.  The New Mission will be launched as 
soon as details are fine tuned. The Committee have been further informed that as part 
of new Mission, Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation will request Department 
of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP) to impres s industries to make provision for 
accommodation facilities for their employees throug h rental housing or Rent to own 
schemes.  Ministry of Labour and State Governments will also be requested to build 
rental housing stock under their welfare funds.  Su ch stock of housing created by the 
corporate entities would be rented to new employees who do not have their own houses 
in the city.  Ministry of Corporate Affairs will al so be requested to include ‘housing for 
their employees’ as one of the activities under the  corporate social responsibilities.   In 
the above backdrop, the Committee hope that the Min istry would complete all the 
formalities at the earliest and implement the same in letter and spirit. The Committee 
would also wish to reiterate their earlier recommen dation given in their 2 nd  Report on 
Demands for Grants (2014-15) that such houses be re nted to the individuals/ families 
for either ten years or till becoming a house owner  whichever is earlier. Necessary 
provisions may be made in the new Mission accordingly. 

-: 48 :- 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
4.2 It is brought to the attention of the Committee  that Rental housing is not a 
component of the Housing for All mission as approve d by the Competent Authority. In 
view of the factual position submitted above, it is  submitted that it is not possible to 
make provision for Rental housing in the new mission for Housing for All. 
( For comments please see paragraph  1.10 of Chapter-I.) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.7) 
SLUM REHABILITATION  
4.3 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee observe that as per 2011 census, the  total slum population in India is 
6.549 crore and the no. of slum households are 1.4 crore. The Committee have noted 
that the slum areas, get 65.3 per cent of tap water  from treated sources and 56.7 per 
cent drinking water is available within the premise s. Electricity facilities are 90.5 per 
cent. Latrine facility within the premises is 66 pe rcent, flush latrine is 57.7 percent and 
closed drainage is 36.9 percent. The Ministry feels  that further improvements are 
required with respect to provision of basic sanitar y facilities and other infrastructure. 
Within the available resources, efforts are being m ade to provide infrastructure in the 
slum re-development projects. The Committee have be en informed that it is the 
responsibility of the State Government to conduct s urvey about the numbers of Jhugi 
Jhopri clusters and the number of JJ clusters rehab ilitated. When enquired about the 
details of development plans submitted by States/UT s/ULBs in respect of housing and 
development infrastructure  in slums, the Committee were informed that Slum Free Plan 
of Action is required to be submitted in terms of  guidelines for the schemes of the 
Ministry and as on date 107 FPOAs have been receive d in the Ministry. The Committee 
feel that against 6.549 crore slum population as pe r population 2011 census, only 107 
SFPOAs are too meager. The Committee agree with the Ministry that Housing and slum 
are State subjects, but at the same time wish to im press upon the Ministry that it should 
take proactive steps and help the State Governments  in preparing SFPOAs to 
encompass the entire slum population in a phased manner. The Committee also wish to 
insist the fact that the SFPOAs should be comprehen sive to include basic facilities like 
housing, electricity, water supply, sanitation and drainage system. 
During examination of Demands for Grants (2014-15),  the Committee had 
observed that slum people are being rehabilitated i n the vertical buildings. In these 
buildings, maintenance is very shoddy. It is very d ifficult for the inhabitants to bear the 
cost of maintenance. The Secretary, Ministry of Hou sing and Urban Poverty Alleviation 
further informed that Ministry is having consultati ons with private builders who are 

-: 49 :- 
 
assigned the task of building houses for slum dwell ers to take care of maintenance 
mandatorily. The Committee are distressed to note t hat the responsibility for ensuring 
maintenance of the houses lies with the beneficiari es and State/ULBs can assist them 
as per their policy.  People living in the slums ar e shifting to multi-storied building and 
are losing their livelihood and finding it hard to maintain the buildings. Therefore, it 
would be unfair to leave the maintenance charge to the beneficiaries. During the study 
visit of the Committee   to Pune and Mumbai, the Co mmittee had observed that slum 
redevelopment is being done on PPP models.  Since t he private developers are given 
the task of redevelopment of slums, the Ministry an d the State Governments should 
insist on them to take charge of maintenance mandat orily instead of leaving it to the 
beneficiaries. 
Another issue related to relocation of slum is that people are being shifted to new 
buildings but at the same time the slum areas are n ot being razed as a result the slum 
dwellers sublet the new houses and come back to the  slums. About the action taken in 
this regard, the Committee have been informed that it is the responsibility of the State 
Governments to de-notify the slum after its redevel opment. The action to de-notify the 
slum after its redevelopment by the State governmen t would ensure that problems of 
subletting of the new houses and returning to the s lum by the beneficiary can be 
avoided. In this regard, the Committee wish to recommend that Ministry should regularly 
monitor the progress in this regard and ask the State Government to submit the physical 
status of the vacant land after the slum rehabilita tion. This will further help to stop 
encroachment of government land.  It is also felt t hat sometimes there is strong nexus 
among mafia groups who are working in tandem with t hose dwellers with their malafide 
intentions and help those dwellers for facilitating  subletting. Therefore, the Committee 
desire that the person found guilty of subletting s hould be debarred and their allotment 
should be cancelled with immediate effect. The Comm ittee also desire that the Ministry 
should allot the house in the joint name of husband  & wife or in the sole name of the 
wife so that the male members cannot dispose it off  and harass the family member with 
any malafide intentions. "  
 
 
 
 Reply of the Government:
 
4.4 The Ministry wish to state that the SFCPOAs hav e been prepared by States with 
regard to the earlier scheme of the Ministry. The S FCPoAs are prepared essentially to 
determine the extent of housing shortage. In so far as the provision of basic facilities like 
electricity, water supply, sanitation and drainage are concerned, these come under 
urban infrastructure and have not been covered unde r SFCPoAs. Out of 228 cities 
which were preparing SFCPoA, 112 have completed the  plans and rest are in progress. 
It is not possible to include additional informatio n at this juncture. Information on 
electricity, water supply, sanitation & drainage are available as per Census 2011.  
 It is clarified that in response to Question no. 2 4 of the List of points on the 
Demands for Grants (2014-15), the Ministry had stat ed that the responsibility for 
ensuring maintenance of the houses built under the scheme of the Ministry is with the 
beneficiaries and State/ULBs can assist them as per  their policy. Insisting on private 
developers to take over the maintenance of slums re developed on PPP basis may 

-: 50 :- 
 
make the project unviable to the private developer as Central assistance to the project 
is fixed. Private developers would not like to cont inue their association with the project 
beyond completion and reasonable time of post completion needs. Maintenance of such 
houses should, therefore, be the responsibility of owners individually or through 
Associations (RWAs). States have been requested to promote formation of RWA for 
such work.  
 In-situ slum redevelopment is the first option sug gested to the State 
Governments under the schemes of the Ministry. Ther e is no vacant land released in 
such cases. As observed by the Committee, it is the  responsibility of the State 
Government to de-notify the slum after its redevelo pment. Ministry always recommends 
de-notification of slums after redevelopment. Minis try completely supports and accept 
the recommendation of the Committee that the person  found guilty of sub-letting should 
be debarred and their allotment should be cancelled with immediate effect. 
 Under the guidelines of the earlier schemes of the  Ministry as well as in the 
proposed new mission on Housing for All, the allotm ent of the house is proposed in the 
joint name of the husband and wife or in the sole n ame of the women head of the 
family. 
(For comments please see paragraph  1.13 of Chapter-I.) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.21) 
BMTPC  
4.5 The Committee note that the National Urban Hous ing and Habitat Policy 2007 
stresses the need for construction of demonstration  houses in order to provide thrust to 
the technology dissemination activities in differen t regions of the country. Therefore, the 
Council besides providing technical assistance to l arge housing projects using cost 
effective housing technologies, proposes to showcas e Innovative, Green and Disaster 
Resistant Technologies through Demonstration Construction in different region. 
Under the proposed new Housing Mission, BMTPC would  be working in these 
areas. Its role would be to enable construction wit h speed and quality and with due care 
towards structural, functional and environmental re quirements under housing for all. 
During the year 2014-15 the grants-in aid received from the Ministry was Rs.4.99 crore. 
The internal revenue generation is Rs. 3.46 crore. The total expenditure is Rs. 7.65 
crore. The BE for the year 2015-16 is Rs. 5.00 cror e only. The Committee are 
constrained to note that at present, the activities  of the Council have been restricted 
keeping in view the grants sanctioned and the exter nal cash flow generated during 

-: 51 :- 
 
relevant year. Further, the role of BMTPC will be m ore challenging in view of the 
Housing for All by 2022. 
  
The present budgetary support and revenue generatio n by BMTPC is bare 
minimum to enhance the activities of BMTPC. In this  connection, the Committee in their 
earlier Reports have been recommending to enhance t he budgetary support. The 
Committee are distressed to note that Ministry has not enhanced the budgetary 
allocation during the current financial year. There fore, the Committee reiterate their 
earlier recommendation to strengthen BMTPC by providing sufficient financial support. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
4.6 During the budgetary demand for 2015-16, the Mi nistry had proposed budgetary 
allocation of Rs.11.50 crore for the BMPTC.  Govern ment has sanctioned Rs.5.00 crore 
for the organization for the FY 2015-16. 
 
(For comments please see paragraph  1.16 of Chapter-I.) 
 
 
  

-: 52 :- 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES O F THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
                                 PINAKI MISRA  
               , 2015
                                                                                           
                 Chairperson,                       
, 1936 (Saka)               Standing Committee on U rban Development 
 
  

-: 53 :- 
 
  

-: 54 :- 
 
 
ANNEXURE -I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2014-2015) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON  
TUESDAY, 4 th  AUGUST, 2015 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 4 th  August, 2015 from 1600 hrs. to 1800 hrs. 
in Committee Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT  
Shri Pinaki Misra   - Chairperson  
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
2.  Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Shri Ramesh Bidhuri 
4.  Shri Ram Charan Bohra 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
Shri Dushyant Chautala 
Shri Ashok Chavan 
Shri Dilip Kumar Gandhi 
Shri Maheish Girri 
9. Shri R.Gopalakrishnan 
10. 
 Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi 
11.  Shri K. Parasuraman 
12.  Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
13.  Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
14.  Shri Dharam Vira Gandhi 
RAJYA SABHA  
15.  Shri Husain Dalwai 
16.  Shri Anil Desai 
17.  Shri Mukul Roy 
18.  Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna 
19.  Shri S.Thangavelu 
  

-: 55 :- 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha   - Director 
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha   - Additional Director 
4. Smt. K. Rangamani N.  -  Under Secretary  
 
 
2. At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the fifteenth 
sitting of the Committee. The Chairperson made a ob ituary reference to the sad demise 
of Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam, former President of Indi a. The Members then stood in 
silence, to express their heart felt condolences and peace of the departed soul.  
The Committee thereafter took up for consideration the draft report on Action 
taken by the Government on the observations/Recomme ndations contained in the Sixth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2014-2015)  pertaining to the 
Ministry of  Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation.  After deliberations, the Committee 
adopted the report without any change and authorize d the Chairperson to present the 
same to both the Houses of the Parliament.  
3. ********  ********** ********  ********** ****** **** 
4. ********  ********** ********  ********** ****** **** 
5.         ******** ********** ********  **********  ********** 
  
 The witnesses then withdrew 
 A verbatim record of the proceeding has been kept.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
*****  These  portions  of the Minutes do not relate to the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 

-: 56 :- 
 
ANNEXURE -II 
                                            [Vide para 4 of the Introduction] 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON T HE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWEN TY FIFTH 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBANDEVELOPLME NT 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
I.  Total number of recommendations                                                  22  
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been ac cepted                  19 
by the Government:                 
Recommendation Nos.  
Percentage to total recommendations                                     (86.3%) 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committ ee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:                                   
Recommendation Nos. 
Percentage to total recommendations                                           (0 %)  
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of whic h replies of           3   
                         
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation No.  
Percentage to total recommendations                                      (13.6%) 
  V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of whi ch final                    
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
-Nil-    
Percentage to total recommendations                                         (0%)  