    STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
          URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
                                (2018-2019) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
RAINWATER HARVESTING IN METROPOLITAN CITIES 
 
 
 
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
January, 2019/ Pausha,1940 (Saka) 
 
 
  
24 


 
TWENTY FOURTH  REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2018 - 2019) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
RAINWATER HARVESTING IN METROPOLITAN CITIES 
 
 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on  07.01.2019 
Laid on the table of Rajya Sabha on  07.01.2019 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
January, 2019/ Pausha,1940 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 C.U.D. No.: 110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2019 By Lok Sabha Secretariat  
 
Publish under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by………… 
 
 
 
 
  

(i) 
 
Contents 
 
  Page No. 
 Composition of the Committee (2018-19) iii 
 Composition of the Committee (2017-18) iv 
 Composition of the Committee (2016-17) v 
 Composition of the Committee (2015-16) vi 
 Introduction  vii 
Chapter Report Part-I 
 
 
I. Introductory 
(a) (a) Importance of Rainwater Harvesting in Metropolitan Cities in the Country in the light of 
declining Ground Water level. 
       (b)   Water availability in the country 
1-6 
II. Role of different Ministries and Mechanism available with States and Urban Local Bodies 
(ULBs) for addressing the issue of inadequate Water Management and solving Water scarcity 
in Metropolitan Cities through rainwater harvesting. 
(i) Role of Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation. 
(ii) Role of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs.  
(iii) Role of NITI Aayog 
(iii)          (iv) Role of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Climate Change 
(v)  Role of State Government and Mechanism with ULBs 
(vi) Issue of solving inadequate water management 
7-16 
III. Rol      Role of different Agencies under Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
River in assisting the  States for water conservation through integrated resource 
management, flood forecast monitoring ground water regime etc. in the Country. 
(i) (i) Role of National Water Mission (NWM).  
(a) Use of Space Technology for water needs. 
(ii)   Role of Central Water Commission (CWC). 
(iii)  Role of Central Ground Water Board (CGWB). 
(iv)Role of Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA). 
17-30 
IV. Techniques of Rainwater Harvesting  
 1. Roof Top Rainwater Harvesting. 
 2.Drive way  off Rainwater Harvesting. 
31-38 
V. Promotion of Rain Water Harvesting     
(i) Need for national strategy for water conservation for long term water sustainable 
through policy interventions like inclusion of rain water harvesting in school 
curriculum 
(ii) Need for National Law for Rain Water Harvesting and storm water 
(iii)Need for separating supply of drinking water from other sources for rain 
water harvesting purposes. 
(iv)      (iv) Need for promoting Rain Water Harvesting through renovation of Jheels ar ound 
Metropolitan cities through MPLADS funds. 
(v)      (v) Need for use of unutilized space of Nalas in various cities for rain water harvesting 
purposes. 
(vi)       (vi) Need for rain water harvesting through dredging of ponds and canals.  
39-42 
VI. Rainwater Harvesting Laws, Guidelines 
I. Model Building Bye laws (MBBC), 2016 for buildings 
A. Rainwater Harvesting in various   Buildings 
B. Rainwater Harvesting in open space. 
C. Ground Water Recharge. 
D. Monitoring and Enforcement. 
II. Urban Regional Development Plan Formulation and Implementation (URDPF&I)  
       Guidelines for RWH for water bodies. 
III. Uniformed Building Bye Laws (UBBL) of NCT of Delhi 2016. 
IV.  Urban Green Guidelines, 2014. 
V. Provisions regarding RWH in AMRUT 
43-58 
VII. Physical and Financial Performance of MOWRRD&GR and MOH&UA 
 (a) Ministry of Water Resources 
 (b) Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs  
59-69 
VIII. Best Practices 70-75 
IX. Requirement of Funds 76-77 
X. Part-II Recommendations and Observations 78-105 

 
 
(ii) 
 
Appendices 
 
Annexure-I National Water Mission work done 106 
Annexure-II  
 (A, B,C) 
Integrated Resources Development and Management in the Country 109 
Annexure-III Directions by CGWA for RWH 112 
Annexure-IV Projects under AMRUT- Status 113 
Annexure-V RWH Projects under Smart Cities Mission 115 
 
 
I Minutes of the Sitting held on 10.02.2016      
 
II Minutes of the Sitting held on 23.01.2017 
 
III Minutes of the Sitting held on 11.07.2017 
         
IV Minutes of the Sitting held on 18.07.2018 
 
V Minutes of the Sitting held on 07.08.2018 
 
VI Minutes of the Sitting held on 29.10.2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

(iii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2018-19) 
Shri Pinaki Misra         -        Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
      LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Pradan  Baruah 
3. Shri Ramesh Bidhuri 
4. Shri Ashok  Shankarrao Chavan 
5. Shri Dilipkumar  Mansukhlal Gandhi 
6. Dr. Dharam Vira Gandhi 
7. Shri Maheish Girri 
8. Shri R.Gopalakrishnan 
9. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
10. Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi 
11. Shri P.C. Mohan 
12. Shri  Srinivas Kesineni Nani 
13. Shri K. Parasuraman 
14. Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil 
15. Shri Charanjeet Singh Rori 
16. Shri Alok Sanjar 
17. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
18. Shri Anil Shirole 
19. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
20. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
21. Prof. K. V. Thomas 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri R.S. Bharathi  
23. Shri Husain Dalwai 
24. Dr. Tazeen Fatma 
25. Shri K.C. Ramamurthy 
26. Shri Y.S. Chowdary 
27. Shri Ahamed Hassan 
28. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
29. Dr. Anil Jain 
30. 
31. 
Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
Dr. Prabhkar Kore 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri P.C. Koul                  -          Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. A.K. Shah         -       Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(iv) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2017-2018) 
Shri Pinaki Misra         -        Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
      LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Pradan  Baruah 
3. Shri Ramesh Bidhuri 
4. Shri Ashok  Shankarrao Chavan 
5. Shri Dilipkumar  Mansukhlal Gandhi 
6. Dr. Dharam Vira Gandhi 
7. Shri Maheish Girri 
8. Shri R.Gopalakrishnan 
9. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
10. Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi 
11. Shri P.C. Mohan 
12. Shri  Srinivas Kesineni Nani 
13. Shri K. Parasuraman 
14. Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil 
15. Shri Charanjeet Singh Rori 
16. Shri Alok Sanjar 
17. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
18. Shri Anil Shirole 
19. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
20. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
21. Prof. K. V. Thomas 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri R.S. Bharathi  
23. Shri Husain Dalwai 
24. Dr. Tazeen Fatma 
25. Shri K.C. Ramamurthy 
26. $Shri Y.S. Chowdary@ 
27. $Shri Ahamed Hassan# 
28. $Dr. Anil Agrawal@ 
29. $Dr. Anil Jain* 
30. Vacant@ 
31. Vacant@ 
 
$   Shri Y.S. Chowdary, Shri Ahamed Hassan, Dr. Anil Agrawal and Dr. Anil Jain nominated as  
   Member  w.e.f. 02/06/2018. 
 
* Shri Mukul Roy resigned from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 11/10/2017. 
 
# Shri Parvez Hashmi retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 27/01/2018. 
 
          @ Shri Anil Desai, Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna, Shri Ajay Sancheti and Shri Devender Goud T.  
             retired from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 02.04.2018. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(v) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2016-2017) 
Shri Pinaki Misra         -        Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
      LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Ramesh Bidhuri 
3. Shri Ram Charan Bohra 
4.  Shri Charanjeet Singh Rori 
5. Shri Ashok  Shankarrao Chavan 
6.  Dr. Dharam Vira Gandhi 
7. Shri Dilip  Mansukhlal Gandhi 
8.  Shri Maheish Girri 
9.  Shri R.Gopalakrishnan 
10. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
11.  Shri  Srinivas Kesineni Nani 
12. Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi 
13. Shri P.C. Mohan 
14. Shri K. Parasuraman 
15.  Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil 
16. Shri Alok Sanjar 
17.  Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
18.  Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
19. Prof. K. V. Thomas 
20. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
21. Shri Pradan  Baruah 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri R.S. Bharathi 
23. Dr. Subhash Chandra 
24. Shri Husain Dalwai 
25. Shri Anil Desai 
26.  Shri Parvez Hashmi  
27. Shri K. G. Kenye 
28. Shri Mahesh Poddar 
29. Shri K.C. Ramamurthy 
30. Shri Ajay Sancheti 
31. Shri Dharamapuri Srinivas 
  

(vi) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2015-2016) 
                           Shri Pinaki Misra         -        Chairperson 
 
    MEMBERS 
     LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Shri Ramesh Bidhuri 
4.  Shri Ram Charan Bohra 
5. Shri Dushyant Chautala 
6.  Shri Ashok  Shankrarao Chavan 
7. Dr. Dharam Vira Gandhi 
8.  Shri Dilip  Mansukhlal Gandhi 
9.  Shri Maheish Girri 
10. Shri R.Gopalakrishnan 
11.  Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua  
12. Shri  Srinivas Kesineni Nani 
13.  Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi 
14. Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
15. Shri P.C. Mohan 
16.  Shri K. Parasuraman 
17. Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil 
18.  Shri Alok Sanjar 
19.  Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
20. Prof. K. V. Thomas 
21. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Smt. Vandana Chavan 
23. Shri Husain Dalwai 
24. Shri Anil Desai 
25.  Shri Parvez Hashmi  
26. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna 
27. Shri Mukul Roy 
28 Shri C.P. Thakur 
29. Shri K.G. Kenye* 
30. Shri R.S. Bharathi** 
31.  Vacant # 
 _____________________________________________________________ 
*  Shri K.G. Kenye  had been nominated w.e.f., 20 May, 2016, Vice Shri Khekiho Zhimomi , 
expired on 26 November, 2015. 
** Shri R.S. Bharathi has been nominated w.e.f., 3 August, 2016, Vice Shri S. Thangavelu, 
retired from Rajya Sabha on 29 June, 2016. 
# Vice Shri Satish Sharma retired from Rajya Sabha on 4 July, 2016.   
 
 
 

 
INTRODUCTION 
  
 I, the Chairperson of the Committee on Urban Development (201 8-19) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty Fourth 
Report on the subject, "Rainwater Harvesting in Metropolitan Cities "  of the Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs. 
 
2. The Commi ttee were briefed  by the r epresentatives of the then Ministry of Urban 
Development on 10 February, 2016 and 23 January, 2017.  The Committee also hear d the 
views of the non-officials i.e. Tarun Bharat Sangh and Centre for Science & Environment on 11 
July, 2017.  The Committee took oral Evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs on 18  July, 2017 and took further E vidence of the representatives of Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs alongwith those of Ministry of Water Resources, River Development 
and Ganga Rejuvenation, Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change and NITI Aayog 
on 7 August, 2018. 
 
3. The Committee w ish to express their gratitude to the representatives of the different 
Ministries and non-official witnesses for appearing before the Committee and placing  the 
requisite material/information from time to time in connection with examination of the subject.  
 
4. The Committee also place  on record the valuable contribution s made by the previous 
Committees (2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-18) on the subject. 
 
5. The Committee of their setting held on 07 Aug 2018, considered and adopted the Draft 
Report. 
 
6. For facility of reference, the Observa tions/ R ecommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters and placed as Part II of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  
04th January, 2019 
14 Pausha, 1940 (Saka) 
          PINAKI MISRA,  
               Chairperson 
Standing Committee  
on Urban Development  
  
 
 
 
(vii) 
 

1 
REPORT 
PART-I  
CHAPTER-1 
Introductory 
  
(a) Importance of Rainwater Harvesting in Metropolitan Cities in the Country 
in the light of declining Ground Water level 
 
 During the last quarter of 2017, media was abuzz with disturbing reports of Day 
Zero happening in Capetown, South Africa in April, 2018.  Day Zero implies ground 
water table running out and the consequent turning off of taps in city concerned with a 
view to ration water supply.  Due  to some natural mitigation, it is understood that Day 
Zero has now been pushed further by a few months but the threat looms round the 
corner. 
 In India's context, the  Committee noted from a Report of Niti Aayog in middle of 
2018, titled composite Water M anagement Index - A tool for Water Management that  
India is suffering from the worst water crisis in its history and millions of lives and 
livelihoods are under threat.  600 million people in India face high to extreme water 
strees and about 2 lakh people die every year due to inadequate access to safe water in 
the country.  About three fourth of the households in the country do not have drinking 
water at their premise.  With nearly 70% of water being contaminated water, India is 
placed 120th amongst 122 countries in the water quality index. 
 The report goes on to state that the crisis is only going to get worse.  By 2030, 
the country's water demand is projected to be twice the available supply, implying 
severe water scarcity for hundreds of millions of peop le and an eventual - 6% loss in 
Country's GDP. 
1.2 The Committee were also informed that the National Commission for Integrated 
Water Resource Development of M/o WR, the water requirement of the Country by 
2050 in high use scenario is likely to be 1180 BCM whereas the present day availability 
is 695 BCM.  The total availability of water possible in Country is still lower than this 
projected demand at 1137 BCM.  Thus, there is an imminent need to deeper our 
understanding of our water resources and usage and p ut in place interventions that 
make our water use efficient and sustainable.  In view of limitations on availability of 
water resources and rising demand for water, sustainable management of water 
resources has indeed acquired critical importance. 

2 
 Another worrying fact brought out in the Niti Aayog Report is that 21 major cities 
in India including New Delhi and Bengaluru may be hit by Day Zero by the year 2020. 
 
India is experiencing rapid urbanization. As per Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs estimates the urban population has gone up from 29 crore in 2001 to 37.70 
crore in 2011 and the number of urban towns has also risen from 5161 to 7935 during 
the period.  As a consequence of this phenomenon, water demand in urban areas is 
increasing rapidly.  At the same time metropolitan cities in the country are currently 
facing a peculiar position of acute shortage of drinking water in the summers despite 
the fact that these cities experience good rainfall and flooding water logging of streets 
in the Monsoons.   In India, a metropolitan city is defined as  having a population of 1 
million and above.  As per  Census  2011, there are 46 metropolitan cities in India and 
the top ten ones being Mumbai, Delhi, Kolkata, Chennai, Hyderabad, Bengaluru, 
Ahmedabad, Pune, Surat and Visakhapatnam.  
 
1.3  As per NITI Aayog, rain water harvesting has been considered to be a simple, 
viable and eco -friendly method of water conservation and a sustainable solution to 
recharge the groundwater. Further  as per Central Ground Water Board data, the Pre -
Monsoon (April-May, 2018) water level data when compared with decadal average 
2008-2017, indicated 66% of wells in the country showing decline in ground water level 
in certain pockets in all States/UTs of the country and   prominent cities like Bengaluru, 
Chennai, Kolkata, Ranchi, Hyderabad, Vishakhapatnam, Mumbai, Guwahati, Indore, etc. 
have experienced steep fall in ground water in terms of number of wells.  Further, 
prominent cities like Allahabad, Ghaziabad, Kanpur, Lucknow, Meerut, Banaras have 
experienced 100 percent fall in ground water level. This calls for an urgent need for 
rainwater harvesting in Metropolitan Cities in a big way. NITI Aayog has also stated that 
most metro cities in India are water starved but not rain starved. The very fact that 
water har vested is water produced and thus we need to make sincere attempts to 
harvest every drop of water that falls within every premises, locality, city and country  

3 
before thinking in terms of mega projects like interlinking of rivers, desalination of sea 
water, etc. Pollution of rivers and dumping of garbage and industrial and domestic 
effluents into water bodies and encroachment of them will have to be stopped and the 
water bodies will have to be revived for capturing rainwater.  In this connection during 
the course of oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs, the Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs on 07.08.2018 admitted 
before the Committee: 
 "आज की डेट में वाटर  को क ं जवव  करना  हमार े  लिए 
बहुत इम्पोटेंट है" 
 
(b) Availability of Water in the country  
 
 1.4  As per NITI Aayog, the subject of rain water harvesting in metropolitan cities 
however, cannot be dealt in isolation and thus, an overall analysis of the water budget 
of India becomes relevant. The average annual rainfall in India is about 1100mm which 
is received mainly from two monsoons viz. the south -west (during June to September 
spreading to western, northern and central India) and north -east (from October to 
December, received mostly in South India). T he rainfall in India is not uniform and it 
varies in space and time. It has the region of highest rainfall, i.e., Mawsynram in 
Meghalaya receiving 12000 mm of annual rainfall and Thar Desert receiving as low as 
50mm of annual rainfall. Owing to this, extre mities like drought and flood co -exist 
simultaneously. Plenty of water getting drained and non -availability of drinking water 
goes hand in hand. The annual water budget of India is tabulated below: 
(BCM- Billion Cubic Metres) 

 
 
 
4 
Precipitation received 4000 BCM (100%) 
Water Resources 
Potential 1869 BCM (46.7%) 
Utilizable Water 
Resources 
1137 BCM 
(28.42%) 
Ground Water 447 BCM (11.11%) 
Surface Water 690 BCM (17.2%) 
 
1.5  In India, around70% of utilizable water resource is used in irrigation itself, the 
efficiency of which is only about 35%. Thus, roughly 313 BCM of the utilizable water 
resources is lost due to poor irrigation efficiency. This is far more than the wate r 
requirement of the country for usage other than irrigation (not exceeding 70 BCM for 
the entire country and 35 BCM for urban areas). As such, the country is not a water -
scarce country as a whole either today or even in the time to come.  The scarcity of 
water, very often debated upon, is actually due to inadequate water management.  As 
much as 55% of India’s total water supply comes from groundwater resources, which is 
also a cause of concern. Irrigation, of which over 60% comes from groundwater, takes 
up over 80% of total water usage in India. Besides, nearly 30% of urban water supply 
and 70% of rural water supply comes from groundwater. So, dependency on 
groundwater is higher in the country owing to improper surface water management. In 
this connection, during the course of evidence of representatives of M/o H&UA, the 
NITI Aayog Report saying that Bangaluru city will go without ground water by 2021 was 
prominently highlighted by the Committee.  

 
 
5 
1.6  The MOWRRDGR in the material submitted before the Co mmittee highlighted the 
need for sustainable water management in urban areas with use of ground water with 
rain water stating as under:- 
"National Water Policy on Urban Water Supply 
National Water Policy (2012) formulated by Government of India has 
stressed on need for sustainable management of water resources in Urban 
areas. Some of the prominent stipulations on urban water management in 
National Water Policy are –  
 
(i) There is a n eed to remove the large disparity between stipulations 
for water supply in urban areas and in rural areas. Efforts should 
be made to provide improved water supply in rural areas with 
proper sewerage facilities. Least water intensive sanitation and 
sewerage systems with decentralized sewage treatment plants 
should be incentivized.   
(ii) Urban and rural domestic water supply should preferably be from 
surface water in conjunction with groundwater and rainwater. 
Where alternate supplies are available, a source  with better 
reliability and quality needs to be assigned to domestic water 
supply. Exchange of sources between uses, giving preference to 
domestic water supply should be possible. Also, reuse of urban 
water effluents from kitchens and bathrooms, after pri mary 
treatment, in flush toilets should be encouraged, ensuring no 
human contact.  
(iii) Urban domestic water systems need to collect and publish water 
accounts and water audit reports indicating leakages and 
pilferages, which should be reduced taking into  due consideration 
social issues.   
(iv) In urban and industrial areas, rainwater harvesting and de -
salinization, wherever techno -economically feasible, should be 
encouraged to increase availability of utilizable water. 
Implementation of rainwater harvesti ng should include scientific 
monitoring of parameters like hydrogeology, groundwater 
contamination, pollution and spring discharges.  
(v) Urban water supply and sewage treatment schemes should be 
integrated and executed simultaneously. Water supply bills s hould 
include sewerage charges.  

(vi) For improved service delivery on sustainable basis, the State 
Governments / urban local bodies may associate private sector in 
public private partnership mode with penalties for failure, under  
 
 
6 
 regulatory control on prices charged and service standards with full 
accountability to democratically elected local bodies  
 The National Water Policy (2012) has been forwarded to all State 
Governments/UTs and concerned Ministries/Departments of Central 
Government for adoption." 
 
 1.7  The Ministry of WRRD&GR in their submission before the Committee have also 
stated:- 
"Urban centres in India are facing an ironical situation today. On one hand there 
is the acute water scarcity and on the other, the streets are often flooded durin g 
the monsoons. This has led to serious problems with quality and quantity of 
groundwater. This is despite the fact that all these cities receive good rainfall. 
However, this rainfall occurs during short spells of high intensity . (Most of the 
rain falls in just 100 hours out of 8,760 hours in a year). Because of such short 
duration of heavy rain, most of the rain falling on the surface tends to flow away 
rapidly leaving very little for recharge of groundwater. Most of the traditi onal 
water harvesting systems in cities have been neglected and fallen into disuse, 
worsening the urban water scenario. One of the solutions to the urban water 
crisis is rainwater harvesting - capturing the runoff. 
Countries like Germany, Japan, United Sta tes, and Singapore are also adopting 
rainwater harvesting. The need of the hour is to implement the rain water 
harvesting on a serious note in all the areas in the country including urban areas 
which are suffering from continuous decline of water level."  
*** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

7 
Chapter-II 
 
Role of different Ministries and Mechanism available with States and Urban 
Local Bodies (ULBs) for addressing the issue of inadequate Water 
Management and solving Water scarcity in Metropolitan Cities through 
rainwater harvesting 
 
2.1 The role of different Ministries and Mechanism with States and Urban Local 
Bodies (ULBs) for rainwater harvesting has shown below: 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the Ministry Role in Rainwater Harvesting 
 
(i) Ministry of Water 
Resources, River 
Development and 
Ganga Rejuvenation 
(M/o WR,RD, GR) 
Framing general policy providing technical and 
financial assistance to States/UTs and 
undertaking  research and development in the 
field of water resources. 
  
(ii) Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs (M/o 
HUA) 
Urban Development including urban planning 
and urban water supply is a State subject. 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
supplements the efforts of the States and 
Urban Local Bodies in these sectors through 
its various flagship program mes. The Ministry 
looks after the supply of water in urban areas 
and its various schemes such as Atal Mission 
for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation 
(AMRUT) whose primary focus is on supplying 
water to the all urban households in 500 
AMRUT cities. 
(iii) NITI Aayog To evolve a shared vision of national 
development priorities sectors and strategies 
with active involvement of States in the light 
of national objectives. To design strategic and 
long term policy and programme frameworks 
and initiatives, and monitor their progress and 
the efficacy. The lesson learnt through 
monitoring and feedback will be used for 
making innovative improvement including 
necessary mid-course corrections. NITI Aayog 
is also to design strategic and long term policy 
and programme frameworks and monitor their 
progress. 
 
 
 
 

8 
(iv) Ministry of Environment 
& Forests and Climate 
Change (M/o E&FCC) 
Implementing schemes of National River 
Conservation Plan (NRCP) and National Plan 
for Conservation of Aquatic Eco -Systems  
(NPCA) and according prior Environmental 
clearance  to different developmental projects  
with specific stringent conditions  includin g 
conditions for rainwater harvesting  as per 
norms of central  pollution control board 
under environmental impact assessment 
notification 2006.   
(v) Role of State 
Governments and 
Mechanism available 
with  Urban Local 
Bodies (ULBs) 
Giving various incenti ves to citizen like rebate 
in property tax, one time subsidy etc. 
providing technical support to empanelled 
persons  to execute rainwater harvesting 
works for private buildings, standards design 
and cost estimates etc. and monitoring,  
evaluation and promotional activities etc. 
 
 
(i) Role of  Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation (MOWRRDGR) 
 
 2.2  During the course of evidence of the representatives of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejunvation (WRRDGR) in their general submission to the 
Committee the WRRDGR stated as under: 
 
 "Ministry of Water Resources, RD & GR has been given the responsibility 
of framing general policy, providing technical assistance, financial assistance and 
undertaking research and dev elopment in the field of water. As per constitution 
of India Seventh schedule, Entry 56 of List I and Entry 17 of List II, water is a 
State subject and therefore, all initiatives on water management including 
conservation and artificial recharge to ground water is primarily States’ 
responsibility. 
 As per direction of Cabinet Secretariat an inter -ministerial Committee 
under the chairmanship of Secretary (MoWR, RD & GR) has been constituted 
with Secretary of concerned ministries including Advisor, Niti Aayog  etc as 
members on ‘Water Conservation emphasising water conservation related 
activities for optimum utilization of monsoon rainfall’’. Chief Secretaries of States 
have been requested to forward state specific action plan for effective water 
harvesting through various central sponsored schemes/state schemes. 
  
 A National Perspective Plan (NPP) envisaging inter -basin transfer of water 
has been formulated by MoWR, RD & GR to improve water security in the 
country. The implementation of NPP would give added be nefits of approximately 
35 million hectare of additional irrigation potential and 34000 Mega Watt (MW) 
hydropower generations apart from the incidental benefits of flood moderation, 
 

9 
 
 navigation, drinking and industrial water supply, fisheries, salinity  and pollution 
control etc. Ministry has taken up several steps to address the problem of 
inadequate water management in the country, including formulation of National 
Water Policy (2012) which highlights the need for water conservation measures 
and holist ic management of water resources in the country including urban 
areas. Time to time advisories has been issued to the State Government 
regarding Artificial Recharge and Rainwater Harvesting measures. Model Bill has 
been circulated with special emphasis on artificial recharge and rain water 
harvesting for sustainability of ground water sources. The States have been 
pursued for enacting suitable legislation for bringing roof top rain water 
harvesting under building Bylaws in urban areas. Recycle and reuse of water, 
after treatment to specified standards as well as rainwater harvesting and 
artificial recharge are being incentivized through various initiatives, programmes/ 
schemes of the Government. 
 The State Governments are taking necessary steps to identify t he 
additional storages required as well as taking up (Extension, Renovation and 
Modernization) ERM schemes for restoration of lost potential. The State 
Governments are identifying additional storage/diversion projects for making full 
use of available surfa ce water. Various initiatives has been proposed under 
National Water Mission to optimize the water utilization which includes increasing 
water use efficiency, recycling and reuse of water as well as dual water supply 
provisions in the urban areas.  In Indi a, water resources projects are owned, 
constructed and maintained and operated by the respective State Governments, 
and so, steps or action to ensure sustainability of water resources   are 
undertaken by respective state Governments depending on their prio rity and 
resources for meeting various demands. The Ministry of Water Resources is 
responsible for laying down policy guidelines and programs for the development 
and regulation of country's water resources. In order to facilitate water 
conservation and gro und water recharge in the country a conceptual document 
titled “Master Plan for Artificial Recharge to Ground Water” - 2013 has been 
prepared by CGWB which provides information about availability of rainwater for 
recharge, area specific artificial recharge  techniques to augment the ground 
water resources. The Master Plan envisages construction of about 1.11 crore 
artificial recharge structures in urban and rural areas at an estimated cost of 
about Rs. 79178 crore.  
 Some of the steps taken by the Central government for conservation of 
ground water are available at http://mowr.gov.in/ sites/default/files/ 
MeasuresForGW-Depletion_2.pdf. These are as under: 
 
"Steps taken by the Central Government to promote rain water harvesting 
in the country are as follows :  
 
(i). Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) has prepared a conceptual document 
titled “Master Plan for Artificial Recharge to Ground Water – 2013” which 
provides information about area specific artificial recharge techniques to augment 
the ground water resources based on the availability of source water and 
capability of subsurface formations to accommodate it. The Master Plan 
envisages construction of about 1.11 crore artificial recharge structures in urban 
and rural areas at an estimated cost of Rs. 79178 crore. 

10 
 This comprises around 88 lakh recharge structures/ facilities utilizing rainwater 
directly from roof top and more than 23 lakh artificial recharge and rainwater 
harvesting structures for conserving surplus runoff to augment the groundwater 
resources. It is estimated that annually about 85,565 MCM of surplus run -off can 
be harnessed to augment the ground water. The Mas ter Plan is available in 
public domain and has also been circulated to the State Governments for its 
implementation.  
(ii). The National Water Policy (2012) formulated by Ministry of Water Resources, 
RD & GR, inter -alia, advocates conservation, promotion a nd protection of water 
and highlights the need for augmenting the availability of water through rain 
water harvesting, direct use of rainfall and other management measures. The 
National Water Policy (2012) has been forwarded to all State Governments/UTs 
and concerned Ministries/Departments of Central Government for adoption.  
(iii). CGWA has been constituted under “The Environment (Protection) Act, 
1986” for the purpose of regulation and control of ground water development and 
management in the Country. So far, CGWA has notified 162 areas in the Country 
for the purpose of regulation of ground water. The ground water abstraction 
guidelines are under revision and are likely to be notified soon. 
(iv). CGWA has issued advisories to States and UTs to take measure s to 
promote/adopt artificial recharge to ground water/rainwater harvesting. 30 
States/UTs have made rainwater harvesting mandatory by enacting laws or by 
formulating rules & regulations or by including provisions in building bye -laws or 
through suitable Government Orders.  
(v). This Ministry has circulated a Model Bill to all the States/UTs to enable them 
to enact suitable ground water legislation for its regulation and development 
which includes provision of rain water harvesting. So far, 15 States/UTs ha ve 
adopted and implemented the ground water legislation on the lines of Model bill.  
 
(vi). CGWB has taken up Aquifer Mapping and Management programme 
(NAQUIM) during XII Plan, under the scheme of Ground Water Management and 
Regulation. The Aquifer Mapping  is aimed to delineate aquifer disposition and 
their characterization for preparation of aquifer/area specific ground water 
management plans, with community participation.  
(vii). Model Building Bye Laws, 2016 circulated by Ministry of Urban 
Development in clude the provision of Rainwater Harvesting. As per Model 
Building Bye Laws, water harvesting through storing of water runoff including 
rainwater in all new buildings on plots of 100 sq.m and above will be mandatory. 
Barring the States/UT of Manipur, Sikki m Mizoram and Lakshadweep, all the 
States have incorporated the provisions in their respective building bye laws. The 
plans submitted to the local bodies shall indicate the system of storm water 
drainage along with points of collection of rain water in sur face reservoirs or in 
recharge wells. Further, all building having a minimum discharge of 10,000 liter 
and above per day shall incorporate waste water recycling system. The recycled 
water should be used for horticultural purposes.  

11 
(viii). Department of Land Resources is currently implementing 8214 watershed 
development projects in 28 States covering an area of about 39.07 million ha. 
under the Watershed Development Component (WDC) of the Pradhan Mantri 
Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) principally for de velopment of rainfed portions 
of net cultivated area and culturable wastelands. The major activities taken up 
under the WDC -PMKSY, inter -alia, include ridge area treatment, drainage line 
afforestation, soil and moisture conservation, rain water harvesting,  horticulture, 
and pasture development etc.  
(ix). The Ministry of Rural Development in consultation and agreement with the 
Ministry of Water Resources, RD & GR and the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ 
Welfare has developed an actionable framework for Na tural Resources 
Management (NRM), titled “Mission Water Conservation” to ensure gainful 
utilization of funds. The Framework strives to ensure synergies in Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS), Pradhan 
Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY), Integrated Watershed Management 
Programme (IWMP) and Command Area Development & Water Management 
(CAD&WM), given their common objectives. Types of common works undertaken 
under these programmes/schemes are water conservation and management,  
water harvesting, soil and moisture conservation, groundwater recharge, flood 
protection, land development, Command Area Development & Watershed 
Management.  
 
 (x) CGWB is carrying out training programs and IEC activities for capacity 
building and awareness creation among stakeholders on the importance of water 
conservation and rainwater harvesting for augmenting the ground water resources".  
 
(ii) Role of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (M/o HUA) 
 
 2.3  During the course of examination of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
(MOHUA) in their material submitted before the Committee have also clarified: 
 
"Urban Development including urban planning and urban  water supply is a State 
subject. Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs supplements the efforts of the 
States and Urban Local Bodies in these sectors through its various flagship 
programmes. The Ministry looks after the supply of water in urban areas and i ts 
various schemes such as Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation 
(AMRUT) whose primary focus is on supplying water to the all urban households 
in 500 AMRUT cities.  The role of this ministry in overall management of water 
resources is quite limited. As far as Rain Water Harvesting is concerned, the role 
of the Ministry is mainly advisory and limited to the measures to be taken by the 
States/ULBs in urban planning and building plan permissions and the Ministry 
does not maintain data base per taining to rainwater harvesting, ground water 
recharge, status of aquifer, etc. On its parts MoHUA has issued guidelines for 
urban and regional planning (Urban and Regional Development Plan Formulation 
and Implementation -URDPFI) and Model Building Bye -Laws (MBBL), which, 
among other things, also mandates the Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) and Urban 
Development Authorities (UDAs) to implement rainwater harvesting.  

12 
 
ULBs/UDAs mainly focus on rainwater harvesting in buildings. The role of ULBs in 
maintaining information on ground water is also very limited. The larger issue of 
ground water recharge and management of water resources, including ground 
water, is dealt with by the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and 
Ganga Rejuvenation (M oWRRD&GR). Aquifers and ground water levels are 
monitored by Central Ground Water Board, which also comes under the 
MoWRRD&GR. Recently, MoWRRD&GR has also constituted a coordination 
committee headed by the Chief Secretaries, to monitor water conservation 
efforts at State level. Further, the implementation of the rainwater harvesting 
and retaining water bodies comes within the purview of urban local bodies/urban 
development authorities of the city concerned. Various issues concerning water 
management such as National Water Policy, Water Conservation, Master Plan for 
Artificial Recharge, National Project on Aquifer Management (NAQUIM), etc. are 
also looked after by MoWRRD&GR. The Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs has 
formulated guidelines for the guidance o f the States for their adoption suiting 
local conditions. Adequate focus has been given on requirement of rainwater 
harvesting and water conservation measures in Unified Building Bye Laws (UBBL) 
of Delhi, 2016, Model Building Bye Laws (MBBL), 2016 and Urba n and Regional 
Development Plan Formulation and Implementation (URDPFI) Guidelines, 2014. 
Due importance is given to rainwater harvesting in urban Missions like Smart 
Cities Mission and AMRUT. Based on the Model Building Bye Laws, 2016 all the 
States, othe r than Manipur, Sikkim, Mizoram and Lakshadweep have 
incorporated the provisions of Rainwater Harvesting." 
 
(iii) Role of NITI Aayog 
 
2.4   Outlining their role and workdone regarding rainwater harvesting, the NITI Aayog 
in their written submission have stated : 
"The work relating to rainwater harvesting particularly in metropolitan cities 
primarily comes within the purview of Ministry of Urban Development, Ministry of 
Water Resources and the State Governments.  The initiatives taken by NITI 
Aayog have been largel y to supplement their initiatives and to play an advisory 
role.  NITI Aayog has developed the Composite Water Management Index to 
gauge the performance of States in the field of management of water resources 
and has ranked them according to their water man agement efforts. In CWMI’s 
indicator 26, NITI Aayog has recorded the performance of the State for rain 
water harvesting."  
 
Asked whether NITI Aayog have any framework for rainwater harvesting in 
public and private buildings; the NITI Aayog informed:- 
 
"The data related to the indicator have been uploaded on online portal viz. 
socialniti.gov.in which is in public domain. Besides, NITI Aayog has also brought 
out a compendium of best practices in various States in the area of water 
resources. NITI Aayog in co llaboration with Singapore Cooperation Enterprise 
has also undertaken capacity building programme in the field of recycling of 
water.  
 

13 
 
NITI Aayog has recently developed the Index (CWMI) where in the various Key 
performance parameter reflects policy le vel implementation. Besides this 
Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office (DMEO) of NITI Aayog has 
developed an output outcome monitoring framework for various Ministries." 
 
(iv) Role of Ministry of Environment & Forests and Climate Change 
(MOE&FCC) 
 
 2.5   During the course  of examination the Committee pointed out that the  Ministry of 
Environment and Forest and Climate change (M/o EF &CC) being the nodal Ministry for 
Environmental clearance to different developmental projects can play a pi oneering role 
towards working for rainwater harvesting in the various Metropolitan Cities facing 
considerable decline in ground water by way of granting such clearances by stricter 
following of rainwater harvesting provisions under Environment Impact Asses sment 
Notification, 2006, the M/o E&FCC informed. 
"As mandated under the Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) Notification, 2006 (and its amendments), 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) accords prior environmental clearance for 
projects or activities listed in the Schedule to the EIA Notification, 2006 after having followed the prescribed 
process in the said notification. Environmental Clearances to different developmental projects  are granted 
with specific stringent conditions whic h are both project specific and general in nature as well as mitigative 
measures in accordance with the Environment Management Plan Report which is prepared on the basis of 
the study and are to be complied with by the project proponents. While considering the Developmental 
projects for grant of prior Environmental Clearance under the provisions of EIA Notification, 2006, the 
following conditions related to rain water harvesting and ground water recharge  are deliberated and 
stipulated as specific condition: 
  
Building and Construction projects/Townships and Area Development Projects:  
 
(i) A complete plan for rain water harvesting, water efficiency and conservation should be 
prepared and implemented.  
(ii) The local bye-law provisions on rain water harvesting should be followed. If local bye -law 
provision is not available, adequate provision  for storage and recharge should be followed as 
per the Ministry of Urban Development Model Building Byelaws, 2016.   
(iii) A rain water harvesting plan needs to be designed where the recharge bores of minimum 
one recharge bore per 5,000 square meters of b uilt up area and storage capacity of minimum 
one day of total fresh water requirement shall be provided. In areas where ground water 
recharge is not feasible, the rain water should be harvested and stored for reuse.  
(iv) The ground water shall not be with drawn without approval from the Competent 
Authority. All recharge should be limited to shallow aquifer. 
(v) At least 20% of the open spaces as required by the local building bye -laws shall be 
pervious. Use of Grass pavers, paver blocks with at least 50% op ening, landscape etc. would 
be considered as pervious surface. 
 Airport Projects: 
(i) The runoff from paved structures like Runways, Taxiways, can be routed through drains 
to oil separation tanks and sedimentation basins before being discharged into rainwa ter 
harvesting structures. 

14 
 
(ii) Rain water harvesting for roof run -off and surface run -off, as plan submitted should be 
implemented. Before recharging the surface run off, pre -treatment must be done to remove 
suspended matter, oil and grease.  
(iii) Ground water abstraction and rain wate r recharge shall be as may be prescribed by the 
CGWA. A clearance of the CGWA shall be obtained in this regards. 
 Industrial Projects: 
(i) Proponent shall practice rainwater harvesting to maximum possible extent.  
(ii) Proponent shall make efforts to minim ize water consumption in the steel plant complex 
by segregation of used water, practicing cascade use and by recycling treated water. 
(iii) The company shall harvest rainwater from the roof tops of the buildings and storm water 
drains to recharge the groun d water and utilize the same for different industrial operations 
within the plant. 
 Non Coal Mining Projects: 
 The mined out area will be used for rain water harvesting. The water, inter -alia used for 
ground water recharge and other agricultural purposes." 
 
2.6  The Committee also wanted to know whether while granting Environment 
clearance for different projects the Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change 
have also promoted the aforesaid techniques amongst the implementing a gencies for 
making them user friendly so that the rainwater harvesting is done properly, the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests has clarified:  
"While granting the Environmental clearances for developmental projects, the 
Ministry of Environment, Forest an d Climate Change have stipulated conditions 
for rainwater harvesting which have to be complied by the project proponent as 
per the norms of Central Ground Water Board. Ministry has not promoted any 
specific techniques for rainwater harvesting amongst the i mplementing 
agencies." 
 
(v) Role of State Government and mechanism available with ULBs 
 
 2.7  The Ministry of  Housing and Urban Affairs outlining the role of State Governments and 
mechanism available with Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) for promoting Rain Water  Harvesting 
during their presentation before the Committee gave the following details: 
(i) Through urban planning tools 
(ii) Built environment and building permissions 
(iii) By including in the reform agenda linked to schemes 
(iv) Various incentives to citizens 
(v) Awareness campaign 
(vi) Provide technical support 
(vii) Monitoring and evaluation 
  

15 
2.8 Ministry of  Housing and Urban Affairs also highlighted  the following measures to 
be undertaken to promote rainwater harvesting. 
"Land use planning can support RWH 
 
(i) Provision of sufficient open and green space 
(ii) Urban and Regional Development Plan Formulation and 
(iii)Implementation (URDPFI) Guidelines, 2014 are widely used 
(iv)It includes provisions, which promote RWH and Ground 
water Recharge, such as: 
  
(a) Provisions for Green City ( 5.4.1) 
 (b) Guidelines for preventing runoff (6.5.2) 
 (c) Provisions for keeping sufficient open land ( 2.2.4.1 & 8.4.5) 
 (d) Preservation and conservation of natural drainage systems (6.7.2) 
 (e) Specific guidelines to promote RWH (8.3.4) 
 (f) Retaining water bodies (6.7.2)" 
 
(vi) Issue of solving inadequate water management 
 2.9  During the course examination NITI Aayog outlined the problem of inadequate 
water management for solving the water scarcity in Metropolitan Cities.  The Committee 
wanted to know whether the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development, Ganga 
Rejuvenation (M/oWR, RD & GR) has ever thought of solving the problem of inadequate 
water management in the country as outlined by NITI Aayog and whether (M/oWR, RD 
& GR) has done any spade work for solving the problem of water scarcity in 
Metropolitan cities in the country.   
The Committee also enquired about work has been done by M/o. WR, RD and 
GR in reducing the dependency on ground water in the country since as high as 30% of 
urban water supply comes from ground water and drinking water supply at Metropolitan 
cities like Chennai is being arranged from a distance of over 200 kms. Whereas for 
Bangalore water supply is coming from Cauvery river which is 95 kms from the city at 
huge cost at public expense.   
 
 

16 
The Committee enquired whether M/o WR, RD & GR has worked on these lines with the 
help of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, (M/o H&UA)particular for solving water 
woes in Metropolitan cities of Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Bangalore, Hyderabad and so 
on, M/o.WR, RD & GR informed: 
"Water is a State subj ect and thus its management including conservation and 
artificial recharge to ground water is primarily States’ responsibility. Further, 
MoWR, RD & GR has taken up mass awareness campaign on water harvesting 
and conservation, implementation of Aquifer Mapp ing and Management program 
pan India including  urban areas.  A few pilot works on rain water harvesting has 
been also taken up by CGWB, which may be replicated Pan -India on their 
success." 
 
2.10  Asked whether the Master Plan prepared by CGWB is not very old and needs to 
be updated for ascertaining the real time data for present day requirement of rainwater 
harvesting and artificial recharge in the country, the MoWR, RD &GR informed:  
"Master Plan for Artificial Recharge to Groundwater is conceptual docume nt 
prepared based on hydro -geological feasibility of rocks, hydrology, rainfall etc. 
There is a need for updating of Master plan incorporating data generated by 
different agencies in coordination with States." 
 
 
*** 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
Role of different Agencies under Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga River in assisting the States for water conservation 
through integrated resource management, flood forecast monitoring ground 
water regime etc. in the Country 
 
3.1  Role of different organizations/PSUs under M/o. Water Resources, River 
Development  and Ganga Rejuvenation on rain water Harvesting issue is as under:- 
 
Sl. 
No. 
 
 
Name of the Mission 
Organisations / PSU / 
Scheme 
 
Objective 
1. National Water Mission Conservation of water, minimizing waste and 
ensuring its more equitable distribution both 
across and states through integrated resources 
development and management 
2. Central Water 
Commission (CWC)  
The main activities of CWC inter alia include 
flood forecasting and assistance to State 
Government in Flood Management, National 
Water Resources Assessment etc. 
3. Central Ground Water 
Board  
The main activities of CGWB are 
(i) National Aquifer Mapping 
(ii) Monitoring of Ground Water Requirement in 
the country 
(iii) Estimation of Ground Water Resources 
(iv) Training on artificial recharge of Ground 
Water 
(v) National Hydrology Project 
(vi) Demonstrative Projects on artificial 
recharge of ground water 
(vii) Regulation of Ground Water  
 
4. Ganga Flood Control 
Commission 
Among the task assigned to GFCC include 
preparation and updation of comprehensive 
Plans for Flood Management of river systems in 
the Ganga Basin. 
 
 
(i) Role of National Water Mission 
 
3.2  During the course of examination, the Committee drew the attention to the Annual 
Report (2016-17) of Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
 
 

18 
Rejuvenation showing activities under National Water Mission as Conservation of water, 
minimizing waste and ensuring its more equitable distribution through integrated 
resources development and management.   
(a)  Need for use of Satellite technology for water needs. 
3.3 During the course of evidence of representatives of Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs, the issue of failure on the part of Government in managing water 
problem came up prominently before the Committee during the and need was 
highlighted before the Committee for creation of sustainable infrastructure for this 
purpose by way of making use of excellent technology available through satellite 
mapping of ground water for assessment of water needs of each city by use of five 
resources of sewage water, sea water, rain water, ground water and reservoir.  In this 
connection, almost no work was done in Andhra Pradesh for rain water harvesting was 
also outlined so it was also told that initiatives like Jal  Jeevan are of no use. The 
Committee enquired  about work done under National Water Mission (NWM) towards 
conservation of water, minimising wastage and ensuring equitable distribution both 
across and within the States through integrated resources development and 
management in the country and whether s ufficient  sustainable infrastructure for the 
above purpose on the suggested lines for Metropolitan cities like Hyderabad, Bangalore, 
Chennai, Delhi, Mumbai and various other cities facing water shortage have been set 
up,  the MOWRRDGR stated: 
'Water being a State subject, initiatives on water governance is primarily States’ 
responsibility. However, National Water Mission (NWM), MoWR, RD&GR is taking 
initiatives to supplement the efforts of the State Governments. The main work 
done by NWM to achieve its goa l include (i) Studies on impact of climate change 
in 7 river basins, ii) Capacity building and training of stakeholders, iii) Base line 
studies for improving water use efficiency, iv) benchmarking studies for water 
use in certain type of industries and pre paration of State specific action plans for 
water sector etc. The details of the work done by National Water Mission are 
attached at Annexure-I. The work done under the National Water Mission 
 

19 
 
 towards conservation of water, minimizing wastage and ensu ring equitable 
distribution both across and within the States through integrated resources 
development and management in the Country during the last two years State 
wise on each Goal are given at Annexure- II A, B, C. 
 
3.4  The MOWR, RD & GR stated:- 
 
"As Water supply, sewage, drainage and sanitation relating to urban areas and 
linkages from allocated water resources is the mandate of Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs, National Water Mission, M/o WR, RD & GR has not taken any 
action on management of Water mainly in urban areas. However, National Water 
Mission has taken an initiative to bridge the critical water governance gap 
through an institutional mechanism of State Water Budgeting on the lines similar 
to that of financial budgeting. NWM developed a template for water budgeting to 
be filled in by the State governments as a part of their State Specific Action Plan 
for water sector (SSAP -Water).  The water budget in the SSAP needs to be 
formulated based on scientific assessment of the supply and demand s ide of 
water resources. To support the initiative, NWM is providing financial support to 
the States. The water budget provides flexibility to meet the emerging demands 
with a revision of allocations subject to a condition that annual water expenditure 
should not exceed estimated annual water availability. 
 
State Specific Action Plans (SSAP) for water  in respect of 11 States (Andhra 
Pradesh, Telangana, West Bengal, Uttarakhand, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Tamil Nadu and Arunachal  Pradesh) have been 
taken up in Phase- I and the remaining states are being taken up in Phase –II." 
 
3.5  In this context, in reply to a unstarred question in Lok Sabha  (ref. 4120 
dated 13/08/2015) outlining the salient features of Geographic Information 
System (GIS) Technology in the field of water resources, the Minister of WR, RD 
& GR clarified: 
 
"Geographic Information System (GIS) technology is a map based 
advanced tool integrating various thematic pieces of information, which 
assist in ev olving solutions for management of water resource.  GIS is 
helpful in areas of Basin Planning, Irrigation Potential Assessment, 
identification of Water Resource Development project sites, Environment 
Impact Assessment studies as well as Environmental and C ommand Area 
monitoring, Rainfall Run -off modeling, Disaster Management, identifying 
feasible locations for wells and formulation of plans for managing 
groundwater resources on a local or regional scale. 
As per the information received from the State Govern ments, 
Chhattisgarh, Tripura, Meghalaya, Telangana, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal 
have adopted GIS based technology for harvesting rainwater.  However, 
no time -line has been fixed for adoption of the same for rain water 
harvesting in the entire Country." 
 

20 
 
(ii) Role of Central Water Commission 
   
3.6  During the course of examination, the Committee drew the attention of Ministry of 
WRRD&GR, the Annual Report (2016 -17) of Ministry of WR, RD & GR indicating  the 
role of Central Water Commission as flood forecas ting and assistance to State 
Governments in Flood Management, National Water Resources Assessment etc. In this 
connection, during the course of aforesaid evidence, it also came up before the 
Committee that during the Summers when the need for rain water ha rvesting becomes 
subject matter of discussion however in the Monsoons when there is plenty of rains 
nobody talks about the issue.  In this connection, the issue of meeting the water 
shortage by desalination of sea water in a big way was also outlined. The Committee 
enquired whether Central Water Commission (CWC) that is inter alia responsible for 
forecasting and Assistance to State Governments in Flood Management and National 
Water Resource Assessment in association with Ganga Flood Control Commission 
(GFCC) has done some work for proper assessment of water at national level,  the 
Ministry of WRRD&GR stated: 
"The  average annual water resources potential in the country was assessed as 
1869 BCM and given in the CWC report entitled ‘Reassessment of Water 
Resources Potential of India’ (1993).The increase in population, agricultural and 
industrial demands resulted in reduction in per capita water availability. In 1951, 
the per capita water availability was 5,177 cubic meter per year (i.e. about 5.18 
million liters per year). On the basis of the population indicated in 2011 census, 
the per capita water availability works out to about 1545 cubic meter per year 
(i.e. about 1.55 million liters per year). In view of topographical constraints and 
hydrological features, the utilizable water has been estimated to be about 1,137 
BCM. (690 BCM surface water as assessed by CWC and 447 BCM ground water 
as assessed by CGWB)" 
 
 3.7  Asked as to whether CWC has also assessed in consultation with M/oH&UA and 
different State Governments, requirement of water in metropolitan cities so that 
availability of water is ensured throughout the year in Metropolitan cities like Bangalore,  
 

21 
Hyderabad, Chennai, Delhi, Mumbai and so on in the country, the Ministry of WR, RD & 
GR clarified:- 
  
"No such exercise has been carried out by CWC in consultation with M/oH&UA 
and different state governments. However, an internal committee under the M/o 
Water Resources, RD & GR has been constituted to undertake a study of current 
and future demand & availability of water for various purposes including drinking 
and domestic purposes in the major cities of the Country and to suggest an 
action plan accordingly.  The report is expected soon." 
 
(iii) Role of Central Ground Water Board  
 
 3.8  During the course of examination, the Committee pointed out that Central Ground 
Water Board (CGWB) is responsible for National Aquifer Mapping, monitoring of ground 
water regi me in the country, estimation of ground water resources, demonstrative 
projects on artificial recharging of ground water, regulation of ground water etc. In 
reply to an Unstarred Question, Lok Sabha,  as per Central Ground Water Board data, 
the Pre -Monsoon (April-May, 2018) water level data when compared with decadal 
average 2008-2017, indicated 66 %of wells in the country have registered decline in 
ground water level in certain pockets in all States/UTs of the country.  The position of 
decline water level in various cities is as under. 
Decadal Water Level Fluctuation With Mean (Pre-monsoon (2007-2016) and  Pre-
monsoon 2017 in Urban areas – Major city-wise details 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the City No. of wells 
Analysed 
No. of wells 
Rise Fall 
1. Mumbai 3 2 1 
2. Delhi 89 56 33 
3. Kolkata  14 2 12 
4. Chennai 11 1 10 
5. Bangalore 25 3 22 
6. Hyderabad 20 9 11 
7. Pune 5 2 3 
8. Kochi 23 11 13 
9. Thiruvananthapuram 14 1 12 
10. Patna 6 2 4 
11. Ranchi 17 2 15 
 

22 
12. Indore 20 7 13 
13. Jabalpur 19 6 13 
14. Guwahati 31 12 19 
15. Faridabad 2 0 2 
16. Coimbatore 4 0 4 
17. Madurai 1 0 1 
18. Vishakhapatanam 14 1 13 
19. Jaipur 7 3 4 
20. Allahabad 1 0 1 
21. Ghaziabad 1 0 1 
22. Kanpur 4 0 4 
23. Lucknow 4 0 4 
24. Meerut 1 0 1 
25. Varanasi 2 0 2 
 
3.9  The Committee pointed out that prominent cities like Bangalore (22 /25 wells), 
Chennai (10/11 wells), Kolkata (12/14 wells), Ranchi (15/17 wells), Hyderabad (11/20 
wells), Vishakhapatnam (13/14 wells), Mumbai (1/3 wells), Guwahati (19/31wells), 
Indore (13/ 20 wells), etc. have experienced steep fall in ground water.  Further, 
prominent cities like Allahabad, Ghaziabad, Kanpur, Lucknow, Meerut, Banaras have 
experienced 100 percent fall in ground water level, based on limited data available with 
State /CGWB.  In this connection, during the course of evidence of representatives of 
M/o H&UA, the NITI Aayog Report saying that Bangalore city will go without ground 
water by 2021 was prominently highlighted by the Committee.  Asked about the 
reasons that almost all m ajor cities have experienced steep fall in ground water level 
during the above period when the responsibility of water management lies with the 
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation  particularly 
of  Central Ground Water Board, the Ministry of WR, RD & GR clarified:- 
 
"Ground water decline in the major cities is broadly due to two reasons , the first 
and foremost reason is increase in ground water withdrawal in localized areas to 
meet the ever increasing demand of cities as well as due to reduction in natural 
ground wat er recharge owing to urbanization / concretization. Further, the 
unregulated use of ground water due to limited availability of surface water 
sources and non -committed/ inadequate water supply by the concerned 
Municipalities, ground water is being abstract ed by the water supply agencies in 
the cities as well as by individual households/ institutional buildings/ housing 
societies/ commercial users etc.   

23 
 
Water being a State Subject, extraction and management of ground water comes 
under the purview of Sta te Governments. Ministry of WR, RD &GR plays an 
advisory role. As per directions of CGWA under the Ministry, States have 
amended building bye laws by incorporating mandatory provision of roof top rain 
water harvesting in buildings. Also Ministry has circul ated Model Bill to regulate 
and control ground water development and management to the States/ UTs. So 
far 15 States/ UTs have adopted ground water legislation.  Therefore, regulation 
of ground water development and management comes under the purview of 
concerned State agencies."  
 
  3.10  Asked about the details of Aquifer mapping, monitoring of ground water 
and estimation of Ground Water Resources is being done by CGWB which is not 
yielding the desired results, the Ministry of WRRD&GR clarified:  
 
"CGWB is mandated to develop and disseminate technologies and monitor 
and implement national policies for the scientific and sustainable development 
and management of India’s ground water resources. Under this ambit and 
with the existing manpower and infra structure, the focus of CGWB is to 
generate scientific data and knowledge to facilitate state agencies in effective 
management of ground water resources. The data and findings of CGWB are 
duly shared with State/ local authorities to take appropriate manage ment 
interventions.  In order to fulfill the mandate, CGWB has taken up activities 
for scientific data generation under National Aquifer mapping programme 
(NAQUIM) to create knowledge base to facilitate effective management of 
ground water by the States. I n view of the declining ground water level in 
several cities, the master plan for artificial recharge to ground water - 2013 
prepared by CGWB lays adequate emphasis in urban areas and accordingly 
suitable interventions have been recommended for the urban ar eas 
separately ( http://cgwb.gov.in/documents/ masterplan-2013.pdf). The report 
has been shared with the State agencies for taking appropriate action. 
Additionally, the CGWA has pursued States for adopting roof top rain water 
harvesting in urban areas through enacting suitable legislation or bringing 
roof top rain water harvesting mandatory under building by laws. 30 States 
have already enacted suitable legislations to this effect. Studies conducted / 
being condu cted by the Central Ground Water Board on Aquifer Mapping, 
Water level monitoring & estimation of groundwater resources etc are 
scientific in nature and on that basis various report on aquifer management 
plans / groundwater management plans are prepared di strict / Block -wise 
which are shared regularly with concerned State / UTs agencies and Central 
agencies for needful interventions in respect of management of groundwater 
resources. Many States / UTs & Ministries have utilized in planning, the 
information on groundwater provided by the Board through various reports & 
documents." 
 
  3.11  The Committee also pointed out that whether proper monitoring is not 
been done by Central Ground Water Board in different States/UTs, the Ministry 
of WR, RD & GR further clarified:  

 
24 
 
"Various activities undertaken by CGWB including regular monitoring o f 
ground water level, quality, assessment of availability of ground water 
resources, preparation of aquifer wise management plans in association with 
State Government facilitates preparation of schemes for development and 
regulation of ground water in the States.  It is because of the proactive role 
of CGWB the scientific data in respect of ground water including status of 
exploitation the country is being appraised to States for taking appropriate 
action. However, regarding the implementation of management interventions, 
the role of CGWB is limited to technical advice, training and capacity building 
advisory role through preparation of Aquifer Mapping and Management Plan 
and sharing the same with State agencies."  
 
  3.12  The Committee also enquired as to how Central Ground Water Board is 
planning to reduce dependence of total water supply on ground water in the 
country and specially in prominent Metropolitan cities of Bangalore, Hyderabad, 
Chennai, Delhi, Mumbai and so on, the Ministry of WR, RD & GR informed: 
  "The dependency on ground water can be reduced through supply & 
demand side management interventions like provision of surface water 
sources, regulation on ground water development, etc." 
 
"The water supply being a State Subject, the role of Ministr y is limited to 
policy interventions and in this regard a Model Bill has been circulated to 
all the States/UTs to enable them to enact suitable ground water 
legislation for its regulation and development. So far, 15 States/UTs have 
adopted and implemented the ground water legislation on the lines of 
Model Bill. 
 
Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) has been constituted under “The 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986” for the purpose of regulation and 
control of ground water development and management in the Country. So 
far, CGWA has notified 162 areas in the Countr y for the purpose of 
regulation of ground water. CGWA while issuing NOC for ground water 
extraction for Industry & Infrastructure projects, also lays emphasis on 
Recycle & Reuse of water to reduce the stress on consumption of fresh 
water.  
 
Apart from abov e, CGWB is implementing National Aquifer Mapping and 
Management Program as a part of the ‘Ground Water Management and 
Regulation’ scheme. The Aquifer management plans incorporate various 
Demand-side management measures including use of recycled water and 
application of water use efficiency etc. The Aquifer Management plans 
are shared with the State Governments for implementation. CGWB also 
undertakes IEC activities through which need for adopting water 
conservation measures are highlighted to the stakeholders." 
 
  

25 
3.13  The Committee also wanted to  know whether CGWB is going to ban ground water 
extraction in areas experiencing steep fall in ground water level on the lines of Australia 
and Japan, the Ministry of WR, RD & GR has stated:- 
 
"Central Ground Water Board regularly monitors ground water levels and ground 
water resource assessment is carried out periodically. Based on  the stage of 
ground water development and significant decline in ground water levels, 
assessment units (blocks/ talukas/ mandals e tc. are categorized as Safe, Semi -
critical, Critical and Over- exploited. As per latest assessment (2013), out of 6584 
assessment units, 1034 Over -exploited, 253 are Critical, 681 Semi -critical and 
4520 Safe. Central Ground Water Authority has notified 162  areas for regulation 
of ground water development. 
 
Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) regulates extraction of ground water 
through guidelines. As per the current guidelines effective from 16.11.2015, no 
new tube wells are permitted in the notified areas except for drinking & domestic 
use. Industries/ infrastructure/ mining projects withdrawing ground water are 
required to seek No Objection Certificate for ground water withdrawal from the 
Authority. NOCs are issued by the Authority with mand atory conditions of 
construction of observation wells (piezometers), installation of Digital water level 
recorders for ground water level monitoring and mandatory ground water 
recharge as specified in the guidelines for each category of area." 
 
 
 3.14  The  Committee also drew the attention to the Annual Report (2016 -17) of 
MOWRRD&GR showing achievements of Central Ground Water Board in the area of 
Aquifer Mapping that Aquifer Mapping is in multi disciplinary scientific process wherein a 
combination of geolo gic, geophysical, hydro -geological and hydrological and Water 
quality data are integrated to characterize the quantity, quality and distribution of 
ground water in Aquifer.  The Committee also pointed out that out of 23 lakh sq. 
kilometer mappable area of the Country, the Central Ground Water Board has initiated 
Aquifer Mapping to cover around 8.89 lakhs sq. kilometer in the first phase, however an 
area of 5.25 lakh sq. kilometer have re -prioritized by the providing priority to regions of 
high level ground water extraction, water quality deterioration etc., in State of Haryana, 
Punjab, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Bundelkhand 
regions of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh. Asked about how much work of 5.25  

26 
lakh sq. mt.re -prioritized area Statewise has so far been covered as on 31.07.2018, the 
Ministry of WR, RD & GR stated:- 
"State and UT -wise areas (in km 2) for which aquifer maps have been prepared 
and management plans have been developed (till June, 2018) 
S.No. State/UT 
Area for which aquifer maps 
and management plans have 
been prepared (km2) 
1. Andhra Pradesh 51942 
2. Arunachal Pradesh 3399 
3. Assam 6879 
4. Bihar 14921 
5. Chhattisgarh 19525 
6. Dadra & Nagar Haveli 490 
7. Delhi 1483 
8. Gujarat 31522 
9. Haryana 44179 
10 Himachal Pradesh 3000 
11. Jammu & Kashmir 9506 
12. Jharkhand 19395 
13. Karnataka 84043 
14. Kerala 15200 
15. Lakshadweep 32 
16. Madhya Pradesh 71364 
17. Maharashtra 64635 
18. Manipur 1655 
19. Mizoram 700 
20 Meghalaya 4937 
21. Nagaland 910 
22. Odisha 22412 
23. Pudducherry 454 
24. Punjab 50368 
25. Rajasthan 151275 
26. Tamil Nadu 70117 
27. Telangana 39578 
28. Tripura 6757 
29. Uttar Pradesh 62231 
30 Uttarakhand 5811 
31. West Bengal 18711 
32. A&N Islands 200 
 Total 877631 
 3.15  When further enquired by the total Mappable area Statewise will be completed, 
the Ministry of WRRD&GR stated: 

27 
 
 "An area of around 6.31 lakh sq. km area has already been covered 
 during XII Plan (2012 -17) by the CGW B and area 6.60 lakh sq. km is 
 targeted to be covered during 2017 -20. Rest of the area will be taken up 
 after 2020, by taking approximately 2 lakh sq. km. per year and expected 
 to be completed by 2025." 
 
(iii) Role of Central Ground Water Authority 
 
 3.16  The MOWRRDGR in their submission before the Committee have informed that 
Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) has been constituted  as per directions of the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court vide order dated 10.12.1996 passed in Civil Writ Petition 
4677/1985; under  Section 3(3)of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 for the 
purpose of regulation and control  of ground water development and management in 
the country.  
 3.17  The MoH&UA while outlining the role of Central Ground Water Authority has 
stated that CGWA is regulating ground water withdrawal by industries / infrastructure / 
mining projects in Non -Notified areas for which guidelines / criteria have been framed 
and are available on website www.cgwb.gov.in.  NOC is granted subject to 
implementation of ground water recharge measures as per following criteria : 
Category of 
assessment 
unit based on 
ground water 
development 
Recharge measures to be 
adopted for 
Industries/Infrastructure/mi
ning units (other than water 
intensive industries) 
Recharge measures to be 
adopted for water intensive 
industries viz packaged 
drinking water, soft drink 
industries, distilleries, 
breweries, paper, etc. 
Safe Recharge measures have to 
be adopted in the  project 
area 
Recharge quantity needs to 
be 50% of ground water 
withdrawal 
Semi-Critical Recharge quantity needs to 
be 50% of ground water 
withdrawal 
Recharge quantity needs to 
be 100% of ground water 
withdrawal 
Critical Recharge quantity needs to 
be 100% of ground water  
withdrawal 
Recharge quantity needs to 
be 200% of ground water 
withdrawal 
Over-Exploited Recharge quantity needs to 
be 200% of ground water 
withdrawal 
No permission for 
Industries under this 
category. 
 

  
28 
 3.18  Asked about the metropolitan cities in different States which have been 
categorized as Safe Semi-Critical and Over-Exploited where rainwater harvesting can be 
done for getting the desired results, the MoWR, RD & GR stated: 
 
"The assessment of Dynamic Ground Water Resources and categorization of 
assessment units are carried jointly with the states. The assessment units are 
generally Blocks/ Taluks/ Mandals/ watershed/ Firkas, talukas etc and not 
separately for metropolitan cities. In the revised norms for assessment of 
dynamic ground water resources assessment for urban areas has been 
recommended. Master plan for artificial recharge for the country including Urban 
areas has been prepared by CGWB. The Master Plan (2013) is available in public 
domain and has been shared with all State agencies for implementation" 
 
 3.19  The Committee also wanted to know whether the Central Ground Water Authority 
has done some tangible work for rainwater harvesting in these Metropolitan Cities 
during the last two years, the Ministry of WR,RD & GR informed:- 
 
"Secretary, MoWR, RD & GR has written to Chief Secretaries of States/ UTs to 
adopt rain water harvesting and artificial recharge measures. Further on the 
directions of Hon’ble NGT, inspections of in stitutional buildings/ hotels/ 
industries/ Yamuna Express way/ malls/ RWAs/ fly overs etc. were carried out in 
Delhi, NOIDA, Greater NOIDA, Faridabad, Ballabhgarh and Gurgaon to check 
proper implementation of  rain water harvesting measures. CGWA provides 
technical expertise to the institutions, RWAs, Schools etc for implementation of 
roof top rain water harvesting. Awareness creation through trainings and mass 
awareness is organized by CGWA." 
 
 3.20  The Committee also wanted to know work done by Central G round Water 
Authority in different States regarding compliance of its various directions by the State 
Governments, NHAI, CRRI, CPWD, Indian Railways, Residential Group Housing 
Societies, etc. during the last two years, the Ministry of WRRD&GR replied:-  
"No such action to monitor compliance of directions issued to State 
Governments, NHAI, CRRI, CPWD, Indian Railways, Residential Group Housing 
Societies, etc. was taken by CGWA during the last two years. However, A D.O. 
letter was addressed by the Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation to Chief Secretaries of States/ UTs to adopt 
rain water harvesting and artificial recharge measures. Further on the directions 
of Hon’ble NGT, inspections of institutional buildings/ hotel s/ industries/ Yamuna 
Express way/ malls/ RWAs/ flyovers, etc. were carried out in Delhi, NOIDA,  
 

29 
 
Greater NOIDA, Faridabad, Ballabhgarh and Gurgaon to check proper 
implementation of  rain water harvesting measures." 
 
 3.21  Asked as to how the above provisions are being monitored by agencies at 
different levels, the Ministry of WRRD&GR stated:-  
"As regards to the implementation of rainwater harvesting  in the Metropolitan 
Cities  the concerned Urban Development has made mand atory provision of its 
implementation in their respective building bye -laws. Also the new infrastructure 
projects are cleared only with a condition for mandatory implementation of 
rainwater harvesting. CGWA while according NOCs to any infrastructure projec t 
has condition for implementation of rainwater harvesting within the campus of 
the project. Also while according the NOCs to such projects the copies are sent 
to respective State Department and concerned District Collector/ District 
Magistrate/ District C ommissioner for ensuring implementation of the conditions 
laid down in the NOC." 
 
 3.22  The Committee further enquired whether GGWA is going to ban ground water 
extraction in areas experiencing steep fall in ground water level on the lines of Australia 
and Japan, the Ministry of WRRD&GR clarified: 
 
"Central Ground Water Board regularly monitors ground water levels and ground 
water resource assessment is carried out periodically. Based on the stage of 
ground water development and significant decline in ground water levels, 
assessment units (blocks/talukas/mandals etc. are categorized as Safe, Semi -
critical, Critical and Over-exploited. As per latest assessment (2013), out of 6584 
assessment units, 1034 Over -exploited, 253 are Critical, 681 Semi -critical and 
4520 Safe. Central Ground Water Authority has notified 162 areas for regulation 
of ground water development. 
 
 Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) regulates extraction of ground 
water through guidelines. AS per the current guidelines effective from 
16.11.2015, no new tubewells are permitted in the notified areas except for 
drinking & domestic use. Industries/infrastructure/mining projects withdrawing 
ground water are required to seek No Objection Certificate for ground water 
withdrawal from the Authority. NOCs are issued by the Authority with mandatory 
conditions of construction of observation wells (piezometers), installation of 
Digital water level recorders for ground water level monitoring and mandatory 
ground water recharge as specified in the guidelines for each category of area." 
 
 3.23  The Committee also drew the attention to the M/o. H&UA has also elaborated 
before the Committee that Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) has also issued 
various directions for artificial recharge of ground water as shown at Annexure-III. 
 

30 
 3.24  The Committee pointed out that various directions has been given by Central 
Ground Water Authority for adoption of Rainwater Harvesting/ Artificial recharge to 
Ground Water on various dates from 2006 to  2011 to Chief Secretaries of 14 States of 
UTs of Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Gujarat, Punjab, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, 
etc. and to NHAI, CRRI, CPWD, State Public Works Department, Indian Railways, etc. 
Residential Group Housing Societies, Schools, Industrial Establishments and so on. 
 
 3.25  Asked about the reasons that in spite of so many Directions issued from time to 
time from CGWA, the level of ground water is receding in almost all major cities in the 
country and whether clarified all these Di rections are on paper, the Ministry of 
WRRD&GR clarified:- 
"Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) has issued several directions from time 
to time for adoption of Rainwater Harvesting/ Artificial recharge to Ground 
Water. During 2006, Chief Secretaries of S tates/ Administrators of Union 
Territories having OE & Critical blocks viz. Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Gujarat, 
Punjab, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, 
Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Daman & Diu and Pondicherry were 
directed for adopting Artificial Recharge/Rain Water Harvesting in 1065 Critical & 
OE blocks; inclusion of RTRWH in building bye laws and promoting conservation 
of water through mass awareness, management trainings, etc.  
 
Directions were also given to NHAI, CRRI, CPWD, State Public Works 
Department, Indian Railways, etc. Residential Group Housing Societies, Schools, 
Industrial Establishments etc. for promoting rain water harvesting and adopting 
artificial recharge to ground  water. Also Chief Secretaries of all States/ 
Administrators of Union Territories and Ministry of Urban Development, Govt. of 
India were directed for adopting Artificial Recharge/Rain Water Harvesting on all 
the Govt. Buildings and MoUD was advised to dire ct the respective departments 
to adopt RWH/artificial recharge on all Central Govt. buildings under their 
jurisdiction.  
 
  
*** 
  

31 
CHAPTER-IV 
Techniques of Rainwater Harvesting in Urban Areas and related issues 
 4.1  The Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs has outlined the following Ancient & Traditional 
methods of rain water harvesting/storage in India.- 
 
 
 
RWH System Region RWH System Region 
Ahar-Pynes South Bihar Kuhl Himachal Pradesh 
Baoris/Bers Rajasthan Kuis/Beris Western Rajasthan 
Bhandaras Maharashtra Kul Himachal Pradesh & Jammu 
Region 
Bundela Tank Madhya Pradesh Naada/Bandha Mewar region 
Chandela Tank Madhya Pradesh Nadis Rajasthan 
Cheo-ozihi Nagaland Naula Uttranchal 
Cheruvu Andhra Pradesh Ooranis Tamil Nadu 
Dungs or Jampois Jalpaiguri district of West Bengal Paar system Rajasthan 
Eri Tamil Nadu Pat Madhya Pradesh 
Jhalaras Rajasthan & Gujarat Phad Northwestern Maharashtra 
Johad Alwar district, Rajasthan Ramtek Ramtek, Maharashtra 
Katas/Mudas/Bandhas Orissa and Madhya Pradesh Rapat  Rajasthan 
Kere Central Karnataka Saza Kuva Rajasthan 
Khatri Hamirpur, Kangra and Mandi 
districts of Himachal Pradesh 
Surangam Northern Malabar region of 
Kerala 
Korambus Kasargod and Thrissur districts of 
Kerala 
Talab/Bandhis Bundelkhand region 
   Vav/ Vavdi/ Baoli/ Bavadi Gujarat & Rajasthan 
  Zabo Nagaland in North-Eastern India 
  Zings Ladakh 

32 
4.2  The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation in 
their written submission before the Committee have outlined the following components 
of rainwater harvesting and traditional Practices & Proof water collection: 
Components of Roof Top Rainwater Harvesting System 
In a typical domestic roof top rainwater harvesting system, rainwater from 
the roof is collected in a storage vessel or tank for use during periods of scarcity. 
Such systems are usually designed to support the drinking and cooking needs of 
the family and comprise a roof, a storage tank and guttering to transport the 
water from the roof to the storage tank.  In addition, a first flush system to 
divert the dirty water, which contains debris, collected on the roof during non -
rainy periods and a filter unit to remove debris and contaminants before water 
enters the storage tank are also provided. 
Traditional Practices of Roof Water Collection 
Collection of roof water on small scale from house roofs to meet the 
immediate household needs is a traditional practice in some parts of India such 
as n orth-eastern states, Rajasthan and eastern coastal areas of Tamil Nadu. 
Small vessels or drums are used to collect and store water. Locally available 
bamboo is split and used as gutters. Existence of such practices makes RRHS to 
meet long-term needs accept able. However, training and transfer of knowledge 
on systematic and economical construction of these systems is required. 
 4.3  During the course of evidence, the following techniques of Rainwater harvesting 
have also been outlined by NITI AAYOG: 
(i) Roof top Rain Water Harvesting 
(ii) Driveway Rain off harvesting  
  

33 
4.4  Explaining the details before the Committee, the NITI Aayog has given the following 
details: 
 
1. Rooftop Rain Water Harvesting 
Rooftop rainwater is of a good quality as it falls on clean terraces and is brought 
down by the drainpipes called rooftop pipes. Some of the processes could be: 
  
(i) to direct at least one or more of these pipes located close to the existing 
belowground level masonry tank (also called sump) into it through a filter. 
 
In case of diversion of rainwater into sumps, the filter will have to be located 
above the ground level and there should be enough space available for it. Diversion to 
sumps is however recommended only in places where there is no or very little municipal 
supply and where water is purchased or tanker fed even on rainy days.   
 
 
Figure 1: Rain Water Harvesting through sump and open well at individual level 
(ii) Any overflow from the sump can be led into an open /dug well, if any within the 
premises. Pipes not directed to the sump can also be led into the well (figure 1) 
     (iii) In the absence of an open well, a percolation/recharge well could be dug (figure 2) 
and the same can be made use of to put the rooftop water into it. 
 
 
 


34 
 
Figure 2: Percolation Well 
(iv) In houses/flat complexes where there is not enough space around the built -up area 
to dig a recharge well, as percolation/recharge pit could be made (figure 3) for the 
purpose of putting rooftop water into it. 
 
Figure 3: Percolation Pit 
(v) In areas where the soil is likely to be impermeable up to say, 20 ft. or more, it is 
advisable to go in for as percolation/recharge well up to 10 or 15 ft. and a 
percolation/recharge pit within this well up to another 10 or 15 ft. from its bott om till a 
permeable soil is reached. A PVC pipe of 4 or 6 inches’ diameter is inserted into the 
bore for the entire length (figure 4). 
 
 
 
 


35 
 
Figure 4: Percolation/Recharge Well Cum Bore Pit 
The above mentioned alternatives are only few demonstrative tec hniques and 
suitable changes will have to be incorporated into them by taking into account the 
nature of soil found in places where rain water harvesting is attempted. It should be 
borne in mind that Rain Water Harvesting (RWH), as aquifer recharge is soil  specific, 
which will have to be reasonably permeable to take in all the water that is ingested into 
the RWH structures. 
2. Driveway Runoff Harvesting 
There is a general feeling among people that only rooftop water is fit for 
harvesting and not the driveway runoff. This is because surface runoff both at the micro 
and macro levels appears to be dirty hence thought unfit for harvesting. It should be 
borne in mind that it is only suspended impurities and can still be put into recharge 
wells both at the micro and macro levels, where the soil will be able to filter it. It is true 
that surface runoff water should not be led into a sump for immediate use or to a 
source well. 
In a large number of houses/flat complexes, office complexes the driveway area 
(all around the built -up area) will be as much or even more than the rooftop area. 
Rainwater falling on this area will be quite large and in addition a sizeable quantity of 
rooftop water will also contribute to this, which eventually runs off tothe street throu gh 
the gate(s). Hence harvesting driveway runoff in such places becomes very important. 
This should be harvested by intercepting it with the help of a shallow gutter (covered 
with a perforated RCC slab) or a bump (which will be a cheaper alternative to the  
gutter) near the gate(s) and directed to a recharge well(s) (figure 5). Such driveway 
runoff should not be led into a source well or a recharge pit since the runoff will contain 
large amounts of silt. 
 
 
 


36 
 
Figure 5: Rain Water Harvesting through Open Wells and Recharge wells at Individual   
Houses." 
 4.5  The Committee pointed out that Roof top Rain Water Harvesting through sump and 
open well at individual level (Fig. 1), percolation well (Fig. 2), percolation pit at flat 
levels (fig. 3), percolat ion/recharge well -cum-bore pit (Fig. 4) and drive way run -off 
harvesting through open wells and recharge well at individual houses level (Fig. 5) as 
shown by Niti Aayog are quite easy and implementable.  The Committee also pointed 
out that as per Annual Re port (2016-17) of MOWR, RD & GR.  'Demonstrative Projects 
on Artificial Recharge to Ground Water & Rain Water Harvesting'  is the work assigned 
to Central Ground Water Board (CGWB).  The Committee also enquired as to how the 
Central Ground Water Board has been promoting these easy techniques of rainwater 
harvesting in their demonstrative projects during the last two years in different States,  
the MOWRRD&GR  informed: 
"The above techniques are, in general, proven techniques and have been 
suggested in the pa st to various State Governments by CGWB. The state 
governments can implement these in consultation with CGWB." 
  


37 
 4.6  In this context, the Committee wanted to know the views of MOH&UA whether the 
aforesaid technologies techniques of rainwater harvesting of Roof top and Driveway 
Rainwater Harvesting are quite workable at individual level and at the level institutions 
also with a view to imbibe them by one and all provided adequate technical knowhow 
and man power is made available at implementing agencies level, the Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs clarified: 
"Different technologies of rainwater harvesting are used as per the topographical 
conditions which may vary from city to city. However, the implementation of rain 
water harvesting is mon itored at the city level by the respective Urban Local 
boy/Urban Development Authority". 
4.7   Asked about the views of MoH&UA on this issue, the MoH&UA informed: 
"Normally the rainy days in the country are limited whereas water demand is 
throughout the ye ar. Hence, rainwater harvesting alone cannot meet the 
increasing demand in metropolitan cities.  On the part of Ministry of Housing & 
Urban Affairs, efforts are being made to encourage States/UTs to implement 
rainwater harvesting through AMRUT reforms and MBBL, 2016.   Huge quantity 
of water flows down to sea every year and, therefore, we need to find ways to 
store or divert flood flows and also to optimally utilize water especially in 
agriculture. "  
 4.8  The Committee also wanted to know whether in the l ight of huge rainwater 
wastage in the country, these techniques should be promoted by Central Ground Water 
Board (CGWB) in a big way especially in areas where ground water level has been 
falling, the MOWRRD&GR  informed: 
"Water is a State Subject and thus water harvesting measures can be 
undertaken by various State Governments.  However, Central Ground Water 
board is collaborating with Ministry of Rural Development for taking up water 
conservation works in the identified nine Over exploited blocks in eight states as 
pilot project under MGNREGA, the technical expertise is being provided by 
CGWB. Depending upon the result /outcomes of these pilot projects further 
replication can be undertaken.  Further, artificial Recharge works are being 
planned in some of th e over exploited blocks of Aspirational districts for their 
holistic development." 
 4.9  In this Context, the Niti Aayog has informed that the above methods are few 
demonstrative techniques only, however many more techniques are also available,  

38 
 when asked whether any tangible work has been done by NITI Aayog in collaboration 
with MOWRRD&GR and M/oH&UA, State Governments and allied agencies responsible 
for ground water recharge activities and with prominent NGOs working in this regard in 
last three years,  the Niti Aayog stated: 
 "Development of CWMI and Strategic Baseline Framework for Water Recycling 
have been undertaken by NITI Aayog in collaboration with MoWR, MoDWS, 
MoRD and MoUD respectively."  
 4.10  The Committee also wanted to know whether Niti Aayog has taken up the issue of 
promotion of these rainwater harvesting methods with the MOWRRD&GR  to  include 
these in their IEC activities so that technology transferred from Lab to Land and at the 
door step of the needy users,  the Niti Aayog stated: 
 "The line Ministries have been associated in development of Composite Water 
Management Index. Similarly, MoUD is an associate in policy making for 
Strategic Baseline Framework for Water Recycling." 
 
*** 
  

39 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
 Promotion of Rain Water Harvesting  
 
(i) Need for national strategy for water conservation for long term  water  
 
5.1  During the course of examination, the Committee came across that water 
conservation and various aspects of water through Information, Education and 
Communication is the work of MOWRRD&GR. During the course of evidence of the 
representatives of MOH&UA, the Secretary, MOH&UA highlighting the need for greater 
awareness for rain water harvesting in the country admitting before the Committee: 
 
"………….. द ू सरा, इसक े लिए एक मैलसव  क ैं पेन की भी जरूरत  है। जो 
बात आपने चेन्नई के लवषय  में कही है, वहां  तो लकसी प्रकार  का 
फाइनेंलियि इंसेंलटव  नहीं था , िेलकन उसक े बावजूद  भी िोगों ने महसूस 
लकया है। सर , मैं समझता हूँ लक अवेयरनेस  क ै म्पेन इसक े लिए बहुत 
आवश्यक है।" 
 
 5.2  The Committee enquired whether a mega awareness drive be launched show 
casing the facts as outlined by NITI Aayog to public by way of bringing techniques from 
lab to land at the doorstep of common man, the MoWR, RD&GR informed: 
"A broad national strategy for water conservation need to be developed to 
address the crucial issue of long term water sustainability. This would in turn 
acknowledge the fact that sustaining water resources a nationwide effort in 
conservation to achieve a balance between supply and demand. 
 As per direction of Cabinet Secretariat an inter -ministerial committee 
under the chairmanship of Secretary (MoWR, RD&GR) has been constituted with 
Secretary of concerned ministries including Advisor, Niti Aayog  etc as members 
on 'Water Conservation emplacing water conservation related activities for 
optimum utilization of monsoon rainfall". Chief Secretaries of States have been 
requested to forward state specific action plan for effective water harvesting 
through various central sponsored schemes/state schemes." 
 
5.3  In reply to a question about need for including RWH in school curriculum for its 
promotion the MoWR, RD&GR stated as under: 
  "Subject of RWH is covered in the text book of NCERT on water including water 
conservation and its importance. Awareness on rainwater harvesting for conservation of 
water need to be included school curriculum country -wide. The Ministry of Water 
Resources is organizing three -level (school, State & National) Painting competition  of 

water conservation issues every year, in the entire country for students of Class 6th to 
8th, wherein more than one crore students have already participated.   
 
40 
 
Additionally, essay competition and quiz programs on water conservation and water 
saving are conducted by the Ministry of Water Resources, RD & GR." 
 
 5.4  The Committee also enquired whether MOWRRD&GR  has taken up the issue with 
Ministry of HRD and other State Governments, the MOWRRD&GR clarified: 
 
 "Matter may be taken up for giving adequate coverage on the subject." 
5.5 Consenting to the ideas and inclusion of Rainwater Harvesting in Curriculum schools 
for its greater awareness, the Niti Aayog stated: 
 
"The introduction of Rain Water Harvesting in school curriculum is a need of the 
hour.  The various school curriculums have already included this.  The M/o WR, 
RD & GR and M/o HUA need to undertake this as a part of IEC programme." 
 
(ii) Need for National Law for Rain Water Harvesting and on Storm Water  
 
5.6  During the course of evidence of the representatives of MOH&UA the need for 
enacting a national legislation on rain water harvesting and on storm wate r was 
highlighted prominently before the Committee in the light of the fact that by 2050 
around half of the population would be migrating to cities and keeping this in mind a 
long term planning on RWH be done so that big cities can be self -sustaining for t heir 
future water needs.  Asked about the need for bringing up a broad based National Law 
on RWH on the above lines, the MOWRRD&GR  stated:  
"Water being State Subject, legislation on Rain water harvesting needs to be 
enacted by the States. MoWR, RD & GR has circulated a Model Bill to all the 
States/UTs to enable them to enact suitable ground water legislation for its 
regulation and development which includes provision of rain water harvesting. So 
far, 15 States/UTs have adopted and implemented the ground water legislation 
on the lines of Model Bill." 
 
 (iii) Need for separating supply of drinking water from other uses for rain 
water harvesting purposes 
5.7  During the course of examination of Niti Aayog, the Committee pointed out that 
Various other suggest ions like separating supply of drinking water from other uses, 
collecting waste water from R.Os systems generally used in Metropolitan Cities for 

getting save water, use of rainwater harvesting purposes like flushing toilets, fire 
fighting purposes, as has been practiced in cities like Tokyo, Singapore etc.  
 
41 
The Committee enquired whether Niti Aayog has ever considered in these issues, the 
Niti Aayog informed: 
 "The NITI Aayog has emphasized this issue in Strategic Baseline Framework for 
 Water Recycling." 
 5.8  The Committee further examined in what way innovative ideas highlighted above 
can be implemented the Niti Aayog stated: 
 "In practicability the introduction of dual pipe system is feasible in new projects 
and construction." 
(iv) Need for promoting RWH through renovation of jheels through MPLADS  
funds  
 
5.9  During the course of evidence of the representatives   of MOH&UA, the issue of 
promoting RWH by way of renovating of jheels  also came up for discussions. In this 
context, poo r conditions of jheels of Fatehpur, Ghitorani, Bhuthal etc. was also 
underlined before the Committee and an initiative taken by a local MP for utilizing 
MPLADS for RWH work in schools, hospitals, Group Housing Societies flats was also not 
taken in right perspective.  Asked about the difficulty is not utilizing MPLADS funds for 
RWH works in schools, hospitals, group housing flats in Delhi on above lines, the 
MOWRRD&GR  stated: 
  
"Water is a State Subject and thus water harvesting measures can be 
undertaken b y various State Governments through different funding 
mechanism." 
 
 5.10  In this connection on the need for restoration and non -encroachment of water 
bodies for the purpose of proper rainwater harvesting, the Niti Aayog stated: 
 
"In the course of the fram ing of urban rejuvenation programmes, especially, 
AMRUT and Smart Cities Mission, NITI Aayog had emphasized upon the need of 
the rejuvenation of water bodies and recharging of groundwater which is 
reflected in the ongoing AMRUT scheme under implementation in 500 cities. The 
AMRUT also mandates the State Governments to formulate the policy and the 
action plan for having the rain water harvesting structures in all commercial, 

public and new buildings on plots of 300 sq.m. and above. Further, MOHUA has 
also incorporated rain water harvesting provisions for a plot size of 100 sq.m. or 
more in their Model Building Bye -Law 2016. All the State Governments, except 
Manipur, Mizoram and Sikkim, have already incorporated this provision. 
However, the minimum size of the  plot varies from State to State depending on 
local conditions."  
42 
 
(v)  Need for use of the unutilized space in Nalas in various cities for rain 
water harvesting 
5.11  It also came out before the Committee during the course of evidence of experts 
that 90% capacity of Nallahs in various Metropolitan Cities is not utilized and that can 
be utilized for Rainwater Harvesting purposes.  Asked about the views of Niti Aayog,  
the Committee were informed: 
" The proposal would require in -depth examination especially with regard to its 
efficacy, practicability, groundwater contamination, associated sanitation issues 
as well as cost benefit analysis. "  
 5.12    When further asked as to whether the aforesaid suggestion is workable and 
implementable , the Niti Aayog clarified: 
"Needs examination." 
(vi) RWH through dredging of ponds and canals  
5.13 During the course of evidence of the representatives of experts, the issue of 
RWH through dredging of ponds came up prominently before the Committee using the 
soil taken out for construction of National Highways without giving any kind or royality 
was also raised before the Committee that would result in automatic emptying  of 
canals, ponds, etc. During the course of evidence of MOWRRD&GR , the Committee 
asked as to whether MOWRRD&GR  is going to undertake RWH in various ponds and 
canals on the suggested lines and whether any spadework has been done in this 
regard, the MOWRRD&GR  stated:  
"Water is a State Subject and water harvesting measures can be undertaken by 
various State Governments by utilizing the guidelines/technical advice issued by 
CGWB from time to time." 
 
5.14 During the course of examination of NITI Aayog, asked whether NITI Aayog 
have taken up the issue with the Ministry of Environment and Forest and Climate 
Change if so what action they have taken on the suggested line, the NITI Aayog stated: 
 
'No' 

 
***** 

43 
CHAPTER-VI 
Implementation of Rainwater Harvesting Law and Guidelines   
6.1 During the course and examination, the Committee came across the following 
rainwater harvesting Law and Guidelines being implemented in the country: 
I     Model Building Bye Laws (MBBL), 2016 for rainwater harvesting for 
buildings. 
II Urban and Regional Development Plan Formulation and 
Implementation (URDPF&I) Guidelines, 2014 for retaining water bodies 
and conservation. 
III  Unified Building Bye Laws (UBBL), NCT of Delhi, 2016. 
IV Urban Greening Guidelines, 2014 
V        RWH Provisions under AMRUT Scheme 
6.2 These are discussed in succeeding paragraphs: 
I Model Building Bye Laws (MBBL), 2016 for buildings 
6.3 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their submission have stated: 
Model Building Bye Laws (MBBL), 2016 stipula tes that all buildings having 
a plot size of 100 sq.m. or more, while submitting the building plans for 
sanction, shall mandatorily include the complete proposal of rainwater 
harvesting. 
 
Rainwater Harvesting is a way to capture the rain runoff, store that  water 
above ground or charge the underground aquifers and use it later. This 
happens naturally in open rural areas. But in congested, over -paved 
metropolitan cities, there is a need to devise methods to capture the rain 
water. The rainwater that is incide nt on the surface/ roof top is guided to 
bore wells or pits or new/old/ abandoned wells through small diameter 
pipes to recharge the underground water which can be used later 
whenever required.  
 
Rainwater can be harvested to the extent of 55,000 litres pe r 100sq. 
meters area per year from rooftops." 
  
  
6.4 In this context, the Committee also enquired from Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs in what way the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has promoted the issue of 
rainwater harvesting through adoption of MMBL laws and aforesaid Guidelines  

44 
particularly when the ground water level in almost all the States has gone down and in 
future the population and Urban areas is galloping, the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs stated:- 
"Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have issued both Model Building Bye Laws 
(MBBL),2016 and Urban and Regional Development and Plan Formulation and 
Implementation Guidelines(URDPFI),2014. 32 States and UTs have already 
adopted the MBBL, 2016. Model Building Bye Laws, 2016 have mandatory 
requirement of Rain Water Harv esting in all buildings having a plot size of more 
than 100 sq.mt. Further, in the recently concluded National Workshop on 
Transforming Urban Landscape: 3 rd Anniversary of PMAY(U), AMRUT and Smart 
Cities Mission held on 27 -28 July,2018 at Lucknow, there we re wide 
consultations on water issues including the water conservation measures and 
Rain Water Harvesting. This workshop was attended by the Principal Secretaries 
(UD) of all the States, Commissioners of major cities and urban planners. They 
were sensitized about Rain Water Harvesting in urban areas." 
 
6.5 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has classified the MBBL into following 
areas: 
  A.  Harvesting provisions in various Building categories 
 B.  Rain water harvesting in open areas in cities  
 C.  Ground Water Recharge 
D. Enforcement and Monitoring 
 
A.  Harvesting provisions in various Building categories 
6.6 MOH&UA in their submission before the Committee outlining harvesting 
provisions in various Building categories have stated: 
"Harvesting provisions in various Building categories All buildings in a city 
contribute to the rainwater runoff during the monsoon and hence such runoff 
can be harvested for water reuse/recharge. The indicative provisions of rainwater 
harvesting in various buildings types are:  
Table: Provisions for Rainwater harvesting by building types 
Category / Use 
Area of Plot  
(sq.m.) 
Provisions to be made Other conditions 
Residential Plotted Houses 
New Proposals 100 and above Construction of Rain Water Harvesting 
Structure. Shall have emphasis on both storage and reuse. 
Group Housing  
New Proposals All plot sizes 
i. Construction of Rain Water Harvesting 
Structure. 
ii. Concrete paving to be avoided and 
permeable materials are to be used for 
all open parking spaces. 
Should indicate the system of Storm Water 
Drainage, Rain Water Harvesting Structure and 
Recharging Well 
 

45 
 
6.7 The MOH&UA has also submitted the following action taken by different States 
incorporating RWH provisions in the State Building Bye-Laws 
 
Public and semi public buildings 
All Proposals 
 
All plot sizes 
 
i. Shall have Rain Water Harvesting 
Structureand storage 
ii. Shall have Recharge pits 
Shall have emphasis on both storage and reuse. 
Commercial / Mixed use 
All Proposals All plot sizes 
i. Construction of Rain Water Harvesting 
Structure.  
ii. Soft landscape provisions and open 
spaces with Percolation pits. 
iii. Common treatment plant to be made 
part of the integrated development, 
funded by sale of commercial space. 
Should indicate the system of Storm Water 
Drainage, Rain Water Harvesting Structure and 
Recharging Well 
 
Shall have emphasis on both storage and reuse. 
Industrial 
All proposals All plot sizes 
i. Construction of Rain Water Harvesting 
Structure.  
ii. Soft landscape provisions and open 
spaces with Percolation pits. 
iii. Use of abandoned bore wells for 
recharging of ground water. 
iv. Common treatment plant to be made 
part of the integrated development 
funded by sale of commercial space. 
Should indicate the system of Strom Water 
Drainage, Rain Water Harvesting Structure and 
Recharging Well. 
Provision should be made not to inject contaminated 
water into recharge structures in industrial areas and 
care is to be taken to keep such structures away 
from sewer lines, septic tanks, soak pits, landfill and 
other sources of contamination. 
Other proposals All plot sizes Similar as above Similar as above 
 
 
Sl. 
No. 
State 
Government 
Action Taken 
1 Kerala The State Government has amended the Kerala Municipality Building Rules, 1999 
vide G.O. NO. 188/99 dated 1 st October, 1999 and have incorporated the provision 
ofrainwater harvesting by including a separate chapter (Chapter XVI -A).The 
rainwater harvesting in terms of residential building is for 100 sqmt of floor area or 
more and plot area of 200 sqmt or more. 
2  Chhattisgarh The Chhattisgarh BhumiVikasNiyam, 1984 under Rule 78 (4) provides for 
mandatory implementation of Rain / Roof Water Harvesting measures for all types 
of buildings having plot size more than 500 sq. mt.  The towns for which the 
planning areas have been notified under the provisions of Chhattisgarh T&CP Act, 
1973 are required to follow the Chhattisgarh BhumiVikasNiyam, 1984.Nagar 
Palika Nigam, Raipur has made it mandatory to adopt the rooftop rainwater 
harvesting for buildings having roof top area more than 500 sq ft. 
 3 West Bengal The State Govt  has incorporated the provisions for rainwater harvesting in the 
West Bengal Municipal Rules,2007 in Rule No.168 (13) Part XII has made 
rainwater harvesting mandatory for all buildings. 

46 
 
 
 
4 Tripura In the Tripura Building Rules, 2004 vide Section 110, the provision for Rain Water 
Harvesting and Waste Water treatment has been made.  Water harvesting through 
storing of rain water runoff is mandatory in all new buildings having plinth area 
more than 300 sq. mt. for all types of uses and in group housing of any size.  
5 Haryana The Haryana Building Code 2016 stipulates arrangement of rainwater harvesting 
within the plot that shall have to be made by the plot owner where the area of the 
rooftop is more than 100 sqmt.  Recharging of groundwater shall be mandatory for 
all types of buildings having a plot area of more than 500 sqmts. 
6. Karnataka The amended BWSSB Rules has provided for rainwater harvesting structures by 
every owner with an area of more than 2400sqft or every owner who proposes to 
construct a new building with plot area more than 1200 sqft. 
7. Himachal Pradesh The Urban Development Department vide its letter no UD -H(C)-(10)-Engg Cell 
3/99 dated 28.4.05 has issued necessary directions to all the Urban Local Bodies of 
the state for making compulsory provision of Rain Water Harvesting in their 
Building Bye Laws 
8 Arunachal Pradesh Government of Arunachal Pradesh has notified the Building Bye-laws, 2009 which 
include provision for rain water harvesting. 
9. Maharashtra a) All the layout open spaces/amenity spaces of housing societies and new 
construction/reconstruction/addition on the plots having area not less than 1000 
sq.mt. in non gaothan areas of Municipal Corpn. of Gr. Mumbai shall have one or 
more Rain Water Harvesting structures having a minimum total capacity as 
detailed  in Schedule. 
  
10 Gujarat The State Government have issued necessary instruction to make provision of 
rainwater harvesting and circulated to all Urban Local Bodies under Section 122 of 
Gujarat Town Planning and Urban Development Act, 1976. 
11 Meghalaya The State Government has made mandatory the provision of rainwater harv esting 
for building with more than 100 sqmt area in the Meghalaya Building Bye -laws, 
2001. 
 
12. Tamil 
Nadu(Chennai) 
Development Regulations in Draft Master Plan (2026) has incorporated Rain 
Water Harvesting. It is mandatory for all the existing and new buildings to provide 
rainwater harvesting facilities under Municipal Laws. It has also been made 
mandatory to include rooftop rainwater harvesting structure in the building plans.  
13. Andhra Pradesh Andhra Pradesh Water, Land and Tree Act, 2002’ stipulates mandatory provision 
to construct rainwater harvesting structures at new and existing constructions for 
all residential, commercial and other premises and open space having area of not 
less than 200 sq.mt. in the stipulated period, failing which the authority may get 
such Rain Water Harvesting (RWH) structures constructed and recover the cost 
incurred along with the penalty as may be prescribed. Municipal Administration 
and Urban Development Department vide G.O. No. 185 dated May 5, 2001 have 
been assigned responsibilities and made special efforts to conserve rain water 
through rain water harvesting structures in urban areas 
14. Delhi Water Harvesting through storing of water runoff including rain water in all new 
buildings on plots of size more than 105sqmt will be mandatory. 
15. Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands 
Provision of Rainwater Harvesting has been incorporated in the Building Bye -
Laws, 1999 

47 
 
16. Rajasthan State government has made rainwater harvesting mandatory for all public buildings 
and establishments and all properties in plots covering more than 300 sqmt in 
urban areas. 
17. Uttar Pradesh In 1998, State Government has directed all the Development Authorities of the 
State to take steps for rainwater harvesting at Master Plan/Zonal Plan and Layout 
level and provision has to be made in all plots with minimum size of 1000 sqmt 
and Group Housing Plots. For housing schemes of 20 acres and above, it is 
mandatory to develop ponds/ water bodies in 5% of the total proposed area. 
18. Madhya Pradesh Incorporated mandatory provision for rain water harvesting in the M.P. 
BhumiVikasNiyam (1984), Rule 78(4) makes it mandatory to provide for rain 
water harvesting in all houses of more than 140 sq.mt 
19. Bihar Enacted “The Bihar Ground Water” (Regulation and Control of Development and 
Management) Act, 2006. Chapter -III (Clause 18) of the Act stipulates provision of 
roof top rain water harvesting structures in the building plan in an area of 1000 
sq.mt or more while according  approval for construction by the Municipal 
Corporation / other local bodies. 
20 Uttarakhand (AwasevamShahariVikas) has made rules for compulsory installation of RWH  
  system and directed to adopt rules in building Bye -laws vide order dated 
15.11.2003.  Accordingly, all the Development Authorities had made partial 
amendments in the prevalent House Building and Development Bye -
laws/Regulations. 
21 Chandigarh UT Administration has made installation of rain water harvesting system 
mandatory for all buildings (existing and new) located on plot of 1kanal and above 
to recharge ground water. 
22 Daman & Diu Incorporated in D&D Building Bye Laws 
23 Puducherry Made provision of rainwater harvesting mandatory in residential, offices, public 
buildings, commercial buildings, educational and health institutes and industrial 
buildings vide Govt. Order Dated 19.3.2010. 
24 Manipur NA 
25 Nagaland The State Government has already made provision for roof top rainwater 
compulsory for all buildings with more than 100 sqmt of plot area. 
26 Sikkim NA 
27 Assam Incorporated in Guwahati Building Construction (Regulation (Act,2010) for all 
buildings with more than 100 sqmt of plot area 
28 Jammu and 
Kashmir 
Incorporated in Jammu Municipal Corporation Building Bye Laws,2011 
29 Goa Government of Goa has made rainwater harvesting mandatory for residential 
complexes including apartments on plot areas of 2000 sq.m& above and for 
industrial units on plot areas of 10,000 sq.m& above. PWD, Goa has been asked to 
take up rain water harvesting structure for Government buildings. 
30 Dadra and Nagar 
Haveli 
Roof Top Rain Water Harvesting made mandatory as per Development and 
Control Rules (Amendments Rules, 2009) in all types of buildings, which are 
constructed in an area of 1000 sq.mt and above. 
31 Jharkhand State Government has initiated action for construction of RTRWH structures in 
Government/Public buildings in a phased manner. A promotional scheme has also 
been started for awareness of protection of ground water and artificial recharge by 
grant of Rs. 25000/- for construction of artificial recharge structures. Ranchi 
Regional Development Authority (Jharkhand) has made Building Bye-laws for 
RWH. 
32 Mizoram NA 

48 
 
 
6.8 The Committee enquired that although the provisions are available for 
rainwater harvesting the implementation at different level for residential plots, public, 
and semi-public, buildings and for commercial and industrial use and also for industrial 
purposes, yet the implementation is not at all visible at ground level, the M/o HUA.  
"After releasing MBBL, 2016 and launch of AMRUT Mission, 32 States/UTs 
have made provisions for rainwater harvesting in their respec tive building 
bye-laws. Building plan approval is accorded only when there is provision 
for rainwater harvesting as per the respective bye -laws and RWH 
structures are verified at the time of issuing OCC."   
B.  Rain Water Harvesting in open Areas 
6.9 The MOH&UA on the issue of Rain Water Harvesting in open areas in their 
written submission have stated as under:- 
"The open spaces/recreational land use generally constitute regional parks, 
district parks, playground and stadium, sports complex, monument zones,  public 
parking, Plaza and other public open space. This may be as high as 30% to 50% 
of the city’s geographic area. All such public open spaces above the size of 500 
sq.m. shall have arrangements for complete utilization and capture of storm 
water with sc ientific rain water harvesting arrangements. Following ideas may 
also be included (i) Well cum Channel cum Percolation pits (ii)Use of abandoned 
bore wells for recharging of ground water and (iii) Artificial or natural Storage of 
storm water runoff from larger sites." 
6.10 The NITI Aayog in their submission before the Committee have also 
stated: 
" Unlike in the past, the present day urbanization has resulted both in shrinking 
of open spaces and very minimal area has been left unpaved resulting into 
reduced groundwater recharge capacity, depleting the groundwater, on one 
hand, and causing urban flooding (including saline intrusion also in coastal 
cities), on the other." 
33 Odisha Incorporated in the Bhubaneshwar Development Authority(Planning and Building) 
Regulations,2008 
34 Lakshadweep NA 
35 Punjab Punjab Building Bye-laws amended to make RWH System mandatory in all buildings 
of above 200 sq. yds. The Punjab Urban Development Authority (PUDA) is in the 
process of amending the PUDA (Building) Rules 1996 for making this system 
mandatory. Municipal Corporation of Ludhiana and Jalandhar have framed Bye -laws 
to make RWH mandatory in new buildings 
36 Telengana Same as Andhra Pradesh 

49 
6.11 Asked whether MoH&UA has taken up matter with State Governments 
impressing upon against concretizing the surroundings, open space available in all 
Governments, private places as well as all institutions and at footpaths and roadside for 
necessary percolation of rain water into ground water buildings in Metropolitan cities, 
the MoH&UA informed: 
 "Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has brought out Urban Green Guidelines 
in 2014 which advocates restricting the concretization and also recommends 
retaining the green spaces and lives of trees. Similarly, Urban and Regional 
Development and Plan Implementation Guidelines (URDPFI) 2014, also 
recommends preservation of open spaces." 
6.12 The Committee also enquired Whether Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
should also educate the State Governments, Corporate House owners etc. about a ll 
these aspects, the MoH&UA informed: 
"The Ministry regularly follows -up with the States regarding adoption of 
MBBL, 2016. 32 States/UTs have already adopted the provision of 
Rainwater Harvesting in their respective building bye laws. In the recently 
concluded National Workshop on Transforming Urban Landscape: 3 rd 
Anniversary of PMA (U), AMRUT and Smart Cities Mission held on 27 -28 
July, 2018 at Lucknow various suggestions were received from the 
stakeholders which included participants from private sector." 
6.13 In this connection, during the course of evidence of the representatives of M/o 
H&UA, it was suggested before the Committee that Government should encourage to 
avoid concreting, front and rear side margins of the buildings for increasing percolation  
of rain water into ground and it should apply to footpath and roadsides especially in 
areas where ground water is on the verge of extinction.  The Committee also pointed 
out that Niti Aayog had submitted before the Committee that unlike in the past, the 
present day urbanization has resulted both in shrinking of open spaces and very 
minimal area has been left unpaved resulting into reduced groundwater recharge  
 

50 
capacity, depleting the groundwater, on one hand, and causing urban flooding 
(including saline intrusion also in coastal cities), on the other.   
C. Ground Water Recharge 
6.14 During the course of examination, the MOH&UA on the issue of Ground Water 
Recharge has submitted as under:- 
"Recharging of ground water should be made mandatory not only for residential 
buildings but for all types of buildings, including Group Housing Societies having 
a plot area more than 500 sq.mt. and above. 
The Ground Water Recharge should also be mandatory for open spaces like 
parks, parking, plazas and playgrounds. T he harvesting and recharge structures 
could be constructed by the Authority with the involvement of community based 
organizations like Resident Welfare Associations. 
In the urban areas due to possibility of contamination of source water it is 
suggested to adopt roof top rain water harvesting and artificial recharge to 
ground water. 
Rain water harvesting including roof top rain water harvesting and artificial 
recharge to ground water projects help in arresting declining ground water levels 
and providing sust ainability to ground water sources and dilution of 
contaminants to certain extent." 
Enforcement and Monitoring 
 
6.15 On the issue of enforcement and monitoring, the MOH&UA has submitted as 
under:- 
 
(a) The Authority shall constitute a Rainwater Harvesting Cell which will be 
responsible for enforcement and monitoring of the provisions of Rainwater 
Harvesting. The cell shall employ qualified persons who are well versed with the 
interpretation of Building Bye Laws and responsible for enforcement as well as 
monitoring the functioning of the Rainwater Harvesting System. 
 
(b) The Authority shall include inspection of Rainwater Harvesting Structures before 
issuing Completion Certificates or NOCs for service connections to the property. 
 
(c) Set an example in the  city by ensuring that Rainwater is harvested in the 
properties /assets owned by them including public buildings, markets, community 
centers, parking spaces, roads and parks etc. 

51 
(d) The Authority shall also establish a mechanism to monitor 100% of RWH 
provisions in all the buildings above 1000 sq.mt. with annual physical verification, 
while buildings less than 1000 sq.m. can be monitored on the basis of 10% 
random survey by competent authority. 
 
(e) With regard to open public spaces viz., Parks, playgrounds etc. the implementation 
of provision rainwater harvesting may be done with the help of Residents Welfare 
Associations, Community Building Organization and Non -Governmental 
Organizations. 
 
(f) The Authority shall ensure earmarking budgetary provision for the creation and 
maintenance of rainwater harvesting structures in public spaces owned and 
maintained by them, like parking spaces, parks, plazas etc. 
 
(g) The practice of incentives and penalties to promote rain water harvesting shall be 
formulated by the local authority based on best practices. Authority shall design its 
own incentive and penalty systems, considering the water level and scarcity. 
 
6.16 Asked about the system of monitoring available at Corporation level in 
Metropolitan Cities and at State level fo r implementing the rainwater harvesting 
provisions stated above, the MOH&UA informed: 
"Municipal Corporations of Madurai, Mumbai, Hyderabad( HMWS&SB), Bengaluru 
(BWSSB) have constituted rainwater harvesting cell which monitors the 
implementation of rainwate r harvesting provision.  
The building plan approvals and issuance of Occupancy -cum- Completion 
Certificate (OCC) is granted subject to adherence to the rainwater provision."  
6.17 In this context, the Committee also enquired from Ministry of Housing and Urb an 
Affairs in what way the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has promoted the issue of 
rainwater harvesting through adoption of MMBL laws and aforesaid Guidelines 
particularly when the ground water level in almost all the States has gone down and in 
future the population and Urban areas is galloping, the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs stated:- 
"Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have issued both Model Building Bye Laws 
(MBBL),2016 and Urban and Regional Development and Plan Formulation and 
Implementation Guidelines(URDPFI),2014.  

52 
 
32 States and UTs have already adopted the MBBL, 2016. Model Building Bye 
Laws, 2016 have mandatory requirement of Rain Water Harvesting in all 
buildings having a plot size of more than 100 sq.mt." 
 
6.18 The issue of violation of rain water harvesting under provisions MBBL laws  that 
non-compliance of rain water harvesting provisions of MBBL Laws at Metropolitan cities 
level also came up before the Committee and it has been reported as people at the time 
of taking occupation certificate make space for that purpose but later close the space or 
convert the same for parking and other purposes.  In this connection, it was suggested 
by the Committee that some sort of water audit be undertaken in all Building Bye  laws 
adopted by State Governments that have been given to the Corporations to implement 
and for that audit of ground water level also undertaken for actual rise in ground water.  
Asked whether under are MBBL, 2016 rainwater harvesting provisions are being  
implemented in letter and spirit, if so what are the reasons that ground water level in 
major cities is on declining side,  the M/o HUA informed: 
"All States/UTs except Mizoram, Sikkim, Manipur and Lakshadweep have 
already made provisions for rainwater ha rvesting in their respective bye -
laws." 
6.19 The Committee also enquired whether any such violation of MBB Laws have been 
reported by MoH&UA replied: 
"Building plan approvals and issuance of Occupancy -cum-completion 
Certificate (OCC) are not issued until t he provisions are made for 
rainwater harvesting." 
6.20 In this context, the Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs also 
explained before the Committee:  
"सर , हमारा  ररव्यू  का लसस्टम है, जो िोकि बॉडीज करती  हैं। जब पास 
होने के लिए आता है, तो नक्शा पास करते  समय देखते हैं लक उसमें र े न 
वाटर  हावेस्स्टंग का लसस्टम इनकॉपोर े लटड है लक नहीं। ऑक्यूपेंसी एण्ड 
कम्पिीिन सलटवलफक े ट जब जारी  करते  हैं, उस समय िोकि बॉडी का 
अलिकारी मौक े पर  चैक करने  के लिए जाता है। वह  अलिकारी दोबारा  
देखता है लक इसमें स्ट र क्चर बना हुआ है या नहीं, क्योंलक हर  साि 
उसको टैक्स का िाभ िेना होता है। सर , टैक्स का िाभ वह  तभी िे 
सकता है, जब वह  चि रहा  होता है।" 

 
 
53 
6.21 During the course of evidence of the representatives of MoH&UA, the Committee 
enquired how often the MoH&UA su ch consultations are held, the Secretary, H&UA 
stated : 
 
"Sir, it is almost done on an annual basis because water is a very important 
subject. Like in Atal Mission f or Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation 
(AMRUT), the major focus is to provide water to every household. We are going 
to get 1.4 crore water connections by the end of the Mission, which is, March 
2020. So, issue of water has always been very important in every meeting. Last 
year in December, we had an  annual conference held in Delhi and this was one 
of the subjects which were discussed. So, whenever we have this kind of 
consultations, water is definitely figuring  there."  
6.22 He added: 
"The discussion was more of a kind of dissemination and we were d iscussing on 
how we should use water. But, Sir, I would like to mention that this kind of a 
discussion has been a regular exercise which we had done while we were 
finalizing our model building byelaws. That is also an important ingredient of our 
model buil ding byelaws, which got notified in 2016. So, it included rain water 
harvesting in itself." 
6.23 The Committee also wanted to know that there is a need to review the present 
system of working for receiving the desired level of people’s participation in rai nwater 
harvesting in Metropolitan Cities in the Country, witness added: 
"In the recently concluded National Workshop on Transforming Urban 
Landscape: 3rd Anniversary of PMA (U), AMRUT and Smart Cities Mission held on 
27-28 July, 2018 at Lucknow, detailed discussions took place amongst the 
stakeholders to improve the water supply through appropriate water 
conservation measures and also to harvest rain water . Urban managers were 
sensitized to create awareness about rainwater harvesting in the cities. It was 
also impressed upon that water conservation measures becomes effective 
through citizen’s participation. Cities like Chennai, Mumbai, Bengaluru and Delhi 
have constituted RWH cell and citizen’s participation is undertaken." 
 
6.24 During the course of evidence of the representatives of MoH&UA, the Committee 
enquired how often the MoH&UA such consulatations are held, the Secretary, H&UA 
stated : 

54 
 
"Sir, it is almost done on an annual basis because water is a very important 
subject. Like in Atal Mission f or Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation 
(AMRUT), the major focus is to provide water to every household. We are going 
to get 1.4 crore water connections by the end of the Mission, which is, March 
2020. So, issue of water has always been very important in every meeting. Last 
year in December, we had an annual conference held in Delhi and this was one 
of the subjects which were discussed. So, whenever we have t his kind of 
consultations, water is definitely fairing there."  
6.25 He added: 
"The discussion was more of a kind of dissemination and we were discussing on 
how we should use water. But, Sir, I would like to mention that this kind of a 
discussion has been a regular exercise which we had done while we were 
finalizing our model building byelaws. That is also an important ingredient of our 
model building byelaws, which got notified in 2016. So, it included rain water 
harvesting in itself." 
6.26 With a view to move faster on the issue of rainwater harvesting, the NITI Aayog 
in their material submitted before the Committee have also stated: 
"While a structured regulatory and implementation framework would be 
necessitated to curb and/or reduce the exploitation of ground water as well as to 
increase the recharge through the Rain Water Harvesting measures, the major 
losses in irrigation, as has been indicated in the initial paragraph, should also be 
considered in the overall Water Management Policy framework." 
6.27 Asked whether ULBs in prominent Metropolitan Cities have set up RWH Cell and 
have sufficient manpower and technical know -how for complying with the above 
provisions, the MOWRRD&GR stated: 
"This information is not maintained by the Ministry of Housing & Urba n 
Affairs.  However, it is ascertained that cities like Madurai, Mumbai, 
Hyderabad(HMWS&SB), Bengaluru (BWSSB), Chennai (CMWSS), Delhi 
(DJB) etc. have constituted rainwater harvesting cell which monitors the 
implementation of rainwater harvesting provision ."  
6.28 The Committee also wanted to know whether the regulatory mechanism as 
suggested by NITI Aayog would be helpful for possible rainwater harvesting, the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs stated: 
 
 

55 
"Since, it is a State subject, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs will 
discuss the regulatory mechanism suggested by NITI Aayog with various 
States/UTs." 
II. Urban and Regional Development Plan Formulation and Implementation 
(URDPFI) Guidelines, 2014 for retaining water bodies and conservation 
 
6.29  The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs during the course of examination have 
stated that URDPFI Guidelines, 2014 stipulates:- 
  "URDPFI Guidelines, 2014, also provides for rainwater harvesting as follows:- 
Guidelines for Rain Water Harvesting 
Rainwater harvesting is the technique of collection and storage of rainwater at 
surface or in sub -surface aquifers, before it is lost as surface run -off. The 
augmented resource can be harvested in the time of need. Rainwater harvesting 
and conserva tion is also an activity of direct collection of rain water. The 
rainwater so collected can be stored for direct use or can be recharged into the 
ground water. 
 
(i) "The main goal is to minimize flow of rainwater through 
drains/nallas to the rivers. It is a known fact that the ground water level is 
depleting and has gone down in the last decades. Thus rain water 
harvesting and conservation aims at optimum utilization of the natural 
resource i.e. rain water. 
 
(ii) Artificial recharge to ground water is a process by which the 
ground water reservoir is augmented at rate exceeding that of under 
natural conditions of replenishment. 
 
(iii) The functioning of ground water recharge units, various methods 
and techniques have already been elaborated in Infrastructure Planning 
section. Ministry of Water Resources,  
Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) has issued the ‘Manual on Artificial 
Recharge of Ground Water’, which can be referred for development of 
such projects." 
6.30 Asked about the system of monitor ing of the above guidelines at State level, 
District level and at the level of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs submitted: 

56 
"Urban and Regional Development Plan Formulation and Implementation 
(URDPF&I) Gui delines, 2014 and (ii)Model Building Bye Laws (MBBL), 
2016 are both advisory while Unified Building Bye Laws (UBBL) of Delhi, 
2016 is statutory. The monitoring is done at the city level.  If there is no 
provision for rainwater harvesting, building plan app roval is not given.  
Further, Occupancy cum Completion Certificate is issued only when 
provisions of rainwater harvesting have been complied with." 
 6.31 The Committee also enquired whether these are not working well particularly 
when inspite of aforesaid guidelines that were formulated way back in 2014 the desired 
results are not forthcoming, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has submitted: 
 "These guidelines are broadly followed by the urban local bodies/urban 
development authorities while preparing Master Plans." 
 
6.32 The Committee also wanted to know the status of implementation of these 
guidelines in different States especially in Metropolitan Cities of Bangalore, Chennai, 
Hyderabad, Delhi, Mumbai and various other cities during the l ast two years, the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs also submitted: 
"Both the guidelines URDPFI and MBBL, 2016, have been adopted by the 
State Governments, however, the norms and standards of these 
guidelines have been adopted in accordance with the l ocal topographical 
conditions which may vary from state to state and city to city.Cities like 
Chennai, Mumbai, Bangalore etc. have set -up dedicated Rainwater 
Harvesting Cell." 
III.  Unified Building Bye-Laws (UBBL) 2016, NCT Delhi  
 
6.33 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their submission before the 
Committee have stated that the Unified Building Bye Laws, 2016 NCT of Delhi stipulates 
the following: 
Bye laws: 10.2 (1): Water Conservation and Management- 
"Considering an ever increasing demand for w ater, efforts are needed to 
substantially reduce water consumption in buildings. Integrated and 
sustainable water management focusing on least anthropogenic water 
discharge from human activities should be pursued. The use of water 
conserving fixtures, landscaping, rain water harvesting, aquifer recharging 
and waste-water recycling need to be given due consideration." 
 

57 
"Rain Water Harvesting from roof and non-roof areas (by 
Recharge) 
Design rainwater harvesting system to capture at least ‘peak-month 
rainfall’ runoff volume from roof and non -roof areas. All buildings with 
more than 105 sq.mt. plot area shall have the provisions of rainwater 
harvesting in accordance with the Table 10.1 chapter 10 of Unified 
Building Bye-Laws 2016, NCT Delhi". 
6.34 The Committee pointed out that various steps like reduction in consumption of 
water in view of rising demand of water, need for integrated sustainable water 
management by way of use of waste water through recycling rainwater harvesting etc. 
have been outlined in the aforesaid Unified Building Bye Laws 2016 besides designing a 
system of capturing at least peak month rainfall run off from roof and non -roof areas 
have also been highlighted.  Asked about these guidelines are being made user friendly 
at S tate level and at District Level as shown by NITI Aayog in their figurative 
expressions before the Committee, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs clarified" 
"These guidelines are simple and easy to comprehend and have been adopted 
at city level while  preparing the Master Plans. Ministry also extends 
handholding support to the States/UTs through Town and Country Planning 
Organization for disseminating these guidelines to the city level." 
 IV.  Urban Green Guidelines, 2014 
6.35  During the course of exa mination, it came out before the Committee that 
MOH&UA has come out with Urban Green Guidelines, 2014 for rain water harvesting 
with the following salient features: 
(i) Impact of Concretisation of Pavement of Trees.  
(ii) Policy Guidelines for strengthening Urban Greens  
(a) Road 
(b) Avenue Plantations 
(c) Group Plantations 
(d) Mixed Plantations 
(e) Informal Plantations 
(f) Spacing of Trees 
(i) Trees along NH/States Highways 
(ii) Trees unsuitable for Roadside Avenues 
(iii) Trees for Town Roads 
(iv) Flowing Trees for Inner Avenues 
(v) Roads Passing Through Special Areas 
(a) Water Logged Areas 
(b) Sandy Areas 
(c) Wooded Areas 
(d) Industrial Areas 

58 
(e) Parking Areas 
(iii)  Maintenance of Plant Material 
(a) Maintenance 
(b) Tiling of pavements: pervious material to be used 
(c) Growth of grass to be encouraged 
(d) Excessive pruning to be avoided 
(e) Compost to be made of leaves 
(f) Adequate space to be left around trees 
(g) Digging near trees to be avoided 
(h) Use of Organic Compost 
(i) Planting of second line trees to be encouraged 
(j) Initiation of IEC activities 
(k) Compactness of soil near trees to be avoided 
(l) Setting up of a Central Resource Centre 
(m) Stress on Shelter beds of thick trees 
(n) Updating technology of transplantation of trees  
(o) Setting up of a tree disease surgery unit in Horticulture Department 
(p) Earmarking of some cost of projects for landscaping 
(q) Use of kitchen and garden waste for compost 
(r) Recharge of aquifers 
(s) Heritage buildings to be landscaped 
(t) Encouragement for water harvesting technologies 
(u) For maintenance of greens internally 
(v) Public participation to be ensured 
(iv)  Integration of Urban Green Spaces 
 
V.  Provisions regarding RWH in AMRUT 
6.36 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their presentation before the 
Committee have outlined the following position:- 
"AMRUT Reform agenda emphasizes on:  
Responsibility of ULBs for public spaces  
Provision of RWH in Bye Laws  
Enforcement and Monitoring  
Technology options  
 10% of funds under AMRUT are awarded for successful reform achievement each year 
 AMRUT prescribes rainwater harvesting in all com mercial and public buildings and new buildings 
on plots more than 300 m2 
 
  All the States/UTs have incorporated the provision of Rainwater Harvesting in their respective 
Building Bye Laws other than Manipur, Mizoram, Sikkim and Lakshadweep." 
  
***** 
 
 
 
 

59 
CHAPTER- VII 
Physical and Financial Performance of MOWRRD&GR and MOH&UA 
 Physical and Financial Performance of workdone for RWH by 
MOWRRD&GR  
7.1 During the course of examination, the MOWRRD&GR has given the following 
information about physical and financial performance: 
State Wise Rural and Urban Artificial Recharge Structures as Proposed in Master Plan 
Sl. N. State Urban (including habitation) 
Structure 
(Number) 
Cost  
(Rs.in 
Crore) 
1 Andhra Pradesh 423900 695.24 
2 Bihar 100000 164.00 
3 Chhattisgarh 200000 309.00 
4 Delhi 142850 1097.50 
5 Goa 10000 16.40 
6 Gujarat 500000 725.00 
7 Haryana 376000 1675.00 
8 Himachal 50000 82.00 
9 Jammu & Kashmir 100000 145.00 
10 Jharkhand 200000 290.00 
11 Karnataka 700000 1148.00 
12 Kerala 315000 456.75 
13 Madhya Pradesh 600000 984.00 
14 Maharashtra 1605670 2765.75 
15 NER states 400000 656.00 
16 Odisha 300000 499.50 
17 Punjab 375000 1650.00 
18 Rajasthan 500000 820.00 
19 Sikkim 5000 13.25 
20 Tamil Nadu 0 0.00 
21 Telangana 326100 534.76 
22 Uttar Pradesh 1200000 1968.00 
23 Uttarakhand 48250 68.25 
24 West Bengal 300000 522.00 
25 Andaman & Nicobar Island 1200 8.00 
26 Chandigarh 8700 652.50 
27 Dadra & Nagar Haveli 1000 1.50 
28 Daman and Diu 4044 4.44 
29 Lakshadweep 6100 30.50 
30 Puducherry 1000 3.05 
 Total  8799814 17985.39 
 
7.2 The M/o WR, RD & RJ has given the following details about Artificial Recharge Schemes 
Implemented by CGWB in Urban Areas during various Five-Year Plans  

60 
S.No. State Scheme Cost Rs in 
Lakhs 
No of structure Impact assessment 
VII Plan 
1. Chandigarh Roof top rain water harvesting at 
CSIO, Chandigarh 
2.20  3812 cubic meter of rain water was 
recharged in one year 
2 Delhi Artificial Recharge in JNU & IIT 43.58  Water levels have risen upto 2.55 m in 
the vicinity of check dams and area 
benefited is  up to 30 hectare from each 
check dam 
IX Plan 
1 
Chandigarh 
Artificial recharge to ground water 
under central sector scheme in 
Punjab university, Chandigarh.        
2.79 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting  
1920 Cubic meter runoff water recharged 
in one year 
2 Scheme for Artificial recharge to 
ground water in Shantikunj area 
sector –16 (Leisure Valley) 
Chandigarh. 
14.31 Recharge 
Wells,Recharge Pits 
&Gabbion Bundhs 
3466000 Cubic meter runoff water 
recharged in one year 
3 Scheme for roof top rain water 
harvesting at Bhujalbhawan 
Chandigarh 
3.74 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting  
1440 Cubic meter runoff water recharged 
in one year 
4 Scheme for Artificial recharge to 
ground water at office of Chandigarh 
housing board in Sector 9, 
Chandigarh. 
8 
Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting  
5450Cubic meter runoff water recharged 
in one year 
5 Scheme for Rain water harvesting at 
DAV School in Sector 8, 
Chandigarh. 
9.41 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting  
10000 Cubic meter runoff water 
recharged in one year 
6 Scheme for Artificial recharge to 
ground water at Technical Teachers 
Training institute (TTTI), Sector 26, 
Chandigarh. 
12.13 Roof Top  Rain 
Water Harvesting  
13000cubic meter runoff water recharged 
in one year 
7 Scheme for utilising surplus water 
monsoon runoff for sector 
26,27,19,30,20, Chandigarh.  
10.38 Recharge Trenches  966000 Cubic meter rainwater runoff 
recharged in one year 
8 
Delhi 
Scheme for Artificial Recharge to 
Ground water at Tuglak Lane and 
surrounding area's , New Delhi. 
9.36 Pavement rain 
water harvesting 
20952 cubic meter of rain water was 
recharged in one year 
9 Scheme for Artificial Recharge to 
Ground water at Meera Bai 
Polytechnic Campus, Mahrani Bag, 
New Delhi 
1.76 roof top rain water 
harvesting system 
3749 cubic meter of rain water was 
recharged in one year 
10 Artificial recharge scheme in park of 
D-Block, Vasant Vihar, New Delhi. 
5.77 Roof top rain water 
harvesting system 
8460 cubic meter of rain water was 
recharged in one year 
11 Scheme for artificial recharge to 
ground water at 5, JanpathRaod, 
New Delhi. 
0.69 Roof top rain water 
harvesting system 
837 cubic meter of rain water was 
recharged in one year 
12 Scheme for artificial recharge to 
ground water at group housing for 
abhiyan CGHS ltd. Plot - 15 , sector- 
12, Dwarka, New Delhi. 
0.99 Roof top rain water 
harvesting system 
2745 cubic meter of rain water was 
recharged in one year 
13 
Delhi 
Artificial recharge to ground water at 
sultangarhi tomb, New Delhi. 
6 Roof top rain water 
harvesting system 
58433 cubic meter of rain water was 
recharged in one year 
14 Artificial Recharge Scheme for 
President Estate, New Delhi. 
12.73 Roof top /pavement 
rain water 
harvesting system 
through dugwell, 
recharge shaft, 
recharge well 
Water level rise 0.94 to 2.32 meters 
15 Artificial recharge to ground water 
in KushakNala,New Delhi 
3.32 Check Dam 127800 cubic meter of rain water was 
recharged in one year 
16 Artificial recharge to ground water 
in Lodi Garden,New Delhi 
5.37 Pavement rain 
water harvesting 
system 
Water level rise 0.67 to 0.72 meters 
17 Scheme for rain water harvesting in 
Shram Shakti Bhawan,New Delhi 
4.26 Roof top/pavement 
rain water 
harvesting system 
3000 cubic meter rain water recharged in 
one year. Water l evel rise 1.42 to 2.17 
meters 
18 Scheme for artificial recharge to 
ground water at Prime Minister’s 
office, South Block, New Delhi. 
5.38 Roof top rain water 
harvesting system 
4995 cubic meter of rain water was 
recharged in one year 
19 Scheme for artificial recharge to 
ground water at Vayusenabad, Air 
force station, Tughlakabad, New 
Delhi. 
5.41 Roof top rain water 
harvesting system 
16371 cubic meter of rain water was 
recharged in one year 
20 Scheme for Artificial recharge to 
ground water at deendayalupadhyay 
hospital, New Delhi. 
4.55 Roof top rain water 
harvesting system 
4968 cubic meter of rain water was 
recharged in one year 
 

61 
21 
 
Aritificial recharge scheme to 
ground water at Safdargunj Hospital, 
New Delhi. 
8.23 Roof top rain water 
harvesting system 
11835 cubic meter of rain water was 
recharged in one year 
22 Scheme for Artificial recharge to 
ground water at DTC Central 
Workshop-II, Okhla, New Delhi.  
6.8 Roof top rain water 
harvesting system 
9320 cubic meter of rain water was 
recharged in one year 
23 Scheme for Artificial Recharge to 
Ground Water at Sena Bhawan, 
South Block, New Delhi 
11.61 
NA NA 
24 
Jammu 
Scheme for Roof Top Rain Water 
Harvesting at Nirman Bhawan, 
panama Chowk, Jammu 
5.3 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting 
300-1200 Cubic meter runoff water 
harvested in one year 
25 Scheme for Roof Top Rain Water 
Harvesting at Airport Building, 
Satvari, Jammu. 
5 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting NA 
26 Artificial recharge project - Jammu 
action plan for project design and 
implementation of roof top rain 
water harvesting at Government 
women college, Gandhi Nagar, 
Jammu (J&K) 
6.24 
Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting NA 
27 Rooftop rainwater harvesting for 
Mata Vaishno Devi Shrine 
Udhampur district, katra J&K state 
20 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting NA 
28 
Benguluru 
Karnataka 
 Artificial Recharge in Bangalore 
University Campus”.Karnataka. 
13.75 NA NA 
29 Artificial recharge in Jnanabharathi 
campus, Bangalore university 
Sector, I and Sector II, and Phase-II. 
29.55 Combination of 
Percolation 
Tanks,Watershed 
Structures,Recharge 
wells, Roof Top 
Rain Water 
Harvesting 
2-3.5 m. rise in water levels and 9-16 ha 
area benefited from percolation tanks  
8.60 lakh cubic meter water recharged 
through recharge well. 
3-5 m rise in ground water levels through 
watershed structures. 
530 cubic meter recharged from Roof 
Top Rain Water Harvesting. 
30 Indore 
 MP 
Pilot project for ground water 
recharge through Roof Top Rain 
water harvesting in Narmada Water 
Supply,PHED Colony, 
Musakhedi,Indore 
6.94 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting  
More than 2 lakh cubic meter runoff 
water recharged in one year. 
31 Dewas City 
MP 
Scheme  for roof top rain water 
harvesting for Dewas City, Dewas 
district, M.P. 
6 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting  
More than 2 lakh cubic meter runoff 
water recharged in one year. 
32 Shillong 
city, 
Meghalaya 
Scheme for roof top rain water 
harvesting in Shillong city, 
Meghalaya 
20.32 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting  
6800 cubic meter runoff water harvested 
in one year 
33 
Bhubhanes
hwar, 
Odisha 
Scheme of rain water harvesting/roof 
top rain water harvesting in Raj 
Bhawan Premises, Bhubhaneshwar, 
Orissa. 
13.5 Rain water 
harvesting through 
Roof Top & 
Pavement 
catchments 
1,200 cubic meter runoff water recharged 
in one year 
34 Pilot project scheme for roof top rain 
water harvesting for application for 
artificial recharge in the Premises of 
Hydrology project building delta 
square, Bhubaneshwar,  
8.13 Rain water 
harvesting through 
Roof Top & 
Pavement 
catchments 
1,200 cubic meter runoff water recharged 
in one year 
35 Amritsar, 
Punjab 
Scheme for Recharge of sarovar 
water in Golden Temple area, 
Amritsar, Punjab. 
9.75 
Recharge wells Decline rate of ground water levels 
reduced from 0.9 m to 0.24 m 
36 Pilot Scheme for Roof Top Rain 
water harvesting to recharge ground 
water in Kheti Bhavan, Amritsar 
town, Punjab. 
1 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting  
474 cubic meter of rain water was 
recharged 
37 
Jaipur 
Rajasathan 
Scheme for construction of roof 
top/pavement rain water harvesting 
structures for artificial recharge in 
the office building of 
CGWB,Western Region ,Jaipur.  
3.96 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting  
411 cubic meter of rain water recharged 
in one year 
38 Roof top /pavement rain water run 
off harvesting at 
SinchaiBhawan,Jaipur 
4.9 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting  
1707 cubic meter of rain water recharged 
in one year 
39 Roof top rain water harvesting at 
Chief Minister's residence,Jaipur. 
5.7 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting  
836 cubic meter water recharged in one 
year 
40 Rooftop rain water harvesting at 
Governor house, Raj Bhavan,Jaipur 
5.1 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting  
525 cubic meter rain water was 
recharged in one year 
41 Roof top/ pavement rain water 
runoff  harvesting structures at 
Rajsthan High Court Jaipur.  
2.25 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting  
1452 cubic meter rain water recharged in 
one year 

62 
42 
Jaipur 
Rajsathan 
Roof top/ pavement rain water 
runoff  harvesting structures at State 
Secretariat (part-I & part-II),Jaipur. 
4.86 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting  
2802 cubic meter of ain water recharged 
in one year 
43 Roof top runoff harvesting artificial 
recharge structures part of 
Institutional building of MREC, 
Jaipur 
2.1 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting  
1757 cubic meter of rain water recharged 
in one year 
44 Roof top/ pavement rain water 
runoff harvesting at Vitta Bhavan, 
Jaipur, Rajasthan. 
3.9 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting  
1369 cubic meter of rain water recharged 
in one year 
45 Roof top/ pavement rain water 
runoff harvesting at Reserve Bank of 
India, ram Bagh Circle, Jaipur, 
Rajasthan.  
4.02 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting  
2300 cubic meter of rain water recharged 
in one year 
46 Roof top rain water harvesting 
structure at ground water department 
building premises, Jaipur, Rajasthan. 
3.02 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting  
345 cubic meter of rain water recharged 
in one year 
47 Concept plan for project design and 
implementation of Roof 
Top/Pavement Rain water Run -off 
harvesting structures at officers 
training school (OTS, Nehru 
Bhawan), Jaipur, Rajasthan. 
11.11 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting  
2505 cubic meter of rain water recharged 
in one year 
48 Artificial recharge at College of 
Technology and Engineering, 
(CTAE), Udaipur, Rajasthan. 
4.5 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting  
1660 cubic meter of rainwater recharged 
in one year 
49 Concept Plan for project design and 
implementation of Roof 
top/pavement rain water run -off 
harvesting structure premises of 
PHED, Head office (New building), 
Jaipur, Rajasthan. 
2.21 NA 
NA 
50 
Lucknow, 
UP 
Project proposal for artificial 
recharge by roof top rain water 
harvesting at Bhujal Bhavan, 
Lucknow. 
3.25 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting  Recharge during 2002 375 Cu m, 2003 is 
511.26 cu m,2004 is 416 cu m 
51 Project proposal for artificial 
recharge by roof top rain water 
harvesting at New Lucknow 
University Campus, Jankipuram, 
Lucknow, UP 
1.97 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting  Recharge during 2002 721 Cu m, 2003 is 
983.2 cu m,2004 is 800 cu m 
52 Project proposal for artificial 
recharge by roof top rain water 
harvesting at Jal Nigam Colony, 
Indira Nagar, Lucknow, UP 
1.97 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting  Recharge during 2002 346 Cu m, 2003 is 
472 cu m,2004 is 384 cu m 
53 Aligarh 
city, U.P. 
Scheme for artificial recharge to 
ground water through storm water 
runoff in Aligarh city, U.P. 
32.76 NA 
NA 
54 Allahabad, 
U.P 
Roof top rain water harvesting at 
Vikas Bhawan, Allahabad, U.P. 
4.6 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting  Recharge during 2004 is 908.74 cu m 
55 Allahabad, 
U.P 
Roof top rain water harvesting at 
Ambedkar Vihar, Chauphataka in 
lieu of Sangam Place, Civil Lines, 
Allahabad, U.P. 
5.83 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting  Recharge during 2004 is 860.98 cu m 
56 Lucknow, 
UP 
Scheme for rainwater harvesting and 
artificial recharge in selected 
government buildings in Seven sites 
at Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh 
69.85 Roof Top Rain 
Water Harvesting  
Recharge during 2004 is 23032.54 cu m 
X Plan 
NIL 
XI Plan 
1 Delhi 
Cantt 
Delhi 
Artificial Recharge to Groundwater 
in the Office, Mess and adjacent area 
in & around CE Office, WAC, 
Palam, Delhi  
43.44 Recharge Trench 
with Twin Recharge 
Well - 10 
Rise of Water level @ 0.11m /year 
2 Ranchi, 
Jharkhand 
Roof Top Rainwater Harvesting 
structures in Ranchi Urban area   
16.49 RTRWH-15 Impact Assessment Report Awaited 
3 Dhanbad 
Jharkhand 
Artificial Recharge &  Rain Water 
Harvesting Structures With in the 
Compounds of Indian School of 
Mines, Dhanbad 
189.46 Recharge Pits-54 
with Recharge bore 
rise in the mean pre-monsoon water level 
by l.03 m in the year 2014 in 
comparison to that of the year 2013. 
 

63 
4 Dimapur. 
Wokha 
Nagaland 
Artificial Recharge to Ground Water 
through Rainwater Harvesting from 
Roof Top in & around Dimapur. 
Wokha town     
224.14 RTRWH-64 Total volume of 37,200 m3/annum rain 
water has been harvested from the total 
roof area of about 30,000 sq.m with an 
average annual rainfall of 1100 mm in 
Dimapur and 2000 mm in Wokha area. 
5 Nagpur 
Maharash
tra 
Artificial Recharge to Groundwater 
in Raj Bhawan area, Nagpur 
15.15 LBS-32, Earthern-2, 
Gabion-8, 
EarthernNB-3, 
Cement,NB-01,                           
Percolation Tank-03 
Increase of soil moisture is witnessed by 
increase in biomass and thick vegetation 
cover in entire area of Rajbhawan 
campus. 
6 Chennai 
Tamil 
Nadu 
RWH in the premise of the NITTTR, 
Taramani, Chenna 
40.0 RTRWH-1 Rise in water level from pre-monsoon to 
post-monsoon was 1.55 m during 2013 -
14 and rise in water level was maintained 
during May 2014 -15 also, i.e., 0.95m. 
The consecutively the pre -monsoon 
water level showed a raising trend from 
5.9 m to 4.87 m bgl, for the period May -
13 to May-15. 
 
7 Rangared
dy, 
Telengan
a 
Rainwater harvesting in premises of 
Jawahar Lal Nehru Technology 
University, Hyderabad 
39.9 Recharge Pond with 
two shaft - 1    
Sump (50000 lit) - 2                
Sump (200000 lit) - 
1             Sump 
(100000 lit) - 3    
There is a marked rise in water level in 
the pre -monsoon period in all the three 
piezometers, ranging from 5.6 m to 2.5 
m from the pre-project to the post project 
period. 
8 Rangared
dy, 
Telengan
a 
AR structure at Bhujal Bhavan 
CGWB Hyderabad 
19.37 Check Dam - 2 Impact Assessment Report Awaited 
9 
Bikaner 
City 
Rajsathan 
Roof Top Rainwater Harvesting 
structures at Govt. 
MahilaPolytechnical Collage  
11.88 RTRWH-2 The total annual quantity of rain water to 
be harvested /recharged from existing 
structure will be 1474 m3 per year  
10 Roof Top Rainwater Harvesting 
structures at Govt.  Polytechnic 
Collage ( Boys)  
13.90 RTRWH-2 The total annual quantity of rain water to 
be harvested /recharged from existing 
structure will be 717 m3 per year 
11 Roof Top Rainwater Harvesting 
structures CE, IGNP Office Building 
) 
8.15 RTRWH-2 The total annual quantity of rain water to 
be harvested /recharged from existing 
structure will be 1474 m3 per year 
12 
Jaipur 
Rajsathan 
RTRWH for Office  Building of 
Govt Polytechniqe College Gandhi 
Nagar Jaipur 
8.420  Impact Assessment Report Awaited 
13 RTRWH for Office   Building of 
Director DakLekha Bhavan 
Institutional Area  Jaipur 
4.900  
14 RTRWH for Building ofRajkiya 
Madhyamik VidyalayaKhejrawas P 
O sambhar Dist  Jaipur 
11.390  
15 RTRWH for Building of Rajkiya 
Madhyamik Vidyalaya Kalakh P O 
sambhar Dist  Jaipur 
11.440  
16 RTRWH for Building of Rajkiya 
Adarsh UchhPrathamikVidyalaya, 
VillageAmarpuraGovindpurDist 
Jaipur 
11.480  
17    
18 
 
RTRWH for Building of 
RajkiyaUchhPrathamikVidyalaya,Vi
llageBarbaraGovindpurDist Jaipur  
10.950  
19 RTRWH for Building at Shri Kalyan 
Singh Govt Sr Sec.School, Shahpora 
Distt Jaipur 
18.940  

 
64 
B.  Work done by M/o Housing and Urban Affairs on rainwater harvesting 
under AMRUT and Smart Cities Mission: - 
(i) Work done for rainwater harvesting under AMRUT Mission 
7.3 During the course of examination, the Committee pointed out that the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs has stated that under the  flagship programme of Ministry of 
Urban Development namely Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation 
(AMRUT), 500 cities having a population of more than 1 lakh have been identified. The 
Mission provides financial support to the cities for in frastructure development and 
governance reforms. It has a very strong reform mandate which is not only incentivized 
by granting 10% additional grant but also monitored regularly by the Ministry. One of 
the reform agenda under AMRUT mandates the State Gover nment to formulate policy 
and action plan for rainwater harvesting in all commercial and public buildings and new 
buildings on plots more than 300 sqmt.. 
7.4 During the course of evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs, the  Secretary of Housing and Urban Affairs outlining the need for 
rainwater harvesting for improving the water table stated that under AMRUT Scheme 
which is to be completed by 2020 in 500 AMRUT Cities with a population of 1 lakh as 
large as 32% households are to be given water connections and the Secretary HUA has 
given the following figures about implementation of various AMRUT Projects 
SL. No. Financial progress of AMRUT Schemes (Rs. in 
crore) 
 
(i) Total amount sanctioned for  77,648 
(ii) water related projects 39,011 
 
 

65 
(iii) Water related projects grounded 24,921 
(iv) Water related projects DPR approved and will be tendered out soon 7,284 
(v) Water related projects tendered out 5,515 
(vi) Water related projects completed 262 
  
7.5 Asked about the reasons that as against the total water related projects of Rs. 
39,011 crore, only 262 projects have been completed and as large as 24921/ - are still 
grounded with remaining projects are under tendering and DPR approval stage, the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs stated:- 
"Under the Mission, selection, appraisal, approval and implementation of 
individual projects is done by the concerned States/Union Territories 
(UTs). The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs only approves the State 
Annual Action Plans (SAAPs) submitted by the States/UTs.  
Further, infrastructure projects in water supply sector normally take 12 -18 
months in planning and project formulation, Detailed Project Report (DPR) 
preparation, approval and tendering, before the projects are actually 
grounded. Out of t he Rs. 39,011 crore allocated towards the projects in 
water supply sector, tenders have been awarded for projects costing Rs. 
25,546.84 crore, while projects worth Rs.12,195.10 crore are at various 
stages of tendering. Thus, works on projects costing Rs.37 ,742 crore 
(97% of the total allocation for water supply projects) are under progress 
at present. The State-wise details of status of projects in the water supply 
sector has been attached at Annexure- IV."  
7.6 The Committee also enquired whether the M/o H &UA need to accelerate the 
progress of implementation of these projects, the Ministry of H&UA stated:  
"The Ministry is continuously monitoring the water related projects and 
proactively taking up with the State Governments through review 
meetings, field visits, video conferences along with monitoring through an 
Independent Review and Monitoring Agency (IRMA). Progress of the 
Mission is also monitored by the Apex Committee constituted under the 
Mission. The Ministry is also providing hand -holding support to  the 
States/UTs whenever required in order to achieve the targets in a timely 
manner.  
The pace of implementation is expected to increase further in the coming 
days, as contracts have been awarded for majority of projects." 
 

66 
Asked about the State wise details of rainwater harvesting projects particularly in 
metropolitan cities sanctioned, grounded, DPR Approved and tendered out as on 
31.07.2018, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs stated: 
"The first priority of the Mission is to provide water suppl y to uncovered 
areas/ households in the Mission cities followed by Sewerage and Septage 
Management. Therefore, States/UTs have mainly taken up projects to 
augment water supply.  
 Work done regarding rainwater harvesting in Smart City Mission 
7.7 During the course of examination, the Committee pointed out that the M/o HUA 
in their brief note have stated that Under Smart Cities Mission, importance is given to 
rainwater harvesting.  So far, 45 Smart Cities have proposed rainwater harvesting 
projects costing Rs.1,133.6 crore and these projects are at various stages of 
implementation. Details are given at Annexure - V. 
7.8 Asked about the reasons that out of 45 rainwater harvesting projects worth 
Rs.1133.6 crore only four projects of Agra (Rs. 6.7 crore ), Ajmer (Rs.1.8 crore), NDMC 
(R. 1.1 crore), Surat (Rs. 0.5 crore) could be completed, the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs stated:  
"As cities have been selected in the 4 rounds over a period of more than 2 
years, their progress   depends   on the R ound of the selection.  After 
selection, it takes around 12 to 18 months to    set    up    Special     
Purpose  Vehicle (SPV), procure Project Management Consultants (PMC), 
hire human resources, call tenders and award work. The   implementation  
plan/ tim eline   for the completion of all projects, including Rainwater 
Harvesting (RWH) projects, is given   by the   Smart   Cities   in their 
Smart City Proposals (SCPs). It is reproduced as follows: 
 
✓ Round  1 cities -   2019-20  to  2020 -21   (20  cities  selected   in Jan  
2016) 
✓ Round  2 cities-   2019-20  to 2021-22   (40  cities  in May  & Sep  2016) 
✓ Round  3 cities -   2020-21  to  2021 -22   (30  cities  selected   in Jun  
2017) 
 

67 
 
✓ Round  4 cities -   2020-21  to  2022 -23   (9  cities  selected   in Jan  
2018) 
Out of the 45 RWH projects under the Mission  
• 4 projects have been completed 
• 3 Projects are under implementation 
• 5 projects are under tendering 
• 2 projects - DPRs have been approved  
• 31 projects are under DPR preparation 
 
Specific city-wise information is being collected on reasons for non -completion of RWH 
projects." 
 
7.9 Asked about the reasons that following big projects are at DPR stage, and By 
when these are likely to be completed, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
clarified: 
 
# Name of the Smart 
City 
Cost in Rs. 
crore 
Remarks 
1 Tirupati (Round 2) 200.0 ➢ Projects are included in place making projects and 
are not separate projects anymore. Detailed Project 
Reports (DPRs) have been approved and tenders 
are being issued for these projects.  
➢ Projects are likely to be completed in 18 months 
from the date of issuance of work order.  
2 New Town Kolkata 
(Round Fast Track) 
180.0 SPV is yet to be incorporated hence funds are yet to be 
transferred for implementation of projects. 
3 Aligarh (Round 3) 70.0 This project has been divided into three phases. Phase 
1 has been tendered out.  
4 Madurai (Round 2) 50.0 DPR is under finalization. 
5 Shimla (Round 3) 40.7 Project will be taken up once the Project Management 
Consultant (PMC) is in place, which is likely to be 
appointed by August, 2018. 
6 Kohima (Round 2) 20.0 Project will be taken up once the PMC is in place. 
 
 Status of rainwater harvesting issues before National Green Tribunal (NGT) 
 
7.10 During the course of examination, the following issues appeared in the Press 
report from time to time pertaining to rainwater harvesting have been before National 
Green Tribunal (NGT) and NGT has sought status report thereon: - 

68 
Sl No. Subject matter Caption Name of the Newspaper  
with date 
1 Inspection of rainwater harvesting 
systems on plots of 500 mtrs. and 
above in all residential and commercial 
buildings by Delhi Jal Board 
'Rainwater Harvesting: NGT directs 
DJB to inspect buildings.' 
The Statesman 09.07.2018 
2 Issue of non -setting up of rainwater 
harvesting facilities in 9 Metro stations 
by DMRC because of non -availability of 
land 
'Rain water Harvesting unavailable at 
9 Metro Stations.' 
The Statesman 28.04.2018 
3. Setting up rainwater harvesting systems 
in flyovers and bridges 
'Rain water Harvesting: NGT seeks 
report on flyovers 
The Statesman 01.02.2018 
4.  Immediate setting up of rainwater 
harvesting systems in Puri 
NGT calls for rainwater harvesting in 
Puri 
The Statesman 02.11.2017 
 
7.11 Asked about the reasons that aforesaid issues pertaining to installation of 
rainwater systems at various places have been the matter of adjudication before 
National Green Tribunal (NGT) land also sought latest update on the projects, the 
MoH&UA permitted the following information: 
"Ministry of Housing and Urban Aff airs has ascertained the details from 
respective agencies as given below: 
 
1. DMRC:  
 
Subject Matter: Issue of non-setting up of rainwater harvesting facilities in 
9 Metro stations by DMRC because of non-availability of land 
  
In the NGT Case (OA No. 94/2013) Vikrant Kumar Tongad vs. DMRC, 
there are 9 metro stations wherein RWH system can be installed by 
DMRC, however, the same cannot be installed on account of non -
availability of land for installation of RWH. An area of 36 sq. mt. is 
required for inst allation of RWH. The names of stations along with the 
agencies from which land is required for installation of RWH is as below: 
 
Stations where Rain Water Harvesting is not installed and not feasible 
Sl. 
No Name of Station  Remarks 
Min Land required 
for constructing 
RWH 
Land 
Owning 
agency 
1 Noida Sec-18 Sufficient land not available 
with DMRC 36 sq.m Noida 
Authority 
2 Noida Sec-16 Sufficient land not available 
with DMRC 36 sq.m Noida 
Authority 
 

69 
3 Jhandewalan Sufficient land not available 
with DMRC 36 sq.m MCD 
4 Karol Bagh Sufficient land not available 
with DMRC 36 sq.m MCD 
5 PreetVihar Sufficient land not available 
with DMRC 36 sq.m PWD Delhi 
6 NirmanVihar Sufficient land not available 
with DMRC 36 sq.m PWD Delhi 
7 Laxmi Nagar Sufficient land not available 
with DMRC 36 sq.m PWD Delhi 
8 Ashok Park Main Sufficient land not available 
with DMRC 36 sq.m PWD Delhi 
9 Kailash Colony Sufficient land not available 
with DMRC 36 sq.m PWD Delhi 
 
Once land is made available, DMRC will construct RWH at these 9 metro 
stations. 
 
2. Puri: 
 
Subject Matter: Immediate setting up of rainwater harvesting systems in 
Puri 
 
The scheme for rooftop Rain Water Harvesting and Ground Water 
Recharge in urban areas has been extended to cover Puri town in 
compliance of the order dated 02.11.2017 of National Green Tribunal vide 
order no. 5847/WR Dtd. 28.02.2018 of Water Resources Department."  
 
***** 
 

70 
CHAPTER-VIII 
Best Practices of RWH 
8.1 During the course of examination, the MoHUA in their submission before the 
Committee have outlined the following best practices being done in RWH: 
Chennai 
(a) A Separate legislation making rain water harvesting mandatory in Chennai 
Metropolitan area.  
(b) A massive awareness campaign was launched with involvement of the civic 
bodies, civil society, Government bodies and citizens to “Conserve Water where 
It falls”.  
(c) In addition to dedicated RWH Cell, “Rain Centres” have been established in 
all area offices of Chennai Metro Water Supply and Sewerage Board (CMWSSB). 
In these “Rain Centres”, live models of different RWH structures are kept for 
explaining to the public about the installation of suitable RWH structures in their 
buildings.  
(d) Chennai is the first city in the country to become 100% rain water compliant 
with 8,84,700 having rainwater structures. The recharge potential from 
Rainwater Harvesting is 2.75 thousand million cubic feet.  
(e) Rainwater so harvested is used to supplement the municipa l water supply at 
household level, especially for non-potable purpose.  
(f) It has led to increase in ground water levels. 
Delhi  
(a) To promote implementation of rain water harvesting by the public at large, 
its design has been simplified and is made avai lable on website of the Delhi Jal 
Board for public facilitation.  
(b) DJB has installed rain water harvesting system in its 166 installations located 
across Delhi & implementation of Rain Water Harvesting system in another 175 
installations will be done in phased manner.  
(c) Delhi Jal Board gives 10% rebate in water bills for providing adequate and 
functional rain water harvesting system for its consumers on the plots/ properties 
of 100 sqm or more. In case of plot size of 500 sqm and above, for non -
compliance water bill is increased 1.5 times till the rain water harvesting is made 
and intimated. 
 

71 
(d) Delhi Jal Board is disseminating information on rain water harvesting through 
print media and various other platforms including organizing workshops etc. F or 
creating public awareness informative booklets and pamphlets on rain water 
harvesting have been printed and are being distributed including with the water 
bills.  
(e) NCT Delhi has introduced financial incentives for adopting rainwater 
harvesting by the  Residents Welfare Associations (RWAs) and neighbourhood 
societies with financial assistance of 50% of the total cost of the project or 
maximum of Rs. 50,000 on satisfactory completion of the rainwater harvesting 
structures.  Jabalpur, Indore and Gwalior M unicipal Corporations have granted 
rebate of 6%• in property tax in the year in which the construction of rain water 
harvesting facility has been completed for the owner of the building as an 
incentive.  In Hyderabad, Metro Water Supply and Sewerage Board has launched 
an App "Jalam • Jeevam". Consumers already having constructed RWH pits need 
to download the App and get registered with their respective Consumer Account 
Numbers (CAN). It provides information about implementation of rainwater 
harvesting in the city." 
Hyderabad:   
(a) Dedicated RWH Cell in MetroWater Supply and Sewerage Board.   
(b) 4,538 RWH structures constructed. 
Bangalore: 
(a) RWH cell established at Karnataka State Council for Science and Technology 
(KSCST) is providing policy support for water conservation and rainwater 
harvesting.   
(b) Mandatory provision for RWH in Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board 
Act. 
(c) Around 1 lakh buildings have implemented RWH measures. 
8.2 In this connection, the NITI Aayog has also submitted: 
"Legislative Measures on Rainwater Harvesting by Indian 
States/Cities 
Many States/Cities have undertaken legislative measures to promote rain 
water harvesting of which, a glimpse of the legislative measures taken by 
some of the Indian states/Cities on rainwater harvesting are as under: 
New Delhi 
Since June 2001, the Ministry of Urban affairs and Poverty Alleviation has 
made rainwater harvesting mandatory in all new buildings with a roof area  

72 
of more than 100 sq m and in all plots with an area of more than 1000 
sqm, that are being developed.  
The Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) has made rainwater 
harvesting mandatory in all institutions and re sidential colonies in notified 
areas (South and southwest Delhi and adjoining areas like Faridabad, 
Gurgaon and Ghaziabad). This is also applicable to all the buildings in 
notified areas that have tube wells. The deadline for this was for March 
31, 2002. T he CGWA has also banned drilling of tube wells in notified 
areas  
Indore 
Rainwater harvesting has been made mandatory in all new buildings with 
an area of 250 sq m or more. A rebate of 6 per cent on property tax has 
been offered as an incentive for impleme nting rainwater harvesting 
systems.  
Kanpur  
Rainwater harvesting has been made mandatory in all new buildings with 
an area of 1000 sq m or more.  
Hyderabad 
Rainwater harvesting has been made mandatory in all new buildings with 
an area of 300 sq m or more.  Tentative for enforcing this deadline was 
June 2001.  
Chennai 
Rainwater harvesting has been made mandatory in three storied buildings 
(irrespective of the size of the rooftop area). All new water and sewer 
connections are provided only after the implement ation of rainwater 
harvesting systems.  
Haryana 
Haryana Urban Development Authority (HUDA) has made rainwater 
harvesting mandatory in all new buildings irrespective of roof area. In the 
notified areas in Gurgaon town and the adjoining industrial areas all the 
institutions and residential colonies have been asked to adopt water 
harvesting by the CGWA. This is also applicable to all the buildings in 
notified areas having a tubewell, deadline was for March 31, 2002. The 
CGWA has also banned drilling of tubewells in notified areas.  

73 
Rajasthan 
The state government has made rainwater harvesting mandatory for all 
public and establishments and all properties in plots covering more than 
500 sq m in urban areas. 
Mumbai 
The state government has made rainwater harvesting mandatory for all 
buildings that are being constructed on plots that are more than 1,000 sq 
m in size. The deadline set for this was October, 2002."  
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation   
(a) Out of 150 elevated stat ions, 116 stations have been provided with 
rainwater harvesting  systems with total pit capacity of 6,169 cum and 
under construction at 19 stations.  
  
(b) Rainwater harvesting structures have been constructed at 22 
ancillary buildings and 9 structures at Metro Depots.  
Delhi Development Authority 
(c) DDA has constructed conventional RWH structures at 30 locations in 
different zones in residential, commercial and  office buildings while 
modular RWH structures provided at 17 locations in different zones in 
residential buildings/flyovers and open spaces at 5 locations in different 
zones at parks, parking and footpaths. 
 Central PublicWorks Department 
(d) CPWD has constru cted 1,089 RWH structures in various 
government building throughout the country, including 356 structures in 
Delhi and NCR. 
 
8.3 During the course of evidence of the representatives of MoH&UA, the Secretary, 
H&UA also stated:- 
"सी.पी.डब्ल्यू.डी. के द्वारा  पूर े  देि में 1089 र े न वाटर  हावेस्स्टंग स्ट र क्चर बने हुए हैं, 
लजसमें 356 स्ट र क्चर क े वि लदल्ली  या एन.सी.आर . क्षेत्र में ही बने हुए हैं। सर , 
लदल्ली  डेविपमेंट ऑथोररटी  ने 30 िोक े िन पर  र े न वाटर  हावेस्स्टंग के स्ट र क्चर 
बनाये हुए हैं। लदल्ली  मेट र ो र े ि कॉपोर े िन के 150 एिीवेलटड मेट र ो स्टेिंस हैं, लजसमें 
से 116 मेट र ो स्टेिंस पर  र े न वाटर  हावेस्स्टंग स्ट र क्चर बने हुए हैं और  19 पर  काम 
चि रहा  है। इसक े अिावा 22 ए ं लसिरी लबस्डंग्स और  9 लडपो की लबस्डंगों पर  र े न 
वाटर  हावेस्स्टंग काम चि रहा  है। इन्फ े क्ट लजतने भी िहरों में मेट र ो है सभी जगह 
र े न वाटर  हावेस्स्टंग और  सोिर के काम को इंश्योर कर  रहे  हैं। एन.बी.सी.सी. के  

 
74 
द्वारा  जहां-जहां इनक े क ं स्ट र क्शंस हो रहे  हैं, सभी जगह र े न वाटर  हावेस्स्टंग हो रही  
है। ऑिर े डी इनक े 33 िोक े िन पर  हो रखे  हैं और  48 िोक े िन पर  इनका काम 
चि रहा  है।  
He clarified: 
"सर , यह कायव स्टेट गवनेमेंट  का है। हमने एडवाइजरी  रोि के तौर  पर  मॉडि 
लबस्डंग बायिॉज में इसको मेंडेट कर  रखा  है, जो भी 100 स्क्वायर  मीटर  से ज्यादा 
बड़े मकान बनेंगे, उनक े लिए र े न वाटर  हावेस्स्टंग बनाया जाना कम्पिसरी है। 
इसक े अिावा हमने रीजनि डेविपमेंट की जो गाइडिाइन बना रखी  है, चूंलक 
इसमें िे आउट प्लानों को बनाते हैं, उसमें क ै से वाटर  बॉडी को ररटेन  कर ें गे, क ै से 
ररवरर ं ग  स्ट र क्चर या नािों को ररटेन  कर ें गे, उसक े बार े  में गाइडिाइंस दे रखी  है। 
इन गाइडिाइंस को हम सार े  स्टेट्स के साथ  िगातार ररव्यू  करते  रहते  हैं। आज 
की डेट में क े वि चार  स्टेट्स ऐसे हैं, लजन्ोंने  अमृत ररफॉमव  में इनको िागू नही ं 
लकया है। वे  स्टेट हैं, मलिपुर, लमजोरम , लसस्िम और  िक्षद्वीप। सर , िक्षद्वीप में 
कोई भी अबवन एररया  नही ं है, िेलकन मलिपुर, लमजोरम  और  लसस्िम ये तीन 
स्टेट्स ऐसे हैं, लजन्ोंने  अपने लबस्डंग बायिॉज में इसको एडॉप्ट नही ं लकया है, 
बाकी सारी  स्टेट्स ने लबस्डंग बायिॉज में एडॉप्ट लकया हुआ है। सार े  स्टेट्स से हम 
यह कहते हैं लक लकसी न लकसी प्रकार  का इंसेंलटव  प्लस आई.ई.सी. क ै म्पेन कर े , 
जैसा लक चैन्नई में कहा गया। सर , कई स्टेट्स हैं। जैसे लदल्ली  में पचास हजार  
रुपये , अगर  कोई ग्रुप हाउलसंग बनती है, जब उसमें र े न वाटर  हावेस्स्टंग स्ट र क्चर 
िगाते हैं, तो पचास हजार  रुपये  कॉस्ट ररड्यूस  करने  के लिए स्ट र क्चर बनाने के 
लिए लदल्ली  गवनवमेंट  के द्वारा  लदये जाते हैं। लदल्ली  जि बोडव वाटर  टैक्स के ऊपर  
दस प्रलतित का लडडक्शन करता  है। उत्तर प्रदेि ने वाटर  टैक्स पर  दो प्रलतित का 
टैक्स लडडक्शन कर  रखा  है। कही ं पर  पांच प्रलतित कर  रखा  है। सर , अिग-अिग 
राज्यों  के अिग-अिग लकस्म के स्ट र क्चर हैं, िेलकन इसका कोई यूलनफॉमव मॉडि 
नही ं है, स्टेट्स इसको अपने मुतालबक करती  हैं, And this is something which we 
are pursuing with all the States.  इस बात को सब ने ररयिाइज कर  रखा  है लक 
आज की डेट में वाटर  को क ं जवव  करना  हमार े  लिए बहुत इम्पोटेंट है। चेन्नई में 
बहुत बुरी  स्थथलत हो गयी थी , िेलकन आज की डेट में उसका वाटर  िेवि बेहतर  हो 
गया है। हर  िहर में हम िोग स्थथलत को मेन्टेन कर  सकते हैं।" 
8.4 During the course of evidence, the issue of late afforestation by NBCC due to 
delay in giving of land by DDA in Kidwai Nagar redevelopment project was raised before 
the Committee elaborating the issue, the Chairman, NBCC stated: 
"र े न वाटर  हावेस्स्टंग के लिए लकदवई  नगर  को अभी हम डेविप कर  रहे  हैं, अगिे 
साि इसे पूरा  लडलिवर कर  देंगे, क ु छ तो हमने  लडलिवर कर  लदया है। वहाूँ हमने 

तीस हजार  क ै पेलसटी के 32 हजार  लपट बनाए हैं। अब हमने एक नई चीज िुरू  की 
है लक मानसून से दो महीने पहिे और  मानसून खत्म होने के दो महीने बाद यानी 
साि में दो बार  उस एररया  की वाटर  टेबि ररकॉडव  पर  चैक कराए ं गे और  उसे 
अपनी वेबसाइट  पर  डािेंगे।" 
 
8.5 During course of evidence outlining the best practices on RWH, the M/oHUA has 
given the following best practices in different States: 

75 
Madhya Pradesh:   
• As an incentive, one time rebate of 6 % in property tax for providing rain 
water harvesting facility is given by Jabalpur, Indore and Gwalior Municipal 
Corporations.  
 
Gujarat (Surat Municipal Corporation):   
• Rebate scheme for Rain Water Harvesting - 50% of actual amount or Rs. 
2000/- (whichever is more). 
 
• Improvement in ground water table by average 0.9 m in areas where RWH 
measures have been implemented. 
Odisha:   
• State Government (Water Resource Department) has launched a new 
Scheme for Rooftop Rain Water Harvesting and Ground Water Recharge in 
Urban areas of the State.   
 
• It is being implemented in Bhubaneswar, Berhampur, Balangir, Titilagarh, 
Jharsuguda & Puri on pilot basis.  
Uttar Pradesh   
• Allahabad Municipal Corporation gives a rebate of 2% in hou se tax for 
buildings which have operational RWH system. 
*** 
  

76 
CHAPTER-IX 
Requirement of Funds 
9.1 During the course of examination on the issue of requirement of funds for RWH, 
the MoWRRD&GR have stated before the Committee as under: 
"A Conceptual Document brought out by Central Ground Water Board captioned 
'Master Plan for Artificial Recharges to Ground Water in India' during  2013 
involving Ground Water Scientists and experts envisages constructions  of  
construction of 1.11 crore rainwater Harvesting and Artificial Recharge Structures  
in the country with an estimated cost of Rs. 79,178/ - Crores to harness 85 BCM 
(Billion Cubic Metre) for enhancing availability of water for drinking, domestic, 
industrial and irrigation purposes. The Master Plan has already been circulated to 
States/UTs." 
 
9.2 In this connection, MoWRRD&GR added: 
"The Master Plan envisages construction of about 1.11 crore artificial 
recharge structures in urban and rural areas at an estimated cost of about 
Rs. 79178 crore. 
 In the Urban areas two type of Roof Top Rain Water Harvesting (RTRWH) 
has been proposed in the entire country. Tentative cost for individual 
buildings is as under: 
 RTRWH (H) - Roof top Rainwater harvesting (House) 
 (Cost varying from Rs 0.1 to 0.5 lakhs) 
 RTRWH (G&I) - Roof top Rainwater harvesting (Government & 
 Institutional building) 
 (Cost varying from Rs 1.0 to 4.5 lakhs)  
 Total Cost of RTRWH proposed- Rs 16,266 Crores  
 Total volume to be harnessed from RTRWH – 2244.60 MCM  
 This Master Plan has been placed on the website Central Ground Water 
Board. Copy of this Master plan has been circulated to the State 
Government for its implementation. Copies were also circulated to all 
Hon’ble MPs for its implementation in their respective constituencies." 
 
9.3 Asked whether any tangible work in the area of rainwater harvesting and 
artificial recharge has progressed in any States/UTs during all these years, the    
MoWRRD&GR informed. 
 
"The Ministry of Rural Development in consultation and agreement with t he 
Ministry of Water Resources, RD & GR and the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ 
Welfare has developed an actionable framework for Natural Resources 
Management (NRM), titled “Mission Water Conservation” to ensure gainful 
utilization of funds. The Framewo rk strives to ensure synergies in Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS),  

77 
 
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY), Integrated Watershed 
Management Programme (IWMP) and Command Area Development & Water 
Management (C AD&WM), given their common objectives. Types of common 
works undertaken under these programmes/schemes are water conservation and 
management, water harvesting, soil and moisture conservation, groundwater 
recharge, flood protection, land development, Comman d Area Development & 
Watershed Management." 
 
 
 
*** 
 
   
 
  

78 
 Part-II 
Recommendations/Observations 
Introductory 
The Committee are deeply disturbed by the water scenario in the 
Country.  Due to lack of adequate sensitivity,  mismanagement of water 
resources, absence of proper conservation strategies and sustainable 
exploitation,  the age old perception of abundance is gone and we are now 
faced with a growing scarcity which may soon acquire apocalyptic 
dimensions. 
 The report of Niti Aayog presents a  very grim picture with even now 
more than 60 million people in India facing extreme water stress as of now.  
It is distressing to note that by 2030 the gap in demand and supply of water 
would lead to colossal loss of 6% in the country's GDP.  Moreover, by  2050 
against a projection of 1180 BCM water,  the possible availability would be 
1137 BCM. 
 Against this background the Committee in this present report took up 
for examination the rain water harvesting in metropolitan cities as this can 
be a major mitigating factor to the predicament the country is faced with.  
Comprehensive and time bound programme on Rain Water Harvesting 
recommended in the light of international experiences 
 The Committee's are constrained to find that Metropolitan cities are 
currently experiencing a peculiar situation of acute shortage of drinking 
water in the summer season and flooding in the monsoon season.  Moreover, 
availability of water is still unpredictable and erratic in most part of the year.  
At the same time ground water table (pre-monsoon) when compared to  

79 
decadal level has fallen in many Metropolitan cities like Bengaluru, Chennai, 
Kolkata, Ranchi, Hyderabad and many more cities ,whereas it has  fallen 
100% in prominent towns of Allahabad, Ghaziabad, Kanpur, Lucknow, 
Meerut and Banaras. This according to Mi nistry of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation (MOWRRD&GR) has led to serious 
problems with quality and availability of ground water.  This is because most 
of the rainfall is just 100 hours out of 8660 hrs. in a year as a result the 
rainfall on the surface tends to flow and as large as 85,565 MCM of surplus 
run-off can be harnessed to augment the ground water.  In this connection, 
the Committee have been informed by NITI Aayog that the country is not 
water scarce as out of 1123 BCM of u tilizable water resources (690  BCM is 
surface water and 433 BCM is ground water) as large as 571 BCM is lost due 
to inefficient management of water for utilization purpose resulting in huge 
dependence on ground water which caters to 55% of total water sup ply 
demand in the country, 60% of utilization requirement, 70% of requirement 
of rural water supply and 30% of urban water supply at the same time. The 
Committee find that as per 2011 Census, out of total population of India 
1210.50 million,  377.10 millio n is urban population which may grow to 575 
million by 2030 and to 875  million by 2050 and available civic amenities may 
not be able to keep pace with this rising population.  In this connection, the 
Committee find that National Water Policy on Urban Wate r Supply inter alia 
also outlines that urban and rural domestic water should preferably be from 
surface water in conjunction with ground water and rain water.  The 
Committee also find that MOWRRD&GR have also held the view before the 
Committee that most of the traditional water harvesting systems in cities  

80 
have been neglected and fallen into disuse, worsening the urban water 
scenario and suggesting that one of the solution to the urban water crisis is 
rain water harvesting capturing the run off.  In thi s connection, the 
Committee find that Committee on Water Resources (2014 -15) in Para 14 of 
their Fourth Report of Sixteenth Lok Sabha presented to the Parliament in 
May, 2015 had underlined the need for modernisation of present flood 
forecasting infrastruc ture in the country so that tangible infrastructure is 
visible in non -flood prone States and reiterated the same in their Action 
Taken Report. Meanwhile, MOWRRDGR have also opined before the 
Committee that countries like Germany, Japan, United States and S ingapore 
are also adopting rain water harvesting and there is a need to implement the 
rain water harvesting on a serious note in the country, including urban areas 
which are suffering from decline in ground water level.  The Committee, 
therefore, are fully  convinced that a massive nationwide and time bound 
programme for intended purpose be launched for 'Rain Water Harvesting' in 
the country without further loss of time.  To begin with and what is 
imminently doable rain water harvesting systems should be man datorily 
installed in all Government and public premises.   
(Rec.Sl.No.1) 
Treating the rain water harvesting issue as States Governments' 
responsibility criticized and Government asked to re-visit the issue as a Mega 
Programme viz., Swachh Bharat Abhiyan ( SBM) on sanitation being State 
subject is already under implementation. 
During the Committee's examination both the Ministries of WRRD&GR 
and MOHUA argued before the Committee that water is State subject thus it 
is the responsibility of State Governments/UTs Administrations.  

81 
In this connection, the MOWRRD&GR in their submission before the 
Committee have contended before the Committee that as per Constitution of 
India Seventh Schedule Entry 50 of List I and Entry 17 of List II 'Water' is  a 
State subject, therefore, all initiatives on water management including 
conservation and artificial recharge to ground water is primarily States' 
responsibility.  The Committee feel that leaving the important subject of rain 
water harvesting to States/UTs on the ground that subject of 'Water' and 
urban development including urban planning and urban water supply is a 
'State subject', is thoroughly inappropriate on the ground that 'Swachh 
Bharat Mission' a mega programme for sanitation is already being run in the 
country even when the subject of 'sanitation'  is 'State' subject.  The 
Committee,  therefore, feel that the above view points raised before and in 
the light of importance of the subject matter,  the issue may  be re-visited 
and  a mega programme on rain water harvesting be launched on the 
analogy of 'Swachh Bharat Mission'. 
(Rec.Sl.No.2) 
 
Absence of workdone on Rain Water Harvesting criticized and Government 
asked to play a proactive role on the issue  
 The Committee are constrained to note that rain water harvesting work 
has not been done in desired measures in Metropolitan cities.  The shortage 
of drinking water in the Summer season and the massive water logging in 
monsoon season has been an annual feature for decades together  and has 
become the order of the day.  The Committee feel that the common man is  

82 
facing tremendous hardship due to  shortage of drinking water in the 
summer season and the country at large has been experiencing huge loss of 
life and property with floods marooning  the cities, towns and v illages badly 
affecting the normal life for months together.  Of equal importance is the 
tremendous loss to the national economy due to such natural disasters.  In 
this connection, both the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development 
and Ganga Rejuvenation (MOWRRD&GR) as also the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs have enumerated a number of steps taken for rain water 
harvesting.  The MOWRRD&GR have laboured to convince the Committee by 
elaborating on details of steps taken  which inter alia include t ackling the 
issue of inadequate management of water by coming up with a National 
Perspective Plan (NPP) envisaging inter -state transfer of water for 
augmenting irrigation,  power generation for incidental benefits which 
include drinking water supply, empha sising holistic management of water in 
the country including urban areas as outlined in National Water Policy,  
apprising the progress of Model Bill across the States by enacting suitable 
legislations for roof top rain water harvesting , coming up with Mas ter Plan 
for Artificial Recharge to Ground Water, 2013 for augmenting ground water 
resources and very recently constituting a Coordination Committee with 
Secretary, MOWRRD&GR as its Chairperson and concerned Ministries 
alongwith Advisor, NITI Aayog as Memb ers for optimal utilization of 
Monsoon rainfall.  Similarly, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs on 
their part have also submitted their Report Card before the Committee 
clarifying that their role is limited in overall management of water resources 
to the measure to be undertaken by States/ULBs in the sectors of urban  

83 
planning and building plan permissions besides supplementing the efforts of 
States and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) in the sectors of Urban Planning and 
Urban Water Supply through its flagship programmes looking  after supply of 
water in urban areas under Atal Mission for  Urban Rejuvenation and Urban 
Transformation,  focusing primarily on supplying water to all the urban 
households in 500 AMRUT cities. 
The MOH&UA have also submitted abo ut issuing  guidelines for urban 
and Regional Planning (Urban and Regional Development Plan Formulation 
and Implementation (URDEFI), 2014 Model Building Bye Laws (MBBL), inter 
alia mandating ULBs and Urban Developing Agencies (UDAs) to implement 
rain water harvesting mainly on buildings. In this connection, the MoH&UA 
have also informed the Committee that due importance to rain water 
harvesting is being given in Smart Cities Mission and AMRUT Mission.  The 
Committee however find that at ground level, the st eps outlined above by 
both the MOWRRD&GR and MOH&UA are barely visible.  The Committee find 
that various parts of the country  like Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya 
Pradesh, Assam and so on have been severely affected by floods. Recently 
Kerala also witnessed colossal loss of life and property due to unprecedented 
floods.  The Committee feel that these are more than sufficient indicators for 
nodal Ministry of WRRD&GR to go in for rain water harvesting in a big way 
by leading the nation in a proactive mann er in association with Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs and other concerned Ministries without any 
further loss of time.  
(Rec.Sl.No.3) 

84 
The Ministry of Environment and Forests and Climate Change asked to ensure 
greater compliance of rain water harvesting measures before granting 
environmental clearance of developmental projects 
 
 The Committee's examination has revealed that the role of the Ministry 
of Environment and Forest and Climate Change (MOE&F&CC) is to accord 
Environmental clearance to Developmental Projects of Building and 
construction projects and Area Developmental Proje ct, Airport Projects, 
Industrial Projects, Coal Mining Project by ensuring compliance of stringent 
conditions which are both project specific and general in nature covering 
various aspects including rain water harvesting.  
 The Committee while glancing thr ough the rain water harvesting 
provisions for all the developmental projects find that these provisions are 
quite important however their actual implementation is hardly seen at 
ground level.  For instance for building and construction projects, the 
requirement of complete plan for rain water harvesting, adequate provision 
for open storage and recharge where local laws are not available etc. are 
mandatory.  Similarly, for industrial projects maximum possible rain water 
harvesting and minimizing water consum ption in steel plants by segregating 
used water and recycling treated water are the conditions to be complied 
with.  Like wise for non -coal mining projects usage of mined out area is 
mandatory for rain water harvesting purposes.  The Committee have been 
informed by MOE&F&CC that these conditions have to be complied with by 
project proponents.   The Committee apprehend that aforesaid conditions 
may not be complied with in letter and  spirit across the States/UTs.  They, 
therefore, recommend that Ministry of EFCC should take up the issue with  

85 
implementing agencies so that strict compliance of rain water harvesting is 
ensured in real terms by project proponents in developmental  projects. 
(Rec.Sl.No.4) 
Non-availability of updated data for ground water recha rge criticized and 
expeditious updation of data recommended  
 
 The Committee are constrained to note that the nodal Ministry of 
Water Resource, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation 
(MOWR,RD&GR) is not equipped with latest data about ground water 
recharge and is managing with data available in Master Plan for Artificial 
Recharge to Ground Water, 2013 brought out by Central Ground Water Board 
(CGWB).  In this connection, the Ministry has admitted candidly before the 
Committee that there is need for updati ng of Master Plan incorporating the 
data generated by different agencies in coordination with States.  As per 
aforesaid Master Plan a total of 1.11 crore artificial recharge structures in 
Urban and Rural areas in the country comprising around 88 lakh recha rge 
structures/facilities utilizing rainwater directly from roof top and more than 
23 lakh artificial recharge and rainwater harvesting structures for conserving 
surplus runoff to augment  the groundwater resources to be constructed.  
The Committee anticip ate that since five years have already gone by, the 
demand of artificial recharge structures might have also increased.  In this 
connection, the NITI Aayog has informed the Committee that it has 
developed a Composite Water Management Index to guage the per formance 
of States in the field of management of water resources.  In view of the 
above, the Committee strongly recommend expeditious updation of data  

86 
regarding artificial recharge and also urge the MOWR,RD&GR to make use of 
the composite Water Managem ent Index brought out by NITI Aayog for 
assessing the exact magnitude of work to be taken in hand. 
(Rec.Sl.No.5) 
 
Use of satellite technology for mapping of ground water for assessing water 
needs of urban towns recommended  
 
 The Committee are disappointed to note that though there are multiple 
Central agencies viz., Central Water Mission (CWM), Central Water 
Commission (CWC), Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) and Ganga Flood 
Control Commission (GPCC) are working under nodal Ministry of WR,RD and 
GR,  yet the data of water management in urban areas is not available in the 
country nor any exercise has been done by MOHUA in this regard.  Besides, 
the Ministry are in the process of preparing a water budget on the lines of 
financial budget that too is in prelimi nary stage with 11 States viz.,  Andhra 
Pradesh, Telangana, West Bengal, Uttarakhand, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Tamil Nadu and Arunachal Pradesh coming 
forward with State Specific Action Plan (SSAP) in Phase I and remaining 
States being taken up in Phase II.  
 The Committee have also noted that very recently a Coordination 
Committee has been constituted to go into the current and future demand 
vis-à-vis availability of water including drinking for domestic purposes in the 
major cities and to suggest an action plan accordingly and soon its report is 
expected.    

87 
The Committee's examination has also revealed that Geographic Information 
System (GIS) technology a map based advance tool integrating various 
thematic pieces of info rmation to assist in evolving solutions for 
management of water resources has already been adopted by Chhattisgarh, 
Tripura, Meghalaya, Telangana, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal for rainwater 
harvesting.  The Committee feel that prominent States viz.,  Maharashtr a, 
Karnataka, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh housing prominent Metropolitan cities of 
Mumbai, Pune, Bangaluru, Ahmedabad, Surat and Visakhapattam as also NCT 
of Delhi are lagging behind in adopting the GIS Technology for rainwater 
harvesting.  In view of the fact  that there are as many as 46 Metropolitan 
cities in the county, there is a need to adopt GIS Technology across all the 
States/UTs for rainwater harvesting purposes. The Committee are also 
constrained to note that the Committee's suggestion of creation of a 
sustainable infrastructure by use of excellent technologies available through 
satellite mapping of ground water for assessing the water needs of each city 
by use of five sources of water, sea water, rain water, ground water and 
reservoir has not been add ressed at all by the nodal Ministry of WRRD&GR.  
In this context, the MOWR,RD&GR have merely elaborated the standard 
reply that water being 'State' subject, initiatives on water governance is 
primarily the responsibility of States and has spelt out goals o f National 
Water Mission that inter alia pertain to areas like studies on impact of 
climate change in 7 river basins, capacity building and tracing of 
stakeholders,  workdone on conservation of water, minimizing wastage etc.   
In this context, the Committee find that as per Fifth Report of the Committee 
on Water Resources (2015-16) Para 12, a pilot scheme has been started in  

88 
Indore district of Madhya Pradesh for strengthening the Satellite Application 
Centres (SACs) in 8 States namely Maharashtra, Karna taka, Kerala, 
Chhattisgarh, Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, West Bengal and Assam to assist 
MGNREGA functioning in better planning of water connection and structures 
and the Committee had recommended its extension to remaining seven 
States.  This was also reitera ted in their Action Taken Report .  The 
Committee would like to know further action taken in this regard. 
In view of the foregoing, since the Report of the Coordination 
Committee to assess the demand and availability of drinking water for 
domestic purpose in major cities is expected shortly and work on water 
budget is underway,  the Committee recommend that th e Ministry should 
also taken into account their suggestion that five sources of water, sea 
water, rain water, ground water and water to be used for reservoirs for 
assessing the demand of each city in a time bound manner for creation of 
infrastructure by making use of available technological advancement and be 
expeditiously implemented by using the expertise of WAPCO Ltd which has 
international expertise in surveys for effective and integrated development 
of water resources with specialization in areas like flood control and river 
management.         (Rec.Sl.No.6) 
 
Role of Central Ground Water Board criticized over constant decline in 
ground water level in major cities 
 The Committee's examination has revealed that Central Ground Water 
Board that is responsible for National Aquifer Mapping, monitoring of ground  

89 
water regime in the country,  estimation of ground  water resources etc. has 
miserably failed in its role  taking into account  the fact that as high as 66% 
wells in the country have registered decl ine in ground water level as Pre -
Monsoon (April-May, 2018) water level when compared with decadal average 
2008-2017 in certain pockets in all States/UTs of the country.  In this 
connection, the Committee are also constrained to note that the level of such 
decline is quite huge and alarming in metropolitan cities.  The Committee are 
constrained to note that many prominent metropolitan cities which have 
registered decline are Bengaluru, Chennai, Kolkata, Ranchi, 
Vishakhapattanam, Hyderabad, Mumbai, Guwahati a nd Indore.  For instance 
in Bengaluru, out of 25 wells analysed as high as 22 wells have registered 
decline in ground water level.  Similarly, in Chennai 10 out of 11 wells have 
registered decline.  Like -wise in Kolkata 12 out of 14 wells have registered 
decline and same is case with remaining States.  Further, the Committee are 
also constrained to note that in many other cities viz., Allahabad, Ghaziabad, 
Kanpur, Lucknow, Meerut and Banaras have experienced 100% fall in ground 
water level.  The Committee are also alarmed to note that as per NITI Aayog,  
Bangaluru City will be hit by Day Zero by 2020.  Apart from Bengaluru, 20 
other cities including New Delhi may also meet the same fate in 2020.   
Various reasons such as increase in ground water withdrawal i n localized 
areas to meet the ever increasing demand of cities, reduction in natural 
ground water recharge owing to urbanization/ concretization, unregulated 
use of ground water due to limited availability of surface water,  inadequate 
water supply by conc erned Municipalities etc., have been attributed  before 
the Committee as reasons for decline in Ground Water in major cities.  The  

90 
Committee have also been informed that water being 'State' subject 
extraction and management of ground water comes under the purview of 
State Governments, the Ministry of WRRD&GR plays an advisory role and as 
directed by Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA), 30  States/UTs  have 
enacted suitable legislations for compulsory roof top rainwater harvesting.  
The Committee feel in spite of almost all the States having  enacted laws for 
roof top harvesting, the decline in ground water level is quite huge. The 
Committee, therefore, are compelled to conclude that the laws for rain water 
harvesting have not been able to serve the int ended purposes and have 
remained on paper.  They, therefore, recommend MOWRRD&GR and 
MOH&UA to take up the issue with State Governments/ULBs/UAAs for 
stricter enforcement of the laws  for achieving the desired results at ground 
level.  
(Rec.Sl.No.7) 
Absence of monitoring mechanism for ground water recharge during the last 
two years criticized, Government asked to persuade State Governments/UTs 
for stricter enforcement of available norms 
 The Committee are perturbed to note that work done on the issue of 
reducing dependence on ground water for water supply in the country has 
been far from satisfactory and it was only due to the intervention of Hon'ble 
Supreme Court, the Government had to constitute Central Ground Water 
Authority (CGWA) for regulation an d control of ground water development 
and management in the country on 10 December, 1996.  The Committee find 
that as per CGWA norms, the country has been divided into four categories of 
safe, semi critical, critical and over exploited areas mandating varying degree 
of recharge measures to be undertaken by industries and even higher degree  

91 
of recharge measures for water intensive industries like packaged drinking 
water, soft drink and so on.  In this context, the Committee find that there 
are a total of  6584 assessment Units, 1034 over exploited,  253 critical, 681 
semi critical and 4520 safe units, with CGMA notifying 162 areas for 
regulation of ground water development banning therein tubewells except 
for drinking and domestic purposes and compulsory o btaining of NOC for 
industries/infrastructure and mining projects.  The Committee also find that 
from 2006 to 2011 Chief Secretaries of 14 affected States/UTs of Andhra 
Pradesh, Haryana, Gujarat, Punjab, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu etc., and NHAI, 
CRRI, CPWD, State PWDs, Indian Railways, Residential Group Housing 
Societies, Industrial establishments and so on have been asked to take 
suitable steps for recharge and rain water harvesting measures.  In this 
connection, the progress of aquifer mapping in 32 differe nt States/UTs has 
been placed before the Committee and the road map for covering the 
remaining areas by 2025 has also been conveyed.  Besides, progress of 
enacting suitable legislations in 15 different States/UTs has also been 
apprised.  The Committee howe ver are constrained to note that there is no 
compliance of the directions of CGWA during the last two years by 
MOWRRD&GR from State Governments, NHAI, CRRI, CPWD, Indian 
Railways, Residential Group Housing Societies and so on. In this context, the 
Committee also find that the Committee on Water Resources in their Fifth 
Report (Para 10), Sixteenth Lok Sabha have inter alia   desired the 
Government to take pro -active and concerted efforts to encourage all 
States/UTs to follow up action on Master Plan for Artif icial Recharge to 
Ground Water in India and also to undertake a comprehensive review  

92 
thereof.  The Committee feel that the real problem lies in poor compliance of 
available provisions due to which all these good provisions remain only on 
paper.  The Committee, therefore, recommend MOWRRD&GR CGWB to play a 
pro-active role in this regard and persuade State Governments for stricter 
implementation of available provisions for reducing dependence on ground 
water for different purposes in metropolitan cities.  
(Rec.Sl.No.8) 
Government asked to persuade State Governments/UTs/ULBs/UDAS to use 
traditional practices of Roof Water Harvesting and other simple technologies 
outlined by NITI Aayog. 
The Committee are constrained to note that centuries old traditional 
rain water harvesting technologies in the form of Aahar -Pynes in South 
Bihar, Bawadis in Rajasthan, Bhandaras in Maharashtra, Bundela and 
Chandela tanks in Madhya Pradesh, Naulas in Uttrakhand etc. have been put 
into disuse and low cost and affordable rain wa ter harvesting technologies 
for roof top and drive way run off technologies brought out by NITI Aayog 
that are already available with State Governments/UTs have not been 
implemented in  desired measures. The Committee also are constrained to 
note that whatever work that has been done is in Pilot Project stages in over 
exploited areas in nine States and works on Base Line Framework for Water 
Recycling has been undertaken by NITI Aayog alone. In this context, the 
Ministry of Water Resources and River Developm ent, and Ganga 
Rejuvenation and Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs were unanimous 
before the Committee about need for revival of traditional rain water 
harvesting technologies, training and transfer of technology and finding 
ways to store or divert the flood flows and its utilization for agriculture and  

93 
for other purposes.  In this connection, the Committee feel that technologies 
outlined by NITI Aayog for roof top and Drive Way Rainfall Harvesting like 
Sumps and Open Well, Percolation Wells and other methods are quite 
workable that can be used in a big w ay by flat owners and office complexes 
alike.  The Committee are also constrained to find that both the Ministry of 
Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation and Ministry 
of Housing and Urban Affairs have forsaken their role in this regard by taking 
the shelter behind  'Water' being State Subject and thereby leaving this 
important subject as a responsibility of State Governments. The Committee, 
therefore, observe that although various rain harvesting technologies both 
traditional and otherwi se are already available with the State Governments, 
yet there is virtually no work done at ground level for the intended purpose.  
In this context, the Committee on Water Resources (2015 -16) in their Tenth 
Report (Para 6) presented to the House in August,  2016 had inter alia 
underlined the need for inter -Ministerial approach for revival of traditional 
such bodies for Rain Water Harvesting purposes. The Committee, therefore, 
even at the cost of sounding repetitive recommend that both the  Ministry of 
Water Resource, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation and Ministry of 
Housing & Urban Affairs should persuade State Governments to take all out 
efforts for revival of traditional rain water technologies and workable 
technologies outlined by NITI Aayog  on prior ity basis in a time bound 
manner. 
 (Rec Sl.No. 9) 

94 
Government asked to promote rain water harvesting in a big way 
The Committee note that the issue of Rain Water harvesting has not 
been getting the required level of attention at Government level as has been 
candidly admitted before the Committee by none other than Secretary, 
Housing & Urban Affairs.  This is in spite of development of a time bound 
national strategy for water conservation for long term water sustainability  
being acknowledged by NITI Aayog. In this connection, the Committee are 
constrained to note that not much progress has been made.  The various 
issues and Government's/NITI Aayog's  stand thereto has also been 
submitted before the Committee.  These inter alia are need  to bring a law on 
rain water harvesting in the country with only 15 States enacting suitable 
legislation, inclusion of rain water harve sting in schools for desired level of 
promotion with only some schools doing needful, separating drinking water 
with other uses for rain water harvesting purposes with NITI Aayog 
emphasizing for Strategic Baseline Framework for Water Recycling and 
agreeing for its use in new projects and constructions, using MPLADs funds 
for renovating jheels with funding from State Governments, using the 
unutilized space of nalas in cities for rain water harvesting with NITI Aayog 
holding that proposal requires in -depth examination and dredging of ponds 
and canals with Ministry of Water Resource & River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation observing that the issue is State Subject and as such rain water 
harvesting can be done by State Governments.  In this connection, the 
Committee also find that as per Para 17,  Fifth Report, Committee on Water 
Resources, the Ministry had organized 'India Water Weeks' in 2012, 2013 
and 2015 to resolve water related issues and create awareness on ground  

95 
water by giving a plateform for intera ction with stakeholders policy maker,  
etc. and Ministry of Panchayati Raj and Department of Land Resources are 
also engaged in water conservation through watershed development.  The 
Committee however feel that although all these efforts have been put in, yet 
their impact is not visible at ground level.   In this connection, the Committee 
are glad to note that Jharkhand is the only State that has come out with a 
scheme for awareness generation of protection of ground water and artificial 
recharge by grant o f 25,000/ - for construction of artificial recharge 
structures.  The Committee feel that all these issues concerning promotion of 
rain water harvesting are quite relevant in present context particularly the 
issue of inclusion of rain water harvesting across  all the schools has been 
acknowledged by NITI Aayog also.  It is time that best practices in this 
regard were identified and taken forward for implementation wherever 
feasible. 
In this context, Committee's examination has revealed that Ministry of 
Water R esources, Rural Development and Ganga Rejuvenation are carrying 
out various awareness campaigns through Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC) activities for water management and constructive 
through special campaigns like 'Jal Bachao, Vedio Banao,   Puruskar Pao" and 
broadcast of audio spots on Radio Channels started in 10th July and to 
continue till November, 2018.  The Committee feel that public at large is 
quite unaware about such moves like many other Government moves due to 
lack of sufficient p ublicity.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that all 
these issues be taken up with State Governments and more and more States  

96 
should come out with scheme for promotion of RWH so that importance of 
rain water harvesting is well recognized through pri nt and electronic media  
among all the stakeholders and it becomes a peoples'  movement in a big 
way. 
(Rec. Sl No. 10) 
Implementation of Rain Water Harvesting Law and Guidelines criticized and 
Government asked to persuade States/UTs for their effective implementation 
The Committee note that although the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs have come out with Model Building Bye-laws, 2016 and as many as 32 
States have made necessary provisions about rain water harvesting  in their 
respective State laws and the Ministry of Housing of Urban Affairs have also 
claimed before the Committee that approval to Building Plan and issuing 
Occupancy-cum-Completion Certificate are issued only after rain water 
harvesting provisions are adhered to, yet the Committee are har dly 
convinced that in actual terms it is being done thereby making the objective 
of Rain Water Harvesting to recharge ground water and augmenting  overall 
water availability completely a farce. 
The Committee are constrained to note that mandatory provision s for 
Rain Water harvesting in MBBL, 2016 regarding compulsory rain water 
harvesting for 100 sq. water for residential plotted Houses, avoiding 
concrete, paving  and use of permeable material in open parking spaces for 
Group Housing Societies, storage and recharge pits percolation walls for 
public and semi public buildings and so on are hardly seen as implemented at 
ground level and whatever work that is being done is for namesake only.   

97 
In this connection, the Committee are shocked to note that only Mu nicipal 
Corporations of Madurai, Mumbai, Hyderabad, Bengaluru have constituted 
rain water harvesting cells for monitoring implementation of rain water 
harvesting provision and in respect of other cities no such implementation 
report has been provided.  The  Committee can, therefore, very well surmise 
that elaborate Urban Greening Guidelines, 2014 highlighting impact of 
concretisation of payment of trees, requiring Greening of roads by planting of 
trees along National and State Highways, city roads specifying  clearly about 
spacing of trees to be planted, kinds of trees to be planted and maintained 
together with area -wise specifications, updating of technology for 
transplantation of trees etc. are not been implemented at all at ground level.  
In this context, t he Committee on Water Resources in their Fifth Report, 
(Para 9), Sxiteenth Lok S abha  presented to the Parliament on December, 
2015 have also endorsed the same view. The Committee, therefore, conclude 
that a lot more is still desired on the issue and the m odus operandi needs to 
be revisited urgently.  The Committee at the same time also underline the 
need for RWH Monitoring mechanism already operating in four places 
mentioned above be operationalised in other cities also without any further 
loss of time.   The Committee would like to be apprised of the same on 
priority basis. 
(Rec. Sl.No. 11) 
Need for proper monitoring of RWH violations at  State level stressed  
 
The violations of RWH provisions in the form of misuse  of RWH space 
allocated in building plan for parking purposes have been subject matter of  

98 
intense debate before the Committee during the current examination and the 
Committee are anguished to note a non-committal reply from MOH&UA that 
Building Plan approvals  and issue of occupancy cum certificate (OCC) are not 
issued until the provisions are made for RWH.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the issue should be taken up with all seriousness w ith State 
Governments and implementing agencies and details of such violations be 
obtained from different State Governments for their perusal for reaching at  
logical conclusion.  
(Rec. SI.No. 12) 
Government asked to impress upto State Governments to emula te the good 
work  done by some State Governments on rain water harvesting. 
 
The Committee find from the status of incorporation of RWH provision 
in State Building Bye Law that only a few States have faired well in RWH 
work.  The Committee find that West Bengal and Tamil Nadu have made 
RWH mandatory for all buildings, whereas other  States have made RWH in 
tems of roof top and size of plots.  Haryana,  has made rain water harvesting 
compulsory for plot owners with roof top areas of more than 100 sq. metres, 
whereas Delhi has made water harvesting through storing of water run off 
including rain water in all new buildings on plots of size more than 105 sq. 
metres mandatory .  Similarly, Kerala has made RWH mandatory for 
residential building of 100 sq. metres of floor area or more and plot areas of 
200 sq. or more.  In respect of other S tates, it is at varying level.  In this 
connection, the Committee appreciate that Tamil Nadu have been futuristic 
about RWH by coming up with a Draft Master Plan, 2016 for RWH  and Uttar  

99 
Pradesh is in the process of coming up with Master Plan/Zonal Pla n for RWH 
purposes.    Similarly Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh have 
been innovative towards RWH work.  The Committee find that  State 
Government of Andhra Pradesh on its own has come up for RWH for 
constructing RWH at Government cost for con structions with open space of 
not less than 200 sq. metres by recovering the cost of construction with 
penalty and Uttar Pradesh has made it compulsory to develop ponds/water 
bodies in 5% of total area proposed  for housing societies of 20 acres and 
above.  The Committee feel that such steps are progressive and may be 
emulated by other State Governments so that work on RWH can be started in 
a more focused and in a time bound manner for getting the expected result 
in near future.  The Committee recommend bot h MOWRRD&GR and MOH&A 
to persuade the State Governments  to move faster on this issue to augment 
the water supply for urban population which is increasing at a fast pace.   
(Rec. SI. No. 13) 
Need for holding consultations  for water availability through ra in water 
harvesting in urban areas beyond the boundaries of AMRUT and Smart cities 
Mission highlighted 
The Committee are constrained to note that Ministry of Housing & 
Urban Affairs have not discussed the issue of water availability through RWH 
in urban ar eas beyond the boundaries of AMRUT and Smart Cities Mission 
and whenever such discussions are held these were held within MOH&UA.  
The Committee have been informed that  last such discussions were held in 
December, 2017 and the first time the issue was del iberated upon at 
National Workshop on Transforming Urban Landscape,  3rd Anniversary of 
PHA(U) AMRUT and Smart Cities Mission held on 27-28 July, 2018 at  

100 
Lucknow wherein detailed discussions took place among stakeholders to 
improve water supply throug h conservation measures including RWH. The 
Committee recommend that more and more such national level workshops 
be organized for the purpose of data mining for ascertaining real assessment 
of water availability through RWH even beyond the ambit of AMRUT an d 
Smart Cities Mission. 
(Rec. SI.No. 14) 
Sporadic workdone on RWH in certain cities, States criticized and 
Government asked to extend the same throughout the country 
The Committee are constrained to note that some  cities and States 
have done commendable w ork for RWH, however it is sporadic  and sparse.   
For instance Chennai has done good work by opening up an awareness 
campaign about RWH, through 'Rain Centres' in the office premises of 
Chennai Metro Water Supply and Sewarage Board (CMWSSB) and has 
become first city with 100% RWH city in the country.  Delhi has also 
witnessed some work by Delhi Jal Board in the form of giving 10% rebate in 
property tax for RWH for consumers on 100 sq. metre plot with 1.5 times 
increase in case of non-compliance for plot owners of 500 sq. mt. and above.  
RWH workdone by DDA, DMRC, CPWD have also been outlined before the 
Committee.  Similar other best practices in other cities of Bengaluru and 
Hyderabad have been outlined before the Committee.  Likewise, the 
MOWRRDGR in their  submission before the Committee have also showcased 
the workdone on Artificial Recharge Schemes implemented by Central 
Ground Water Board (CGWB) in urban areas during erstwhile VII and IX Plan 
periods in various cities of Chandigarh, Delhi, Jaipur, Jammu, Bengaluru,  

101 
Indore, Bhubneswar, Lucknow, Aligarh, Allahabad, Ranchi, Nagpur, Chennai 
and Hyderabad under different Schemes.  
NITI Aayog also outlined before the Committee various RWH works 
undertaken at city and State level showcasing workdone in prominent cities 
of NCT of Delhi, Indore, Kanpur, Hyderabad, Mumbai, etc. and by State 
Governments of Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Odisha,  Uttar Pradesh, outlining 
various RWH steps taken such as CGWA banning drilling of tube wells and 
notified areas (South and South West Delhi) and adjoining areas of 
Faridabad, Gurugram and Ghaziabad incentivizing  rebate on property tax 
etc., for RWH work in Indore and Uttar Pradesh.  The Committee however 
feel that the good work done is limited to certain cities and with limited 
number of States. They, therefore, recommend that RWH works be 
undertaken and promoted in a big way also in other States for augm enting 
availability of water for meeting the requirement in urban areas.  
(Rec. SI.No. 15) 
Absence of  requirement of funds for RWH in the country criticized and 
Government asked to update the data expeditiously 
 The Committee note with concerned that the nodal Ministry of 
WR,RD&GR responsible for RWH work in the country does not have updated 
data regarding requirement of funds for artificial recharge structures in 
urban areas and is managing with five year old Master Plan for Artificial 
Recharges to Ground  Water in India, 2013 estimating the total requirement 
of Rs.79,179 crore for constructing 1.11 crore RWH and Artificial Structures 
in the country.  In this connection, the CGWA was candid in its admission 
before the Committee that the data needs updation.   The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that requirement of funds for RWH as also for  
 

102 
Artificial Structures be expeditiously assessed for getting factual position 
without wasting any further time.  
(Rec. SI. No. 16) 
Huge gap between demand vis -à-vis actual workdone for RWH criticized and 
Government asked to assess the demand vis -à-vis availability of fund for 
RWH uniformly in the country 
 
 The Committee's examination has revealed that work done so far for 
RWH has not been commensurate with the quantum o f demand for such 
works in the country.  For instance, against the total requirements of funds 
amounting to Rs. 17,985.39 crores for constructing around 88.00 lakh RWH 
structures in the country (as per relevant Master Plan, 2013),  works for as 
low as  6.7 6 crore have been done in different States/UTs during Eighth to 
Eleventh Plan periods that too only in few States/UTs of NCT of Delhi, 
Chandigarh and States of  Jammu and Kashmir, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, 
Meghalaya, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand, Naga land, Maharashtra, Tamil 
Nadu, Telangana and Rajasthan. The Committee find that the above 
information furnished before the Committee is incomplete and does not 
cover all the States/UTs. They, therefore, recommend MOWRRD&GR to make 
a complete assessment of existing vis -à-vis likely demand of RWH works 
alongwith cost involved in different States/UTs in consultation with 
MoH&UA, State Governments, ULBs, UDAs etc. in a time bound manner for  
getting an over view  on the subject matter.  
(Rec. SI. No. 17) 
 
 
 

 
103 
Slow implementation of  RWH projects under Smart Cities Mission criticized 
and Government asked to expedite the same 
 The Committee's examination has revealed that a total of 45 RWH 
projects at the cost of Rs.1133.6 crore in different States are under 
implementation out of which only three projects one at New Delhi Municipal 
Committee worth Rs.1.1 crore,  second at Ajmer worth  Rs.1.8 crore and third 
at Surat worth  Rs.0.5 crore have been completed and as many as 31 projects 
are under DPR preparation an d 8 projects are under Tendering/Work Order 
stage and remaining are under DPR approval stage.  The Committee are 
disappointed to find that prominent RWH projects that are under DPR 
preparation stage are New Town Kolkata Project worth Rs.180.6 crore, 
Tirupati Project worth Rs.200.00 crore, Aligarh Project worth Rs.70 crore, 
Madurai Project worth Rs.50.00 crore, Agartala Project worth Rs.30.2 crore 
and other important cities of Kohima, Kanpur, Kochi and so on are also 
witnessing the same fate.  Similarly, pro minent Rain Water Harvesting 
projects that are under Tendering Work Orders issued scenario are Sagar 
Project worth Rs.299.1 crore, three Tirupati Projects and other projects at 
Faridabad and Gwalior.  Besides, two projects at Vadodara are at DPR 
approval stage.  The Committee feel that such a large number of Rain Water 
Harvesting projects at DPR preparation stage does not reflect well on the 
over-all functioning of MOH&UA.  They, therefore, recommend for 
expeditious clearance of various projects under imple mentation for their 
early completion for intended purpose. 
(Rec. SI. No. 18) 

104 
Slow implementation of  water supply projects under AMRUT criticized  
 
 While reviewing the project, planning and implementation of projects 
undertaken for RWH under AMRUT scheme, the Committee find that 
MOH&UA have furnished two sets of data,  one showing status of 
implementation of water supply projects under AMRUT and second details of 
rain water projects taken up by States/UT under AMRUT. 
 The Committee are dismaye d to note that large number of projects 
worth crores of rupees are either stuck up at 'Contract awarded' stage or at 
'tendering stage' leaving only a few as completed. For instance as against the 
total projects worth Rs.37,741.94 crore as many as projects worth 
Rs.25,265.65 crore are at 'Contract awarded' stage and projects worth  
Rs.12,195.1 crore are at tendering process and projects worth a measely  
Rs.281.18 crore only have been completed.  The Committee's examination of 
State-wise data reveal that Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Madhya 
Pradesh, Karnataka, Bihar, Chhattisgarh are the prominent States where 
most of such projects are pending.  For instance in Tamil Nadu out of total 
project worth Rs.6505.65 crore, projects worth Rs.4101.98 crore ar e at 
'tendering' and projects worth Rs.2351.72 crore are under 'contract 
awarded'.  Likewise in Uttar Pradesh, out of total project worth Rs.4427.68 
crore, projects worth Rs.3096.08 crore are 'under Tendering' and projects 
worth Rs.1327.24 are under 'Contr act awarded'.  In Maharashtra, Madhya 
Pradesh, Karnataka, Bihar projects worth crores are at 'Contract awarded' 
stage.  In view of the foregoing, the Committee feel that all this does not 
augur well for this scheme and MOH&UA should pull up their socks and work  

105 
out a time bound programme for their expeditious completion.  The 
Committee also would like to know in what way these projects are going to 
promote RWH in different States/UTs.  The Committee would like an 
explanation in this regard. 
(Rec. SI. No. 19) 
 
Less workdone for RWH under AMRUT scheme criticized Government asked 
to expand it manifold across the country for intended purpose  
 
 The Committee's examination of work done for RWH under AMRUT 
Scheme of MOH&UA reveal that almost nil progress of w ork has been 
reported throughout the country and whatever work has been done is in few 
cities of Kochi, Kollam and  Shimla  that too is in preliminary stages.  The 
Committee feel that the tall claim of MOH&UA that RWH requirement has 
been taken care under AMRUT scheme does not hold good.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that RWH work under AMRUT scheme be scaled up in 
a big way across all the States/UTs for serving the intended purposes. 
(Rec. SI. No.20) 
 
 
  
NEW DELHI;                         PINAKI MISRA  
4th  January, 2019               Chairperson,                                                                                                               
14 Pausha (Saka)1940                                                             Standing Committee on  
                                            Urban Development 
 
**** 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 


 
 


 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 


117

118

119

120

121

122

123

124

125

126      

127

128

129

130

131

132

133

134

135

136

137 
            4.           Kunal Kumar     Joint Secretary (Smart City Mission) 
 5. Amrit Abhijat     Joint Secretary (Pradhan Mantri  
        Aawas Yojana) 
 6. Vinod Kumar Jindal    Joint Secretary (Swachh Bharat  
        Mission) 
 7. Anupam mishra    Economic Advisor (Housing) 
 8. Mukund Kumar Sinha    Joint Secretary & OSD (UT) 
 9. Archana Mittal    Director (Smar5t City-I)   
 10. Rahul Kapoor     Director (Smar5t City-III) 
  II. Representatives of Delhi Development Authority (DDA) 
 1. Tarun Kapoor     Vice Chairman 
 2. Shailendra Sharma    Engineering Member 
 3. Rajeev Verma     Pr. Commissioner (LD, LM &   
        Coordination) 
 4. Chandu Bhutia     Addl. Commissioner (Planning) 
 5. Vinod Dhar     Chief Architect 
  III. Representatives of New Delhi Municipal Corporation (NDMC) 
 1. Naresh Kumar     Chairman 
 2. Amin Ahmed Taxir    Director 
 3. Ramanand Bhagat    Director  
  IV. Representatives of National Buildings Construction Corporation India  
   Ltd. (NBCC) 
 1. Shri A.K.Mittal     CMD 
  V. Representatives of Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) 
 1. Shri Mangu Singh    CMD 
  VI. Representatives of Smart Cities 
 1. Rohan Saxena     CEO, Indore Smart City 
 2. M. Thennarasan    Municipal Commissioner, Surat 
 3. Nitin Bansal     Municipal Commissioner & CEO,  
        Varanasi Smart City 
 4. Sreedhar Cherukuri    MD, Amravati Smart City 
 5. Shan Mohan     CEO, Amravati Smart City 
 6. Rajcherubal     CEO, Chennai Smart City 
 7. Sidharth Sihag     CEO, Udaipur Smart City 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee 
convened for taking the evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs on the subject, 'Development of Smart Cities'  followed by consideration and adoption of 
Draft Report on the subject, 'Rainwater Harvesting in Metropolitan Cities' in the Country. 
 
*    *    *    * 
6. The Committee then adopted the Draft Report on the subject, 'Rainwater Harvesting in 
Metropolitan Cities' and authorized the Hon'ble Chairperson to finalize the Draft Report after 
factual verification from the concerned Ministries and to present the same to the Lok Sabha 
and also lay a copy thereof in the Rajya Sabha. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
* Para No. 3 to 5 not related to the Report. 