 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
  
URBAN DEVELOPMENT
 
(2016
-
2017)
 
                               
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
 
 
 
                          
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
 
 
 
                           
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in 
the Fifteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Urban Development on 'Demands for Grants (2017
-
2018)']
 
 
 
                  
 
 
 
              
NINETEENTH   REPORT
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
                      
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
         
 
 
 
 
                    
NEW DELHI
 
 
 
August, 2017, Sravana 1939 (Saka)
 
 
19
 


2
 
 
 
 
 
NINETEENTH   REPORT
 
 
 
     
STANDING COMMITTEE ON  URBAN DEVELOPMENT
 
(2016
-
2017)
 
 
                               
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Fifteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Urban Development on 'Demand
s for Grants (2017
-
2018)']
 
  
 
 
   
Presented to Lok Sabha on  10.08.2017
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  10.08.2017
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
August, 2017, Sravana1939 (Saka)
 


3
 
 
 
 
   
C.U.D No. 105
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. ….
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2017  BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct 
of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Fifteenth Edition) and printed by .............................................
 
 
 
 

4
 
 
 
CONTENTS
 
 
PAGE
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                   
                              
(iii)
 
 
INTRODUCTION                   
                                                                     
             
(v)
 
 
CHAPTER I
 
Report
 
1
 
CHAPTER II
 
Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
12
 
CHAPTER III
 
Observations 
/Recommendations
 
which the Committee
 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies
 
38
 
CHAPTER IV
 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration 
 
39
 
CHAPTER V
 
Observations 
/Recommendations
 
i
n respect of which final  
replies of the Government are still awaited
 
43
 
 
 
ANNEXURES
 
I.
 
Minutes of the 15
th
 
Sitting of the Committee held on 9 August, 2017.
 
II.
 
Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations 
contained in the Fifteenth Report(16
th
 
Lok Sabha).
 
 
 
 
 
 

5
 
 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2016
-
2017)
 
Shri Pinaki Misra         
-
        
Chairperson
 
MEMBERS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA
 
 
2. 
 
Shri Ramesh Bidhuri
 
3.
 
Shri Ram Charan Bohra
 
4. 
 
Shri Charanjeet Singh Rori
 
5.
 
Shri Ashok  Shankarrao Chavan
 
6. 
 
Dr. Dharam Vira Gandhi
 
7.
 
Shri Dilip  Mansukhlal Gandhi
 
8. 
 
Shri Maheish Girri
 
9. 
 
Shri R.Gopalakrishnan
 
10.
 
Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua
 
11. 
 
Shri  Srinivas Kesineni Nani
 
12.
 
Smt. 
Meenakshi Lekhi
 
13.
 
Shri P.C. Mohan
 
14.
 
Shri K. Parasuraman
 
15. 
 
Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil
 
16.
 
Shri Alok Sanjar
 
17. 
 
Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
 
18. 
 
Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
 
19.
 
Prof. K. V. Thomas
 
20.
 
Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma
 
21.
 
Shri 
Pradan  Baruah
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
22.
 
Shri R.S. Bharathi
 
23.
 
Dr. Subhash Chandra
 
24.
 
Shri Husain Dalwai
 
25.
 
Shri Anil Desai
 
26. 
 
Shri Parvez Hashmi 
 
27.
 
Shri K. G. Kenye
 
28.
 
Shri Mahesh Poddar
 
29.
 
Shri K.C. Ramamurthy
 
30.
 
Shri Ajay Sancheti
 
31.
 
Shri 
Dharamapuri Srinivas
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
1.
 
Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi            
-
      
Joint Secretary
 
 
2.
 
Ms. Amita Walia
 
                
 
      
-
 
Additional Director
 
 
3.
 
Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan
 
      
-
      
Deputy Secretary
 
 
4.
 
Dr.(Maj.) Jagmohan Khatry
 
      
-
 
Committee Officer
 
 
(iv)
 

6
 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2016
-
2017) having been authorized by the Committee, present this Nineteenth Report 
(16
th
 
Lok Sabha) on action taken by the Government on the  
Ob
servations/Recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report (16
th
 
Lok Sabha) 
of the Committee on  'Demands for Grants (2017
-
2018)'  of the Ministry of Urban 
Development.
 
2.
 
The Fifteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 17
 
March, 2017 
and laid 
on the table of Rajya  Sabha on  
same date
. The  Action Taken Replies of the 
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 
23 June,  2017.
 
3.
 
The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held o
n  9 
August, 2017.
 
4.
 
An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Fifteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at 
Annexure
-
II.
 
5.
 
For the facility of reference and convenience, the 
Observati
ons/Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters 
in the body of the Report.
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
 
 
 
August
, 
2017
 
18 Sravana
,
1939 
(Saka
) 
 
 
  
Pinaki Misra
 
Chairperson, 
 
 
Standing Committee on Urban 
Development
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 
 
          
       
 
(v)
 
 
 

7
 
 
 
CHAPTER I
 
REPORT
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2016
-
2017) 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in their 
Fifteenth
 
Report (Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2017
-
 
2018) of the Ministry of Urban Development 
which was presented to Parliament on 17
.03.2017.
 
1.2
 
Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of 
all the 16 recommendations 
contained in the Report.  These have been categorized 
as follows:
 
(i)
 
Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government :
 
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2,3,4,5,
6,
 
7,
9,
10,11,12,13,15 and 16
 
 
 
 
 
           
(Total 
-
1
4
)
 
(Chapter
-
II)
 
(ii)
 
Recom
mendations /Observations, which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government's   replies :
 
Recommendation No.
 
Nil
 
 
 
                              
 
 
(Total 
-
0)
 
(Chapter
-
III)
 
(iii)
 
Recommendations /Observations, in respect of which replies of 
Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee :
 
 
R
ecommendation Nos. 8
 
and
14
 
     
 
 
                                       
 
                                                                                                
(Total 
-
 
02)
 
(Chapter
-
IV)
 
(iv)
 
Recommendations /Observations, in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are, still awaited :
 
           
Recommendation No.  
Nil
                                              
                    
 
(Total 
–
0
)
 
(Chapter
-
V)
 
 

8
 
 
1.3
 
The Committee desire 
that specific replies to the comments contained in 
Chapter
-
I  of this Report may be furnished at the earliest and in any case, not later 
than three months of the presentation of this Report.
 
1.4
 
The Committee will now like to comment on the action taken by
 
the 
Government on some of their recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No.3)
 
 
PROTECTING GOVT.  LAND FROM ENCROACHMENT
 
 
1.5
 
The Committee had recommended as under:
 
 
"The Committee note that Land Management & Engineering Dep
artment of 
DDA is responsible and custodian for complete details of vacant land and land 
under encroachment within their territory. Security guards, revenue staff and 
field investigators of LM Department have been assigned the task of detection 
of encroach
ment on DDA land. The Committee, however, note that there are 
many land pockets which are under encroachment in Delhi. On one hand, 
there are not enough schools, playgrounds and hospitals etc. for want of land 
and on the other hand, large areas of DDA has 
been encroached, sometimes 
with the patronage of vested interest groups. This matter is of urgent concern 
for the Government. The Committee have been apprised about the status of 
implementation of Information Technology Initiatives for protecting DDA's lan
d 
from encroachment. The Committee have also been apprised by DDA that 
they have developed a system of uploading photographs of vacant land/plots 
of DDA so that encroachment if any, is detected without delay. Mobile App 
has been developed for detection and
 
reporting of encroachment and 
arranging demolition programs.
 
 
While the Committee note the steps taken by Govt. to detect encroachment of 
DDA land, they urge the Ministry that a centralized data should be maintained 
in the Department for proper analysis 
and also urge the Ministry to constitute 
Quick Reaction Team which can immediately react to the information of 
encroachment as and when received. The awareness programs for using 
Mobile App should also be conducted so that people can easily use these 
kind 
of IT initiatives. Further they recommend to the Ministry to create 
widespread awareness proactively among people to report encroachments 
and also regularly monitor and ensure that encroachments are evicted 
forthwith with the help of local authorities/pers
ons so that it does not turn into 
a menace. The Committee recommend that mechanism developed to control 
such incidents should be periodically revised to examine their effectiveness 
and outcome of the system."
 
1.6
 
In their action taken reply, the Ministry h
ave stated as follows:  
 
"Delhi Development Authority (DDA) has informed that they have complete 
details of vacant land including the land which are under encroachments.  
Land Management (LM) & Engineering departments of DDA are regularly 
putting best effo
rts to remove the encroachment.  After reclaiming the land, 

9
 
 
the same have been transferred to Horticulture and Engineering departments 
for further 
utilization
. DDA has further informed that Quick Response Teams 
(QRTs) have also been constituted by its Engineering department.   Zonal 
staff upto the level of Deputy Directors of LM and Horticulture departments, as 
an additional manpower in the field to identify en
croachments, have been put 
under the control of Superintending Engineers (SEs). Nearly, 60 numbers of 
Assistant Engineers (AEs) have been designated as AE (QRT) for detection 
and removal of encroachments. 
 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) has also been i
ntroduced by DDA for 
detection of encroachment and carrying out demolition programmes. For 
better output, DDA has developed mobile application for detection and 
reporting of encroachment and carrying out demolition programmes. LM and 
Engineering department
s of DDA continuously monitor efficacy of the SOP. 
As and when, any modification is to be required in the system, the same is to 
be carried out promptly. In addition to this, DDA is proposing to introduce new 
mobile app for public help shortly."
 
 
1.7
 
In or
der to protect and reclaim Government land from encroachment, 
the Committee had recommended the Ministry to develop a centralized data 
base of DDA land and put into use mobile applications/ IT initiatives. They 
have also recommended the constitution of a Q
uick 
Reaction Team (QRT) for 
action in case of encroachments.  
The Committee  
note that DDA has complete 
details of vacant land including the land under encroachment and the 
Engineering Department of DDA has  constituted a Quick Reaction Team for  
detectio
n and removal of encroachments. The Committee are also apprised 
that DDA has developed a mobile application for detection and reporting of 
encroached land and introduced Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) for 
detection of encroachment and carrying out demo
lition programmes. While 
reiterating their recommendation
, the Committee desire that the mobile app 
developed by DDA be introduced to the public at the earliest and the data  with 
DDA may be made available on the website to ensure transparency and 
proactiv
e participation of public in reporting encroachments to the DDA. 
Awareness campaigns regarding the mobile app may also be conducted 
regularly so that the common people are well versed in the use of these kinds 
of technology applications. The Committee may 
be 
appraised
 
at the earliest 
about the action taken in this respect.
 
 
 
 

10
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.6)
 
 
STRENTHENING FEEDER BUS SYSTEM UNDER METRO RAIL PROJECTS
 
1.8
 
The Committee had recommended as under:
 
"The Committee are concerned to note that there are 291 metro feeder buses 
plying on 41 metro feeder routes in Delhi Metro. The Committee note the 
average daily ridership of Delhi Metro system for the month of January, 2017 
was 27.69 lakhs per day. In the 
year 2015
-
16, feeder buses in Delhi were 
228. Now it has been increased by only 63 buses which is very miniscule 
figure. The Committee are not satisfied with the state of affairs of feeder bus 
services in Delhi. This situation compels the commuters to depe
nd on the 
mercy of overcharging auto and cycle Rickshaws to reach their final 
destinations. 
 
 
This last mile connectivity is a matter of serious concern for the commuters 
availing metro rail facility.  The Committee are of the considered opinion that 
concerned agencies should join hands to strengthen effective feeder bus 
system connecting Metro Stations with residential and commercial places all 
over the country so that an integrated transportation system develops. Some 
Municipal Corporations such as A
hmadnagar Municipal Corporation have 
prepared detailed Project Report (DPR) for modernization of Bus Services 
including pathways and bus stops and they are waiting for the fund clearance.  
The Committee recommend the allocation of adequate funds for improv
ing 
number of the bus services within and outside the city and modernization of 
existing bus services. The Committee also strongly recommend for allocation 
of separate funds for feeder bus services to adequately increase the number 
of feeder buses to make 
public transport more comfortable."
 
1.9
 
In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:  
 
"Integration of various modes of transport including bus service which act as 
feeder system to the Metro Rail and improvement in city bus service ar
e done 
by respective State Government/Union Territory/Municipal Corporation. Delhi 
Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) has taken up the issue of improvement in 
feeder bus service with State Transport Authority (STA), Delhi. E
-
rickshaw & 
Gramin Sewa are very popu
lar and are acting as feeder to Metro Rail system 
in Delhi.  Ministry of Urban Development vide letter dated 30.08.2013 has 
issued advisory to all State Governments/Union Territories requesting them 
for inclusion of feeder buses in the influence zone as an
 
integral portion of the 
DPRs for Mass Rapid Transit System (MRTS) projects. Provision for 
multimodal integration including feeder bus system has been made in the 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) of Metro Rail Projects. Multimodal integration 
for improving la
st mile connectivity is one of conditions of sanction of Metro 
Rail projects."
 
1.10
 
In view of the difficulties faced by commuters
 
availing metro rail facility 
in the last mile connectivity, the Committee had desired that the feeder bus 
system connecting Metro Stations with residential and commercial places all 

11
 
 
over the country may be strengthened and an effective an integrated 
transp
ortation system be developed. The Action taken reply has stated that the 
Multimodal integration for improving last mile connectivity is one of the 
conditions of sanction of Metro Rail projects and the responsibility to develop 
the same is vested with the S
tate Government/Union Territory/Municipal 
Corporation.
 
The Committee are unhappy with the reply of the Ministry that E
-
rickshaws and Gramin Sewa services are very popular among the populace 
and are acting as feeder services to metro rail system in Delhi. I
n fact, the 
Committee feel that the commuters are forced to resort to Auto rickshaws/E
-
rickshaws for last mile connectivity in the absence of sufficient feeder buses 
in certain corridors. The Committee, hence, reiterate that the Ministry and 
other stakehol
ders should join hands to strengthen the feeder bus system so 
as to make it an effective integrated transportation system. 
Further, the 
Ministry of Urban Development may also provid
e
 
separate funds for
 
feeder bus 
service
s
 
for
 
augmenting the
ir
 
number and mo
dernizing existing services.
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.8)
 
URBAN PARKING
 
1.11
 
The Committee had recommended as under:
 
 
"The Committee observe that large areas of urban land including green and 
open spaces is being consumed by vehicle parking due to substantial 
increase in cars and other vehicles. The Committee are perturbed to note that 
despite provision of funding for mul
tilevel parking to States under AMRUT 
Mission, Detailed Project Reports of such Multilevel parking projects in States 
have not been drafted till now and the details of such projects are not 
provided. The Committee are not happy with the state of affairs of
 
parking in 
many metropolitan cities in the country particularly Delhi. Therefore, the 
Committee are of the considered opinion that planning of parking spaces 
should be done by concerned State Govt. in  consultation with the Ministry in 
a hand holding mann
er. Given the magnitude of the menace of growing 
number of vehicles on road, it is very pertinent that planning of parking of 
vehicles and innovative methods for restraining the proliferation of vehicles 
should be carried out in a time bound manner. The Co
mmittee also 
recommend the Ministry to suitably develop a system to control congestion in 
metropolitan and other big cities. For this, the Committee also recommend the 
Ministry to conduct pilot studies for Electronic Road Pricing (ERP) system for 
reducing 
Road traffic in highly congested areas of metropolitan and other big 
cities. The Govt. should also introduce pre
-
paid cards for the vehicles to be 
read and deduct the amount electronically when the vehicles enter the 
designated congested areas. The Committ
ee are of the view that parking 
charges in metropolitan cities and other bigger cities should be  

12
 
 
commensurate  with the facilities available at the parking sites and as well as 
according to the congestion level in that particular area of the city."
 
1.12
 
 
In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"
The thrust  area of the Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban 
Transformation (AMRUT) is 
water supply, sewerage & septage, Urban 
Transport, Strom water Drainage and parks. However, the fi
rst priority of the 
Mission is water supply and sewerage. In Urban Transport sector, Multilevel 
Parking is one of the components. On the basis of Mission priority, State/UT 
Govts have submitted their State Annual Action Plans. All action plans have 
been ap
proved by the Ministry. In these action plans, some States have 
submitted proposal of Multilevel Parking of value    Rs.176 Cr. which have 
been approved by the Ministry. 60% DPRs of Multilevel Parking have been 
approved and 28% Contracts have been awarded.
 
 
Urban Transport is intertwined with Urban Development which is a State subject. 
As such, the initiatives including planning and execution of urban transport 
systems are taken up by the State/Union Territories and Urban Local Bodies. 
However, the 
Government has issued National Urban Transport Policy (NUTP) in 
year 2006 which stresses on the following issues pertaining to parking and de
-
congestion:
 
 
(i)
 
Levying high parking fee, that truly represents the value of the land 
occupied;
 
(ii)
 
Giving preference in 
allocation of parking space for public transport and 
non
-
motorised transport modes;
 
(iii)
 
Adopting graded scale of parking fee that recovers the economic cost of 
the land used in parking spaces;
 
(iv)
 
Amending building bye
-
laws in all million plus cities so that adequ
ate 
parking space is available for all residents/users of such buildings; 
 
(v)
 
Making Multi
-
Modal parking complexes a mandatory requirement in city 
centres that have several high rise commercial complexes;
 
(vi)
 
Making appropriate changes in bye
-
laws to free the pub
lic carriage way 
from parked vehicles that impede the smooth flow of traffic in residential 
areas; and
 
(vii)
 
Making provisions in the appropriate legislation to prevent the use of the 
right of way on road systems for parking purposes.
 
(viii)
 
Issue of Advisory on congestion charges to State Governments/UTs; 
 
(ix)
 
Stipulating condition of developing Parking Policy by cities as one of the 
conditions under bus funding scheme; 
 
For decongestion, the NUTP states the following:
 
“The central Government wou
ld support formulation and implementation of 
specific “Area Plans” in congested urban areas that propose appropriate mix 
of various modes of transport including exclusive zones for non
-
motorised 
transit”. The National Urban Transport Policy 2006 is availab
le on the 
URL:
 
http://moud.gov.in/sites/upload_files/moud/files/pdf/TransportPolicy.pdf
."
 
 
 
 

13
 
 
1.13
 
The Committee in th
eir original Report has raised serious concerns 
about the traffic congestion in Metropolitan cities and the growing parking 
problems.  It is seen from the reply that the Government has  issued National 
Urban Transport Policy (NUTP) way back in 2006 which l
ay stress upon levying 
high and graded parking fee, amending building bye
-
laws, advisory of 
congestion charges etc., for tackling the issue of rising number of vehicles on 
the  roads and parking. However, the Committee find that Ministry is silent 
about th
e specific 
 
aspect of the 
recommendation of the Committee to conduct 
a feasibility study on Electronic Road Pricing System (ERPS) towards 
decongesting urban roads in India which has proved to be highly effective in 
other countries. Hence, the Committee aga
in recommend that Ministry of 
Urban Development should explore the feasibility of introducing ERP System 
which would enable deduction of road usage charges electronically from 
prepaid cards when the vehicles enter congested areas. The Committee would 
like 
to be apprised about the action taken in this regard within three months 
from the date of presentation of this Report to the Parliament.
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.9)
 
 
MAINTAINING COMPUTERIZED DATABASE OF TAINTED CONTRACTORS
 
 
1.14
 
 
The Committee had recommended as under:
 
"The Committee are perplexed to note that centralized records are not 
maintained in CPWD/MoUD with regard to the contractors penalised for 
compliance of laid down norms for the assigned works. The Committee feel 
tha
t maintenance of centralised computerized database of tainted contractors 
will help the system in curbing corrupt practices as such contractors will be 
automatically debarred  from getting further  contracts/projects of 
Govt./Ministry in future. Furthermor
e, the delay in commissioning of the 
Projects of CPWD, thereby leading to cost and time escalation, can be 
curbed if tainted and corrupt contractors/conniving officials of CPWD and 
other agencies' data base is maintained and widely shared. 
 
The Committee s
trongly reiterate the recommendation relating to Demands 
For Grants (2016
-
17) for maintaining centralized and computerized database 
of tainted/black listed contractors in a time bound manner under intimation to 
the Committee. Once this database gets prepar
ed, the information should be 
shared with all concerned Govt. agencies/stakeholders involved in 
constructions/ maintenance business. The Committee also recommend the 
Ministry should strictly adopt Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) guidelines 
with regard t
o posting of officers in sensitive portfolios in 
Ministry/CPWD/MCDs/NDMC/NBCC/ NCR etc." 
 

14
 
 
1.15
 
In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
 
 
"
It is submitted that a computerized database of contractors against whom 
disciplinary actio
n has been taken is under development, and the facility will 
be made operational by June 2017. 
 
 
It is submitted that the Central 
Vigilance Commission (CVC) guidelines with 
 
regard to posting of officers in sensitive portfolios are being followed by 
 
CPWD."
 
 
1.16
 
With a view to curbing tainted contractors getting further contracts with 
the connivance of corrupt officials, the Committee had desired the 
Government to maintain a centralised computerized database of 
tainted/blacklisted contractors. The Min
istry of Urban Development and CPWD 
have  submitted to the Committee that such a database is under development 
and will be made operational by June, 2017. The Committee are of the 
considered opinion that maintenance of such a database is very essential for
 
curbing the nexus between contractors and officials as this will automatically 
debar tainted contractors from getting any future tenders/ projects of the 
CPWD/Ministry
 
and, therefore
,
 
reiterate their earlier recommendation
. The 
Committee may
, therefore,
 
b
e 
appraised
 
at the earliest, the current status of 
the said facility
,
 
which 
as per the reply of the Ministry, should
 
have been made 
operational by now. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.11)
 
 
USE OF LOW COST TECHNOLOGY FOR SEWAGE WATER TREATMENT 
 
1.17
 
 
The Committee had recommended as under:
 
"The Committee note that the existing system of Sewerage Treatment Plants 
(STPs) is highly expensive and creates tonnes and tonnes of sludge which is 
piling up in cities. The Committee are aware that Indian Agricult
ure Research 
Institute (IARI), Pusa, has developed an innovative and eco
-
friendly waste 
water treatment technology using 'Typha Latifolia ' (a wet land Plant), local 
media and native micro organisms present in waste water for treating sewage 
water to the c
apacity of 2.2 million litres per day. The technology used in this 
waste water treatment system is associated with just 1% energy requirement 
of the conventional systems, zero chemical application, zero
-
sludge 
generation, 50
-
60% reduced cost and no skill r
equirement. 
 
 
The Committee are of the considered view that su
ch technology should be 
widely 
used for Sewerage Treatment. The Committee had also recommended 
this in their earlier report. They, therefore, reiterate that the Ministry of Urban 
Development to 
contact and interact with IARI for adopting this technology, 

15
 
 
and impart training in coordination with IARI to concerned 
Departments/Agencies/States and ULBs for its proper and efficient use. The 
Committee further urge the Government to issue instructions t
o the State 
Government/Municipalities to adopt this system expeditiously for their all 
round benefits to get rid of vast pile of sludge and clean the water at minimum 
cost. "
 
1.18      
In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:  
 
"Mi
nistry has already issued an Advisory on  Constructed Wetland based 
Sewage Treatment System developed by Indian Agricultural Research 
Institute (IARI), New Delhi on 23.03.2017 to all States / UTs." 
 
 
1.19
 
While taking note of the highly expensive sewerage treatment 
technology being employed as on date and the huge quantum of sludge piling 
up in cities, the Committee had recommended the adoption of the eco
-
friendly 
waste water treatment technology developed 
by the Indian Agriculture 
Research Institute (IARI), Pusa, using 'Typha Latifolia’. 
The
 
Committee note
 
with 
some 
satisfaction
 
that an Advisory on adoption of Constructed Wetland 
based Sewage Treatment System developed by IARI
,
 
New Delhi has already 
been is
sued on 23.03.2017 to all States/UTs by the Ministry in tune with the 
recommendation
 
of the Committee. However, they 
further desire that the 
Ministry should do the necessary follow up in this regard
 
and share 
the 
response
 
and implementation of the same by
 
the States/ULBs with the 
Committee within three months
 
of the  presentation of this Report
.
 
Recommendation (Serial No.14
)
 
 
ATAL MISSION FOR REJUVENATION AND URBAN TRANSFORMATION 
(AMRUT) 
 
1.
20
 
 
The Committee had recommended as under:
 
"The Committee note that criteria for inclusion of Cities under the Atal 
Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) mission are 
population of 1 Lakh or more. The Mission mandates a set of 11 reforms 
which have to be implemented by all States
 
and 500 mission cities within a 
period of 4 years. Thrust Areas of Mission are water Supply, sewerage 
facilities and septage management, storm drains to reduce flooding, 
pedestrian, non
-
motorized and public transport facilities, parking spaces, 
reduce pol
lution levels; enhance amenity value of cities by creating and 
upgrading green spaces, parks and recreation centers especially for children. 
The Committee are apprised that Government of Rajasthan has been 
repeatedly requesting the Ministry of Urban Develo
pment time and again to 
include the cities like Makrana, Barmer, Karoli, Banswara, Jhalawar and 
Sardar Shahar in AMRUT Mission and the same have not been included so 

16
 
 
far, in spite of having population of more than 1 lakh. Similar requests have 
been made by
 
other States too. Hence, the Committee recommend the 
Ministry to examine and consider these requests for inclusion of their cities in 
the Mission and provide the required assistance to the State Government. 
 
 
The Committee also note that sewerage treatmen
t plant in some of 
Municipalities like Ahmadnagar Municipal Corporation and Brari Nambal 
Lagoon(Dal lake), Srinagar etc, which were already approved under 
JNNURM have not been accorded funds under AMRUT till now. Hence, the 
Committee recommend that Ministr
y may consider for providing adequate 
funds for such municipalities whose projects were sanctioned under 
JNNURM and are still pending and limping just because of lack of funds. The 
Committee are also apprised that the Ministry has received only Rs. 9000 
cr
ore against the demand of Rs. 50000 crore under AMRUT.  Hence, the 
Committee recommend to the Ministry for approving the action plan for the 
entire AMRUT Mission in one go so that all the projects selected under 
AMRUT Mission may be implemented in a fast t
rack mode without any 
delay."
 
1.
21      
In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:  
 
 
"
AMRUT Mission was launched in June 2015 to develop the urban 
infrastructure in 500 Mission cities. All cities having a population of 1.0 Lakh 
or more in the census 2011 were eligible. The Ministry has already selected 
500 Cities for coverage under the Miss
ion and there is no proposal to extend 
the Mission to more or additional cities. 
 
 
Also, Sewerage treatment plant in some of Municipalities like Ahmednagar 
Municipal Corporation and brari Nambal Lagoon (Dal Lake), Srinagar etc, 
were not covered in the list
 
of 1631 projects of JnNURM  as the JnNURM 
shceme had already ended on 31.03.2014. This scheme was extended till 
31.03.2017 and 398 projects were considered eligible for further funding 
under AMRUT. The above mentioned projects were also not included in th
e 
list of 398 projects. 
 
 
The Ministry has already approved all State Annual Plans for Mission period 
of which estimated cost of Rs. 77682 Cr. State Governments have already 
awarded the contracts of Rs. 15057 Cr. The Mission is going on fast track.
"
 
 
1.22
 
The Committee were of the view that there are many cities in Rajasthan 
and other States which are eligible for inclusion in the list of AMRUT. These 
cities could be taken up for improving water supply, sewage, septage etc., 
which are the thrust areas of AM
RUT Mission. The population of these cities is 
already above 1 lakh which is the requisite parameter for inclusion under the 
Mission. However, the Committee note with dismay that their recommendation 
has been rejected outright by the Government with a curt
 
reply that the 
500 
Cities for coverage under the Mission have already been selected and there 

17
 
 
exists no proposal to extend the Mission to more or additional cities. 
But, 
the 
Committee 
would like to 
reiterate their earlier recommendation that the 
Ministry should reconsider the requests for inclusion of more cities from 
various States and especially the cities of  Makrana, Barmer, Karoli, Banswara, 
Jhalawar and Sardar Shahar from Rajasthan in the 
AMRUT
 
Mission and 
provide required assistance to them.
 
 
The Committee also reiterate that 
adequate funds may be provided for the projects which were sanctioned under 
JNNURM but still pending   and limping just because of lack of  funds. The 
status report in thi
s regard may be intimated to the Committee in a time bound 
manner.
 
 
 
 

18
 
 
       
 
CHAPTER II
 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
 
Recommendation (Serial No.1)
 
 
 
SUITABLE ENHANCEMENT OF BUDGET ALLOCATION FOR URBAN 
DEVELOPMENT
 
2.1
 
The Committee note that from this Financial Year 2017
-
18, distinction 
between Plan and Non
-
Plan has been removed because of various structured 
budgetary reforms undertaken by the Government. The overall BE 2017
-
18 under 
Demand No. 97 is Rs. 36777.70 crore 
(Gross). The Net BE 2017
-
18 is Rs. 34211.84 
crore after anticipated recoveries of Rs. 2565.86 crore. Out of total Central Govt. 
outlay of Rs. 2164734.78 crore, the Ministry of Urban Development has been 
allocated Rs. 34211.84 crore, which is 1.58%, a littl
e higher than previous year 
allocation. 
 
 
During the evidence, the representatives of the Ministry submitted that though 
BE 2017
-
18 of Rs. 34211.84 crore represents an increase over the last year's budget 
estimate but actually this is also way short of wha
t the Ministry had projected i.e. Rs. 
68409.71 crore. As per census of 2011, 31% people are living in cities and towns 
and this percentage is going to increase very significantly up to 50% by 2050. The 
Committee are well aware of the increasing importance 
of investing in the urban 
sector in the cities for improving the infrastructure and delivery of services now itself 
to cater to not only the present but also for future growth of population in the urban 
cities.
 
 
The Committee feel that judicious allocation
 
of budget among various 
schemes/projects of Ministry of Urban Development is the need of the hour and at 
the same time enhancing the budgetary allocation of Ministry of Urban Development 
at RE stage. The Committee feel that lopsided allocation in favour o
f Metro Projects 
and release of funds may hamper the implementation of rest of projects and scheme 
of Urban Development such as AMRUT, Swacch Bharat Mission, HRIDAY etc.  The 
Committee, accordingly, recommend that the requirement of funds for significant 
i
nvestment in urban infrastructure to improve civic life, delivery of services for ever 
increasing urban population and implementation of various flagship projects and 

19
 
 
schemes of Ministry of Urban Development should be vigorously pursued with 
Ministry of Fi
nance. The Ministry of Urban Development, while bringing out their 
need for funds should project their demand for additional funds at RE stage so that 
they are able to cater to the requirements of the cities and towns and also meet their 
commitments under 
various Missions. The Committee further desire that the Ministry 
of Urban Development should also explore other means for mobilizing the funds viz. 
PPP, Multilateral funding agencies, external Commercial borrowings etc. for their 
projects.
 
Reply of the Gov
ernment
 
2.2
 
Ministry projects its budget requirements for implementation of the Schemes 
including Swachh Bharat Mission, 100 Smart Cities,  AMRUT and Metro Projects to 
maintain the tempo of work and to achieve the Mission targets set by the 
Government. Min
istry will project requirement of additional funds at the 
Supplementary Demands for Grants as well as at RE stage.
 
 
In order to expedite the progress of implementation of urban transport 
projects like Metro Rail system, additional funds as per requirement 
are asked from 
Ministry of Finance in Revised Estimate (RE). Allocation of fund for Metro Projects 
for the financial year 2016
-
17 in Budget Estimate (BE) was Rs. 10,000 crore which 
was increased to Rs. 15,700 crore in RE. 
 
 
In order to promote private part
icipation in Metro Rail Projects, Ministry of 
Urban Development vide letter dated 25.08.2014 has issued advisory to all 
States/Union Territories for exploring Public Private Partnership (PPP). Metro Rail 
projects of Mumbai Metro line
-
1, Rapid Metro in Guru
gram and Hyderabad Metro are 
under PPP model. 
 
 
Government of India has entered into contract with various external funding 
agencies like Japan Investment Cooperation Agency (JICA), European Investment 
Bank (EIB), AfD (Agence française de développement) of
 
France, KfW (Kreditanstalt 
für Wiederaufbau) of Germany etc. for funding of metro projects.
 
 
As regards other Schemes, f
unds are also expected to be mobilized from
 
:
 
 
 
i. States/ULBs own resources from collection of user fees, beneficiary 
charges and impa
ct  fees, land monetization, debt  etc. 
 

20
 
 
 
 
ii. Additional  resources transferred due to acceptance of the 
recommendations of the Fourteenth Finance Commission (FFC.
 
 
 
iii. Innovative finance mechanisms such as municipal bonds with credit rating 
of ULBs,  Pooled Finance  Mechanism, Tax Increment Financing (TIF). 
 
 
 
iv. Convergence with other schemes of Central Government. 
 
 
 
v. Leverage borrowings from financial institu
tions, including bilateral and 
multilateral institutions, both domestic and external sources. 
 
 
vi. States/UTs may also access the National Investment and Infrastructure 
Fund (NIIF). 
 
 
Vii. Private sector participation through PPPs.
 
Recommendation (Serial 
No.2)
 
 
JUDICIOUS/PROPER  UTILIZATION  OF  FUNDS
 
2.3
 
The Committee note that 52.61% i.e. Rs. 18000 crore of total budget 
estimates (2017
-
18) i.e. Rs. 34211.84 crore of the Ministry of Urban Development 
has been earmarked for Metro Rail Projects. The Committ
ee were apprised that 
though Metros are getting high allocation but still they are short of their requirements.   
 
 
The Committee observe that though Metro is a way forward for improving 
Urban Transport Services but still Metro Rail Projects drain most of 
the budget 
estimate leaving other projects suffering from inadequate funds. Hence the 
Committee are of the considered opinion that new options such as international 
cooperation/assistance should be identified for getting funds for Metro Rail Projects 
so as
 
to reduce dependency of these projects on Central Sector grants. They note 
that for Bullet train between Mumbai and Ahmadabad, the project is assisted by 
Societies Nationale Dis Chemins De Fer Francais (SNCF) and Japanese 
International Cooperation Agency 
(JICA). They are of the opinion that in the same 
way Metro projects should not depend much on Govt. budgetary support.  The 
Committee desire the Govt. to come out with some innovative methods for raising 
funds for the Metro Rail Projects. In addition to th
e budgetary support International
-
cooperation/assistance/long term aid should be sought for funding these Metro Rail 
Projects which are heavily capital intensive. Also the funds have been released when 
the projects are in the formulation stage and are redu
ced in the implementation 
stage. Hence the Committee strongly recommend that there should be adequate 

21
 
 
allocation of funds for those projects which are in the implementation phase so that 
they can be utilized properly.
 
Reply of the Government
 
2.4
 
Ministry o
f Urban Development has issued advisory to States/ UTs for 
innovative financing for Metro Rail projects by implementing measures like levy of 
dedicated taxes/levies, capturing of increased land and property value from sale 
proceeds/rental as well as increa
sed Floor Area Ratio (FAR) along metro corridor, 
betterment tax etc. vide letter dated 16.04.2012. Assistance from external funding 
agencies like Japan Investment Cooperation Agency (JICA), European Investment 
Bank (EIB), AfD (Agence française de développe
ment) of France, KfW (Kreditanstalt 
für Wiederaufbau) of Germany etc. has also been taken for funding of Metro Rail 
Projects. Funds are released to Metro Companies as Pass Through Assistance 
(PTA) from budget of Ministry of Urban Development. External fund
ing agencies, 
after receipt of claim, reimburse the fund to Government of India. Rs.13,644 crore 
has been allocated as PTA to Metro Rail projects in Budget Estimate of 2017
-
18 out 
of total budgetary provision of Rs. 18,000 crore for Urban Transport. Funds 
are 
released to Metro Companies during implementation phase as per progress of 
projects and utilization.
 
Recommendation (Serial No.3)
 
 
PROTECTING GOVT.  LAND FROM ENCROACHMENT
 
2.5
 
The Committee note that Land Management & Engineering Department of 
DDA is r
esponsible and custodian for complete details of vacant land and land under 
encroachment within their territory. Security guards, revenue staff and field 
investigators of LM Department have been assigned the task of detection of 
encroachment on DDA land. T
he Committee, however, note that there are many 
land pockets which are under encroachment in Delhi. On one hand, there are not 
enough schools, playgrounds and hospitals etc. for want of land and on the other 
hand, large areas of DDA has been encroached, so
metimes with the patronage of 
vested interest groups. This matter is of urgent concern for the Government. The 
Committee have been apprised about the status of implementation of Information 
Technology Initiatives for protecting DDA's land from encroachment
. The Committee 
have also been apprised by DDA that they have developed a system of uploading 

22
 
 
photographs of vacant land/plots of DDA so that encroachment if any, is detected 
without delay. Mobile App has been developed for detection and reporting of 
encro
achment and arranging demolition programs.
 
 
While the Committee note the steps taken by Govt. to detect encroachment of 
DDA land, they urge the Ministry that a Centralized data should be maintained in the 
Department for proper analysis and also urge the Mi
nistry to constitute Quick 
Reaction Team which can immediately react to the information of encroachment as 
and when received. The awareness programs for using Mobile App should also be 
conducted so that people can easily use these kind of IT initiatives. F
urther they 
recommend to the Ministry to create widespread awareness proactively among 
people to report encroachments and also regularly monitor and ensure that 
encroachments are evicted forthwith with the help of local authorities/persons so that 
it does 
not turn into a menace. The Committee recommend that mechanism 
developed to control such incidents should be periodically revised to examine their 
effectiveness and outcome of the system. 
 
Reply of the Government
 
2.6
 
Delhi Development Authority (DDA) has informed that they have complete 
details of vacant land including the land which are under encroachments.  Land 
Management (LM) & Engineering departments of DDA are regularly putting best 
efforts to remove the encroach
ment.  After reclaiming the land, the same have been 
transferred to Horticulture and Engineering departments for further utilisation. DDA 
has further informed that Quick Response Teams (QRTs) have also been constituted 
by its Engineering department.   Zona
l staff upto the level of Deputy Directors of LM 
and Horticulture departments, as an additional manpower in the field to identify 
encroachments, have been put under the control of Superintending Engineers (SEs). 
Nearly, 60 numbers of Assistant Engineers (A
Es) have been designated as AE 
(QRT) for detection and removal of encroachments. 
 
 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) has also been introduced by DDA for 
detection of encroachment and carrying out demolition programmes. For better 
output, DDA has developed
 
mobile application for detection and reporting of 
encroachment and carrying out demolition programmes. LM and Engineering 
departments of DDA continuously monitor efficacy of the SOP. As and when, any 
modification is to be required in the system, the same 
is to be carried out promptly. 

23
 
 
In addition to this, DDA is proposing to introduce new mobile app for public help 
shortly. 
 
2.7
 
 
For comments of the Committee please see para1.7 of the Chapter
-
1 of the 
Report.
 
Recommendation (Serial No.4)
 
 
A. 
ACQUISITION OF ILLEGAL FARMHOUSES FOR SOCIAL 
 
INFRASTRUCTURES  AND SICK INDUSTRIAL PLOTS FOR RESIDENTIAL 
 
DEVELOPMENT
 
 
2.8        The Committee note that Policy of farmhouses have been notified by DDA 
on 31.12.2012. The aim of this policy is to regulate th
e existing farmhouses which 
are constructed beyond permissible limits. This policy provides one time relief to 
farm houses which had come before 7.2.2007 except those falling in certain 
categories as specified in the regulations.  The Committee note that t
his policy of 
DDA does not envisage acquisition of illegal farm houses for social infrastructure. 
There is no differentiation between Sick and Non
-
Sick industrial units as per the 
Master plan of Delhi 2021. However, there is a provision of Group housing pr
ojects 
in industrial plots as per the Chapter 7 of the Master Plan. 
In existing industrial 
units/plots with an area of 3000sq.m. or above abutting road of 24m ROW and above 
shall be eligible for Residential use (Group Housing) within development control 
no
rms of Group Housing along with incentive 1.5 times Floor Area Ratio (FAR) of 
permissible FAR of Group Housing subject to payment of Conversion charges as 
prescribed by the Government from time to time for respective use
. 
The Committee 
are of the view that
 
there are large number of farm houses owners that have flouted 
the rules and have built palatial structures with swimming pools and other luxurious 
facilities whereas the farm house is meant only for agricultural purposes with one 
small room. The Committe
e are of the opinion that zonal development should also 
include social infrastructure like Group Housing Developments. They suggest
 
for 
hefty penalties to be levied  and in egregious cases for the acquisition of illegal 
farmhouses who have flagrantly  flou
ted rules, for social infrastructure such as 
hospitals, orphanages, old age homes, schools, sports complex etc. and sick 
industrial plots for housing development. Hence, the Committee recommend that 
DDA should modify the existing policy on farm houses wher
ein illegal farmhouses 
should be dealt with firmly by the DDA and Group Housing Projects should be 

24
 
 
launched. More so, land should be identified by GPS technology and other IT 
initiatives, as per the defined present land use and any change there in should b
e 
immediately recorded. Regular monitoring should be undertaken by the concerned 
agencies.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
Regarding farmhouses, it is submitted that the existing policy on farmhouses 
provides for regularization of only those farmhouses, which 
had come up prior to 
07.02.2007 and involve construction beyond permissible building limits. This policy 
was prepared under the provision of the National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws 
(Special Provisions) Second (Amendment) Act, 2011, passed by the Parli
ament, 
which required the formation of a policy regarding existing farmhouses involving 
construction beyond permissible building limits. The policy specifies restrictions on 
development control norms such as plot size, Floor Area Ratio (FAR), number of 
dwe
lling units, height, etc., which would prevent regularization of any flagrant 
violations in existing farmhouses. Further, farmhouses falling in forest area, 
protected monument area, etc. are not covered under this policy.
 
 
Regarding penalties to be recover
ed in cases of regularization of farmhouses, 
it is stated that the policy provides for graded penalty for excess construction beyond 
5% FAR besides recovery of use conversion charges (@ 
₹630/sqm) and additional 
charges @10% for unsanctioned farmhouses. 
 
 
R
egarding sick industrial plots for residential development, it is submitted that 
the Standing Committee has stated that such plots  should be acquired for housing 
development. The Standing Committee has already noted that the Master Plan for 
Delhi (MPD) 
-
 
2021 does not differentiate between sick and non
-
sick industrial units. 
The Committee has also noted that MPD
-
2021 provides 1.5 times the FAR for Group 
Housing to allow group housing projects on individual plots subject to plot size and 
abutting road
-
width
 
requirements being met. 
 
 
Thus, industrial plots can be redeveloped for providing housing subject to 
fulfilment of various requirements. It is further submitted that for the above purposes, 
amalgamation and sub
-
division of industrial plots is also allowed
.
 

25
 
 
 
Besides residential use, industrial plots can also be utilized for other uses 
such as, commercial, multi
-
level parking, hospital, banquet hall, restaurant, 
recreational club, hostel, and old age home, as per the provisions stated in Chapter
-
7 of MPD
-
202
1. 
 
 
DDA has further informed that Revenue department, Government of National 
Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD), is the custodian of land records of villages in 
NCTD. GNCTD, through its subsidiary company, Geospatial Delhi Limited (GSDL), 
has already take
n up initiatives for creating land management information system on 
Geographic Information System (GIS) platform. Accordingly, Land Management 
department of DDA is maintaining the Land Management Information System (LMIS) 
for regular updating the land reco
rds, which are under possession of DDA.
 
 
B. 
LAND POOLING POLICY (LPP)
 
 
 
The Committee note that Government have formulated a Land Pooling Policy 
(LPP), which was notified in September, 2013. in PPP mode under which various 
housing projects shall be taken up by using the large parts of land available in the 
urbanisable zone ide
ntified for residential use under various Zonal Development 
Projects. However, some issues need to be resolved before notification of the 
regulations for implementing LPP with Delhi Govt. The Committee endorse the land 
pooling concept of DDA. However, the 
Chief Secretary apprised the Committee that, 
the status of land has to be changed from rural to urban and 95 villages have to be 
notified as development area of DDA under Section 12 of Delhi Development 
Corporation Act 1957 by LG Delhi in consultation with
 
Delhi Municipal Corporation. 
DDA is perusing the matter with Land and Building Department GNCTD since 
November 2014. Further, out of these 95 villages, 89 villages have to be declared as 
urban areas under DMC Act. The proposal for this was sent by DDA to 
concerned 
DMC and GNCTD on 09.06.2014 and is awaiting issue of final decision. 
 
 
The Chief Secretary of GNCTD has assured the Committee to expedite the 
notification of all the 95 villages as urban area. The Committee expect that the 
matter may be settled a
t the highest level and the Central Government and State 
Government should initiate steps on priority and sort out the contentious issues and 
implement the land pooling policy immediately. The steps taken in this regard should 
be intimated to the Committee
. 
 
 

26
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
DDA has informed that they have taken up the matter for declaration on 95 
Development Area of DDA in June, 2014, and further issued various letters to Delhi 
Government regarding  declaring the Development Area of DDA viz. lette
r no 
F.15(6)2012/MP/D
-
95 dated 12.11.2014 addressed to Principal Secretary (Land & 
Building), GNCTD and subsequent clarification and reminders vide letters dated 
30.12.2014, 02.01.2015, 02.02.2015, 11.02.2015, 02.03.2015, 02.03.2015 and 
10.03.2015.  Subseq
uently, D.O. letters from VC, DDA dated 28.05.2015 and 
05.10.2015, addressed to Chief Secretary, GNCTD; letter dated 18.03.2016 from 
Commissioner (Planning), DDA addressed to Principal Secretary (Planning), Land & 
Building Department, GNCTD; a D.O. letter 
dated 05.10.2016 from Secretary to L.G. 
Delhi addressed to Chief Secretary, GNCTD and a D.O. letter dated 31.10.2016 from 
VC, DDA to Chief Secretary, GNCTD were issued. 
 
 
This matter was reviewed by Secretary (Urban Development) on 01.11.2016 
wherein DDA a
nd GNCTD were requested to resolve all the outstanding issues to 
ensure expeditious implementation of the policy. Thereafter, DDA, vide letters dated 
19.04.2017, has requested GNCTD to expedite declaration of 95 villages as 
development area of DDA and 89 v
illages as urban areas. “Subsequently, GNCTD 
has notified 89 villages as urban areas vide notification dated 16.05.2017
. 
The 
matter regarding notification of  95 villages as development area is still under 
consideration of the concerned Department of GNCTD
”.
 
Recommendation (Serial No.5)
 
 
 
EXPEDITIOUS IMPLEMENTATION OF REGIONAL RAPID TRANSIT 
 
SYSTEM (RRTS)
 
2.9
 
The Committee note that NCRPB had recommended construction of Regional 
Rapid Transit System (RRTS) in their functional plan of NCR 2032. This Plan 
recommended eight Regional Rapid Transit System corridors to connect various 
towns/ areas of National Capital Region. Out of eight corridors, the Government of 
India has prioritized the following three corridors for implementation in consultation 
with Stat
e Governments: i) Delhi
-
 
Sonipat
-
 
Panipat ii) Delhi
-
 
Gurgaon
-
 
Rewari
-
 
Alwar 
iii) Delhi
-
 
Ghaziabad
-
 
Meerut. It has been proposed to implement the project through 
NCR Transport Corporation (NCRTC).
 

27
 
 
 
The Committee find that Detailed Project Report (DPR) of De
lhi
-
Sonipat
-
Panipat (111 km.) & Delhi
-
Gurgaon
-
Alwar (180 Km.) are under preparation. DPR of 
Delhi
-
Ghaziabad
-
Meerut has been prepared and approved by NCRTC and has been 
sent to Govt. of Uttar Pradesh and Govt. of National Capital Territory of Delhi 
(GNCTD) 
for their approval. The Committee are of the view that the delay in 
implementation of projects on these three prioritized sectors will lead to delay in 
implementation of projects on remaining five corridors, which over the passage of 
time might defeat the 
purpose of these RRTS.
 
 
The Committee note that at last now regular Managing Director of NCRTC 
has been appointed after a long delay of 3
-
4 years. Hence, there is no reasons for 
delay in execution of these projects. The Committee strongly recommend to the 
Ministry to expedite the implementation of these three prioritized projects without any 
further delay. The Committee also suggest the Ministry to integrate these projects 
with Smart City development plan by applying Build
-
Operate
-
Transfer (BOT) Model. 
The 
Committee further recommend the Ministry to ensure continuous uninterrupted 
flow of funds for such initiatives along with proper implementation at ground level 
and regular review of their outcome including their contribution to passenger 
satisfaction. The 
Committee urge that periodical status reports in this regard should 
be sent to this Committee in a time bound manner.
 
Reply of the Government
 
2.10 
 
After joining of the regular Managing Director, full
-
fledged functioning of 
National Capital Region Transpor
t Corporation Ltd. (NCRTC) has already started 
and many important decisions have been taken and the process of finalization of 
DPRs have been expedited by NCRTC.
 
 
The Detailed Project Report (DPR) of Delhi
-
Meerut RRTS corridor has been 
approved by the Boar
d of NCRTC.  In the DPR, Government funding model has 
been suggested for implementation of Delhi
-
Meerut RRTS corridor.  The DPR of this 
corridor has been forwarded by NCRTC to the State Governments of Uttar Pradesh 
and GNCTD for obtaining their approval.
 
 
The DPRs of Delhi
-
Gurgaon
-
Rewari and Delhi
-
Sonipat
-
Panipat RRTS 
corridors are under consideration in NCRTC.
 

28
 
 
 
All the stakeholders of NCRTC have released their share of contribution to 
NCRTC towards its Seed Capital.
 
Recommendation (Serial No.6)
 
 
STRENTHENING FEEDER BUS SYSTEM UNDER METRO RAIL PROJECTS
 
2.11
 
The Committee had recommended as under:
 
"The Committee are concerned to note that there are 291 metro feeder buses plying 
on 41 metro feeder routes in Delhi Metro. The Committee note the average daily 
ridership of Delhi Metro system for the month of January, 2017 was 27.69 lakhs per 
day. In the 
year 2015
-
16, feeder buses in Delhi were 228. Now it has been increased 
by only 63 buses which is very miniscule figure. The Committee are not satisfied with 
the state of affairs of feeder bus services in Delhi. This situation compels the 
commuters to depe
nd on the mercy of overcharging auto and cycle Rickshaws to 
reach their final destinations. 
 
 
This last mile connectivity is a matter of serious concern for the commuters 
availing metro rail facility.  The Committee are of the considered opinion that 
conce
rned agencies should join hands to strengthen effective feeder bus system 
connecting Metro Stations with residential and commercial places all over the 
country so that an integrated transportation system develops. Some Municipal 
Corporations such as Ahmadn
agar Municipal Corporation have prepared detailed 
Project Report (DPR) for modernization of Bus Services including pathways and bus 
stops and they are waiting for the fund clearance.  The Committee recommend the 
allocation of adequate funds for improving n
umber of the bus services within and 
outside the city and modernization of existing bus services. The Committee also 
strongly recommend for allocation of separate funds for feeder bus services to 
adequately increase the number of feeder buses to make publi
c transport more 
comfortable."
 
2.12
 
In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:  
 
"Integration of various modes of transport including bus service which act as 
feeder system to the Metro Rail and improvement in city bus service are do
ne 
by respective State Government/Union Territory/Municipal Corporation. Delhi 
Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) has taken up the issue of improvement in 
feeder bus service with State Transport Authority (STA), Delhi. E
-
rickshaw & 
Gramin Sewa are very popular 
and are acting as feeder to Metro Rail system 
in Delhi.  Ministry of Urban Development vide letter dated 30.08.2013 has 
issued advisory to all State Governments/Union Territories requesting them 
for inclusion of feeder buses in the influence zone as an int
egral portion of the 
DPRs for Mass Rapid Transit System (MRTS) projects. Provision for 
multimodal integration including feeder bus system has been made in the 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) of Metro Rail Projects. Multimodal integration 
for improving last m
ile connectivity is one of conditions of sanction of Metro 
Rail projects."
 
2.13
 
 
For comments of th
e Committee please see para 1.10
 
of the Chapter
-
1 of the 
Report.
 

29
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.7)
 
 
A. SWACHH BHARAT MISSION (SBM)
 
2.14
 
The Committee are informed that 500 cities have been declared as open 
defecation free (ODF) after third party verification under Swachh Baharat 
Mission(Urban) of Ministry of Urban Development. They note the efforts made by the 
Ministry of Urban Development
  
in achieving the desired objective under the Mission 
such as Swachh Sarvekshan(Survey) and SWACHH 
APP 
involving railways to build 
public and community toilets on their land (though no permanent structure
 
is 
permissible there) increasing quantum of assist
ance for community toilets etc
. 
The 
Committee were informed that for SBM, out of Rs. 12000 crore, the Ministry has 
been granted Rs. 6800 crore only and therefore the Ministry have projected 
additional requirement. The Committee find that only Rs. 3729.21cr
ore have been 
released against an allocated fund of Rs. 14161.28 crore for SBM as on 27.01.2017. 
Further, the Committee are of the opinion that if Rs. 14000 crore is to be provided for 
4
-
5 years against SBM, the same should be provided in time to make the 
Mission 
successful. Hence, the Committee desire that Ministry of Finance should be pursued 
to grant more funds for this flagship scheme.
 
Reply of the Government
 
2.15
 
It is informed that  938 cities have self
-
declared as  ODF, of which 735 have 
been 
certified by Third Party Certifying agency (Quality Council of India). So far, Rs. 
4431.90 Crore have been released to States/UTs under Swachh Bharat Mission(U). 
During current Financial Year 2017
-
18, Rs.2300 Cr. has been allocated by Ministry 
of Finance f
or SBM(U), of which Rs. 665 Cr. has been disbursed to states/UTs. The 
Ministry intends to request for additional funds in RE.
 
B.SEWERAGE TREATMENT PLANTS (STPs)
 
 
The Committee gather that Rs. 2000 crore have been spent on cleaning the 
river Yamuna till now
 
but find there has been minimum improvement in water quality 
after 22 years of haphazard and kneejerk spending. The Committee understand that 
there are 23 Sewerage Treatment Plants (STPs) which were planned and are 
existing as of today in Delhi. The oxida
tion pond at Timarpur which was 
commissioned in 1947 is now proposed to be closed. There are 4 STPs at Kondali 

30
 
 
which are lying closed due to inadequate sewerage. Sewerage is not even reaching 
the STPs and getting drained into the river directly without get
ting treated. There is a 
need of comprehensive strategy for solid waste and sludge management. The 
Committee are of the view that if entire STP infrastructure are made fully functional 
then they can be used and utilized to support and aid implementation of
 
Swachh 
Bharat Mission in Delhi. 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
Govt. of NCT of Delhi has
 
 
stated that Oxidation Ponds at Timarpur are lying 
defunct for a long time and are proposed to be revived to treat 6 MGD (23 MLD) of 
sewage.
 
 
The work is likely to be comp
leted by March 2020.
 
 
Further, 4 Nos, 
Sewage Treatment Plants at Kondli having treatment capacities of 10, 25, 10 and 
45 MGD (45,113,45 and 205 MLD) respectively are partially functional treating 65 
MGD (295.50 MLD).
 
 
Tenders have been invited for revived 
and up gradation of 
these plants, with funding provided by JICA & the work expected to be completed 
by December 2020.
 
 
Also, for optimization of the treatment capacity, a 35 MGD 
(160 MLD) sewage pumping station is also being executed together with 280
-
800 
mm dia pipe lines at various places.
 
 
The State has also intimated that the work of providing and laying 280 mm to 
710 mm diameter internal/peripheral sewer lines in colonies in parts of Karawal 
Nagar, Mustafabad and Gokul Puri in Yamuna Vihar STP Catchmen
t 
 
area is 
being executed which will carry flow of about 12 MGD for further treatment.
 
 
The work of “Construction of 318 MLD (70 MGD) Wastewater Treatment 
Plant at Coronation Pillar, Delhi” is under execution.
 
 
This plant is being 
constructed in accordance
 
to the Sewerage Master Plan (SMP)
-
2031 and it will 
cater to the requirement of sewage treatment for the Coronation Pillar drainage 
Zone.
 
 
A flow of 40 MGD will be diverted to this proposed WWTP from un
-
sewered 
areas under the command of Coronation Pillar 
WWTP.
 
 
The existing flow from 30 
MGD WWTP will also be diverted to this plant to treat the effluent with latest 
parameters of CPCB.
 
 
Work of “Rehabilitation/ upgradation of 182 MLD STP Rithala Phase
-
I” as 
also “Construction of a new 564 MLD (124 MGD) WWTP 
at Okhla”
 

31
 
 
 
Instead of old existing Phase
-
I,II,III &IV STPs with the latest CPCB treated 
effluent parameters is proposed to be taken under JICA assisted YAP projects.
 
C.
 
E 
-
 
Waste Disposal 
 
The Committee have gathered that many power distribution companies 
in Delhi 
including the 66 KV grid substations at IP extension, Dilshad Garden, Sonia Vihar, 
Patparganj Industrial area, Punjabi Bagh, Sriniwaspuri and Okhala and other places, 
were flouting E
-
waste rules and are contributing to the air pollution menace in 
the 
city.   The Committee feel that these E
-
Wastes are highly polluting to the 
environment. Further the improper disposal of E
-
Waste is by law a criminal offence. 
The Committee are of the opinion that if such big Power Distribution Companies flout 
these ru
les in Delhi itself, what can be expected from the common man who may not 
be aware of E
-
Waste disposal system. They feel that adequate punitive measures by 
the Competent Authority should be taken against these errant companies. Therefore 
the Committee are 
of the view that pollution monitoring agency  should inspect the 
premises of power distribution companies storing toxic e
-
waste regularly. Delhi 
Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) and Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) 
should also inspect these areas p
eriodically under intimation to this Committee. 
 
 
The Committee are of the view that although initiatives have been taken  
under SBM (Urban) but there is a long way to go and, therefore, recommend that 
capacity building programmes should be launched by the
 
Ministry to strengthen the 
Urban Local Bodies/Municipal Corporations for implementation of SBM projects in 
urban cities across the country. Some of the States like MP, Andhra Pradesh and 
Rajasthan are better equipped and have entered into contracts for wa
ste to energy 
plants in all their cities. They desire that other States/UTs should also be approached 
in this regard and with some assistance from the Centre, these plants can be set up 
there.  The Committee also recommend to develop audit mechanism and ad
opt 
healthy measures so that the work undertaken by the Government under the Mission 
is not compromised. The Ministry should also pursue the State Govts. to promote the 
implementation of the schemes as also release their share of funds in time. They 
urge t
he Ministry to monitor that the money spent in building the toilets are functional 
at ground level, including water availability. They should also create awareness 
among people and involve community and educate different sections and society, 
especially th
e young student community in their endeavor to make SBM a success. 
 

32
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
In regard to E
-
waste management in Delhi, it is pertinent to mention that the 
matter is dealt jointly by Ministry of Environment & Forests and Ministry of 
Electronics & Information Technology through Department of Environment (DoE), 
Govt. of Delhi, Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) and Delhi Pollution Control 
Committee (DPCC).  However, Ministry of Urban Development has requested the 
DoE, CPCB and DPCC 
for taking further necessary action on the above 
observations.
 
 
 
In regard to Capacity Building, one of the major component under SBM urban 
is Administrative Office Expenditure and Capacity Building to strengthen all 4041 
Urban Local Bodies for implementat
ion of SBM in urban areas across the country. 
Ministry has also developed 135 online training courses (e
-
module) on SBM portal 
on various topics. About 3.2 lakh of officers from 1114 ULBs have been registered 
for e
-
module and got certificates. Ministry has
 
organized the exposure visits of 
officials and non
-
officials to the cities that have done good work in SBM
-
Urban.
 
 
 
In regard to monitoring the money spent in the States/UTs, fund transferred 
and monitoring system is robust. Out of total States/UTs, 25 St
ates/UTs have been 
registered under Public Financial Management System (PFMS). Out of ,total 4041 
ULBs, 1383 ULBs have been registered by the States/UTs. Ministry of Urban 
Development is regularly monitoring the status of funds released to the States/UTs 
a
nd further to the ULBs for construction of toilets and also the funds utilisation. The 
photos of constructed toilets shall be uploaded on SBM urban portal before release 
of final instalment to the beneficiary.
 
 
 
Ministry of Urban Development is also implem
enting Atal Mission for Urban 
Rejuvenation and Transformation (AMRUT) for providing water supply to the 500 
cities in the country. Toilet constructed by ULBs shall also be provided with water 
supply under AMRUT. ULBs provide water supply/tap  connection to
 
individual 
household toilets, community and public toilets constructed under SBM.
 
 
 
Intensive media campaign for behaviour change has been started by the 
Ministry through Audio Visual mode. Ministry has roped in NGOs, RWAs, Community 
organisations, SHGs, 
school children, Swachhagrahis to bring about behaviour 
change in society towards sanitation and solid waste management issues under 
SBM
.
 
Recommendation (Serial No.9)
 
 
MAINTAINING COMPUTERIZED DATABASE OF TAINTED CONTRACTORS
 
 
2.16
 
 
The Committee had recommended as under:
 
"The Committee are perplexed to note that centralized records are not maintained in 
CPWD/MoUD with regard to the contractors penalised for compliance of laid down 
norms for the assigned works. The Committee feel tha
t maintenance of centralised 
computerized database of tainted contractors will help the system in curbing corrupt 
practices as such contractors will be automatically debarred  from getting further  
contracts/projects of Govt./Ministry in future. Furthermor
e, the delay in 
commissioning of the Projects of CPWD, thereby leading to cost and time escalation, 

33
 
 
can be curbed if tainted and corrupt contractors/conniving officials of CPWD and 
other agencies' data base is maintained and widely shared. 
 
 
The Committee 
strongly reiterate the recommendation relating to Demands 
For Grants (2016
-
17) for maintaining centralized and computerized database of 
tainted/black listed contractors in a time bound manner under intimation to the 
Committee. Once this database gets prepa
red, the information should be shared 
with all concerned Govt. agencies/stakeholders involved in constructions/ 
maintenance business. The Committee also recommend the Ministry should strictly 
adopt Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) guidelines with regard 
to posting of 
officers in sensitive portfolios in Ministry/CPWD/MCDs/NDMC/NBCC/ NCR etc." 
 
2.17
 
In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
 
"
It is submitted that a computerized database of contractors against whom 
disciplinary actio
n has been taken is under development, and the facility will be 
made operational by June 2017. 
 
It is submitted that the Central 
Vigilance Commission (CVC) guidelines with regard to 
posting of officers in sensitive portfolios are being followed by CPWD."
 
2
.1
8
 
 
For comments of the Committee please see para 1.1
6
 
of the Chapter
-
1 of the 
Report.
 
Recommendation (Serial No.10)
 
 
MAINTENANCE OF GOVERNMENT GUEST HOUSES OF DIRECTORATE OF 
ESTATES
 
2.19
 
The Committee observe that guest houses of DoE located in prime 
areas/locations of the city are not properly maintained and the Central Government 
employees have to stay in private hotels as alternate venues. The Committee have 
been informed that earlier, 
there was no separate budget allocation for maintenance 
of guest houses/inspection bungalows but from the financial year 2013
-
14, a 
separate head for Maintenance /Upkeep of Inspection Bungalows, Guest Houses & 
Holiday Homes has been created through token s
upplementary grant in the 
supplementary Demand for Grants 2013
-
14. In the 2016
-
17 Rs. 8.83 crore was the 
budget demand,  but Rs. 5 crore has been allocated in 2016
-
17 & 2017
-
18 
respectively. Up to January 2017 Rs. 3.63 crore have been spent under minor wor
ks 
i.e. 
Maintenance/ Upkeep of Inspection Bungalows, Guest Houses & Holiday 
Homes. 
The Committee also note that there is no separate manpower and 
machinery for maintenance of guest houses. Rather they are maintained by 
respective service centres as per ava
ilable resources. There are also no separate 
guidelines for changing the furniture, mattresses and carpets of guest houses. They 

34
 
 
are replaced as per expiry of their useful life on the basis of guidelines available in 
CPWD manual or may be even later than t
hat. Most of times the guidelines 
specifying the wear and tear and disposal time itself needs to be revised.
 
 
Hence, the Committee strongly recommend to create separate budget with 
adequate financial provision under the head MH
-
2059/M&R (other building) fo
r 
maintenance/upkeep of inspection bungalows/guest houses with separate 
manpower and machinery. Separate revised guidelines should be put in place for 
changing furniture, mattresses and carpets of these places.
 
Reply of the Government
 
2.20
 
 
It is submitted
 
that even after rationalization of several Budgetary Heads from 
2017
-
18, a distinct head for maintenance/upkeep of Inspection Bungalows, Guest 
Houses & Holiday Homes has been retained with separate budgetary allocation.  An 
expenditure of Rs. 4.24 crore w
as made against the allocation of Rs. 5 crore in the 
year 2016
-
17.
 
 
It is also submitted that the manpower and machinery requirement for 
maintenance are worked out taking into consideration all the buildings  under a 
particular service centre. Hence there 
is no shortage of manpower or machinery for 
maintenance of guest houses. CPWD has also issued fresh instructions to all its field 
units to properly maintain all the inspection bungalows, guest houses and holiday 
homes. 
 
 
Revised guidelines for replacement 
of furniture, mattresses, pillows, bed 
sheets, carpets etc. are being framed, and will be finalized by June, 2017.
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.11)
 
 
USE OF LOW COST TECHNOLOGY FOR SEWAGE WATER TREATMENT 
 
2.
21
 
The Committee note that the existing system of Se
werage Treatment Plants 
(STPs) is highly expensive and creates tonnes and tonnes of sludge which is piling 
up in cities. The Committee are aware that Indian Agriculture Research Institute 
(IARI), Pusa, has developed an innovative and eco
-
friendly waste wat
er treatment 
technology using 'Typha Latifolia ' (a wet land Plant), local media and native micro 
organisms present in waste water for treating sewage water to the capacity of 2.2 

35
 
 
million litres per day. The technology used in this waste water treatment sy
stem is 
associated with just 1% energy requirement of the conventional systems, zero 
chemical application, zero
-
sludge generation, 50
-
60% reduced cost and no skill 
requirement. 
 
 
The Committee are of the considered view that such technology should be 
widel
y  used for Sewerage Treatment. The Committee had also recommended this in 
their earlier report. They, therefore, reiterate that the Ministry of Urban Development 
to contact and interact with IARI for adopting this technology, and impart training in 
coordi
nation with IARI to concerned Departments/Agencies/States and ULBs for its 
proper and efficient use. The Committee further urge the Government to issue 
instructions to the State Government/Municipalities to adopt this system 
expeditiously for their all rou
nd benefits to get rid of vast pile of sludge and clean the 
water at minimum cost. 
 
Reply of the Government
 
2.
22
 
Ministry has already issued an Advisory on  Constructed Wetland based 
Sewage Treatment System developed by Indian Agricultural Research 
Institute 
(IARI), New Delhi on 23.03.2017 to all States / UTs
.
 
2.
23
 
 
For comments of the Committee please see para 1.19 of the Chapter
-
1 of the 
Report.
 
Recommendation (Serial No.12)
 
 
EXPEDITIOUS IMPLEMENTATION OF KOLKATA EAST
-
WEST METRO 
CORRIDOR (KEWMC)
 
2.
24
 
The Committee note that the project of Kolkata East West Metro Corridor from 
Salt Lake Sector V to Howrah sanctioned by Govt. of India on 30.07.2008 is targeted 
to be completed in August 2009  at an estimated cost of Rs. 4676 crore which was 
further rev
ised on 19.02.2009 to Rs. 4874.58 crore. This project was initially being 
implemented by Kolkata Metro Rail Corporation Ltd. (KMRCL), a 50:50 SPV of Govt. 
of India and Govt. of West Bengal. Subsequently this project was transferred to 
Ministry of Railways 
with 74% equity and 26% Ministry of Urban Development. The 
Committee find it very strange that till now physical and financial progress is just 
44.00% and 43.44% respectively due to land acquisition and realignment issues. 

36
 
 
The Committee desire that Ministr
y of Urban Development should coordinate with 
Ministry of Railways and sort out the issues resulting in delay.  The status report 
should also be made available to the Committee periodically.
 
 
The Committee also note that Ministry of Urban Development are w
orking on 
a new metro policy as well as a new Metro Bill. The Committee are apprised that the 
new Metro policy is designed to provide a variety of options. It will promote 
indigenization and standardization. The Committee urge the Ministry to expedite the 
completion of this policy and Metro Bill within a time bound manner.
 
Reply of the Government
 
2.
25
 
Kolkata East West Metro corridor is under administrative control of Ministry of 
Railways (MoR). Issues of land acquisition and realignment have been sorted out. 
Civil work is in progress at fast pace in phase
-
1 of the project from Salt Lake Sector
-
V to Sea
ldah and commercial operation from Salt Lake to Phoolbagan is expected 
by June, 2018. The work order for supply of 84 coaches has also been awarded in 
February, 2015. After resolution of alignment issue in Mahakaran and Central 
stations of phase 
-
II, the w
ork of underground corridor has been started from Howrah 
Maidan as well as Howrah Station. More than 1.5 km of twin tunnel has been 
completed which will pass below river Hooghly on way to Mahakaran. Work of 
underground stations at Howrah maidan and Howrah 
Station is also in progress. 
After refusal of permission from The Competent Authority, AMSAR Act, West Bengal 
for undertaking underground work near centrally protected monuments namely 
Magen David Synagogue, Beth
-
El
-
 
Synagogue and Currency Building, Minist
ry of 
Culture has been approached. Ministry of Urban Development is coordinating with 
MoR for sorting out the issues. 
 
Metro Bill and Metro policy are presently under consultation for firming up the 
details. Thereafter, they will be proposed for the consid
eration of the Government.
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.13)
 
SMART CITY MISSION
 
2.2
6
 
The Committee note that the smart cities were to be set up under the Smart 
City mission launched on 25 June 2015 with the financial assistance of the Central 
Government to th
e extent of Rs. 48000 cr. over a period of 5 year i.e. 100 crore per 
city per year on an average with matching contribution by the State/ULBs. During 

37
 
 
2016
-
17, 40 Smart Cities have been selected in addition to the 20 Smart Cities 
selected in Round 1 resulti
ng in total requirement of Rs. 12338.80 crore. For the year 
2017
-
18, the Round 3 is going on and expected that 40 cities will be selected in 
remaining period i.e. competitive process is still on. This mission is implemented 
through  Special purpose Vehicle
 
(SPV) to be set up at city level and will be 
promoted by State/UT and ULB's jointly both having 50:50 equity share holding.  The 
Committee note that so far only 54 cities selected under Smart City Mission in first 
round have set up the SPV and staffed the
m and 23 cities have procured PMC 
(Project Management Consultants). They have identified the projects and DPRs in a 
large number of projects have been prepared and bids have been called. The 
Committee were apprised that their implementation will soon begin
. They feel that 
SPV should be designed as a service delivery arm that supports the Municipalities 
instead of running a parallel system. The Committee desire that CEO/Governing 
Board of SPV should both be responsible for investment as well as the operation
s. 
They should not only be able to manage operation directly but also be made liable 
for progress and timelines for completion of the concerned projects under Smart City 
Mission. The Committee would desire to be kept apprised of the action taken in this 
re
gard besides regular update on the tangible progress.
 
 
The Committee note that in the last financial year, Rs. 4493.36 crore out of 
Rs. 4598.5 crore (RE 2016
-
17) have been spent under this Mission (Almost 
97.71%). The Committee find that Jaipur and Udaipur
 
were first round cities and 
projects worth Rs. 2500 crore are being tendered and work would soon start. They 
were also informed that from the first round of cities, projects worth Rs. 25000 crore 
have been identified of which small projects worth Rs. 300 
crore have already been 
completed and projects worth Rs. 2700 crore are under implementation. The 
Committee also find that inadequate allocation have resulted in non
-
payment and 
part payment to 40 cities selected in fast track round and Round 2 of Smart Ci
ty 
Mission. Keeping all these facts in view, the Committee recommend the Ministry of 
Urban Development to pursue the Ministry of Finance and  procure additional funds 
at Revised Estimate stage so that implementation of these projects should not get 
hampere
d because of lack of funds.  The Committee, also recommend the Ministry 
of Urban Development to explore alternative methods for generating funds to set up 
under Smart City Mission and they should seek International cooperation in this 
regard. The Committee
 
are not at all convinced with such slow level of 

38
 
 
implementation of the scheme and there is a long way to go and, therefore, the 
efforts for identification for completion of projects should be expedited in fast track 
mode. They desire that the Government t
hrough ULBs should put institutional 
mechanism in place to improve municipal Governance so as to improve governance 
and ensure efficient delivery system, focus on specific technologies and on 
economic goals to achieve the objectives of Smart City Mission. 
Further, since 
development of new cities have a long gestation period, private players can be 
incentivized only when they see value in the project, therefore, necessary 
infrastructure would also have to be developed and value be created for them before 
see
king their participation.  The Committee are of the view that that Ministry of 
Railways should also be involved and approached to modernize the Railway stations 
accordingly in these selected Smart Cities. The Committee strongly believe that 
moneys that has
 
been spent so far do not appear to have shown any visible and 
tangible results and appears to have been confined to preparation of fanciful DPRs 
alone without there being any concrete futuristic roadmap immediately in sight. 
Therefore, the participation o
f public representatives including Lok Sabha MPs, 
Rajya Sabha MPs, MLAs and MLCs become all the more important so that it does 
not remain  bureaucratic exercise on paper. The Committee strongly desire the 
Ministry to involve the representatives of people i
.e. MPs/MLAs/MLCs in 
development of Smart Cities.
 
Reply of the Government
 
2.2
7
 
The Smart Cities Mission Guidelines envisages implementation by a City level 
Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) incorporated as a limited company under the 
Companies Act, 2013 in 
which the State/UT and the Urban Local Body (ULB) will be 
the promoters having 50:50 equity shareholding. The SPV will have to comply with 
all the regulatory/monitoring mechanisms set out in the Company’s Act.
 
 
One of the primary reasons for the creation o
f an SPV is to ensure operational 
independence and autonomy in decision making and mission implementation. The 
SPV will plan, appraise, approve, release funds, implement, manage, operate, 
monitor and evaluate the Smart City development projects. Rs. 4655.4
9 crore was 
allocated at RE stage during FY 2016
-
17 against proposal of Rs. 12338.80 crore 
from this Ministry. Due to less allocation, Rs. 7740.30 crore was sought through 3rd 
Supplementary Demands for Grants to fulfil the commitments in FY 2016
-
17. 

39
 
 
Howeve
r, the allocation was not made. Rs. 4000 crore has been allocated as BE 
2017
-
18. The proposal for allocation of additional fund through 2
nd
 
Supplementary of 
Grants will, therefore, be sent to Ministry of Finance.
 
 
Apart from the Governments grants, the Sma
rt Cities Mission Guidelines 
envisages for mobilization of additional funds from various sources including internal 
and external financing. In order to meet the financing needs of the Smart Cities, this 
Ministry has taken several proactive steps to identif
y sources of  fundings from 
financial institutions such as World Bank, ADB, Asian Infrastructure Investment 
Bank (AIIB), National Investment and Infrastructure Funds (NIIF), Pooled Municipal 
Debt Obligation (PMDO) facility, New Development Bank under BRICS
, Bilateral 
funding Agencies etc. States have already been asked to prepare pipeline of 
projects and submit to Ministry of Finance to avail the external financing. 
 
 
 
Besides, this Ministry is assisting cities to maximize internal sources of 
revenue such a
s Property Tax, Advertisement Tax, Municipal Bonds, Value Capture 
Financing tools etc. Moreover, resources would also be available through 
convergence with other Schemes such as Solar Rooftop, Integrated Power 
Development Scheme (IPDS), etc. The implementa
tion of the Smart Cities Mission 
is on course. At city level, it is done by a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV). Out of 60 
Smart Cities, 58 cities except Mangaluru and New Town Kolkata have incorporated 
city level Special Purpose Vehicles. 
 
 
These cities have 
reported completion of 27 projects. Besides this, 40 Smart 
Cities have since informed that they will complete around 151 projects worth Rs. 
1629 crore by 25
th
 
June 2017. Around 292 projects (worth Rs. 15857 crore) will be 
on
-
going and around 405 projects (
worth Rs.18347 crore) will be awarded by 25
th
 
June 2017. 
 
 
To monitor and review the progress of Smart Cities, the monitoring 
mechanisms are set out in the Smart City Mission Guidelines. At the National level 
the implementation of Smart Cities Mission woul
d be closely monitored by an Apex 
Committee headed by Secretary, MoUD, which will provide overall guidance and 
play an advisory role.
 
 
At State level, there is a State level High Powered Steering 
Committee (HPSC) chaired by the Chief Secretary which would 
steer the Mission 
program in its entirety. At City level, a Smart City Advisory Forum will be established 
for all Smart Cities to advise and enable collaboration among various stakeholders 

40
 
 
and will include the District Collector, MP, MLA, Mayor, CEO of SPV
, local youths, 
technical experts etc. Finally, a Special Purpose vehicle (SPV) will be established in 
each of the winning Smart City. The SPV will have to comply with all the 
regulatory/monitoring mechanisms set out in the Company Law.
 
 
Apart from the Mec
hanism set out in the Mission Guidelines, progress of 
Implementation is being reviewed regularly through Video Conference Review 
Meetings by Secretary (UD)
 
every month. Besides, MoUD Nominee Directors on the 
Boards of SPVs are also monitoring the progress 
in respective cities regularly.
 
 
 
A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) for redevelopment of railway 
stations of Smart Cities and its suburbs as part of the Smart City Plan has already 
been signed between Ministry of Urban Development and Ministry of Railway
s on 
19
th
 
October 2016.
 
 
For monitoring the Smart Cities Mission at city level, the Mission Guidelines 
prescribe for constitution of a City Level Advisory Forum to advise and enable 
collaboration among various stakeholders. The Forum includes the MP, MLA, 
Mayor, 
District Collector, CEO of the SPV, local youths, technical experts etc.
 
 
Vide letter dated 28.03.2017, Chief Secretaries of all States/UTs have been 
requested to issue the Orders for constitution of the City Level Smart City Advisory 
Forum.
 
Recomme
ndation (Serial No.15)
 
 
RISING FIRE INCIDENCES IN METRO CITIES : IMMEDIATE NEED TO 
 
REMEDY 
THIS PROBLEM
 
2.28
 
Frequent fire incidents as well as human loss have been reported from metro 
Cities like Mumbai, Delhi, Kolkata, Ahmedabad, etc. in the recent past. The 
Committee note that in many fire incidences in Govt./Public buildings, the primary 
cause of fire reporte
d to be short circuit, overloading and subsequently overheating 
in the absence of ventilation and non dissipation of heat. In many of the Govt. and 
public buildings it has been established that there was complete failure of fire 
detection system due to fau
lty placement of smoke detectors which subsequently led 
to delayed fire detection and consequently spread of fire. 
 

41
 
 
 
The Committee are concerned that the Ministry of Urban Development and 
related agencies have not made concerted efforts to identify the rea
sons of such 
incidents in Metro Cities and take suitable measures to remedy this problem. It is, 
therefore, recommended that the Ministry of Urban Development and all concerned 
agencies examine and analyze the root causes of these fire incidences and take 
remedial measures such as :
 
1.
 
Technological up gradation, 
 
2.
 
Enforcing fire safety manuals, 
 
3.
 
Compulsory fire safety provisions, 
 
4.
 
Evacuation plans in all buildings, 
 
5.
 
Periodic fire safety drill and inspection of fire safety equipments
 
6.
 
Installation of Sprinkler S
ystem in all Govt. as well as Public Buildings
 
7.
 
Function public address system
 
8.
 
Installation of CCTV Cameras
 
9.
 
Implementation of ban on smoking
 
10.
 
Review of existing fire gadgets and technology
 
11.
 
Disposal of unserviceable/dismantled materials
 
12.
 
Fluorescent 'Exit' 
signages should be provided at all locations to guide the 
escape route.
 
13.
 
Emergency light should be provided in all the corridors and staircases
 
14.
 
 
Mandatory Functional disaster management cell.
 
 
Reply of the Government
 
 
2.29
 
Fire services come within administ
rative control of State Governments.  
Ministry of Urban Development has released Model Building Bye Laws (MBBL) in 
March, 2016 which is an advisory document for the State/UT Governments.  MBBL, 
2016 contain a separate chapter on Fire protection and Fire Sa
fety Requirements.  
MBBL, 2016 has already been circulated to all State/UT Governments. The urban 
local bodies and urban development authorities along with State/City Fire Services 
need to ensure compliance to Fire protection and Fire Safety Requirements w
hile
 
approving the building plans and issuing completion certificate. 
 
 
 

42
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.16)
 
 
MODERNIZATION OF DIRECTORATE OF PRINTING, STATIONARY AND 
PUBLICATION OFFICE
 
2.
30
 
The Committee note that capacity utilization of the Government of India Press 
have rapidly fallen because of many factors like: irregular supply of paper, non up 
gradation of old and defunct machineries, Shortage of skilled workers etc. These 
Presses are r
eliable source for printing documents of sensitive and confidential 
nature. The printing industry is very sensitive to economic trends. Data reveal that 
the pace of growth has accelerated and the printing industry will grow accordingly. 
With the advancemen
t of technology the need of proformas may diminish, but the 
need of Text books will remain forever. So, there is a lot of scope for utilization of 
Govt. of India Press and this industry need to be developed. Further there is acute 
need for modernization of
 
Printing technology as the obsolete technology leads to 
higher cost and time. Many a times they lose out on business viz
-
a
-
viz private sector 
on account of their modern technology. 
 
 
The Committee further note that Ministry have tried to make some efforts
 
to 
process the proposals for requirement of paper for Govt. of India Presses and 
sanctioned it on priority basis. They have also taken a few steps for modernization of 
Govt. of India Presses like partial modernization was undertaken between 2004 and 
2008 
in which Offset Technology which includes Pre
-
Printing, Printing and Post
-
Printing of Indian make machines & equipments have been installed to replace the 
Letter Press technology etc. 
 
 
It is the considered opinion of the Committee that the press is render
ing 
valuable service to the nation, with its available limited resource and manpower by 
executing orders of Postal, Defence, RGI (Census) and others. Although the Ministry 
are considering the proposals of Committee of Secretaries (CoS) regarding the 
Modern
ization of Govt. of India Presses viz
-
a
-
viz leveraging of land resources to 
generate revenues, modernization on pilot basis through PPP model and Budgetary 
support from Central Sector Grants, yet they are of firm opinion that much more is 
required to be do
ne and the Ministry should expedite implementation of these 
proposals on ground at the earliest to make the functioning of Department self
-
sustainable. They should endeavor for making all out efforts to modernize equipment 
and machines and also to ensure t
hat Govt. Departments are instructed to use the 

43
 
 
services of this Directorate, as far as possible,  rather than using an outside agency 
and infuse fresh lease of life to this Department. Therefore, It is reiterated by the 
Committee to modernize department o
f stationary and publication and Govt. of India 
Printing press in a time bound manner under intimation to the Committee.
 
Reply of the Government
 
2.
31
 
Ministry has already deliberated on the approach to be taken which are 
detailed as under:
 
a.
 
To start with redevelopment of GIP Minto Road by constructing a new 
building and induction of State
-
of
-
the
-
art modern machinery with a 
budgetary support of Rs. 338 crores (approx.). The proposal has been 
sent for consideration  of  the Department of Expend
iture, Ministry of 
Finance. 
 
b.
 
In the meantime, Group of Secretaries (set up by the Government for 
undertaking a mid
-
term review of policies and programmes of the 
Government on 28
th
 
October, 2016) has recommended the rightsizing of 
printing presses as under:
 
The 17 printing presses owned by Govt. of India use obsolete 
technology, both machinery and equipment are outdated, and have 
outlived their useful lifespan. Some of them are around 100
-
150 
years old. Given the constraints, out of 17 presses, 9 presses 
have 
been identified to be modernized in the first phase. Redevelopment 
costs for an entire printing press would amount to Rs. 236 crore of 
which cost of modernization of only the machineries is Rs. 100 
crores. The principle to be followed is that that unu
sed land parcels 
can effectively contribute towards achieving the twin benefit of 
utilizing land for public use and of monetizing it to self
-
finance the 
modernization of the printing presses
. 
Recommendations are under 
consideration in the Ministry.
 
 
Once t
he modernization of the Presses take place , all the 
Government Departments will be requested to use the service of 
Directorate of Printing for quality printing within the shortest possible 
time.
 
 

44
 
 
CHAPTER III
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DES
IRE TO PURSUE 
IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT
 
 
-
Nil
-
 
 

45
 
 
                                                                                                                             
                                                                    
CHAPTER IV
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
 
Recommendation (Serial No.8)
 
URBAN 
PARKING
 
4.1
 
The Committee observe that large areas of urban land including green and 
open spaces is being consumed by vehicle parking due to substantial increase in 
cars and other vehicles. The Committee are perturbed to note that despite provision 
of funding for mult
ilevel parking to States under AMRUT Mission, Detailed Project 
Reports of such Multilevel parking projects in States have not been drafted till now 
and the details of such projects are not provided. The Committee are not happy with 
the state of affairs of 
parking in many metropolitan cities in the country particularly 
Delhi. Therefore, the Committee are of the considered opinion that planning of 
parking spaces should be done by concerned State Govt. in  consultation with the 
Ministry in a hand holding manne
r. Given the magnitude of the menace of growing 
number of vehicles on road, it is very pertinent that planning of parking of vehicles 
and innovative methods for restraining the proliferation of vehicles should be carried 
out in a time bound manner. The Com
mittee also recommend the Ministry to suitably 
develop a system to control congestion in metropolitan and other big cities. For this, 
the Committee also recommend the Ministry to conduct pilot studies for Electronic 
Road Pricing (ERP) system for reducing R
oad traffic in highly congested areas of 
metropolitan and other big cities. The Govt. should also introduce pre
-
paid cards for 
the vehicles to be read and deduct the amount electronically when the vehicles enter 
the designated congested areas. The Committe
e are of the view that parking 
charges in metropolitan cities and other bigger cities should be  commensurate  with 
the facilities available at the parking sites and as well as according to the congestion 
level in that particular area of the city. 
 
Reply o
f the Government
 
4.2
 
The thrust  area of the Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban 
Transformation (AMRUT) is 
water supply, sewerage & septage, Urban Transport, 
Strom water Drainage and parks. However, the first priority of the Mission is water 
supply and
 
sewerage. In Urban Transport sector, Multilevel Parking is one of the 

46
 
 
components. On the basis of Mission priority, State/UT Govts have submitted their 
State Annual Action Plans. All action plans have been approved by the Ministry. In 
these action plans, 
some States have submitted proposal of Multilevel Parking of 
value Rs.176 Cr. which have been approved by the Ministry. 60% DPRs of Multilevel 
Parking have been approved and 28% Contracts have been awarded.
 
Urban Transport is intertwined with Urban Develop
ment which is a State subject. 
As such, the initiatives including planning and execution of urban transport systems 
are taken up by the State/Union Territories and Urban Local Bodies. However, the 
Government has issued National Urban Transport Policy (NUTP
) in year 2006 which 
stresses on the following issues pertaining to parking and de
-
congestion:
 

 
Levying high parking fee, that truly represents the value of the land 
occupied;
 

 
Giving preference in allocation of parking space for public transport 
and non
-
mot
orised transport modes;
 

 
Adopting graded scale of parking fee that recovers the economic 
cost of the land used in parking spaces;
 

 
Amending building bye
-
laws in all million plus cities so that 
adequate parking space is available for all residents/users of su
ch 
buildings;
 

 
 
Making Multi
-
Modal parking complexes a mandatory requirement in 
city centres that have several high rise commercial complexes;
 

 
Making appropriate changes in bye
-
laws to free the public carriage 
way from parked vehicles that impede the smooth
 
flow of traffic in 
residential areas; and
 

 
Making provisions in the appropriate legislation to prevent the use 
of the right of way on road systems for parking purposes.
 

 
Issue of Advisory on congestion charges to State 
Governments/UTs;
 

 
 
Stipulating conditio
n of developing Parking Policy by cities as one 
of the conditions under bus funding scheme; 
 
For decongestion, the NUTP states the following:
 
“The central Government would support formulation and implementation of 
specific “Area Plans” in congested urban areas that propose appropriate mix 

47
 
 
of various modes of transport including exclusive zones for non
-
motorised 
transit”.
 
The National Urban Trans
port Policy 2006 is available on the 
URL:
 
http://moud.gov.in/sites/upload_files/moud/files/pdf/TransportPolicy.pdf
 
4.3
 
 
For comments of the Committee please see para 1.13 of the Chapter
-
1 of the 
Report.
 
Recommendation (Serial No.14
)
 
 
ATAL MISSION FOR REJUVENATION AND URBAN TRANSFORMATION 
(AMRUT) 
 
4.4
 
 
The Committee note that criteria for inclusion of Cities under the Atal 
Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) mission are 
population of 1 Lakh or more. The Mission mandates a set of 11 reforms which 
have to be implemented by all States 
and 500 mission cities within a period of 4 
years. Thrust Areas of Mission are water Supply, sewerage facilities and septage 
management, storm drains to reduce flooding, pedestrian, non
-
motorized and 
public transport facilities, parking spaces, reduce poll
ution levels; enhance amenity 
value of cities by creating and upgrading green spaces, parks and recreation 
centers especially for children. The Committee are apprised that Government of 
Rajasthan has been repeatedly requesting the Ministry of Urban Develop
ment time 
and again to include the cities like Makrana, Barmer, Karoli, Banswara, Jhalawar 
and Sardar Shahar in AMRUT Mission and the same have not been included so 
far, in spite of having population of more than 1 lakh. Similar requests have been 
made by 
other States too. Hence, the Committee recommend the Ministry to 
examine and consider these requests for inclusion of their cities in the Mission and 
provide the required assistance to the State Government. 
 
 
The Committee also note that sewerage treatment
 
plant in some of 
Municipalities like Ahmadnagar Municipal Corporation and Brari Nambal Lagoon(Dal 
lake), Srinagar etc, which were already approved under JNNURM have not been 
accorded funds under AMRUT till now. Hence, the Committee recommend that 
Ministry
 
may consider for providing adequate funds for such municipalities whose 
projects were sanctioned under JNNURM and are still pending and limping just 
because of lack of funds. The Committee are also apprised that the Ministry has 
received only Rs. 9000 cro
re against the demand of Rs. 50000 crore under AMRUT.  
Hence, the Committee recommend to the Ministry for approving the action plan for 

48
 
 
the entire AMRUT Mission in one go so that all the projects selected under AMRUT 
Mission may be implemented in a fast tr
ack mode without any delay."
 
Reply of the Government
 
4.5
      
AMRUT Mission was launched in June 2015 to develop the urban 
infrastructure in 500 Mission cities. All cities having a population of 1.0 Lakh or more 
in the census 2011 were eligible. The Minist
ry has already selected 500 Cities for 
coverage under the Mission and there is no proposal to extend the Mission to more 
or additional cities. 
 
 
 
Also, Sewerage treatment plant in some of Municipalities like Ahmednagar 
Municipal Corporation and brari Nambal Lagoon (Dal Lake), Srinagar etc, were not 
covered in the list of 1631 projects of JnNURM  as the JnNURM shceme had already 
ended on 31.03.2014. 
This scheme was extended till 31.03.2017 and 398 projects 
were considered eligible for further funding under AMRUT. The above mentioned 
projects were also not included in the list of 398 projects. 
 
 
 
The Ministry has already approved all State Annual Plans
 
for Mission period 
of which estimated cost of Rs. 77682 Cr. State Governments have already awarded 
the contracts of Rs. 15057 Cr. The Mission is going on fast track.
"
 
 
4.6
 
 
For comments of the Committee please see para 1.
22
 
of the Chapter
-
1 of the 
Report.
 
 
 

49
 
 
CHAPTER V
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
 
-
Nil
-
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI; 
 
 
9 August
, 
2017
 
 
18
Sravan
a
, 1939 (Saka)                    
                
Pinaki Misra
 
Chairperson,          
Standing Committee on Urban Development
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 

50
 
 
ANNEXURE 
-
I
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2016
-
2017)
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 
 
WEDNESDAY,  9
TH
 
AUGUST, 2017.
 
      
The Committee sat from 1000 hrs. to 1055 hrs. in Committee Room 
No.4, A Block,  Extension to Parliament  Annexe Building, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
Shri Pinaki Misra     
 
-
 
Chairperson
 
MEMBERS
 
LOK SABHA
 
2.
 
Shri Maheish Girri
 
3.
 
Shri P.C. Mohan
 
4.
 
Shri K. 
Parasuraman
 
5.
 
Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil
 
6.
 
Shri Alok Sanjar
 
7.
 
Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
 
8.
 
Prof. K. V. Thomas
 
9.
 
Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
10.
 
Shri Anil Desai
 
11.
 
Shri Mahesh Poddar
 
12.
 
Shri K.C. Ramamurthy
 
13.
 
Shri Ajay 
Sancheti
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
1.
 
Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi
 
-
 
Joint Secretary
 
2.
 
Ms.  Amita Walia
 
 
 
-
 
Additional Director
 
3.
 
Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan
 
-
 
Deputy Secretary
 
 
2.
 
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting 
of the Committee. 
 
3.
 
The Committee then took up for consideration the following draft  Reports :
 
 
(i)  Eighteenth Report  on Action Taken on  the  
12
th 
Report (16
th
 
Lok  Sabha) 
on 
 
'
Modernization  of Directorate of  Printing, Government of India Stationery 
Office 
 
and Department of Publication'
 
 

51
 
 
 
(ii) 
Nineteenth Report on Action Taken on  the  
15
th
  
Report (16
th 
Lok Sabha) 
on 
 
'Demands for Grants (2017
-
18)' of the Ministry of Urban 
Development,
 
and;
 
 
 
(iii) 
Twentieth Report on
 
Action Taken on 
16
th 
Report (16
th
 
Lok  Sabha) on 
 
'Demands for Grants (2017
-
18)' of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty 
 
Alleviation.
 
4.
 
After some deliberation, t
he Committee adopted the above  draft Rep
orts 
without  any modifications and authorized the Chairperson to finalize them and  
present the Reports to Parliament.
 
The Committee then adjourned.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

52
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
-
II
 
                                            
[Vide para 4 of the Introduction]
 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFT
EENT
H 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPLMENT 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
 
I.
 
 
Total number of recommendations       
 
 
                      
 
   
16
 
 
 
                      
 
 
   
 
 
II.
 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
 
by the Government:
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Recommendation Nos. 
1, 2,3,4,5,
6,
 
7,
9,
10,11,12,13,15 and 16
 
   
1
4
 
 
Percentage to total recommendations                                                   
 
    
 
                                                                                                  
(
87.50
%)
 
 
III.
 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
 
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:       
 
 
           
 
Recommendation No
.
 
Nil
 
 
                                                         
0
 
 
 
 
 
Percentage to total recommendations                     
 
 
              
(
0
%) 
 
 
IV.
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of          
 
                          
 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
 
Recommendation No.
 
8 and14    
                                                          
02
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Percen
tage to total recommendations                             
 
            
(12.16%)
 
                            
 
V.
 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
 
 
    
 
           
 
replies of the Government are still awaited: 
Nil
            
                           
0
 
 
Percentage to total recommendations          
 
 
                       
(
0
%)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 