 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2015-2016) 
 SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
                                 MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
                            DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
                                  (2015-2016) 
  
 
(Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban Development on Demands for Grants 
(2015-2016)  of the Ministry of Urban Development] 
 
 
NINTH  REPORT 
 
      
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
October 2015, Asvina 1937 (Saka) 
 
9 


2 
 
 
 
NINTH  REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2015-2016) 
 
                                
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
 
(Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban Development on Demands for Grants 
(2015-2016)  of the Ministry of Urban Development] 
   
Presented to Lok Sabha on  21.12.2015 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  21.12.2015 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
October, 2015 Asvina 1937 (Saka) 
 


3 
 
 
   C.U.D No.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2012 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) 
and printed by the Indian Press, Delhi-110033. 
 
 
 

4 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .....................……….…………………..........................….. (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ......................................................................………………………………………. (v) 
 
REPORT 
CONTENTS 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
1 
CHAPTER II 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government  
19 
CHAPTER III Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
57 
CHAPTER IV 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration  
58 
CHAPTER V Observations /Recommendations in respect of which final  replies 
of the Government are still awaited 
67 
 
ANNEXURES 
I. Minutes of the First  sitting of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2015-
16) held on 16th   September, 2015...........................................................................69   
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained 
in the Fifth Report of the Committee (16th Lok Sabha)….. .....................................71 

5 
 
 
 
 
 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2015-2016) 
Shri Pinaki Misra         -        Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Shri Ramesh Bidhuri 
4.  Shri Ram Charan Bohra 
5. Shri Dushyant Chautala 
6.  Shri Ashok  Shankrarao Chavan 
7. Dr. Dharam Vira Gandhi 
8.  Shri Dilip  Mansukhlal Gandhi 
9.  Shri Maheish Girri 
10. Shri R.Gopalakrishnan 
11.  Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua  
12. Shri  Srinivas Kesineni Nani 
13.  Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi 
14. Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
15. Shri P.C. Mohan 
16.  Shri K. Parasuraman 
17. Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil 
18.  Shri Alok Sanjar 
19.  Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
20. Prof. K. V. Thomas 
21. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Smt. Vandana Chavan 
23. Shri Husain Dalwai 
24. Shri Anil Desai 
25.  Shri Parvez Hashmi  
26. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna 
27. Shri Mukul Roy 
28 Shri Satish Sharma 
29. Shri C.P. Thakur 
30. Shri S.Thangavelu 
31.  Shri Khekiho Zhimomi  
 

6 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi            -      Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S Malha         - Director 
3. Smt. J.M. Sinha                     - Additional Director 
4. Dr. Jagmohan Khatry        - Executive Officer 
 
(iv) 
  

7 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2015 -2016) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Ninth Report (16 th Lok 
Sabha) on the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Fifth Report (16 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban Development on “Demands for 
Grants (2015-2016) " of the Ministry of Urban Development. 
2. The Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 27 April, 2015 and laid on the table of 
Rajya  Sabha on  27 April, 2015 .  Replies of the Government to all the recommendations 
contained in the Report were received in 27 July, 2015.  
3. The Standing Committee on Urban Development considered and adopted this Report at th eir 
sitting held on 16.09.2015. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
                    PINAKI MISRA 
12 October, 2015                                       
                     Chairperson,       
 21 Asvina,1937 (Saka)                                            Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
 
 (v)  
 
 
  

8 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (201 5-2016) 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in their Fifth Report ( Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2015-2016) of the Ministry of Urban Development 
which was presented to Parliament on 27.04.2015. 
1.2 Action Taken Replies have been received from the  Government in respect of 
all the 30 recommendations contained in the Report.  These h ave been categorized 
as follows: 
(i) Recommendations /Observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government. (Chapter-II): 
 Recommendation Nos. 
1,2,4,5,6,7,10,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26,28,30 
               (Total -23) 
(Chapter-II) 
(ii) Recommendations /Observations, which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government's   replies.  (Chapter-III): 
Recommendation No. Nil                         (Total -0) 
(Chapter-III) 
(iii) Recommendations /Observations, in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter-IV): 
 Recommendation Nos. 3,8,9,11,12 and 29                                                
                                                                                               (Total - 6  ) 
(Chapter-IV) 
(iv) Recommendations /Observations, in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are, still awaited(Chapter-V): 
           Recommendation  No.  27                                            (Total –1) 
(Chapter-V) 
 

9 
 
1.3 The Committee  desire that specific replies to the comments  contained in 
Chapter-I  and Chapter-V of this Report may be furnished to them at the earliest and 
in any case, not later than three months of the presentation of this Report. 
1.4 The Committee will now like to comment on  the action taken by the 
Government on some of their recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.   
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.2) 
 
NATIONAL CAPITAL REGIONAL PLANNING BOARD (NCRPB):WAVING OF 
GUARANTEE FEE 
1.5 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"During the  FY 2012 -13, an amount of Rs.55.00 crore had been approved and 
released by Government of India against which Rs.  637.05 crore has been incurred  
which includes loan of Rs. 418.51 crore disbursed to the State Govt./ their 
implementing agencies. During the  FY 2013 -14, an amount of Rs.60.00 crore had 
been approved and released by Government of India against which Rs. 643.76 
crore has been incurred  which includes loan of Rs. 355.44 crore disbursed to the 
State Govt./ their implementing agencies. During the  FY 2014 -15, an amount of 
Rs.80.00 crore had been approved as BE against which Rs.62.00 crore have been 
released by Government of India against which Rs. 383.73 crore has been incurred  
which includes loan of Rs. 206.22 crore disbursed to the State Govt./ their 
implementing agencies upto December,2014. The expenditure incurred in excess of 
the budgetary support was me t out of the Internal and Extra Budgetary (I&EBR) 
sources of the Board.  As on 31.12.2014, total debt outstanding on account of 
domestic market borrowing is Rs.1100 crore and Rs. 494.72 crore loan from 
multilateral and bi -lateral agencies. Keeping in view huge dependency of NCRPB 
on the Internal and extra Budgetary sources of the Board and huge outstanding 
debt on account of domestic borrowing of Rs. 1100 crore and Rs. 494.7 crore loan 
from multilateral and bilateral agencies, the Committee in their earlier  reports have 
been recommending to waive of the guarantee fee to enable NCRPB to raise the 
requisite loan from the multilateral aid agencies. The Committee are informed that 
this matter was taken up with D/o Economic A ffairs and Budget Division of the M/o 
Finance. The Committee are informed by the Ministry that in the past, Budget 
Division had agreed for reduction/ waiver of guarantee fee provided the PSU is sick, 
Cabinet approval has been obtained that the reduction of Guarantee fee is passed 
onto the end consumer. In view of the above, the Ministry of Urban Development 
again took up the matter with the Ministry of Finance. NCRPB has submitted that 
the loan from ADB and KFW is a direct loan to NCRPB and not pass through 
assistance. All risks i.e. interest r ate and currency rate fluctuation attached to these 
loans are being borne by NCRPB. It further submitted that if the Government is not 
in a position to waive the entire guarantee fee, they may fix the guarantee fee to 
minimum extent to fund the guarantee r edemption fund. Further NCRPB is an 

10 
 
autonomous body created under an act of Parliament i.e. NCRPB Act 1985 with a 
mandate to provide financial assistance to the participating State Government 
Departments, Urban Local Bodies, Development Authorities and oth er parastatals 
for physical and social infrastructure development projects. Board is charging low 
interest on these long tenure loans so as to provide assistance for large number of 
physical & social infrastructure development projects. As such the benefit s of 
reduction of guarantee fee is passed on to end consumers by providing soft loans to 
the participating State Governments and their implementing agencies for basic civic 
amenities. In view of the above clarifications, the Ministry of Urban Development 
has requested the Ministry of Finance to waive the guarantee fee on loan availed by 
NCRPB from bilateral/Multilateral agencies. Keeping in view all these facts provided 
by the Ministry of Urban Development, the Committee strongly recommend for 
waving of gua rantee fee so as to enable NCRPB to raise the requisite loan from 
Multilateral Aid Agencies."  
 
1.6 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"Regarding waiving of guarantee fee, the proposal was sent by Ministry of Urban 
Development to Ministry of Finance for their consideration who had raised certain 
queries. Detailed clarifications/ justifications on these queries have been forwarded 
to the Ministry of Finance for consideration/ approval by them for waiving of 
guarantee fees. The decision to waive guarantee fee is to be taken by Ministry of 
Finance." 
1.7 Keeping in view huge dependenc y of NCRPB on the Internal and E xtra 
Budgetary sources of the Board and huge outstanding debt on account of 
domestic borrowing  to the extent  of Rs. 1100 crore and Rs. 494.7 crore loan 
from multilateral and bilateral agencies, the Committee in their earlier reports 
had recommended to waive the guarantee fee to enable NCRPB to raise the 
requisite loan from the multilateral aid agencies.  The Committee note that the 
Ministry of Urban Development has taken up the matter for waiving of 
guarantee fee with the Ministry of Finance. Now, the Ministry of Urban 
Development has also forwarded certain clarifications to the queries raised by 
the Ministry of Finance. The Committee agree with the Ministry that the 
decision in this regard will be taken by the Ministry of Finance. However, they 
desire the Ministry of Urban Development to sincerely pursue this matter till  
the final outcome  in this matter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.3) 
MONITORING AND VIGILANCE BY NCRPB: AMENDMENT IN THE NCRPB 
ACT, 1985 
1.8 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 "The Committee came to know that monitoring the preparation of sub -regional 
plans by the respective NCR participating States is being monitored by NCR 
planning board regularly. It also extends financial assistance for preparation of the 
sub-regional plan on the request of the participating State Governments. Ministry of 
Urban Development submitted that the preparation of Master/development plans 
are being prepared and finalized by the respective State Government under the 
prevailing Act/statutes in the State s.  There is no provision in the NCRPB Act with 
respect to Master plan of the towns failing in the NCR. However NCRPB has been 
pursuing for preparation of master/Development plans for all the towns in the NCR 
in conformity of the regional plans. The Commit tee become anguished to know that 
there is no provision in NCRPB Act, 1985 for monitoring and keeping vigilance over 
the development at site in the National Capital Region due to which NCRPB does 
not have any role in monitoring and keeping vigilance over t he developments at site 
in the NCR.  The Committee are apprised that regarding violations of the Regional 
Plan by the States, each participating State is responsible for the implementation of 
the Sub-Regional Plan as per the NCRPB Act,1985.  Coordinating a nd monitoring 
the enforcement and implementation of the Regional Plan is done through 
participating State Governments.  Further, NCR Board has created NCR Planning & 
Monitoring Cell in each participating States. The Ministry has submitted that no 
cases of violations has been reported to NCRPB by the NCR planning and 
monitoring cells.  However, NCR board has carried out land use change analysis of 
the Natural Conservation Zone with the help of National Remote Sensing Centre 
(NRSC) Hyderabad and found variati ons in the NCZ. The Committee are apprised 
about the comparative analysis which indicated that there is shrinkage of NCZ as 
15.43% in NCT-Delhi, 25.97% in Haryana sub-region, 43.88% in UP sub-region and 
11.18% in Rajasthan sub -region. Keeping in view of all these facts the Committee 
strongly recommend carrying out necessary amendments in the NCRPB Act so as 
to insert a key provision in the Act whic h will empower NCRPB for direct monitoring 
and keeping a vigilance eye over the development at sites in the NCR so that there 
is no violation of the regional plans. It will also help in coordinating and monitoring 
the enforcement and implementation of the regional plans in conformity with the 
sub-regional plans. " 
 
1.9 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
  
"NCRPB has been constituted, among other things, for the preparation of plans for 
development of National Capital Region (NCR) and hence it is primarily a planning 
body. To achieve the objectives, NCRPB prepares Regional and Functional Plans, 
arranges for p reparation of Sub -Regional Plans by the participating States and 
coordinates the enforcement and implementation of these plans only through the 
participating States.  This mandate of NCRPB is clearly in consonance with the 
subject matters assigned to the S tates in the Constitution of India.  Therefore, it 

12 
 
would be appropriate to continue with the existing provisions which provide for 
harmonized development of NCR without compromising the powers and jurisdiction 
of the participating States. " 
 
1.10 The Committee note that to achieve the objectives of a planned 
development in the National Capital Region, NCRPB prepares Regional and 
Functional plans, arrange for preparation of Sub -Regional Plans by the 
participating States and coordinates the enforceme nt and implementation of 
these plans only through the participating States. Further, NCR Board has 
created NCR Planning and Monitoring cell in each participating States.  During 
examination of Demands for Grants(2015-16) the Committee had observed that 
in spite of the above mechanism there was shrinkage of NCZ in Delhi, Haryana, 
Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan sub-regions. This clearly depicts the failure of the 
above mechanism. Therefore, the Committee had recommended to amend the 
NCRPB Act and insert a suitable clause to empower the NCRPB for direct 
monitoring and keeping a vigilan t eye over the development in the NCR. 
However, the Committee are anguished to note the reply of the Ministry that 
the mandate of NCRPB is in consonance with the subject matter s assigned to 
the States in the Constitution of India. Therefore, it would be appropriate to 
continue the existing provisions. The Committee had recommended on ly after 
seriously considering all aspects that necessary amendment be incorporated 
in the key pr ovisions of NCRPB Act for direct monitoring without which the 
very purpose of planning would be futile. Moreover, when all  the participant 
States are being represented by their respective Chief Ministers and Ch ief 
Secretaries. Every decision  taken by the N CRPB has the approval of all the 
Board Members. Therefore, the Board should be empowered to monitor the 
developments in the NCR.  The Committee, therefore reiterate their earlier 
recommendation for effective coordination and monitoring the enforcement 
and implementation of the sub -regional plans in conformity with regional 
plans. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.5) 
 
CREATE ADDITIONAL POSTS IN NCRPB 
1.11 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee are also apprised that NCRPB has huge work load on its existing 
staff. Ministry of Urban Development has also accepted that NCRPB has a meagre 
staff strength of only 51 posts.  Over a period of time, the Board‟s activities have 
increased manifold in respect of financing and monitoring of project implementation.  
Although, the responsibility of implementation of the projects financed by the 
NCRPB lies with the concerned agencies of the State Governments, closer 
monitoring and follow up of such projects by NCRPB is very essential for timely 

13 
 
utilization of funds and completion of projects. In 2011, Ministry of Urban 
Development has approved the creation of five temporary posts to function as 
Project Management Unit (PMU) of NCRPB after the due app roval of Ministry of 
Finance.  Two Posts were revived by Ministry of Urban Development  in 2013 after 
the due approval of Ministry of Finance.  A proposal for creation of additional posts 
has already been forwarded to Ministry of Urban Development  in 2012.  Therefore, 
the Committee strongly recommend that Ministry of Urban Development should 
provide strategic methods for addressing present and anticipated workforce issues 
and at the same time should create additional posts in NCRPB with immediate 
effect." 
 
1.12 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"NCRPB submitted a proposal for creation of 39 additional posts to the Ministry in 
2012.  Subsequently, the proposal was forwarded to Ministry of Finance who raised 
certain queries. NCRPB forwarded detailed clarifications/ justifications on the queries 
raised by the Ministry of Finance, and the same have been forwarded to the Ministry 
of Finance for seeking their approval in the matter." 
1.13  The Committee are  note that the NCRPB had submitted a proposal for 
creation of 39 additional posts to the Ministry in 2012  as NCRPB ha d huge 
work load on it s existing staff and o ver a period of t ime, the Board’s activities 
had increased manifold in respect of financing and monitoring  of project 
implementation. Subsequently, the proposal was forwarded to Ministry of 
Finance who raised certain queries. NCRPB forwarded detailed clarifications/ 
justifications on the queries raised by the Ministry of Finance, and the same 
have been forwarded to the Ministry of Finance for seeking their approval in 
the matter. Hence, the Committee desire that NCRPB should pursue vigoursly 
with the Ministry of Finance for seeking their approval in  the matter and 
expedite the process for addressing present and anticipated workforce issues. 
Recommendation (Serial No.8) 
EXPEDITIOUS IMPLEMENTATION OF THE REGIONAL  RAPID TRANSIT 
SYSTEM PROJECTS 
1.14 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee feel that high speed corridors are need of the hour as this will 
facilitate better commuting in the National Capital Region. The Committee has been 
apprised that the three Rapid  Regional Transit System corridors have been 
prioritized by the Ministry of Urban Development for implementation in phase I i. e.,  
Delhi - Sonipat -Panipat, Delhi - Gurgaon - Rewari - Alwar, Delhi-Ghaziabad-Meerut 
for which estimated cost till Sept 2011 was Rs. 72,170 crore. These routes have 
been identified for the R RTS because these towns and cities have a large number 
of people travelling daily for economic reasons. The Committee note that Ministry of 
Railways has informed Ministry of Urban Development vide letter dated 10.12.2014 
that Ministry of Railways is commit ted towards the participation in NCRTC, but as 
contribution to equity participation needs approval of Parliament, funds shall be 

14 
 
made available in February, 2015 only after seeking approval of Parliament in the 
Supplementary Demands for grants.  However, Ministry of Railways has sanctioned 
the release of Rs. 1.25 lakhs to National Capital Region Transport Corporation 
(NCRTC) towards subscription amount for participation of Ministry of Railways in 
NCRTC. Ministry of Urban Development is pursuing with the Min istry of Railways 
for further release of funds. The Committee are happy with the release share of 
funds by the Ministry of Railways. Now NCRTC has got shares from each 
stakeholders, hence, they should work toward expeditious implementation of RRTC 
corridors. In view of the above, the Committee strongly recommend to implement 
this RRTS project expeditiously in a time bound manner so as to make travel in the 
National Capital Region faster and easier." 
1.15 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRPB) was involved in the Rapid 
Regional Transit System (RRTS) corridors since their conceptualization like 
selection of the prioritized RRTS corridors and appointment of consultant, etc.   As 
the appointment of regular Managing Director of National Capital Region Transport 
Corporation (NCRTC) is under process as of now.  Ministry of Urban Development 
(MoUD) vide letter number K -14011/47/2013-MRTS-I dated 08.04.2015 has 
advised NCRPB to finalize the Det ailed Project Reports (DPRs) of the following 
three RRTS corridor Projects expeditiously till such time a regular Managing 
Director of NCRTC is appointed:  
(i) Delhi – Sonipat - Panipat; 
(ii) Delhi – Ghaziabad - Meerut; and 
(iii) Delhi – Gurgaon – Rewari – Alwar" 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.9) 
 
EXPEDITIOUS APPOINTMENT OF MANAGING DIRECTOR (NATIONAL 
CAPITAL REGION TRANSPORT CORPORATION). 
1.16  The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee learnt that there is delay in implementation of Meerut -Delhi 
Express highway and as well as Regional Rapid Transit system because of 
delaying in search -cum-selection of Managing Director of NCRTC. In its 
submission, Ministry of Urban Develop ment stated that they are corresponding with 
Department of personal and training to expedite search -cum-selection of managing 
Director of NCRTC. In its submission Ministry of Urban Development stated that 
National Capital Region Transport Corporation Ltd. (NCRTC) has been constituted 
as a company under the Companies Act, 1956 on 21.8.2013.  As the full time 
Managing Director (MD) of NCRTC could not be appointed due to non -availability of 
guidelines on the procedure for appointment of MD in such a company wh ere 50% 
Equity is with the Government of India (GoI) and the MD has to be a nominee of the 
Govt. of India.  After detailed interaction, Department of Personnel & Training 
(DoPT) has now advised the procedure to be adopted for selection of MD, NCRTC.  
The process for appointment of MD, NCRTC as per advice of the DoPT has now 

15 
 
been initiated and accordingly, MD, NCRTC will be appointed shortly.  The work of 
RRTS is expected to speed up with the appointment of regular MD, NCRTC. The 
Committee became aware that it is general instruction of Government of India that 
whosoever the MD of corporation if he is serving Officer then he has to resign from 
his parent Organization then only he can be taken on absorption basis. For getting 
the exemption, Communication has to  go to the department of the Public 
enterprises. After this procedure MD will be selected. The Committee was told that 
once the appointment of MD of NCRTC has been completed then work of three 
corridors of Panipat, Meerut and Alwar will be expedited. Feasi bility study of this 
three corridors and Detailed Project Report have been completed. The Committee 
while expressing their displeasure over the delay in implementation of Regional 
Rapid Transit System because of delay in search -cum selection of Managing 
Director of NCRTC, strongly recommend that instead of focusing on only the 
serving officer, the Ministry should select professionals from all walks of life for this 
important post. This will facilitate to use his professional expertise." 
 
 
1.17 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"The comments have been received from Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) 
vide their O.M. dated 23.04.2015.  On the basis of comments received from DPE, 
following has been issued: 
(i) Order for constitution of Search cum Selection Committee for selection of 
Managing Director, NCRTC. 
(ii) Advertisement for the post of Managing Director, NCRTC along with details 
of eligibility, qualification and experience, etc.  Which includes both 
Government officers (on absorption basis) and Professionals from Public 
Sector / Private Sector Companies. 
The applications have been received and the process of selection is underway." 
 
1.18 The Committee had expected that regular appointment of M.D. of NCRTC 
would have been finalized by now. The  Committee are apprised  that Ministry 
of Urban Development vide letter number K -14011/47/2013-MRTS-I dated 
08.04.2015 has advised NCRPB to finalize the Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) 
of the following three RRTS corridor Projects expeditiously till such time a 
regular Managing Director of NCRTC is appointed . The Committee are 
surprised that implementation of project s are delayed  just because of non -
appointment of regular M.D(NCRTC).  This is not acceptable to the Committee. 
The Committee, therefore reiterate their earlier recommendation and 
emphasize on time bound selection of Managing Director  of NCRTC and 
implementation of RRTS  expeditiously in a time bound manner under 
intimation to the Committee so as to make travel in the National Capital Region 
faster and easier. 

16 
 
 Further, the Ministry's reply is silent with regard to recommendation of 
the Committee for consideration of professionals from all walk s of life while 
selecting the MD, for RRTS, instead of focusing on serving o fficers only. The 
Committee desire the Ministry to intimate them about the action taken in this 
regard. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.11) 
 
MONORAIL IN METROPOLITAN SUBURBS AND TIER-II CITIES: 
1.19 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee have been apprised that Monorail is a safe, reliable, economical, 
quick, comfortable and effective mass public transit system. The high -speed rail -
based Regional Rapid  Transit Systems (RRTS) would allow people living in 
metropolitan suburbs within a radius of 100 km to commute to work, thereby easing 
pressure on the infrastructure services within the city. The Committee came to know 
that there has been no budgetary allocation and expenditure from the Union Budget 
for Monorail Projects till now.  Therefore, keeping in view all the advantages of 
Monorail, the Committee in their earlier reports had strongly recommend ed for 
Ministry of Urban Development to act as facilitator, provide budgetary allocation 
from the Union Budget for Monorail Projects and facilitate foreign collaboration, if 
need be, into Monorail sector so as to set up monorail both as a means of feeder 
system within the bigger metros and as an independent mode of  transport in Tier II 
cities. The Committee were apprised about the National Urban Transport Policy 
(NUTP), 2006, in which Ministry supports all modes of public transport including 
Mono Rail systems.  Ministry submitted that proposals for monorail projects  have to 
be initiated by the State Governments as Urban Transport is a state subject.  
Ministry of Urban Development will consider proposal of monorail projects after 
following due appraisal process, depending upon the feasibility of the project and 
availability of funds.  Government of India has accorded in -principle approval for 
one monorail project in Chennai on PPP mode with no financial commitment from 
Govt. of India.  Further, one more proposal for Chennai Monorail Project (Phase -2) 
has been received in this Ministry which is under appraisal. The Committee agree 
that Monorail projects are to be initiated by the State Governments according to the 
needs of their cities and not by the Central Government. The cities have to prepare 
the Comprehensive Mobili ty Plan (CMP) with alternative analysis for promoting 
sustainable transport. But still the Committee strongly recommend the Nodal 
Ministry to help the States in formulating their Comprehensive Mobility Plan (CMP) 
and help them in formulating sustainable ur ban transport. The Committee also 
came to know that a s of now, there is no foreign collaboration in the Monorail 
sector. There is no proposal with Central Government for attracting funding of 
Monorail Projects from foreign countries. The Committee are awar e that monorail is 
easier and cheaper to lay in comparison to metro lines. The monorail can also take 
sharp curves in contrast to the Metro and thus run in densely populated localities as 
it takes lesser area to manoeuvre. Monorail seems a perfect mode for  mass transit 
in congested areas where metro cannot be constructed and roads are too crowded 
for frequent movement of buses. Therefore, keeping in view all the advantages of 

17 
 
Monorail, the Committee strongly recommend Ministry of the Urban Development to 
act as facilitator, provide budgetary allocation from the Union Budget for Monorail 
Projects and facilitate foreign collaboration, if need be, into the Monorail sector so 
as to set up monorail both as a means of feeder system within the bigger metros 
and as well as independent means of transport in Tier II cities." 
 
1.20 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"As per National Urban Transport Policy (NUTP) 2006, the Government of India 
(GoI) supports all kinds of public transport systems which include Mono Rail also. 
However, as urban transport is intertwined with urban development, which is a state 
subject, all urban transport projects are initiated by the State Government. GoI 
would consider Mono Rail projects, as per extant poli cy, as and when such projects 
are posed to GoI by the State Government." 
 
1.21 Keeping in view all the advantages of Monorail, the Committee had 
desired  the Ministry of Urban Development to act as facilitator, provide 
budgetary allocation from the union Budget for Monorail project and facilitate 
foreign collaboration, if need be int o the Monorail sector. However, the reply 
of the Ministry is silent about the steps taken by the Ministry as per the 
recommendation. The Committee note the stereotyped  casual reply that  the 
Government of India support s all kinds of public transport system including 
monorail as per National Urban Transport Policy(NUTP) 2006. The Committee 
accept that the  Urban Transport is intertwined with urban development which 
is a State subject and all urban transport projects are t o be initiated by the 
State Government. However, they desire the Ministry of Urban De velopment 
that being the nodal C entral Ministry it should pursue and motivate all the 
State Governments to come forward with proposals for monorail system and 
intimate the m about the concrete steps being initiated/proposed to be 
initiated in this direction . 
Recommendation (Serial No.12) 
STRENGTHENING AND PROVIDING EXTRA BUDGETARY SUPPORT FOR 
FEEDER BUS SYSTEM 
1.22 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee knew that Delhi Metro may have provided a quick, reliable and 
comfortable public transport to travel around the city and NCR but reaching the 
Metro station from offices and homes and back continues to be a challenge. With a 
poor para-transit and feeder bus system in place, the last mile connectivity is one of 
the biggest issues that metro commuters face.  On being enquired about the details 

18 
 
of allocation/ expenditure of funds in last 5 years and the steps being taken to 
strengthen the feeder bu s system, pedestrian pathways and cycling tracks with 
metro rail system in the States, Ministry of Urban Development stated that feeder 
Service and Non -motorized transport have been made as a part of Condition of 
Sanction and the provisions of feeder servi ces, Last Mile Connectivity and Non -
Motorized Transport (NMT) are covered in DPRs, which is funded by this Ministry.  
For Delhi Metro Rail Corporation, Ministry has sanctioned 228 buses under the 
JnNURM Scheme for feeder services at an estimated cost of Rs . 45 crores, in 
which Government of India share is Rs.15.96 crore and till date Rs.6.23 crores have 
been released."  The Committee are anguished to note that Ministry has sanctioned 
only 228 buses under JNNURM for feeder services. Since the year 2013-14, the no. 
of feeder buses has remained the same. The Committee are not happy with the 
state of affairs of feeder bus service in Delhi because of which commuters are left at 
the mercy of over -charging auto and cycle rickshaws to reach their final 
destinations. The Committee are of the considered opinion that time has come for 
the agencies concerned to join hands and come up with an effective feeder system 
connecting Metro stations with residential and commercial places. Keeping all these 
factors in view, the Co mmittee recommend for allocating separate funds for feeder 
bus services to increase the no. of feeder buses adequately to the make public 
transport more comfortable. " 
 
1.23 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"This is to inform that the transition phase of Bus Funding Scheme under Jawaharlal 
National Urban Renewal Mission (JnNURM) has come to an end on 31 st March, 
2014. 
  
Ministry of Urban Development has recently launched a new scheme namely Atal 
Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) wherein Urban 
Transport is an eligible component for funding from Govt. of India, However, as per 
the guidelines, it is up to the State / Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) to decide and 
prioritize their projects among all the eligi ble components such as water supply, 
sewerage, septage, storm water drainage, Urban Transport, Green space and parks, 
reforms management & support, capacity building etc. as per their requirement and 
submit their State Annual Action Plan (SAAP) to MoUD. 
  
Further Ministry of Urban Development vide its letter No. K -14011/1/2007-UT-IV 
dated 30th August, 2013, issued an advisory/circular stating that all the ToR as well 
as DPR of the MRTS Projects/proposal shall include feeder buses, public bike 
sharing and pe destrianisation in the influence zone of the stations in the project‟s 
cost in the DPR. Even the existing DPRs should be revised to provide for the feeder 
systems, wherever these have not been provided for." 
 
 
 
 

19 
 
1.24  According to the Ministry, the transition phase of Bus Funding Scheme 
under Jawaharlal National Urban Renewal Mission (JnNURM) has come to an 
end on 31 st March, 2014 and A tal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban 
Transformation (AMRUT) scheme has been launched  wherein Urban Transport 
is an eligible component for funding from Govt. of India. The Committee also 
note that Ministry of Urban Development vide its letter No. K -14011/1/2007-UT-
IVdated 30 th August, 2013, issued an advisory/circular stating that all the 
Terms of Reference (ToR) as well as DPR of the MRTS Projects/proposal shall 
include feeder buses, public bike sharing and pedestrianisation in the 
influence zone of the stations in the project’s cost  in the DPR. B ut the 
Committee are constrained to note  that under Delhi Metro Rail Corporation, 
Ministry has sanctioned 228 buses under the JnNURM Scheme for feeder 
services at an estimated cost of Rs. 45 crores, in which  share of Government 
of India is Rs.15.96 crore of which  till date  only Rs.6.23 crores have been 
released.  The Committee are anguished to note that Ministry has sanctioned 
only 228 buses under JNNURM for feeder services and the no. of feeder buses 
has remained the same  since the year 2013 -14. The  Committee, therefore  
reiterated their earlier recommendation that time  has come for the agencies 
concerned to join hands and come up with an effective feeder system 
connecting Metro stations with residential and commercial places  and allocate 
sufficient funds and increase the number of feeder buses adequately to make 
public transport more comfortable. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.18) 
ADEQUATE ALLOCATION OF FUNDS FOR EXPANSION OF PARLIAMENT 
HOUSE ANNEXE BUILDING 
1.25  The Committee had recommended as under: 
 "During the scrutiny of Detailed Demand for Grants(UD) 2015 -16, the Committee 
observed that the estimated cost of work of Parliament Civil Work Zone(PCWZ) is 
Rs. 163.06 crore and actual expenditure during the year 2013 -14 and 2014 -15 is 
Rs. 99.75 crore. Dur ing the current financial year 2015 -16, BE for PCWZ is Rs. 
17.68 crore.  The Committee found that the estimated cost of Parliamentary Electric 
Work Zone(PEWZ) is Rs. 80.13 crore. The expenditure during financial year 2013 -
14 and 2014 -15 is Rs. 30.53 crore.  The Budget estimate for current financial year 
for PEWZ is Rs. 20.13 crore. The Committee came to know that the building is 

20 
 
expected to be completed in 2015. The Committee feel that with the huge pendency 
of work and the short span of time left for comple tion of work, the amount allocated 
for civil and electric work of extension of Parliament House Annexe Building is 
meagre. With this allocation, the entire building work cannot be completed. 
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that adequate budgeta ry allocation 
should be provided for completion of the Parliament House Annexe Building at the 
earliest, so as to adhere to the expected timelines of delivery. "   
 
1.26 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"The budget allotment for Parliament House Annexe Building for the financial year 
2015-16 under the relevant head of account is ₹41.10 crore. The total requirement 
of budget under this head of account is ₹90 crore. The Ministry of Finance will be 
requested to provide adequate budgetary allocation for the work by way of 
supplementary grant. " 
1.27 The Committee are apprised that Ministry of Urban Development will 
request Ministry of Finance to provide ad equate budgetary allocation by way 
of supp lementary grant for completion of extension of Parliament House 
Annexe Building. Since, this project has  been over -delayed, the Committee  
while reiterating emphasize upon  the Ministry to take up this matter at the 
Ministerial level to provide the required budgetary  allocations at the 
supplementary grant positively under intimation to them. 
Recommendation (Serial No.29) 
 
NEED TO ENSURE BALANCED URBANIZATION OF THE CITY OF 
CHANDIGARH  
1.28 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"It has been observed by the Committee that State Government of Punjab had 
sanctioned 50 acres of land right behind the Capital Complex i.e. zero kilometer 
from the periphery of Chandigarh. Initially this area was given to the MLAs of the 
Punjab legislature for construction of “Punjab MLAs Society” wherein these MLAs 
were allotted the said land for construction of their residential houses/dwelling units. 
Under dubious circumstances the land of the Society spreading over 52 acres has 
been transferred/sold to the Tata Housing Camelot Company on an understanding 
between them that each member of the legislative assembly who was a member of 
the Punjab MLAs Society would be given some incentives. This Company will 
buildbuildings as high as 35 stories which are to c ome up in the entire area of 52 
acres thereby completely obstructing the view of the Shivalik Hills with a unnatural 
and concrete barrier between the Capital Complex and the hills, and in complete 
defiance of the original planning as conceived by Le Corbusier. This area falls in the 
eco-fragile northern part of Chandigarh. The Project allegedly falls in the catchment 

21 
 
areas of Sukhna Lake in union territory of Chandigarh and is in close proximity of 
wild life sanctuary declared as a reserve forest area. If t he land and its surrounding 
areas are allowed to be urbanized, it will result in the degradation of the habitat and 
disturb thousands of migratory birds which come every year to the Sukhna Lake. 
2.  The Committee came to know that in the year 1972 a Commit tee was set up 
by the Government of India, Ministry of Works and Housing to guide and co -
ordinate the growth of Chandigarh and the urban centers coming up in the 
neighborhood of Chandigarh for the balanced development of the region falling 
within the influ ence zone of Chandigarh.  The Secretary of the then Ministry of 
works and Housing, Government of India was the Chairman of that Committee. In 
this connection on being asked to state whether the Ministry of Urban Development 
have been consulted by the Punja b Government/Haryana Government or the 
Advisor of Union Territory of Chandigarh, the type of monitoring mechanism 
available with the Ministry of Urban Development with regard to balanced 
urbanization of the city of Chandigarh, to study its developmental pl an, to access 
the impact of the development programmes already implemented and those being 
implemented in the township and preparing an outline of the regional plan for 
Chandigarh and the urban areas falling within its zone of influence, the Ministry has 
submitted that the matter of allotment of land is a State subject. This Ministry was 
not required to be consulted in this matter and therefore, no such consultation was 
done. They further stated that allotment of land do not fall under thepurview of the 
co-ordination Committee. 
3. The Committee are apprised that the role of the Co -Ordination of the 
Committee is to attempt amicably resolve the issues of Co -Ordination in urban 
planning between the two States of Haryana, Punjab and Union Territory of 
Chandigarh. The Constitution of the Committee was through an executive order and 
the role of the Committee are advisory in nature. Because of this despite 26 
meetings of the Committee held so far there has not been any tangible outcome. In 
the last meeting held on 2 7th March, 2015, the State Government of Haryana had 
raised the issue that Co -Ordination Committee has no statutory mandate for the 
preparation of Inter State regional plan for Chandigarh. In view of the above the 
Committee are pained to note that the Ministry of Urban Development has not taken 
up this issue at the Cabinet level to examine such issues.  The Committee are of 
the view that because of absence of statutory power of the Co -Ordination 
Committee the State Government/UTs are ducking the issues and violating the 
master plan and Inter -State regional plan, thereby such type of instances have 
occurred. Therefore, the Committee strongly desire the Ministry of Urban 
Development to take up such matters with the Cabinet to explore the ways and 
means to strengthen the power and functions of the Co -Ordination Committee. The 
Committee further desire that such Co -Ordination Committee should have the 
power to monitor and oversee the balanced urbanization of the City of the 
Chandigarh and its nearby areas and to a ccess the impact of development 
programmes already implemented and those being implemented in the township on 
the surrounding eco-system." 
1.29 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"Land is a State subject. The Coordination Committee was constituted through an 
executive order and terms of references of the Coordination Committee are 
advisory in nature. The role of the Coordination Committee is to attempt to amicably 
resolve issues of coordination in urban planning between the two States of Haryana 

22 
 
and Punjab and the Union Territory of Chandigarh. The Coordination Committee 
has only an advisory role in the matter of preparation of Master Plan or the Inter 
State Regional Plan. It is for the respective State Governments and Union Territory 
administration to take necessary action for the planned development under the 
relevant State Statutes." 
 
1.30      The Committee were apprised that in the year 1972    a Committee 
was set up by the Gover nment of India, Ministry of Works and Housing to 
guide and co -ordinate the growth of Chandigarh and the urban centers 
coming up in the neighborhood of Chandigarh for the balanced development 
of the region falling within the influence zone of Chandigarh.  The Committee 
were of the opinion that State Governments/UTs were ducking the issue s 
because of absence of statutory  powers with the coordination Committee.  
The Committee  had desired that Co -Ordination Committee should have the 
power to monitor and overse e the balanced urbanization of the City of the 
Chandigarh and its nearby areas and to access the impact of development 
programmes already implemented and those being implemented in the 
township on the surrounding eco -system. The Committee do not buy the 
argument of the Ministry that land is a State subject. The Coordination 
Committee was constituted through an executive order and terms of 
references of the Coordination Committee are advisory in nature. The role of 
the Coordination Committee is to attempt to  amicably resolve issues of 
coordination in urban planning between the two States of Haryana and 
Punjab and the Union Territory of Chandigarh. The Coordination Committee 
has only an advisory role in the matter of preparation of Master Plan or the 
Inter Sta te Regional Plan. It is for the respective State Governments and 
Union Territory administration to take necessary action for the planned 
development under the relevant State Statutes.  
 The Ministry's reply is silent with regard to the recommendation of the 
Committee for taking up this matter with the Cabinet to explore the ways and 
means to strengthen the Co -ordination Committee. Therefore, the Committee  
emphatically reiterate its earlier recommendation and desire to furnish action 
taken in this regard at the earliest. 
   

23 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.1) 
 
UNDER UTILISATION OF PLAN OUTLAY FOR THE D/O URBAN 
DEVELOPMENT UNDER DEMAND NO.101: 
2.1 The Committee observe that Demand No. 104 pertains to the Department of 
Urban Development. During the year 2014-15, the allocation at BE for the plan side 
is Rs. 16508.09 crore. This has been reduced to Rs. 10,000 crore at RE stage.  The 
difference between BE and RE is Rs. 6508.09 crore. The Actual expenditure is Rs. 
7913. 91 crore. The Committee note that Rs. 2086.09 core has remained unutilized. 
The allocation at BE during the year 2015 -16 is Rs. 16832.20 crore. There is an 
increase of  only Rs 324.11 crore. The Committee are concerned to note that 
lowering of the RE provision attributes to  slow progress of the work pertaining to 
other Ministries whose allocations has been included in the Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry of Urban Deve lopment. The concern of adverse effects on various 
metro project as well as other ongoing schemes due to reduction has been taken up 
with the Ministry of Finance at appropriate level. 
As per the Mckinsey Global Institute report (2010) on India‟s Urban 
Awakening, building inclusive cities, sustaining economic growth, 1.2 trillion dollars 
is required as capital investment for meeting the projected demand in Indian Cities. 
The Committee learned that Ministry of Urban Development provided financial 
assistance t o the States /UTs, ULBs towards urban infrastructure development in 
selected 65 mission cities during the period 2010 -15. The funding was only for 
permissible sectors and for selected cities. Urban development is a State subject 
and State Governments and U LBs will also generate resources through other 
means like State budgetary support, loan and external funding etc. Therefore, the 
gap between demand and service can be fulfilled through State resources, private 
sector funding and external borrowing/assistan ce etc. However, the Committee 
observe that all the State  
All State Governments are not equally progressive. The State Governments 
could avail the benefits of the schemes where there were robust urban local bodies 

24 
 
and where there was   better implementati on of urban reforms. The Committee are 
distressed to note that in many States the important schemes of the Ministry like 
JNNURM, Urban mobility and Urban Development in North Eastern States are not 
successful because of lack of capacity building of the ULB s.  Many projects 
remained incomplete even after spending of thousands of crores. It was a 
monumental wastage of public money.  
The   Mckinsey Global Institute report (2010) was also of the view that a 
country should have futuristic planning, anticipate de mand and invest sufficient 
resources to build service for citizens. However, in India investment in urban 
development is based on constant catch -up rather than a futuristic planning. There 
is adhocism in the planning process and funding pattern. In countri es around the 
world Governments have devised mechanism to ensure cities to have reliable 
access to funds, internally generated and externally supported. Developing 
countries have used land monetization and debt quite extensively to fund their 
urban infrastructure. China has monetized its land assets and converted many of its 
big projects into Special -Purpose-Vehicle (SPV). The Committee are informed by 
the Ministry that in addition to Government Grants, the Smart Cities Mission and 
National Urban Rejuvenati on Mission will incentivize States and ULBs to expand 
internally generated revenues, access external sources, such as bonds, private 
sector funds (e.g., PPPs) and rely on other innovative financial tools. Importantly, 
larger devolution of funds due to acce ptance of the recommendations of the 14 th 
Finance Commission are likely to increase the availability of funds with the ULBs 
and make the allocations more transparent and formula based. Finally, the Mission 
design is also considering establishment of SPVs, financial intermediaries and to 
make State Finance Commissions more effective. 
The Committee are constrained to note that the JNNURM has finally come to 
an end w.e.f., 15 March, 2015. The mission components of Smart City and National 
Urban Rejuvenation Mis sion are yet to be finalized by the Central Government. At 
this pace the Committee are of the opinion that long term futuristic plans for urban 
development is still a distant dream. Therefore, they wish to recommend the 
Government to finalize the mission c omponent in a time bound manner to stop 
adhocism. The Committee are of the view that the need of the hour is to strengthen 
the ULBs by (i) enhancing the budgetary allocation of the Ministry of Urban 

25 
 
Development at RE stage (ii) providing 100% grants to the  financially weaker ULBs 
for their capacity development,(iii) imparting training to the personnel working in the 
ULBs (iv) sharing the success stories of strong ULBs like Mumbai and 
Hyderabad(v) monetizing land assets and (vi) proper implementation of Urba n 
Reforms. The Committee strongly feel that these measures will definitely go a long 
way to generate more funds for urban development programmes.  These measures 
will also help the Ministry, State Governments and UTs to implement the schemes 
in a true spirit and thereby stop reduction of allocations at RE stage.  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
2.2   (i) The Actual Plan expenditure in financial year 2014 -15 under Demand 
No. 104-Urban Development is ₹9980.11 crore against RE of ₹10,000 crore which 
is 99.8 % of RE. In respect of Smart Cities a Token provision was made during 
2014-15 for the Mission for Development of 100 Smart Cities and no expenditure 
could be incurred as the Mission for Development of 100 Smart Cites was approved 
on 29 th April, 2015. The Mission ha s been launched by the Prime Minister on 
25.06.2015 and its guidelines have also been issued. 
(ii) The Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) has 
also been approved on 29.04.2015 by the Government. For the year 2015 -16 
budget provis ion of ₹3966.49 crore has been made. The Mission has been 
launched by the Prime Minister on 25.06.2015 and its guidelines have also been 
issued. 
(iii) In the AMUT Mission Capacity Building will be fully (100%) funded by the 
Government of India as given in para 5.1 of Guidelines. Moreover, a Capacity 
Building strategy has been set out in Guidelines (para -13) and the States/ Cities 
have to prepare Annual Capacity Building Plan (Annexure-7of the Guidelines). 
(iv)  The MoUD will upload the success stories on the website and inform States. 
(v) Land monetization is a tool for generating revenues in Smart Cities Mission 
(para 11.3(i) of the Guidelines) 
(vi) The AMRUT Mission contains a set of Urban Reforms (para 12 of the 
Guidelines) and incentivising them by setti ng aside 10% of fund for incentive. 

26 
 
Moreover, Reforms are also part of State Annual Action Plans (Annexure -2 of the 
Guidelines). 
As regards Capacities Development, the valuable suggestions of the Hon‟ble 
Committee have been noted and made part of the guide lines of Capacity 
Development Plan. 
Recommendation (Serial No.2) 
 
NATIONAL CAPITAL REGIONAL PLANNING BOARD (NCRPB):WAVING OF 
GUARANTEE FEE 
2.3 During the  FY 2012 -13, an amount of Rs.55.00 crore had been approved 
and released by Government of India against which Rs. 637.05 crore has been 
incurred  which includes loan of Rs. 418.51 crore disbursed to the State Govt./ their 
implementing agencies. During the  FY 2013 -14, an amount of Rs.60.00 crore had 
been approved and released by Government of India against which Rs. 643.76 
crore has been incurred  which includes loan of Rs. 355.44 crore disbursed to the 
State Govt./ their implementing agencies. Du ring the  FY 2014 -15, an amount of 
Rs.80.00 crore had been approved as BE against which Rs.62.00 crore have been 
released by Government of India against which Rs. 383.73 crore has been incurred  
which includes loan of Rs. 206.22 crore disbursed to the Stat e Govt./ their 
implementing agencies upto December,2014. The expenditure incurred in excess of 
the budgetary support was met out of the Internal and Extra Budgetary (I&EBR) 
sources of the Board.  As on 31.12.2014, total debt outstanding on account of 
domestic market borrowing is Rs.1100 crore and Rs. 494.72 crore loan from 
multilateral and bi -lateral agencies. Keeping in view huge dependency of NCRPB 
on the Internal and extra Budgetary sources of the Board and huge outstanding 
debt on account of domestic bo rrowing of Rs. 1100 crore and Rs. 494.7 crore loan 
from multilateral and bilateral agencies, the Committee in their earlier reports have 
been recommending to waive of the guarantee fee to enable NCRPB to raise the 
requisite loan from the multilateral aid a gencies. The Committee are informed that 
this matter was taken up with D/o Economic affairs and Budget Division of the M/o 
Finance. The Committee are informed by the Ministry that in the past, Budget 
Division had agreed for reduction/ waiver of guarantee fee provided the PSU is sick, 
Cabinet approval has been obtained that the reduction of Guarantee fee is passed 

27 
 
onto the end consumer. In view of the above, the Ministry of Urban Development 
again took up the matter with the Ministry of Finance. NCRPB has su bmitted that 
the loan from ADB and KFW is a direct loan to NCRPB and not pass through 
assistance. All risks i.e. interest rate and currency rate fluctuation attached to these 
loans are being borne by NCRPB. It further submitted that if the Government is no t 
in a position to waive the entire guarantee fee, they may fix the guarantee fee to 
minimum extent to fund the guarantee redemption fund. Further NCRPB is an 
autonomous body created under an act of Parliament i.e. NCRPB Act 1985 with a 
mandate to provide financial assistance to the participating State Government 
departments, Urban Local Bodies, Development Authorities and other parastatals 
for physical and social infrastructure development projects. Board is charging low 
interest on these long tenure loans  so as to provide assistance for large number of 
physical & social infrastructure development projects. As such the benefits of 
reduction of guarantee fee is passed on to end consumers by providing soft loans to 
the participating State Governments and their implementing agencies for basic civic 
amenities. In view of the above clarifications, the Ministry of Urban Development 
has requested the Ministry of Finance to waive the guarantee fee on loan availed by 
NCRPB from bilateral/Multilateral agencies. Keeping in view all these facts provided 
by the Ministry of Urban Development, the Committee strongly recommend for 
waving of guarantee fee so as to enable NCRPB to raise the requisite loan from 
Multilateral Aid Agencies.  
Reply of the Government 
2.4 Regarding w aiving of guarantee fee, the proposal was sent by Ministry of 
Urban Development to Ministry of Finance for their consideration who had raised 
certain queries. Detailed clarifications/ justifications on these queries have been 
forwarded to the Ministry of F inance for consideration/ approval by them for waiving 
of guarantee fees. The decision to waive guarantee fee is to be taken by Ministry of 
Finance. 
2.5 For comments see para no. 1.7 of Chapter I.   

28 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.4) 
 
CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION PLANNING 
BOARD 
2.6 The Committee note that the National Capital Region Planning Board 
(NCRPB) has modest project development and appraisal capacities. Though 
NCRPB prepares the regional plan and financial projects but it suffers from lack of 
in-house capacity for project app raisal, monitoring and evaluation. The Committee 
are surprised that there is only one man window system for promoting project 
formulation and development, project evaluation, monitoring of project 
implementation due to which feedback become insufficient. T his led to outsourcing 
of some of the project appraisal to the National level Institutions. The process of the 
project appraisal is time consuming. Moreover perusal of few reports revealed gaps 
in projects appraisal. The Committee has taken note of the sub mission by the 
Ministry that the Asian Development Bank (ADB) had approved an advisory 
Technical Assistance (TA) for Capacity Development for the NCRPB in the area of 
planning and financing of urban infrastructure and to impart necessary skills to 
conceive, design, develop, appraise and implement good quality infrastructure 
projects for planned development of the NCR.  As a part of capacity building 
programmes, the ADB Technical Assistance Consultants have prepared Master 
Plans for a few selected towns of N CR in areas of water supply, waste water, 
drainage and solid waste management which have been uploaded on NCRPB 
website for use by the stakeholders. In addition to the existing staff of NCRPB i.e. 
Finance and Project Wings, the services of Project Management Consultancy under 
ADB and KfW Technical Assistance Programmes are being availed to appraise, 
monitor and evaluate the various projects under the financial assistance of NCRPB.  
The services of National Institutions are also being availed on need basis. The 
Committee are of the considered view that NCRPB should train and enhance the 
capacities of staff so as to impart them necessary skills to conceive, develop, praise 
and implement good quality infrastructure projects for planned development of the 
NCR.  
 

29 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.7 NCRPB has informed that it is regularly conducting training programmes to 
improve the capacity of staff under the Technical Assistance of Asian Development 
Bank and KfW.  Officers/ Staff of NCRPB are being deputed to training programmes 
on Procurement, Environmental and Social Safeguards, DPR preparation etc. 
Officers are also being nominated for training programmes/ study tours for a 
comprehensive understanding of national and international best practices from time 
to time und er the Technical Assistance programmes. All efforts are being made to 
train and enhance the capacity of NCRPB staff, so as to impart them necessary skills 
to conceive, develop, appraise and implement good quality infrastructure projects for 
planned development of the National Capital Region. 
Recommendation (Serial No.5) 
 
CREATE ADDITIONAL POSTS IN NCRPB 
2.8 The Committee are also apprised that NCRPB has huge work load on its 
existing staff. Ministry of Urban Development has also accepted that NCRPB has a 
meagre staff strength of only 51 posts.  Over a period of time, the Board‟s activities 
have increased mani fold in respect of financing and monitoring of project 
implementation.  Although, the responsibility of implementation of the projects 
financed by the NCRPB lies with the concerned agencies of the State 
Governments, closer monitoring and follow up of such projects by NCRPB is very 
essential for timely utilization of funds and completion of projects. In 2011, Ministry 
of Urban Development has approved the creation of five temporary posts to function 
as Project Management Unit (PMU) of NCRPB after the due app roval of Ministry of 
Finance.  Two Posts were revived by Ministry of Urban Development  in 2013 after 
the due approval of Ministry of Finance.  A proposal for creation of additional posts 
has already been forwarded to Ministry of Urban Development  in 2012.  Therefore, 
the Committee strongly recommend that Ministry of Urban Development should 
provide strategic methods for addressing present and anticipated workforce issues 
and at the same time should create additional posts in NCRPB with immediate 
effect. 

30 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.9 NCRPB submitted a proposal for creation of 39 additional posts to the Ministry 
in 2012.  Subsequently, the proposal was forwarded to Ministry of Finance who 
raised certain queries. NCRPB forwarded detailed clarifications/ justifications on the 
queries raised by the Ministry of Finance, and the same have been forwarded to the 
Ministry of Finance for seeking their approval in the matter. 
2.10  For comments see para no. 1.13 of Chapter I. 
Recommendation (Serial No.6) 
 
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT  
2.11 The Committee become anguished with the status of Solid Waste 
Management in most of Urban Cities and Metropolitan cities. The Committee came 
to know that Ministry of Urban Development has a target of 4041 statutory towns in 
which there are ambitious plans of Solid Waste Management. There are two 
components of Solid Waste Management first are collection and transportation and 
second is scientific disposal.  As of now most of the Solid Waste are going into land 
fill sites without any treatment. The Committee are happy to note that Ministry of 
Urban Development is working on a policy, "Waste to Health" which will be part of 
Swach Bharat Mission. Deliberations with the stakeholders which produces 
compost and generate power from Solid  Waste has been completed. The 
Committee came to know that there is no tariff fixed for the power generated from 
waste by Central Electricity Regulatory Mission. In Madhya Pradesh and Uttar 
Pradesh there is a tariff fixed on Bio -Gas. Ministry of Urban Deve lopment has 
already taken up matter of determining the generic tariff for the Waste to power. 
The Committee are of the considered opinion that Ministry of Urban Development 
should take special interest in case of Solid Waste Management and expediting 
determination of generic tariff in the case of generation of power from Waste.  
 
 

31 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.12 As regard to Solid Waste Management, Ministry is working on policy 
interventions for compost and Waste to Energy as under: 
 
"As regard to compost, a m eeting of the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) with the 
concerned Ministries was held in the Cabinet Secretariat, Rashtrapati Bhawan on 
13th May, 2015, for promotion of city compost.  Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers 
has agreed that market development a ssistance in the form of fixed subsidy of 
₹1500 per MT will be given to promote selling city compost and that this subsidy 
will be absorbed in the existing budget of the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers. 
It has also been agreed that Fertilizer Marketi ng Companies will be encouraged to 
market the Compost along with Chemical Fertilizers. 
 
As regard to Waste to Energy, Solid Waste Association has recently applied to 
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) for fixing Generic Tariff for solid 
waste to electricity. Ministry has also pursued the matter with CERC vide letter D.O. 
No.Q-15014/2/2009-CPHEEO dated 27.03.2015 to expedite the fixation of generic 
tariff for Waste to Energy. CERC has started the process for determination of 
generic tariff for Waste to Energy plants and requested Ministry of Urban 
Development for further information and the process is likely to be completed soon." 
Recommendation (Serial No.7) 
 
SMOOTH TRAVEL IN NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION  
2.13 The Committee feel that smooth and seamless movement of Inter -state 
traffic in the National Capital Region is dire need of the hour and efforts is required 
to make it unrestricted and commuters friendly. The Committee note that NCRPB 
pursued with its const ituent States for signing of “Reciprocal Common Transport 
Agreement” for „Contract Carriage‟ and „Stage & Goods Carriage‟ for unrestricted/ 
seamless travel in NCR to facilitate general public. The “Reciprocal Common 
Transport Agreement” for “Contract Carri age” among the NCR States was signed 
on 14.10.08. Under this Agreement, all the participating States of NCR agreed to 
abolish passenger tax from Autos and Taxis. Only Govt. of NCT -Delhi is yet to 
abolish the MCD Entry Tax of NCR Registered Contract Carriag e Vehicles. The 
Committee became appraised that National Capital Region Planning 

32 
 
Board(NCRPB) requested the NCR participating States to provide the status of 
implementation of the Reciprocal Common Transport Agreement among 
Governments of NCT-Delhi, Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh for unrestricted 
movement of vehicles in NCR for “Contract Carriage” and “Stage Carriage” vides 
letters dated 22.09.2014, 23.09.2014, 05.01.2015, 19.01.2015. GNCT -Delhi has 
informed vide their letter dated 29.01.2015 that the y are regularly issuing NCT 
permits as well as counter signing the permits to taxis/radio taxis who intend to ply 
their vehicle in NCR.  GNCT -Delhi has also informed that they are in the process to 
issue the NCR Auto Rickshaw Permits for Haryana and UP.  However, the 
Committee are dismayed with the hollowness in the official claims of working out a 
transport plan for smooth connectivity between Delhi and its  neighbours – Gautam 
Budh Nagar  (Noida), Ghaziabad and Gurgaon. Buses may have been plying 
between these cities but auto -rickshaws, the preferred mode for many commuters 
and taxis (except for radio taxis) stay away because of jurisdictional issues and 
harsh penalties. Therefore, the Committee strongly reiterate their  earlier 
recommendation that the NCRPB and Govt. of Delhi and other adjoining States 
should take quick decisions relating to critical activities and resolve inter -state 
issues/matters for early implementation of this agreement i.e., Reciprocal Common 
Transport Agreement” for „Contract Carriage‟ and „Stage & Goods Carriage‟ for 
unrestricted travel in NCR to facilitate general public.  The M inistry of Urban 
Development may also pursue the matter vigorously.  
Reply of the Government 
2.14  Inter-state movement of vehicles is governed by Motor Vehicle Act, 1988. NCR 
Planning Board facilitated signing of the „Reciprocal Common Transport Agreement‟ 
for „Contract Carriage‟ & „Stage Carriage‟. Board has been pursuing with the 
participating States to expedite the implementation of both the Agreements. As per 
the information available with the Board received from the participating States, about 
12,000 NCR Taxis are operational.  
Subsequent to Board‟s earlier letters, Board vide letter dated 14.05.20 15, again 
requested the NCR participating States to provides the status of implementation of 
the said Agreement. Govt. of NCT Delhi vide letter dated 11.06.2015, has intimated 
that GNCT Delhi has started issuing Auto rickshaw/TSR permits for NCR -Haryana 
State as well as NCR – UP State as per Reciprocal Common Transport Agreement 

33 
 
dated 14.08.2008. It has further been informed that 1257 applicants have been found 
eligible for NCR Haryana permits and 1068 vehicles have been registered as on 
date.  Similarly 24 18 applicants have been found eligible for NCR UP permits and 
339 vehicles have been registered as on date. 
GNCT Delhi has also informed vide the said letter dated 11.06.2015 that only 177 
TSR (Auto-rickshaw) owners registered in Uttar Pradesh have approached this office 
for endorsement of permit for Delhi. As regards, Haryana, since the state has not 
imposed the conditions of mandatory installation of GPS and Electronic Fare devices 
in the TSRs no applications for endorsement by the TSR owners registered i n 
Haryana have been received till date. Incidentally in Delhi integrated fare meters are 
installed in Auto rickshaws. 
Govt. of U.P., vide letter dated 02.06.2015, informed that 42 permits on 14 routes 
between Uttar Pradesh and NCT Delhi have been obtained by Uttar Pradesh State 
Road Transport Corporation (UPSRTC), as against 575 permits on 90 routes 
between Uttar Pradesh and NCT Delhi, 135 permits on 30 routes between Uttar 
Pradesh and Haryana, 09 permits on 03 routes between Uttar Pradesh and 
Rajasthan as per the Reciprocal Common Transport Agreement among NCR 
participating State Governments for Unrestricted Movement of Vehicle in the NCR 
(Stage Carriage), 2010. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.10) 
 
CITY- LEVEL UNIFIED METROPOLITAN TRANSPORT AUTHORITY FOR ALL 
ONE MILLION PLUS CITIES 
2.15 The Committee are apprised that as per thereport of Planning Commission's 
Working Group on Urban Transport for 12th Five Year Plan , there is no legislation 
at present that covers the requirements of urban transport comprehensively . The 
Committee became aware that the Motor Vehicles Act deals with the licensing of 
vehicles, Railway Act covers inter -city traffic, Metro Construction Act deals with the 
specific issues related to construction of the metro rail, Tramways Act deals with 
tramways within the road surface with free access across it. Other modes of mass 
rapid transit such as the bus rapid transit, the light rail transit, the mono rail and 
several other guided modes of transport and issues of transport planning, multi -

34 
 
modal int egration, safety, tariff and financing are not covered under any Act. UT 
plans have to be implemented over a period of time and hence require continuity. 
The Committee are of the considered opinion that an agency needs to be made 
responsible for providing legislative support to take care of these and several other 
aspects. A comprehensive UT Act to cover all aspects of urban transport is 
essential. The Committee were enlightened by the Ministry of Urban Development 
that they are promoting setting up of a ci ty-level Unified Metropolitan Transport 
Authority (UMTA) for all one million plus cities, duly backed by a legislation, to 
facilitate coordinated planning and implementation of projects relating to urban 
transport and their integrated management. Further, under the World Bank -Global 
Environment Facility (GEF) -UNDP assisted, Sustainable Urban Transport Project 
(SUTP), Ministry has awarded consultancy to the  Joint Venture of Deloitte Touche 
Tohmatsu India Private Limited and Voyants Solutions Private Limited  for 
developing operations documents for Urban Metropolitan Transport Authority 
(UMTA) with the following objectives: 
 Recommend design and structure an appropriate UMTA relevant to the 
 Indian context and existing governance system.   The UMTA shall be 
set up  by way of model legislation and would replace existing multiple 
authorities  that are involved in administering the public  transport. 
 Help develop comprehensive operations manual for the UMTA in English & 
later in the official language of the States/UTs, if required. 
The consultant will develop Generic Operation Documents & Draft 
Legislation for establishing UMTA and City specific UMTA document for 8 selected 
cities namely Bhopal, Kochi, Ahmedabad -Gandhi Nagar, Hyderabad, Vijaywada, 
Tiruchirapalli, Jaipur and Lucknow. 
The Committee are happy to note that Ministry of Urban Development has 
started working to set up city-level Unified Metropolitan Transport Authority (UMTA) 
for all one million plus cities.Hence the Committee strongly recommend that Ministry 
of Urban Development should expedite constitution of all city level unified 
metropolitan transport authority(UMTA) so as to facilitate co -ordinate planning and 
implementation of projects relating to urba n transport and their integrated 
management within a time bound manner under intimation to the Committee.  
 

35 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.16 Ministry of Urban Development, while sanctioning the bus funding projects 
during transition phase of JnNURM, has made mandatory to set up a Unified 
Metropolitan Transport Authority for all Million plus cities.  
 
Further, under Sustainable Urban Transport P roject (SUTP), following steps have 
been taken for constitution of city level Unified Metropolitan Transport Authority 
(UMTA) so as to facilitate co -ordinate planning and implementation of projects 
relating to urban transport and their integrated management within a time bound: 
 
(i) The works is in advance stage for finalization of Draft Operation & Process 
Manual and Legislation of UMTA.  
(ii) Ministry has empaneled 7 consultants for assisting the Cities/States for 
setting up of UMTA, if required.   
(iii) Draft legislati on of UMTA for the city of Bhopal and Kochi has been 
prepared and shared with respective State Govt. /City Authorities.  For 
other cities continuous follow up is being done.  
 
It may be mentioned that Urban Transport is intertwined with Urban Development 
which is a State Subject, therefore, the onus is on the State/cities to set up the 
UMTA at city level.  
Recommendation (Serial No.13) 
 
STANDARDIZATION AND INDIGENIZATION OF METRO RAIL SYSTEM. 
 
2.17 The Committee observe with satisfaction that for manufacturing of metro rail 
system, Bombardier a Canadian Company, Alstom, a French Company have set up 
their firms in Vadodara and Sri City respectively. These Companies are providing 
jobs to Indian citizens. The Committee welcome the setting up of such c ompanies. 
However, they understand that due to adversarial tax methods adopted on the 
Nokia India in Chennai, the Company was compelled to close its manufacturing 
hub, and as a result 15000 people lost their jobs. Keeping in view the above 
instance, the Co mmittee desire the Ministry to take up the matter with the Ministry 
of Finance to ensure these companies work in India in a harmonious tax regime 
which is not adversarial and conducive to attracting more such players. 
 

36 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.18 Noted.  However, this Ministry has not received any adversarial tax method 
related issue from the Metro systems manufacturing companies.  Appropriate action 
in the matter will be taken as and when any such issues are received in the 
Ministry. 
Recommendation (Serial No.14) 
 
STRENGTHENING OF BUS TRANSPORT SYSTEM  
2.19 Regarding the Bus transport system in Delhi the Committee are apprised that 
the Urban Transport matter comes under the purview of State/UTs. The initiatives 
therefore has to be taken by the Government of NCT of Delhi. Ministry of Urban 
Development through funding can assist to the State Government. The Committee 
note that for impr oving  the bus transport system in NCT of Delhi, Ministry 
sanctioned 1728 modern intelligent enabled buses (1500 to Delhi and 228 to DMRC 
as feeder services) with the estimated project cost of Rs. 810.00 crore during 2008 -
09 and 2009 -10 under the bus fundi ng scheme which was introduced under 
JnNURM as a stimulus package. Further, Ministry got mandate of sanctioning 
another 10000 buses to cities/cluster of cities in India during the transition phase of 
JnNURM i.e. 2013 -14. Delhi could not get any share in 10 000 as they submitted 
their proposal after 31.03.2014 while the scheme was meant only for 2013 -14. 
Regarding the procurement of buses in Delhi the Committee came to know that 
there is a complete break down on the procurement process of new buses. 
Regarding the status of Bus Transport system in Delhi the Committee were 
apprised that there are cluster buses and DTC buses. DTC currently have 4705 
buses. The proposal of 1380 buses, that is semi -low floor, is under process. But the 
problem here is that the matte r is still under negotiation because they had received 
a single bid. In terms of cluster, they have 1402 buses currently and can induct 
1038 buses immediately provided they get land for the cluster bus depots. For that, 
they have been requesting DDA for th e land. Once land are given, it will take 15 
months to induct 1038 buses from the cluster scheme. Regarding the bidding 

37 
 
process of procurement of buses and the reasons why they are getting a single bid 
and whether they are tailoring the bid in such a way t hat only one company can bid, 
then Ministry of Urban Development stated that the problem in India in general has 
been that urban bus specifications were not evolved in the past. It is only very 
recently in the last few years that the urban bus modern speci fications have been 
evolved. The Committee are very unhappy to note that there are not actually too 
many bus makers in the country which can provide quality low floor or semi -low 
floor buses that are specified in the Government of India specifications. Mos t of the 
cities across India have been facing this kind of problem with buses. The 
Committee are very distressed to note that Tatas and Ashok Leyland are the only 
bus makers. Lack of response from vehicle manufacturers has thus played 
spoilsport. 
 
The Committee are of the considered opinion that expansion  of buses in the 
Transport Department of Delhi are required immediately and at the same time 
strongly recommend that the Ministry of Urban Development should facilitate for 
multiple biddings and compar ative rates from the different Buses Manufacturing 
Companies. The Committee also strongly recommend that DDA should release 
land immediately for cluster bus depots. 
The Committee have been informed that there is lamentable underutilization 
of Low floor bus es. In Faridabad more than 50% of Low floor buses are currently 
standing ideal and not being used. It appears that State Government is unable to 
divert them to a suitable city because of lack of flexibility in norms. The Committee 
feel that there should be  ample space in the joints for the norm/rules to allow them 
to utilize those buses which are excess in numbers in other cities under the same 
project. 
Reply of the Government 
2.20 There are three issues raised in the above recommendation of the Standing 
Committee.  Comments/reply of the Ministry vis-à-vis recommendation are as under: 
 
I) To facilitate Transport Department, Govt. of NCT of Delhi for multiple 
bidding and comparative rates from the different bus manufacturing 
companies: 
  

38 
 
As the officers fro m the Transport Department, Govt. of NCT of Delhi also 
attended the Standing Committee meeting, they were requested to convey the 
measures taken so far for multiple bidding and competitive rates from the 
different Bus Manufacturing Companies. However, no r eply has been 
received from Transport Department so far. 
Further, it is to state that Unban transport is intertwined with the urban 
development which is s State subject. MoUD does not have any mandate to 
facilitate the city in procurement of buses from the ir own resources. GoI, 
MoUD is mainly for making policies, guidelines and issuing advisories in 
consultation with stakeholders for quality bus services in cities.  Ministry has 
taken certain steps to improve the urban transport system in this regard. It 
may also be added that DTC does not come under the purview of MoUD. 
II) To take up with DDA for release of land for cluster bus depots: 
 
As informed by Delhi Development Authority (DDA), the position regarding 
allotment of land for cluster bus depots is as under: 
i) Vasant Kunj:  A land measuring 3.89 ha. has already been allotted to 
Transport Department, GNCTD and part of this land is under encroachment.  
Further, as per decision taken by the Hon‟ble LG on November 11, 2014  an 
alternative site equivalent in area of the litigation portion may be considered in 
this regard.  The alternative site identified at Vasant Square local shopping 
centre is also under litigation.  The land free from encroachment at Vasant 
Kunj shall be considered for setting up of bus depot. 
 
ii) Bus depot site at Sector A -7, Narela measuring 1.99 ha. is being 
considered for the allotment for which the change of land use from PSP to 
Transportation approved in the Authority meeting on 24-4-15. 
 
iii) Recently 8 ha of land has been allotted  to Transport Department, 
GNCTD, near Industrial Area, Rani Khera, Rohini, Ph.V.  The land is already 
handed over to DTC, the change of land use for the site has also been 
notified by Mound on 16th March, 2015. 
iv) About 4 ha of land has been provisionally  allotted to the Transport 
Department for a bus depot in Sector-32, Rohini.  The change of land use has 
been approved in the Authority meeting held on 24 -4-2015.  In addition to 

39 
 
above sites referred in Rohini Project, about 17.12 ha of land has already 
been allotted to Transport Department for bus depot in this project. 
v) 5.0 acres of land for bus depot in Sector 22 Dwarka has been 
earmarked.  The same may be considered for setting up of bus depot at 
Dwarka. 
vi) Allotment of land by DDA to DTC for developm ent of cluster bus 
depot at Karkari More, Zone ‘E’.   Land measuring 6.458 ha (54860 + 9400 
sqm) for construction of integrated passengers‟ terminal (IPT) cum bus depot 
with bus terminal facility and mandatory parking of IPT modes (i.e. 
auto/TSR/taxi/cycle/rickshaw/parking for two wheelers etc.) at Karkari More 
near Karkardooma has already been allotted on 12-2-2015. 
vii) Cluster Bus Depot at Service Centre No.16, Vikas Puri :   In this 
service centre, one plot for cluster bus depot of area measuring around 1 6000 
sqm (4 acreas approx.) is being identified and further action is being taken for 
modification of lay out plan of Service Centre -16, subject to vacation of land 
by PWD which is now being used by PWD for pre-casting yard. 
viii) Bus Depot at Vinod Nagar:    An area measuring 1.84 ha. has been 
earmarked for bus depot after processing the change of land use under 
Section 11 -A of DD Act from „Recreational „to „Transportation‟(bus depot).  
Part of land is sub -judice which forms part of land for bus depot & DMR C 
depot.   MoUD has raised certain queries before final notification of the 
change of land use which is under process. 
 
ix) Cluster Bus Depot at Vasant Kunj :   There is litigation on the land 
measuring 38900 sqm already allotted to Transport Department, GN CTD at 
Vasant Kunj.  In the meeting of Hon‟ble LG held on 11 -11-2014, Hon‟ble LG 
directed that alternative land of equal area at the same price be immediately 
allotted to Transport Department in the vicinity at Planning Zone-J. 
x) Cluster Bus Depot at Okhla (hot mix plant):  Land measuring 5 
acres proposed to be allotted to Transport Department, GNCTD for 
construction of cluster bus depot at Okhla Industrial Area Phase -II is a part of 
hot mix plant of PWD. 
Hot mix plant of PWD was u nder operation and the same was closed 
following the orders of Hon‟ble Supreme Court of India dated 10 -5-1996 in the 

40 
 
matter of M.C. Mehta Vs. Govt. of India and ors. which was regarding closure 
of H(a) and H(b) category of industries as specified in MPD-2001. 
Hon‟ble Supreme Court of India vide order dated 8 -7-1996 and subsequent 
orders in 1A no.22, had identified 1328 „H‟ category industries.  These also 
included 43 hot mix plants, 21 arc. and induction furnace, 246 brick kilns, 
besides hazardous and noxious industries operating in Delhi. 
Therefore, the matter needs to be examined in detail in light of the Hon‟ble 
Supreme Court‟s order dated 10-5-1996 & 8-7-1996. 
 
Chief Secretary, Govt. of NCT of Delhi vide DO letter dated 24 -4-15 
addressed to Vice Chairman  DDA regarding allotment of additional land of 
around 300 acres apart from 200 acres already allotted to Transport 
Department for bus terminal/bus depots has annexed a note wherein the 
details of land matters pending with DDA for decision.  As per the note  
regarding Karkari More land allotment, it is mentioned that a portion of the 
land is under encroachment which is to be removed. 
 
Encroachments from the site proposed to be allotted to Delhi Transport 
Corporation, land measuring 100 bigha, 19 biswa of vill age Mandavali 
Fazalpur & Karkardooma near Karkari More behind Deepak Memorial 
Hospital has been got vacated.  However, 10 temporary chhappars, tin shed 
rooms and unauthorized construction could not be removed from the land 
falling in Khasra No.5057/5281 me asuring 03 bigha 06 biswa of village 
Karkardooma because of status quo order passed by the Hon‟ble High Court 
in the matter Jagmal v/s UoI & Ors in WPC No.3190/2015 & CM 
No.5693/2015.  Next date of hearing is fixed for 28-7-2015. 
 
The list of pending reque sts for allotment of land to Transport Department, 
GNCTD is as under: 
List of Pending Requests (Part-1) 
Sl 
No 
File No. Subject Allotment 
status 
Date of 
allotment 
Amount 
(Rs.) 
Paymen
t status 
Possession status 
1. F.24(2) 
14/IL 
A/O land 20 acres for 
bus depot in Rohini, 
Ph-V in lieu of 
Millennium bus depot 
(Rani Khera) 
Allotted 16.7.14 ₹4,94,58,545/
- 
Not 
received 
Possession handed 
over on 23.07.14 and 
date for handing over 
of remaining land is 
fixed on 29.5.2015.  

41 
 
2. F.24(06) 
14/IL 
A/O land 6.426 Ha. 
for IPT cum bus 
depot with bus 
terminal facility & 
mandatory parking of 
IPT modes (i.e. auto/ 
TSR/taxi/cycle/ricksha
w/ parking for two 
wheeler etc.) Anand 
Vihar near 
Karkardooma (Karkari 
More). 
Allotted  12.2.15 ₹67,44,26,677/
- 
Not 
received 
Possession not 
handed over due to 
non-payment & 
unauthorized 
encroachment at site. 
However, 
encroachment has 
recently been removed 
on 22.5.15, but some 
part of land is still 
under encroachment 
which could not be 
removed due to 
litigation.  
3. F.24(7) 
08/IL 
A/O addl. land 
measuring 12000 
sqm addl. land for 
cluster bus depot at 
Sec-22, Phase -II, 
Dwarka. 
Allotted  22.1.15 ₹12,59,43,394/
- 
Not 
received 
Possession not 
handed over due to 
non-payment.   
4. F.24(8) 
14/IL 
Working permission 
for land measuring 
18396.96 sqm for bus 
cluster deport at East 
Vinod Nagar. 
Working 
permission 
granted  
15.1.15 ₹19,30,81,274/
- 
Not 
received  
Possession not 
handed over due to 
non-demarcation of 
site. 
5. F.24(9) 
14/IL 
A/O land 40000 Sqm 
for cluster bus depot 
at Rohini Sector -32, 
Phase-4  
Allotted  22.1.15 ₹41,98,11,208/
- 
Not 
received  
Possession not 
handed over due to 
non-receipt of 
payment. 
6. F.24(8) 
83/IL/Pt. 
A/O land for 
construction of bus 
terminal at Vikaspuri 
opposite H -3, Block, 
land measuring  7650 
sqm 
Allotted 17.6.13 ₹8,02,88,929/
- 
Payment 
received 
Possession not 
handed over as  land  
in question stands   
allotted on temporary 
basis and handed 
over to PWD vide file 
No. F.32 
(44)2012/IL/1905 dt. 
8.8.13 for 2.5 yrs.                                 
7. F.24(15) 
/08/IL 
A/O land for bus 
terminal in Sector-37, 
Rohini, land 
measuring 4.9 Ha. 
Allotted 19.3.12 ₹29,12,58,320/
- 
Payment 
received ₹ 
284567146
/-   
Possession not 
handed over due to 
area has been 
stalled by the local 
residents. 
 
List of Pending Requests (Part-2) 
Sl 
No 
File 
No. 
Subject Allotment status Date of 
allotme
nt 
Amount Payme
nt 
status 
Possess
ion 
status 
1. F.24(0
4) 
14/IL 
A/O land for 2 nd 
ISBT at Sarai Kale 
Khan 
Not allotted due to 
non-identification 
of land 
Nil Nil Nil Not 
handed 
over. 

42 
 
2. F.24(0
5)/14/I
L 
A/O land for bus 
depot near 
Okhla/Tehkand in 
Zone F 
Not allotted as 
proposed site is   
meant for   is 
commercial use as 
per report by Area 
Planning-1. 
Nil Nil Nil Not 
handed 
over 
 
 
3. F.24(1
0)/14/I
L 
A/O land 19980 
sqm  for cluster bus 
depot in Narela 
Not allotted due to 
Court Case No. 
WPC 4114/2003 
& CM No. 
18141/2014 
Nil Nil Nil Not 
handed 
over 
4. F.24(0
7) 
14/IL 
A/O land for bus 
terminal at Mayur 
Vihar Phase-III 
Not allotted due 
non availability of 
land.   
NIL Nil Nil Not 
handed 
over 
 
 
 
III) Underutilization of buses sanctioned to Faridabad under JnNURM   
                            
As far as under -utilization of buses in Faridabad is concerned, Transport 
Department Govt. of Haryana, was requested to furnish a status report. 
However despite a reminder dated 13.07.2015 no reply has been received so 
far. 
Recommendation (Serial No.15) 
 
 
RAIN WATER HARVESTING SYSTEM 
2.21 The Committee are perturbed to note that India is moving towards being 
environmental basket -case marked by dead rivers and falling water tables. This 
situation has arisen due to continuous extraction of ground water in ever growing 
urban areas of the count ry. The simple and effective solution to this problem is rain 
water harvesting. However, it is very disheartening to note that though the Central 
Ministry is providing huge funds to States through its Centrally Sponsored Schemes 
but has not made it mandato ry to all State Governments to comply with the 
provisions of the model building bye - laws especially with regard to rain water 
harvesting systems. The advisory issued by the Ministry has not found favour with 
the States and ULBs.  
 
The Committee found that  Rain Water Harvesting system has not been 
implemented till now despite Ministry of Urban Development's instruction on 
mandatory rain Water Harvesting in all Govt. buildings and Colonies. The 

43 
 
Committee were apprised that CPWD has provided Rain Water Harves ting for 
recharging the Ground water in 116 non residential complexes and 144 residential 
colonies till Sep, 2014.  
 
The Committee are constrained to note that CPWD has implemented Rain 
Water Harvesting system in majority of complexes  but could not implem ent this 
system in all the buildings because RWH system is not technological feasible due to 
high level of ground water table and in adequate catchment area to make the 
system feasible. As per the various study reports the ground water is 
depleting.However, the Committee were perturbed to note that in response to a 
question from the Committee as to why rain water harvesting was not being 
improved, the reply was rendered by the Ministry, whichreads as under: 
 “Rain water harvesting system is not technically feasible due to high level of 
ground water table.” 
The Committee note with regret that such a reply in the light of the well -
known problem of shrinking of water level exhibits a lackadaisical approach and 
non-application of mind on the part of the Ministry  in replying to the queries of the 
Committee. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that in all the future 
projects to be financed by Central Ministry or to be taken up for construction by the 
attached offices and P.S.Us of Ministry of Urban Develop ment like DDA, NBCC, 
CPWD along with HUDCO (the PSU attached to Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Poverty Alleviation) Rain Water Harvesting System should be made mandatory. 
The Committee further desire that the possibility of incorporating Rain - Water 
Harvesting System in the existing Central and State Government Offices and 
Residential areas should be explored and implemented in a time bound manner. 
The Committee further recommend that the Research and Development (R&D) in 
this regard should be stressed upon and Central Data Base should be maintained 
by the Central Ministry regarding Government and corporate buildings which have 
implemented Rain Water Harvesting System.  
Reply of the Government 
2.22    CPWD is obliged to the committee for valuable suggestion on conservation of 
rainwater. Accordingly, instructions have been issued to all the field units in CPWD 
making the rain water harvesting system mandatory in all the projects to be taken up 
for the construction by CPWD, as well as all the existing buildings. 

44 
 
 
CPWD is maintaining the data base of government buildings under its maintenance 
where rain water harvesting system has been implemented. Ministry of Water 
Resources/Central Ground Water Board (CGWB), is responsible for research and 
development in regard to  rain water harvesting accordingly, it is submitted that the 
job of maintaining data base may be assigned to it.  
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.16) 
 
REMOVAL OF JHUGGI CLUSTERS NEAR ALL GOVT. RESIDENTIAL 
COLONIES 
2.23 The Committee are aware that in all gover nmental residential colonies 
across Delhi there is a large sprawl of jhuggi clusters and residents of these 
colonies have voter identity cards and ration cards issued on their names. 
Mushrooming growth of Jhuggie clusters in Delhi is a well -known phenomenon.The 
growth of slums has resulted in environmental degradation as well as creating 
social tension and other related law and order problems.  The Committee observe 
that sprawl of jhuggi clusters are still persisting and no action appears to have been 
taken by local authorities till now.  It has been informed by the Ministry that CPWD 
has consistently taken steps to prevent the sprawl of jhuggis and to clear the slums. 
Payment of ₹ 376.17 lakhs is being made to DUSIB for relocation of JJ clusters at 
DDU Marg, Press Road, Aram Bagh, and Havlock Square in New Delhi. The 
Committee are of the considered opinion that the time has come when it is essential 
to have an integrated approach for taking care of the existing slum dwellers and 
also work out ways and means to curb the growth of slums as neither the city has 
got physical capacity nor financial resources. Therefore, there is a need to have a 
detailed study for preparing a perspective plan for an integrated approach for 
development of Slums by taking recourseto various approaches followed in other 
cities as well as other countries. Hence  the Committee strongly recommend that 
CPWD and other agencies of Ministry of Urban Development should take consistent 
and coordinated steps for removal and as well as prevention of setting of Jhuggi 
Clusters in and around Govt. Colonies.  
 

45 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.24     CPWD has been pursuing with Delhi Urban Slum Improvement Board 
(DUSIB), an agency of Govt. Of NCT of Delhi, for removal of jhuggi clusters from 
government land and rehabilitation of slum dwellers.  Steps such as erection of 
boundary wall or fencing, engage ment of security guard and regular inspection by 
field officers have been taken to prevent fresh encroachment on government land. It 
is stated that in respect of Delhi, a large number of agencies besides CPWD are 
involved. It is therefore suggested to form  a committee of all such agencies for 
preparing a perspective plan and then follow an integrated approach.  
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.17) 
 
STRENGTHENING OF MONITORING MECHANISM BY CPWD 
  2.25 The Committee knew that inspection of site by senior officers improves the 
quality of work. However, it was noticed that senior officers are not issuing any 
inspection notes as a record of their inspection. This is mainly due to the fact that 
senior office rs are not keen on taking any responsibility for quality of work. The 
inspection of senior officers is not to be confined only to issues concerning 
progress, coordination etc. Senior officers are required to inspect the site to check 
quality of work etc. W orks manual of the organization should specify such matters. 
Inspection note is to be issued invariably for each inspection carried out by senior 
officers. An inspection register is to be maintained at site and inspection notes are 
to be entered in these registers.  
   
  Regarding the monitoring of construction sites by the CPWD, the Committee 
are apprised that inspection of site by senior officers is being done regularly by all 
senior officers in CPWD. An inspection register is also maintained at site of w ork 
where the inspecting officer records their observations. Section 53.17 of CPWD 
Works Manual, 2014, clearly prescribes the responsibility of each officer towards 
quality. Hence adequate institutional mechanism is available. The Committee are of 
the cons idered opinion that senior officers must review the inspection notes on 

46 
 
subsequent visit to ensure its compliance. In the absence of the above procedure, 
there is a tendency for the subordinate officials to allow bad quality work for giving 
undue benefit to the contractor. The Committee also recommend that senior officers 
should take their responsibilities for the quality of the work. Only junior level officers 
like JE/AE should not be held responsible for the poor quality of work or corruption. 
If any malafide practices has been found, responsibility of senior officers at the level 
of Chief Engineer should be fixed. The inspection of senior officers should not be 
confined only to issue progress and coordination etc. Hence the Committee strongly 
recommend that a strong institutional mechanism be created in CPWD to monitor 
the construction sites so as to prevent corruption and curb malafied practices at 
grass root level. 
Reply of the Government 
2.26 Provision has been made to review the inspection notes of the senior officers 
on previous visits as per para 5.2.2 of CPWD Works Manual 2014. To ensure quality 
of work, third party quality assurance by reputed institutions like IITs, NITs, CRRI, 
CBRI, has also been established. The system of online payment to the contractors 
and vendors has been created to eliminate possibility of corruption. Despite these 
mechanisms, the JE, AE, EE and SE all are primarily held responsible for poor 
quality of work or corruption. Still, if any malafide practices are found, responsibility is 
fixed on the officers concerned. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.18) 
 
ADEQUATE ALLOCATION OF FUNDS FOR EXPANSION OF PARLIAMENT 
HOUSE ANNEXE BUILDING 
2.27 During the scrutiny of Detailed Demand for Grants(UD) 2015 -16, the 
Committee observed that the estimated cost of work of Parliament Civil Work 
Zone(PCWZ) is Rs. 163.06 crore and actual expenditure during the year 2013 -14 
and 2014-15 is Rs. 99.75 crore. Dur ing the current financial year 2015 -16, BE for 
PCWZ is Rs. 17.68 crore.  The Committee found that the estimated cost of 
Parliamentary Electric Work Zone(PEWZ) is Rs. 80.13 crore. The expenditure 
during financial year 2013-14 and 2014-15 is Rs. 30.53 crore.  The Budget estimate 
for current financial year for PEWZ is Rs. 20.13 crore. The Committee came to 
know that the building is expected to be completed in 2015. The Committee feel 

47 
 
that with the huge pendency of work and the short span of time left for completion of 
work, the amount allocated for civil and electric work of extension of Parliament 
House Annexe Building is meagre. With this allocation, the entire building work 
cannot be completed. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that adequate 
budgetary allocation should be provided for completion of the Parliament House 
Annexe Building at the earliest, so as to adhere to the expected timelines of 
delivery.    
Reply of the Government 
2.28 The budget allotment for Parliament House Annexe Building for th e financial 
year 2015 -16 under the relevant head of account is ₹41.10 crore. The total 
requirement of budget under this head of account is ₹90 crore. The Ministry of 
Finance will be requested to provide adequate budgetary allocation for the work by 
way of supplementary grant.  
2.29  For comments please see para no. 1.27 of Chapter I. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.19) 
 
 
MODERNIZATION OF DIRECTORATE OF PRINTING, STATIONARY AND 
PUBLICATION OFFICE 
2.30 The Committee are given to understand that capacity utilization of the 
Government of India Press have rapidly fallen because of: 
a) Regular supply of paper was lesser for the number of years for which 
 indenters have withdrawn their orders. 
b) The old and defunct machineries are neither updated/repaired nor 
 replaced. 
c) Permission to fill up essential posts has not been given. Shortage of 
 skilled workers hampered the work seriously  
d) NOCs are given to Government Departments to get the printing from 
 outside. 
 
It is the considered opinion of the Committee that the press is rendering valuable 
service to the nation, with its available limited resource and manpower by 
executing orders of Postal, Defence, RGI(Census) and others. Moreover, the 

48 
 
Press is a reliable source for printing documents of sensitive and confidential 
nature. The printing industry is very sensitive to economic trends. Data reveals that 
the pace of growth has accelerated and the printing industry will grow accordingly. 
With the advancement of technology the need of forms will diminish, but the need 
of Text books will remain forever. So, there is a lot of scope of its utilization and 
this industry need to be developed. The Committee are happy to note that there is 
no proposal by the Ministry of Urban Development to wind up the Directorate of 
Printing Office or Govt. of India Presses. At present Government is exploring the 
modernization of the presses by deliberating three pronged approach which 
includes the following: 
(i) Leveraging of land resources to generate revenue for financing 
  modernization.  
(ii) To undertake modernization on pilot basis on PPP model and  
 replicate it, if found successful. 
(iii) Financing the modernization through budgetary support. 
   
The Committee came to know that a proposal in this regard was placed before the 
Committee of Secretaries (CoS) in its meeting dated 01.04.2014. The Committee 
recommended that MoUD may either redesign the project in PPP mode as per laid 
down procedures in consultation with M/o Finance/DEA  and Planning Commission 
or submit a proposal to M/o Finance for Budget allocation as per extant practices. 
The recommendation of CoS is under consideration in MoUD and a final view in 
this regard is yet to be taken.  
 
The Committee are distressed to know that BE for year 2015-16 regarding demand 
no. 106 of Stationary and Printing is only Rs. 57.69 crore. It is again and again 
reiterated by the Standing Committee of Urban Development to modernize 
department of stationary and publication and Govt. of India P rinting press. The 
Committee were surprised with allocation of meager amount of Rs. 57.69 crore for 
the modernization. In its submission the Ministry stated that Budget estimate of 
Rs.57.69 crores indicates the allocation for non -plan expenditure. This amo unt is 
exclusively used for meeting the operational expenditure including salaries etc. of 

49 
 
the printing presses. Modernization of printing presses is under consideration of 
the ministry. This allocation does not reflect resources available for modernizatio n. 
Some of the options explored by the ministry for mobilizing the financial resources 
for modernization include land leveraging, Public Private Partnership, additional 
budgetary support. However, a final decision in this regard is yet to be taken.In 
view of the above, the Committee desire the Ministry to urgently examine the 
matter in minute details and consider the concerns of all stakeholders before taking 
a final decision in the matter. Till then, the Ministry should endeavor to take into 
account, the d ifficulties being faced by the Government of India Press and 
ameliorate them for the smooth functioning of the press.  The Committee are of the 
view that it is very easy to shut down any institution which has grown over the 
decades by the dint of the hard work and labor and perseverance of thousands of 
workers who are working there. The Government should not take recourse to the 
easy path of closure but instead endeavor to make all out efforts to modernize the 
equipments and machines and also to ensure that  Government Departments are 
instructed to use this directorate rather than using an outside agency, at much 
higher costs, which entails grave losses to this Government department and 
massive out flow of the Government money which is entirely unnecessary. 
Reply of the Government 
2.31.  
a) Supply of Paper:  Full efforts are made to process the proposals for 
requirement of paper for Govt. of India Presses and sanctioned on priority 
basis. 
b) Steps taken for modernization to replace the old and defunct machineries 
are as follows: 
 
- Partial modernization of Govt. of India Presses was undertaken between 2004 
and 2008 in which Offset Technology which includes Pre -Printing, Printing and 
Post-Printing of Indian make machines & equipments have been installed to 
replace the Letter Press technology. 
 
- For further up-gradation / modernization, a comprehensive proposal regarding 
selection of approach for resource mobilisation for modernization was 
discussed with Ministry of Finance. Ministry of Finance has advised to 
modernize the presses with budgetary support from the Government. The 
proposal in this regard is accordingly being prepared. 

50 
 
c) Permission to fill up essential posts has not been given. Shortage of 
skilled workers hampered the work seriously. 
Group „C‟ post of Govt. of India Presses have been lying unfilled since, 2007 -08, 
after the cancellation of recruitment process in 2008. The direct recruitment were 
initiated once again in the year 2013. But the same has to be put under abeyance. 
The reason being that since these posts have been lying vacant for more than one 
year (many years), they need to be first revived with the approval of Ministry of 
Finance. M/o Finance has agreed to revive 700 posts in Group „C‟ category. 
Further action is being taken by Directorate of Printing. 
Modernization: 
The following proposals for modernization are under consideration of the Ministry. 
(i) Leveraging of land resources to generate revenue for financing modernization. 
(ii) To undertake modernization on pilot basis on PPP model and replicate it, if 
found successful. 
(iii) Financing the modernization through budgetary support. A meeting was held on 
17th July, 2015 with Ministry of Finance to discuss this aspect. M/o Finance has 
advised to finance modernization through budgetary support from the 
Government. Accordingly, proposal is being prepared. 
 
The recommendation of Committee of Secretaries (CoS) in t his regard is under 
examination. 
 
Efforts to utilise the services of Govt. of India Presses 
The Ministry has already written to all Ministries, Departments, Undertakings, 
Autonomous Bodies and Agencies to utilise the services provided by Directorate of 
Printing and Government of India Presses. Letters to all Secretaries of different 
Ministries/Departments have been sent at the level of Secretary, Joint Secretary and 
Director (Printing). 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.20) 
 
URBAN REJUVENATION MISSION 
2.32 The Committee observe that JNNURM has come to an end on 31st March, 
2014.  No new projects can be sanctioned under it.  The Ministry of Urban 
Development had asked the States to expedite the implementation of the projects 
and complete all the ongoing proje cts sanctioned under it till 31 March, 2012 and 
which were not completed till the extended period upto 31 March, 2014 from their 

51 
 
own resources and to furnish completion certificates to the Ministry. The Ministry 
has no role to play in implementation of the  projects. The committee further 
observe that during the year 2015 -16, JNNURM will be replaced by Urban 
Rejuvenation Mission covering 500 cities. The Budget allocation during the current 
year is Rs.398 crore. The Cabinet has approved the new Mission, howev er, 
detailed guidelines are being finalized. This is expected to launch in the month 
April, 2015. The Committee note that through this mission the Government of India 
will incentivize the States and ULBS to expand internally generated revenues, 
access  ext ernal sources such as bonds, private sector funding and rely on other 
innovative financial tools. This will help the ULBs to strengthen their infrastructure. 
Keeping in view the lessons learnt during the implementation of JNNURM and the 
goal envisaged in the new mission, the Committee desire the Ministry to finalizethe 
guidelines at the earliest and launch the scheme from the month of April, 2015 as 
assured to the Committee. The Committee desire the Ministry to subsume the 
incomplete projects of the JNNURM in the new mission so that the allocations 
already spent and other resources already put into the projects do not go waste.  
 The Committee understand that under the new mission, the Ministry, State 
Governments, ULBs and other agencies may require temporar y acquisition of land 
for redevelopment of cities. The Committee are concerned to note that 
redevelopment is not a part of the Urban Rejuvenation Mission. Therefore, they 
desire the Ministry of Urban Development to consider redevelopment of cities 
under th e new Mission and send their suggestions to the Ministry of Rural 
Development for suitable incorporation in the Land Acquisition Bill. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.33 The Cabinet has approved the Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban 
Transformation (AMRUT) on 29.4.2015. The objectives of the Mission is to develop 
the basic urban infrastructure for water supply, sewerage, septage, drainage and 
urban transport. The guidelines of the Mission have been issued. 
 
 
 
 
 

52 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.21) 
 
SETTING UP OF VIGILANCE COMMITTEE UNDER THE CHAIRMANSHIP OF 
LOCAL MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT TO MONITOR THE PROGRESS OF 
VARIOUS ONGOING SCHEMES OF THE MINISTRY 
 
2.34 The Committee in their earlier reports on Demands for Grant and Action 
Taken Report thereof have been recommending for involving elected 
representatives in social auditing and monitoring of schemes and setting up of 
Vigilance Committee under the Chairmanship of local Members of Parliament to 
monitor the progress of various ongoing schemes supported by the Ministry as is 
done in the Rural Development Ministry Programmes. It is regrettable that despite 
a passage of 7 years,the State Governments have chosen not to act in this matter. 
This seriously impedes the role and functions of the MPs in their constituenc y. The 
Committee recommend that the Urban Development Ministry must be firm in 
dealing with those States which continue to be recalcitrant in following the 
Ministry's policy decisions. The Committee recommend that the States must be 
issued firm directives that non -implementation may result in harsh penalties in 
some form of penal action by the Urban Development Ministry since this is 
fracturing the basic tenets of our Parliamentary and constitutional system of 
Government.  In this regard, the Committee also  desire the Ministry to explore 
suitable means for discontinuance of release of funds to the centrally sponsored 
schemes in such cases where State Governments choose not to pay heed to the 
lawful and reasonable directives of the Central Ministries. 
Reply of the Government 
2.35 The position under various Schemes being implemented by the Ministry is 
given below:- 
Smart Cities 
As far as Mission for development of 100 Smart Cities is concerned, it is proposed 
to establish a Smart City Advisory Forum at the city level for all 100 Smart Cities to 
advise and enable collaboration among various stakeholders and will include the 

53 
 
District Collector, MP, MLA, Mayor, CEO of SPV, local youths, technical experts, 
and members from the local areas. 
AMRUT 
Under AMRUT there is a provision to constitute a District Level Review and 
Monitoring Committee (DLMRC). The DLMRC will monitor and review th e 
implementation of the projects.  
JnNURM 
As recommended by the Standing committee, on the similar lines, a District Level 
Review and Monitoring Committee(DLRMC) having membership of elected 
representatives was envisaged under JnNURM .An Order dated 28.11.2011 was 
issued to all State/UT Govts deta iling guidelines regarding constitution, objectives 
and functions of DLRMC. 23 States/UTs (Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, 
Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Goa, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, M anipur, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, Nagaland, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and West 
Bengal)   have so far notified the constitution of DLRMCs. However, it is informed 
that JnNURM has already ended on 31.03.2014.  
SBM 
The composition of Distric t Level Review and Monitoring Committee (DLRMC) 
under the chairmanship of local Member of Lok Sabha, its key tasks, responsibilities 
and functions has already been recommended and State Govts. have been 
requested to take action for formation of DLRMC.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No.22) 
 
STRENGTHENING AND CAPACITY BUILDING OF URBAN LOCAL BODIES 
REGARDING SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANTS 
2.36 The Committee came to know that almost one -fifth of the centrally -funded 
sewage treatment plants in the country are “non -operational”, leading to millions of 
liters of untreated water either seeping into the ground as potential pollutant of 
ground water or  being discharged into natural drainage systems and rivers every 
day.  Besides, performance of another nearly one -fifth of the 152 sewage 

54 
 
treatment plants (STPs) was found to be unsatisfactory. The findings are part of a 
report of the Central Pollution Con trol Board (CPCB) which conducted 
performance evaluation of sewage treatments plants. The report said, “Out of the 
152 STPs, nine plants are under construction, 30 are nonoperational and 
performance of 28 plants are not satisfactory.  
According to the Ministry of Urban Development, the referred report of the CPCB is 
the outcome of the study (2013) on Performance Evaluation of STPs funded under 
National River Conservation Plan of Ministry of Environment and Forests, 
Government of India. The report envisages p erformance evaluation of 152 STPs 
spread over 15 states in the country and having a total treatment capacity of 4716 
MLD. The study revealed that the actual treatment capacity utilization is only 3126 
MLD (66 %).  It was reported that out of 152 STPs, 30 S TPs are not functional. It 
was observed by the CPCB that these STPs are under repair due to poor 
operation and maintenance. The Committee observe that poor operation and 
maintenance of sewage treatment plant is because of lack of financial resources 
with the ULB, inadequate trained personnel, absence of collection system and lack 
of last mile connectivity with the existing sewerage system. The specific reasons 
for non -functioning of these plants are primarily due to non -removal of silt and 
sludge in the bot tom of the oxidation ponds / waste stabilization ponds over a 
period of time leading to loss of treatment capacity, non -repairing of screens 
leading to carryover of solid waste, thus affecting the treatment system. Some of 
the STP‟s were not functional due  to inadequate flow in the absence of collection 
system and also mixing of industrial wastewater with sewage affecting the 
treatment process. The Committee were apprised that the Ministry of Urban 
Development has issued an Advisory on “Recent Trends and Te chnologies in 
Sewerage systems” in March 2012 and published a revised and updated Manual 
on Sewerage and Sewage Treatment Systems (2013) in three parts, (Part A: 
Engineering, Part B:  Operation and Maintenance, Part C: Management). In order 
to ensure effec tive capacity utilization of the STPs, Swachh Bharat Mission 
envisages the last mile connectivity of households with the sewer system wherever 
feasible.  Keeping in view the lack of financial resources with the ULBs, the 
proposed New Urban Development Miss ion and the Mission for Smart Cities 
envisage to provide funding for O & M of the assets to be created under the 
Missions. Hence, the Committee strongly recommend the Ministry of Urban 

55 
 
Development for allocating adequate funds to the State Govt. /Urban Loc al Bodies 
so as to enhance their capacity building for operation and maintenance of centrally 
funded sewage treatment plant and monitoring mechanism should be established. 
Reply of the Government 
2.37 Operation and maintenance of sewage treatment plants lies with respective 
Urban Local Bodies. Due to lack of resources with ULBs, the maintenance and 
operation of STPs have been poor. Also, under earlier programmes like JNNURM, 
there was no provision for operation and maintenance of assets under the Mission.  
 
Govt. of India has already approved new Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban 
Transformation (AMRUT) of 500 cities and Development of 100 Smart Cities. The 
guidelines for these schemes have been iss ued on 25.06.2015. AMRUT Mission 
Guidelines (para 13) gives the Capacity Building Strategy and Annexure 7 gives 
detailed instructions to prepare Annual Capacity Building Plan. 
Recommendation (Serial No.23) 
 
PUBLIC TOILET IN CITIES 
2.38 According to National Urban Sanitation Policy, the State Governments have 
to formulate State Sanitation Strategies and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) Have to 
prepare City Sanitation Plans, focusing on 100% sanitation across the cities 
including construction of public toilets with emphasis on preventing open defecation. 
But the Committee are distressed to note that the Indian cities have not shown any 
urgency to improve the situation. For example, Chennai, which needs about 6000 
public toilets has only 714 and Na gpur which needs more than 3000 toilets has 318 
only. Even the existing ones are poorly maintained, badly located and hardly used. 
This persisting neglect has let to woeful sanitary conditions. The situation in other 
cities is no more encouraging. Regarding the percentage of Urban Population using 
toilets and percentage of Urban Population defecating in the open, the Committee 
are apprised that as per 2011 Census, the percentage of urban population having 
toilets within their premise is 81.4.  
 

56 
 
The percentage of urban population using public toilets is 6. The remaining 12.6% 
resort to open defecation. Out of the aforesaid figure of 81.4%, 32.7% population 
are connected with piped sewerage system, 38.2% are having septic tanks, 8.8% 
households are having pit latrines (single & double, etc.) and 1.7% of households 
are having insanitary latrines (connected to open drains, night soil removed by 
human etc. The Committee became very distressed after knowing that only 6% of 
urban population uses public toilets.  The Committee are well aware of the fact that 
the Ministry of Urban Development is the nodal Ministry for formulation of broad 
policy programmes and guidelines for water supply and sanitation including the 
norms for public toilets. But the Committee fail to un derstand the callous attitude of 
the Ministry in monitoring the proper implementation of National Urban Sanitation 
Policy (NUSP), or for that matter any other policy that has been formulated by 
Central Ministry, by passing on the buck to the State Governme nts under the 
pretext of it being a state subject. The Committee would like to recommend in 
unequivocal terms that the Central Ministry should closely monitor the 
implementation of NUSP by States and should also make it a pre-requisite for ULBs 
to provide or promise to provide public toilets in whole of their area before financing 
any Centrally-sponsored scheme like JnNURM-II and NMSH in future. 
Reply of the Government 
2.39 In order to implementation of National Urban Sanitation Policy by States, 
Ministry has launched Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM) on 2 nd October, 2014. The 
specific objectives of SBM are: 
• Eliminate open defecation. 
• Conversion of insanitary toilets to pour flush toilets 
• Eradication of manual scavenging. 
• 100% collection and scientific pr ocessing /disposal /reuse / recycle of 
Municipal Solid Waste. 
• To bring about a behavioural change in people regarding healthy sanitation 
practices. 
• Generate awareness among the citizens about sanitation and its linkages with 
public health. 
• Strengthening of urban local bodies to design, execute and operate systems. 
• To create enabling environment for private sector participation in CAPEX and 
OPEX. 

57 
 
 
For implementation of SBM, the State Govts. need to prepare State Sanitation 
Strategy and City Sanitation Plans for respective cities. Funds will be released after 
submission of State Sanitation Strategy and City Sanitation Plan by the cities. City 
Sanitation Plan includes construction of toilet at households/ community as well as 
public toilets, solid waste management and storm water drainage facilities. Under 
SBM, public toilets is also one of the components which is to be built by private 
agency on PPP mode.  
 
Govt. of India has approved a new Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban 
Transformation (AMRUT) of 500 cities and also smart cities scheme.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No.24) 
 
KOLKATA EAST-WEST METRO CORRIDORS 
2.40 The Committee become aware that this  project was sanctioned by Govt. of 
India on 30th July, 2008 at an estimated cost of Rs. 4676 crore. The Committee are 
distressed to note that physical and financial progress of this project is only 36.5%. 
The Committee are apprised about the reasons of sl ow progress that in Phase-I of 
the Project from Salt Lake Sector -V to Sealdah, a small stretch of elevated viaduct 
of 365m in Duttabad where work is stopped due to settlements in the form of 
shanties on Govt. land.   The matter has been referred to State Go vt. in Sept., 2014 
but the problem persists even today. Government of West Bengal has initiated a 
realignment proposal in Phase -II in between Howrah & Sealdah in 2012 for which 
tunneling in this section could not proceed.  The Committee are informed that 
Government of WB has been requested by Ministry of Railways to prepare a DPR 
for realignment route considering detailed technically feasibility, financial 
implication, land issues on realigned route and detailed utility and building condition 
study. Govt. of WB has awarded the work of DPR to RITES Ltd. on 30 -7-2014, the 
reports have been submitted by RITES recently.   Ministry of Railways, having the 
administrative control over the project being the major stake -holder (74%), is taking 
action on the DPR. Keep ing in view of all these facts the Committee strongly 
recommend the Ministry of Urban Development and State Government of West 
Bengal sit together to resolve all the issues connected with this project and 

58 
 
expeditiously implement Kolkata East -West Metro Cor ridors with in a time bound 
manner under intimation to the Committee.  
Reply of the Government 
2.41 Kolkata East West Metro Corridor Project, covering 13.77 km at an estimated 
cost of ₹4676 crore from Salt Lake Sector-V to Howrah, was sanctioned by GoI on 
30.7.2008.  The project cost was revised on 19.2.2009 to ₹4874.58 crore by 
extension of alignment by about 900 m (total length 14.67 km). 
 
The Union Cabinet, in its meeting held on 23.8.2012, approved the transfer of 74% 
equity of the project to Ministry o f Railways (MoR).  Ministry of Urban Development 
(MoUD) issued the order for transfer of the project to MoR vide Office Order dated 
15.11.2012.  Now the administrative control of KMRCL lies with MoR.  All matters of 
KMRCL are now dealt with by MoR .  The dr aft MoU prepared by MoR and to be 
signed between MoUD, GoWB, MoR and KMRCL has been approved and 
conveyed to MoR vide letter dated 27.1.2015.  This will supersede existing MoU. 
Phase-I 
 
The Rehabilitation Committee formed by GoWB has negotiated with the PA Ps in 
Duttabad (365 m incomplete Viaduct) on 11.5.2015 and persuaded them to move 
into temporary resettlement units already constructed by KMRCL, the possession of 
those units handed over to the PAPs on 14.5.2015 and the shifting of the PAPs  has 
been completed within 20-5-2015. 
Phase-II 
 
RITES has submitted final DPR for realigned route to Government of West 
Bengal(GoWB).  The same has been approved by GoWB and given to KMRCL on 
24-4-2015.  Ministry of Railways being the administrative control on the project is 
taking action on it. 
Recommendation (Serial No.25) 
 
SWACHCH BHARAT MISSION  
2.42 The Committee have been apprised about the components of Swachch 
Bharat Mission in which Govt. of India is committed to make India open defecation 

59 
 
free by 2019.  This Mission addresses the issues of sanitation in all 4041 statutory 
towns in the country to achieve Swach Bharat by 2019 to mark 150 th Birthday of 
Mahatma Gandhiji. The sanitation component proposed in this Mission includes 
individual household toilets, community toilets, public toilets, solid waste 
management, public awareness and capacity building.  This Mission has got 
basically two parts.  One part is creation of physical infrastructure, namely toilets, 
solid waste management etc.  On the other hand, need for change in the mindset; 
unless we bring in a change in behaviour and conduct, this is not going to be 
sustainable.  The total tentative cost of the mission is about Rs. 62,000 crore out of 
which the Central assistance is Rs. 14,623 crore.  The Comm ittee are happy to 
note that the Ministry has taken a concerted effort in this regard.  The Committee 
are apprised that Rs. 1000 crore has been allocated for the scheme under the 
Ministry of Water Supply and Sanitation. The Ministry of Urban Development is  the 
administrative Ministry to implement the scheme. The Committee wish to mention 
here that before the year 2014 -15 the fund for JNNURM scheme was from the 
Ministry of Urban Development, Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Home Affairs. 
Later on the Gove rnment could realise that funding pattern for a single scheme 
from different sources posed a hindrance in successful implementation and 
resulted into delays. Therefore, during the year 2014 -15 the allocations were made 
under the administrative Ministry i.e . Ministry of Urban Development. The 
Committee feel that under the Swach Bharat Mission, as a result of the funding 
pattern from the Ministry of Water Supply and Sanitation, this mission may also 
face the same fate of JNNURM.  Therefore, they desire the Mi nistry to take up this 
matter with the Ministry of Finance to transfer the entire allocation under the 
Ministry of Urban Development. The Committee also desire to fix responsibility on 
the officers responsible for non -implementation of projects under JNNUR M and as 
well as for delay in the operationalisation of projects. This should not happen in the 
new Mission. 
The Committee were apprised that regarding successor scheme of JNNURM 
there is a scheme of 500 cities which have more than 1 lakh population. Minis try of 
Urban Development are likely to finalize the scheme soon in April. Simultaneously, 
there is a scheme of 100 smart cities in which conceptualization have been 
completed but final approval still lacking. Therefore, the Committee re -emphasize 
the operationalization and implementation of this mission with full vigour in a time -

60 
 
bound manner under intimation to the Committee.  The Committee during their 
study tour to Pune were given a presentation by SWACH Organisation with regard 
to the large -scale initia tive undertaken by them for door to door collection and 
disposal of domestic garbage in the city.  The Committee were vastly impressed 
with this initiative and seriously feel that it has merit and strongly recommend that 
this system should be adopted by ot her small and large cities all over India. The 
Citizen-Government partnership model as seen in Pune is a very good scheme for 
furthering the laudable idea of the Swach Bharat Mission and has good chance of 
success as has happened in Pune municipality.  
Reply of the Government 
2.43 SWACH organization, Pune (Seva Sahakari Sanstha Maryadit) is an 
autonomous enterprise that provides front -end waste management services to the 
citizens of Pune. It avers that it is India‟s first wholly -owned cooperative of self-
employed waste pickers or waste collectors and other urban poor.  The organization 
has an MoU with Pune Municipal Corporation for 5 years. The SWACH waste 
collection model is user fee-based, usually ₹10 to 30 per household per month. 
 
The process of S olid Waste Management (SWM) by SWACH organization is being 
highlighted as a worthy “good practice” on SBM website 
www.swachhbharaturban.gov.in Also States and ULBs are being advised to interact 
with SWACH organization to design their own SWM programmes. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.26) 
CAP ON HEIGHT INCREASE FOR BUILDING IN DELHI 
2.44 During examination of Demands for Grants(2014 -15), the Committee were 
informed that almost a year after Delhi Development Authority increased the cap on 
height of residential buildings from 15 metres to 17.5 metres, no one in Delhi has 
been benefited from this new policy.  The Municipal Corporations in the city are 
unable to sanction building plans with 17.5 metre height as it would require 
clearance from Delhi Fire Service (DFS) which insists on leaving a six -metre 
setback around the building.  It appears that under the DFS rules, any structure 
which is more than 15 metres in height is considered a high -rise and for such high -
rises, it is mandatory to leave a setback of six metres so that there is adequate 

61 
 
space for fire tenders to move around in case of an  emergency.  Therefore, any 
structure above 15 metres in height, an NOC from the fire department is required. 
The Committee have been further informed that with a majority of plots in Delhi 
being less than 250 square metres in size,  it is impossible for r esidents to leave a 
setback of six metres around the building  since there will be no space left on the 
plot to build. The height of residential buildings was revised with a view to 
accommodate stilt parking which has become a mandatory pre -requisite for n ew 
constructions.  The result of not getting DFS clearance means that new 
constructions with stilt parking have to confine themselves to 15 m height which 
entails vast reduction in the height of each floor  (since the third floor is permissible 
and all new  construction seek to avail of the same).  The decision to increase the 
height from 15 metre to 17.5 metre was taken so that owners would not have to 
compromise on the height of each floor.  The Committee felt that this anomaly must 
be corrected at the ear liest and new constructions with 17.5 metres height must be 
exempted from fire clearance from DFS. The Committee learnt the matter is being 
examined in consultation with DDA keeping in view the safety requirements of the 
building. The Committee desire the Ministry for expediting the examination process. 
Reply of the Government 
2.45 The matter was examined in this Ministry and it was concluded that the 
provisions of Master Plan for Delhi (MPD) - 2021, Building Bye -Laws (BBLs) and 
National Building Code (NBC) , 2005, as applicable in Delhi, do not exempt 
residential buildings up to 17.5  m with stilt, from the mandatory fire protection 
requirements related to the setbacks, access, alternate stairs etc. In fact, MPD -2021 
mandates the individual plot owner to obta in clearance of Fire Department for the 
purpose of fire and life safety requirement. 
BBL 17.1 requires buildings to comply with Part IV Fire Protection of NBC which 
stipulates mandatory requirements of setbacks, access etc. 
As per MPD -2021, in all the cate gories of residential plots, the maximum FAR is 
between 3 and 4 times the maximum Ground Coverage. If all the floors are 
constructed as per NBC, 2005, that is, with height of rooms as 2.75 m, then the 
entire available FAR in each category of residential pl ot size can be achieved within 
the height of 15 m without sacrificing either the stilt or any floor. 

62 
 
As regards Fire Safety requirements, Delhi Fire Services (DFS) is the competent 
body to attend exigencies in case of fire. DFS filed an affidavit in 2014 o n this issue 
in a writ petition before Hon‟ble High Court, from which it is clear that the 
requirement of fire clearance for buildings taller than 15 m is an operational 
requirement for ensuring safety of human life. 
The safety of human life is paramount a nd all the provisions regarding development 
control norms, fire protection requirements (including those for buildings taller than 
15 m) and other requirements for buildings should be followed invariably. 
This issue is also being considered by Hon‟ble High  Court of Delhi in a writ petition 
No. 1476/2014 titled Vikas Singh vs. LG & Others, in which this Ministry has filed a 
detailed affidavit stating the position as above. Hon‟ble Court, after considering the 
reply of this Ministry, has reserved its judgement which is yet to be pronounced. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.28) 
 
SMART CITY MISSION 
2.46 The Committee note that to handle the large scale urbanization in India and 
finding new ways to manage complexity, increase efficiency reduce expenses and 
improve quality of life, Government of India during the year 2014 -15 had initiated a 
new schemes to promote 100 smart cities. The Committee in their first Report on 
the Demands for Grants(2014 -15) had recommended for implementation of this 
mission in a time bound manner. However, the Committee are distressed to note 
that even after passing of seven months of announcement of this mission i.e. 
August, 2014, the mission components and the list of smart cities are yet to be 
finalized. The Committee are of the view that  this is a futuristic programme of the 
Ministry so far as urban development planning is concerned. Therefore, delay in 
finalizing this mission will give way to adhocism in the urban planning process. 
Therefore, they urge upon the Ministry to finalize the c omponents and list of 100 
smart cities within three months of the presentation of this report. 
 
 

63 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.47 The Cabinet on 29 th April, 2015 has already approved a Smart City Mission 
and the Mission has been launched by the Prime Minister on 25.06.2015. The 
guidelines of the Mission have also been issued. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.30) 
 
THE HERITAGE CITY DEVELOPMENT AND AUGUMENTATION 
YOJANA(HRIDAY): 
2.48 The Committee note that the Ministry of Urban Development has launched 
the Heritage City Development and Augmentation Yojana(Hriday) on 21 January, 
2014. Initially 12 cities namely: 
1. Varanasi 2. Amritsar 3. Ajmer, 4. Ma thrura 5. Gaya 6. Kancipuram 7 
Vellankani 8 Badami 9. Amravati 10. Warangal 11. Puri and 12. Dwaraka have 
been identified for development under the scheme.The scheme aims at restoring, 
reviving and strengthening the soul and heritage of the city. for this purpose, the 
Scheme shall support development of core heritage infrastructure projects which 
shall include revitalisation of tangible assets such as monuments, ghats, temples 
etc. along with reviving intangible assets such as local art and craft, dance for ms, 
literature etc. 
In addition, the scheme shall also develop linked city infrastructure which 
shall link heritage facilities with trunk infrastructure of the city. These shall include 
development of sanitation facilities, roads public transportation and parking, citizen 
services, information kiosks etc. 
An outlay of Rs.200 crore has been earmarked under HRIDAY for the year 2014 -
15, out of which Rs.87 lakhs has been released till 28.2.2015. For the current 
financial year Rs. 200 crore has been allocated. The Committee welcome the steps 
initiated in this di rection. However, they felt that it is a very small beginning and 
there should be at least 200 cities which merit at par with the 12 cities. Therefore, 

64 
 
they wish to recommend the Ministry to extend to another 200 cities in the next 
financial year. 
Reply of the Government 
2.49 Since the first phase of identification of cities is now over, the 
recommendation of standing committee regarding inclusion of cities, would be kept 
in mind when scheme is expanded. 
  

65 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE 
IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
NIL 
  

66 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES O F THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Serial No.3) 
 
MONITORING AND VIGILANCE BY NCRPB: AMENDMENT IN THE NCRPB 
ACT, 1985 
 
4.1  The Committee came to know that monitoring the preparation of sub -
regional plans by the respective NCR participating States is being monitored by 
NCR planning board regularly. It also extends financial assistance for preparation of 
the sub -regional plan o n the request of the participating State Governments. 
Ministry of Urban Development submitted that the preparation of 
Master/development plans are being prepared and finalized by the respective State 
Government under the prevailing Act/statutes in the States.  There is no provision in 
the NCRPB Act with respect to Master plan of the towns failing in the NCR. 
However NCRPB has been pursuing for preparation of master/Development plans 
for all the towns in the NCR in conformity of the regional plans. The Commi ttee 
become anguished to know that there is no provision in NCRPB Act, 1985 for 
monitoring and keeping vigilance over the development at site in the National 
Capital Region due to which NCRPB does not have any role in monitoring and 
keeping vigilance over the developments at site in the NCR.  The Committee are 
apprised that regarding violations of the Regional Plan by the States, each 
participating State is responsible for the implementation of the Sub -Regional Plan 
as per the NCRPB Act,1985.  Coordinating and monitoring the enforcement and 
implementation of the Regional Plan is done through participating State 
Governments.  Further, NCR Board has created NCR Planning & Monitoring Cell in 
each participating States. The Ministry has submitted that no cases of violations has 
been reported to NCRPB by the NCR planning and monitoring cells.  However, 
NCR board has carried out land use change analysis of the Natural Conservation 
Zone with the help of National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) Hyderabad and 
found variat ions in the NCZ. The Committee are apprised about the comparative 
analysis which indicated that there is shrinkage of NCZ as 15.43% in NCT -Delhi, 

67 
 
25.97% in Haryana sub -region, 43.88% in UP sub -region and 11.18% in Rajasthan 
sub-region. Keeping in view of a ll these facts the Committee strongly recommend 
carrying out necessary amendments in the NCRPB Act so as to insert a key 
provision in the Act which will empower NCRPB for direct monitoring and keeping a 
vigilance eye over the development at sites in the NC R so that there is no violation 
of the regional plans. It will also help in coordinating and monitoring the 
enforcement and implementation of the regional plans in conformity with the sub -
regional plans.  
Reply of the Government 
4.2 NCRPB has been constituted, among other things, for the preparation of 
plans for development of National Capital Region (NCR) and hence it is primarily a 
planning body. To achieve the objectives, NCRPB prepares Regional and Functional 
Plans, arranges for p reparation of Sub -Regional Plans by the participating States 
and coordinates the enforcement and implementation of these plans only through the 
participating States.  This mandate of NCRPB is clearly in consonance with the 
subject matters assigned to the S tates in the Constitution of India.  Therefore, it 
would be appropriate to continue with the existing provisions which provide for 
harmonized development of NCR without compromising the powers and jurisdiction 
of the participating States.  
 
4.3 For comments see para no. 1.10 of Chapter I. 
Recommendation (Serial No.8) 
 
EXPEDITIOUS IMPLEMENTATION OF THE REGIONAL  RAPID TRANSIT 
SYSTEM PROJECTS 
4.4 The Committee feel that high speed corridors are need of the hour as this will 
facilitate better commuting in the National Capital Region. The Committee has been 
apprised that the three Rapid  Regional Transit System corridors have been 
prioritized by the Ministry of Urban Development for implementation in phase I i. e.,  
Delhi - Sonipat -Panipat, Delhi - Gurgaon - Rewari - Alwar, Delhi-Ghaziabad-Meerut 
for which estimated cost till Sept 2011 was Rs. 72,170 crore. These routes have 
been identified for the R RTS because these towns and cities have a large number 
of people travelling daily for economic reasons. The Committee note that Ministry of 

68 
 
Railways has informed Ministry of Urban Development vide letter dated 10.12.2014 
that Ministry of Railways is commit ted towards the participation in NCRTC, but as 
contribution to equity participation needs approval of Parliament, funds shall be 
made available in February, 2015 only after seeking approval of Parliament in the 
Supplementary Demands for grants.  However, Ministry of Railways has sanctioned 
the release of Rs. 1.25 lakhs to National Capital Region Transport Corporation 
(NCRTC) towards subscription amount for participation of Ministry of Railways in 
NCRTC. Ministry of Urban Development is pursuing with the Min istry of Railways 
for further release of funds. The Committee are happy with the release share of 
funds by the Ministry of Railways. Now NCRTC has got shares from each 
stakeholders, hence, they should work toward expeditious implementation of RRTC 
corridors. In view of the above, the Committee strongly recommend to implement 
this RRTS project expeditiously in a time bound manner so as to make travel in the 
National Capital Region faster and easier. 
Reply of the Government 
4.5 National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRPB) was involved in the Rapid 
Regional Transit System (RRTS) corridors since their conceptualization like 
selection of the prioritized RRTS corridors and appointment of consultant, etc.   As 
the appointment of reg ular Managing Director of National Capital Region Transport 
Corporation (NCRTC) is under process as of now.  Ministry of Urban Development 
(MoUD) vide letter number K -14011/47/2013-MRTS-I dated 08.04.2015 has 
advised NCRPB to finalize the Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) of the following 
three RRTS corridor Projects expeditiously till such time a regular Managing 
Director of NCRTC is appointed:  
(iv) Delhi – Sonipat - Panipat; 
(v) Delhi – Ghaziabad - Meerut; and 
(vi) Delhi – Gurgaon – Rewari – Alwar 
 
4.6  For Comments please see para no. 1.18 of Chapter I. 
 
 
 

69 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.9) 
 
EXPEDITIOUS APPOINTMENT OF MANAGING DIRECTOR (NATIONAL 
CAPITAL REGION TRANSPORT CORPORATION). 
4.7  The Committee learnt that there is delay in implementation of Meerut -
Delhi Express highway and as well as Regional Rapid Transit system because of 
delaying in search -cum-selection of Managing Director of NCRTC. In its 
submission, Ministry of Urban Developm ent stated that they are corresponding with 
Department of personal and training to expedite search -cum-selection of managing 
Director of NCRTC. In its submission Ministry of Urban Development stated that 
National Capital Region Transport Corporation Ltd. ( NCRTC) has been constituted 
as a company under the Companies Act, 1956 on 21.8.2013.  As the full time 
Managing Director (MD) of NCRTC could not be appointed due to non -availability of 
guidelines on the procedure for appointment of MD in such a company whe re 50% 
Equity is with the Government of India (GoI) and the MD has to be a nominee of the 
Govt. of India.  After detailed interaction, Department of Personnel & Training 
(DoPT) has now advised the procedure to be adopted for selection of MD, NCRTC.  
The process for appointment of MD, NCRTC as per advice of the DoPT has now 
been initiated and accordingly, MD, NCRTC will be appointed shortly.  The work of 
RRTS is expected to speed up with the appointment of regular MD, NCRTC. The 
Committee became aware that it is general instruction of Government of India that 
whosoever the MD of corporation if he is serving Officer then he has to resign from 
his parent Organization then only he can be taken on absorption basis. For getting 
the exemption, Communication has to go to the department of the Public 
enterprises. After this procedure MD will be selected. The Committee was told that 
once the appointment of MD of NCRTC has been completed then work of three 
corridors of Panipat, Meerut and Alwar will be expedited. Feasib ility study of this 
three corridors and Detailed Project Report have been completed. The Committee 
while expressing their displeasure over the delay in implementation of Regional 
Rapid Transit System because of delay in search -cum selection of Managing 
Director of NCRTC, strongly recommend that instead of focusing on only the 
serving officer, the Ministry should select professionals from all walks of life for this 
important post. This will facilitate to use his professional expertise. 
 

70 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.8 The comments have been received from Department of Public Enterprises 
(DPE) vide their O.M. dated 23.04.2015.  On the basis of comments received from 
DPE, following has been issued: 
(i) Order for constitution of Search cum Selection Committee for selection of 
Managing Director, NCRTC. 
(ii) Advertisement for the post of Managing Director, NCRTC along with details 
of eligibility, qualification and experience, etc.  Which includes both 
Government officers (on absorption basis) and Professionals from Pu blic 
Sector / Private Sector Companies. 
The applications have been received and the process of selection is underway. 
4.9 For Comments please see para no.1.18 of Chapter I. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.11) 
 
MONORAIL IN METROPOLITAN SUBURBS AND TIER-II CITIES: 
4.10 The Committee have been apprised that Monorail is a safe, reliable, 
economical, quick, comfortable and effective mass public transit system. The high -
speed rail-based Regional RapidTransit Systems (RRTS) would allow people living 
in metropolitan suburbs within  a radius of 100 km to commute to work, thereby 
easing pressure on the infrastructure services within the city. The Committee came 
to know that there has been no budgetary allocation and expenditure from the 
Union Budget for Monorail Projects till now.  Therefore, keeping in view all the 
advantages of Monorail, the Committee in their earlier reports had strongly 
recommend for Ministry of Urban Development to act as facilitator, provide 
budgetary allocation from the Union Budget for Monorail Projects and faci litate 
foreign collaboration, if need be, into Monorail sector so as to set up monorail both 
as a means of feeder system within the bigger metros and as an independent mode 
of transport in Tier II cities. The Committee were apprised about the National Urban 
Transport Policy (NUTP), 2006, in which Ministry supports all modes of public 
transport including Mono Rail systems.  Ministry submitted that proposals for 
monorail projects have to be initiated by the State Governments as Urban Transport 
is a state subject.  Ministry of Urban Development will consider proposal of monorail 

71 
 
projects after following due appraisal process, depending upon the feasibility of the 
project and availability of funds.  Government of India has accorded in -principle 
approval for one monorail project in Chennai on PPP mode with no financial 
commitment from Govt. of India.  Further, one more proposal for Chennai Monorail 
Project (Phase-2) has been received in this Ministry which is under appraisal. The 
Committee agree that Monorail proj ects are to be initiated by the State 
Governments according to the needs of their cities and not by the Central 
Government. The cities have to prepare the Comprehensive Mobility Plan (CMP) 
with alternative analysis for promoting sustainable transport. But still the Committee 
strongly recommend the Nodal Ministry to help the States in formulating their 
Comprehensive Mobility Plan (CMP) and help them in formulating sustainable 
urban transport. The Committee also came to know that a s of now, there is no 
foreign collaboration in the Monorail sector. There is no proposal with Central 
Government for attracting funding of Monorail Projects from foreign countries. The 
Committee are aware that monorail is easier and cheaper to lay in comparison to 
metro lines. The mo norail can also take sharp curves in contrast to the Metro and 
thus run in densely populated localities as it takes lesser area to manoeuvre. 
Monorail seems a perfect mode for mass transit in congested areas where metro 
cannot be constructed and roads are too crowded for frequent movement of 
buses.Therefore, keeping in view all the advantages of Monorail, the Committee 
strongly recommend Ministry of the Urban Development to act as facilitator, provide 
budgetary allocation from the Union Budget for Monorail Projects and facilitate 
foreign collaboration, if need be, into the Monorail sector so as to set up monorail 
both as a means of feeder system within the bigger metros and as well as 
independent means of transport in Tier II cities. 
Reply of the Government 
4.11 As per National Urban Transport Policy (NUTP) 2006, the Government of 
India (GoI) supports all kinds of public transport systems which include Mono Rail 
also. However, as urban transport is intertwined with urban development, which is a 
state subject, all urban transport projects are initiated by the State Government. GoI 
would consider Mono Rail projects, as per extant policy, as and when such projects 
are posed to GoI by the State Government. 
4.12  For Comments please see para no. 1.21 of Chapter I. 

72 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.12) 
 
STRENGTHENING AND PROVIDING EXTRA BUDGETARY SUPPORT FOR 
FEEDER BUS SYSTEM 
 
4.13 The Committee knew that Delhi Metro may have provided a quick, reliable 
and comfortable public transport to travel around the city and NCR but reaching the 
Metro station from offices and homes and back continues to be a challenge. With a 
poor para-transit and feeder bus system in place, the last mile connectivity is one of 
the biggest issues that metro commuters face. On being enquired about the d etails 
of allocation/ expenditure of funds in last 5 years and the steps being taken to 
strengthen the feeder bus system, pedestrian pathways and cycling tracks with 
metro rail system in the States, Ministry of Urban Development stated that feeder 
Service and Non -motorized transport have been made as a part of Condition of 
Sanction and the provisions of feeder services, Last Mile Connectivity and Non -
Motorized Transport (NMT) are covered in DPRs, which is funded by this Ministry.  
For Delhi Metro Rail Corpo ration, Ministry has sanctioned 228 buses under the 
JnNURM Scheme for feeder services at an estimated cost of Rs. 45 crores, in 
which Government of India share is Rs.15.96 crore and till date Rs.6.23 crores have 
been released."  The Committee are anguished to note that Ministry has sanctioned 
only 228 buses under JNNURM for feeder services. Since the year 2013-14, the no. 
of feeder buses has remained the same. The Committee are not happy with the 
state of affairs of feeder bus service in Delhi because of which commuters are left at 
the mercy of over -charging auto and cycle rickshaws to reach their final 
destinations. The Committee are of the considered opinion that time has come for 
the agencies concerned to join hands and come up with an effective feeder sy stem 
connecting Metro stations with residential and commercial places. Keeping all these 
factors in view, the Committee recommend for allocating separate funds for feeder 
bus services to increase the no. of feeder buses adequately to the make public 
transport more comfortable.  
 
 

73 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
4.14 This is to inform that the transition phase of Bus Funding Scheme under 
Jawaharlal National Urban Renewal Mission (JnNURM) has come to an end on 
31st March, 2014. 
  
 Ministry of Urban Development has recently launched a new scheme namely 
Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) wherein Urban 
Transport is an eligible component for funding from Govt. of India, However, as per 
the guidelines, it is up to the State / Urban Local Bodie s (ULBs) to decide and 
prioritize their projects among all the eligible components such as water supply, 
sewerage, septage, storm water drainage, Urban Transport, Green space and parks, 
reforms management & support, capacity building etc. as per their requ irement and 
submit their State Annual Action Plan (SAAP) to MoUD. 
  
Further Ministry of Urban Development vide its letter No. K -14011/1/2007-UT-IV 
dated 30th August, 2013, issued an advisory/circular stating that all the ToR as well 
as DPR of the MRTS Proj ects/proposal shall include feeder buses, public bike 
sharing and pedestrianisation in the influence zone of the stations in the project‟s 
cost in the DPR. Even the existing DPRs should be revised to provide for the feeder 
systems, wherever these have not been provided for. 
4.15 For Comments please see para no. 1.24 of Chapter I. 
Recommendation (Serial No.29) 
 
NEED TO ENSURE BALANCED URBANIZATION OF THE CITY OF 
CHANDIGARH  
4.16 It has been observed by the Committee that State Government of Punjab 
had sanctioned 50 acres of land right behind the Capital Complex i.e. zero kilometer 
from the periphery of Chandigarh. Initially this area was given to the MLAs of the 
Punjab legislature for construction of “Punjab MLAs Society” wherein these MLAs 
were allotted the said land for construction of their residential houses/dwelling units. 
Under dubious circumstances the land of the Society spreading over 52 acres has 

74 
 
been transferred/sold to the Tata Housing Camelot Company on an understanding 
between them that each member of the legislative assembly who was a member of 
the Punjab MLAs Society would be given some incentives. This Company will 
buildbuildings as high as 35 stories which are to c ome up in the entire area of 52 
acres thereby completely obstructing the view of the Shivalik Hills with a unnatural 
and concrete barrier between the Capital Complex and the hills, and in complete 
defiance of the original planning as conceived by Le Corbusier. This area falls in the 
eco-fragile northern part of Chandigarh. The Project allegedly falls in the catchment 
areas of Sukhna Lake in union territory of Chandigarh and is in close proximity of 
wild life sanctuary declared as a reserve forest area. If t he land and its surrounding 
areas are allowed to be urbanized, it will result in the degradation of the habitat and 
disturb thousands of migratory birds which come every year to the Sukhna Lake. 
2.  The Committee came to know that in the year 1972 a Commit tee was set up 
by the Government of India, Ministry of Works and Housing to guide and co -
ordinate the growth of Chandigarh and the urban centers coming up in the 
neighborhood of Chandigarh for the balanced development of the region falling 
within the influ ence zone of Chandigarh.  The Secretary of the then Ministry of 
works and Housing, Government of India was the Chairman of that Committee. In 
this connection on being asked to state whether the Ministry of Urban Development 
have been consulted by the Punja b Government/Haryana Government or the 
Advisor of Union Territory of Chandigarh, the type of monitoring mechanism 
available with the Ministry of Urban Development with regard to balanced 
urbanization of the city of Chandigarh, to study its developmental pl an, to access 
the impact of the development programmes already implemented and those being 
implemented in the township and preparing an outline of the regional plan for 
Chandigarh and the urban areas falling within its zone of influence, the Ministry has 
submitted that the matter of allotment of land is a State subject. This Ministry was 
not required to be consulted in this matter and therefore, no such consultation was 
done. They further stated that allotment of land do not fall under thepurview of the 
co-ordination Committee. 
3. The Committee are apprised that the role of the Co -Ordination of the 
Committee is to attempt amicably resolve the issues of Co -Ordination in urban 
planning between the two States of Haryana, Punjab and Union Territory of 

75 
 
Chandigarh. The Constitution of the Committee was through an executive order and 
the role of the Committee are advisory in nature. Because of this despite 26 
meetings of the Committee held so far there has not been any tangible outcome. In 
the last meeting held on 2 7th March, 2015, the State Government of Haryana had 
raised the issue that Co -Ordination Committee has no statutory mandate for the 
preparation of Inter State regional plan for Chandigarh. In view of the above the 
Committee are pained to note that the Ministry of Urban Development has not taken 
up this issue at the Cabinet level to examine such issues.  The Committee are of 
the view that because of absence of statutory power of the Co -Ordination 
Committee the State Government/UTs are ducking the issues and violating the 
master plan and Inter -State regional plan, thereby such type of instances have 
occurred. Therefore, the Committee strongly desire the Ministry of Urban 
Development to take up such matters with the Cabinet to explore the ways and 
means to strengthen the power and functions of the Co -Ordination Committee. The 
Committee further desire that such Co -Ordination Committee should have the 
power to monitor and oversee the balanced urbanization of the City of the 
Chandigarh and its nearby areas and to a ccess the impact of development 
programmes already implemented and those being implemented in the township on 
the surrounding eco-system. 
Reply of the Government 
4.17 Land is a State subject. The Coordination Committee was constituted 
through an executive order and terms of references of the Coordination Committee 
are advisory in nature. The role of the Coordination Committee is to attempt to 
amicably resolve issues of coordination in urban planning between the two States of 
Haryana and Punjab and the Union  Territory of Chandigarh. The Coordination 
Committee has only an advisory role in the matter of preparation of Master Plan or 
the Inter State Regional Plan. It is for the respective State Governments and Union 
Territory administration to take necessary action for the planned development under 
the relevant State Statutes. 
4.18 For Comments please see para no. 1.30 of Chapter I. 

76 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation (Serial No.27) 
 
UNDER UTILIZATION OF FUNDS AND UNDER ACHIEVEMENT OF PHYSICAL 
TARGETS BY CPWD: 
 
5.1 The head 4216 is pertaining to residential units constructed by CPWD. The 
Committee observe that during the 12 th Plan period from 2012 -13 to 2015 -16, the 
allocation is  Rs. 2082.72 crores. The expenditure upto February, 2015 is only Rs. 
1105.56 crore. Against the target for completion of 2274 units, the actual completion 
is only 1239 units. There is a shortage of 10 35 units. The head 4059 is related to 
non-residential units constructed by CPWD. The Committee observe that from the 
year 2012-13 to 2015-16, against the allocation of Rs. 850.71 crore, the expenditure 
is only Rs.372.6 crore. Against the target completion of 104045 no. of units the 
achievement is only 44636 units. There is a gap of 59409 units. The reasons for 
delay in completion of works and consequential underutilization of allocation are as 
under: 
(i) Major construction works takes two-three years for completion 
(ii) Bills of contractors are finalized about 4 -6 months after the completion of 
the projects.  
To overcome the problems the CPWD has taken the following measures: 
i) Periodical review of the expenditure is conducted by the Ministry of Urban 
Development with a view to fully utilizing the budget. 
ii)  Periodical meetings are conducted by DG, CPWD to review the progress 
of works and expenditure. 
iii)  Improvement in the contract management system by way of modification 
to the existing clauses of the contract for m. Modifications like introduction 
of incentive clause and mile stone for physical and financial progress of 
the project have brought about significant reduction in time over -run in 
project completion.  
iv) A scheme of e-governance for seamless integration of all its operations is 
under process which will enable close monitoring of progress by all levels 
of management.  
 

77 
 
The Committee have been apprised the following suggestions for expeditious 
completion of the projects: 
The layout plan along with detail drawi ngs are prepared by the Senior Architects 
duly scrutinized by the Chief Architect and ADG (Arch).  The officials are fully 
conversant with the Municipal / Local Bodies / Development Authorities bye -laws 
and guidelines.  Thus it is proposed, that the local authorities should be advised that 
the plans prepared by the Central Government architects should be considered as 
approved, and only formal letter can be issued.  This would cut down delays 
considerably. Recently Hon‟ble Urban Development Minister has tak en up the 
matter with the State Governments to examine this matter and to amend the local 
bye laws to this effect. 
 The Committee are in agreement with the CPWD and welcome the steps 
taken by the Urban Development Minister. They hope that positive outcome will flow 
from this noble initiative. The Committee desire the Ministry to apprise them the 
outcome thereof. 
Reply of the Government 
5.2 The response of the state governments on the issue of approval of building 
plans is awaited.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
                                                                            Pinaki Misra   
12 October, 2015                                                                                    
              Chairperson,                        
21 Asvina, 1936 (Saka)              Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
  

78 
 
ANNEXURE … 
                                            [Vide para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTH REPORT 
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN  DEVELOPLMENT ( SIXTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) 
 
I.  Total number of recommendations                               30 
                               
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government:                  
 Recommendation Nos.        23  
Percentage to total recommendations                                                        
                                                                                                (76.66%) 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:                     
Recommendation Nos.                                                             0 
    
Percentage to total recommendations                                     (0%)  
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of                                      
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation No.                                                             6 
      
Percentage to total recommendations                                          (20%) 
                             
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final       
             
replies of the Government are still awaited:                                         1 
 
Percentage to total recommendations                                    (3.33%)
           
           
                              