1 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
                          (2018-2019) 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT INCLUDING HAZARDOUS WASTE, MEDICAL 
WASTE  AND   
E-WASTE 
 
 
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
12 February, 2019,   23 Magha,1940 (Saka) 
25 


2 
 
 
TWENTY FIFTH  REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2018-2019) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
 
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT INCLUDING HAZARDOUS WASTE, MEDICAL 
WASTE AND E-WASTE 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 12.02.2019 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on… 12.02.2019 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
12 Febraury, 2019,  23  Magha, 1940 (Saka) 
 
 


3 
 
 
 
 C.U.D. No.: 111 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2019 By Lok Sabha Secretariat  
 
Publish under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by………… 
 
 

4 
 
Contents 
 
 Composition of the Committee (2015-16 & 2016-17 will be appended later)  
Sl.No
. 
DRAFT REPORT Page 
No. 
I. Introductory 
 
A.Overall scenario. 
B.Kinds of Solid Wastes  
(i) Wet wastes 
(ii) Dry wastes 
C.Challenges  
D. Constitutional position  
01-09 
II. Implementation of different Waste Management Rules 
A. Role of different Ministries 
B. Different Rules of Solid and other Waste Management 
(a) Salient features of Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 
(i) Role of State Government/Collector 
(ii) Role of Central Pollution Control Board 
(iii) Role of Urban Local Bodies  
10-20 
III. Solid Waste Management under Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban). 
(i)       A. Scheme for Solid Waste Management  
(ii)       B. Solid Waste Management - over all scenario 
(iii)           (a) Progress on Door to Door collection 
(iv)           (b) Progress on Source Segregation 
(v)           (c) Progress on Waste Processing 
(vi)           (d) Implementation constraints 
21-29 
IV. (vii) A. Issues related with waste Collection, Segregation and Recycling  
(a) Need for setting up robust infrastructure  and upgrading set up of scrap dealers 
(b) Need for joint efforts by Corporates, Recyclers etc with Government/ULBs 
(c) Need for promoting segregation at Source 
(i) Need for essential registration of rag pickers  by every Municipalities and 
ensuring their safety 
(ii) Need for promoting door to door collection by subsidizing waste collection by 
Municipalities need for taking fee for waste collection and segregation 
(iii) Need for setting up portable sorting sheds of waste for collection and 
segregation purposes within Group Housing Societies 
(d) Need for scientific collection and transportation of Solid Waste alongwith its 
time-bound target and monitoring 
(e) Extended Producers' Responsibility (EPR) 
30-55 
V. Different Models of Decentralised Solid Waste Management 
(a) Ambika Pur Model  
(b) Pune Model 
(c) Bangaluru, Banaras and Amritsar Models 
(d) Tamil Nadu and Goa Models 
(e) Best Practices in Solid Waste Management 
(f) Need for Decentralised Solid Waste Management wherever possible 
56-71 
VI. Issues related with Waste Generation and Compost 
Need for data base for waste generation and working out a Perspective Plan 
quantifying Waste Generation and compost analysis. 
72-73 
VII. Issues related with waste to compositing  
(a) Need for tapping emerging opportunities. 
(b) Need for Decentralised Solid Waste Management at the level of households, 
hotels etc. 
(c) Policy Issues 
74-93 

5 
 
(i) Need for enforcement of mandatory offtake of city compost by fertilizer 
company. 
(ii) Need for all India marketing licence for compost 
(iii) Need for warehousing facilities for organic manure.  
(iv) Need for nutrient based subsidy for organic manure. 
(v) Inclusion of city compost under Nil category under GST. 
(d) Promotion of Waste to Compost.                                                      
VIII. Issues related with waste to Energy 
(a) Issues related with landfills  
(i)   Need for disincentivising landfills 
(ii) Need for scientific landfills and 
(b) Capacity creation and related issues 
(i) Capacity creation 
(ii) Augmenting capacity building 
(iii) Promoting R&D in SWM 
(c) Issues related with Plastic Wastes 
(i) Use for road construction 
               (d) Issues related with C&D Wastes 
94-115 
IX. Allocation vis-à-vis utilization and related issues 
                         (a) Need for separate budget for Solid Waste Management 
                         (b)  Lower utilization of funds 
                         (c)  Issue of inadequate funds 
                         (d)  Need for attracting private investment in Solid Waste Management 
                         (e)  Generation of resource for SWM through Municipal Bonds 
116-125 
X. 'e' Waste Management    126-134 
XI. Bio Medical Waste Management 135-141 
XII. Management of Hazardous Waste 
(a) Kinds 
of hazardous wastes and available mechanism for its management 
(b) Statu
s of hazardous waste 
(c) Probl
em of its unscientific disposal 
(d) Salient Features of Hazardous and other Waste (Management and Transboundary 
Movement) Rules, 2016 
142-146 
 Part-II Recommendations and Observations 147-196 
 Annexure - I 
Annexure - II 
Annexure - III 
 
 
 
 
 

6 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2018-19) 
Shri Pinaki Misra         -        Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Pradhan  Baruah 
3. Shri Ramesh Bidhuri 
4. Shri Ashok  Shankarrao Chavan 
5. Shri Dilipkumar  Mansukhlal Gandhi 
6. Dr. Dharam Vira Gandhi 
7. Shri Maheish Girri 
8. Shri R.Gopalakrishnan 
9. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
10. Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi 
11. Shri P.C. Mohan 
12. Shri  Srinivas Kesineni Nani 
13. Shri K. Parasuraman 
14. Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil 
15. Shri Charanjeet Singh Rori 
16. Shri Alok Sanjar 
17. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
18. Shri Anil (alias Padmakar) Gulabrao Shirole 
19. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
20. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh  
21. Prof. Kuruppassery Varkey Thomas 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
23. Shri R.S. Bharathi 
24. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
25. Smt Thota Seetharama Lakshmi* 
26. Shri Husain Dalwai 
27. Dr. Tazeen Fatma 
28. Shri Ahamed Hassan 
29. Dr. Anil Jain 
30. Dr. Prabhakar Kore  
31. Shri K.C. Ramamurthy 
 
   *Nominated to the Committee w.e.f 03.12.2018 in place of Shri.  
   Y.S. Chowdhary. 
 
 

7 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri  P.C. Koul                                   -          Joint Secretary 
2. Shri  A.K. Shah           -          Director 
3. Shri  Mukesh Kumar          -          Executive Assistant 
 

8 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2017-2018) 
Shri Pinaki Misra         -        Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Pradan  Baruah 
3. Shri Ramesh Bidhuri 
4. Shri Ashok  Shankarrao Chavan 
5. Shri Dilipkumar  Mansukhlal Gandhi 
6. Dr. Dharam Vira Gandhi 
7. Shri Maheish Girri 
8. Shri R.Gopalakrishnan 
9. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
10. Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi 
11. Shri P.C. Mohan 
12. Shri  Srinivas Kesineni Nani 
13. Shri K. Parasuraman 
14. Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil 
15. Shri Charanjeet Singh Rori 
16. Shri Alok Sanjar 
17. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
18. Shri Anil Shirole 
19. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
20. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
21. Prof. K. V. Thomas 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri R.S. Bharathi  
23. Shri Husain Dalwai 
24. Dr. Tazeen Fatma 
25. Shri K.C. Ramamurthy 
26. $Shri Y.S. Chowdary@ 
27. $Shri Ahamed Hassan# 
28. $Dr. Anil Agrawal@ 
29. $Dr. Anil Jain* 
30. Vacant@ 
31. Vacant@ 
 
$   Shri Y.S. Chowdary, Shri Ahamed Hassan, Dr. Anil Agrawal and Dr. Anil Jain have been nominated 
as  
   the Member of Standing Committee on Urban Development  w.e.f. 02/06/2018.  
 
* Shri Mukul Roy resigned from Rajya Sabha Membership w.e.f. 11/10/2017.  
 
# Shri Parvez Hashmi retired from Rajya Sabha Membership w.e.f. 27/01/2018 . 
 @ Shri Anil Desai, Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna, Shri Ajay Sancheti and Shri Devender Goud 
 T. retired from Rajya Sabha Membership w.e.f. 02.04.2018.  

9 
 
 
(v) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2016-2017) 
Shri Pinaki Misra         -        Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Ramesh Bidhuri 
3. Shri Ram Charan Bohra 
4.  Shri Charanjeet Singh Rori 
5. Shri Ashok  Shankarrao Chavan 
6.  Dr. Dharam Vira Gandhi 
7. Shri Dilip  Mansukhlal Gandhi 
8.  Shri Maheish Girri 
9.  Shri R.Gopalakrishnan 
10. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
11.  Shri  Srinivas Kesineni Nani 
12. Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi 
13. Shri P.C. Mohan 
14. Shri K. Parasuraman 
15.  Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil 
16. Shri Alok Sanjar 
17.  Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
18.  Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
19. Prof. K. V. Thomas 
20. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
21. Shri Pradan  Baruah 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri R.S. Bharathi 
23. Dr. Subhash Chandra 
24. Shri Husain Dalwai 
25. Shri Anil Desai 
26.  Shri Parvez Hashmi  
27. Shri K. G. Kenye 
28. Shri Mahesh Poddar 
29. Shri K.C. Ramamurthy 
30. Shri Ajay Sancheti 
31. Shri Dharamapuri Srinivas 
 
 
(vi) 

10 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2015-2016) 
                           Shri Pinaki Misra         -        Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Shri Ramesh Bidhuri 
4.  Shri Ram Charan Bohra 
5. Shri Dushyant Chautala 
6.  Shri Ashok  Shankrarao Chavan 
7. Dr. Dharam Vira Gandhi 
8.  Shri Dilip  Mansukhlal Gandhi 
9.  Shri Maheish Girri 
10. Shri R.Gopalakrishnan 
11.  Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua  
12. Shri  Srinivas Kesineni Nani 
13.  Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi 
14. Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
15. Shri P.C. Mohan 
16.  Shri K. Parasuraman 
17. Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil 
18.  Shri Alok Sanjar 
19.  Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
20. Prof. K. V. Thomas 
21. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Smt. Vandana Chavan 
23. Shri Husain Dalwai 
24. Shri Anil Desai 
25.  Shri Parvez Hashmi  
26. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna 
27. Shri Mukul Roy 
28 Shri C.P. Thakur 
29. Shri K.G. Kenye* 
30. Shri R.S. Bharathi** 
31.  Vacant # 
 ___________________________________________________ 
*  Shri K.G. Kenye  had been nominated w.e.f., 20 May, 2016, Vice Shri Khekiho  Zhimomi, expired on 26 November, 
2015. 
** Shri R.S. Bharathi has been nominated w.e.f., 3 August, 2016, Vice Shri S. Thangavelu, retired from Rajya Sabha 
on 29 June, 2016. 
# Vice Shri Satish Sharma retired from Rajya Sabha on 4 July, 2016.    
 
 

11 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2018 -19) 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) having been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report 
on their behalf, present this Twenty Fifth Report on the subject, "Solid Waste 
Management including Hazardous Waste, Medical Waste and E -Waste"  of the Ministry 
of Housing and Urban Affairs. 
 
2. The Committee  were briefed by the representatives of the then Ministry of 
Urban Development on 13 th July, 2015 and also took evidence of the non -officials of 
Centre for Policy Research, Centre for Science & Environment, Swachh, Pune and 
representatives of Central Pollution Control Board on 4 th August, 2015. The Committee 
also heard the representatives of ASSOCHAM on 30 th August, 2017. The Committee 
took oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs on 
22nd January, 2018.  
 
3. The Committee wish to express their gratitude to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs and non -officials witnesses for appea ring before 
the Committee and placing the requisite material/information from time to time in 
connection with examination of the subject. 
 
4. The Committee also place on record the valuable contributions made by the 
previous committees (2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-18) on the subject. 
 
5. The Committee considered and adopted the draft Report at their Sitting held on 
11th February, 2019. 
 
New Delhi;  
11 February, 2019 
22 Magha (Saka 1940) 
          Pinaki Misra,  
               Chairperson 
Standing Committee  
on Urban Development 
                                       

12 
 
  
DRAFT REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
Introductory 
A. Overall Scenario 
 Generation of waste is a part of human existence.  The higher we soar above the 
basic level of existence, the greater and more diverse wo uld be the nature of waste 
generated.  This is also visibly evident in Indian context.  The significant increase in 
waste generation in Indian cities is  also attributed to over -population, industrialization 
and many other factors  that strive for economic g rowth. In this connection, Ministry of 
Environment & Forest & Climate change has stated that with the ever increasing 
population and urbanization, the waste management has emerged as a huge challenge 
in the country.  Not only the waste has increased in qua ntity but the characteristics of 
the waste have also changed tremendously over a period with the introduction of so 
many new gadgets and equipment s.  It is estimated that about 65 million ton nes of 
waste is generated annually in the country out of which ab out 62 million ton nes is 
Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) which include organic waste, recyclables like pa per, 
plastic, wood, glass etc. About 45 -50% of this MSW is biodegradable/wet/organic 
waste, 20-25 % is recyclable waste & about 30-35% is inert/debris. 
1.2 Only about 75-80% of the municipal waste gets collected and out of this only 22-
28% is processed and treated and remaining is deposited indiscriminately at dump 
yards.  It is projected that by the year 2031 , the MSW generation shall increase to 165 
million tonnes and to 436 million tonnes by 2050.  Eliminating, dumping and minimizing 
releases of hazardous  chemicals by paying special attention to air quality and municipal 
and other waste management and reducing waste generation through prevention, 

13 
 
reduction, recycling and reuse globally have been one of the Su stainable Development 
Goals (SDGs) that have been adopted by UN General Assembly in September, 2015.  
1.3 It has been estimated that the Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) spend about 60 -70% 
of total expenditure on street sweeping, 20-30% on transportation and less than 5% on 
municipal disposal of waste, which shows that hardly any attention is given to scientific 
disposal of waste.  The waste collection efficiency in India ranges between 70% and 
90% in major Me tro cities, whereas in several smaller cities it is below 50%.  However, 
if the current 62 million tones annual generation of MSW continues to be dumped 
without treatment; it will need 3.40 lakh  cubic meter of landfill space every day.  
Considering the proj ected waste generation of 165 million tonnes by 2031, the 
requirement of land for setting up landfill for 20 years (considering 10 meter high waste 
pile) could be as high as 66 thousand hectares (1240 hectare per year) of precious 
land, which our country cannot afford to waste.  Currently, of the estimated 62 million 
tonnes of MSW generated annually by 377 million people in urban areas, more than 
80% is disposed of indiscriminately at dump yards in an unhygienic manner by the 
municipal authorities leading to problems of health and environmental degradation.   
1.4 As per NITI Aayog, presently, out of the total MSW generated, only 29.51% is 
subjected to treatment which, however, is poised to improve with the Swachh Bharat 
Mission (Urban) scheme of Government o f India being in full swing. Some of the major 
achievements of the mission are as under:  
i) 77% of the total wards (about 65,0 00 wards) now have door -to-door 
collection facilities, with 38% (32,000) wards having 100% segregation of 
waste.  
ii) 15 Lacs million to nne per annum of compost production per year against 
the assessed potential of 54 lacs Million tonne per year.  
iii) 90 MW electricity generation against the assessed capacity of 511 MW. 
 

14 
 
 
B. Kinds of Solid Wastes  
1.5 The major solid waste contributors in India are as under: 
(i) Municipal Solid Waste 
(ii) Solid Waste generated from sewage 
(iii) Industrial Waste 
(iv)Bio-Medical Waste 
(v) e-Waste 
(vi)Nuclear Waste 
(vii) Agriculture Waste 
1.6 The NITI Aayog informed that Solid Waste is the unwanted or useless solid 
materials generated from human activities in residential, industrial or commercial areas.  
It may be categorized in three ways.  viz: 
(i) Origin (domestic, industrial, commercial, construction or 
institutional) 
(ii) Contents (organic material, glass, metal, plastic paper, etc.) 
(iii) Hazard potential (to xic, non -toxic, flammable, radioactive, 
infectious, etc.). 
1.7 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has outlined the following kinds of 
Solid Wastes: 
(a) Wet Waste 
(b) Dry Waste which include Sanitary napkins and diapers, Material Recovery 
Facility (MRF), Refused Desired Fuel (RDF) 
(c) Inert Wastes 
1.8 As per National Housing Federation, t he Solid Waste includes plastics, food 
waste, bottles, paper and other wastes such as industrial waste, construction and 
demolition waste, bio-medical waste, electronic waste and nuclear/radioactive waste. 
(i) Plastic Waste: Plastic waste  roughly comprises 10% of total garbage.  
In India 5.6 million tonnes of plastic waste is produced each year, of which only 

15 
 
20% is recycled.  Plastic Waste in Delhi is estimated at 690 mt, Mumbai 408 mt. 
and Bengaluru 314 mt./day.  
(ii) Industrial Waste is produced by the factories, mills and mines.  The 
industrial waste can be non -hazardous, non-toxic, such as waste fibre produced 
by agriculture, or it could be toxic, chemical and hazardous.  It pollutes t he 
water, air and land. 
(iii) Construction and Demolition Waste (C&D Waste): The progressive 
pace of construction and demo lition in city works have enhanced the debris to a 
large extent.  It could be as high as one -third of urban waste in areas having 
extensive construction activity, while 15 per cent in a normal situation.  It needs 
to be treated separately, and can be recycled to a large extent. 
(iv) Electronic Waste includes all secondary computers, entertainment 
devices, mobile phones and other items, such as television sets and refrigerators. 
The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MEIT Y) has 
informed that electronic waste  creates a global crisis due  to environmental 
degradation. The major concern of electronic waste (e -waste) management in 
India is recycling of e -waste in non -formal units by unscientific, unhealthy and 
non-environmental non-friendly methods.  Like other parts of the world, India is 
also facing serious challenges due to growing generation of e -waste, lack of 
environmental awareness among the public, consumers, producers and social 
and economic aspects associated with it. As per the Department of Chemicals 
and Petro -Chemicals, E-waste typically contains complex combinations of 
plastics and metals & other components down to microscopic levels.  
 
 

16 
 
(v) Bio Medical Waste 
As per information furnished by Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare.  Bio -Medical Waste constitutes merely 15 -25% of total waste 
generated in a hospital but has the propensity to cause transmission of 
pathogens namely Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), Hepatitis B and 
Hepatitis C Virus es, etc. making it essential  that due care is exercised while 
handling and disposing it.  Currently, in India  there are around 20 00 Common 
Bio-Medical Waste Treatment Facilities (CBMWTF) in op eration which is 
inadequate for Health facilities in 750 district s.  All such waste which adversely 
harm the environment or health of a person is considered as infectious  and such 
waste has to be managed as per BMWM Rules, 2018.  Traditionally, metals, glass 
and ceramics were used for medical implant devices and supports. However, 
polymers are better suited to many of applications as they offer lighter weight, 
better biocompatibility and lower cost.   
(vi) Hazardous waste 
 As per Department of Chemicals an d Petrochemicals , Hazardous 
Waste means any waste which by reason of characteristics such as physical, 
chemical, biological, reactive, toxic, flammable, explosive or corrosive, poisons, 
liberation of toxic gases in contact with air and water, causes danger  or is likely 
to cause danger to health or environment.  Hazardous Waste is generated during 
Petrochemical processes, pyrolytic operations, petroleum refinery, during 
metallurgical operations in the production of metals, metal surface treatment 
operation, production of fertilizers, production of plastic, cement production, 
leather tanneries etc.  Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change has 
notified Hazardous and other Waste (Management and Transboundary 
Movement) Rule, 2015.  According  to which,  they are the Nodal Ministry for 
import and export matters of hazardous and other waste.  MOEF&CC/CPCB are 

17 
 
responsible to issue guidelines or standard operating processors for 
environmentally sound management of hazardous and other waste from time to 
time.  CPCB issue guidelines for safe handling, storage and transport.   
 
1.9 In this connection outlining the solid waste processing the MOH&UA has 
informed the centre that a t processing stage, various methods / types of solid 
waste treatment adopted  are as follows: 
 
For Wet Waste 
 
i.      Decentralised/Centralised Composting  
Composting can be done in decentralized or centralised manner 
including onsite composting of waste by Bulk Generators.  
 
Decentralized composting can be for a specific ward or area where  
composting of biodegradable waste is done up to 5 TPD capacity at a 
place. The different technologies that can be taken up under 
decentralized technology are pit composting, pot composting, bag 
composting, OWC, windrows etc.   
 
Centralized composting incl udes composting of waste in a centralized 
manner, where biodegradable waste from all wards is brought into a 
centralized facility and composted through either windrow composting 
or other such large scale composting methods more than 5 TPD 
capacity". 
 
 Decentralised options can be tailored to the local waste stream and 
the climatic, social, and economic conditions; 
Decentralised systems reduce the cost of collection, transportation, and 
disposal of waste by the ULBs. 
 
ii. Bio methanation 
Biomethanation is the  conversion of biodegradable waste into biogas 
under anaerobic conditions. In this process the biodegradable 
components including the food waste etc are broken down into 
methane under anaerobic conditions. The methane gas thus generated 
can be used as a fu el. Biomethanation plants can be decentralized or 
centralized. 
 
For Dry Waste 
 
i. Sanitary napkins and Diapers 
 
Sanitary napkin treatment includes incineration facilities where the 
sanitary napkins collected can be incinerated.  Alternatively, the wastes 

18 
 
can be taken after disinfection to waste to energy plants also for 
incineration. 
 
ii. Material Recovery Facility (MRF) 
 
Material recovery facility are those facilities where dry waste is further 
segregated into valuable components including plastics, paper,  metal, 
glass etc. Material recovery facilities can be manual or automated 
based on the size of the plant. For small capacity plants, segregation 
table and manual segregation are the equipments used. For large scale 
plants, magnetic belts, separators and o ther segregation equipments 
are used.    
 
iii. Refused Derived Fuel (RDF) 
 
The waste material which is left behind after segregation can be used 
as combustibles. The waste materials/ combustibles are shredded to a 
desired size to be used as fuel material k nown as Refuse Derived Fuel 
(RDF). RDF can be used by cement kilns or boilers as replacement of 
other fuels including coal and diesel. 
 
iv. Waste to Energy plants including ones on cluster basis 
 
Waste to energy (WtE) refers to the process of generating en ergy in 
the form of heat or electricity from MSW. Energy from MSW can be 
achieved through thermal processes like incineration or combustion of 
refuse derived fuel (RDF); and biological processes like biomethanation 
and further conversion into electrical po wer or automotive fuel 
(compressed biogas).Only RDF will go to waste to energy plants. 
 
Inert Waste 
 
i. Filling in Scientific landfill (SLF) 
 
Scientific landfill are landfills developed as per specifications provided 
under SWM Rules, 2016, and are used for  disposing inert waste after 
scientific processing of waste. 
 
Challenges of SWM 
1.10 The NITI Aayog while outlining the following challenges in the Solid Waste 
Management in the countr y informed the Committee that the crux of the Solid Waste 
Management including Municipal Solid Waste lies in efficient collection and segregation 
at source, which despite the efforts made by the Government of India through its 
policies highlighted above, remains a major challenge with the prime onus on the 
Municipal bodies. Th e Urban Rejuvenation Mission, although, has driven the Urban 
sector in a designed manner for the first time, however, the strengthening of the 

19 
 
Municipal bodies is yet to be completed. Being a major stakeholder, the State 
Governments also have to come forwa rd in this regard and contribute their might to 
solve this huge problem of Solid Waste Management.  
 Some of the cities have done exemplary work in the Solid Waste Management 
like Ambikapur and Pune and are models to be emulated by other cities. These citi es 
have evolved their own models by bringing rag -pickers into the fold. For example, 
Ambikapur in Chhattisgarh, owing to intensive training, general awareness and citizens‟ 
participation, became the first municipal corporation in India to digitize garbage 
management, make the city dustbin free and convert 'garbage into gold' by employing 
poor women from Self Help Groups (SHGs) to collect the waste.  
 What is more heartening is the emergence of several start -ups in this sector that 
is likely to give impetus to this sector once the momentum is gained. It is envisaged 
that the scenario of Solid Waste Management Sector would improve in the country 
provided the State Governments also come forward in strengthening the Municipal 
bodies.  
 To sum up, while the Solid  Waste Management has many challenges, it offers 
huge opportunities in terms of business and employment generation. A more concerted 
effort from all the stakeholders would, however, be required in addressing the same.   
 (c) Constitutional Position 
1.11 The MOH&UA in its submission before the Committee stated  that t he 
Constitution of India identifies water supply and sanitation as a State subject.  The 74th 
Amendment to the Constitution which was enacted in 1993 identified water supply and 
sanitation the fu nctions that need to be transferred by the State Government to the 
Urban Local Bodies (ULBs). However, the transfer of  functions is in transition.  
Historically, in addition to the ULBs, the water supply and  sanitation functions have also 
been discharged Parastatals/State agencies which may cater to the demands of the 
entire State or of a particular city. Thus, the responsibility for planning, design, 

20 
 
implementation, operation and maintenance of water supply and sanitation systems 
rests with the concerned ULBs, Parastatal agencies and State Governments. 
 At the central level, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs is the nodal 
Ministry for formulation of policies, strategies and guidelines and assists the States by 
providing financial assistance for deve lopment of water supply and sanitation 
infrastructure in the cities and towns.  
1.12 In this context, the Ministry of Environment & Forest & Climate Change   also 
informed the Committee  that the State Governments have the prime responsibility for 
enforcing and implementing various provisions of the Rules to achieve the stated 
objectives of the Rules as above and a communication was sent to all the States/UTs 
for effective implementation of these Rules.  
*****

21 
 
CHAPTER II 
IMPLEMENTATION OF WASTE MANAGEMENT RULES 
A. Rules Regulating Solid and other Wastes Management 
2.1 The MOHUA has stated that these different types of wastes are regulated under 
following Rules notified by the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change 
(MoEF&CC) which also is the monitoring authority:- 
(1) Solid Waste Management (SWM) Rules 2016 
(2) Plastic Waste Management (PWM) Rules 2016 
(3) e-Waste Management (EWM) Rules 2016 
(4) Bio-Medical Waste Management Rules 2016 
(5) Hazardous Waste Management Rules 2016 
 
B. Role of Various Ministries  
 
2.2 The role of various Ministries as outlined in Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 
is  as under:- 
Sl. 
No. 
Ministry Role 
(i) Ministry of 
Environment 
Forests and Climate 
Change 
Over all implementation through a Central 
Monitoring Committee consisting offices from other 
Ministries. 
(ii) Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs 
(a) To take periodic review of measures taken by 
States and local bodies for improving  solid waste 
management projects funded by the Ministry and 
execution of projects funded by the Ministry at 
least once in a year. 
(b) To formulate National Policy and strategy on 
solid waste management including policy on waste 
to energy in consultation with stakeholders within 
six months from the date of notification of  Rules. 
(c) To facilitate States/UTs in formula tion of State 
Policy and strategy on solid waste management.  
(d) To promote research and development in solid 
waste management. 
(e) To undertake training and capacity building of 
local bodies and other stakeholders. 
(f) To provide technical assistance and  finances to  
States/UTs and ULBs on solid waste management 
 

22 
 
(iii) Department of 
Fertilizers, Ministry 
of Chemical and 
Fertilizers 
(a) To provide market development assistance on 
city compost. 
(b) Promotion  of co -marketing of compost with 
chemical fertilizers 
(iv) Ministry of 
Agriculture & 
Farmers Welfare  
(a) To provide flexibility in Fertilizers control order 
for manufacture and sale of compost 
(b) To propogate utilization of compost on farm 
land. 
(c) To set up labs to test quality of compost 
produced by local authorities. 
(v) Power (a) To decide tariff or charges for power generated 
from waste to energy plants based on solid waste . 
(b) Compulsory power purchase from such waste 
to energy plants by distribution companies. 
(vi)  New and 
Renewable Energ y 
Sources 
(a) To facilitate infrastructure creation for waste to 
energy plants and  
(b) To provide appropriate subsidy or incentive for 
such waste to energy plants 
 
2.3 Besides these, wastes like Battery Waste, chemical waste and radioactive waste 
etc. are regulated under various Rules notified by MoEF&CC from time to time. 
2.4 The Ministry of Environment and Forests and Climate Change (MOEFCC) 
outlining their role about Solid Waste Management inter alia informed the Committee 
that they have notified Hazardous and other Waste (Management and Transboundary 
Movement) Rules, 2015.  According  to which, they are the nodal Ministry for import 
and export matters of hazardous and other waste.  MOEF&CC/CPCB are responsible to 
issue guidelines or standard operating procedures for environmentally sound 
management of hazardous and other waste from time to time.  CPCB issue guidelines 
for safe handling, storage and transport. 
 In the administrative structure of the Central Government, the primary concern 
of the Ministry  of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEFCC) is for the 
planning, promotion, coordination and overseeing the implementation of our country's 
environmental and forestry policies and programs.  The objectives of the Ministry are 
well supported by a se t of legislative and regulatory measures, aimed at the 

23 
 
preservation, conservation and protection of the environment.  The prescribed 
authorities for the enforcement of the said legislative and regulatory measures in 
States/Union Territories are local agenc ies such as State Environment Departments, 
State Pollution Control Boards, Pollution Control Committees in respect of Union 
Territories, State Urban Development Departments, Urban Local Bodies etc. 
2.5 The Ministry of EF&CC further submitted  that it  had no tified the Solid Waste 
Management (SWM) Rules, 2016 in supersession of the Municipal Solid Waste 
(Management and Handling) Rules, 29008 vide GSR No.1357(E) on dated 8th April, 
2016. 
 Under the Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016, the Ministry of Environment , 
Forest and Climate Change is responsible for overall monitoring the implementation of 
these rules in the country.  The Ministry is mandated to constitute a Central Monitoring 
Committee (CMC) under the chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Environ ment, Forest 
and Climate Change comprising of the officials of various Ministries.  This Committee is 
mandated to meet at least once a year to monitor and review the implementation of the 
rules. 
2.6 Asked whether there is somewhere or the other there a lack of co ordination 
among above Ministries responsible for making solid waste management a success at 
ground level, the MOH&UA averred that t here is no lack of coordination between the 
ministries. In Inter - ministerial committees on various issues, re presentatives of all 
concerned ministries are nominated to elicit the views of concerned 
ministries/departments.  However, each ministry has been given separate mandate and 
jurisdiction as per Allocation of Business Rules. 
2.7 Asked whether in view of prevailing challenges in  solid waste management in 
urban areas, the role of nodal Ministry of Urban Development is a policy formulator and 
coordinator with State Government is very crucial, the MoH&UA replied in affirmative. 
2.8 The Committee further wanted to know whether a lot more was required to be 
done in the area of solid waste management in the country  in response the MoH&UA 

24 
 
stated that the M inistry is putting all efforts to improve solid waste management  
situation in the country.  But since the task is closely relate d with behaviour change of 
citizens, lot more is to be done on it , including achieving anti  littering, segregation of 
waste at source, it's appropriate processing which includes on site processing of waste 
by bulk waste generators, use of plastics, managem ent of Construction and Demolition 
Waste. 
2.9 Outlining the system of collection and segregation of waste, the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs in a written note stated that c ollection of segregated 
municipal waste from source is an essential step in SWM.  Waste should be segregated 
by waste generators into three fractions: wet (green container), dry ( Blue container), 
and domestic hazardous waste.  This is referred to as the three -bin system.  Apart from 
these wastes horticulture waste, construction an d demolition and sanitary waste should  
be stored and collected separately.  The wet fraction should preferably be used for 
composting; and the dry waste should be sent for recycling , also to be ensured that 
sanitary waste should be wrapped securely, collec ted and handed over separately to 
the waste collectors.  Also domestic hazardous waste should be collected separately 
and deposited at the designated collection centers. 
 Waste collection service is divided into primary and secondary collection.  
Primary collection refers to the process of collecting waste from households, markets, 
institutions, and other commercial establishments and taking the waste to a storage 
depot or transfer station or directly to the disposal site, depending on the size of the 
city and the prevalent management system.  Secondary collection includes picking up 
waste from community bins waste storage depots, or transfer stations and transporting 
it to waste processing sites or to the final disposal site.  Primary collection must be 
introduced bother in small and large towns and cities.  Secondary collection systems are 
necessary in all cities and towns for collection of waste in the community bins or at the 

25 
 
secondary waste storage depots or at decentralized sorting centers by sanitation  
workers for onward transportation of waste to processing and disposal facilities."  
2.10 with regards to  salient features of Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 , the 
following information was furnished to the Committee: 
 Salient Features of Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016:- 
(a) The ambit of the rules has been expanded beyond Municipal area to 
cover, outgrowths in urban agglomerations, census towns, notified industrial 
townships, areas under the control of Indian Railways, airports, airbase, Port and 
harbour, defense establishments, special economic zones, State and Central 
government organizations, places of pilgrims, religious & historical importance 
(b) The SWM rules, 2016 emphasizes on source segregation of waste, a basic 
need for channelizing the waste to wealth by recovery, reuse and recycle.  
(c) Responsibilities of Generators have been introduced to segregate the 
waste at source namely in to three streams, Wet (Biodegradable), Dry (Plastic, 
Paper, metal, wood, etc) and domestic hazardous wastes (diapers, napki ns, 
empty containers of cleaning agents, mosquito repellents, etc.). 
(d) Generator would have to pay ‘User Fee’ to waste collector and for ‘Spot 
Fine’ for Littering and Non-segregation as specified by the local bodies . 
(e) The issues related to collection and disposal of sanitary waste like diapers, 
sanitary pads and other disposal items have been addressed.  
(f) The roles of local authorities have been mentioned more explicitly. The 
timelines have been given to local authorities for putting in place namely the (i) 
door to door collection system by involving Self Help Groups/ Ragpickers (ii) 
infrastructure for waste management - decentralized processing of wet waste, 
Material Recovery Facilities/ collection centers for dry waste,  (iii) transportation 
and secondary storage of segregated waste and (iv) waste processing facilities.  
(g) Bulk and Institutional Generators, Market Associations, event organizers  
and Hotels and restaurants have been made responsible for Segregation and 
Sorting and to have partnership with Local Bo dies for management of waste 
generated in their premises.  
(h) New townships, Group Housing Societies (exceeding certain area) have 
been made responsible to develop in -house waste handling, and processing 
arrangements for biodegradable waste.  
(i) The developers o f Special Economic Zone, Industrial Estate, Industrial 
park to  earmark at least 5% of the total area of the plot or minimum 5 plots/ 
sheds for recovery and recycling facility. 
(j) treet Vendor to ensure segregation at source and deposit waste at 
designated places. 
(k) To promote sale of Compost along with Chemical Fertilizers, 
responsibilities for Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilisers and Ministry of Agriculture 
and Farmers Welfare have been introduced. 
(l) To promote waste to energy, responsibilities for Ministry of Ne w and 
Renewable Energy and Ministry of Power have been introduced. 

26 
 
(m) To promote utilisation of RDF, industrial units using fuel and located 
within 100 km from an solid waste based RDF plant to replace at least 5 % of  
their fuel requirement by RDF  
(n) Compost Standards prescribed in line with Fertiliser Control Order (FCO). 
 
(i) Role of State Government/District Authorities 
2.11 During the course of examination , it came out before the Committee that under 
the Solid Waste Management Rule, 2016, the District Authority is to facilitate, identify 
and allocate suitable land for solid waste management and to review performance of 
ULBs. 
2.12 Asked whether District Authorities are doing their jobs well in major cities and 
whether MOH&UA is reviewing the role of ULBs as st ipulated, and whether ULBs are 
facing problems like public resistance for giving  land for suc h waste disposal purposes, 
the MoH&UA submitted to the Committee that u nder rule 12 of Solid Waste 
Management Rules, 2016  ‘Duties of District Magistrate or Distr ict Collector or Deputy 
Commissioner’ the rule mandates the District Magistrate or District Collector or as the 
case may be, the Deputy Commissioner to do the following activities:  
(a) Facilitate identification and allocation of suitable land as per clause (f ) of 
rules 11 for setting up solid waste processing and disposal facilities to local 
authorities  in his district in close coordination with the Secretary -in-charge of 
State Urban Development Department within one year from the date of 
notification of these rules;   
 
(b) Review the performance of local bodies, at least once in a quarter on 
waste segregation, processing, treatment and disposal and take corrective 
measures in consultation with the Commissioner or Director of Municipal 
Administration or Director o f local bodies and secretary -in-charge of the State 
Urban Development.  
 The primary concern of MoEF&CC is the planning, promotion, co -
ordination and overseeing the implementation of the country’s environmental 
and forestry policies and programs. The objec tives of the Ministry are well 
supported by a set of legislative and regulatory measures, aimed at the 
preservation, conservation and protection of the environment.   
 The prescribed authorities for the enforcement of these legislative and 
regulatory measures in States/ Union Territories are local agencies such as State 
Environment Departments, State Pollution Control Boards, Pollution Control 
Committees in respect of Union Territories, State Urban Development 
Departments, Urban Local Bodies, etc". 

27 
 
2.13 About Implementing Agencies  the Ministry of MOHUA quoting MOEFCC has 
stated that prescribed authority for implementation of the provision of these rules is the 
State Pollution Control Boards/Pollution Control Committee in  States/UTs. In case of 
Health Care Est ablishment of Armed Forces, prescribed authority for implementation is 
Director General, Armed Forces Medical Services. Every State Government or Union 
Territory Administration has to constitute an Advisory Committee for the respective 
State or Union Terri tory under the Chairmanship of respective health Secretary 
including members from Department of Environment, Urban Development, Animal 
Husbandry and Veterinary Science to oversee the implementation of the rules in the 
respective State and to Advice for any  improvement. The Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change has constituted Central Monitoring Committee under the 
Chairmanship of Additional Secretary including members from Ministry of Health & 
Family Welfare (MoH &FW), State Health Secretaries, SPCBs, CPCB to review the 
implementation of the Bio -medical Waste Management (BM WM) Rules, 2016 in the 
country. 
2.14 In this connection, a representative of  Pepsico from  ASSOCHAM submitted 
before the Committee:  
"Sir, we all know that urban solid waste man agement poses a great risk to the 
environment, society as well as offers an excellent opportunity for resource 
conservation that the society can really capitalize on.  So, urban solid waste 
management needs a key stakeholders. The key stakeholders here are : urban 
local bodies, which is our Municipal Corporations, the regulators -CPCB and 
Ministry of Environment, businesses house corporate like us and community and 
consumer.  All wastes begin its journey as a part of products that businesses 
produce for consumers to consume.  So, the that is the genesis of waste".  
2.15 About implementation, witness also stated: 
"Sir, rules are important and strict regulatory concerns should be attached.  Now, 
there are plastics and few very strict regulations have come.  With out strict 
regulations, things will not work in India at all.  You may keep doing it for 10, 30, 
50 years, but it is not going to work.  Strict rules should be there.  Be it public or 
a normal person like me, who is using it, strict rules are important and  they have 

28 
 
to come from the Government side. We cannot do much about it.  Basically, rules 
and regulations are there but nobody is really implementing them. If you go and 
see those litters, you would not find this, you may not find others.  It is all those 
polybags.....Sir, Solid Waste Rule, 2016 has all the rules in the book, but nothing 
is being followed right from the souce of generation till processing and till usage.  
The Pollution Control Board is not following it; the generator is not following it; 
the urban local body is not following; the cement plants are following". 
2.16 Asked about the action taken by Central Pollution Control Board, the MOH&UA 
stated that according to CPCB , 24 States/UTs are reporting their progress on various 
components of SWM R ules.  The States/UTs not mentioned are ANI, Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli, Daman & Diu, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Lakshadweep, Manipur, Nagaland, 
Rajasthan, Mizoram, West Bengal and Sikkim. 
(ii) Role of Central Pollution Control Board 
2.17 Under the above Rules, t he following works have been assigned to Central 
Pollution Control Board: 
(a) To coordinate with State Control Board for implementation of above Rules 
and adherence to prescribed standards by local authorities. 
(b) To formulate standard for ground water, ambience air, noise pollution , 
leachates  in respect of all solid waste management 
(c) To review environmental standard for solid waste processing to facilitate 
treatment technologies and their updation. 
(d) To review proposals of State Pollution Control Board at least onc e in a year 
on use of new technologies in processing, recycling and treatment of solid 
waste. 
(e) To prepare annual report on implementation of these Rules based on reports 
reserved from State Pollution Control Board and submit the same to Ministry 
of Environment and Forests and the report shall be put on public domain. 
(f) To publish guidelines for maintaining buffer zone restricting any residential, 
commercial or any other construction activity from the outer boundary of 
waste processing and disposal facilities for different sizes at facilities handling 
more than five tons per day of solid waste. 
Applicability of Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 
2.18 Section 2 of the above Solid Waste Management Rule, 2016 stipulates as under:- 
“These Rules shall apply to  every urban local body, outgrowths in urban 
agglomerations, census towns as declared by the Registrar General and Census 
Commissioner of India, notified areas, notified industrial townships, areas under  

29 
 
the control of Indian Railways, airports, airbases,  Ports and harbours, defence 
establishments, special economic zones, State and Central government 
organisations, places of pilgrims, religious and historical importance as may be  
notified by respective State government from time to time and to every 
domestic, institutional, commercial and any other non -residential solid waste 
generator situated in the areas except industrial waste, hazardous waste, 
hazardous chemicals, bio-medical wastes, e-waste, lead acid batteries and radio -
active waste, that are covere d under separate rules frames under the 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986”. Ipt is commonly seen that above wastes 
particularly hazardous bio -medical waste e -waste etc. are not properly stored 
and disposed off in most of the major cities making them as ey e sore and 
causing health hazard also". 
2.19 Asked about whether MOH&UA has mapped out identified such areas for proper 
is disposal of such wastes, the MOH&UA stated  that (i) The Municipal Waste streams 
are mapped at ULB level and the mechanism (Equipment and financial) for collection, 
transportation, processing and disposal are worked out locally.  (ii) The other waste 
streams are not authorized to be mixed into MSW Streams and has to be collected and 
channelized as per procedures mapped under aegis of the Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare (MoH&FW) and Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change (MoEF&CC) 
under applicable rules. 
Role of Urban Local Bodies: 
2.20 The Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 define the role of Local Bodies as 
given below:- 
(a) To prepare a Solid Waste Management Plan within the six months 
from date of notification of State policy. 
(b)To arrange for door to door collection of segregated Solid Waste from 
all households including slums and informal settlements, commercial 
institutions and non-residential premises. 
(c)To establish a system to recognize organizations of waste pickers for 
facilitating their participation in Solid Waste Management. 
(d)To direct waste generators not to litter i.e. throw or dispose of any 
waste such a s paper, water bottles, liquor bottles, soft drink canes, tetra 
packs, fruit peel, wrappers, etc., or burn or burry waste on streets, open 
public spaces, drains, waste bodies and to segregate the waste at source 
as prescribed under these rules and hand ove r the aggregated waste to 
authorized waste pickers. 
 

30 
 
(e)To set up material recovery facilitates or secondary storage facilities 
with sufficient space for sorting  of  recyclable materials to  enable  
informal or authorized waste pickers and waste collector s to separate 
recyclables from the  waste and provide  easy access to  waste  pickers  
and  recyclers  for collection of segregated recyclable waste such as 
paper, plastic, metal, glass, textile from the source of generation or from 
material recovery facilities; Bins for storage of bio-degradable wastes shall 
be painted green those for storage of recyclable wastes shall be printed 
white and those for storage of other wastes shall be printed black. 
(f)To establish waste deposition centers for domestic hazard ous waste 
and give direction for waste generators to deposit d omestic hazardous 
wastes at these centers with a gap of twenty km. between two centers. 
(g)To provide training on solid waste management to waste-pickers. 
(h)To collect waste from vegetable,  fr uit, flower, meat, poultry and fish 
market on day to day basis and promote setting up of decentralized 
compost plant or bio -methanation plant at suitable locations in the 
markets or in the vicinity of markets ensuring hygienic conditions.   
(i)To transport  segregated bio -degradable waste to the processing 
facilities like compost plant, non -biodegradable waste to respecti ve 
processing facility and construction and demolition waste as per rules. 
(j)To facilitate construction, operation and maintenance of sol id waste 
facilities and associated infrastructure with their own or private 
participation by adopting suitable technologies giving preference to 
decentralized processing to minimize transportation cost and 
environmental impact such as; 
(a) Bio-Methanation 
(b) Waste to energy processes 
(k)To make adequate provision of funds for capital investments as well as 
operation and maintenance of solid waste management services in the 
annual budget. 
(l) Creating public awareness for minimizing waste generators, reuse of 
waste, practice segregation  of different wastes, practice home 
composting, vermi composting, etc. 
2.21 In this context, during the course of examination the Committee enquired 
whether all the Local Bodies have prepared Solid Waste Management as  on 01.01.18, 
the MOH&UA stated that all States have prepared Swachh City Plans (SCPs) for all their 
ULBs as per guidelines of Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM) and DPRs have been prepared 
by the States for MSWM as per the needs of each ULB in the State.  

31 
 
2.22 The Committee also pointed out that there is almost no control of local bodies on 
Waste generators on segregation and disposal of waste materials in big cities.  Asked 
whether the  local bodies at States/UTs level directing the waste generations not to 
throw dispose of any waste material shown above or impress upon segregating waste 
at source in major cities for the purpose of Solid Waste Management, the MoH&UA in a 
written reply stated  that a ll major cities have existing bye -laws which lay down 
penalties to be imposed for l ittering. Major IEC Campaigns have also been initiated at 
city, state and national levels to motivate citizens to refrain from throwing/ disposing 
the waste haphazardly and to segregate waste at source. These are supported by 
eminent personalities and thou ght leaders. SWM Rules -2016 have laid down the 
relevant regulatory framework.  These measures are sufficiently effective and are 
further picking pace from the fact that 51,735 wards (63%) wards have effective door 
to door collection and of which 18,946 war ds are reporting segregation at source. The 
states/ULBs are implementing Anti -littering measures as per SWM Rules 2016 and 
Municipal Acts. It is reported that so far Rs. 3.62 crores has been collected as charges 
after the reporting started under SBM. 
***** 

32 
 
Chapter-III 
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT UNDER SWACHH BHARAT MISSION (URBAN) 
A. Scheme for Solid Waste Management 
3.1  Solid Waste Management is one of the two components of Swachh Bharat 
Mission (Urban) i.e. SBM(U) with the objective of 100% scientific processin g of solid 
waste in all 4041 Urban Local Bodies (ULBs).  The Scheme has following four areas: 
  (i) Collection 
  (ii) Transportation 
  (iii) Processing  
B. Solid Waste Management Over-all Scenario 
3.2 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has given the fo llowing details about 
Physical Performance under Solid Waste Management component under Swachh Bharat 
Mission (Mission)  on Door-to-Door Collection, Source segregation, waste generated, 
waste processing: 
State 
Name 
Total 
Nos of 
wards 
Wards with 100% 
Door to  Door 
Collection as on 
Sep 2018 
% 
Source 
Segregation as 
on June, 2018 
% 
Total Waste 
Generated 
(TPD) 
Waste 
Processing As 
on June, 2018 
% 
Andhra 
Pradesh 3409 3409 100% 3000 88% 6384 29% 
Andaman& 
Nicobar 
Islands 
24 24 100% 6 25% 115 50% 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 75 72 96% 0 0% 181 0% 
Assam 934 403 43% 54 6% 1134 35% 
Bihar  3377 2698 80% 437 13% 2271 27% 
Chandigarh 
UT 26 26 100% 21 81% 462 79% 
Chhattisgarh 3217 3217 100% 3217 100% 1649 84% 
Daman & 
Diu 28 28 100% 2 13% 32 53% 
Dadra & 
Nagar 
Haveli 
15 0 0% 0 0% 35 0% 
NCT of Delhi 294 254 86% 128 60% 10500 55% 
Goa 214 214 100% 370 24% 260 62% 
Gujarat  1528 1415 93% 254 17% 10145 23% 
 
 

33 
 
Haryana 1475 1171 79% 21 4% 4514 17% 
Himachal 
Pradesh 497 341 69% 48 4% 342 32% 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 1100 543 49% 721 83% 1374 8% 
Jharkhand 866 866 100% 1424 22% 2327 22% 
Karnataka 6476 4927 76% 3536 100% 10000 26% 
Kerala 3536 2618 74% 3734 53% 624 47% 
Madhya 
Pradesh 6999 6999 100% 2945 40% 6424 58% 
Maharashtra 7322 5990 82% 0 0% 22570 44% 
Manipur 306 130 42% 18 16% 176 50% 
Meghalaya 114 27 24% 83 25% 268 58% 
Mizoram 328 264 80% 19 8% 201 4% 
Nagaland 234 104 44% 22 7% 342 15% 
Odisha 2002 1605 80% 27 1% 2720 11% 
Puduchery 
UT 122 105 86% 122 100% 350 10% 
Punjab 3043 2650 87% 750 25% 4100 33% 
Rajasthan 5399 5338 99% 3507 65% 6500 50% 
Sikkim 53 53 100% 20 38% 89 66% 
Tamil Nadu 12814 11532 90% 10251 80% 15347 49% 
Telangana 2112 1865 88% 300 14% 7371 65% 
Tripura 310 65 21% 0 0% 420 45% 
Uttar 
Pradesh 12007 7413 62% 4886 41% 16800 27% 
Uttarakhand 913 806 88% 145 16% 1406 20% 
West Bengal 2900 1896 65% 141 5% 7700 5% 
Total 84,069 69068 82% 40,209 48% 1,45,133 37.23% 
  
3.3 During the course of examination  in January 2018 , the Committee pointed out 
that Municipal Solid Waste Management in number of wards with 10 0% Door to Door 
Collection, Source Segregation and overall Waste Processing has been as low as 68.4%, 
32.5% and 23.7% respectvely.  Asked as to how the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs are going to achieve 100% Solid Waste Management with above slow p ace of 
implementation of Municipal Solid Waste Management in near future, the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs stated  that Ministry is pursuing the proven methods of solid 
waste management adopted in various States like Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, 
Jharkhand, Kerala etc., for replication in other States. Already door to door collection of 
waste is reaching to 78%and source segregation is also 43% and growing, in short 

34 
 
span of time i.e. slightly over one year. The waste processing at present is 33.15%, 
with many plants are under construction and in other cases projects are under 
implementation for which Ministry is pursuing hard towards improving solid waste 
management. However, the approach being pursued by GoI with States is expected to 
bring result in shortest possible time and at the same time sustainable solution. 
 
3.4 Asked about steps taken by the Central Government, the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs in a written note stated that the components are covered under Municipal 
solid waste and are guided by Municipal  Solid Wastes (Management and Handling) 
Rules, 2000.  Ministry is supporting States/UTs in segregaton of waste at household 
level in wet and dry waste category.  Wet waste is for biological decomposition to 
produce compost/combustible gas.  Dry waste follows the route of reuse/recycling.  The 
Ministry supports States/UTs in acheiving safe eco-friendly disposal of waste under SBM 
and also through Manual/Advisories/sharing of best practices etc. 
 
(a)  Progress on Door to Door Collection 
3.5 The Committee also wanted to know whether the good work done by five 
States/UTs can't be replicated in big States like Assam, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal 
where the Door to Door Collection is as low as 24%, 47.3% and 48% respectively  so 
that they can als o fall in line with good performing States, the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs stated that door to door collection of waste has already reached 78% and 
growing. The door to door collection in big States like Assam, Uttar Pardesh and West 
Bengal has now improved to 38%, 58% and 65% respectively and growing fast. 
Ministry is expecting to achieve 100% door to door collection within Mission period. 
Ministry is closely monitoring and hand holding States like Assam, Uttar Pradesh, West 
Bengal, Bihar and Od isha etc.  Further, Ministry is closely monitoring through video 
conferences and reviews with all the States and UTs to achieve higher rate of door to 
door collection. Also Ministry is monitoring the best practices across India which can be 
replicated in t he laggard States. By introducing competitive spirit through the Swachh 

35 
 
Survekshan and the Garbage Free Star Rating System to the Cities there will be End -to-
End management of garbage system for obtaining higher ranking. 
 
3.6 In this connection, MOH&UA has also stated that with door to door collection and 
source segregation, the processing of wet waste adopting decentralised/ centralised 
composting and bio -methanisation for wet waste with high moisture content and 
separate processing for waste of streams li ke garden waste, animal dung, vegetable 
waste and bulk waste etc., the waste processing targets can be achieved.  
 
 Similarly, in case of dry waste component, the approach of setting up MRF 
facility and involving informal sector and getting recyclers conne cted, processing plastic 
waste and also using in road construction, setting up RDF plants and co -processing of 
RDF in cement plants, as well as, waste to energy plants in larger cities/in cluster basis 
in smaller cities and finally very minimal inert going to landfill is the approach to achieve 
the targets.   
 
 As a part of capacity building for States/UTs, Ministry is working in almost all 
connected areas to improve solid waste management through a number of books on 
technology and best practices etc. Swachh Survekshan, Garbage Free Star Rating, Hand 
holding in DPR preparation and also with the help of planning tools, the support is 
being provided to States/Cities to achieve the target. Apart from that robust monitoring 
with State and Cities and also supporting with funding under SBM is strengthening ULBs 
in processing of waste. 
 
3.7 Outlining the measures taken to achieve 100% Solid Waste Management, the 
 Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in written note has inter alia stated that
 already door to door c ollection of waste is reaching to 82% and source segregation is 

36 
 
 also 48% and growing, in short span of time i.e. slightly over one year. The waste 
 processing at present is 37.23%, with many plants are under construction and in other 
 cases projects are u nder implementation for which Ministry is pursuing hard towards 
 improving solid waste management.  Ministry is also working on other initiatives on 
 imparting training to ULB personnel, video clips of best practices helping in uploading 
 various products r elated to SBM on GeM portal and also supporting States with 
 collection and transportation app which has been tested in many cities and shortly 
 going to be launched.  The IEC activities like Swachhta selfie and promoting innovations 
 is also going to be h elpful in achieving targets in time bound manner.   The tools like 
 Swachhta App, e -learning platform and citizen’s grievance redressal through toll free 
 no.1969 and various books as below which are also very helpful to achieve targets. 
1. Manual on Municipal Solid Waste Management 
2. Swachh Neighbourhood 
3. ODF Protocol 
4. Standard Operating Procedures for: 
i. Swachh Offices 
ii. Swachh Parks 
iii. Swachh Hospitals 
iv. Swachh RWAs 
v. Swachh Clubs 
vi. Swachh Railway Stations 
vii. Swachh Roads 
viii. Swachh Volunteering 
ix. Swachh School 
5. Integration of the Informal Recycling sector 
6. Empowering marginalized groups – Guidelines on SBM and DAY-NULM 
convergence 
7. Star Rating protocol for Garbage Free Cities 
8. Transforming Urban Landscapes of India (Success Stories in SWM) 
9. Swachh Bharat IEC Book 
10. Swachh Bharat Idea Book 
11. Decentralized Composting Techniques 
12. Design & Costing of Different Technologies 
13. Bulk Solid Waste Generators Compliance Guideline 
14. Conservation & Lifestyle: Indian Heritage 
15. Guidelines on Usage of Refuse derived Fuel in Various Industries 

37 
 
16. Utilisation of recycled produce of Construction & Demolotion Waste – A Ready 
Reckoner. 
 
(b)  Progress on Source Segregation 
  
3.8 The Committee also pointed out that  a few States/UTs of Puducherry  (100%), 
Chhattisgarh (91%) and Tamil Nadu  (76%), could do some good work in Sourc e 
Segregation so far, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs replied  that t he 
improvement in source segregation is happening fast.  In addition to Puducherry  , now 
Kerala and Chhattisgarh have also achieved 100% source segregation and many other 
States like Andhra Pradesh, Chandigarh, Jharkhand and Tamil Nadu have also achieved 
more than 80% source segregation and progressing fast to achieve 100% target.  
 
3.9 The Committee further examined about the difficulty with rest of the States/UTs 
in not moving w ell in this regard, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs stated  that 
in spite of robust monitoring by Ministry and hand holding to States/UTs/ULBs, the 
matter is taking time as it is closely related with behaviour change of the people apart 
from making additional arrangements for source segregation and also putting in extra 
efforts. 
 
3.10 The Committee pointed out that Source Segregation, the situation is even worst 
with only UT of  Puducherry with 100% Source Segregation followed by Chhattisgarh 
(100%) and Kerala (100%) and remaining States are lagging far behind. 
 
3.11 Asked about the reasons that the overall Source Segregation has not moved 
beyond 32.5% in the Country, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs stated  that 
source segregation has alread y reached 43% in over a year’s time and is progressing 
fast.  The measures mentioned for door to door collection is also being followed in case 

38 
 
of source segregation.  However, some of the factors responsible for low rate of Source 
segregation is due to th e existing behaviour pattern and the failure of the authorities in 
imposing it. The basic units such as households need to implement two bin + one bin 
system such as for wet, dry and domestic hazardous fraction of the waste.  Also, the 
citizens have litera lly put more than the three times the effort in disposing t he waste 
within their premises. 
 
3.12 During the course of examination, the Committee wanted to know the non -
compliance of Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 by the ULBs as reported by the 
stakeholders, mentioned above puts a big question mark on the overall functioning of 
the nodal Ministry i.e. Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, the M oH&UA in a written 
reply stated that the following progress has been made under Solid Waste Management 
as on 1st January 2018: 
Target Progress as on 1st January 2018 (Unit) 
100% door to door collection  51,734 (63% of wards) 
Waste Processing 23.7% 
100% Source Segregation  18,946 (23% of wards) 
Identification of all bulk generators (BG) and 
processing of waste e ither onsite or by 
authorized agency 
51,601 bulk generators details received and continuing   
  
 Given that Solid Waste Management is a State subject and MoHUA push the 
States through various strategies and success achieved till date show s that we are 
working on right path for achieving the mandate of 100% scientific waste management 
by 2nd October, 2019. 
 
(c)  Progress on Waste Processing  
 
3.13 The Committee pointed out that on Waste processing only few States of the 
Telangana (67%), Sikkim (66%), Goa (62%) , Chhattisgarh (60%), Meghalaya (58%), 

39 
 
Tripura (57%) and NCT Delhi (53%) could do some progress on Waste processing and 
other States/UTs are lagging far behind. 
 
3.14 Asked about the practical difficulties in not achieving 100% waste processing in 
aforementioned States, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs stated that Ministry is 
supporting States/UTs/ULBs to set up decentralised systems which is faster and 
sustainable in long term. Further, the laxity in the implementing of the erstwhile MSWM 
Rules 2000 and 2016, in the past, has primarily led to the present situation of existing 
large gap in processing of waste.  Also the issues like difficulty in acquiring land for 
waste processing plants, NIMBY (Not in My Backyard) syndrome and past approach of 
ULBs adopted for capital intensive centralised composting/ waste to energy plants also 
delayed in setting up the waste processing plants. 
 
Implementation Constraints 
 
3.15 During the course of examination, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have 
elaborated the following implementation constraints on Solid Waste Management in the 
country: 
(i) Behaviour – The perception that we should clean our places and our garbage 
should be dumped on public places which is the responsibility of ULBs.  For this 
intensive IEC activities have to be taken up to educate the public to maintain 
cleanliness at all places and times. The waste generators have to be educated 
and enforced upon to segregate the waste with responsibility. 
 
(ii) Segregation at source:  The general public is n ot in the habit of segregat ing the 
garbage at source resulting the usefulness of the resource is lost.  The public has 
to be educated and awareness programmes are to be launched for source 
segregation.  ULBs are also required to enforce source segregation strictly. 
(iii) On- site processing:  Wet waste is to be processed at source level for converting 
into compost including household level.  People are to be educated about the 
benefits of composting at source level.  Simple, inexpensive, innovative 
techniques are  to be popularised among garbage generators.  Compliance of 
bulk generators rules are to be enforced. 
(iv)Land use planning – the development plans, layout plans, housing plans etc need 
to necessarily have provision for managing the waste at the local level su ch as 

40 
 
spaces for decentralised treatment plants, spaces for material recovery facilities 
& recycling centres etc. 
(v) Applying the polluter pays principle – Fees for Solid waste management to meet 
the expenditure for door to door collection, transportation, pr ocessing and 
disposal have to be implemented vigorously by the state Govts.  
(vi)Clusterisation – For achieving economies of scale, the cluster models for Solid 
waste management are preferable. As this is beyond the capacity of local bodies, 
state Govts. Have to take the lead. This is especially true for setting up 
processing plants and scientific landfills for disposing the rejects from processing. 
 
3.16 In this Connection, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs also added  that the 
biggest challenge is the availability of land for setting up SWM facilities as well as the 
suitability thereof. This problem has arisen due to explosion of waste accumulation, 
waste generation and the laxity in the past by which suitable pieces of land could not 
be acquired. 
  
*****

41 
 
Chapter-IV 
Issues related with Waste Collection, Segregation and Recycling  
(a) Need for setting up robust infrastructure and upgrading set up for 
Scrap Dealers 
4.1 During the course of examination, the Committee had heard the representatives 
of prominent persons from Institutions engaged in Solid Waste Management like Centre 
for Science & Environment, Swachh Pune, Centre for Policy Research alongwith 
representatives of ASSOCHAM represented by Pepsico, IL&FS, Reliance etc. Explaining 
the views of Pepsico, a representative of Pepsico submitted:- 
"Sir, we all know that urban solid waste management poses a great risk to the 
environment, society as well as offers an excellent opportunity for resource 
conservation that the society can really capitalize  on.  So, ur ban solid waste 
management needs a well thought , collective, cohesive and equitable approach 
among key stakeholders.  The key stakeholders here are: urban local bodies, 
which is our Municipal Corporations, the regulators – CPCB and Ministry of 
Environment, businesses house corporate like us and community and consumer.  
All wastes begin its journey as a part of products that businesses produce for 
consumers to consume.  So, that is the genesis of waste." 
 
4.2 The witness added: 
 
"The municipal corporations or the urban local bodies in India lack critically in 
infrastructure and capability.  This is our observations.  There are infrastructures 
but they are not functioning to its capacity as well.  It is necessary to take 
challenge of effective management and enforcement of these urban solid 
wastes." 
 
4.3 In this connection Suggestion of ASSOCHAM and Comments of Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs are as under: 
 
 Suggestion of ASSOCHAM    Comments of MoH&UA 
 
Municipal Corporations lack the capacity 
to tend er out commercially viable and 
sustainable projects in MSW Treatment. 
Hence we see many sermi -functional, 
dilapidated or shut plants across various 
cities in lndia. The ULBs are often 
marred with issues such as inability to 
  
Not Agreed. Sanitation is a State subject. 
  

42 
 
acquire land, neighbourhood resi stance, 
local political unrest,  etc. thereby 
delaying plant installation and 
commissioning. lt is desirable that MSW 
treatment in cities and towns in India is 
taken up by an apex body of the Central 
Government on lines of National 
Highways Authority of lnd ia. This body 
could have the responsibility of tendering 
and awarding PPP concessions and also 
regularly monitoring the same.  
 
 4.4 In this connection, ASSOCHAM in its written submission before the Committee  
inter alia stated  that the waste of any kind in any form is not a waste but has to be 
treated as raw material to produce something else. For eg: the waste of steel can be 
melted and converted into steel of a different kind, the plastic waste is also conve rted 
to make plastic. Similar way the other solid municipal waste from municipalities can be 
used to produce power and if segregated properly then many other things can be 
made. The end of life vehicles can bring out many useful things; the tyres can be 
converted into useful floor tiles. Even the liquid municipal waste can create methane to 
produce power. The list is endless.  There are options available for everything called 
waste to be used as raw material for something else but there is a dire need of hav ing 
right policies, motivation and fiscal benefits to attract investment in this segment of 
business where the municipalities do not create mounds of waste next to the urban 
population but attract businesses to set up their plant to convert such waste into  useful 
things. 
Few examples are given below: 
(1) European countries as well as North America where no hillocks of waste 
are seen but everything gets converted to a product 
(2) A two decade back Canadian government took lead in disposal of 
automotive tyres by imposing disposal fee of CAD 4 for each tyre replaced.   This 
fee was paid to the tyre collector who would collect tyre from retail outlets and 
convert them into useful products. It helped the administration remove 
botheration of waste management of tyres and t he tyres went into production of 
useful things thus creating employment. 

43 
 
(3) This model was followed by USA and other European countries and it 
started a new business segment of treating tyre waste into a new product. 
(4) In Europe, the contract for Municipal wast e collection is given to private 
sectors who not only collect the solid waste but take it to the plants where it is 
processed and converted into gases to run turbines and the final waste becomes 
manure for the fields. 
(5) In western European countries even the  tree leaves are collected and 
baled to use them in making of fertilisers, medicinal values or even burning to 
get heat. It keeps the cities clean. 
(6) In Europe & USA, there are businessmen who are motivated by local and 
federal governments to invest in this business giving them tax incentives, free 
land use for the processing along with legislative powers to be in the business of 
waste processing." 
 
4.5 ASSOCHAM has also stated that a crucial partner in effective Urban Solid Waste 
(USW) and EPR management is ULB, who is  foundational for a successful EPR and 
USW management. ULBs in India lack critically in infrastructure and capability  
necessary to take on challenge of effective management of USW. Most successful EPR 
and USW management systems globally have fo cused on infrastructure and capability 
development at local levels, funded publically or through public -private 
partnerships. The infrastructure focused on efforts for source segregation, collection, 
secondary segregation, transporting, and recycling. The businesses usually take 
responsibilities to fund the financial gap between operational expenses and recycle 
revenue for ULBs. Another challenge to successful USW and EPR management is loss 
of ULB’s revenue through informal sector  that removes higher recycl e revenue 
generating material from ULB’s collection system. And the last but not the least of the 
challenge is to change the consumers and households attitude on source segregation. 
4.6 In this context, the MOH&UA has opined that as per SWM Rules 2016, the waste 
has to be stored, collected, transport, treated/disposed off separately in segregated 
manner.  In addition to this domestic hazardous waste has to be collected transport and 
treated separately. 

44 
 
4.7 Suggestions of ASSOCHAM  and comments of MoH&UA and  MoEF&CC are as 
under: 
Suggestion of ACCOCHAM  Comments of MoH&UA  Comments of MoEF&CC  
Privatise complete 
collection of solid waste 
from municipalities to 
only those entrepreneurs 
who would convert them 
into useful products and 
will not dump them 
Not agreed. 
All models of collections 
including Self Help Group, 
Private contractor and 
Collection by ULBs can be 
followed. 
Private parties will be 
selected as per tender 
conditions. 
The 6 waste management 
rules notified by the 
Ministry in 2016 lay down a 
comprehensive framework 
of management of different 
waste streams in the 
country. Roles and 
responsibilities of different 
stakeholders have been 
identified in the Rules. 
The principle of waste 
hierarchy is the over -
arching approach for 
management of waste in 
the co untry, wherein, 
emphasis is given to 
emphasis to prevention, 
reduction, reuse, recycling, 
recovery and disposal, 
with prevention being the 
most preferred option and 
the disposal at the landfill 
being the least. 
The present cost of waste 
removal should be shared 
with such entrepreneurs 
on a phasing out tenure 
of say 3 to 5 years 
State Government may follow 
various financial models 
including cost sharing. 
Rule 22 of the SWM Rules, 2016 
provide for time lines to be 
adhered by local bodies and 
other concerned agencies for 
creation of necessary 
infrastructure for 
implementation of the Rules, 
including for identification of 
suitable sites for setting up solid 
waste processing facilities and 
identification of sites for setting 
up stand -alone or common 
regional sanitary landfill facilities. 
          Urban Development 
Departments of States/ UTs are 
mandated to design a State 
policy and strategy on solid 
waste management which 
ensures minimization of waste 
going into landfills. Identification 

45 
 
and allocation of suitab le land to 
local bodies for setting up 
processing and disposal facilities 
and incorporating suitable 
provisions in the master plans of 
every city is mandated to State 
Urban Development 
Departments and District 
Magistrate/ District 
Collector/Deputy Commissi oner 
as per Rule 11 and Rule 12 of 
SWM Rules, 2016, respectively. 
          Under Rule 15, local 
authorities and villages 
panchayats of census towns 
and urban agglomerations are 
mandated to undertake 
construction, operation and 
maintenance of sanitary 
landfill and associated 
infrastructure. 
Land should be provided 
free of cost to such 
entrepreneurs for setting 
up of processing plants 
 Agreed.  
There should be NO taxes 
on waste processing 
business of any kind; 
either a direct tax or an 
indirect tax 
Partially Agreed. 
GST at lower rate should be 
applied on activities of waste 
management to enable 
venders to claim input credit. 
Ministry of Finance to 
comment on Direct tax. 
 
The entrepreneurs should 
be encouraged to bring in 
the best of the 
technologies from w ithin 
lndia or from anywhere 
in the world 
  
Agreed 
 
 
4.8 During the course of evidence when a representative of Swachh  Pune also 
underlined the need for handing over collection and segregation work to Cooperatives 
stated: 
"The third question that you rais ed is perhaps that a ll municipalities are 
confronted with corruption and want to give out contracts to large private 
companies for various reasons. Our suggestion is that this sector of waste -
handling, primary collection, ideally should be kept completely out of the purview 

46 
 
of the private companies and it should entirely be given to cooperatives. It 
should be like the Kutumbshree model where the same effort was made. So, we 
should keep private companies only at the secondary collection onwards level, 
depending upon the model the city has taken. It should be ensured that primary 
collection sector of work is reserved for the informal sector and offers various 
steps for that sector to formalise." 
4.9 In this connection, a representative of Swachh Pune while out lining the 
performance in making the city of Pune clean during their evidence before the 
Committee has stated: 
"In Pune, the trade union of waste pickers was formed in the year 1993 with the 
expressed aim of publicly documenting and establishing the environmental, social 
and economic contribution of waste pickers.  We have done a number of 
research studies which actually quantify the economic as well as the 
environmental value due to the total net recycling done by the waste pickers.  
We have used these arg uments, we have done these studies with the 
International Labour Organisation, with the JIZ and used the argument to the 
municipalities to advocate that waste pickers in Pune not only get an identity 
card which establishes and gives them a right to engage in this work but they 
also entitle to insurance benefits which the municipality covers the cost for.  
They are also covered under various welfare benefit programmes.  They are 
recognised as an important sector in waste management. Everyone including 
administration, citizens as well as elected representatives in Pune is fairly aware 
of the significant role being played by waste pickers.  Against this backdrop, in 
the year 2007, we propose that instead of outsourcing the work of doorstep 
collection in Pune to a private entity why not a cooperative of waste pickers do 
the work?"  
4.10        During the course of evidence of Swach Pune, the Committee wanted to 
know whether the NGO is doing a way with whole concept of inter -mediately collection, 
the witness clarified: 
"Sir, let me clarify. We have done away with containers which have mixed 
waste in the city. What we are arguing for is that although citizens might give 
wet and dry waste segregated, dry waste itself comprises 35 different kinds of 
materials – four kinds of plastics, five kinds of metals and eight types of tapers 
– which have to be further segregated in order to get them 
recycled........Typically, it happens outside the shop of the scrap dealer. All the 
waste-pickers are selling their material to the sc rap dealers who are selling it 
to the wholesalers who are selling it to the recycling industry.  
 
Many of the scrap dealers are running in slums or informal shanties in not very 
hygienic conditions. Our point is that those set -ups need to be upgraded. We 
need to offer them places. In PMC what we are saying is that in the 

47 
 
Development Plan, you keep such spaces available and outsource it to the 
scrap dealers. Let the scrap dealers bid for it, pay a rent and take over the 
running of these places. And, let waste-pickers have access to go and sell their 
material there. So, there will be a need for decentralized spaces, but it is not 
for mixed waste. We are talking of recycle-able waste which does not have too 
much odor and is not physically as ungainly as organic  waste is. In that, if we 
have good quality segregated paper, tin, metal and plastic which is getting 
further segregated in these decentralized places, it is not really such an eye -
sore." 
b Need for joint efforts by Corporates, Recyclers etc with State 
Governments/ULBs 
4.11 In this context, the ASSOCHAM has stated  that m any Corporate, Recyclers, 
Waste Management Companies, and association are supporting this effort discretely. 
This needs a joint effort along with Government and Local bodies to succeed. We n eed 
to work on infrastructure for collection, segregation, aggregation and recycling to 
ensure waste is treated. It can be most efficiently be conducted by Waste Segregation 
at the household level, enforced by the Urban local bodies.  Processing of segrega ted 
waste can be made into a viable option for the private sector to take up, especially as 
the cost of waste transportation and landfills keep increasing. With PWM (Plastics waste 
Management) Rules 2016, there is extended produce responsibility to ensure the waste 
generated is disposed in responsible ways. 

48 
 
4.12 In this context the suggestion of ASSOCHAM and Comments of MoH&UA and 
MoEF&CC are as under: 
Suggestion of ASSOCHAM     Comments of MoH&UA     Comments of MoEF&CC 
 
ln the SLW Mqt systems, 
planning needs to be done 
with communities in an 
integrated manner, 
including aspects of 
conservation, treatment, 
Recycling. These have to 
be done on revenue maps. 
The collection of solid 
waste needs to be defined 
and agreed; and also the 
liquid waste the drainage 
systems needs to be 
integrated 
Solid waste and Liquid 
waste are handled in 
separate system and the 
same is planned at the 
Town Planning stage itself. 
  
Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 
define “waste picker” as a person or 
groups of persons informally engaged in 
collection and recovery of reusable and 
recyclable solid waste from the source of 
waste generation the streets, bins, 
material recovery facilities, processing 
and waste disposal facilities for sale to 
recyclers directly or through 
intermediaries to earn their livelihood. 
  
 Under the rules, waste pickers 
have been identified as a key stakeholder 
in the waste value chain. Rule 11 
mandate that the State’s/ UT’s solid 
waste management strategy and policy 
should acknowledge the primary role 
played by the  informal sector of waste 
pickers, waste collectors and recycling 
industry in reducing waste and provide 
broad guidelines regarding integration of 
waste picker or informal waste collectors 
in the waste management system. 
State/UT urban development department 
is also mandated to start a scheme for 
registration of waste pickers and waste 
dealers. 
  
 Local authorities and village 
panchayats of census towns and urban 
agglomerations have been mandated to 
establish a system to recognise  
organisations of waste pickers or informal 
waste collectors and promote and 
establish a system for integration of 
these authorised waste -pickers and 
waste collectors to facilitate their 
participation in solid waste management 
including door to door collection of 
waste. They are als o mandated to 
provide training on solid waste 
management to waste -pickers and waste 
collectors.  
 
 For environmentally sound 

49 
 
management of construction and 
demolition waste the Ministry has 
notified Construction and Demolition 
Waste Management Rules 2016. The 
rules notified for the 1 st time, detail roles 
and responsibilities of various 
stakeholders involved in 
 
 
4.13 In this context, Swach Pune has stated  that there is a necessity of an integrated 
planned approach to Solid Waste Management . In this connect ion the following 
suggestions have been suggested before the Committee: 
   
(a). The  overall  framework  of  Solid  Waste  Management  should  be  
long‐ termand sustainable,keeping in mind the growth of the city and solutions th
at are equitable and just.   
(b).Solid Waste Management should be comprehensive in scope and should look 
at all streams of  waste and the entire process.   
(c).‘Polluter pays’ principle should be followed.   
(d).Full acceptance of 3 R principle, i.e. maximization of Reduction, Re‐ utilization
 and Recycling.    
(e).Decentralized Recovery and processing options are emphasized to the extent 
possible even if there is a slightly higher economic cost to doing so. (f).Inclusion 
of economically vulnerable segments that are dependent on Solid Waste for theirl
ivelihood should be a policy objective, while ensuring that safe, decent and hygie
nic workconditions are mandatorily provided for all manual work performed in su
pport of SWM.  
(g).When implementing any plans or projects it should be in accordance with the
 policy to ensure consistency. 
   
4.14 On the aspect of recycling of solid waste like plastic, a representative of 
CHINTAN during the course of evidence stated: 
 
   "We would say that first of all we should take care of our 50 -60 per cent of our 
organic waste. If we can do composting for that, since that is one of our major 
problems, we take care of that by doing composting. I am not getting into 
decentralize or centralize the system. Decentralised Waste Management 
System is obviously a solutio n. But if we do 50 -60 per cent composting, the 
rest 20-25 per cent is actually plastic paper, glass and all of these things. These 
things do not have to be incinerated. Why would we want to incinerate them? 
We have a very good recycling market which is here a huge industry. 
So far I have not come under the GST. The GST is having a huge impact on 
recyclable scraps. So let me not get into that now. That is another story from 
the same side. But we can take care of 50 -60 per cent of the waste, we are 
sending 20-25 per cent of the waste for recycling, then all we have is about 10-
15 per cent which is all the multilayer packaging and all these things for which 
there is no solution so far. So EPR has to come in over here. If our EPR is there 
in the Solid Waste Mana gement Rule 2016, all we have to do is to implement 

50 
 
it. EPR should be implemented. Recycling should be done f or the non -
biodegradable waste." 
 
4.15 In this context with regard to Circular Economy the ASSOCHAM has also stated 
the following: 
(a) There is glo bal thinking towards the circular economy. Circular economy is           
similar to the natural cycles existing in the world like water cycle, food cycle etc. 
(b)  Plastics are both reusable and recyclable if used responsibly. For plastics 
which cannot be recy cled there are ways to recover energy or use them in 
making roads to ensure safe disposal at end of life. We need to ensure there 
is a system to channel used plastics from land, air and water. 
(c) We all are aware of Reduce, Reuse and Recycle in term of global  resources. 
Reduce, reuse and Recycle needs innovation at design level to ensure 
minimum usage of plastics. Reuse means that the products are designed in a 
way that they can be reused multiple times thus reducing impact on global 
resources. 
(d) Recycling suppo rts the global resources by bringing in more material for 
consumption through recovery from the waste. If this is not possible, we can 
still go for energy recovery. Finally, the residuals may go for incineration 
without energy recovery and sent to landfill s. This waste hierarchy process 
helps Municipal bodies, economy and environment thus supporting triple 
bottom line for the plastics. 
(e) Globally only 14% of the plastics are recycled. In Europe around 30% of 
plastics are recycled but energy recovery rate is h igh ensuring most of the 
plastic is consumed. This ensures no littering and taking waste out of planet. 
This has been possible due to continuous effort by European Union to 
improve management of waste. 
(f) Japan has high recycling rates due to continuous effor ts in last decade. While 
China imports lot of waste and has the recycling technologies, recycling rate 
is still very low. In India high recycling rate of 60% is mainly 
supported by the informal economy. 
(g) Through various EPR (Extended producer responsibility) legislations, there    
      are  global efforts to improve recycling rates. 
 
 About recycling in India, the ASSOCHAM has stated:  
"In India we will consume around 14.5 Million ton of plastics this year (2017 -
18).Of this 51% goes into packaging applicati ons both rigid and flexible which 
get into the waste stream within 6 Months. Considering the CPCB study 2013 -14 
as base, we can assume that 3.0 Million ton is uncollected plastic today." 
 
4.16 The suggestions of ASSOCHAM and comments of MoH&UA and MoEF&CC are as 
under: 

51 
 
 
Suggestions of ASSOCHAM  Comments of MoH&UA     Comments of MoEF&CC 
(i) To increase the 
thickness specified in PWM 
2016 from 50 Micron to 100 
Micron. This will ensure that 
the waste get picked up due 
to its recycling value. This has 
been suc cessful in case of 
PET bottle where we have 
vibrant recycling industry and 
you will not find any PET 
bottles littered or at landfill 
sites. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) Proper infrastructure/ 
capacity for segregation, 
recycling and incineration of 
the plastic waste in each  of 
large consumption areas. 
(i) Creation of PRO in India with 
Industry participation 
(iv) Following the set 
Policy & Standards on the 
Plastic waste management 
and consolidation of all legal 
cases related to plastics in 
one court to have common 
judgment. 
(v) No ban on plastic 
without scientific basis and 
alternate solution which is 
more eco friendly. 
 
The Ministry of 
Environment Forest   
and Climate Change 
has notified the Plastic 
Waste Management 
Rules  2016 and 
Plastic Waste 
Management 
(Amendment) Rules 
2018.   
   
       
 
 
 
 
 
MoEF&CC to provide 
comments on Solid    
Waste Management 
Plastics in Urban –    
India. 
 
The earlier Plastic Waste (Management 
and Handling) Rules, 2011 prescribed a 
thickness of 40 micron, however, the 
thickness was increased from 40 micron 
to 50 micron vide Plastic Waste 
Management Rules, 2016 with a motive 
that the waste get picked up due to its 
recycling value. 
The rate of recycling primarily depends 
upon the segregation of the waste at 
source and further the transportation of 
segregated waste to the 
processing/recycling facility.  To achieve 
greater recyclability the Solid Waste 
Management Rules, 2016 mandate the 
Local Authorities to setup material 
recovery facilities or secondary storage 
facilities with sufficient space to enable 
authorized waste pickers and waste 
collectors to separate recyclables such as 
paper, plastic, metal, glass, textile from 
the waste. The Rules prescribes to take 
every effort to recycle or reuse the 
rejects to achieve the desired objective 
of zero waste going to landfill. 
 
The Ministry had notified the Recycled 
Plastic Manufacture and Usage Rules, 
1999 for regulating manufacture and 
sale of plastic carry bags. It was 
superseded by Plastic Waste 
(Management and Handling) Rules, 
2011 on 4th February, 2011. Further the 
Ministry Notified Plastic Waste 
Management Rules, 2016 vide 
Notification dated 18 th March, 2016 
superseding Plastic Waste 
(Management and Handling) Rules, 
2011 and its amendments. 
 
As per the Rules, the generators of 
waste have been mandated to take 
steps to minimize generation of plastic 
waste, not to litter the plastic waste, 
ensure segregated storage of waste at 
source and handover segregated waste 
to local bodies or agencies authorised 
by the local bodies. The rules also 
mandate the responsibilities  of local 
bodies, gram panchayats, waste 
generators, retailers and street vendors 

52 
 
to manage plastic waste. 
 
 
              
        
(c) Need for promoting segregation at Source 
 
4.17   Outlining the need for promoting segregation at source, the NIYI Aayog has 
stated that Solid Waste Management reduces or eliminates the adverse impact on the 
environment and human health. A number of processes are involved in effectively 
managing waste for a municipality. These include monitoring, collection, transport, 
processing, recycling and disposal. The quantum of waste generated varies mainly due 
to different lifestyles, which is directly proportional to socio-economic status of the urban 
population.  While each of the contributors pose a challenge in containing its gen eration 
as well as its management, the Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) happens to be the most 
visible one, as it is mostly generated by the citizens directly. MSW generation has a 
positive co-relation with economic development in terms of kg/per capita per day of solid 
waste generation in general.  On an average, the urban India today generates about 
0.45 kg per capita per day of MSW which is likely to grow with the increase of affluence 
which is about to happen as the country is traversing a steep growth traje ctory.  As per 
a study by Columbia University, New York, a higher standard of living results in more 
waste and also a greater ability to invest in waste management system (Matsunaga and 
Themelis, 2002). There are several such studies which establishes this  co-relation. As 
such, the MSW generation in India, which is presently about 1,45,000 tonnes per day is 
likely to increase substantially in years ahead, thereby, posing a gigantic challenge for 

53 
 
the Government to manage the generation as well as the disposa l of the solid waste. 
However, it also creates opportunities for better SWM in view of the capacity of the 
citizens to pay for SWM on account of increase in standard of living.  
4.18 During the cour se of evidence of prominent NGO,  Centre for Scienc e & 
Environment, the need for promoting segregation at source was underlined.  Explaining 
the issue a representative of Centre for Science & Environment stated: 
"The second very important issue is going to be the segregation at source. This 
is an issue which I was  quite surprised when we looked at all the city data.  
Many cities have tried to segregate but they have not succeeded.  The only city I 
have seen succeeding is Panjim and in Kerala, I am seeing it succeed only 
because they have no alternative.  Both in Tr ivandrum as well as in Alleppy, the 
advantage they have is the fact that the villagers have said that you cannot bring 
waste there.  So the municipalities have no place to take waste.  So in both 
those places, the waste collection has stopped." 
4.19 In this connection, the issue of segregation at source was raised before Ministry 
of Housing and Urban Affairs, the Ministry stated that t he Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs has taken various steps for segregation of Waste at source and a massive 
drive has already been launched on 5 th June 2017 on the oc casion of World 
Environment Day. 
 
4.20 In this context, suggestions of ASSOCHAM and comments of MoH&UA and 
MoEF&CC are as under: 
  
Suggestions of ASSOCHAM      Comments of MoH&UA        Comments of MoEF&CC 
There should be a proper 
method of segregation at 
source of non -
biodegradable/recyclable 
waste at primary or 
secondary collection points 
As per SWM Rules 2016 the 
waste has to be stored, 
collected, transport, treated 
/disposed off separately in 
segregated m anner .In 
addition to this domestic 
hazardous waste has to be 
collected transport and treated 
separately. 
Under Solid Waste 
Management Rules, 2016 waste 
generators are mandated to 
ensure segregation at source 
waste generated by them in 
three separate strea ms namely 
bio-degradable, non -bio-
degradable and domestic 

54 
 
Separate municipality bins 
should be provided for dry 
and wet waste. 
Agreed, As per SWM 
Rules,2016 . 
hazardous wastes in suitable 
bins. Further, source segregation 
at primary and secondary levels 
has been mandated for resident 
welfare associations and market 
associations, gated communities 
and inst itutions with more than 
5000 sqm. Area, all hotels and 
restaurants and organizers of 
event/ gathering of more than 
100 persons. 
 
Further, rules also 
mandate that Bins for storage of 
bio-degradable wastes shall be 
painted green, those for storage 
of recycla ble wastes shall be 
printed blue and those for 
storage of other wastes shall be 
printed black. 
 
In addition, the waste 
processing facilities are 
mandated to include composting 
as one of the technologies for 
processing of bio -degradable 
waste. In this regar d, Standards 
for composting have been 
prescribed under   Schedule II of 
the SWM Rules,  2016. 
For management of industrial 
hazardous waste, the Ministry 
has notified Hazardous & 
Other Wastes (Management & 
Transboundary Movement) 
Rules, 2016 wherein scientif ic 
disposal of hazardous waste 
through collection, storage, 
packaging, transportation and 
treatment, in an 
environmentally sound 
manner has been mandated. 
Under the rules, the hazardous 
waste can be disposed at 
captive treatment facility 
Scientific methods such as 
compositing for m anaging 
biodegradable waste must be 
encouraged 
Agreed 
There should be a color 
coding the collection vessels/ 
collection vehicles of the 
municipal corporations as 
under - 
Green Color : 
White Color : 
Black Color : 
Biodegradable waste such as 
household wast e ,Plastic 
Waste , Miscellaneous Toxic, 
Hazardous Waste 
Agreed. 
Color coding is already being 
practiced inSWM Rules 2016 
as under 
Green –For Wet Waste 
Blue- For Dry Waste 
Black-Domestic Hazardous 
Waste. 
  
  
Implementation of efficient 
collection and segr egation 
techniques will help to bring 
back its value and best out of 
waste can be ensured. 
Agreed 
  
Another challenge to 
successful USW and EPR 
management is loss of ULB's 
revenue through informal 
sector that removes higher 
recycle revenue generating 
material from ULB's 
collection system. And the 
last but not the least of the 
challenge is to change the 
consumers and households 
attitude on source 
segregation. 
MoEF&CC to provide 
comments 

55 
 
installed by the i ndividual 
waste generators or at 
Common Hazardous Waste 
Treatment, Storage and 
Disposal Facilities (TSDFs). 
 (i) Need for essential registration of rag pickers by every Municip alities 
and ensuring their safety 
 
4.21 In this connection, during the course of evidence a representative of Swach, 
Pune outlining  the need for essential registration of rag pickers by every 
Municipalities, stated: 
"We have considered a priority group un der the National Urban Livelihood 
Mission in various schemes for poverty alleviation.  If the waste -picker is 
registered with the Municipality and if every Urban Local Body registers their 
waste-pickers, they should be the first priority group which is int egrated in all 
kinds of waste – processing, collection, treatment contracts so that their work 
conditions can be enhanced and improved.  They are already creating a large 
number of livelihoods" 
4.22 Outlining the role of informal sector the witness stated: 
"I speak here on behalf of the informal sector waste pickers because we are 
aware of their presence in all the cities particularly in the urban areas.  They 
have been playing a very significant role with respect to recycling, retrieving 
recyclable waste and ensuring that the municipal waste that is being handled by 
the municipalities is reduced to a large extent. Therefore, they are directly 
reducing municipal solid waste handling costs and also contributing significantly 
to the environment by diverting a large quantity of recyclables away from the 
landfill prior to collection.  In fact, many of them are engaged at the bins where 
the waste is put either at the roadside or are engaged in doorstep collection of 
waste. 
A large number of waste pickers are also collecting waste from landfill, working 
in pretty sad condition and ensuring that a large amount of plastic, paper, 
metal, glass that finds its way to the landfill is also recycled.  There is an 
alliance of Indian waste pickers, a group of waste pickers in  India representing 
35 cities KKPKP, which is the trade union of waste pickers in Pune is an active 
member of the network.  In Pune we have been working very closely with the 
informal sector and we would like to share some of the experiences, learnings 
and put forth some suggestions with respect to the integration of waste pickers 
in this work." 

56 
 
4.23 In this context, the witness  from Centre for Science and Environment  also 
stated: 
"Then the second biggest thing that I am seeing both in Panjim as well as in  
Kerala is that you use the informal re -cycling industry, the kabadiwala to 
essentially take value out of the product.  The Kerala Government has done 
something which I think is very wise.  On their website, they have created a 
dossier of every kabadiwala and the cost that they charge for paper, for metal 
and for aluminium and the phone number of the kabadiwala.  So, they have 
said that you compost yourself and the rest of the waste you sell to a 
kabadiwala.   You make use of the informal sector and you do not re-create it.  
So, you essentially make use of the two best things you could do which is to 
segregate and compost and then re-cycle. 
 Now the challenge is that how do you take it to a city at the scale of Delhi 
or Mumbai and how do you take it to a sca le which is much bigger and 
therefore, the quantity of waste is much higher and your ability to therefore 
manage it at a decentralised level does not happen.  My answer to it is two-fold.  
One, I think you have a lot of small towns.  You talked about Hisa r.  In His ar, 
this can start immediately.  You do not have to first become Delhi and then 
have to deal with waste.  So the first thing you would do in Hisar is to stop land 
filling.  You will insist on segregation at source.  You would build composting 
systems at the decentralised level or at the municipal level and you would make 
sure that you would use your kabadiwala system most efficiently to deal with 
the re-cyclable waste.  You could do that for 80 per cent of the cities that exist 
in India." 
4.24 On the issue of ensuring their safety, the Swach Pune in their written submission 
before the Committee stated that the World Bank "The need to tackle special waste 
streams such as 
sanitarywaste.  Sanitary waste means waste arising from used and discarded domesti
c hygiene related products contaminated with blood, body fluids, faeces etc. including b
aby diapers, sanitary napkins, tampons, incontinence pads, condoms, menstrual cups et
c. An estimated 7000 tons of sanitary waste is generated across India every day. This f
ast growing stream of waste requires special considerationof the committee given the f
ollowing pertinent issues surrounding it:   
a.Improper segregation and disposal brings waste‐ collectors, waste‐ picker
s and informal recycling workers into direct contact with Sanitary Waste lea
ving them vulnerable to Hepatitis B and C, E coli, salmonella, staphylococc
us and even Ebola. 
 b.Absorbent hygiene products contain a substantial component of chlorine
 bleach‐ washed plastic and chlorinated wood pulp the incineration / burnin
g of which has been shown to lead to emission of dioxins, some of the mos
t poisonous and carcinogenic substances known to man as per WHO report
s.    
c.Cities have to spend an atrocious amount of money to provide for the col
lection, transportation, processing/ treatment and disposal of such type of 

57 
 
waste in addition to the environmental and  
social cost of handling of sanitary waste. 
4.25 On the issue of Sanitary Napkins MoEF&CC has stated that  as far as the issue 
regarding sanitary napkin is concerned following are the  provisions in the Solid Waste 
Management Rules, 2016: 
(1) All manufacturers of disposable products such as ti n, glass, plastics 
packaging, etc., or brand owners who introduce such products in the market  
shall provide necessary financial assistance to local authorities for  establishment 
of waste management system. 
 
(2)  All such brand owners who sale or market t heir products in such 
packaging material which are non -biodegradable shall put in place a system to 
collect back the packaging waste generated due to their production.    
 
(3)  Manufacturers or brand owners or marketing companies of sanitary 
napkins and di apers shall explore the possibility of using all recyclable materials 
in their products or they shall provide a pouch or wrapper for disposal of each 
napkin or diapers along with the packet of their sanitary products.  
 
 (4)  All such manufacturers, brand owners or marketing companies shall  
  educate the masses for wrapping and disposal of their products. 
4.26 In this connection the Suggestion of ASSOCHAM and Comments of MoH&UA and 
MoEF&CC are as under: 
 Suggestion of ASSOCHAM   Comments of MoH&UA    Comments of MoEF&CC 
ln the present solid waste 
management scenario, i.e. 
waste pickers are limitedly 
main streamed and 
recognized at the ULB 
levels. However, they 
remain the main resources 
of collection and 
segregation of municipal 
solid waste. They are the 
poorest, most 
marginalized,'neglected, 
vulnerable sections in the 
society. Live in poor 
conditions - by the 
roadsides near waste 
dumps. They should be 
recognized at the ULBs 
and provided social 
Agreed. 
 
Solid Waste Manag ement 
Rules, 2016 define “waste 
picker” as a person or groups 
of persons informally engaged 
in collection and recovery of 
reusable and recyclable solid 
waste from the source of 
waste generation the streets, 
bins, material recovery 
facilities, processing an d 
waste disposal facilities for 
sale to recyclers directly or 
through intermediaries to earn 
their livelihood. 
Under the rules, waste pickers 
have been identified as a key 

58 
 
security and livelihoods 
opportunities 
stakeholder in the waste value 
chain. Rule 11 mandate that 
the State’s/ UT’s solid w aste 
management strategy and 
policy should acknowledge 
the primary role played by the 
informal sector of waste 
pickers, waste collectors and 
recycling industry in reducing 
waste and provide broad 
guidelines regarding 
integration of waste picker or 
informal waste collectors in 
the waste management 
system. State/UT urban 
development department is 
also mandated to start a 
scheme for registration of 
waste pickers and waste 
dealers. 
Local authorities and village 
panchayats of census towns 
and urban agglomeration s 
have been mandated to 
establish a system to 
recognize organizations of 
waste pickers or informal 
waste collectors and promote 
and establish a system for 
integration of these authorised 
waste-pickers and waste 
collectors to facilitate their 
participation in solid waste 
management including door to 
door collection of waste. They 
are also mandated to provide 
training on solid waste 
management to waste -pickers 
and waste collectors. 
 
 
 
(ii) Need for promoting Door to Door collection by subsidizing Waste 
Collection by Urban Local Bodies 

59 
 
4.27 In this context, ASSOCHAM has stated  about uuniversal doorstep collection, with 
charging service fees. This ensures that the waste flow can be managed. But this service should 
not be free, everyone must pay. Slums and the u rban poor may not be able to pay adequate 
amounts, and nor will very small commercial establishments. They may pay a lesser rate can be 
subsidized. 
 
4.28 During the course of examination the NGO 'Swachh Pune' in its note submitted 
before the Committee has stated: 
"Two thousand three hundred members of Swach recover user fees and service 
about 4 lakh households (including 28000 slum households) for daily door to 
door waste collection in Pune.  The worker retains the right to the earnings from 
the sale of rec yclable materials.  Each Swach member contributes 5 per cent of 
the earnings to the cooperative.  The Pune Municipal Corporation and Swach, 
had a Memorandum of Understanding between 2008 and 2013 according to 
which PMC was to provide office space; uniforms , raincoats, footwear and safety 
gear; collection equipment (push carts and buckets); recycling sheds for waste 
categorisation; subsidy for collection from slums; welfare benefits and 
operational costs of supervision, training and citizen outreach to Swach .  
According to the MOU, over a period of five years, the PMC was to spend Rs.206 
per thousand by way of operational costs to Swach against which it actually 
spent only Rs.98 per households.  The MOU is currently in the renewal process 
with revision of some of the terms and conditions, based upon the experience of 
the  first five years.  The total annual savings to PMC on account of S wach is 
more than Rs.38 crores." 
4.29 On being asked whether the slum dwellers can pay the user charges a 
representative of Swach, Pune during evidence  stated: 
"Our experience is that slum -dwellers are willing to pay. For a good service, the 
slum-dwellers are willing to pay. Typically, it is a local politician in the slum who 
is stopping these slum -dwellers from paying, but a s lum-dweller is willing to pay 
up to Rs. 30 also for this. However, the problem is that the paying capacity of 
the slum-dwellers is still lower and the recycle -able waste in slums is still lower. 
So, the waste -picker, who is working in a non -slum area gets a much bigger 
income compared to a waste -picker working in a slum pocket. So, waste 
collection in slum has to be subsidized by the municipality. There is a ratio in 
which it can be subsidized and it is still fairly do-able."  
We can have a lot of things in  which these people can be strengthened for 
example doortstep collection. It has to have a payment attached to it.  You 
cannot have free doorstep collection.  A lot of doorstep collection which is now 

60 
 
being done very informally by waste pickers actually do es not have payment 
attached.  I think that is a very big one and may be slums and communities 
which are poorer, they can be subsidized." 
 
4.30 In this context the Suggestions of ASSOCHAM and Comments of MoH&UA are as 
under: 
 Suggestions of ASSOCHAM       Comments of MoH&UA   
Universal doorstep collection, with charging 
service fees. This flow ensures that the waste 
can be managed. 
As per  Solid Waste Management 
(SWM) Rules 2016 
 
(iii)  Need for providing portable sheds of waste collection and segregation 
 purposes within the premises of Group Housing Societies 
 
4.31 During the course of evidence of the representatives of Swach Pune outlining the 
need for providing portable sorting sheds for waste collection and segregation within 
the premises of Group Housing Societies, a representative of Swach Pune stated:- 
"Many of our citizens, who live in very up -market areas, are travelling abroad 
and are willing to segregate 20 kinds of waste abroad and also keeping the 
containers within the society. So, we are saying  that we need to start promoting 
these practices. Actually, in Pune, a lot of cooperative societies have actually 
built sorting sheds, which the municipality has not provided. The households 
have provided that within their premises. Our point is that decen tralised spaces 
across the city should be there.  Of course, not all the households, but a number 
of societies have provided it. We still do not have it to the extent we need, but 
there is definitely a trend. In fact, that is the kind support which, we feel , might 
be useful to get the corporates to give. If a corporate is willing to support a 
sorting shed within a  housing society, maybe it should be encouraged for some 
time till the trend picks up and citizens know that they have to do it themselves. 
They ar e also providing in situ  space for composting their own waste or for 
running biogas plants in large complexes. So, one of the things we have 
suggested in the draft bye -laws for Pune is that above a certain number of 
households, if it is a complex with more  than 50 or 100 households, the 
municipality should not collect the organic waste; it should be processed in situ. 
This is a moving trend that is working to some extent." 
 
 
4.32 In this connection, the witness added: 
"The challenge is also to create new de signs. Many citizens do not want these 
sorting sheds very close to their houses. We are saying why do we not look at 

61 
 
portable sorting sheds; we are looking at mobile sorting sheds using old 
skeletons of buses which can be created as sorting sheds temporari ly, and each 
area has to decide that this sorting shed will be moved every six months to a 
different locality. We need citizens to also step up and say, “Okay, I will keep in 
front of my house for six months, and six months later it will move to another 
pocket.” There should be some such arrangement, and citizen participation is 
critical. One advantage in swach model is that it is possible to actually interact 
with citizens on a regular level and get them involved in these processes." 
(d) Need for scientifi c collection and transportation of Solid Waste along  
with its time-bound target and monitoring 
4.33 In this context, a representative of ASSOCHAM during evidence also stated: 
"Scientific collection and transportation of solid waste, there has to be time 
bound target and monitoring for achieving at least 90 per cent segregation at 
source, that is biodegradable separate and non -biodegradable separate, which is 
not happening at all.  This is creating big nuisance and big wastage of energy 
and money.  Then ther e has to be enforcement of separate transportation for 
different waste streams." 
4.34 ASSOCHAM in their written submission before the Committee has also stated that 
there is lack of clear guidelines related to collection, storage, segregation, treatment 
and stringent actions against offenders in cases of non-compliance. 
4.35 In this context the views of ASSOCHAM and Comments of MoH&UA and 
MoEF&CC are as under: 
 Views of ASSOCHAM    Comments of MoH&UA   Comments of MoEF&CC 
Scientific methods 
such as composit ing 
for managing 
biodegradable waste 
must be encouraged. 
 
 Implementation of 
efficient collection 
and segregation 
techniques will help 
to bring back its value 
and best out of waste 
can be ensured. 
Agreed "Solid Waste is managed in a 
decentralized approach wherein local 
bodies, village panchayats and state 
urban development departments are 
assigned with tasks related to 
management of landfill sites. Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate  
Change, under SWM Rules, 2016 has laid 
detailed provisions on deve lopment of 
(sanitary) landfill sites and has 
prescribed roles and responsibility of 
various actors involved. 
(e) Extended Producer Responsibility 
4.36 ASSOCHAM has also clarified  that EPR-Extended Producer Responsibility or making 
the manufacturer responsible. Some wastes, such as CFLs and batteries, are highly toxic. They 

62 
 
cannot be handled by municipalities. Per the global norms, such products are now the 
responsibility of the companies who manufacture them, so that the environment and public 
health is safeguarded. It is essential that they pay for collection of these at collection centres, 
create financial incentives for disposers to deliver them and then ensure their safe recycling.  
 
4.37 During the course of evidence of the representative of ASSOCHAM,  a witness stated: 
 
"Globally, there is a drive to extend business responsibility. I am here basically 
focusing on the post -consumer waste.  There is an EPR (Extended Producers 
Responsibility).  So, business belong to recognized as well unrecognized sectors.  
There are formal sectors and there are informal sectors, whereas the recent 
Government initiative has improved these business transitions to the recognized 
sectors.  But still the large fraction of these businesses still belong to the 
unrecognized informal sectors.  While the Government EPR policies focused on 
recognized sectors, the unrecognized sectors really get a free ride. So, we are 
not capturing unrecognized informal sectors into our  Extended Producers 
Responsibility.  This free riders problems put rather greater burden on the 
recognized sectors.  The higher the unrecognized sector, the greater the burden 
is. Therefore, it is imperative to eliminate and really have a solid enforcement on 
unrecognized sectors as well." 
4.38 The witness added: 
"Here, the crucial partner in effective urban solid waste and EPR management is 
the Municipal Corporations/ Urban Local Bodies, which is fundamental for 
successful EPR and urban solid waste management.   
The municipal corporations or the urban local bodies in Indi a lack critically in 
infrastructure and capability.  This is our observations.  There are infrastructures 
but they are not functioning to its capacity as well.  It is necessary to take 
challenge of effective management and enforcement of 
 these urban solid wastes.  In many parts of the world there is an effective EPR 
in place.  It is well-laid.  It is simply to be replicated in the country.  We can pick 
up those best practices and bring and replicate that.  One of the examples which 
I would like to share ov er here is having a sort of waste bank or a centralised 
waste bank where under EPR all the businesses, especially, the post -consumer 
waste can be deposited into that waste bank.  According to the size and the 
volume of waste, all the producers can share an d contribute as a part of their 
EPR.   
Waste to wealth is another example and all the companies, who are present over 
here and who are there into recycling, there is a by -product out of this waste.  
How are we really going to optimise and also see that it really reduces the 
burden of EPR?  So, there is an effective mechanism.  There are several such 
technologies and we have been working with several partners and NGOs.  

63 
 
Recently I s aw and there was a presentation  made by one of the companies 
about its technology." 
4.39 The witness further added: 
"The biggest challenge today which the country is facing is of source collection 
and segregation. Segregation is the biggest issue. I was really happy to see that 
you need not to segregate the entire solid waste and i t can be recycled and the 
end product is really like jet fuel, diesel, etc., of a very high quality. So, there are 
several such technologies which can be used and leveraged to manage our solid 
waste.   
Therefore, my submission as an industrialist or as a c orporate is that we are fully 
committed as an industry for EPR.  We want to contribute but there should be 
simple, easy to implement and sustainable models. We would be very happy to 
really participate and adhere to those guidelines.  Otherwise, guidelines would be 
there but if it is not implemented, then it is not sustainable at all."  
4.40 In this connection ASSOCHAM has suggested that the following key 
 actions are required: 
(i) To increase the thickness specified in PWM 2016 from 50 Micron to 100 
Micron. This will ensure that the waste get picked up due to its recycling value. 
This has been successful in case of PET bottle where we have vibrant recycling 
industry and you will not find any PET bottles littered or at landfill sites. 
(ii) Proper infrastructure/capacity for segregation, recycling and incineration 
of the plastic waste in each of large consumption areas. 
(iii)     Creation of PRO in India with Industry participation 
(iv) Following the set Policy & Standards on the Plastic waste management 
and c onsolidation of all legal cases related to plastics in one court to have 
common judgment. 
(v) No ban on plastic without scientific basis and alternate solution which is 
more eco friendly. 
 
4.41 The suggestions of ASSOCHAM and comments of MoH&UA and MoEF&CC are  as 
under: 
 
 Suggestions of ASSOCHAM  Comments of MoH&UA        Comments of MoEF&CC 
Solid Waste Management 
Plastics in Urban –India. 
The Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change has 
notified the Plastic Waste 
Management Rules 2016 
and Plasti c Waste 
Management 
(Amendment) Rules 
2018. MoEF& CC to 
provide comments on 
Solid Waste 
Management Plastics in 
Urban –India. 
The Ministry had notified the 
Recycled Plastic Manufacture 
and Usage Rules, 1999 for 
regulating manufacture and 
sale of plastic carr y bags. It 
was superseded by Plastic 
Waste (Management and 
Handling) Rules, 2011 on 4 th 
February, 2011. Further the 
Ministry Notified Plastic 
Waste Management Rules, 
2016 vide Notification dated 
18th March, 2016 
superseding Plastic Waste Businesses belong to MoEF&CC to provide 

64 
 
recognized as well as 
unrecognized sectors. 
Whereas recent 
government initiatives have 
improved businesses' 
transition to the recognized 
sector, a large fraction of 
lndian businesses still 
belong to unrecognized 
sector. While the 
government EPR policies 
focus on the recognized 
sector, the 0nrecognized 
sector gets free -ride. ‘This 
free-rider problem puts 
greater burden on the 
recognized sector; the 
higher the unrecognized 
sector, the greater the 
burden. Therefore, it is 
imperative to eliminate the 
unrecognized sector. 
comments (Management and Ha ndling) 
Rules, 2011 and its 
amendments. 
The earlier Plastic Waste 
(Management and Handling) 
Rules, 2011 prescribed a 
thickness of 40 micron, 
however, the thickness was 
increased from 40 micron to 
50 micron vide Plastic Waste 
Management Rules, 2016 
with a motive that the waste 
get picked up due to its 
recycling value. 
As per the Rules, the 
generators of waste have 
been mandated to take 
steps to minimize generation 
of plastic waste, not to litter 
the plastic waste, ensure 
segregated storage of waste 
at source  and handover 
segregated waste to local 
bodies or agencies 
authorised by the local 
bodies. The rules also 
mandate the responsibilities 
of local bodies, gram 
panchayats, waste 
generators, retailers and 
street vendors to manage 
plastic waste. 
Further, the Mi nistry has 
worked out 3 draft models 
for the EPR. The same has 
been circulated to various 
stakeholders during the 
Regional Workshop 
conducted by the Ministry 
and CII on 12 th and 13 th 
November, 2018 for the 
comments. Once the 
consultation process is over, 
the final EPR mechanism will 
be implemented. 
 
The Ministry of 

65 
 
Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change, has 
introduced the Plastic Waste 
Management Rules, 2016, 
the policy principle of 
Extended Producer 
Responsibility. Under EPR, a 
producers, brand owners 
and importers are mandated 
to collect back and process 
the waste generated by the 
material it has introduced in 
the market.  
According to the Plastic 
Waste Management Rules, 
2016 responsibilities have 
been assigned to producers, 
importers and brand owners 
to work out modalities for 
waste collection system 
based on EPR involving 
State Urban Development 
Departments, either 
individually or collectively 
through their own 
distribution channel or 
through local bodies. The 
Ministry is currently 
deliberating modalitie s for 
implementing EPR in plastic 
waste in the country. In this 
regard, stakeholder 
consultations have been 
conducted in Bangalore and 
Ranchi. Further two more 
consultations have also been 
planned. ULBs are involved 
in the stakeholder 
consultation and nece ssary 
provisions for the capacity 
building of ULBs are 
incorporated in the draft 
models. 
 
***** 

66 
 
CHAPTER V 
Different Models of Decentralised Solid Waste Management 
5.1 During the course of evid ence of the representatives of Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs it came out before the Committee that a workable system of waste 
collection at source is already in operation in places like Ambikapur, Bengaluru, 
Chandigarh, etc. A brief resume of   these models of decentralized Solid Waste 
Management is as under:  
(a) Ambikapur Model of Decentralised SWM  
5.2 During the course of evidence of the representatives of MoH&UA, Additional 
Resident Commissioner, Government of Chhattisgarh in her Power Point Presen tation 
before the Committee focused on the issue of solving the problem of solid waste, in 
Ambikapur town of Chhattisgarh showcasing a self -sustainable model of segregation of 
wet waste to compost and solid waste to some extent as raw material to an indust ry.  
In the material submitted before the Co mmittee captioned 'Transforming G arbage Into 
Resource'  shows details of converting waste generation to treatment in Ambikapur 
town by involving  commercial, residential bulk generators SHGs, Residents Welfare 
Associations, hotels etc. from Door to Door Collection through GIS based Route Plan 
and Primary Segregation at source, Secondary Segregation Centres, Segregation of 
inorganic waste and decomposing through decomposter of organic waste and producing 
methane ga s by decomposing food waste. Asked as to how this completely 
decentralized model of waste management can be replicated in the country, the witness 
explained: 
"Sir, it is segregated to that extent that the raw material for that particular 
industry.  So, we do not give it to the cement factories.   There are a few 

67 
 
industries, which take it as  raw material. We collect it in that quantum and 
sell it." 
 
5.3 Asked as to whether there is no incineration, the witness clarified: 
"Yes, Sir.  Ours is 100 per cent recycling and reuse. Nothing is going waste." 
 The Committee also asked whether it is actually possible, the witness stated: 
"Yes, Sir, it is possible. That is why we are segregating." 
5.4 Asked about the system of making the model viable by taking user charges the 
witness explained: 
"It is charged household-wise. Around 90 per cent are paying and it is 
increasing. We are charging Rs. 50 per month." 
5.5 Asked about the collection of user charges, the witness stated: 
  "The woman SHGs are collecting it. Initial ly, we had worked out that it would 
be a cooperative society. When we were doing this kind of a work, they were not 
that empowered and aware. Gradually, we built their capacity. Initially, they 
were going, but people were not listening to them. Then, we ha d a meeting with 
the Municipal Corporation’s Revenue Team and it was decided that initially it 
would be done. It was linked with the service. Gradually, people started. Then, 
we started getting acknowledgements for our project. Now, citizens do not want 
to drop it." 
5.6 The Committee also wanted to know whether the money is going to the 
Corporation or the SHGs, the witness stated: 
"It is going into a separate account in the Corporation maintained for the solid 
waste management. The honorarium is being paid to these women from this 
money." 
5.7 The Committee also enquired whether there is no gap funding required now at 
all from the State, the witness stated: 
"Yes, it is over … It was one-time….. All these are coming into one account. One 
thing, which I felt is that if I disturb the existing system of whatever is going on, 
then they will not allow this project to succeed. So, first we allowed everything to 
succeed and then once it was established, then gradually deal with the 
stakeholders like scrap dealers who were behind the fire and theft issues. So, we 
got to know that we need to involve them . We actually involved and made room 

68 
 
for everybody. We did not get into the existing system at all like the transporter 
kept on taking  
the contract. Gradually, when they started getting less volume, then they 
stopped, but had we stopped them initially, then they would not have allowed 
this project to succeed." 
5.8 Asked whether it was achieved through persuasion, the witness clarified:  
"Yes, Sir.  There are two things – persuasion and technology.  We have used a 
participatory kind of thing – app and complaints. Initially people were saying that 
since they were not reaching to them, they were not paying. Now, we have made 
sure that they reach to them. The citizens were part of this model, from designing 
to execution." 
5.9    The witness also stated: 
"The Centre has put in it one -time for tools, equipment, uniform, etc. They are 
O&M issues and that is it and nothing else. Since the city’s drains and roads were 
clean, the consumables and chemicals expenditure, which was around Rs. 50 lakh 
per year, became zero." 
 
5.10 Asked as to how this model can be replicated in the country, the witness 
clarified: 
"We have around 4,000 ULBs all over India out of which around 3,000 are of les s 
than one lakh population.  The norm is that one household generates around 400 
to 500 gm waste per day. If we calculate it,  then for these small ULBs, these 
kinds of mechanical plants are simply inoperable.  Secondly, the resources, the 
technical expertise to operate these kinds of plants is not available. For example, 
in Ambikapur, I have to travel 350 kilometres to all the sites to catch even a train. 
In those kinds of areas, with mechanic kinds of incinerators, plants,  solutions are 
not workable.  Th is is my submission.  In my previous District, I had seven ULBs 
and some of them were in the mining areas.   There, an incineration plant was 
put but it was shut down because it is not operable there.  We do not get even 
engineers." 
5.11 Asked whether the above model implemented in Ambikapur town and whether it 
is still working well, the MOH&UA informed  that t he Ambikapur model is successfully 
working since 14th April, 2015 and is being replicated ac ross the State of Chhattisgarh.   
Any other big city or tow ns either Chhattisgarh or in adjoining States of Madhya 
Pradesh, Odisha, Jharkhand etc. have been able to use Ambikapur model. 

69 
 
5.12 Asked about the  viewpoints of respective States in  this regard, the MOH&UA 
stated that Chhattisgarh is replicating the Ambikapur model across the entire State with 
good results in cities like Durg, Rajnandgaon etc. Various cities and states 
representatives have visited Ambikapur and replicated the same. Ministry has also 
disseminated the model across the country.  
 
 5.13 The Committee also enquired whether the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
has been able to work out a roadmap of bringing 2704 ULBs out of 4000 ULBs in the 
country under Amb ikapur model in the first phase.  Asked about the States/UTs wise 
break up of ULBs t hat can be tentatively ta rgeted for this huge task, the MOH&UA 
informed that  the State wise number of ULBs having population less than 3 lakhs which 
are more suitable for adopting the Ambikapur model are given below: 
 
List of ULBs with <= 3 lakh population out of 4041 statutory 
towns 
State / UT No.of Cities < 3 lakh 
A&N 1 
Andhra Pradesh 114 
Arunachal Pradesh 26 
Assam 87 
Bihar 135 
Chhattisgarh 164 
D & D 2 
D & H 1 
Delhi 2 
Goa 14 
Gujarat 188 
Haryana 76 
Himachal Pradesh 56 
Jammu & Kashmir 84 
Jharkhand 37 
Karnataka 209 
Kerala 54 
Madhya Pradesh 359 
 
Maharashtra 230 

70 
 
Manipur 28 
Meghalaya 10 
Mizoram 23 
Nagaland 19 
Odisha 104 
Puducherry 5 
Punjab 139 
Rajasthan 177 
Sikkim 8 
Tamil Nadu 712 
Tripura 15 
Uttar Pradesh 629 
Uttarakhand 73 
West Bengal 115 
Grand Total 3896 
  
 
5.14 In t his connection, NITI Aayog also  stated that some of the cities have done 
examplary work in the Solid Waste Management like Ambikapur and Pune and are 
models to be emulated by other cities.  These cities have evo lved their own models by 
brining rag -pickers into the fold.  For example, Ambikapur in Chhattisgarh, owing to 
intensive training, general awareness and citizens' participation, became the first 
municipal corporation in India to digitize garbage management,  make the city dustbin 
free and convert 'garbage into gold' by employing poor women from Self Help Group 
(SHGs) to collect the waste. 
(b) Pune Model of Decentralised Waste Management 
5.15 During the course of evidence a representative of Swach Pune spelling out the 
details about Pune Model of Decentralised Waste Management stated as under: 
"So, the SWACH model is essentially a model where waste pickers have been 
integrated into a formal cooperative.  They are registered as a service 
cooperative.  It is this cooperative of waste pickers which is covering 50 per cent 
of the city in doorstep collection work.  The significance of this model is that the 
municipal costs for waste handling are extremely low.  They are the lowest in 
India for primary collection.  The mu nicipality, as per the formal MoU with 
SWACH, was expected to pay approximately Rs. 200 for a five year period per 
household which in itself is a very low cost.  They finally ended up paying only 

71 
 
around Rs. 98 for five years which works out to per househol d per month Rs. 
1.50.  It has been unmatched in that sense in India.  The strength of this model 
is that the citizen who is getting the service to whose the waste pickers going 
and collecting the waste is actually paying the user fee directly.  They are pa ying 
between Rs. 20 or Rs. 50 a month.  So the net cost to the citizen is much higher 
but the municipal cost is much lower." 
5.16 The witness also elaborated: 
"Swachh is a wholly owned autonomous cooperative of self -employed waste 
pickers and other urban p oor that came into existence in 2007, with the support 
of the Kagad Kach Patra Kashtakari Panchayat (KKPKP) and the Pune Municipal 
Corporation, KKPKP is a membership based registered trade union of waste 
pickers and itinerant waste buyers in Pune and Pimpr i-Chinchwad in Maharashtra 
formed to organise waste -pickers and establish their status as workers and 
assert their contribution to the environment, and their crucial role in the Solid 
Waste Management of the cities.  Established in 1993, it currently has a bout 
9000 members, 80 per cent of whom are Dalit women from socially excluded and 
marginalised castes."  
5.17 The witness also stated: 
"The advantages are also that the model is far more accountable.  So, if the 
waste picker does not turn up on a particula r day, the citizen has the freedom to 
not pay and say that you have not done a very good service.  So, it is an effort 
to formalize the informal sector in a gradual manner.  It is also giving the time to 
the informal sector to upgrade itself, its skills an d provide an efficient service. 
The argument is also premised on the fact that no one perhaps understands the 
value of segregation more than the waste picker because she is a direct 
beneficiary of segregated waste.  If she gets access to segregated waste, she 
gets better quality waste and she gets a better return on it.  She is also able to 
sell it at a higher price. Scrap dealers are willing to buy it at a premium from her.  
So, the best worker who could possibly perform the work of doorstep collection 
is a waste picker if we want to promote segregation.  So, that is the second 
premise of the argument that it should be accountable and it should be the 
waste picker providing the service." 
5.18 The witness added: 
"Our third effort, of course, is that the effo rt of segregation of waste is only 
useful if we can maintain the integrity of the segregated streams. In Pune 
around 40 per cent citizens are maintaining, at least, two bins.  The two bins 
may not have perfectly segregated waste but, at least, the make an effort to 
keep wet and dry waste in a segregated manner.  We also have to recognize 
that there are a lot of wastes today which are really a challenge.  I mean, where 
is one supposed to throw a ball pen which has combination of organic as well as 
recyclable material; where are you supposed to throw tea bags or ear buds?  
There are lot of composite materials which do not fit very directly wet or dry 
waste." 

72 
 
5.19 Asked how Swachh is managing without the administrative cost, the witness 
clarified: 
"The waste picker pays five per cent of her earnings from user fees towards the 
running the SWACH.  So, currently, the cooperative is entirely managed with the 
earnings." 
5.20 The witness also elaborated: 
"Citizens are expected to maintain in situ compost pits, and the  waste-picker is 
running the compost pits and ensuring that the organic waste is getting 
composted.  The Municipality is not only saving on the direct cost of collection 
but it is in fact not collecting the organic waste at all.  So, the PMC pays a small 
rebate, five per cent rebate in property tax to citizens who are actually 
composting their waste in situ.  Obviously, from the Municipality point of view, 
the five per cent rebate is a very small cost to pay in order to ensure that they 
have to collect that  much less waste.  So, that model is also working.  The 
benefit to the waste -picker is that apart from getting the user fee for collection 
of waste, she also gets a user fee for composting the waste. So, she makes a net 
higher earning.  We have around 9,00 0 waste-pickers in Pune and around 2,300 
of them are a part of SWaCH model.  All of them are working much fewer hours 
and are earning relatively higher per hour with better access to waste and 
certainly with much better conditions. Based on these learning,  some of the 
other cities in India have also come and studied the Pune model.  The waste -
picker groups as well as the Municipal officials have drawn a Memorandum of 
requirements, which they feel that the Urban Local Bodies can endorse.  This 
ensures that these kinds of models can get replicated in other cities." 
(c) Bengaluru, Varanasi and Amritsar Models of Decentralised Waste 
Management 
5.21 During the course of evidence of the representative of MOH&UA on the issue of 
collection and segregation of waste in Bengaluru city, the Commissioner, BBMB stated: 
" Sir, I would first like to give you a brief background of my city. I would like to 
bring to your kind notice that Bengaluru has a population of approximately of 
about 1.25 crore with an area of 800 square kilometres and the city of Bengaluru 
generates about 4500 tonnes of solid waste everyday. The basic process is that 
in all the households the solid waste is collected house to house in a segregated 
form and probably Bengaluru is one of the top ten cities, maybe in the world, to 
collect 50 per cent of its wastes segregated. These segregated wastes goes to 
our plants and then we make compost sort of thing and then the Agriculture 
Department of Karnataka and also Swachh Bharat Mission is also giving us 
subsidy. 25 per cent of the waste is from the bulk generators.  
 Anybody who generates more than 10 kgs of wastes has been categorised 
as bulk generators and this is collected by our authorised contractors who are 
scrutinised by a group of expert Committees and o fficers and then they are 

73 
 
empanelled in the website and only those empanelled vendors are allowed to 
collect waste from the bulk generators. By bulk generators I mean apartment 
complexes and then shops and other establishments." 
5.22 On the issue of Waste to Compost the Committee inquired whether are there any 
buyers for Waste to Compost, the witness stated:  
" In the BBMP Budget also, we had said that anybody who is willing to give 
compost, BBMP is willing to buy that through the DWCC. Even State Governmen t 
and the Central Government are willing to give subsidy and we can directly pass 
on this subsidy." 
5.23 Asked whether, If the Welfare Association is making compost, and BBMP has not 
bought it for so many years, the witness stated:  
" There was some issue about the compost. Last time, the Agriculture Minister of 
Karnataka himself visited and saw the quality of compost.  He immediately 
offered, what Swachh Bharat is offering, additional subsidy of Rs. 800 to the 
farmers.  So, not even one kg. of compost rema ins in my plant. All the compost 
has been cleared." 
5.24 On the issue of treatment of C&D Wastes the problem of lakhs of tonnes of 
Waste spread over Mandur area came up before the Committee. Asked about the 
factual position, the witness stated:  
" Sir, it is a matter of 83 acres of land in Mandur, as you are aware. We have 
called for tenders for bio mining there.  A couple of people had shown interest 
but they did not come up later.  For four times, we have called tenders.  We are 
waiting now for any compan y which is coming forward. We will give them 4G 
exemption, if they are willing to do it.  In the meanwhile,  hon. Chief Minister 
wants to take up construction activity there for building up of houses. 
Automatically, we are in the process of removing the was te quickly as a large 
amount of RDF is available which is in great demand." 
5.25 The witness further elaborated:  
"Regarding construction debris, we have called for tenders from one company 
called Raw Crystals. Bengaluru generates 2000 tonnes of constructi on debris 
every day.  We were using it previously for the  quarry refilling. But now as per 
the 2016 SWM, we cannot do it any more. We need to process it and then do it. 
So, we have called for tenders from a company called Raw Crystals.  We are 
handing it over to them."   
5.26 Asked what would they do out of it, the witness clarified:  

74 
 
" They will basically crush the whole material.  They will take out valuable things 
like steel, stone and everything. Bricks also have got some value. They segregate 
it into four or five streams, and whatever the rejected remains is left, it goes to 
the landfill." 
5.27 The witness stated: 
"Sir, we have one of the best models in the country. We have one of the best 
SHG groups in the country. We have sold four lakh tonnes of com post. We have 
the SHGs working very strong. Ambikapur is a small town while challenges in 
Bengaluru city are different. 
5.28 Asked about the total expenditure that you are incurring for this waste 
management, the witness stated: 
"Our expenditure is Rs. 800 crore per annum. The major amount of it goes 
towards the labour wages." 
5.29 The Committee also wanted to know in what way can we imitate the Ambikapur 
model that she has presented, the witness explained: 
"For example, we are introducing mechanical sweepe rs. Previously, they were 
charging Rs. 17 lakh per month to sweep 20 kms. of road. Now the same 
mechanical sweepers sweep 50 kms. of road for Rs. 5.5 lakh including the cost 
of the machine." 
5.30 About collection of waste in Varanasi, a representative of the Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs stated: 
" Now, Varanasi has everything there. There are seven, of which, three 
functioning bio -magnesium plants; there are 6 -7 composting plants; and we 
have the dumping yard. So, we have everything working there pl us the legacy 
issue. Now, I would suggest that up to now our strategy was that we would be 
following with the Swachh Survekshan in this. I was seeing our cities population-
wise. There are 88 cities with 5 lakh population; 329 cities with 1 -5 lakh 
population; 468 cities with 50,000 to one lakh population; and 2,704 cities with 
less than 50,000 population. In this, Ambikapur may very well apply in 2,704 
immediately." 
5.31 The Committee asked whether it c an be immediately pushed for, a 
representative of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs stated now, they have identified 

75 
 
2 or 3 models in each of these categories, and they will try to implement so that by 
next meeting we will be able to show some progress. 
5.32 The Committee drew the attention of the Ministry to the observation made by 
the Commissioner SDMC that if Swachh Bharat Mission fails, it is due to financially poor 
Corporations, a witness of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs clarified: 
"Sir, the strategy was that they were sort of saying that we  will have a ‘loose fit 
light touch model’ and we will try to induce cities to do it through the Swachh 
Survekshan. Now, the star -rating was inaugurated yesterday by the hon. 
Minister. Now, our experience has been that I have been looking after Varanasi 
for 4 ½ months acting like a Super Commissioner. Firstly, it has to be a 
customised model. Secondly, I do not agree with him as money is not a problem. 
Varanasi has no money. It is actually a governance issue and a matter of 
structuring it. Varanasi has 90 Wards; there are four organisations doing it, that 
is, the Nagar Nigam, Ecopal, KIANA and ILFS that is doing it. We found an event 
where we could not trace the workers. There are Kooda Ghar, which is a big 
building. So, the first person who goes there puts it in the front and after that 
everything comes on. Any pilgrim who comes there keeps on throwing there. So, 
Kooda Ghar is an old concept. If we can bring about this structural change and 
discipline our people, then it works." 
5.33 The witness further stated: 
"In Varanasi, what did we do in IT, and it is magnificent. No longer do we take 
attendance. It is photograph taken; photo matching; and attendance 
automatically taken. So, we have record of everybody. After that, there is street 
sweeping, which is very important and which you have missed. Every day, street 
sweeping photographs are taken 2-3 times ‘before’ and ‘after’ the street is swept. 
Every bin is photographed ‘before’ and ‘after’, and once they pick up the garbage 
from the house, we send an SMS like  an OTP. So, if the guy has not picked up, 
the household complains that he did not come. So, the results have been 
tremendous. Of course, there has been a lot of resentment from the employees 
literally bordering on strike, but we went ahead as we had to do  it to show UP 
that if we can do it in one city, then we can do it everywhere." 
 
5.34 About collection of waste in Amritsar, a representative of MOH&UA stated: 
"The other thing is that I went to Amritsar. Mr. Sidhu had called me, and we had 
a six-hour long meeting. The discussion was that just one mile from the Golden 
Temple there is a dumping yard, which is still being used. So, we allowed them 
to use Smart City Mission money so that we can clean it." 
5.35 Asked how it will be cleared the witness stated: 

76 
 
"Sir, it is like this. Already, whatever had to become compost has become 
compost. Now, you have the recyclables, plastics, metals and 5 -10 per  cent 
inerts. So, we will remove the compost and we need to pay them for it. So, we 
will pay somebody to come and do it. We will remove it and then we will make a 
park and in between a small place for zero -inventory sort of operation because 
we cannot put a waste to energy plant right next to the Golden Temple. It is just 
not possible. So, that is a model that they are doing now. So, as you have rightly 
said that it cannot be ‘one size fits all’ and it has to be customized. It has to be 
done as it is a crisis / emergency, and we have to do it quickly. They will do it. 
We have been talking about it since morning and by next time they will be 
following the strategy that before the ending of this they will also give some 
strategic intervention to each city to do it that way." 
(d) Tamil Nadu and Goa Models of Decentralised Waste Management 
(i) Decentralised SWM in Tamil Nadu 
 
5.36 With regard to progress made in decentralized waste processing in Tamil Nadu 
during the recent Study Tour of the Committee in the course of informal discussion with 
the representatives of Government of Tamil Nadu at Ooty it was outlined before the 
Committee by State officials that in future a number Decentralized Waste Processing 
Units (DWPUs) will be set up with a view to reduce the number of Centralized Waste 
Processing Units in Tamil Nadu.   Asked w hether the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs going to set up Decentralized Waste Processing Units (DPUs) in different 
States/UTs  on the lines of Goa and Tamil Nadu, if so, whether MOH&UA has prepared 
any road map i n this regard, the MOH&UA stating in the affirmative also informed that  
Ministry is spreading the information about decentralised processing units implemented 
by ULBs and disseminating the information widely as detailed in 6(a). Recently, during 
the Swachh Bharat Awards ceremony of the results of the Swachh Survekshan 2017 at 
Indore on 23.6.2018, the Hon’ble Prime Minister has released the Ministry’s Advisory on 
“Onsite and Decentralized Composting of Municipal Organic Waste” which puts together 
several such units existing in the country. The Advisory has been disseminated to all the 
States and ULBs as a reference tool. 
 

77 
 
(ii) Goa Model of Decentralised SWM 
 
 5.37  With regard to 100 TPD MSC/W Waste Treatment plant at North Goa during the 
evidence of the representative of M/o Housing and Urban Affairs, Municipal 
Commissioner, East MCD also e nlightened the Committee that he is well aware about 
Goa facility since he was Environment Secretary in Goa.  Asked about the views of 
MOH&UA on the above waste treatment plant, the MOH&UA stated  that Ministry 
officials have seen the said plant in Goa. It is a direct intervention by the State 
Government of Goa and highly cost prohibitive (at Rs. 158 crore for processing 100 TPD 
waste), which is not affordable by most ULBs in view of their precarious financial 
position. However, with mandatory segregation an d decentralised processing, it is 
certain that the costs of processing for the ULBs will come down and also reduce the 
expenditure in collection and transportation. 
 
5.38 The Committee further enquired whether more and more such waste 
management plants nee d be set up in Solid Waste affected areas, more particularly in 
Delhi, the MOH&UA stated that t he key to waste management lies in segregation and 
its processing at decentralised level.  More waste to energy plants are already coming 
up, however, the other ULBs which are not having waste processing facility so far are 
being encouraged to adopt decentralised/centralised waste processing facilities 
particularly the composting and biomethanation. Considering the typical composition of 
wastes and the climatic co nditions, composting is highly relevant in India and is the 
best method to be considered in all municipal solid waste management (MSWM) 
concepts In Delhi following are the Waste to Energy plants: 
 
1. Waste to Energy plant in Okhla (2000 MTPD) 
2. Waste to Energy plant in Ghazipur (1300 MTPD) 
3. Waste to Energy plant in Narela Bawana (2000 MTPD) 

78 
 
4. Waste to Energy plant in Tehkhand, Okhla (2000  MTPD - is under 
construction). 
 
5.39  In reply about need for replicating the decentralized models of waste 
management in Pune, Kerala and Goa to other parts of the country the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs stated as Under: 
 
"(i) Facilitation of participation by the waste -pickers is one of the prime 
objectives of the Swachh Bharat Mission as stated in the Guidelines. SWM 
Rules 2016 also emphasize on streamlining Waste Pickers in waste 
management system and all states and ULBs have also been sensitized to this 
aspect. To enable the ULBs SBM has brought a step -by-step guide for the 
integration of Waste Pickers into the Municip al Solid Waste Management 
chain. 
 
(ii) Under the ongoing Swachh Survekshan -2018, which is the first ever 
survey where all ULBs will be participating and thus sharing their progress for 
review by an independent third party, one of the specific parameters be ing 
judged is the Percentage of Informal Waste Pickers formally integrated into 
Solid Waste Management (SWM) in the city (as per SWM 2016 rules)." 
 
(e) Best practices of Decentralised SWM 
 
5.40 During the course of examination, best practices in decentrali zed solid waste 
management in Vengurla town in Sindhugarh District of Maharashtra and Alleppy 
district in Kerala also came up before the Committee. 
 
5.41 With regard to Vengurla town the following were the different stages of pre -
implementation stages and after implementation, features of Solid Waste Management  
 
Situation primarily prior to 
implementation 
Implementation measures undertaken  Situation after implementation 
Plastic waste choking up the 
creek and beecha 
Public outreach programme for waste 
segregation at some stated and supervising 
mechanism set up 
Vengurla Municipal Council has become 
first Municipal  Council in Maharashtra, 
plastic bag free city, zero garbage city.  
Waste was pitting up in the 
city 
Waste bye Laws passed   
Poor Solid Waste 
Management 
Plastic carry bag banned  
Insufficient logistics  Generating clean energy reducing carbon 
Deploying sufficient  vehicles for waste 
collection treating staff Members.  Setting 
 

79 
 
up Grievance Reducing System.  
  
 
5.42 Similarly, outlining the good w ork done in decentralized work managed in 
Alappuzha, the MOH&UA has given the following facts before the Committee: 
 
(i) "Alappuzha, which has a population of 0.174 million and produces 58 tonnes of 
solid waste a day, has been implementing a project called  Nirmala Bhavanam 
Nirmala Nagaram (Clean Homes- Clean City) since November 2012.  
 
(ii) The city has adopted decentralised waste management and is pushing for 100 
per cent segregation in all the 23 wards of the city. More than 80 per cent 
households now ha ve biogas plants and decentralized composting system. The 
project was taken up under the 'Nirmala Bhavanam, Nirmala Gagaram (Clean 
Home, Clean City)' programme that envisaged the municipality setting up biogas 
plants, pipe compost units in households and a erobic composting units in public 
places.  
 
(iii) Biogas plants, both portable and fixed, were installed in households, with 50 
percent subsidy from government agencies. Hotels, vegetable markets, wedding 
halls were asked to have their own plants or make a rrangements to entrust their 
waste to recognised private service providers. Within a month, the scheme was 
rolled out in 12 more wards. The urban body has so far established 5,000 kitchen  
 bins, 3,000 biogas plants, 2,800 pipe composting units and 218 aerobic composting 
 units to manage 58-60 tonnes of waste the town generates daily. 
 
(iv) The biogas produced from the plants at the houses is being used for the 
purpose of cooking. Currently, it provides enough fuel for two hours of cooking. The 
waste-filled in the compost units at home is converted into vermi-compost that can 
be either used for the kitchen garden or sold. 
 
(v) The waste deposited at the aerobic compost plants in public places is converted 
into organic fertilizers and distributed to the publi c free of cost. Each unit, 
comprising two bins, processes 2,000 kilograms of waste and converted it into 
fertilizer within 90 days. 
 
(vi) Plastic and other non -degradable wastes are segregated at the source and 
delivered to the respective units. While the kitchen waste can be deposited in public 
aerobic bins, the plastic waste is separately collected once a month by the 
municipality officials from the units or households and handed over to private 
parties for recycling. Plastic waste can also be given to the state government's Clean 
Kerala Company which sells it to factories in other states. 
 
(vii) The decentralised waste management system has helped Alapuzha municipality 
to save substantial funds every year. Money saved on diesel used for operating 40-
50 trucks to transport the waste to the dumping yard alone comes to about Rs 50 

80 
 
lakhs. The cost of the biogas produced through the plants works out to Rs 60 lakhs. 
The fertiliser can fetch up to Rs 30 lakhs." 
 
(f) Need for Decentralized Solid Waste Management where ever possible. 
 
5.43 During the course of Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), the Committee 
enquired about a balanced view on the issue of Decentralised/Centralised Solid Waste 
Management, the Member Secretary, CPCB clarified: 
 
"Here, the debate is that of decentralised and centralised system. So, there is no 
conflict of interest between these two issues. Decentralisation, wherever 
possible, is the most welcome thing. We are also trying it. Many of our informal 
sectors  are doing a good job. But th is does not end here. City -wise plan has to 
come here where the regulators like the Central Pollution Control Board and the 
Urban Development Ministry have to come in." 
 
5.44 In this connection, sharing his experience, the witness stated: 
 
" I would start with my observations as a regulator. The MSW rule came into 
being in the year 2000. Just two years back, I got an opportunity to act as a 
member-Secretary. I was working in different capacities. I have realised that 
these rules were formulated in 2000 and why I should not start practising the Act 
on the campus. In fact, on 5 th June of 2014, the entire waste of the campus was 
collected. It is having two roots composting: one is vermi -compost and the 
another one is open organic waste converter. Then, we have the segregation at 
each floor office where we are operating, where we have the laboratories.  Then, 
the estimates were that 50 to 60 kgs of waste were generated every day which 
we have brought down to 8 to 10 kgs. I thought that in the campus if I have to 
act as a Commissioner, then how it will be that of a city." 
 
5.45 The Committee enquired how it was brought down, the witness explained: 
 
"I will tell you. Out of the 50 kg which was coming, some portion was coming 
from the canteen; another portion through  the papers. There are also different 
wastes. We have the sweeping horticulture wastes and all those wastes. The 
horticulture waste goes to the vermi bags where vermin -culture is there. We 
have started producing manure. We are using it in our own campus.   
Second, in the canteen, we have put  the organic waste converter. That is also 
being used.  In fact, we are giving it to our staff also. They can take home that 
for use in their pots. But still there is a residue which is there because chemicals 
are coming from the laboratories. So, we are storing and sending it to the CTP. 
Another model which we have seen is in New Moti Bagh in Delhi where we have 
the composite facility working. They have the horticulture waste converter. Then, 
they have the organic waste converter. Plastic coming out is converted into liquid 
fuel. The gas coming out is used for cooking purpose. These two models are to 
be scaled up at the national level. These are the small stories converting into big 
events." 

81 
 
***** 

82 
 
CHAPTER VI 
Issue related with Waste Generation  
Need for data base for waste generation and working out a 
Perspective Plan quantifying Waste Generation and compost 
analysis. 
6.1 During the course of evidence of the representatives of Central Pollution Control 
Board (CPCB), a re presentative of CPCB underlining the need for data base for waste 
generation stated: 
"The biggest handicap in this country is that we do not have the waste 
generation data. Today, we will see the different figures floating around. Some 
will say that it is 1,20,000 MT; some other will say that it is 1,40,000 MT. 
Actually, we have carried out a survey in 2004 -05 where actually 59 cities were 
sampled. How do we arrive at these figures? Most of the concept for estimating 
waste generation is population multiplie d by per capita is equivalent to the 
waste. That is not correct. What we have to do is that each city has to weigh 
how much waste is generated and the next step is its composition."  
6.2 The witness further added: 
"What waste we were generating 50 years ba ck, if you see the position now, it 
has altogether changed. Now we have almost 9 per cent plastics coming into our 
waste. We have other components getting into it. So, the waste which was 
simply a biodegradable waste is gradually getting converted into het erogeneous 
waste and its chemical composition is changing. Now this basic composition will 
determine the type of technology to be employed. Ms. Sunita Narain said that 
she has no opposition for incineration. I will take that. We need a higher 
consuming waste technology in the country. There is no conflict. She says very 
rightly that we need hybrid technologies. We need a combination of 
technologies. We might need RDF, we need incineration and perhaps the higher 
version of fourth plasma archs. Maybe, you can not have land fills, you cannot 
have the composting because of the climatic conditions. You may require a much 
higher version of the technology. So, when the country is progressing, why do 
we deprive when these options should be stopped? The only mistake w hich we 
make is the locating of such a plant is very crucial. If in Sukhdev Vihar which is 
already a residential area, the wrong locating has resulted in a big challenge in 
the operation of the plant." 
6.3 The witness further added: 
"Now, the second thing is that we segregate the waste, we determine the 
composition, we label with the calorific value and utilise the technology and 
obviously stricter standards and online continuous monitoring devices are 
essential. This will also help us. Still in many parts of the world, incineration and 

83 
 
thermal route are preferred. About 60 to 70 per cent of the waste is still going 
through the thermal route. The only thing is, they have better operation, skill 
and they have a better design. Therefore, according to the under standing of our 
waste and designing technology is the foremost thing and this will help. 
Decentralisation will compliment the efforts because it will reduce the 
unnecessary burden on the land fill. We have to go for disincentivising land fill 
because all cities will not get land always and cases will end up in litigation." 
6.4 The witness further elaborated: 
"Our suggestion is that every local body must do quantification, compost analysis 
and a total plan which should come into the public domain. Every citi zen has a 
right to see that his city what plan it will have. It may have a 2 year or a 3 year 
or a 5 year plant, but at least we will come to know in the next 5 years the waste 
which is generated from the city is going to this and accordingly every local b ody 
can work out plans and can seek the partnership of voluntary and non -voluntary 
organisations and work out plans. So, it will ease out. Therefore, it is the 
combination of the efforts which will drive the entire solid waste management 
plan in our country." 
 
*** 
 
   
  
  
 
  

84 
 
CHAPTER-VII 
 Issue Related with Waste Composting  
7.1 On the issue of Waste to Compost the Ministry of Housing and Urban affairs have 
stated as under:  
"For Wet Waste 
 
 i.    Decentralised/Centralised Composting 
  
 Composting can be do ne in decentralized or centralised manner including onsite 
 composting of waste by Bulk Generators.  
 
 Decentralized composting can be for a specific ward or area where composting 
 of biodegradable waste is done up to 5 TPD capacity at a place. The differe nt 
 technologies that can be taken up under decentralized technology are pit 
 composting, pot composting, bag composting, OWC, windrows etc.   
 
 Centralized composting includes composting of waste in a centralized manner, 
 where biodegradable waste from al l wards is brought into a centralized facility 
 and composted through either windrow composting or other such large scale 
 composting methods more than 5 TPD capacity. 
 
 Decentralised options can be tailored to the local waste stream and the   
 climatic, social, and economic conditions; Decentralised systems reduce the 
 cost of collection, transportation, and disposal of waste by the ULBs 
 
 ii.   Bio methanation 
 
 Biomethanation is the conversion of biodegradable waste into biogas under 
 anaerobic condition s. In this process the biodegradable components including 
 the food waste etc are broken down into methane under anaerobic conditions. 
 The methane gas thus generated can be used as a fuel. Biomethanation plants 
 can be decentralized or centralized." 
 
7.2 About Waste to Energy Programme the Ministry of New and Renewal Energy in a 
written note stated that Ministry of New & Renewable Energy has been promoting the 
use of technologies for energy recovery from municipal, industrial and commercial 
wastes for meet ing certain niche energy demands of urban, industrial and commercial 
sectors in the country. Ministry is focusing on Energy generation from Urban, Industrial 
and Agricultural Waste / Residues such as municipal solid wastes, vegetable and other 

85 
 
market waste s, slaughterhouse waste, agricultural residues and industrial wastes & 
effluents.  
 
7.3 The Ministry of New & Renewal Energy has given the following lists of Urban and 
Other waste for generation of Bio Gas and Power : 
 1. Urban waste:   2. Agricultural Waste 3. Industrial wastes/Effluents 
  Kitchen waste   Paddy straw  • Agro processing industry Effluents 
  Garden waste   Agro processing   • Paper & Pulp Industry Effluents 
  House-hold garbage, industries residues/ effluents  • Milk processing Effluents 
  Cattle dung   Green grass  • Spent wash from distilleries 
  Vegetable & fruits     • Waste from sago/starch 
 market waste     • Pharmaceuticals Effluents 
   Slaughter house waste    • Oil extraction plants Effluents 
  Poultry waste     • Slaughter house/ tanneries Effluents 
  Commercial/institutional garbage    • Press mud etc. 
  Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) 
 
7.4 Explaining methods of processing, the Waste to Energy, the MOH&UA stated that 
there are no separate suitable methods for metropolitan ci ties and other smaller cities. 
All processing methods are suitable for certain quality of waste with suitable quantity. 
However, segregation of waste in different streams is key for efficient and economical 
waste processing. Even smaller towns in cluster can install all waste processing facilities 
including waste to energy that is often considered suitable for large cities.  The Ministry 
of Housing and Urban Affairs has given the following suggestions:  
"(a) Considering the typical composition of wastes and the climatic conditions, 
composting is highly relevant in India and is the best method for wet waste 
processing. 
(b) However, in certain categories of bulk waste generators like hotel, 
restaurants, vegetable market places and places with animal dung etc., bio-
methanisation process proves to be better and economical option.  
(c) Segregation and Recycling of various streams best method for dry waste 
processing depending on its type, quality and quantity. 
(d)  MRF, RDF, waste to energy in large cities or on cl uster basis involving many 
smaller cities are various methods of processing for dry wastes like plastic waste 
etc." 
 

86 
 
7.5 During the course of examination the Committee have heard the representatives 
of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, ASSOCHAM, promi nent NGOs like Swachh 
Pune, Cent re for Science & Environment, Central Pollution Control Board and have 
obtained views of various Ministries like Ministry of New and Renewable Sources of 
Energy, NITTI Aayog, Department of Fertilizer, Ministry of Agriculture  and Farmers 
Welfare etc. The following issues have emerged on the issue of Waste to Compost:  
(a) Need for tapping the opportunities.     
(b) Need for waste to compost at house hold level. 
(c) Policy issues  
(i)  Need for Enforcement of mandatory offtake  of city  compost by 
fertilizer companies 
 (ii)  Pan India License for Waste to Compost. 
 (iii)  Need for Ware Housing facilities for organic manure. 
 (iv) Need for nutrient based subsidy for organic fertilizer.   
 (v) Inclusion of city compost under Nil category under GST. 
 (vi) Capacity creation.     
(d)  Promotion of Waste to Compost. 
(a) Need for tapping the opportunities.    
7.6 On the issue of need for tap ping the opportunities in the area of Waste to 
Compost in the light of growth of industry with ne w technologies and innovative 
financial intervention, the NITI Aayog has stated  that t he current valuation of MSW 
management market in the country is around US $ 8.5 billion. The estimated growth of 
this industry is 7% per annum. By 2030, the estimated bus iness potential would be 
around US$20 billion per annum as per the concept note prepared by Ministry of 
External Affairs (for Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Conference on the “Role of Indian Diaspora 
in Capacity Building for Affordable Waste Management” held in July 2018). This open up 
huge opportunities for public and private participation, foreign 

87 
 
participation/collaboration with new technologies and innovative financial interventions. 
The avenues of waste recycling through Waste to energy, Waste to construction  
material and Waste to Compost offers a lucrative business opportunities which need to 
be tapped in a big way. 
(b) Need for waste to compost at house hold level. 
7.7 On the issue of need for Waste to Compost at House Hold Level, the Committee 
have heard th e views of the representatives of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, 
ASSOCHAM, prominent NGOs like Swachh Pune, Centre for Science & Environment, 
Central Pollution Control Board and have obtained views of various Ministries like 
Ministry of New and Ren ewable Sources of Energy, NITTI Aayog, Department of 
Fertilizer, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare etc. In this connection a 
representative of prominent NGO , Chintan, during the course of evidence submitted 
before the Committee:  
 "We would say that first of all we should take care of our 50-60 per cent of our 
organic waste. If we can do composting for that, since that is one of our major 
problems, we take care of that by doing  composting. I am not getting into 
decentralize or centralize the system. Decentralised Waste Management System 
is obviously a solutio n. But if we do 50 -60 per cent composting, the rest 20 -25 
per cent is actually p lastic paper, glass and all of these things. These things do 
not have to be incinerated. Why would we want to incinerate them? We have a 
very good recycling market which is here a huge industry."   
 
7.8 In this connection a representative of ASSOCHAM also stated: 
"First, I will respond to the question of spaces. In fact, we have been arguing 
that the Uruli-Fursungi kind of situation, where all the waste is being transported 
to that landfill or dump site, is problematic. What we are suggesting is that every 
housing society or cooperative society should provide space in situ , within its 
own complex, as it happens abroa d. Many of our citizens, who live in very up -
market areas, are travelling abroad and are willing to segregate 20 kinds of 
waste abroad and also keeping the containers within the society." 
 
  
7.9 In this connection the suggestion of ASSOCHAM and comments of MoH&UA and 
MoEF&CC are as under: 

88 
 
  Suggestion of ASSOCHAM  Comments of MoH&UA       Comments of MoEF&CC 
All wet waste, ie,50% of 
the waste generated, to be 
composted at the colony 
and ward level. 
Agreed 
  
Under Solid Waste 
Management Rules, 2016 
waste gen erators are 
mandated to ensure 
segregation at source waste 
generated by them in three 
separate streams namely bio -
degradable, non -bio-
degradable and domestic 
hazardous wastes in suitable 
bins. Further, source 
segregation at primary and 
secondary levels has  been 
mandated for resident welfare 
associations and market 
associations, gated 
communities and institutions 
with more than 5000 sqm. 
Area, all hotels and restaurants 
and organizers of event/ 
gathering of more than 100 
persons. 
 
Further, rules also 
mandate that Bins for storage 
of bio -degradable wastes shall 
be painted green, those for 
storage of recyclable wastes 
shall be printed blue and those 
for storage of other wastes 
shall be printed black. 
 
In addition, the waste 
processing facilities are 
mandated to  include 
composting as one of the 
technologies for processing of 
bio-degradable waste. In this 
regard, Standards for 
composting have been 
prescribed under   Schedule II 
of the SWM Rules,  2016. 
Involve the informal 
sector, comprising 
wastepickers and kaba ris, 
who recycle upto 20% of 
the total waste. Delhi has 
40,000 wastepickers and 
a total of '150,000 waste 
traders, kabaris and 
workers. They experience 
extreme harassment, have 
to often bribe the police in 
order to work, face 
significant health 
concerns an d are treated 
like the waste they pick 
SWM Rules 2016 mandates 
registration of waste 
pickers and waste dealers 
and they are to be provided 
training on solid waste 
management. 
  
  
The zonal and master 
plans should have 
provision of space for 
local level w aste 
handling, such as 
composting and for the 
informal sector to store 
and sell waste. 
To be followed as per  Solid 
Waste Management (SWM) 
Rules 2016. 
  

89 
 
 
   
 
7.10 In this connection a representative of prominent NGO, Cent re for Science & 
Environment during evidence stated: 
"Now I have seen composting work brilliantly at places. It is a question of the 
cost and it is also a question of the scale. I agree with you  totally. I love bio -
methanisation. I went to Pune because only I heard  about it and I w anted to 
see it work. I think that is clearly a technology  which India needs celebrate. Bio -
gas is something we talked about, KVIC  model and others. We let it go. We need 
to do it. But the principle is the  following. One you will have segregate; you 
will have to do it as locally as possible. If you can compost well and good  and if 
you cannot compost, do bio-methanisation, do anything else, but do it in a way 
that you make the  best out of segregated waste. I can show you  a picture of 
bio-gas plant. I went to a poor woman’s house in Kerala. I n Kerala nobody is 
really poor but what they would consider poor.  ABÉE UÉä]É ºÉÉ ÉËºÉ]äBÉDº É 
BÉEÉ ]éBÉE cè, =ºÉBÉEä >ó{É® BÉEè{É cè, =ºÉBÉEä +ÉÆn® ºÉä SÉèxÉãÉ 
ÉÊxÉBÉEãÉiÉÉ cè* In fact, I have a picture on my phone and she takes the 
household waste and puts it in the bio-gas plant. Now, I have  put my 
colleagues to find out. I was fas cinated. You are getting these technology 
providers, individual level bio -gas plants. +ÉÉ{É +É{ÉxÉä PÉ® àÉå ãÉMÉÉ® 
BÉE®, VÉcÉÆ ºÉä AãÉ{ÉÉÒV ÉÉÒ BÉEÉ BÉExÉäBÉD¶ÉxÉ ÉÊnªÉÉ cè, 
=ºÉBÉEä {ÉÉºÉ +ÉÉ{ÉxÉä BÉE® ÉÊnªÉÉ cè*  She is a poor woman. She was 
not a very strong woman. I asked if she had any problem and she said there was 
no problem at all. I ha ve been spending a little time now looking at waste and I 
am very excited. What I am seeing is a huge possibility of seeing huge numbers 
of technologies emerging, huge numbers of entrepreneurs coming into it. As long 
as we can come up with clear  principles and this is a change because till now 
the entire way the  MSW  roles have been done, the entire fundi ng for waste 
has been built on sanitary land fills. The minute you change  that game and say 
no sanitary land fills, treat waste as a resource, you will see the game change in 
India." 
7.11 In this context, a representative of Centre for Science & Environment, during the 
course of evidence stated: 
 "... The best thing that has happened in Alleppy is that the MLA of Alleppy town 
is also an MLA of the Alleppy village where the waste was going.  His name is 
Thomas Issac.  Now he has to find a solution which is good for his village and for 
his town constituency as well.  In Trivandrum as well as Alleppy, this system of 
turning out to be individual level composting at the household level. I am seeing 
it happen very  efficiently.  We are looking at the technologies as they are 
emerging to do household level. Then at the colony level composting which is 
also what I saw in Panjim town. Then you have dedicated composting which you 
collect from hotels and other places whi ch you take to municipal level 
composting places.  In Pune the best thing that I saw was actually the bio -

90 
 
methanation that is happening which is taking the compostable waste directly 
from hotels and making biogas out of it.  But again it has to be segregat ed at 
source. For the remaining cities I believe what you need is a hybrid system.  You 
need a system in which you disincentives land fill.  So Delhi cannot ask today 
that I want Bhatti mines or I want five more land fills or I want to go to Haryana 
or I want to go somewhere else because I do not have place in Delhi any more 
for waste.  It cannot be done.  Delhi has to manage its own waste.  It cannot be 
based on land fills.  Secondly, Delhi will have to make sure that you can do much 
more efficient composting which is within high-density area".  
 
7.12 The witness added: 
"The effort of segregation of waste is only useful if we can maintain the integrity 
of the segregated streams. In Pune around 40 per cent citizens are maintaining, 
at least, two bins.  The two bins may not have perfectly segregated waste but, at 
least, the make an effort to keep wet and dry waste in a segregated manner.  
We also have to recognize that there are a lot of wastes today which are really a 
challenge.  I mean, where is one supposed  to throw a ball pen which has 
combination of organic as well as recyclable material; where are you supposed to 
throw tea bags or ear buds?  There are lot of composite materials which do not 
fit very directly wet or dry waste.  So, when we get into higher level of 
segregation, we need to address these issues as well.  Now, the argument in 
Pune is that if you want to maintain the integrity of the streams, it works best if 
one can have some kind of sink for the organic waste.  So a number of waste 
pickers in Pune are also performing the work of servicing compost pits.  Citizens 
are expected to maintain in situ compost pits, and the waste -picker is running 
the compost pits and ensuring that the organic waste is getting composted."   
 (c) Policy issues  
 (i) Need  for enforcement of mandatory offtake  of city compost by 
 fertilizer companies 
7.13 During the course of evidence of the representatives of ASSOCHAM, the issue of 
unsold compost came up before the Committee.  In this context, a representative of 
ASSCOCHAM stated: 
"Today about 200 thousand tonnes of compost is lying spread all over India in 
the various plants which is lying unsold because the companies which were 
tagged with fertilizers, they did not honour the agreements.  Today, no bank, no 
financial inst itution is giving you loans because they know that the project is 
unviable, the compost is not getting sold.  How do we put additional projects?  
We just cannot put.  There has to be some separate budget for that. There has 
to be dedicated escrow account for payment of dues.  We supply compost to the 
urban local bodies.  They do not give you the payment, what to talk of months, 
for years together.  We have to go from pillar to post to get our payments".   
 

91 
 
 7.14 The Committee also pointed out that whether t housands of tonnes of compost is 
lying unsold in various plants as the fertilizer companies which are supposed to take 
them do not honour the agreements in this regard, the MOH&UA in a written note 
clarified: 
"In many cities the compost after its productio n is not being purchased in time 
by fertilizer companies, therefore, making running of compost plants difficult, as 
far as, flow of funds and O&M of compost plant is concerned. This problem is 
encountered by majority of compost plants currently functioning in the country".  
  
7.15 The witness from ASSOCHAM further stated: 
"The country produces about 70 billion tonnes of waste. Theoretically, 1.5 million 
tones of compost is available for our country to use. Ironically, as on date, there 
are 78 functional com posting plants and half of them are lying closed because 
there are no off -takers. The Department of Fertiliser has not been able to 
enforce the directions of the Supreme Court. Last year, Ministry of Urban 
Development pro-actively came up with Swachch Bhar at Mission and they came 
up with a scheme of providing subsidy of Rs. 1500 per tonne even to fertilizer 
marketing companies. Even after that, off -take by the fertilizer companies has 
gone down compared to what it was earlier. This is a serious matter. Composting 
is an integral part because half of the material, which is coming, is wet waste 
and that is required to be converted into compost not only because it is a safer 
and faster disposal of the waste but it is also giving you compost which is to be 
used b y agriculture soil. This is a serious matter. If one -half is taken care of, 
which partly is being addressed by MoUD, Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of 
Fertilizer, then you are left only with the combustible part". 
 
7.16 The Committee also wanted to k now whether Fertilizers Companies are resisting 
it, the witness stated: 
"Yes, there is a problem". 
  
7.17 The witness added: 
"The compost which is going to be produced at a small scale level, wherever 
we are going to do it, it may not qualify on the standa rds set under FCO. FCO 
standards are very strict and FCO is under ESMA. There may be issued a non -
bailable warrant if you fail on the quality specifications. So, we really do not 
know, if you do it on a small scale at a decentralized model for making 
compost, whether it is going to fit on to the specifications laid down under 
FCO. There are strict quality control norms which are to be met. Therefore, if 
you go through the recommendations of the Inter -Ministerial Task Force of 
2008 and the order of the Supre me Court, the things are absolutely clear. 

92 
 
Implementation and enforcement has been a serious problem with the fertilizer 
companies".  
7.18 In this context, during the course of evidence of ASSOCHAM, a witness stated as 
under: 
"Sir, I want to say something to the august Committee. In 2006, an Inter -
Ministerial Task Force was set up under the aegis of the hon. Supreme Court of 
India to go into the details of why composting is required in the country. The 
Indian soil is deplete of organic carbon.  Finally, the  studies recommended the 
use of compost made out of city waste in combination with urea. Our country 
has been using urea and DAP rampantly because of certain other compulsions. 
Hon. Supreme Court gave a direction to the Government of India to enforce 
and e nsure that this compost is sold in a certain ratio along with urea by 
fertilizer marketing companies who have a network and also the selling licence. 
Compost in our country is a licensed product. It falls under Fertilizer Control 
Order. There are regulations and it is a State subject". 
7.19 In this context, on the issue of quality of waste to Compost, the witness stated: 
"Sir, If many RWAs are putting up decentralized composting machine, there 
could be a problem of surplus compost generation and how to use it. In cities, 
there are some bulk consumers of compost. For example, CPWD maintains 
parks; horticulture department also maintains parks; NHAI also maintain 
greenery on both sides of the roads. In a way, they procure a very big amount 
of compost every year  or maybe every six months. There can be a system to 
make Compost Bank, you may say, where these RWAs can sell their compost 
directly to these organisations. Maybe, these organisations may have to extend 
their Department or so, but this can be done". 
7.20 In this context, suggestion of ASSOCHAM and Comments of MoH&UA and 
MoEF&CC are as under:  
Suggestion of ASSOCHAM  Comments of MoH&UA   Comments of MoEF&CC 
"Ministry of Urban 
Development roll out the 
policy of Subsidy on City 
Compost, it is not going as 
originally envisioned. The 
start was good in 2016 
when the fertilizer 
companies complied with 
the mandate of procuring 
city compost from MSW 
Treatment Plants. However, 
the momentum has fizzled 
out. In the meanwhile, the 
MOUD and MOCF 
Not agreed. Market 
Development Assistance 
(MDA) should be given 
for s ale of compost in 
bag as well as bulk sale. 
Regarding establishment of 
composting units  the Rules has 
mandated the following: 
Duties of Department of 
Fertilisers, Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilisers. -
(1) The Department of 
Fertilisers through appropriate 
mechanisms shall,- 
 
(a)  provide market 
development assistance on 

93 
 
introduced the concept of  
MSW Treatment plants to 
themselves avail subsidy 
through direct sale of 
Compost. It has been 
pointed out to both 
ministries that MSW 
Treatment companies lack 
both the market reach and 
financial wherewithal to 
avail direct subsidy from the 
government. It is our strong 
recommendation to the 
government that the route 
of sale through the fertilizer 
companies is continued and 
the fertilizer companies are 
mandated to continue to 
procure and sell more 
quantities of City Compost 
from the MSW Treatment 
Plants in or der to make the 
goal of Swachh Bharat 
achievable. In the financial 
year 2016 -17, only about 
100,000 MT of City 
Compost was sold by the 
fertilizer companies as 
against their ability to 
procure and sell at least 2 
Million MT of the same". 
city compost; and  
 
(b)  ensure promotion of 
co-marketing of compost with 
chemical fertilisers in the ratio 
of 3 to 4 bags: 6 to 7 bags by 
the fertiliser companies to the 
extent compost is made 
availablefor marketing to the 
companies. 
Duties of Ministry of 
Agriculture, Government of 
India.-The Ministry of 
Agriculture through 
appropriate mechanisms 
shall,- 
 
(a) provide flexibility in 
Fertiliser Control Order  
for manufacturing and 
sale of compost; 
(b) propagate utlisation of 
compost on farm land; 
(c) set up laboratories to 
test quality of compost 
produced by local 
authorities or their 
authorised agencies; 
and 
(d)      issue suitable guidelines    
          for maintaining the 
quality of compost and 
ratio of use of compost 
visa-a-vis chemical 
fertilizers while 
applying compost to 
farmland. 
  
7.21 The Committee also pointed out that the Committee had heard the 
representatives of Industry and various NGOs.  Va rious issues that came up during the 
course of discussions inter alia include,  problem of unsold compost at the level of plant 
owners, non-payment of compost for years together by ULBs  leading to closure of as 
high as 50% of the Plants.  Asked about the  views of MOH&UA on the above 

94 
 
suggestions given before the Committee, the MOH &UA in a written note clarified, plus 
comments of MoEF&CC are also shown alongside: 
    Views of ASSOCHAM  Comments of MoEF&CC 
Problem of 
unsold 
compost at 
the level of 
plant owners 
To promote production and Sale of 
compost and for other suggestions 
given ab ove, government has taken 
steps. 
(i) The SWM Rules 2016 issued on 
8.4.2016 clearly mandates the 
local bodies to scientifically 
manage the solid waste using 
different technologies.  As these 
Rules, notified under EPA 1986 
are mandatory in nature, there is 
no need for separate Policy and 
only the implementation of the 
Rules is required. 
(ii) MoHUA has already issued 
National Urban Sanitation Policy 
2008 which inter -alia provides 
for scienti fic solid waste 
management.  Modern and 
scientific municipal solid waste 
management is one of the 
objectives of SBM(U). It is 
targeted to cover all the 
Statutory Cities and Towns with 
SWM services, which comprise 
segregation at source and 
storage, primary collection, 
secondary storage, 
transportation, secondary 
segregation, resource recovery, 
processing, treatment and final 
disposal of solid waste as per 
SWM Rules notified from time to 
time.  
(iii) SBM being a comprehensive 
solid waste management 
programme, there is no need for 
a separate National Policy for 
SWM. The SBM Guidelines also 
promote projects of Waste to 
Energy, for which the Central 
Government grant/VGF under 
SBM may also be used, either 
upfront or as generation based 
incentive for power generated 
for a given period of time.  
(iv) The following policy and 
strategic interventions were 
made under SBM in convergence 
with sister ministries: 
Regarding establishment of 
composting units  the Rules has 
mandated the following: 
 
Duties of Department of 
Fertilisers, Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilisers.- 
(1) The Department of Fertilisers 
through appropriate mechani sms 
shall,- 
 
(a)  provide market 
development assistance on city 
compost; and  
 
(b)  ensure promotion of co -
marketing of compost with 
chemical fertilisers in the ratio of 3 
to 4 bags: 6 to 7 bags by the 
fertiliser companies to the extent 
compost is made ava ilablefor 
marketing to the companies. 
 
Duties of Ministry of 
Agriculture, Government of 
India.-The Ministry of Agriculture 
through appropriate mechanisms 
shall,- 
 
(d) provide flexibility in 
Fertiliser Control Order  for 
manufacturing and sale of 
compost; 
(e) propagate utlisation of 
compost on farm land; 
(f) set up laboratories to test 
quality of compost produced 
by local authorities or their 
authorised agencies; and 
(g) issue suitable guidelines for 
maintaining the quality of 
compost and ratio of use of 
compost visa-a-vis chemical 

95 
 
 
(a) Providing Market Development 
Assistance (MDA) to fertiliser 
marketing companies for marketing 
city compost processed out of MSW. 
MDA of Rs.1500/ - per MT is 
available on effecting sales of city 
compost. This scheme is co -
ordinated by Ministry of Chemical 
and Fertilisers. MDA is now available 
for bulk (unpacked) and bagged 
sale of city compost also as per 
amendment issued b y Department 
of Fertilizers (DoF). 
fertilizers while applying 
compost to farmland. 
 
Non-payment 
of compost for 
years together 
by ULBs  
leading to 
closure of as 
high as 50% 
of the plants 
All stranded plants are being 
monitored by the states and efforts 
are being made to resolve the  
disputes. 
 
 
 (ii) Need for Pan India Licence for Waste to Compost. 
7.22 During the course of examination ASSOCHAM in the written submission before 
the Committee has underlined the need for Pan India Licen ce for Waste to Compost. 
During the course of evid ence a representative of ASSOCHAM in this connection stated 
as under:  
"Coming to solid waste to organic composting, there has be a pan market India 
licence.  Now the licence i s State -wise.  Every State has different rules and 
regulations.  It takes time.  Everybody has certain demands.  So, there has to be 
a p an India marketing licence for compost so that that licence is applicable 
across pan India basis."    
 
(iii)   Need for Ware Housing facilities for organic manure 
 
7.23 In this context, a representati ves of ASSOCHAM , during the course of evidence 
stated: 
"Facility of warehousing for the organic fertilizer should be introduced by the 
Government of India and enforcement of mandatory offtake of the city compost 
by fertilizer companies.  Agreements were e ntered into; they did not honour.  
Today, neither the Ministry of Agriculture  nor the Fertilizer Ministry, nor the 
Ministry of Urban Development are able to tell them that why don’t you lift the 
compost.  If I am spending crores of rupees and if there is no sale, who will put 

96 
 
up the compost plants?  That is becoming a big issue in the country today.  The 
plants are dying.  More than 50 per cent of the plants have shut down and more 
are there to follow." 
 
(iv) Need for nutrient based subsidy for organic fertilizer. 
 
7.24 In this connection the ASSOCHAM in its written submission before the Committee 
has underlined the need for nutrient based subsidy for organic fertilizer. During the 
course of evidence a representative of ASSOCHAM in this connection stated: 
 "Then we have to also include something called Phosphate Rich Organic Manure 
(PROM) in the nutrient based subsidy scheme which is not included as of now." 
 
 (v) Inclusion of city compost under Nil category under GST.  
7.25 In this connection the ASSOCHAM in its written submission before the committee 
has underlined the need for Inclusion of city compost under Nil category under GST. 
During the course of evidence a representative of ASSOCHAM in this connection stated 
as under: 
" So far I have not come under the GST. The GST is having a huge impact on 
recyclable scraps. So let me not get into that now. That is another story from the 
same side. But we can take care of 50 -60 per cent of the waste, we are sending 
20-25 per cent of the waste for recycling, then al l we have is about 10 -15 per 
cent which is all the multilayer packaging and all these things for which there is 
no solution so far. So EPR has to come in over here. If our EPR is there in the 
Solid Waste Management Rule 2016, all we have to do is to implem ent it. EPR 
should be implemented. Recycling should be done for the non -biodegradable 
waste." 
 
 In this context, the suggestion of ASSOCHAM and comments of the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs are as under: 
 
Suggestion of ASSOCHAM    Comments of MoH&UA 
inclusion of city compost under nil 
category under GST regime 
GST at lower rate should be applied on 
activities of waste management to 
enable venders to claim input credit. 
Ministry of Finance to comment on 
Direct tax. 
Construction & Demolition Waste 
Management- ln order to encourage 
usage of recycled products made 
Proposal for recommendation of 
uniform GST Rate of 5% on all C&D 
Recycled Products is under 

97 
 
from C&D waste be kept under NIL 
GST category 
consideration in MoHUA, with a 
single HSN code for all  C&D 
Recycled products. 
 
(vi) Capacity creation. 
7.26 It came out during the course of examination that the following waste to 
compost and waste to Energy plants are currentl y being implemented and 
planned as on Jan, 2018: 
  Waste to Compost          Functional Plants                 Under Con/Tendering plants 
# State No. of 
Cities 
Plant 
Capacity 
(MTPA) 
Compost 
production 
(MTPA) 
No. of plants 
Capacity 
(MTPA) 
1 A.P. 14 98,400 28,324 27 1,66,200 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 1 18,000 1350 2 NA 
3 Assam 1 18,000 1800 2 NA 
4 Bihar - - - 1 NA 
5 Chhattisgarh 4 18,720 3780 5 32,724 
6 Delhi 3 34,200 5130 - - 
7 Goa - - - 1 NA 
8 Gujarat 12 3,64,500 67,536 20 2,37,000 
9 Haryana - - - 1 30,000 
10 H.P. 1 4,320 144 - - 
11 Jammu & Kashmir 1 720 72 1 12,000 
12 Jharkhand 1 18,000 3780 1 3,000 
13 Karnataka 19 8,97,120 1,93,320 3 2,37,600 
14 Kerala 5 1,57,320 15,930 - - 
15 Madhya Pradesh 9 2,25,540 46,620 2 NA 
16 Maharashtra 19 10,04,940 2,08,746 14 8,71,722 
17 Manipur 1 36,000 1440 - - 
18 Meghalaya - - - 2 NA 
19 Mizoram - - - 3 3,690 
20 Nagaland 1 18,000 0 1 NA 
21 Odisha 1 36,000 4320 1 1,80,000 
22 Punjab 3 8,10,000 55,800 2 1,41,000 
23 Rajasthan 1 90,000 14,400 16 3,85,500 
24 Sikkim - - - 1 15,000 
25 Tamil Nadu 13 5,39,802 70,869 19 63,000 
26 Telangana 9 2,01,960 1,242 1 900 
27 Tripura 1 72,000 7,200 - - 
28 Uttar Pradesh 14 14,75,280 5,66,262 1 1,05,000 
29 Uttarakhand 5 11,340 1,701 4 1,53,000 
30 West Bengal 5 82,260 11,259 1 58,000 
  Total 145 62,32,422 13,11,026 150 33,48,336 
 
7.27 During the course of e xamination on the issue of gap between installed capacity 
vis-à-vis actual production at different compost plants across the States/UTs, the 
Committee pointed out that as against the total plant capacity of 62.32 lakh tonnes, the 

98 
 
actual production was as l ow as 13.11 lakh tonnes and the situation was worse in big 
States of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Maharashtra and Odisha. The Committee 
also wanted to know whether that managing with roughly 300 Waste to Compost 
(WTC) Plants completed/under construc tion in different States/UTs is quite less and 
needs to be enhanced manifolds for comprehensive solution to Solid Waste 
Management problem in years to come, the MOH&UA in a written note informed  that 
Yes, more number of Plants are needed to process the was te effectively. However, the 
Ministry is encouraging to segregate waste at source and also to have decentralized 
processing of wet waste at the Household, bulk generator and community level.   
Further, as per the policy on promotion of City compost, Ministr y of Chemicals and 
Fertilizers is providing Market Development Assistance of Rs.1500/ - per ton to scale up 
compost production and consumption. Compost Manufacturing companies have also 
been tagged with Fertilizer distribution companies in All States. Amend ments to FCO 
Norms have also been issued by Department of Agriculture allowing for Bulk Sale of 
Compost by manufacturers to the farmers. These initiatives are bound to enhance the 
production of compost and the setting up of more WTC plants. 
7.28 The Committee also pointed out that as against 145 Waste to Compost (WTC)  
Plants with capacity of 13.41 LTPA have been completed and 153 Waste to Compost 
(WTC) Plants with capacity of 31.03 LTPA are under construction. The Committee also 
pointed out that from the St ate-wise details, it appeared that Waste to Compost (WTC) 
Plants are set up or in the process of being set up in Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, 
Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Uttrakhand, Kerala, 
Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Chhattisgarh, Punjab and Delhi.  Asked whether such WTC 
plants should come up in other States/UTs also for their pan India presence for tackling 
the problem of Solid Waste Management comprehensively, the MOH&UA in a written 

99 
 
note informed that Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has taken intensive drive for 
segregation of waste at the source in all 4041 cities/towns in the urban area to produce 
good quality compost to enhance its usage. Accordingly, many other States like Assam, 
Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Odisha, Arunachal Pradesh etc. have plants that are 
set up or in process of being set up. Segregated wet waste may be used for production 
of compost, due to which it is expected that the production of compost may increase. 
(d) Promotion of Waste to Compost. 
7.29 On the issue of promotion of city compost Department of Fe rtilizers has inter-alia 
stated that the policy on promotion of city compost has been approved by the Cabinet 
which has been notified by the Department of Fertilizers on 10.2.2016 wherein Ma rket 
development assistance in the form of fixed amount of Rs. 1500  per tonne city 
compost has been  provided for scaling up production and consumption of the city 
compost. Initially, marketing and promotion of city compost was being done by the 
existing fertilizer companies. In due course, manufactures and other marketing entities 
recognized by the concerned State Government have been included for marketing of 
city compost in bulk and bagged form with the approval of Department of Fertilizers.  A 
Committee of Joint Secretaries of Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of Urban 
Development and Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare has been 
set up to resolve issues that are currently an impediment of operationalizing the policy 
on promotion o f city compost. For better coordination and promotion of city compost, 
States have been asked to constitute State level Steering Committee. 11 States have 
constituted State Level Steering Committee so far.  
 
 The marketing development activities are being carried out by the Department of 
Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare. The Agricultural Extension Machineries 

100 
 
including KVKs of ICAR and Agricultural Universities have been advised by DAC to make 
special efforts in this regard. Ministry of Urban De velopment has been asked to take 
steps to increase setting up of compost plants across all States.  
 
 The sale of city compost has gone up substantially over the last two years and 
showing increasing trends in the current year as well, as reflected in the following table:  
                                                                          (in MT) 
Year Sale by marketing   
companies 
Bulk Sale   by  
manufacturing 
companies 
Total  sale % increase in total 
sale from previous 
year 
2016-17 96584.00 - 6584.00 - 
2017-18 123569.87 75492.04 199061.91 106.1 
2018-19 
(April-
October) 
102567.91 
 
45524.29 148092.20  
 
  Further, Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) has been rolled out in Fertilizer Sector 
w.e.f. 1st April, 2018 and fertilizer companies marketing city comp ost are also covered 
under the scheme. 
7.30 The Committee also wanted to know specific steps have been taken by the 
Government for promotion /marketing of compost and whether Fertilizer companies 
/Horticulture Department, etc. have been given any direction s in this regard, the 
MOH&UA in a written note quoting the reply is as per the information provided by 
Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers Department of Fertilizers  stated that s ince 
implementation of the policy, the following actions have been taken by th e Department 
for promotion of city compost:  
(i) Concerned Ministries/Departments/Authorities have been requested to 
take appropriate action on actionable points contained in the notification. 
(ii) For co -marketing of City Compost, the tagging of Cities wi th fertilizer 
marketing companies for the purpose of proper utilization of City Compost 
produced in the cities has been completed as per the list provided by M/o Urban 
Development.  

101 
 
(iii) A separate budget head has been created for release of Market 
Development Assistance (MDA) on sale of City Compost. For the period 2018 -
19, a provision of Rs.10 crores has been made. 
(iv) Operational guidelines for release of MDA on sale of City Compost have 
been issued on 03.06.2016.  Revised operational guidelines have b een issued to 
all concerned on 10.10.2016. Amendment in the guidelines dated 10.10.2016 
has been made allowing manufacturing companies for bagged sale of city 
compost vide O.M. dated 7.9.2017 
(v) Manufacturing companies vide O.M. dated 28.09.2016 issued by  the 
Department of Fertilizers have been allowed for direct sale of city compost to 
farmers. Guidelines for release of MDA on direct sale of city compost by 
compost manufacturers to farmers under the policy on promotion of city 
compost have been issued by the Department of Fertilizers on 09.01.2017.  
Amendment in the guidelines   dated 9.1.2017 has been made allowing 
marketing companies for bulk sale of city compost vide O.M. dated 7.9.2017.  
(vi) The required software for routing of MDA through FMS and mFM S (now 
iFMS) is operational. 
(vii) The fertilizer Companies have adopted 384 (210 in 2016 -17 and 174 in 
2017-18) villages for promoting the use of City Compost.   
 
(viii) State level steering Committee has been constituted in 11 States for 
promotion of City Compost. 
  
(ix) Government Departments and Public Sector undertakings will also     use 
City Compost to the extent possible for their horticulture and relate use. 
 
 7.31 Similarly, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Department of Agriculture 
& Cooperation & Farmers Welfare has also stated that the DAC&FW is administering the 
Fertiliser (Control) Order,1985. Under the Order City compost is declared as Organic 
fertiliser and its specification are prescribed in Schedule IV of FCO. The Government of  
India, in order to promote the City Compost has so far taken the following steps:  
 (a) Provide flexibility in the Fertiliser (Control) Order,1985 for 
 manufacturing and sale of City Compost: 
 (i) Under Clause 14 -15 of   the Fertiliser (Control) Order,198 5 it was earlier   
required for the manufacturer of the   organic fertiliser including City Compost 
manufacturer   to obtain the Certificate of Manufacture for manufacturing of 
Organic fertiliser  from the Registering Authority of the State Government. In 
order to facilitate entrepreneurs to enter in the business  of manufacturing of 
city compost, this Ministry has dispensed  with the requirement of obtaining 
Certificate of Manufacture for manufacturing of organic fertiliser/ City compost.  

102 
 
(ii) In the specific ation of city compost specified in Schedule IV, the value of 
moisture content is amended from the existing value of 15 -25% to 25% 
maximum in order to take into account the tropical weather conditions in the 
quality parameters. 
 (iii) In clause 2 (f) of the  FCO i.e. definition of dealer, the Marketer concept is 
incorporated and the same is also defined under the new clause (ma).   This 
would facilitates the manufacturer to sell the city compost through an identified 
marketers in the area where he has no dealer net work.  This would also lead to 
increase in the consumption of city compost. 
(iv) In order to encourage the sale of City Compost at a comparative low price, 
the GOI under clause 22 © of FCO notified around 90 units for bulk sale of City 
Compost directly to farmers. 
(v) Municipalities have been permitted to sell the City Compost in bulk. 
(b) Propogate utilization of compost on farm land: 
This Ministry is regularly pursuing the State Government to encourage the use 
of City Compost. 
(i) Advisories has bee n issued to the State Governments to  encourage the 
manufacture, sale and distribution of the use of City Compost.   
(ii) The state Governments were requested to educate farmers through their 
Extension machinery to educate the farmers on use of various orga nic fertiliser 
including city compost. 
(iii) An advertisement on promotion of use of City Compost in the daily local 
news papers was published. 
(iv)  The IEC campaign material is being provided for publicity through audio 
spot in Kisan Vani on FM Radio net  Work of AIR, publicity through video spot in 
Krishi  Darshan & DD Kisan and print advertisement in news papers. 
(v) The discussion on use of City compost on DD Kisan was done. 
(vi) All the States in the Zonal Conferences (Kharif 2018 and Rabi 2018 -19) 
were pursued to encourage the use of City Compost.  
(c) Set up laboratories to test quality of compost produced by local 
authorities or their authorized agencies: 
There are 6   Central organic fertiliser testing laboratories namely, the National 
Centre of Orga nic farming, Ghaziabad, Regional Centres of Organic farming at 
Bengaluru, Bhubaneshwar,  Imphal, Jabalpur, and Nagpur. These laboratories 
have the annual analyzing capacity of 10,000 samples. .Some of the state 
namely, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, have 
established their laboratory for testing of Organic Fertiliser/City compost.. States 
may acquire new laboratories/ strengthen the existing laboratories under the 
National Mission on Sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) and Rashtriy a Krishi Vikas 
Yojana (RKVY). 
  

103 
 
(d) Quality of compost: 
(i) Under schedule IV of the Fertiliser (Control) Order, 1985, the DAC &FW   has 
specified the specification of   Organic Fertiliser   namely, City Compost, Vermi 
Compost, Bio Enriched Organic manure   and general specification of organic 
manure. 
              Clause 19 of the FCO strictly prohibits the sale of organic fertiliser 
which are not of prescribed standards. The method of analysis has also been 
prescribed in the Schedule IV D for determination of various content of Organic/ 
City compost. 
(ii)  Advisory was issued to the State Governments to take quality control 
measures under FCO, 1985 to ensure the supply of good quality city compost to 
the farmers. 
(iii)  Efforts are being made to disseminate th e use of city compost through 
audio spot in Kisan Vani on FM Radio net Work of AIR, publicity through video 
spot in Krishi Darshan & DD Kisan and print advertisement in news papers. 
(iv) This Ministry has advised the State Governments during Rabi 2018-19 Zonal 
Conference advised to assess per annum requirement of organic fertiliser of 
about 3 tonne/ hectare /per annum as per ICAR recommendation and States 
were also requested to evaluate all sources all sources of organic fertiliser and 
bio-fertilisers available with them and to meet the balance requirement through 
City compost. Further, Soil Health Cards are being distributed to farmers which 
carry deficiency of soil nutrients and general fertiliser recommendations. 
 
(e) Development of Waste Decomposer by Na tional Centre of Organic 
Farming, Ghaziabad a subordinate office of DAC&FW): 
Waste Decomposer is a consortium of few beneficial microorganisms which is 
isolated from desi cow dung. Waste decomposer works as biofertiliser, 
biocontrol and as well as soil hea lth reviver. It can also be used in various ways 
such as quick composting of bio wastes, drip irrigation, foliar spray as 
biopesticides against most plant diseases for all types of agriculture and 
horticulture crops, in-situ composting of crop residue and seed treatment. It has 
longer self life (3 years), works as a great component for clean India Movement 
(Swachh Bharat Mission) by converting bio waste into organic manure, low cost 
and more than 1 lakh metric tonne organic manure can be produced from 1 
bottle per year by farmers.  
*****

104 
 
CHAPTER VIII 
Issues related with Waste to Energy 
8.1 On the issue of Waste to Energy, the MOH&UA has furnished the following 
details: 
 For Dry Waste 
(i) Sanitary napkins and Diapers 
Sanitary napkin treatment includes inciner ation facilities where the sanitary 
napkins collected can be incinerated in biomedical waste incinerators.   
Alternatively, the wastes can be taken after disinfection to waste to energy 
plants also for incineration. 
(ii) Material Recovery Facility (MRF) 
Material recovery facility are those facilities where dry waste is further 
segregated into valuable components including plastics, paper, metal, glass 
etc. Material recovery facilities can be manual or automated based on the 
size of the plant. For small capac ity plants, segregation table and manual 
segregation are the equipments used. For large scale plants, magnetic belts, 
separators and other segregation equipments are used.   
  
 (iii) Refuse Derived Fuel (RDF) 
The waste material which is left behind after s egregation can be used as 
combustibles. The waste materials/ combustibles are shredded to a desired 
size to be used as fuel material known as Refuse Derived Fuel (RDF). RDF 
can be used by cement kilns or boilers as replacement of other fuels 
including coal and diesel. 
  
(iv) Waste to Energy plants including ones on cluster basis 
Waste to energy (WtE) refers to the process of generating energy in the 
form of heat or electricity from MSW. Energy from MSW can be achieved 
through thermal processes like incinera tion or combustion of refuse derived 
fuel (RDF); and biological processes like biomethanation and further 
conversion into electrical power or automotive fuel (compressed biogas). 
Only RDF will go to waste to energy plants. 
  
Inert Waste 
(i) Filling in Scientific landfill (SLF) 
Scientific landfill are landfills developed as per specifications   provided under 
SWM Rules, 2016, and are used for disposing inert waste after scientific 
processing of waste." 
 
Waste to Energy Scenario 

105 
 
8.2 According to NITI Aayog, t he European Union has 445 waste to energy Plants, 
China has around 150 Plants, USA has 86 Plants whereas India has only 8 such Plants. 
In this connection NITI Aayog has also stated that  Solid Waste Management reduces or 
eliminates the adverse impact on th e environment and human health. A number of 
processes are involved in effectively managing waste for a municipality. These include 
monitoring, collection, transport, processing, recycling and disposal. The quantum of 
waste generated varies mainly due to di fferent lifestyles, which is directly proportional 
to socio-economic status of the urban population.  While each of the contributors pose 
a challenge in containing its generation as well as its management, the Municipal Solid 
Waste (MSW) happens to be the most visible one, as it is mostly generated by the 
citizens directly. MSW generation has a positive co -relation with economic development 
in terms of kg/per capita per day of solid waste generation in general.  On an average, 
the urban India today generate s about 0.45 kg per capita per day of MSW which is 
likely to grow with the increase of affluence which is about to happen as the country is 
traversing a steep growth trajectory.  As per a study by Columbia University, New York, 
a higher standard of living results in more waste and also a greater ability to invest in 
waste management system (Matsunaga and Themelis, 2002). There are several such 
studies which establishes this co -relation. As such, the MSW generation in India, which 
is presently about 1,45,000  tonnes per day is likely to increase substantially in years 
ahead, thereby, posing a gigantic challenge for the Government to manage the 
generation as well as the disposal of the solid waste. However, it also creates 
opportunities for better SWM in view o f the capacity of the citizens to pay for SWM on 
account of increase in standard of living. 
   
Pointing out the present status the NITI Aayog has stated  that t ill the recent 
past, the MSW management was mostly based on transporting the unsegregated waste 

106 
 
to landfill sites for dumping, which was not only leading to losing of 1,240 hectares of 
additional precious land every year to accommodate processed/un -processed Municipal 
Solid Waste but has been posing several environmental threats like ground water 
pollution due to leachate generation, air pollution, etc., due to self and uncontrolled 
gasification besides other problems like landslide and aesthetic issues.  The NITI Aayog 
has also stated that as against the assessed capacity of 511 MW, the actual electric ity 
generation is 90 MW.  
 
Available Technologies for processing Waste to Energy 
 
 8.3 The NITI Aayog has also outlined that Some of the popular technologies for 
converting Waste to Energy and other products of economic value which can be 
introduced in the  cities based on the suitability and requirement as per the local 
conditions and which can be managed on business model include the following:  
(i) Hydrothermal Carbonisation (Conversion of wet waste to green coal).   
(ii) Catalytic Thermo-chemical process (Shell Technology) that converts Biomass 
and Biodegradable MSW to liquid fuel.  
(iii) Plasma Gasification (EAWC technology) which can gassify all kinds of waste 
to energy at 3000 degree Centigrade  
(iv) Thermal De -polymerisation which can generate methane  and oil from 
unsegregated MSW etc. 
 
8.4 Explaining methods of processing, the Waste t o Energy, the MOH&UA has stated 
that there are no separate suitable methods for metropolitan cities and other smaller 
cities. All processing methods are suitable for cert ain quality of waste with suitable 
quantity. However, segregation of waste in different streams is key for efficient and 
economical waste processing. Even smaller towns in cluster can install all waste 
processing facilities including waste to energy that i s often considered suitable for large 
cities. Considering the typical composition of wastes and the climatic conditions, 
composting is highly relevant in India and is the best method for wet waste processing. 
MoH&UA has also stated the following details: 

107 
 
(a) However, in certain categories of bulk waste generators like hotel, 
restaurants, vegetable market places and places with animal dung etc., bio -
methanisation process proves to be better and economical option.  
(b) Segregation and Recycling of various streams bes t method for dry 
waste processing depending on its type, quality and quantity. 
(c) MRF, RDF, waste to energy in large cities or on cluster basis involving 
many smaller cities are various methods of processing for dry  wastes like plastic 
waste etc. 
8.5 The foll owing points pertaining to Waste to Energy have emerged during the 
Committee examination: 
 (a) Issues related with land fills. 
  (i) Need for dis-incentivising land fills. 
  (ii) Need for Scientific land fills and converting these into parks. 
 (b) Capacity creation and related issues 
  (i) Capacity Creation  
  (ii) Augmenting Capacity Building   
  (iii) Promoting R&D in Solid Waste Management 
 (c) Issues related with Plastic Waste 
  (i) Use of plastic for Road construction 
 (d) Issues related with C&D Waste 
(a) Issues related with land fills. 
(i) Need for dis-incentivising land fills  
8.6 In this context, NITI Aayog has stated  that t ill the recent past, the MSW 
management was mostly based on transporting the unsegregated waste to landfill sites 
for dumping, which was not only leading to losing of 1,240 hectares of additional 
precious land every year to accommodate processed/un -processed Municipal Solid 
Waste but has been posing several environmental threats like ground water pollution 

108 
 
due to leach generation, air pollution, etc., due to self and uncontrolled gasification 
besides other problems like landslide and aesthetic issues. 
8.7 On the issue of landfills, ASSOCHAM has stated that f inding and developing new 
landfill sites for treatment of domestic waste an d industrial waste is one of the biggest 
constraints, because of the “not in my backyard” (NIMBY)  approach.  The domestic 
and industrial solid waste collection system in our nation is very poor. Collection 
efficiency is around 50 -60% only. Only 10 percent  of the collected waste receives 
treatment and virtually nothing is scientifically disposed in engineered landfills. Apart 
from that, household waste, e -waste, toxic waste, hazardous waste, industrial waste 
and bio -medical waste - all kind of wet and dry w aste are mixed and disposed 
indiscriminately at dump yards in an unhygienic manner by municipal authorities and 
results into air pollution and health hazards. In addition, there is no formal mechanism 
of periodically collecting data on waste generation.  L ocal people of villages and 
Environment Activists, NGO’s, etc. deter the developers from developing new sites. In 
many cases, the developers of already operational sites have to spend money after 
them to continue their work.  ASSOCHAM has also stated that E uropean countries and 
North America do not have landfills and whatever waste available gets converted into 
product. 
8.8 In this connection the views of ASSOCHAM and Comments of Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs and MoEF&CC are as under: 
 Views of ASSOCHAM    Comments of MoH&UA  Comments of MoEF&CC  
Government/Ministry 
of Environment, 
Forests &Climate 
Change/ State 
pollution Control 
Boards must be 
The sanitary landfill sites 
should be selected by 
ULBs/District 
Administration keeping in 
view the sitting conditions 
of landfill as per 
Solid Waste is managed in a 
decentralized approach wherein local 
bodies, village panchayats and state 
urban development departments are 
assigned with tasks related to 

109 
 
authorized to identify 
land for site 
development. 
These selected sites 
should preferably be 
barren land with  
suitable transportation 
access 
specifications prescribed in 
SWM Rules 2016. 
management of landfill sites. Ministry 
of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change, under SWM Rules, 2016  has 
laid detailed provision s on 
development of (sanitary) landfill sites 
and has prescribed roles and 
responsibility of various actors 
involved. 
            
 
 
8.9 Clarifying the issue, the  Secretary, MOH&UA during the evidence  stated: 
"ºÉ´ÉÇ|ÉlÉàÉ àÉé Aà{ÉEäºÉÉ<VÉ BÉE®xÉÉ SÉÉcÚÆM ÉÉ ÉÊBÉE ´Éäº] ]Ú 
<xÉVÉÉÔ {ãÉÉx] ªÉÉ ´Éäº] ]Ú BÉEà{ÉÉäº] {ãÉÉx] àÉå <xÉVÉÉÔ ªÉÉ {ÉÉ´É® 
ªÉÉ BÉEà{ÉÉäº] +ÉÉì¤VÉèÉÎBÉD]´É xÉcÉÓ cè, º´ÉSUiÉÉ +ÉÉì¤VÉèÉÎBÉD]´É 
cè ÉÊBÉE ´Éäº] BÉEÉ ÉÊbº{ÉÉäVÉãÉ cÉä* =nÉc®hÉ BÉEä iÉÉè® {É® 
ÉÊcxnÖºiÉÉxÉ BÉEÉ ºÉÉ®É ´Éäº] +ÉMÉ® {ÉÉ´ É® ¤ÉxÉÉxÉä àÉå ãÉMÉ 
VÉÉA iÉÉä ABÉE +ÉÉÆBÉE½É cè ÉÊBÉE ]Éä]ãÉ FÉàÉiÉÉ 700 àÉäMÉÉ´ÉÉ] 
cè, BÉEÉä<Ç ¤ÉcÖiÉ VªÉÉnÉ {ÉÉ´É® xÉcÉÓ ¤ÉxÉäMÉÉÒ iÉÉä AÆb 
|ÉÉäbBÉD] VÉÉä {ÉÉ´É® cè, ´Éc =qä¶ªÉ xÉcÉÓ cè, ºÉ{ÉEÉ<Ç cÉäxÉÉ =qä¶ªÉ 
cè*'  
8.10 In this connection, Director, Centre for Science & Environment stated: 
"We need a disincentive for landfills.  If you look at all over the world, they have 
a very high tipping fee for landfills.  So, they will insist on anybody who wants 
to have a landfill will have to pay a very high co st for bringing the waste there.  
We have the reverse.  Today, one of our biggest challenges in Delhi is that we 
have a waste collection system in which we incentivise more waste to go to 
landfill because we pay by weighing the waste of the landfill and we  say  
ÉÊVÉiÉxÉÉ £ÉÉÒ <ºÉBÉEÉ ãÉébÉÊ{ÉEãÉ ãÉÉAÆMÉä, =iÉxÉÉ VªÉÉnÉ 
+ÉÉ{ÉBÉEÉä {ÉèºÉÉ ÉÊàÉãÉäMÉÉ*  So there is no incentive to segregate.  
There is, in fact, an incentive to put inert weight, construction waste and all into 
the same box which goes to the land fill.  So one policy that we need is to make 
sure that the land fill is disincentivise.  From our survey from all over the world, 
the clear way to do that is to have a very prohibitively high tipping fee.  Any 
municipality which wants to allow a land fill has to pay a very high cost for 
bringing it to the land." 
8.11 Questioning the need of use of land for landfills purpose, Director, Centre for 
Science & Environment in her deposition before the Committee stated: 
"I think in India we need a rule saying that  land is too valuable for us to leave 
for waste.  +ÉÉ{ÉBÉEä {ÉÉºÉ +ÉÉVÉ ºÉ¤ÉºÉä ¤É½É ºÉ´ÉÉãÉ ãÉéb 
AÉÎBÉD´ÉÉÊVÉ¶ÉxÉ BÉEÉ cè* One  question that we should be having is, we 

110 
 
cannot afford to waste the land any more.  We need land for water.  We need 
land for e very other best purpose but we cannot have land for landfill sites.  
That is also what is coming out of NIMBI.  Villagers will not allow you.  +ÉÉ{É 
ABÉE VÉäxÉ®ä¶ÉxÉ +ÉÉè® BÉE® ãÉÉÒÉÊVÉA, àÉé A¶ªÉÉä® BÉE®iÉÉÒ 
cÚÆ ÉÊBÉE +ÉMÉãÉÉÒ VÉäxÉ®ä¶ÉxÉ iÉBÉE +ÉÉ{ÉBÉEÉä  BÉEÉä<Ç 
MÉÉÆ´É ´ÉÉãÉÉ +É{ÉxÉä MÉÉÆ´É àÉå ´Éäº] xÉcÉÓ ãÉä VÉÉxÉä näMÉÉ*" 
8.12 In this connection, Director, Centre for Science & Environment also stated: 
" Where there is no facility, no land, how will you do it? I think those cities also 
will not have lan dfill. Delhi is a classic case. It is a very congested city, a very 
large city where a very huge amount of waste is generated. We are now one of 
the highest generators of waste today in terms of cities. Where will our waste 
go? The question you have asked is something in my mind as well. I want to 
take Delhi as an example to actually give this challenge to both my colleagues 
and myself. I want to come up with a plan in which we say using the same 
principle, it should treat, minimise the landfill. The sanita ry landfill must be only 
for the completely non-usable ones. " 
8.13 On the issue of land for landfills purpose, the then Secretary, Ministry of Urban 
Development during the evidence also stated: 
"+É¤É ºÉÉìÉÊãÉb ´Éäº] BÉEä >ó{É® ¤ÉÉiÉ BÉE® ãÉäiÉä cé* ºÉÉìÉÊ ãÉb 
´Éäº] BÉEä >ó{É® ãÉMÉ£ÉMÉ càÉBÉEÉä 500 ABÉE½ +ÉÉè® ãÉéb BÉEÉÒ 
VÉ°ô®iÉ cè* I will cover one or two more points simultaneously . 
ABÉDSÉÖ+ÉãÉÉÒ ºÉÉìÉÊãÉb ´Éäº] àÉå +ÉBÉDºÉ® nÖÉÊxÉªÉÉ àÉå ªÉc 
{ÉÉªÉÉ MÉªÉÉ cè, càÉxÉä |ÉEÉÆºÉ BÉEÉ £ÉÉÒ näJÉÉ cè,  we have been a 
part of this delegation which the Ministry of Urban Development sent to the 
French cities to see how they are processing the garbage .  ¶ÉÖ°ô -¶ÉÖ°ô àÉå 
ºÉ£ÉÉÒ ¶Éc®Éå àÉå ªÉc ãÉMÉiÉÉ lÉÉ ÉÊBÉE VÉèºÉä ÉÊnããÉÉÒ cè iÉÉä 
ÉÊnããÉÉÒ BÉEä ¤ÉÉc® VÉÉBÉE® BÉEcÉÓ MÉÉÄ ´É àÉå AxÉºÉÉÒ+ÉÉ® 
àÉå bÉãÉ ÉÊnªÉÉ VÉÉA* {ÉäÉÊ®ºÉ àÉå ãÉÉäMÉÉå BÉEÉä ãÉMÉ ®cÉ lÉÉ 
ÉÊBÉE {ÉäÉÊ®ºÉ àÉå xÉcÉÓ ªÉc MÉÉÄ´É àÉå bÉãÉ ÉÊnªÉÉ VÉÉA* 
VÉèºÉä-VÉèºÉä ãÉÉäMÉ VªÉÉnÉ +É´ÉäªÉ® cÉäxÉä ãÉMÉä, ªÉÚ®Éä{É 
BÉEä MÉÉÄ´É àÉå iÉÉä +ÉÉè® VªÉÉnÉ +É´ÉäªÉ®xÉäºÉ cè, ãÉäÉ ÊBÉExÉ 
<ÉÎxbªÉÉ BÉEä MÉÉÄ´É àÉå £ÉÉÒ +ÉÉn®hÉÉÒªÉ àÉäà¤É® ºÉÉc¤É 
VÉÉxÉiÉä cé, <ºÉ ºÉàÉªÉ +É´ÉäªÉ®xÉäºÉ ãÉä´ÉãÉ ABÉEnàÉ ºÉä ¤ÉfÃ 
SÉÖBÉEÉ cè* BÉEÉä<Ç £ÉÉÒ ªÉc xÉcÉÓ SÉÉciÉÉ cè ÉÊBÉE +ÉÉ{É 
càÉÉ®ä ªÉcÉÄ +ÉÉBÉE® MÉÉ®¤ÉäVÉ BÉEÉä bÉãÉ nÉÒÉÊVÉA*  The 
witness added: " ÉÊnããÉÉÒ àÉå £ÉÉÒ VÉÉä càÉÉ®ÉÒ xÉ<Ç 
]äBÉDxÉÉäãÉÉìVÉÉÒ cè, =xÉBÉEÉä àÉqäxÉVÉ® ®JÉBÉE® 500 ABÉE½ 
BÉEÉÒ ãÉéb +ÉÉ<bäÉÎx]{ÉEÉ<Ç cÖ<Ç ÉÊBÉE +ÉÉVÉ BÉEÉÒ iÉÉ®ÉÒJÉ 
àÉå, VÉèºÉä +ÉÉVÉ càÉ VÉÖãÉÉ<Ç 2015 àÉå cé, 500 ABÉE½ ãÉéb +ÉÉè® 
SÉÉÉÊcA ºÉÉìÉÊãÉb ´Éäº] àÉèxÉäVÉàÉ å] BÉEä {ãÉÉÆ]ÂºÉ BÉEÉä 
ãÉMÉÉxÉä BÉEä ÉÊãÉA, BÉDªÉÉåÉÊBÉE ÉÊ´ÉVÉÉË]MÉ ãÉébÉÊ{ÉEãÉ 
ºÉÉ<]ÂºÉ VÉÉä cé, ´Éä SÉÉäBÉE cÉä SÉÖBÉEÉÒ cé* {ãÉÉÆ] BÉÖEU ¤ÉxÉ 
®cä cé, +ÉÉäJÉãÉÉ {ãÉÉÆ] BÉEÉÒ BÉÖEU BÉEÉÊ~xÉÉ<ÇªÉÉÄ cé, VÉÉä 
]äÉÎBÉDxÉBÉEãÉ {´ÉÉ<Æ]ÂºÉ ÉÊbºBÉEºÉ cÉä ®cä cé* ªÉc 500 ABÉE½ ãÉéb 
+ÉÉ<bäÉÎx]{ÉEÉ<Ç BÉE®xÉä BÉEä ÉÊãÉA ABÉE iÉÉä bÉÒbÉÒA BÉEÉä 
ÉÊ®BÉD´Éäº] BÉEÉÒ MÉ<Ç cè +ÉÉè® ABÉE VÉÉä OÉÉàÉ ºÉ£ÉÉ BÉEÉÒ 
ãÉéb BÉÖEU ÉÊnããÉÉÒ àÉå cè, ÉÊVÉºÉä ãÉäÉÎ{ÉD]xÉå] MÉ´ÉxÉÇ® BÉEä 

111 
 
+É|ÉÚ´ÉãÉ ºÉä càÉÉ®É ®ä´ÉäxªÉÚ ÉÊb{ÉÉ]ÇàÉå] cÉÒ +ÉãÉ Éì] BÉE® 
ºÉBÉEiÉÉ cè, ´Éc ãÉéb £ÉÉÒ +ÉÉ<bäÉÎx]{ÉEÉ<Ç cÖ<Ç* +É£ÉÉÒ 
àÉÉÒÉË]MÉ BÉEÉÒ iÉèªÉÉ®ÉÒ BÉE® ®cä lÉä iÉÉä {ÉiÉÉ SÉãÉÉ ÉÊBÉE 
VÉÉä ÉÊbÉÊ´ÉVÉxÉãÉ BÉEÉÊàÉ¶xÉ® xÉä ãÉéb +ÉÉ<bäÉÎx]{ÉEÉ<Ç 
BÉEÉÒ cè, MÉÉÄ´É BÉEä ãÉÉäMÉ =ºÉBÉEÉ +É{ÉÉäVÉ BÉE® ®cä cé 
ÉÊBÉE xÉcÉÓ-xÉcÉÓ, càÉÉ®ä MÉÉÄ´É àÉå ªÉc xÉcÉÓ cÉäMÉÉ* <ºÉÉÊãÉA 
ªÉc VÉÉä ºÉÉìÉÊãÉb ´Éäº] BÉEÉ ABÉE <¶ªÉÚ cè, ¶Éc® BÉEä +Éxn® 
BÉEÉ{ÉEÉÒ BÉEÉà{ãÉäBÉDºÉ cé* VÉcÉÄ £ÉÉÒ càÉ ABÉE VÉMÉc ºÉä 
ãÉäBÉE® nÚºÉ®ÉÒ VÉMÉc VÉÉAÆMÉä iÉÉä ´ÉcÉÄ BÉEä VÉÉä ABÉEnàÉ 
+ÉÉºÉ{ÉÉºÉ BÉEä ãÉÉäMÉ cé , ´Éä =ºÉBÉEÉä +É{ÉÉäVÉ BÉE®åMÉä* 
ºÉ®BÉEÉ® BÉEÉä +ÉÉè® +ÉÉ{ÉBÉEÉÒ àÉnn ºÉä £ÉÉÒ VÉ¤É ABÉE ¶Éc® 
BÉEä ÉÊãÉA {ÉÉìÉÊãÉºÉÉÒ ¤ÉxÉÉxÉÉÒ cè iÉÉä ºÉ¤É SÉÉÒVÉÉå BÉEÉä 
näJÉBÉE® ´Éc {ÉÉìÉÊãÉºÉÉÒ ¤ÉxÉÉxÉÉÒ {É½äMÉÉÒ*" 
8.14 In reply to a query, the Ministry of Housing an d Urban Affairs stated that 
Municipal solid waste management is State subject and State Govts. have to identify the 
land free from all encumbrance for sanitary landfill.  In case, the land for landfill is not 
available for smaller towns, landfill on region al basis approach may be adopted by 
ULBs.  The States like Haryana, Punjab, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra 
Pradesh etc. are planning for preparation of solid waste management project on 
regional/cluster based approach  for disposal of waste for smal ler ULBs where land is 
not available for individual landfill. 
8.15 In this context MoEF&CC has stated that Solid Waste is managed in a 
decentralized approach wherein local bodies, village panchayats and state urban 
development departments are assigned with  tasks related to management of landfill 
sites. Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, under SWM Rules, 2016  has 
laid detailed provisions on development of (sanitary) landfill sites and has prescribed 
roles and responsibility of various actors  involved. Rule 22 of the SWM Rules, 2016 
provide for time lines to be adhered by local bodies and other concerned agencies for 
creation of necessary infrastructure for implementation of the Rules, including for 
identification of suitable sites for setting  up solid waste processing facilities and 

112 
 
identification of sites for setting up stand -alone or common regional sanitary landfill 
facilities. 
(ii) Need for Scientific landfills and converting these into parks 
8.16 During the course of evidence, a represent ative of an NGO Centre for Policy 
Research, underlining the need for scientific landfills stated: 
"Towards waste management, the examples of Pune and Surat as well as Goa, have 
had an history of its development. Pune, 15 years back, was also the leading ci ty 
innovating in waste management and so was Goa. Surat, after the plague was where it 
went from the worst, most unclean city to becoming in five years to the awarded city. 
The whole bunch of restructuring at municipal level happened to enable that. There is a 
particular relationship between waste and society in India, the rag picking and the 
recycling that happens is surely something very special. Our consumption levels are still 
much lower than most regions in the world. There is a huge opportunity there.  There 
are two elements. One is that there is no silver bullet. So, I agree with Dr. Sunita 
Narain on that. There is no one size fits all thing. So, the strategies have to emerge 
from the cities themselves. Having said that, there is no environmentally saf e waste 
management system in the world without a scientific  landfill.  Every time we talk about 
a land fill in India, we are actually talking of an open dump. I am not a great proponent 
of that. But if there is no environment situation where you can close  the cycle 100 per 
cent and there will be residues which are damaging to the environment. So, would you 
want to see another 20 years of compromised environmental outcomes or would you 
want it now is an issue, I think, we need to deal with." 
8.17 In this context, a representative of ASSOCHAM also stated: 

113 
 
"For sanitary landfill management, it is high time that the sanitary landfills in all 
the major cities, we have to do some management of these landfills.  Landfills 
sites are exempted from public hearing if identified under city master plan.  They 
should be exempted.  Then land acquisition for solid waste processing and SLF 
should be made simple.  To make budgetary provision for tipping fees to be paid 
for operation and maintenance of landfill and landfill sh ould be scientifically 
should be designed  rather than just a dumpyard.  What ULB does, they will 
select an area of about 10 acres, they will say go on throwing the dump here.  
Go on throwing the garbage here.  People bring their tipper, they just put it 
there and that is how the hearing is happening.  Is this the way to manage a 
landfill?  It is not Sir.  It should be scientifically managed and then, we should 
think of remediation of all the landfills which are already there and IL&FS will 
come forward very gladly and we can do remediation of all this.  We have done 
one in Bombay which is an example in the whole world how remediation has 
been done.  It is all green and with fountains and everything. They have the gas 
holes where the gases can come out and a ll that.  It is becoming a park for th e 
people to sit in the evening."  
8.18 In this connection the MoEF&CC has stated  that Urban Development 
Departments of States/ UTs are mandated to design a State policy and strategy on solid 
waste management which ensu res minimization of waste going into landfills. 
Identification and allocation of suitable land to local bodies for setting up processing 
and disposal facilities and incorporating suitable provisions in the master plans of every 
city is mandated to State Ur ban Development Departments and District Magistrate/ 
District Collector/Deputy Commissioner as per Rule 11 and Rule 12 of SWM Rules, 
2016, respectively. Under Rule 15, local authorities and villages panchayats of census 
towns and urban agglomerations are m andated to undertake construction, operation 
and maintenance of sanitary landfill and associated infrastructure. 
 
(b) Capacity Creation and related issues 
(i) Capacity creation 
8.19 About Waste to Energy, the Ministry of Ne w and Renewal Energy has stated that  
Ministry of New & Renewable Energy has been promoting the use of technologies for 
energy recovery from municipal, industrial and commercial wastes for meeting certain 

114 
 
niche energy demands of urban, industrial and commercial sectors in the country. 
Ministry is focusing on Energy generation from Urban, Industrial and Agricultural Waste 
/ Residues such as municipal solid wastes, vegetable and other market wastes, 
slaughterhouse waste, agricultural residues and industrial wastes & effluents. 
8.20 The Ministry of New & Renewal Energy has also stated that it will be responsible 
for facilitating appropriate mechanism in following two areas: 
(a) Facilitate infrastructure creation for waste to energy plants.  
(b) Provide appropriate subsidy or incentives for such waste to energy plants. 
8.21 The Ministry of New & Renewal Energy has given the following  State-wise details 
of waste-to-energy plants set up  with installed capacity and number of plants, as on 
30.09.2018 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of 
State/Union 
Territories 
MSW 
based 
Power 
Plants 
Agricultural, Urban & Industrial Effluent/Waste  
Based Waste to Energy plants 
Total  
(Grid & 
Offgrid) 
Power 
(Grid) 
Power 
(Grid) 
Power 
(Off-grid) 
Biogas 
(Off-grid) 
BioCNG 
(Off-grid) 
MW (No. 
of plants) 
MW 
(No. of 
plants) 
MW (No. 
of plants) 
M/day 
(No. of plants 
Kg/day 
(No. of 
plants) 
MWeq 
1. Andhra 
Pradesh 
- 23.16(4) 17.66(11) 60,240(5) - 46.44(20) 
2. Bihar - - - 12,000(1) - 1.00(1) 
3. Chhattisgarh - - 0.33(1) - - 0.33(1) 
4. Delhi 52.00(3) - - - - 52.00(3) 
5. Gujarat - - 11.275(10) 24,840(4) 12,538(2) 15.66(16) 
6. Haryana - - 4.0(2) - 2,050(2) 4.46(4) 
7. Himachal 
Pradesh 
- - - 12,000(1) - 1.00(1) 
8. Karnataka - 1.00(1) 4.8(3) 58,080(3) 1800(1) 11.05(8) 
9. Kerala - - - 2,760(1) - 0.23(1) 
10. Madhya 
Pradesh 
11.5(1) 3.9(2) - 5,640(3) 1,200(1) 16.12(7) 
11. Maharashtra 3.00(1) 9.59(3) 14.63(10) 73,080(8) 19,533(3) 37.17(25) 
12. Punjab - 9.256(2) 4.17(3) 33,720(5) 1,847(1) 16.65(11) 
13. Rajasthan - - 3.0(1) - 4,000(2) 3.91(3) 
14. Tamil Nadu - 6.4(3) 4.05(3) 1,57,320(28) - 22.96(34) 
15. Telangana - 18.5(3) 1.0(1) 30,000(4) - 22.00(8) 

115 
 
16. Uttar 
Pradesh 
- - 44.625(22) 57,200(5) 2,000(1) 49.81(28) 
17. Uttrakhand - - 1.89(2) 67,200(5) 5,460(1) 8.49(8) 
18. West Bengal - - - 14,040(2) - 1.17(2) 
 Total 66.5(5) 71.8(18) 111.43(69) 6,08,180(75) 50,428(14)  
310.45(181)   249.73MW 50.67MWeq 10.05MWeq 
  GRID-
138.,30MW(23) 
       OFF GRID-172.15MWeq(158) 
8.22 Asked about the share of power generated from MSW in the total power 
generated  in the country along  with the target set in this reg ard, the MOH&UA stated  
that t he total installed capacity (as on 31.05.2018) in India as per Central Electricity 
Authority (CEA) is 3,43,899 MW. The total capacity of Waste to Electricity (MW) from 
MSW is 88.4 MW which stands nowhere compared to total power  generated in the 
country. The present overall potential of Waste to Energy Capacity in India is estimated 
at 511 MW. The total capacity of constructed and operational plants is 88.4 MW. 
Another 415 MW are in the stages of under-construction. 
 
 8.23 The Co mmittee also wanted to know the sort of Central assistance is being 
provided for setting up of waste to energy plants. Asked about provisions under SBM 
for the same, the MOH&UA stated that some of the States have already have prepared 
their comprehensive S anitation policy and action plan for 100% scientific waste 
processing and others are in the process. 
 
8.24 The  Committee also wanted to know about steps are underway to put up more 
and more Waste to Energy (WTE) Plants across the States/UTs, the MOH&UA in  a 
written note stated the following: 
(i) A Committee has been constituted by the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs for developing Standards for Refused Derived Fuel (RDF), which may 
enhance setting up of more WTE Plants due to good quality of input material and 
lower operational and maintenance cost. 
 

116 
 
(ii) Ministry of Power amended the Tariff Policy, 2006 under Electricity Act, 
2003, to include the provision that the distribution licensee(s) shall compulsorily 
procure 100% power produced from all the Waste to E nergy plants in the State, 
in the ratio of their procurement of power from all sources including their own, at 
the tariff determined by the Appropriate Commission under Section 62 of the Act. 
(iii) Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (CERC) has amended the  CERC 
(Terms and Conditions for Tariff determination from Renewable Energy Sources) 
(Fourth Amendment) Regulations, 2015 to specify norms for determination of 
generic tariff for Municipal Solid Waste and Refuse Derived fuel for Waste to 
Energy projects and indicative tariff for 2015-16. Determination of Generic Tariff 
will boost the financial viability of Waste -to- Energy plants in the country. The 
determined generic tariff for Municipal Waste to Energy (WTE) plants is Rs. 7.04 
per unit and for energy plan using Refused Derived Fuel (RDF) is Rs. 7.90 per 
unit. 
8.25 The Committee also wanted to know the sort of Central assistance is being 
provided for setting up of waste to energy plants and details of the provisions under 
SBM for the same, the MOH&UA stated as under:                                      
 (i) The Union Cabinet has approved the proposal of the Ministry of Power 
 for amendments in the Tariff Policy. The provision in the Electricity Tariff Policy 
 2006 is to “Mandatorily Purchase All Power Genera ted from Municipal Solid 
 Waste at the Rate Determined by Appropriate Authority” by State Electricity 
 DISCOMs. 
 
 (ii) CERC Tariff of 7.04 Rs/KWh for MSW projects and 7.90Rs/Kwh for RDF 
 based MSW projects. Based on this guidance of CERC, the appropriate S tate 
 Electricity Regulatory Commission (SERC) can determine the tariff for the 
 particular Waste to Energy plant setup under the area of its jurisdiction OR 
 SERC can have its own analysis. 
 
 (iii) Land Allocation by ULBs and Assured supply of Waste ( agreed costs)  
 
 
 (iv) Upto 35% of the total project cost to be funded under Swachh Bharat 
 Mission (Urban) as VGF/Grant to the ULBs - Provision under Swachh Bharat 
 Mission. 
 
8.26 In this connection, outlining the policy interventions taken in this regard th e NITI 
Aayog has stated that s ome major policy interventions have been initiated for 
encouragement of SWM by the Central Government like 35% provisions as Viability Gap 
Funding/Grant by Government of India for all Solid Waste Management projects, 

117 
 
making it mandotory for State DISCOMS to purchase power from Waste to  Energy 
plants at Rs. 7.04 per unit and for RDF (Refuse Derived Fuel) at Rs. 7.90 per unit, 
Market Development Assistance of Rs. 1,500 per tonne to fertiliser 
companies/ULBs/Compost manufacturers, etc., to promote the manufacturing of energy 
from waste and compost in the country so as to being the Solid Waste Management a 
component of circular economy.  However, it may be observed that while the Swachh 
Bharat Mission has led to initiatives that hav e begun to address the management 
challenges of Solid waste to a good extent and in structured manner, yet a lot needs to 
be done and the onus mainly lies on the States/UTs to carry forward the initiatives 
further to capitalise the potential that the secto r offers, not only to address the 
challenges but also to generate revenue. 
8.27 The MoH&UA  has outlined t he following are the mer its and demerits of WTE 
plants: 
 Merits 
1. Resource recovery and savings greatly expanded 
 
2. Generates power in the form of electri city or steam which can be used for 
several  purposes 
3. Reduces landfill usage and landfill expansions 
4. Trucking of waste for longer distances for dumping of waste can be 
greatly reduces 
5. The economy of the community can be greatly enhanced 
6. Easiest technology with shorter time to reduce the menace of waste 
Demerits 
1. Smoke and ash emitted by the chimneys of incinerators include acid 
gases, nitrogen  oxide, heavy metals, particulates, and dioxin, which is a 
carcinogen. While incineration  pollution control technol ogy is evolving to 
reduce these pollutants, it has been found that  even with controls in 
place, some remaining dioxin still enters the atmosphere. 
2. These facilities require skilled and highly trained staffs to run and maintain 
them. 
3. Highly cost intensive. 

118 
 
8.28 The  Ministry of New and Renewal Energy has also inter alia highlighted 
eefficient collection, segregation, transportation and storage of requisite quality  and 
quantity of feed stock one of the major challenges. 
8.29 Besides the MOH&UA has outlined the following constraints in WTE Plants:- 
 
(i) Availability of Land  
(ii) Single window clearances for the project 
(iii) Financial feasibility of the projects and financial closure 
(iv) Standardization of contracts, preparation of RFPs and Concessionaire 
Agreements 
(v) Quality of the input materials/ waste  
        (vi) Assured quantity of the raw material/waste 
 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs during the course of examination also 
furnished the following States -wise Plans taken up for setting up of waste to energy 
plants in different States:- 
 
(i) Andhra Pradesh 
Plans to set up 13 waste to electricity plant in urban and rural areas.   
Andhra Pradesh has planned to set up 12 waste to energy plants with capacity of 
64 MW. Out of 12 plants, work has been awarded for 10. The  plants are likely to 
be commissioned before May 2019. 
(ii) Delhi 
Plans to commission 2 Wastes to energy and IC&D plants in current 
Financial year. The WTE plants at Ghazipur (12 MW) and Narela Bhavana (24 
MW) have been commissioned between Dec-Mar 2016. Commercial operations of 
both these plants have been achieved in 2017 -18. A C&D plant of 500 TPD 
capacity has also been commissioned in 2016 in Shastri Park.  A new Waste to 
Energy plant of average 20 MWe – 2000 TPD is planned by South Delhi Municipal 
Corporation (SDMC) at Tehkhand. It is likely to be completed in the next 18 -24 
months depending on all clearances. 
 (iii) Karnataka 
80% municipalities with  installed compost plants.  In Karnataka there are 
220 ULBs of which 96 ULBs (44%) have developed processing facilities with a 

119 
 
designed capacity of 3,772 TPD and operational capacity of 2,239 TPD.  Efforts 
are being taken to achieve 100% in waste processing by the end of the mission 
period. 
(iv) Kerala 
Preparing a micro -plan for 100% decentralized plan across sanitation 
supply chain (Collection to disposal).   Owing to scarcity of public land, 
decentralized waste management is being promoted in the State.  It has been 
promoted for last five years. All households, institutions, flats, gated community 
are motivated to do at source composting/bio -methanation. 100% coverage is 
anticipated over the next few years. 
Kerala’s waste management policy includes: 
a) Every producer of bio -degradable waste shall process and dispose it in 
their premises or in the composting facili ty provided by the local bodies 
(at source level decentralized composting facilities). 
b) 100% regular Door-to-door collection of non -bio-degradable waste would 
be looked after by all local bodies ensuring appropriable business models.  
It will be channelized to recyclers through Material Recovery Facility which 
shall be set up by all local bodies. 
c) Appropriate IEC and Capacity Building programmes for creating enabling 
environment for accomplishment of sustainable SWM models. 
 As per Government order No. 2420/2 017 dated 15.07.2017 detailed 
guidelines for sanitation waste management campaign under Haritha Keralam 
Mission have been issued. Accordingly, Haritha Karma Sena (Green Task Force) 
have been formed in 532 local bodies including 46 urban local bodies. Mater ial 
collection facilities have been set in 171 local bodies including 39 ULBs and 
Resource Recovery facilities in 61 urban local bodies.  
 (v) Maharashtra 
 MOUs with  Holland to set up waste to energy plants.  MoU was between 
City of Amsterdam and Maharash tra. The objective of the MoU was cooperation 
through the exchange of knowledge, technical expertise and best practices in the 
area of Urban Planning, Waste & Water Management.  
 
(vi) Odisha 
 Plants achieve 100% Waste Management target in Puri in current f inancial 
year.  Puri municipality generates 80 MT of waste per day of which 50 MT per 
day (62%) is processed.  
(vii)Punjab & Haryana 
Cluster approach to partnership formation for solid waste management 
projects. 

120 
 
(i) Haryana: 
a) Haryana has adopted a cluster based  approach for SWM projects. 
14 clusters have been formed in the state 
b) 4 Plants are in the pre -tendering Stage in  clusters Ambala-Karnal 
(WtE), Panchkula (WtC), Bhiwani (WtC), Rewari (WtC) and Fatehabad 
(WtC). 
c) Gurgaon cluster plant is under construction. Co ncessionaire has 
commenced door to door collection in Faridabad and Gurgaon 
 
(ii) Punjab: 
a) Punjab has also adopted cluster based approach for Ludhiana and 
Amritsar SWM Projects. 
(viii)Rajasthan 
State notification on collection of user changes for door to door co llection. 
Rajasthan has released notification on collection of user charges for door to door 
collection. 
(ix) Uttar Pradesh 
 Incentivising waste to energy projects by providing generations/output 
based subsidy throughout plant life through State Budget.  There is no such 
provision currently in Uttar Pradesh for incentivising waste to energy projects by 
providing Generations/ Output based subsidy throughout plant life through State 
Budget. 
8.30 The Committee also enquired about the reasons that whatever action taken on 
solid waste management is limited only to nine States, the MOH&UA stated : 
"All States are:  
The Action on MSWM is being taken by all States and UTs , some states are fast 
movers that others. "  
8.31 The Committee also wanted to know the above work done across the States is 
quite less and is in formative stages and is the latest update in this regard, the 
MOH&UA stated that in  several states, the implementation has progressed to complete 
the tendering process of MSW processing & treatment plant which is the weakest link in 
the entire MSWM chain as collection and transportation mechanisms are well 
established as more than 80-85% waste is being collected and transported. 
 (ii) Augmenting Capacity Building 

121 
 
8.32 The Committee also wanted to know the details of work done by Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs in the area of augmentation of capacity building for solid 
waste management for training and stakeholders give financial assistance to State/UTs, 
ULBs during the last two years, the MOH&UA furnished the following information: 
(a) For effective implementation of SWM Rules 2016 (including 5 other Waste 
Rules - C&D, Plastic, E -Waste, Bio -medical and Hazardous), Ministry in 
partnership with MoEF&CC - CPCB is conducting training workshops in 68 
metropolitan & major ULBs for all SWM staff coordinated through the 
National Productivity Council (NPC).  So far, these trainings have been 
conducted in 8 metro cities and one for Master Trainers at NPC, Delhi. 
(b) For the training of SWM functionaries of the ULBs, Natio nal Institute of 
Urban Affairs (NIUA), which is part of this ministry, has conducted 24 
training and exposure visits for 660 ULB officials and functionaries 
involved in the sector. 
(c) Capacity building of ULBs on Best SWM Practices was also enabled 
through Peer to Peer learning and exposure visits to different ULBs across 
the country. Till now, 19 Best Practice Exposure visits/ trainings have been 
conducted in which 380 ULBs participated (many ULBs participated in 
multiple visits). 
(d) Further, 88 E -learning cours es on best SWM practices have also been 
prepared and hosted on the SBM portal. ULB functionaries can take these 
courses at their own convenience and get certified on successful 
completion of the course.  Till now about 4,12,154 staff of ULBs have 
been registered on the E -Learning portal and 3,63,307 certifications have 
been generated, in which multiple learnings -cum-certification are also 
included. 
(iii) Promoting R&D in Solid Waste Management  
 
8.33 In this context the suggestion of ASSOCHAM and Comments o f Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs thereon are as under: 
 
 Suggestion of ASSOCHAM     Comments of MoH&UA 
Many innovative technologies and 
services are being introduced for the 
treatment of MSW. One such 
innovative method is Composting on 
Wheels. It is  important that the 
Ministry of Urban Development and 
all ULBs recognize the need to 
Agreed. MoHUA support innovative 
technologies. However, ancillary 
infrastructure space has to be provided 
by ULBs/ State Governments. 

122 
 
motivate and incentivize such   
innovative services and offer required 
ancillary infrastructure such as de -
centralized spaces within the city for 
curing of compost ,etc. 
 
8.34 In this context the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has also stated that for 
encouraging R&D in solid waste man agement sector and to disseminate information on 
viable SWM technologies, the Ministry has set up the Technical Evaluation Committee 
(TEC) for examining new technologies and processes under the Chairmanship of Dr. 
R.A. Mashelkar, which examines the replica bility, scalability and sustainability of the 
new technologies & processes and recommends the same for possible implementation. 
This work is ongoing.  Ministry has compiled the information on the solid waste 
management sector and has prepared the list of ve ndors for composting, 
biomethanation, RDF and integrated solid waste management. The compendium with 
the list of vendors has been published and posted on the Swachh Bharat portal for the 
information of States and Urban Local Bodies. The list of pre -qualified Transaction 
Advisors for solid waste management projects has also been prepared and posted on 
the website. 
(c) Issues related with Plastic Wastes 
    (i) Use of Plastic for road construction 
8.35 During the course of evidence of the representative of MOH&UA, the issue of 
plastic for road construction came up before the Committee and the Committee pointed 
out that the matter is still on paper.  At this Commissioner, BBMP replied: 
 "Sir, Bengaluru city is doing it. BBMB is doing it." 
8.36 At this Committee also pointed out that NHAI has already opposed it even after 
signing of an MOU long back for using Ghazipur dump site and no progress has been at 
inter ministerial convergence.  Replying to it, the Commissioner, SDMC stated: 

123 
 
"With great difficulty, we wer e able to pull off an MoU with NHAI. The MoUD is 
also a part of that MoU. But NHAI is extremely reluctant. The MoU stipulates that 
they will be reclaiming the entire Gazipur dump site. Then, that will be used by 
us for setting up an integrated facility with engineered landfill site etc. That is the 
dream with which the MoU was signed, but it has not reached anywhere so far. 
Earlier, they did a tender which failed. Then, they thought that this is too costly 
for them and therefore, they would rather do a pilo t. They have done the pilot 
for two years. Even the pilot is not working." 
8.37 At this, the Committee also pointed out that in 2012, the then integrated 
Municipal Corporation had given an affidavit in Hon'ble Supreme Court that Ghazipur 
dump site has reac hed a saturated point and no dump can be put there.  However, 
fifteen years, thereafter dumping is continuing.  The Committee wanted to know 
whether use of waste can be done for road construction purposes, a representative of 
BBMB clarified: 
 "We are using five percent of plastic." 
8.38 The witness further added: 
"What Bengaluru has been doing is that they are using plastic in bitumen.  What 
NHAI has been asked to do is to use earth for this. These are totally two 
different things. Plastic has a component o f bitumen. It is well established. But, 
what the NHAI has been asked to do is to use soil for embankment. They are 
totally different. There is a resistance there." 
8.39 At this, the Committee pointed out that NHAI is also not opposing  plastic and 
their resistance is for non -plastic feeling that required technology is not identified.  At 
this, Commissioner, SDMC clarified: 
"As far as our MoU with NHAI is concerned, the use of plastic for laying the road 
is not relevant there. That is not a part of the MoU. It is only about segregating 
the existing legacy waste at Gazipur dump site and then using the inert part of it 
for filling." 
8.40 At this, a representative of MOH&UA assured: 
 "I will request the Minister. We will take it up." 
(d) Issues related with C&D Wastes 

124 
 
8.41 During the course of evidence of the representative of ASSOCHAM, various 
issues related with C&D wastes came up before the Committee.  These inter alia include 
need for Minimum Support Price (MSP) for RDF, need for transport subsidy for C&D 
Waste, need for exempting import duty for importing equipments like turbines for 
Waste to Energy Plants Cement Plants, giving banking facility for DISCOM and purchase 
of electricity from Waste to Energy Plants.  On the issue of provisioning MSP for RDF a 
representative of ASSOCHAM stated: 
"There are two streams, as we discussed. One is biodegradable; other is non -
biodegradable.  So, non -biodegradable is Refuse Derived Fuel (RDF) which 
comprises of plastics, clothes, textiles and so on which can be burnt and it  has a 
very good heat value.  The cement plants were asked to lift at least 5 per cent of 
their requirement of fuel vide Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016.  They did 
not even lift 0.1 per cent.  So the other stream which is loitering on the roads 
and going in the drains, going to the dump sites is not being utilised anywhere in 
the country today.  Today, you have three or four dump sites in Delhi alone like 
Ghazipur, Bhalwaswa.  All have gone to a height of 50 to 60 metres.  It is just 
like mountains.  So,  the minimum support price for RDF has to be fixed where 
waste to energy plants are feasible because in waste to energy plant, for every 
MW, you have to make capital investment of about Rs. 15 to Rs. 20 crore.  You 
do not get the purchase price for that.  So, people are not coming forward to put 
up waste to energy plant." 
 8.42 On the need for transport subsidy to Cement  Plants, the witness added: 
"Cement plants are there where you have limestone, which are far away from 
the urban cities.  The rule says, w ithin 100 kms. you have to supply them 
whereas the plants are generally 200 to 300 kms. even up to 350 kms.  So, you 
have to increase distance from 100 kms. to at least 400 kms. for supply with a 
subsidy in transportation.  Then we have to mandate power pl ants and cement 
plants to use RDF at least for five per cent of their requirement which should 
gradually increase to about 15 -20 per cent over the next three to five years.  It 
has not even taken off.  They do not want to take and if they want to take they  
say, give us free of cost which is not possible.  We have processing cost.  We are 
processing it; we are segregating it; we are shredding it and then we are 
sending it to them.  So, you have to give some financial incentive to the cement 
plants also to mo dify their fuel technology so that they can accept RDF.  
Otherwise, they will not be using it." 
8.43 The witness added: 
"Then, Sir, another thing is construction and demolition that is C&D waste. The 
buildings are broken. The new buildings are made.  You w ill see heaps of the 
C&D waste lying on the roadside itself – the Yamuna sand, the concrete, the 

125 
 
bricks, the chattas and all those kinds of things lying which nowhere in the world 
you will find like that.  I was in the UK. Right in the evening, the person who is 
constructing his house or demolishing his house, it is mandatory for him to take 
it to a pre-selected site where it will be processed otherwise he will be fined very 
heavily and there they also have a gateway for the dumpsite. If you bring in 
some kachra in the dumpsite, you will be charge 70 pounds a tonne. For C&D, 
you should have a budgetary provision for payment of transportation processing 
charges. They do not want to pay anything which is economically viable.  In 
order to encourage usage of recycled product made from C&D waste, this should 
be kept under GST category and so also, the organic compost should be under 
GST category.  From C&D, I am processing about 2500 tonnes of C&D everyday 
and I am making tiles and I am making slabs, I am making p aver blocks.  But 
then, the taxation on this is 18 per cent. It becomes unviable to sell." 
8.44 On the issue of need to exempt import duty from imported turbine used for WTE 
purposes, the witness stated: 
"The other thing is waste to energy, solid waste.  T he same thing can also be 
used for waste to energy.  For example, we have a 12 MW plant in Ghazipur 
which is consuming 1200 tonnes of waste every of the East Delhi Corporation.  
But, practically there are no buyers at an economically viable price for elect ricity.  
So, we have to mandate local discoms to offtake power from waste to energy 
plant at the pre set tariffs.  Wheeling transmission charges, cross subsidy, import 
duty and other charges for waste to energy projects should be exempted 
because we have t o import certain equipments like turbines and so on and so 
forth which are not practically manufactured here for waste to energy 
technology.  So, those should be exempted from the import duty." 
8.45 On the issue of giving banking facility for DISCOM and purpose of electricity from 
WTE Plants, the witness stated: 
"The provision of banking facility for the discoms and purchase of electricity from 
waste to energy plants, it should be considered under CSR.  In my Ghazipur 
plant, I have spent Rs. 250 crore.  How  do I recover this money?  It should be 
covered under CSR. At least some part of it I will be able to recover." 
8.46 On all these issues, the comments of MOH&UA are as under: 
Recommendation of ASSOCHAM Comments of Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs 
Mandate local DISCOMs to off -take power from 
WtE plants at pre-set tariffs 
  
  
  
The provision in the Electricity Tariff Policy 2016 
is to “Mandatorily Purchase All Power Generated 
from Municipal Solid Waste at the Rate 
Determined by Appropriate Authority” by  State 
Electricity DISCOMs. 
Purchase of electricity from WtE plants to be 
considered under CSR 
  
Not Agreed. 

126 
 
Provision of banking facility with DISCOM Need to be explained. 
Exemption from Wheeling, Transmission 
charges and Cross -Subsidy, lmport Duty and  
other charges for WtE projects 
Ministry of Power to provide comments 
Construction & Demolition Waste Management - 
ln order to encourage usage of recycled 
products made from C&D waste be kept under 
NIL GST category 
Proposal for recommendation of uniform GS T 
Rate of 5% on all C&D Recycled Products is 
under consideration in MoHUA, with a single 
HSN code for all C&D Recycled products. 
 
8.47 On the issue of status of GST on rejected product, a representative of MOH&UA 
during their evidence clarified: 
"It has not been examined too much in detail. But, apparently, on one page that 
I have gone through, there is no specific reduction in the river. However, the 
issue has been whether we should allow the waste pickers to pay GST or not. 
Most of the waste pickers have  more than Rs.20 lakh, they are not being 
charged GST. But, there is no difference between a product manufactured from 
the recycled product or from the new products." 
8.48 A representative of MOH&UA further added: 
"In GST, I had seen notifications of a few  Governments in which all the 18 
functions entrusted to ULBs were exempt. What we will do is that we will get this 
examined and we will come back by the next meeting." 
***** 

127 
 
CHAPTER IX 
 
Allocation vis-a-vis utilisation and related issues 
9.1 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has given the following details about 
funds vis-a-vis the utilization on Solid Waste Management component of SBM(U) as on 
30.09.2018: 
 
(a) Lower Utilisation of funds 
                                                            
(Figures in Crores) 
SBM (U) - Solid Waste Management Funds Released and Utilisation  
  
S. 
No. 
State/UT Mission 
Allocation 
Funds 
Released 
UCs Due  UCs 
Received 
UCs 
Received 
1 A&N Islands 2.50 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 
2 Andhra Pradesh 308.54 308.54 206.99 170.02 122.57 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 7.25 6.84 6.84 6.84 6.84 
4 Assam 76.76 38.38 0.00 0.00 0.00 
5 Bihar 259.96 107.97 96.63 24.66 24.66 
6 Chandigarh 22.24 2.47 2.47 2.33 2.33 
7 Chhattisgarh 131.53 97.99 8.79 49.95 8.79 
8 Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 2.27 0.00 0.00 0.00 
0.00 
9 Daman & Diu 1.57 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
10 Delhi 263.68 63.11 63.11 22.30 57.15 
11 Goa 9.29 5.93 3.78 1.70 3.78 
12 Gujarat 536.22 268.11 187.90 0.00 80.21 
13 Haryana 181.80 57.66 57.66 57.66 57.66 
14 Himachal Pradesh 15.22 9.10 9.10 9.10 9.10 
15 Jammu & Kashmir 67.99 39.45 10.90 10.90 10.90 
16 Jharkhand 122.68 92.38 46.69 9.33 9.33 
17 Karnataka 512.52 99.18 57.26 0.00 57.26 
18 Kerala 121.35 29.99 0.00 0.00 0.00 
19 Madhya Pradesh 434.01 301.75 52.93 52.93 52.93 
20 Maharashtra 1081.84 290.34 42.43 1.85 42.43 
21 Manipur 14.72 9.61 9.61 9.61 9.61 
22 Meghalaya 8.69 3.53 2.98 2.98 2.98 
23 Mizoram 13.22 8.21 8.21 0.00 0.00 
24 Nagaland 11.69 6.68 6.68 6.68 6.68 
25 Odisha 138.05 18.98 18.98 18.98 18.198 
26 Puducherry 17.30 2.12 2.12 1.00 1.00 

128 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                         
 
 
   
 
 
9.2 The Committee pointed out that major beneficiaries States of Solid Waste 
Management funds are Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat, Karnataka, 
West Bengal and Delhi.  However, huge amounts have are yet to be relea sed to these 
States/UT’s, Asked about the reasons that huge amount have been shown as balance in 
respect of these States, the Ministry of Hous ing and Urban Affairs stated that f or 
releasing funds to States/UTs from the Government of India, some certain con ditions 
have to be fulfilled by the States/UTs which are as under: 
(i)  ULBs are to prepare DPR for Solid waste management of their city in 
consultation with state governments. Smaller cities can form clusters to 
become viable entities to attract private inves tment. 100% Cost 
reimbursement for preparing the DPR shall be done by GoI as per unit 
cost and norms set up by NARC.  
(ii)  State governments may handhold ULB’s in quickly preparing DPR’s for 
SWM by empanelling /shortlisting /identifying private or government 
agencies for the same.  
(iii)  The DPRs should be bankable, having a viable financial model. These will 
be prepared emanating from the needs identified in the City Sanitation 
Plan. DPRs should be aligned with Govt. of India’s goals outlined in the 
NUSP 2008, SWM 2016 rules, advisories, CPHEEO manuals (including 
cost-recovery mechanisms), O&M practices and Service -level Benchmark 
advisories released by M/o UD from time to time. Street Sweeping, litter 
control interventions, and dumpsite remediations will be part of  DPR 
which is essential for a clean city. 
(iv)In order to promote projects of waste to energy, it is clarified that the 
central government Grant / VGF may also be used for such projects, 
either upfront or as generation based incentive for power generated for 
a given period of time. 
(v)  The State High Powered Committee (HPC) will authorize institutes of 
national repute for appraisal of DPRs for the technical and economic 
27 Punjab 220.97 120.38 23.00 23.00 23.00 
28 Rajasthan 363.46 344.26 215.60 33.65 162.31 
29 Sikkim 3.42 2.52 2.52 2.52 2.52 
30 Tamil Nadu 689.87 205.01 205.01 218.14 205.01 
31 Telangana 223.43 111.72 65.30 15.22 61.64 
32 Tripura 15.51 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
33 Uttar Pradesh 940.91 427.73 37.56 37.56 37.56 
34 Uttarakhand 57.57 5.00 5.00 5.00 5.00 
35 West Bengal 487.79 199.80 34.54 87.98 34.54 
STATE/UT 7365.82 3284.79 1490.65 881.94 1116.83 

129 
 
appraisal of DPRs for projects recommended by ULBs. No appraisal will 
be done by MoHUA. The cos t of DPR appraisal by these institutes shall 
be an admissible component under administrative costs, subject to 
norms as approved by MoHUA.  
(vi) The performance and quality of appraisal by these identified and 
authorized institutes will be evaluated and monitored by HPEC as well as 
NARC and corrective actions taken wherever necessary.  
(vii) The State Level high power committee will approve the DPR as well as 
the financial model of solid waste management.  
(viii) The implementation of SWM projects will be as per directions of State 
Level High Power Committee.  
(ix)  Central government incentive for the SWM projects will be in the form of 
a maximum of 35% Grant / VGF for each project.  
(x)  While considering projects under MSWM it will be ensured that there is 
no duplication in terms of funding under any other scheme or 
programme.  
(xi)  Detailed technical and financial appraisal of the DPRs will be carried out. 
O&M arrangements for the project shall necessarily be an integral part 
of the project in the DPR.  
(xii) SWM projects will be sanctioned  by the State level HPC which shall 
include a representative of the MoHUA. In the entire project approval 
and procurement process, all provisions and procedures as prescribed by 
respective State Governments must be followed in their entirety. The 
entire approval procedure for MSW projects except for release of Central 
funds will end at the State Level.  
(xiii) The States shall be free to choose the technology for SWM projects, 
toilets and street sweeping.  
(xiv) States will contribute a minimum of 40% share of funds for  SWM 
projects (comprising 23.3% of project costs) to match 60% Central 
Share (10% in the case of North East States  and special category 
States).  
 9.3 Asked about the difficulty in releasing these amounts, the Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs stated  that States/UTs are required to submit their demands for 
seeking funds from Central Government under Solid Waste Management (SWM) 
component alongwith minutes of State High Power Committee meeting headed by 
Chief Secretary of the concerned state, thereafter Government of India considers for 
releasing 35% of the project cost as VGF/Grant. And for releasing 2nd instalment of 
the grant under SWM component, Central Government requires Utilization Certificate 
(UC) as well as physical and financial progress of the fund released under 1st 
installment of the same project. In the lack of UCs and physical progress of the same 
project, GoI is not in a position to consider releasing 2nd instalment VGF/Grant for 
same projects, hence balance is shown against States allocations. 

130 
 
9.4 During the course of evidence of the representative of MOH&UA, in reply to a 
query about dismal performance in utilization of funds under Solid Waste component 
under Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban), the Commissioner, SDMC stated: 
"Sir, not all munic ipal corporations or municipal bodies are equally financially 
sound. Those which have - for example, EDMC - a very poor financial position, 
are not able to make use of funds under Swachh Bharat Mission because it 
stipulates that two-third of the funding ha s to come from the local body and only 
one-third of the funding is from the Central Government. If we do not have funds 
to put in the matching share, we are not able to share the money which even 
comes from the Central Government. We are in that kind of a situation. So, we 
need to find some solution to this." 
9.5 The witness further added: 
"If the Swachh Bharat Mission fails in the financially -poor Corporations, then it is 
not going to succeed in the country." 
 In this connection, the ASSOCHAM has also shar ed their experiences.  Their 
views and comments of MOH&UA thereon are as under: 
Recommendation of ASSOCHAM Comments of Ministry 
of Housing and Urban 
Affairs 
Funding for large plants continues to remain a huge 
subject of concern for private companies and 
infrastructure players in Municipal Solid Waste 
Management, especially for treatment plants. Each of the 
above points will help financial institutions build trust in 
this activity. It is also important that the activity of MSW 
Treatment is given an “Essenti al Infrastructure’ status in 
order to avail debt funding at subsidized rates form 
national and international financial institutions 
  
MoHUA support status 
of priority lending to 
MSW projects. 
 
9.6 In this context, a representative of MOH&UA during the cou rse of evidence 
stated: 
"Regarding the financial resources, the ULBs, except for the large Corporations, are 
totally dependent upon the State Governments even for their salary pay off.  The lack 
of technical capacity of ULBs in preparation of RFPs and tend ers is poor as there are 

131 
 
very few skilled personnel in the area of SWM. With the rolling of SBM which is having a 
repository of methods and technologies for waste processing, several advisories for 
capacity building have been brought out. " 
 
(b) Issue of Inadequate Funds 
9.7 During the course of evidence, the issue of gross underutilization of funds for 
Solid Waste Management component under Swachh Bharat Mission in different States 
came up before the Committee in a big way. In this connection the Commissio ner East 
Delhi Municipal Corporation expressed helplessness before the Committee that due to 
poor financial position of Urban Local bodies they are unable to managed their share of 
SWM funds under SBM Mission. The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs on t heir part 
have shown certain requirements like preparation of DPRs and their clearances from 
designated agencies to be fulfilled forgetting Central SWM funds. The Ministry have 
even informed the Committee that due to lack of Utilization Certificates the Mi nistry is 
unable to release the requisite funds.  Asked whether Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs have received any request from EMCD for   revising the available funding 
pattern, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs stated in the negative. 
 
9.8 The Committee further enquired whether Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
evolved some way out at the level of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs level for 
helping various ULBs like SDMC, the Ministry of H ousing and Urban Affairs stated that 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs under Urban Development Fund, has sanctioned 
Rs. 300 crore for 3 Municipal Corporations of Delhi i.e. North Delhi Corporation, East 
Delhi Corporation and South Delhi Corporation at the rate of Rs. 100 crore each.  
However, UDF Operation & Management Guidelines, 2016, mandates a minimum of 

132 
 
20% of the cost of the project should be arranged by the implementing agency from 
sources other than UDF and accordingly, 80% of the cost project, i.e., Rs.80 crores 
each was approved by the Pr oject Sanctioning Committee (PSC) to each MCD including 
South Delhi Corporation. However, on the request of Chief Secretary, GNCTD to exempt 
North DMC and East  DMC from contributing their share of 20%, i.e., Rs.20 crores each, 
Ministry has accepted the same. 
 
 9.9 The Committee also wanted to know the details of the average budget spent by 
ULBs on SWM, particularly, the treatment and disposal of waste is an under -invested 
area as compared to funds spent on collection and transportation, the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs stated that a s per a past estimate, the Urban Local Bodies 
(ULBs) spend about 60 -70% of total expenditure on street sweeping, 20 -30% on 
transportation, and less than 5% on final disposal of waste. The major part of 
expenditure is on manpower engaged in street sweeping and transportation, which 
shows that hardly any attention is given to door to door collection, segregation and 
scientific processing and disposal of waste in the past. However, with the launch of 
Swachh Bharat Mission, t he situation is fast improving not only in terms of investment 
towards solid waste processing, but also towards upward revision in the user -fee by 
many of the States/UTs/ULBs. As per information collected by the Ministry, now 616 
centralised waste to compo st plants are completed and are functional as well as 7 
waste to energy plants. Another 267 compost plants and 56 waste to electricity plants 
are under construction/upgradation. This is bound to bridge the gap in waste 
processing on their completion. 
 
9.10 Asked about the details of allocation vis -a-vis expenditure under different 
components under SWM(U), the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in a written no te 

133 
 
stated that t he Government of India has released Rs. 453.78 crore as installment till 
date to the States for integrated solid waste management under SWM. 
 
9.11 In this context, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs also added  stated 
Regarding the financial resources, the ULBs, except for the large corporations, are 
totally dependent upon the St ate Governments even for their salary pay off.  The lack 
of technical capacity of ULBs in preparation of RFPs and tenders is poor as there are 
very few skilled personnel in the area of SWM.  With the rolling of SBM which is having 
a repository of methods a nd technologies for waste processing, several advisories for 
capacity building have been brought out. 
 
9.12 In this context, the Committee also wanted to know in what way the finance of 
ULBs can be augmented, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in a written note 
stated that m ost of the solid waste management projects in the Country are wither 
funded completely or partially by Government of India or Governments of the 
concerned States/UTs or external agencies like JICA, ADB etc. for the creation of 
infrastructure.  However, the operation and maintenance of those projects have to be 
arranged by the ULBs either through the user fees or by any other legal means.  The 
ULBs can augment their finances for construction and operation & maintaining of solid 
waste facilities, and associated infrastructure by any of the following means: 
(a)  Private Sector Participation 
(b)  Additional Resources from State Government/ULB 
(c)  Beneficiary Share 
  (d)  User Charges 
  (e)  Land Leveraging 
  (f)  Innovative revenue streams 
  (g)  Swachh Bharat Kosh 
  (h)  Corporate Social Responsibility 
  (i)   Market Borrowing  
  (j)  External Assistance 
 
(c)  Need for attracting private participation in SWM 

134 
 
9.13 The Committee also enquired as to how ULBs can be strengthened to streaml ine 
the entire process of solid waste management, the Ministry of H ousing and Urban 
Affairs stated that the financial & technical capacities of ULBs is being enhanced by way 
of recovering O&M through, levying of user charges and encouraging ULBs in 
compensating gap between income and expenses through sale of compost/ Recyclables 
and compliance of bulk waste generator rules. Private participation in SWM by 
leveraging VGF will also boost capacity of ULBs to manage solid waste efficiently. Their 
technical capacity is also being enhanced by way of exposure visit to the cities having 
improved SWM system and also through workshops and advisories. The 
competitiveness developed among ULBs because of Swachh Survekshan and Garbage 
Free Star Rating is already touching all aspects of solid waste man agement and 
strengthening ULBs. 
(d)  Generation of Resources for SWM through Municipal Bonds 
9.14 During the course of evidence of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, the 
Committee wanted to know whether the financial posit ion and ULBs can be augmented 
through Municipal Banks, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs explained  that yes.  
There are limited revenues sources of municipalities and limited options to borrow from 
the market.  At the same time, the local bodies ne ed substantial funds to finance their 
core development functions.   Therefore, municipal bond market can serve as a 
significant source of funds to Municipalities. 
 
9.15 In this context, explaining the details about Municipal Bonds, the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs added that municipal bond is a bond issued by a city or other 
local government, or their agencies to bridge their funding gap. The Urban Local Bodies 
(ULBs) have a debt obligation to repay the principal amount along with the interest to 
the investors on bond maturity. Municipal bonds generally have long repayment period 
that approximates the useful life of infrastructure being financed, with payments due 

135 
 
quarterly, semi -annually or annually. A municipal bond issue is broken down into 
multiple bonds disbursed among different investors.   
 Merits of Municipal Bonds 
        • Bonds can be issued for longer tenure. 
        • Help municipal corporations to directly raise funds. 
        • Municipal bonds provide avenues to large institutional in vestors like   
pension funds and insurance companies, because these are looking for 
investing in less risky securities. 
  
9.16 When further enquired about financial guarantee/financial backing for issuing 
Municipal Bonds, the Ministry of Hous ing and Urban Affairs clarified that  the  bonds 
shall be secured by the creation of a charge on specific revenue stream, properties or 
assets or the receivables of the Urban Local Body, having a value sufficient for the due 
repayment of the amount of bonds and interest thereon. 
 
9.17 The Committee also wanted to know that whether only financially rich municipal 
corporations are able to issue and generate funds through Municipal Bonds or the 
financially poor municipalities also issue bonds to raise funds? If so, whether this can be 
subscribed by the people, the Ministry of Hous ing and Urban Affairs clarified that           
in the negative and stated , financially poor municipalities can also raise funds through 
municipal bonds. As per recent guidelines of SEBI project specif ic funds can be raised 
through municipal bonds which are also known as revenue bonds. SEBI has permitted 
public offering of revenue bonds. 
 
9.18 The MOH&UA has also stated that p ooled financing may be undertaken by the 
ULBs when their creditworthiness is not found very sound on a standalone basis.  Under 
such a scheme, funds raised from bonds are extended as credit by the issuers  to more 
than one borrower (in this case, more than one ULB). These borrowers are not 
necessarily related among themselves. It is a process of credit enhancement for smaller 
ULBs. Pooled municipal bonds require to combine the expertise of both project design 

136 
 
and management. Also, the ULBs are required to meet the pre -conditions of a bond 
issue, such as accounting, management informa tion systems and procurement reforms, 
by enhancing their efficiencies. To encourage the issue of municipal bonds, the Ministry 
of Housing and Urban Affairs  has launched an incentive scheme for urban local bodies 
(ULBs). Under this scheme, the incentive am ount is Rs. 13 crore for every 100 crore of 
bonds issued and up -to a maximum of Rs. 200 crore worth of bonds per ULB will be 
incentivized under this scheme. 
 
        9.19      At this, the Committee also enquired whether making the Municipal Bonds tax 
free will help the municipalities generate resources, the Ministry of H ousing and Urban 
Affairs stated that m aking Municipal Bonds tax free will make the bond issue more 
attractive. 
 
**** 

137 
 
Chapter-X 
E-Waste Management 
10.1 As per Ministry of Electronics and I nformation Technology  electronic waste 
creates a global crisis due to environmental degradation.   Based on a survey carried 
out by the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), it is estimated that 1.46 lakh tonnes 
of e -waste was generated in the country in  the year 2005, which  was estimated to 
increase to 8.00 lakh MT by 2020.  Toxic constituents such as Lead, Mercury, Cadmium, 
Hexavalent Chromium, etc. are used in the manufacturing of electronic devices.  
Disposal of e -waste from such electronic devices, w ithout processing it in an 
environmentally sound manner, may affect the human health and environment 
including soil and ground water etc.   As per the NITI Aayog India happens to be one of 
the largest producers generating (discarding) 18.5 lakh tonnes of h azardous waste and 
importing items yielding e -waste of 1 3.5 lakh tonnes annually. As per Ministry of 
Environment Climate and Change, (HSM Division) e-waste means wastes from electrical 
and electronic equipment, whole or in part or rejects from their manufa cturing and 
repair process, which are intended to be discarded.  With increasing use of electrical 
and electronic equipments, the amount of e -waste generated has been increasing 
rapidly across the world including India.   The e lectronic waste ends up in la ndfills 
/incinerators releasing cancer causing toxins.  
10.2 India is going through an exciting phase of development and economic 
transformation at an unprecedented pace.  Information Technology has given India 
formidable brand equity in the global market.   Electronics industry in India, however, 
depends heavily on imports of electronic goods to meet its domestic demand.  More 
than 35% of electronics appliances imports in India are sourced from China.  Electronic 
and appliances indu stry would reach to US $ 400Bn by 2020.  In order to absorb this 
growth, the country would consume significant volume of electronic goods and would in 
turn generate enormous electronic waste.   
10.3 Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeiTY), being the nodal 
ministry for Electronics and IT, is engaged in nurturing and evolving several affordable 
technologies to recycle e -waste in environmental friendly manner.  Recycling and 

138 
 
recovery of valuable resources from waste is essential to conserve the natural 
resources, which are depleting at a faster rate due to over-consumption.  
10.4 The recycling of these wastes is difficult owing to its complex nature and would 
require technology interventions which are yet to happen in a structured manner.  Due 
to this, the impacts ar e worse as the p eople engaged in recycling the e -Waste are 
mostly in the unorganized sector.  E -Waste (Management & Handling) Rules, 2011.  
Explaining the objectives of the e-waste (Management & Handling Rules, 2011) the M/O 
Environment & Fores t and Climat e Change has stated that i n order to address this 
escalating issue of environmentally sound management of e -waste, Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) notified the e-waste (Management 
and Handling) Rules, 2011 which came into effec t from 1st May, 2012.  These rules 
were applicable to every producer, consumer or bulk consumer, collection centre, 
dismantler and recycler of e -waste involved in the manufacture, sale, purchase and 
processing of electrical and electronic equipment or comp onents specified in schedule - 
I. Two categories of end of the life electrical and electronic equipment namely (i) IT and 
Telecommunication Equipment and (ii) Consumer Electricals and Electronics such as 
TVs, Washing Machines, Refrigerators and Air Conditio ners are covered under these 
Rules. The rule mandate  setting up of collection centers which were not mandated 
under Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) Authorization. 
10.5 In this connection, the MOH&UA has stated  that e-Waste (Management) Rules 
(2016) were notified by Government of India in 2016, with the objective of properly 
channelizing e -waste for formal treatment and resou rce recovery. e-waste is also 
prohibited from entering into the municipal solid waste stream.  Domestic e-waste such 
as the tube  light, CFL lamps, computer hardware need to be deposited at the nearest 
Material Recovery Facility (MRF). It may be seen the society needs to be informed and 
trained in careful and scientific m  engagement of all waste which are generated at the 
domestic level and the waste from all commercial establishments may necessarily be 
linked to the commercial service provider to ensure proper treatment. 

139 
 
10.6 Explaining the reasons behind coming with e -waste (Management) Rules, 2016, 
the MoE&FCC stated  that t aking c ognizance of unsatisfactory compliance of various 
provisions of e -waste Rules, 2011, specially the implementation of provision on 
Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) by Producers, setting up of collection centers 
and the capacity of recyclers, it was de cided in the Ministry to amend the rules to 
address the issue of poor compliance of the rules.  Ministry has now notified E -
Waste(Management)Rules, 2016 vide GSR No. 338(E) dated 23rd March, 2016.  The 
provisions of these Rules include elaboration on EPR, setting up of Producers' 
Responsibility Organizations, and e -waste exchange, assigning specific responsibility to 
bulk consumers of electronic products for safe disposal, provision of economic 
instrument for channelization of electronic waste, and other su ch measures to improve 
the implementation of the rules.  
The concept of Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) had been enshrined in 
these Rules as per which the producers shall be responsible for environmentally sound 
management of e -waste generated from their end of life equipment.  Extended 
Producer's responsibility (EPR) was enshrined as the main feature of the E -waste 
(Management and Handling) Rules, 2011, wherein the producer of electrical and 
electronic equipment has the responsibility of managing su ch equipment after its 'end 
of life', thus the producer is responsible for their products once the consumer discards 
them.  Under this EPR, Producer is also entrusted with the responsibility to finance and 
organize a system to meet the costs involved in co mplying with EPR.  The producers 
are required to obtain authorization from SPCB/PCCs for implementing their EPR.  It 
also had specific provision for Reduction of Hazardous Substances (RoHS) in EEE at the 
manufacturing stage, which became implementable from May 2014. 

140 
 
 State Pollution Control Boards/Committees were the prescribed authority for 
implementation of e-waste Rules in respective States. As per Rule 14 and Schedule III 
of e -waste ( Management and Handling) Rules, 2011 monitoring of compliance of 
authorization and registration conditions falls under the purview of implementing 
Reduction of Hazardous Substances (RoHS) compliance in manufacturing of items listed 
in Schedule-I. 
10.7 Explaining the salient features of law the MoEFCC stated as under; 
(i) Sta keholders to be converged under the rules is being expanded to 
manufacturer, dealer, refurbished, e -retailer and Producer Responsibility 
Organization (PRO) and e -waste exchange to address leakage of e -waste 
to informal sector at any stage of the chain; 
(ii) Applicability of the Rules is now being extended to components, 
consumables and spare parts of EEE which makes the product operational: 
(iii) Only Micro Enterprises has been exempted whereas the Small and 
Medium enterprises as defined in MSME Development  Act, 2006 has been 
covered under the purview of these Rules as manufacturer of EEE and their 
spare parts;  
(iv) Bulk consumer is being redefined in terms of turnover and the number 
of employees and they need to file annual returns now; 
(v) The target base d approach with introduction of more flexibility for 
implementation of Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) and phase wise 
target has also been fixed for ease of Producers and compliance of The 
EPR; 
(vi) Option has been given for setting up of PRO, e -waste exchange, e -
retailer, Deposit Refund, as additional channel for implementation of EPR 
by Producers to ensure efficient channelization of e-waste; 
(vii) Authorization not required for Collection centers which shall now be 
Producers responsibility with collection mechanism approach  
(viii) Compact Fluorescent Lamp (CFL) and other mercury containing lamp 
brought under the purview of rules. 
(ix) EPR Authorization for Producers is being  CPCB's responsibility to 
ensure pan India implementation; 
(x) Simplification in registration/authorization for dismantling and recycling 
through one system i.e. Authorization instead of both registration are 
authorization; 
(xi) Mandatory obligation is being introduced for dismantlers to supply e -
waste components to relevant registered recyclers of the product. 
(xii) Provision on Reduction of Hazardous Substances (RoHS) and related 
Schedule II has been revised in line with existing EU regulatory framework 
which forms the basis of the provision; 

141 
 
(xiii) In case the product not comply with the RoHS provision, provision has 
been introduced to withdraw or recall the product from market and take 
corrective measures to bring the product into compliance; 
(xiv) The roles of the State Government has been also introduced in the 
Rules in ord er to ensure safety, health and skill development of the 
workers involved in the dismantling and recycling operations including 
earmarking or allocation of e-waste dismantling/recycling by the respective 
departments or government agency; 
(xv) Liability for damages caused to the environment or third party due to 
improper management of e -waste including provision for levying financial 
penalty for violation of provisions of the Rules also been introduced. 
(xvi) Urban Local Bodies (Municipal Committee/  Council/ Corporation) has 
been assign the duty to collect and channelized the orphan products to 
authorized dismantler or recycler; 
(xvii) Provision to file an appeal in case aggrieved by an order of 
suspension or cancellation or refusal of authorization or its re newal passed 
by the Central Pollution Control Board or State Pollution Control Board. 
 
10.8 During the course of evidence, the Committee pointed out that as per Press 
report ‘captioned ‘India’s Toxic Effect Towns’ appeared in ‘The Hindu’ dated 14 January, 
2014 quoting United Nations report that out of 44.7 million towns of electronic waste in 
2016, equivalent to some 4550 Effel Towers, India’s contribution is 2 million tonnes.  
Despite E -Waste Management Rules placing responsibility on electronic good 
manufacturing companies and bulk consumers to collect to authorized reprocessing 
units, as high as 80% of e -waste, old laptops, cell -phones, TVs are continues to be 
broken at huge health and environmental cost by the informal sector.  
 
10.9 Asked about the over all preparedness for door to door collection, segregation 
and disposal of e -waste at ULB level in differen t States/UTs, the MoH&UA stated that 
according to the e -waste (Management) Rules 2016, it is the duty of ULBs to ensure 
that e-waste pertaining to orp han products is collected and channelized to authorized 
dismantler or recycler. Further, they have to ensure that e -waste if found to be mixed 
with Municipal Solid Waste is properly segregated, collected and is channelised to 
authorized dismantler or recyc ler. The main responsibility of collection and 

142 
 
channelization of e -waste under extended producer responsibility has been given to 
producers. Every producer has to make an application for EPR to CPCB for EPR 
authorization. The authorization includes among o thers targeted quantity of e -waste, 
product code wise, to be collected during the year. It should comprise of general 
scheme for collection of waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment from the Electrical 
and Electronic Equipment placed on the market earli er, such as through dealer, 
collection centers, Producer Responsibility Organization (PRO), through buy -back 
arrangement, exchange scheme, Deposit Refund System, etc. whether directly or 
through any authorized agency and channelizing the items so collected  to authorized 
recyclers.  
 Producers are also responsible for providing contact details such as address, e -
mail address, toll -free telephone numbers or helpline numbers to consumers or bulk 
consumers through their website and product user documentation so  as to facilitate 
return of end -of-life electrical and electronic equipment. Further, they should create 
awareness through media, publications, advertisements, posters, or by any other 
means of communication and product user documentation accompanying the 
equipment. The producer may opt to implement EPR individually or may be set up his 
own collection centre or implement take back system or both to meet E xtended 
Producer Responsibility.  
Disposal of e-waste 
10.10 Explaining the methods of disposal of e-waste the MoH&UA has stated as under: 
e-waste 
 
The methods for disposal of e-waste includes dismantling of electronic and 
electrical equipment followed by recycling of individual components such as 
plastic, metal etc. There are about 178 authorized recyclers a nd dismantlers in 

143 
 
India. The specific recycling process and methodologies for printed circuit board 
are as follows: 
 
Physical process 
 
Physical recycling involves a preliminary step where size reduction of the 
waste is performed followed by a step in which  metallic and non -metallic 
fractions are separated and collected for further management. The PCB is cut 
into pieces of approximately 1-2 cm2 usually with shredders or granulators giving 
the starting batch easily manageable for treatments. Further particle size 
reduction to 5 -10 mm is done by means of cutting mills, centrifugal mills or 
rotating sample dividers equipped with a bottom sieve. Size and shape of 
particles play crucial roles in mechanical recycling processes because the metal 
distribution is a function of size range. Al is mainly distributed in the coarse 
 
fractions (> 6.7 mm), but other metals are mainly distributed in the fine fractions 
(< 5 mm). Magnetic separators, in particular, low intensity drum separators are 
widely used for the recovery o f ferromagnetic metals from non -ferrous metals 
and other non -magnetic wastes. Electric conductivity -based separation such as 
Eddy current separation, corona electrostatic separation and triboelectric 
separation separates materials of different electric con ductivity such nonferrous 
metals from inert materials. Density -base separation of particles such as sink -
float separation, jigging, and separation are also used to separate metal from 
nonmetallic components in PCB wastes. 
 
Chemical process 
 
 Chemical recyc ling refers to decomposition of the waste polymers into 
their monomers or some useful chemicals by means of chemical reactions. In 
this view, chemical recycling consists of pyrolysis process, depolymerization 
process by using supercritical fluids, hydrogen olytic degradation and gasification 
process. The refining of the products (gases and oils) is included in the chemical 
recycling process, and can be done with conventional refining methods in 
chemical plants. Metal fraction can be treated by pyrometallurgical and 
hydrometallurgical approaches, biotechnological processes being still in their 
infancy. 
 
10.11 Asked whether proper training should be imparted to workers for that purpose, 
the MoH&UA stated that MoEF&CC has initiated project in coordination with M oHUA for 
conducting capacity building programs on implementation of Waste Management Rules, 
notified in the year 2016 including e -Waste Management Rules, 2016. The program is 
designed to be implemented in 68 cities of the country in first phase in associat ion with 
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) within the umbrella framework of Swachh Bharat 
Mission (SBM). 

144 
 
International Best Practices  
 
10.12 The M/o Environment & Forest and Climate Change explaining the international 
experience in this regard has stated as under: 
(i) Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) is an established technology 
management of various kind of wastes especially e -waste.  Implementation is 
successfully proved in many developed countries and some of the developing 
countries. OECD ha s been working on  it and has their guidance document 
published in 2001.  Accordingly, EPR has been strengthened in line with existing 
international best practices. 
(ii) Producer Responsibility Organization (PRO) as mode of implementation EPR is 
the established successful procedures in developed countries and the same has 
been adopted.  Between 1998 and 2007, it is estimated the more than 260 PROs 
were established in Europe.   
(iii) Deposit Refund Scheme has been introduced as an optional economic market 
based instrument as channel for implementation of EPR. 
(iv) Targets have been introduced for effective product take back requirement as 
is appicable in many other countries viz. Japan, Netherland, Spain etc. 
(v) Information based instruments have been strengt hen by strengthening the 
mechanism on public awareness. 
(vi) Provision on Reduction of Hazardous Substances (RoHS) and related 
Schedule II has been revised in line with existing EU regulatory framework which 
forms the basis of the provision alongwith provi sion to withdraw or recall of the 
product from market and take corrective measures in case of non -compliance of 
the RoHS provision; 
 Work done by M/o Electronics and IT 
10.13 The Ministry of Electronics and IT has stated that the following R&D projects 
have  been initiated as under:  
(i) Pilot scale released and Development to demonstrate e -waste Recycling 
facilitation using Physical Separate Method 
(ii) RLD to demonstrate e -waste Recycling facility using Pyrolysis and smelting 
Method. 
(iii) Establishment o f restriction of Hazardous substances (RoHS) Relting 
Facilities in India. 
(iv) Setting up a Pilot Demonstration Plants of e-waste recycling. 
 The M/oEFCC has also stated that a number of R&D projects have been initiated 
at national  institutions in India.  Some such projects are: 

145 
 
Pilot scale Research and Development to demonstrate E -waste Recycling Facility 
using Physical Separation Method: 
A processing technology has been developed for recycling and reuse of electronic 
waste at National Metallurgical Labor atory (NML), Jamshedpur and a pilot scale 
operation of nearly 1 Metric Tonne of printed circuit boards (35 MT of e -waste) 
had been successfully demostrated.  The processing technology for recycling of 
e-waste through physical separation and chemical leachi ng methods had been 
developed at NML, Jamshedpur.  Attempt is being made to take it to possible 
commercial application. 
Research and Development to Demonstrate E -waste Recycling Facility using 
Pyrolysis and Smelting Method . In another project, the recovery  process of 
precious metals from Printed Circuit Boards (PCBs) had been successfully 
developed jointly by Centre for Materials for Electronics Technology (C -MET), 
Hyderabad-an R&D laboratory under MeitY and E -parisaraa, Bangalore.  In this 
project, a uniqu e component depopulation followed by pyrolysis and solvent 
extraction route has been established and demonstrated. 
Establishment of Restriction of Hazardous Substances (RoHS) Testing facility in 
India 
Development of modern electronic gadgets, such as, cell  phone, iPOD, Palm 
Top/Laptop computers, etc. results in the high use of different hazardous 
substance.  These hazardous substances used in various electronic equipments 
are very harmful for environment as well as for human body.   
 In this cont ext, NITI A ayog also has stated that u sing best available technology 
will help in environmentally sound recycling and recovery of various metals thereby 
leading to low GHSs when compared to extraction of these metals from ores  
(MoEF&CC 2016).  Recently the GST council significantly reduced the rates on electronic 
waste from 28% to 5%. Producer may opt to implement EPR individually or may be 
set up his own collection centre or implement take back system or both to meet 
Extended Producer Responsibility. 
***** 
 

146 
 
Chapter-XI  
 
Bio-Medical Waste Management 
 
11.1 The Committee find that as per NITI AAYOG, India also produces 551 Metric 
Tonnes of Bio Medical Waste daily which is likely to increase to 776 Metric Tonnes per 
day by the year 2022 .  As per Ministry of Environment & Forests and Climate 
Change(HSM Div) quoting annual report of CPCB,  there are about 1.87 lakh  Health 
Care Facilities (HC) in the country having 17.01 lakh beds and generating about 519 
tonnes per day of bio -medical waste.  Besides, there are about 189 C ommon Bio -
Medical Waste Treatment Facilities (CBMWTFs) in operation and 20 new such facilities 
are under construction out of which only 11,712 HCFs are having captive bio medical 
waste treatment and disposed facilities which   Treat  483 tonnes per day of bio medical 
waste accounting for 93% of total waste generated.  As per Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare, (Hospital II Section) BMW constitutes merely 15-22% of total waste generated 
in a hospital but has the propensity to cause transmission of pathogens  namely Human 
Immunodeficiency Virus, Hepatitis B Virus and Hepatitis C Virus etc making it essential 
that due care is exercised while handling and disposing it.  
Issues and challenges 
11.2 (i) Currently, in India, there are around 200 Common Bio -Medical W aste 
 Treatment Facilities (CBWTFs) in operation which is inadequate for health 
 facilities in 750 districts of the Country.  There is a great need for rapid 
 development of more CBMWTF to fulfill the need of treatment and disposal of all 
 BMW generated in India.  
(ii) Difficulty in setting of Effluent Treatment Plant (ETP) by less than ten bedded 
facility, as required by Bio -medical Waste Management Rules (2016), in case 
terminal sewage treatment plant is not available. 
  
11.3 Medical waste was earlier con sidered a part of municipal waste.  It was only 
when the problems  with mixing the two realized that separate policies were framed for 
their treatment.  In India, first time rules were notified on July 20, 1998 and were called 
Bio-medical Waste (Management  & Handling) Rules, 1998".  Ministry of E&FCC has 

147 
 
informed that the following Bio -Medical Waste Management Rules, 2016  have been 
notified.   
11.4 The following major salient features: 
(a). These rules are applicable to all persons who generate, collect, rec eive, 
store, transport, treat, dispose or handle bio medical waste in any form 
including hospitals, nursing homes, clinics, dispensaries, veterinary institutions, 
animal houses, pathological laboratories, blood banks, ayush, hospitals, clinical 
establishments, research or education institutions, health camps, medical or 
surgical camps, vaccination camps, blood donation camps, first aid rooms of 
schools, forensic laboratories and research labs. 
(b) Phase-out the use of chlorinated plastic bags (excluding blo od bags) and 
gloves by 27 March, 2019. 
(c) Pre-treatment of the laboratory waste, microbiological waste, blood samples 
and blood bags through disinfection or sterilization on -site in the manner as 
prescribed by WHO or NACO. 
(d) Provide training to all its health care workers and immunize all health 
workers regularly. 
(e) 4 colored containers viz. Red, Blue, Yellow and White are assigned for 4 
different categories of waste as per categorization in Schedule -I, to improve the 
segregation of waste at source; 
(f) Procedure to get authorization simplified.  Automatic authorization for 
bedded hospitals.  The validity of authorization synchronized with validity with 
orders for Bedded HCFs.  One time Authorization for Non-bedded HCFs. 
(g) Operators of common bio -medical waste treatment and disposal facilities 
shall establish bar coding and global positioning system for handling of bio -
medical waste in accordance with guidelines issued by the Central Pollution 
Control Board by 27 March, 2019. 
(h) The new rules prescrib e more stringent standards for incinerator to reduce 
the emission of pollutants in environment.  
(j) State Government to provide land for setting up common bio -medical waste 
treatment and disposal facility. 
(k) No hospital or health care facility is allowe d to install on -site treatment and 
disposal facility, if a CBWTF is available within 75KM. 
(l) Operation of a CBMWTF to ensure timely collection of bio-medical waste from 
the HCFs and assist the HCFs in conducting training programs. 
 
Work done 
11.5 The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare have informed about the following work 
done on Bio-medical Wastes: 
(i)  An Expert Group in Dte. GHS reviewed Biomedical Waste Management 
Rules 2016 and prepared a review report which was submitted to Ministry 
of Environment Forest and Climate Change. 

148 
 
 
(ii) Dte. GHS, MoHFW and CPCB have jointly prepared Guidelines on 
Management of Health Care Waste as per Bio -medical Waste 
Management Rules, 2016. 
(iii) To build capacity of health care staff in public health facilities MoU 
has been signed with IGNOU for training of state level master trainers. 
(iv) With respect to Central Hospitals namely AIIMS, Lady Hardinge 
Medical College, Safdarjung Hospital, Dr. RML Hospital which are directly 
under control of MoHFW, based upon information available with Dte . 
GHS, it is stated that a Common Biomedical Waste Treatment & Disposal 
Facility is engaged of all biomedical waste in each institution / hospital.  
PGI Chandigarh has on onsite incinerator. 
11.6 The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare have further stated that on direction of 
Hon'ble NGT to MoEF&CC vide its order dated 10.01.2017 and 11.01.2017 in the 
original Application No. 199 of 2014 in the matter Almitra H. Patel vs Union of India and 
Application No. 281 of 2016 in the matter of Kudrat Sandhu vs Govt. of NCT of Delhi, 
the Government of India, Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change 
(MoEF&CC) constituted a C ommittee (including Dte. GHS) and 4 Sub -committee 
(including Dte. GHS) on 23.01.2017 to visit four municipalities in NCT of Delhi where 
the mass generators of wastes (including central government hospitals) are located and 
submit report.  Accordingly MoEF&CC constituted four sub -committee to visit four 
municipalities of Delhi with following terms of reference: 
(I). To visit various Institutions in various locations in Delhi where mass 
generators of waste are located. 
(II). Sub-committee may seek the assistance or participants public authorities 
etc. to provide due assistance.  
(III). Sub committees shall inspect; 
(a) Hospitals which are more than 200 beds  
(b) Co-operating group housing societies having>300 flats. 
(c) Shopping malls having built up areas>50000 Sq. Mtrs. 
(d) Colleges hostels having accommodations>500 students. 
(e) Other places in NCT Delhi in the first places. 
 
(IV). Committee shall submit report  to state quantum of different kinds of 
generated  

149 
 
 
(V).  Inspection report to state process, treatment, transportation and 
destination of the waste generated 
(VI). Also report on the status of STP/sewerage network owned by above 
mentioned institutions. 
(VII). In relation to hospitals, the committee shall inspect/examine the manner 
in which bio-medical waste is being handled Committee shall submit reports in 
respect of hospitals for the following 
(a) Generation of bio-medical waste  
(b) Generation of municipal solid waste 
(c) Generation of hospital hazardous waste 
(d) Waste generated from pathological laboratories and sewage 
system 
(e) Causes for hospitals infection and remedies for prevention. 
(VIII). Committee shall submit the report i.r.o institution afore indicated for the  
following: 
(a) Generation of municipal solid waste  
(b) Sewerage system 
(c) Other kind of waste 
(IX). Committee shall inspect record for strict compliance to the law in  force 
(X). If found lacking or non-compliant the committee shall issue  show cause 
to defaulting institutions. 
(XI). The Committee shall submit report to tribunal within six weeks from 
10.01.2017. 
 
11.7 The Ministry of Health Family Welfare giving details about salient finding of the 
NGT Committee Report of NDMC gave the following details: 
(a) RML Hospital 
(i) RML has not been accorded Consent to Operate and as such they are 
violating the provisions of the Water Act, 1974. 
(ii) The hospital is discharging effluent in sewerage system of NDMC without 
proper treatment except giving hypochlorite treatment which is not adequate. 
However, RML hospital has awarded the contract to CPWD for installation of 
STP/ETP which should be completed on time. 
(iii) Even though RML has proposed to setup STP but it is felt that the hospital 
which is connected to city sewerage system for di scharge of its sewage should 
not have individual STP within the hospital complex as it would be a source of 
infection to the patients. Rather than STP, ETP should be provided for treatment 
of effluent emanating from path labs and other liquid waste dischar ged from 
various wings of the hospital. 
(iv) Procurement of red bins and additional autoclaves must be expedited. 

150 
 
(b)  Lady Harding Medical College and Hospitals 
(i) Lady Harding Medical College and Hospitals (Sucheta Kriplani & Kalawati 
Saran Hospital) have not b een provided with consent to operate by 
DPCC. LHMC and associated hospitals are required to upgrade their 
existing ETP Plant or setup a new one so as to treat the effluent 
emanating from its hospitals and medical college to the desired standards 
before discharging. 
(ii) LHMC is also discharging untreated effluent in sewers and is required to 
seek consent to operate from DPCC. However, it is felt that Sewage 
Treatment Plant is not required to be set up by LHMC and its associated 
hospitals as it may lead to infection to the patients. 
(iii) Sewage generated (not mixed with any other effluent generated from the 
hospitals) may be connected to NDMC sewerage system after seeking 
consent from DPCC. 
(iv)Common storage facility in LHMC was found in dilapidated condition and 
needs im provement. The height of chimney provided in the kitchen is 
inadequate and as such should be increased in consultation with DPCC. 
(v) Also, Oil and Grease Trap (OGT) is required to be provided for the 
effluent emanating from the kitchen. 
(c)  Palika Maternity Hospital 
(i) Even though ETP Plant was installed in Palika Maternity Hospital (PMH) of 
NDMC, it was found non-operational during the visit. BOD and Bio -assay test are 
not meeting the prescribed standards. More so, it was informed that this treated 
water is use d for flushing of Toilets and for Horticulture purposes which is not 
desirable as it is not meeting the required norms. As such ETP should be made 
functional urgently but not later than 3 months so as to meet the prescribed 
standards. 
(ii) All the three chambers made for storing bio-medical wastes in the storage 
area are required to be well ventilated as per the requirement of Bio -Medical 
Waste Management Rules, 2016. 
(iii) Use of sludge from STP/ETP for horticultural proposes must be stopped as 
it is hazardous. 
(iv) Also use of treated effluent for flushing of toilets should be stopped as it 
may cause infection to the patients. 
(d)  Charak Palika Hospital 
(i) ETP of NDMC’s another Hospital namely Charak Palika Hospital (CPH) was 
also not found operational and the untreated eff luent was being discharged 
directly into the sewerage system. This ETP must also be made functional 
urgently within 3 months. 
(ii) There is no committee yet formed for checking and controlling of HAI. The 
same should be formed urgently and periodic meeting be h eld. Safai-karmcharis 
(including contractual staff) should also be vaccinated. 

151 
 
(iii) BMW should not be stored in common passage used by patients and 
should be transferred to common storage area as required by Bio -Medical Waste 
Management Rules, 2016. 
 
(e)  Primus Hospital 
In Primus Hospital, the storage rooms provided for storing of red, yellow, blue 
and black bags are not properly ventilated and as such require improvement as 
per Bio-Medical Waste Management Rules, 2016. 
 
(f)  Northern Railway Central Hospital 
NRCH must expedite installation of ETP. Also, Hepatitis B vaccination should be  
given to the concerned staff.  
 
(g)  Lab Path Labs 
(i) Lab Path Labs should either provide individual ETPs or provide collection 
system for effluent generated in these labs and brin g the same to NRL, where 
excess capacity of treatment exists to the extent of 30KL/Day. 
(ii) Efficiency of this STP/ETP provided in NRL must be improved to meet BOD 
and Bio-assay standards as at present it is not meeting the prescribed standards. 
(iii) Other Path Lab s generating effluent should also install ETPs before 
discharging in the sewage system. Alternatively, DPCC may initiate setting up of 
a Common Effluent Treatment Plant (CETP) for treatment of effluent generated 
by these Path Labs. 
(h)  Need for Toxic Substance Disposal Facility (TSDF) 
As there is no TSDF in Delhi for disposal of hazardous waste, it is high 
time to either facilitate construction of TSDF in Delhi itself or make immediate 
arrangements with neighboring states for transportation, treatment and disposal 
of hazardous waste being stored presently in Delhi by various industrial units and 
Bio-Medical Waste Management facilities in their premises. 
 
11.8 The MoH&UA  has also stated  that Bio-medical waste should be segregated, 
treatment and deposed in a ccordance with schedule -I and in compliance with the 
standards provided in schedule -II by the health care facilities and common bio -medical 
waste treatment facility. Prescribed authority for implementation of the provision of 
these rules is the State Pollu tion Control Boards/Pollution Control Committee in 
States/UTs.  In case of Health Care Establishment of Armed Forces, prescribed 
authority for implementation is Director General, Armed Forces Medical Services. Every 
State Government of Union Territory Admi nistration has to constitute an Advisory 
Committee for the respective State or Union Territory under the Chairmanship of 
respective e health Secretary including members from Department of Environment, 

152 
 
Urban Development, Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Scie nce to oversee the 
implementation of the rules in the respective State and to Advice for any improvement.  
The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change has constituted Central 
Monitoring Committee under the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary in cluding 
members from Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoHFW), State Health Secretariat, 
SPCBs, CPCB to review the implementation  of the Bio -medical Waste Management 
(BMWM) Rules, 2016 in the country. 
 
***** 

153 
 
Chapter-XII 
MANAGEMENT OF HAZARDOUS WASTE 
(a) Kinds of Hazardous Wastes and available mechanism for its management  
12.1 Explaining about hazardous waste Ministry of Environment  Forest and Climate 
Change (E&FCC) HSM Divison has stated that Hazardous waste means any waste 
which by reason of charact eristics such as physical, chemical, biological, reactive, toxic, 
flammable, explosive or corrosive, causes danger or is likely to cause danger to health 
or environment, whether alone or in contact with other wastes or substances. It 
basically comprises of  the waste generated during the manufacturing processes of the 
commercial products such as industries involved in petroleum refining, production of 
pharmaceuticals, petroleum,  paint, aluminum, electronic products etc. As per, the 
information furnished by C PCB in the year 2015, the total hazardous waste generation 
in the country is 7.46 million metric tons per annum from about 44,000 industries 
 Hazardous waste as L ead Acid Battery scraps, used oil, waste oil, spent catalyst 
etc.  and other waste such as was te tyres, paper waste, metal scrap etc. are used as 
raw material by the industries involved in recycling of such waste and as supplementary 
resource for material and energy recovery. 
 Accordingly, it's always preferable to utilise such waste through recycl ing or for 
resource recovery to avoid disposal through landfill or incineration.  There are about 
1080 registered recyclers;  47 cement plants permitted for co -processing; and about 
108 industries permitted for utilization if hazardous waste. 
12.2 As per Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, a few items of domestic waste such 
as paints and paint boxes, aerosol cans, spent batteries (pencil cells) etc. are hazardous 
in nature and they have to be separated and sent to the hazardous waste treatment, 

154 
 
storage and disposal facilities (TSDF). Waste such as broker thermometers, CLFs also 
need to be carefully managed with hazardous waste collection centers. 
(b) Problems of unscientific disposal of Hazardous and other waste 
12.3 Outlining the problems of unscientific  disposal of haz ardous waste, the MoEFCC 
stated that  unscientific disposal of hazardous and other waste through burning or 
incineration leads to emission of toxic fumes comprising of Dioxins & Furans, Mercury, 
heavy metals, causing air pollution and associ ated health related problems.Disposal in 
water bodies or in municipal dumps leads to toxic releases due to leaching in land and 
water entailing into degradation of soil and water quality.  The workers employed in 
such unscientific practices suffer from  neurological disorders, skin diseases, genetic 
defects, cancer etc.  Hence, there is a need for systematic management of hazardous 
and other waste in an environmentally sound manner by way of prevention, 
minimisation, re -use, recycling, recovery, utilisation in cluding co -processing and safe 
disposal of waste. 
(c) Hazardous waste management 
12.4 MoEF&CC stated has explained that Scientific Disposal of hazardous waste 
through collection, storage, packaging, transportation and treatment, in an 
environmentally sound manner minimises the adverse impact on human health and on 
the environment. The hazardous waste can be disposed at captive treatment facility 
installed by the individual waste generators or at Common Hazardous Waste Treatment, 
Storage and Disposal Facilit ies (TSDFs). There are 40 Common Hazardous Waste 
Treatment, Storage and Disposal Facilities (TS DFs) available in 17 States/UTs . 12.5
 In this connection, the Ministry of Electronics and Information T echnology has 
also informed that Development of modern ele ctronic gadgets, such as, cell phone, 
iPOD, Palm Top/LapTop computers, etc. results in the high use of different hazardous 

155 
 
substance. These hazardous substances used in various electronic equipments are very 
harmful for environment as well as for human bod y.  In order to restrict these 
materials, including, Cadmium, lead, Hexavalent Chromium, Mercury and poly 
brominated compounds, European Union (EU) had issued a "Directive for Restrictive 
use of hazardous substances (RoHS)" and had banned importing these p roducts in EU 
countries since 2006.  In India, in E-Waste (Management and Handling) Rules 2011, the 
RoHS clause has been mandated from 1st May 2014.  RoHS compliance is essential for 
selling products in India or for exporting.  In view of this , MeitY had created world 
class, first government testing laboratory for hazardous substances present in 
electronics and electrical equipments  at C -MET, Hyderabad and to issue internationally 
valid certificate, as per ISO 17025.  To restrict the use of hazardous subs tances 
properly, it is also necessary to establish more RoHS Testing facility in other part of 
country.  Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) has endorsed this lab as reference lab 
in the country, since February, 13, 2017.  
(d) Status of Hazardous Waste Management in country  
12.6 In this  context, the MoEF&CC has stated  that in order to address the issue of 
ensure environmentally sound management of hazardous waste for safety of health and 
environment during handling of such waste, Hazardous Wastes (Mana gement, Handling 
& Trans  boundary Movement) Rules, 2008 were notified under Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986. The Rules lay down procedure towards this process by providing 
provisions for authorization of hazardous waste generating and units using hazard ous 
waste. It also provides for establishment of Treatment Storage and Disposal Facility 
(TSDF) for disposal of hazardous wastes. The rules have an important provision on 
regulation of import /export of hazardous waste in pursuance to our obligation under 
the Basel convention on Control of Trans  boundary Movement of Hazardous waste and 

156 
 
it’s Disposal. India is party to the Convention.  On the basis of experience garnered 
during the course of implementation of the Rules, the need has be en felt for review of 
the Rules. 
12.7 The major salient features of Hazardous and Other Wastes (Management & 
Trans boundary Movement) Rules, 2016 include the following:- 
(i) The ambit of the Rules has been expanded by including ‘Other Waste’.  
(ii) Authorization and Registration requireme nt is replaced with one 
permission i.e. authorization under the rules for all stakeholders handling 
the hazardous and other waste.  
(iii) The basic necessity of infrastructure to safeguard the health and 
environment from waste processing industry has been prescr ibed as 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOPs) specific to waste type which has to 
be complied by the stakeholders and ensured by SPCB/PCC while granting 
such authorisation.  
(iv) Waste Management hierarchy in the sequence of priority as prevention, 
minimization, reuse, recycling, recovery, co -processing; and safe disposal 
being incorporated.  
(v) The provision on co -processing as preferential mechanism over disposal 
for use of waste as supplementary resource or for recovery of energy is 
being enumerated with simplific ation of process for approval of such 
activity  
(vi) Responsibilities of State Government for environmentally sound 
management of hazardous and other wastes has been introduced as 
follows: 
 to set up/ allot industrial space or sheds for recycling, pre -processing and 
other utilisation of hazardous or other waste  
 to register the  workers involved in recycling, pre -processing and other 
utilisation activities; 
 to form groups of workers to facilitate setting up such facilities;  
 to undertake  industrial skill develop ment activities and ensure safety and 
health of workers.  
(vii) Schedule I giving “List of processes generating hazardous wastes” has 
been reviewed taking into account technological evolution in the 
industries.  
(viii) Schedule II giving ‘List of Waste Constituents wit h Concentration 
Limits’ has been revised as per United Nation Environment Protection Act 
(USEPA), Canadian Standards and drinking water standard.  
(ix) The process of import/export of waste under the rules has been 
streamlined by simplifying the procedure and b y revising the list of waste 
regulated for import/export under Schedule III.   
(x) Separate Schedule has been introduced which comprises of waste such as 
metal scrap, Paper waste and various categories of electrical and 
electronic equipments for re -use purpose  exempted from the need of 
obtaining Ministry’s permission.  Document based approach for such 
import/export shall ensured by the Custom Authority.  

157 
 
(xi) The list of waste prohibited for import has been revised by inclusion of 
following items  
a. Waste edible fats and oil of animals or vegetable origin.  
b. Household waste  
c. Critical Care Medical equipment.  
d. Tyres for direct re-use purpose  
e. Solid Plastic wastes 
f. Waste electrical and electronic assemblies scrap.  
g. Other chemical wastes especially in solvent form  
12.8 On th e issue of storage of waste hazardous material during the course of 
evidence of the representatives of MoH&UA pointed out that whether sufficient 
secondary storage facilities with sufficient space available in different States/UTs 
particularly in major cities for sorting of recyclable materials, the MoH&UA informed that 
depending on their approach for management of Solid waste, some of the big cities 
such as Bengaluru has made available sufficient storage/ sorting facilities. 
 12.9 The Committee also wanted  to know whether Green, White and Black Bins are 
being used for keeping bio -degradable, recyclable and for other wastes in major cities 
by ULBs, the MoH&UA claimed that Municipal Authorities are increasingly promoting use 
of their municipal waste into two principal streams, i.e. Green for biodegradable and 
blue for the other streams. In addition to above, citizens are encouraged to store 
separately domestic hazardous waste, to be collected separately in compliance with 
SWM Rules 2016. 
12.10  The Committee a lso wanted to know that Whether basic things which are 
essentially required for proper Solid Waste Management, the MoH&UA informed that 
Yes, it is agreed and Ministry is encouraging States to adopt this approach to achieve 
the target in time bound manner. 
**** 
 

158 
 
Part-II 
Recommendations/Observations 
Government asked to review the issue of Solid Waste Management in the 
country in a holistic manner  
 
 Waste generation is intrinsic to human existence. In the Indian 
context, it is largely due to reasons like over  population, rapid 
industrialization, introduction of new gadgets and equipments , changing 
consumption patterns, etc. in urban areas. The Committee are perturbed to 
note that as per Ministry of Environment &  Forests and Climate Change, 
annually 65 million  tonnes of waste is generated in India out of which as 
high as 62 million tonnes is Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) that includes 
organic waste, recyclables like paper, plastic etc, 45 -50% of which is 
biodegradable, 20-25% is recyclable and 30-35% as inert/debris.   
 The Committee are also deeply concerned  to note that only 75 -80% of 
the MSW is collected and as high as 22-28% remains untreated/unprocessed  
and is deposited indiscriminately in dumping yards and landfill sites.  The 
Committee apprehend that the problem may increase many fold in years to 
come,  posing a serious health and environmental hazard apart from 
increasing demand of land for dumping untreated/unprocessed waste which 
the country can ill -afford.  The projections of solid waste generation 
submitted by the Government to the Committee viz., 165 million tonnes in 
2031 and 436 million tonnes in by 2050 bear ample testimony to the 
Committee's gravest apprehensions. 
 After carefully examining the prevailing scenario and on the basis of  

159 
 
documents and evidence placed before them , the Committee are constrained 
to conclude that in spite of its potentially devastating ramifications solid 
waste generation and its management has not received due attention from 
the Government.  Thus SWM, although it is a pa rt of the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) adopted by UN General Assembly in September, 
2015 does not appear to be an immediate priority of the Government.  It may 
be pertinent to mention here that SDGs are to be achieved by 2030 i.e. just a 
decade plus later.  The Committee are also concerned to note that due to this 
apathy at Government level,  Urban Local Bodies have not been getting 
requisite funds for SWM purposes as 60 -70% of their expenditure goes for 
street sweeping and 20 -30% goes towards for wa ste transportation 
purposes. The Committee are also perturbed to note that waste collection 
efficiency in India is also very low as it ranges between 70 -90% in Metros 
and below 50% in small cities.   It is highly disconcerting to note that Door 
to Door Col lection has reached only upto 82% and source segregation has 
not moved beyond 48% in the country. With as high as 22 -28% of waste 
remaining untreated/unprocessed in the country and hardly any funds 
available for SWM with ULBs, the Committee recommend that the entire 
issue of SWM needs to be looked into immediately in a comprehensive 
manner at the highest level by a multi -disciplinary mechanism consisting of 
all stake holders.  The Committee further recommend that once a roadmap  is 
laid out by such a multi -disciplinary mechanism, the Government should 
make provisions for necessary funds and manpower for  Solid Waste 
Management to ULBs in a time bound manner particularly on Waste disposal  

160 
 
with utmos t promptitude and keeping in mind the overall threat to  the 
human health and environmental degradation.  
[Rec Sl. No.1] 
Government asked to open up national initiative for addressing the problem 
of Solid Waste in association with different stakeholders like Central 
Ministries/State Governments  and ULBs 
 
 The Committee's examination has revealed that different kinds of Solid 
Wastes like Municipal waste, Bio -Medical Waste, e -Waste,  etc.  are major 
contributors in India.  The Committee also find that as per NITI Aayog,  solid 
waste can be categorized on the basis of o rigin, contents and hazardous 
potential, whereas Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has broadly 
categorized Solid Waste in Wet and Dry Wastes.  The Committee find that 
various constituents of solid wastes like plastic waste, C&D Waste, e -Waste, 
bio-Medical Waste etc,  are causing a big challenge as a large part of the 
same remains untreated/unprocessed.  For instance, out of the total garbage 
of 5.6 million tonnes annually in India , only 25% is recycled and 10% of 
total garbage is plastic waste alone.   In the case of major metropolitan 
cities,  the Committee find that waste generation is as high as 690 mt. in 
Delhi, 408 mt in Mumbai and 314 mt in Bengaluru on a daily basis.  Similarly, 
for C&D waste due to progressive pace of construction in cities, the  C&D 
waste could be as high as one third of urban waste that needs to be recycled.  
Likewise, for e-waste that include computers, entertainment devices, mobile 
phones,  etc. the major concern is that recycling is done by non -formal units 
by unscientific, unhealthy and non-environment friendly methods.  About Bio 
Medical Waste, the Committee are constrained to note that as per Ministry of 

161 
 
Health and Family Welfare, Bio -Medical Waste,  that constitutes 15 -25% of 
total waste generated in hospitals,  has the pr opensity to cause transmission 
of dreaded HIV, Hepatitis B, Hepatitis C viruses requiring due care while 
handling and their disposal.  As per Review Report prepared by the Expert 
Group the Directorate of Government Health Services  submitted before the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests and Climate Change (MOE&F&CC) on 
the Direction of National Green Tribunal (NGT) there is a need for more Bio -
Medical Waste Treatment Facilities (CMWTF)  in the country,  as 200 CMWTFs 
in 750 district hospitals are grossly inadequate.   
 The Committee's examination has also revealed that as per Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy,  the wet waste like kitchen waste, vegetable 
fruit market waste,  etc and dry waste like sanitary napkins and diapers, 
Material Recovery Facility (MRF) waste like plastic,  glass etc, Refused 
Derived Fuel (RDF) are also causing major problems.  
 In this context, NITI Aayog has admitted before the Committee that 
ULBs and State Governments being major stakeholders have to come 
forward for efficient co llection and segregation at source for Solid Waste 
Management including Municipal Solid Waste. It has also opined that there 
are large opportunities in the area of Solid Waste Management.  The 
Committee find that since 'Water Supply' and 'Sanitation' are ' State' subjects 
under the Constitution and role of MOH&UA is about formulation of policies 
and assisting States/UTs by providing financial assistance for creation of 
necessary infrastructure, the Committee recommend that a country-wide full  

162 
 
fledged inter-Ministerial initiative be opened with ULBs, State Governments 
etc., to address the problem of Solid Waste in the country in a wider 
perspective. 
[Rec Sl. No.2] 
Strict enforcement of available provision for Solid Waste Management 
recommended 
 The Committee while reviewing the implementation of different Waste 
Management Rules find that there are specific Rules for Solid Waste,  Plastic 
waste, e-Waste, Bio-Medical Waste, Hazardous Waste.  However, in the light 
of deposition of representatives of ASSOCHAM and prominent NGOs, the 
Committee find that their implementation is only on paper.  The Committee's 
examination has also revealed that for Solid Waste Management, Ministry of 
Environment and Forests and Climate Change   (M/o. E&F&CC) is responsible 
for overall  monitoring in the country under Central Monitoring Committee 
(CMC), headed by Secretary (MOE&F&CC),  comprising officials from various 
Ministries. Similarly, the role of different Ministries have also been defined.  
The role of Ministry of Housing and Urb an Affairs is periodic review of 
measures taken by States and ULBs, formulating policy etc. for Solid Waste 
Management; role of Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of 
Fertilizers is to provide market  development assistance for city compost; 
role of Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare is to propagate utilization 
of compost on farm land; role of Ministry of Power is to decide tariff or 
charges for power generated from Waste to Energy plants and role of 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy source is to facilitate infrastructure  

163 
 
creation for Waste to Energy Plants. Besides MOE&F&CC/Central Pollution 
Control Board issues guidelines for management of regular and other waste 
management.  In this context, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Aff airs has 
contended before the Committee that there is no lack of coordination 
between Ministries on Solid Waste Management and each Ministry has been 
 given separate mandate and jurisdiction.  The Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs candidly admitted bef ore the Committee that a lot more needs to be 
done on issues like anti-littering, segregation of waste at source, appropriate 
waste processing etc. since the task is related w ith behavior change of 
citizens.  In this connection, the Committee have been inf ormed by Ministry 
of Housing and Urban Affairs about three bin system for collection of waste 
i.e. Green Bin for Wet Waste, White for Dry Waste and Black Bin for 
Hazardous Waste.  About disposal of waste, the Committee have been 
informed that, wet waste is  preferably for compost preparation or bio -
methanization (depending upon liquid content),  dry waste for recycling and 
hazardous for depositing at designated collection centers.  On services part, 
the Committee have also been informed that collection at pr imary level i.e. 
households level to storage depot and at secondary level i.e. picking up f rom 
storage to waste processing sites.  
 About monitoring part, the Committee have perused the Solid Waste 
Management Rules, 2016 and have noticed that enough provis ions are 
already available for making Solid Waste Management a success.  These,  
inter alia,  pertain to responsibility of generator of waste, payment of users  

164 
 
charges to waste collectors, 'Spot Fine' by ULBs for littering and for non -
segregation, collection and disposal of sanitary wastes like sanitary pads etc. 
door to door collection by SHGs/ragpickers, infrastructure for Solid Waste 
Management, making Bulk and Institutional Generators like households, 
Market Associations,  etc. accountable for segregat ing and sorting of wastes 
in association with ULBs, making Group Housing Societies accountable for in 
house waste handling and composting,  promoting Waste to Energy,  etc.  
Similarly, role of Central Pollution Control Board/ULBs have been sufficiently 
clear.  In this context, the Committee have also been informed by MOH&UA 
that through IEC campaigns like Swachh Office, Swachh Parks, Swachh 
RWAs, Swachh Schools and also through standard operating procedures,  
citizens are being motivated to abide by above r egulations.  The Committee 
however are constrained to note that even after everything is available in the 
'Rule Book' the progress on Solid Waste Management has not moved beyond 
82% for door to door collection and 48% in segregation at source indicating 
that the entire well laid out mechanism is only on paper. The Committee feel 
that enough time and efforts have been wasted by now and it is time for 
taking coordinated steps on a war footing to tackle the menace of Solid 
Waste in the country and for strict e nforcement of measures available in 
'Rule Book'.  
[Rec Sl. No.3] 
 
 
 

165 
 
Strict enforcement of available provision for Solid Waste Management 
recommended 
 The Committee find it deplorable  that waste source segregation and  
waste processing is far lower than Do or to Door Collection in urban areas of 
the country leading to health and environmental hazards.  For instance, as 
against the 82% 'Door to Door Collection of Waste', the 'Waste Source 
Segregation'  is as low as 48% and 'Waste Processing'  is a dismal 37.2 3%.  
As regards, 82% Door to Door Collection, the Committee are alarmed to note 
that it is still at very low levels in several States.  For instance, Andhra 
Pradesh, Goa, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Sikkim are the 
only States alongwith UTs of A&N Islands, Chandigarh, Daman and Diu with 
100% Door to Door Collection whereas States with higher level of Door to 
Door Collection are Rajasthan (99%), Tamil Nadu (90%), Arunachal Pradesh 
(96%) etc.  The Committee are concerned  to note that NCT of De lhi is still 
far behind at 86%.  The Committee are also concerned to note that large 
States viz. Assam, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal  are slow moving with 
43%, 62% and 65% Door to Door Collection respectively.  In this 
connection, the Committee recall tha t in January, 2018, the overall Door to 
Door Collection was 68.4% which has gone upto 82%.  However, looking at 
prevailing scenario, the Committee feel that a lot more needs to be done in 
this area especially in big States like Assam, Uttar Pradesh and Wes t Bengal 
and in other States too by accelerating the coverage with available 
mechanism like Star Rating protocol for Garbage Free Cities, IEC activities 
etc.  
[Rec Sl. No.4] 

166 
 
Drawing up a phase -wise time table for achieving of source segregation by 
October, 2019 recommended 
 
The Committee  are dismayed to note that scenario of source 
segregation  is also dismal and whatever progress has been done is limited to 
few States/UTs only. For instance, 48% workdone on source segregation is 
mainly in three States of Chhattisgarh, Karnataka and UT of Puducherry with 
100% source segregation, followed by Andhra Pradesh with 88%,  J&K with 
83%, UT of Chandigarh with 81%  and Tamil Nadu with 80%.  Other States 
are experiencing still lower level of source segregation.  The Committee are 
also constrained to note that in most of the States, it is very low.  For 
instance, in large States of Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh, it is as low as 65% 
and 41% respectively and similar is the position of other large States.  The 
Committee are  also constrained to learn that in States of Assam, Bihar and 
many other States/UTs it is in single digit.  The Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs have also expressed their helplessness before the Committee 
that in spite of robust monitoring by Ministry  and hand holding of 
States/UTs/ULBs, the matter is taking time due to reasons like existing 
behavioral patterns and failure of the authorities in imposing existing rules 
and so on.  The Committee apprehend that with this pace of work, the 
Ministry of Hous ing and Urban Affairs may not be able to achieve the 
mandate of scientific waste management by 2nd October, 2019.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that a time table in a phased 
manner be drawn up for achieving the aforesaid goal by making concerted all  

167 
 
out efforts for uniform source segregation across the States specially those 
which are lagging far behind.  
[Rec Sl. No.5] 
A wide ranging dialogue recommended with stakeholders for enhancing 
waste processing in the country 
 The Committee are dismayed to note that scenario of waste processing 
is quite dismal with overall waste processing being as low as 37.23% with 
only a few States doing well.  These include Chhattisgarh with 84%, Sikkim 
with 66%, Telangana with 65%, Madhya Pradesh and Meghalaya with 58% 
each. The remaining States are lagging behind. The Committee find that 
large States viz. Assam, Bihar and Uttar Pradesh are lagging behind at 35%, 
27% and 20% respectively  in waste processing.  The Committee feel that 
the lower rate of waste proc essing speaks volumes about working of various 
line Ministries i.e. Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, Environment and 
Forests and Climate Change, Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of 
Agriculture Cooperation and Farmers Welfare etc., for not creating  conducive 
atmosphere for waste composting.  Besides New and Renewable  Energy is 
also largely responsible for creation of Waste to Energy Plants. The 
Committee, therefore, call upon all the concerned Ministries to sit with 
various stakeholders i.e. State Governments, ULBs and representatives of 
Industry/NGOs etc.  for enhancing Waste processing at desired levels in the 
country. 
[Rec Sl. No.6] 

168 
 
Strict implementation and regular interaction with public for opening up 
Awareness campaign about garbage collecti on and source segregation at 
school level  recommended 
 
 The Committee's examination has revealed that various 
implementation constraints are coming in the way of Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs for achieving complete Door to Door Collection of Waste s, its 
source segregation and processing due to the common belief that garbage 
clearing is largely the responsibility of ULBs.  Additionally, the general public 
is not habitual of source segregation of waste and as such usefulness of 
waste as source is los t.  Besides problem of availability of land for setting up 
SWM facilities, need for waste management in land use planning and need 
for polluters  to pay,  cluster approach for Solid Waste Management have 
also been underlined before the Committee by MOH&UA.  The Committee feel 
that all these implementation constraints can be resolved with stricter 
implementation and regular interaction with public at large within the 
wherewithal available with implementing agencies by bringing about 
awareness in garbage collection and source segregation in school curriculum 
for greater impact on the public at large.  Focussed media campaigns with 
judicious use of social media platforms can also be utilised fruitfully for 
awareness generation. 
[Rec Sl. No.7] 
 
 
 
 

169 
 
Lack of critic al infrastructure for Solid Waste Management at ULB level 
criticized and need for robust infrastructure for SWM purposes recommended 
 
 The Committee's  examination  of  various  shades  of  opinion  like  
ASSOCHAM, prominent NGOs engaged in the field of So lid Waste 
Management like Swachh Pune and  Center for Science & Environment has 
revealed that there is a need for critical infrastructure for Solid Waste 
Management in the country.  For instance, it has been opined by ASSOCHAM 
before the Committee that urb an solid waste management not only posed 
great risk to environment and to society but also gave an opportunity for 
resource conservation and ULBs do not have necessary wherewithal for that 
purpose.  In this context, it has also been brought out before the Committee 
that in European and North American countries waste conversion into useful 
products is working well with proper motivation of business people with local 
and federal Governments and are encouraging investment in Solid Waste 
Management business by giving them tax incentive  free land for processing 
etc.  It has also been submitted before the Committee by ASSOCHAM to 
completely privatise the collection of Solid Waste from municipalities.  On 
the contrary, Swachh Pune has opposed the same and have come up with the 
idea of handing over the primary waste collection to informal sector and to 
cooperatives that are doing well mainly in Pune and have advocated that 
private sector,  if need be, be  given secondary level depending upon the 
model of the city.  In this connection, the Ministry of Urban Development has 
'Not  Agreed' to  the suggestion of ASSOCHAM of completely  privatizing 
collection of Solid Waste from Municipalities and have opined that all models 
of collections including SHGs, private contracto rs and collection by ULBs can 

170 
 
be followed and private partners will be selected as per tender conditions. 
The Committee also find that Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has 
'Agreed' to the ASSOCHAM suggestions of free of cost land for setting up 
processing plants and encouraging best technologies for waste processing. 
The Committee also notice that in regard to ASSOCHAM's suggestion of cost 
sharing with entrepreneurs, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has 
left the issue at the discretion of Stat e Governments.  About the  idea of tax 
holiday for waste processing business, the MOH&UA 'Partially Agreed' and 
have left it to Ministry of Finance to comment upon the same and have 
opined that GST at lower rate be applied on activities of waste management  
to enable venders to claim impact credit.    In this context, the Ministry of 
Environment & Forests and Climate Change (MOE&F&CC) quoting Rule 22 
and Rule 15 of SWM Rules, 2016 providing for timelines to be adhered to by 
local bodies and Panchayats and ot her concerned agencies for creation of 
infrastructure, identification of sites for SWM purposes,  besides Urban 
Development Department of States/UTs are mandated to design policy for 
minimizing waste going to landfills.   
The Committee have also been infor med by Swachh,  Pune about 
ameliorating the condition of Scrap Dealers who are working in very 
unhygienic conditions so that recycling of waste progresses on desired lines.  
In view of the above facts and since these issues are of far reaching 
ramifications, the Committee recommend that Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs should sit together with concerned Ministries specially MOE&F&CC, 
Health, Finance, Power etc., State Governments/ULBs, other stakeholders for 

171 
 
setting up/creation of necessary infrastruct ure and mechanism for Solid 
Waste Management in the country in shortest possible time. 
[Rec Sl. No.8] 
Government asked to concretizing integrated mechanism of industry/ 
informal sector for Solid Waste Management in the country  
 
 The Committee are glad to learn that both ASSOCHAM and prominent 
NGOs have underlined the need for joint efforts by Corporate, Recyclers,  etc. 
with Governments/ULBs for tackling the problem of Solid Waste 
Management especially recycling of waste.  In this context, the MOH&UA has 
submitted before the Committee that Solid Waste and Liquid Waste are 
handled separately and the same is planned at the Town Planning stage 
itself.   In this context, the Committee  also note submission of  the 
MOE&F&CC that under Rule 15 and Rule 22 of SWM Rules there is a well laid 
down provision for creation of infrastructure for different implementing 
agencies like Panchayats and ULBs also and for framing a policy. State UD 
Departments and implementing agencies have been given timelines for 
infrastructure creation. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
Government should work out an integrated mechanism of SWM with industry 
and informal sector expeditiously.  
[Rec Sl. No.9] 
 
 
 

172 
 
Government asked to accelerate the process of source segregation in the 
country 
  
 The Committee have been informed by NITI Aayog that estimated 
Municipal  Solid Waste generation in the country is 1.45 lakh tonnes per day,  
which may go still higher,  posing a gigantic challenge to the Government.  In 
this connection, NITI Aayog has also opined that different contributors of  
Waste pose a problem for its management also.  It came out during the 
course of examination that various suggestions from ASSOCHAM and NGOs 
like proper method of segregation/recyclable waste at  primary or secon dary 
level, scientific compositing, colour coding etc., have come up and these have 
already been 'agreed to'  by MOH&UA.  In this context, as per MOE&F&CC 
these are mandatory within the Solid Waste Management Rules.  The 
Committee also recall that prominen t NGOs have also highlighted the need 
for segregation at source on the pattern of Panjim in Goa and 
Thiruvananthpuram and Alleppe in Kerala thereby stopping desegregated 
waste collection completely.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
MOH&UA take up source segregation and its disposal also in a big way,  in a 
time bound manner,   across the States/UTs specially in those which are 
lagging behind.  
[Rec Sl. No.10] 
Compulsory registration of rag-pickers at State/UT  level recommended 
 The Committee note that both ASSOCHAM/ Swachh, Pune have 
suggested for registration of ragpickers  for twin purposes of reduction in 
municipal solid waste handling costs and diverting large quantity of wastes 

173 
 
away from landfills thereby saving the environment.  The Committee  also 
note that it has been done in Pune city and even Kerala Government already 
has a website on kabariwalas.  The Committee have also been informed that 
an alliance of ragpickers is already working in the country.  The Committee 
also find that MOH&UA has also 'agreed' for such a move and Ministry of  
Environment and Forests and Climate Change has confirmed that States/UT, 
Urban Development Department are also mandated to start a scheme for 
registration of rag -pickers and waste dealers.  In view of the for egoing, the 
Committee strongly recommend that a system of compulsory registration of 
rag-pickers be started for desired purposes at States/UTs level by 
Municipalities expeditiously.   
[Rec Sl. No.11] 
Need for tackling sanitary waste by adequate allocation of funds for its 
appropriate handling 
 
 The Committee's examination has revealed that as per Swachh,  Pune 
as high as 2000 tonnes of sanitary waste per day is  generated in India and is 
improperly segregated and disposed off by informal recycling workers,  
making them vulnerable to dreaded diseases like HIV, Hepatitis B, C and 
even Ebola virus,  requiring allocation of huge funds for their appropriate 
handling and disposal.  In this connection, the Committee find that Ministry 
of Housing and Urban Affairs have 'agreed'  before the Committee that waste 
pickers living in poor conditions by roadside near waste dumps  are poorest, 
most marginalized, neglected, vulnerable sections in society.   Further, the 
Committee have been inter alia informed by Ministry of E nvironment and 

174 
 
Forests and Climate Change that manufacturers or brand owners or 
marketing companies of sanitary napkins and diapers shall explore the 
possibility of  using all recyclable materials in their products.  The Committee 
treat the matter as grave and recommend that appropriate measures be  
taken for tackling the issue in coordination and consultation with Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare and also at the level of Hospital/Dispensaries and 
even at PHC level by allocating adequate funds for the purpose.  
[Rec Sl. No.12] 
Promoting Door to Door collection of waste by subsiding Waste Collection by 
ULBs recommended 
 
 An issue has come up before the Committee that whether Door to Door 
Collection can be done by subsidizing waste collection by ULBs.  In  this 
connection, ASSOCHAM as also prominent NGOs like Swachh Pune have been 
unanimous before the Committee that user charges be taken from 
households for waste collection.  In this context, the Committee have been 
informed by Swachh Pune that their Member s are recovering users charges 
from 3 lakh household including 28,000 slum households and have suggested 
before the Committee that waste collection in slums has to be subsidized by 
municipalities.  The Committee have also been informed by MOH&UA that it 
should be as per SWM Rules.  The Committee find that the relevant Rules 
stipulate that Generator would have to pay user fees for waste collection, the 
Committee recommend that Door to Door Collection of Waste by charging 
users for waste collection be started  by all ULBs across the States/UTs.  As 

175 
 
regards sections like slum dwellers the local bodies may include as 
appropriate measure of subsidy to take care of the matter.  
[Rec Sl. No.13] 
Time bound scientific collection and transportation of waste recommended 
It came out during the course of evidence of the representatives of 
ASSOCHAM that there is a need for time bound scientific collection and 
transportation of waste in the country by way of use of efficient collection 
and segregation techniques for getting best out of wastes since there is a  
lack of clear guidelines for collection, storage,  etc and for stringent action 
against offenders in case of non -compliance.  In this connection, Committee 
also find that MOH&UA has also 'agreed' with ASSOCHAM about nee d for 
scientific collection and transportation in the country.  The Committee feel 
that there is a need for its implementation through out the country.  Further, 
the representatives of Swachh Pune has also underlined the need for 
promoting portable sorting sheds for waste collection as people do not want 
these in front of their houses.  In this context, the Committee have also been 
informed that many such portable sheds are already working in Pune city.  
The Committee feel that the issue be expeditiously ex amined by MOH&UA 
and action taken thereon be conveyed to the Committee for enabling them to 
arrive a logical conclusion.       [Rec Sl. No.14] 
 
Strict implementation of Extended Producers Responsibility (EPR),  
recommended 
 

176 
 
 The Committee find that some wa stes such as CFLs, batteries  etc. that 
are highly toxic and cannot be handled by municipalities are now the 
responsibility of companies manufacturing these so that the environment 
and public is safeguarded.  In this connection, various issues pertaining to  
EPR etc. have come up before the Committee from ASSOCHAM which include 
need for payment of fee for waste recycled for reducing land fills  instead of 
collection of tipping fee from waste collected, need for bringing unrecognized 
sector within the EPR fold, increasing the thickness of plastic from 50 micron 
to 100 micron for making it of recyclable value and  need for no ban on 
plastic without scientific basis,  etc.  In this context, on the collection of 
tipping fee issue, the Committee have been informe d by MOH&UA  that both 
models of tipping can be adopted. On other issue, the MOE&F&CC has inter 
alia informed that thickness of plastic from 4 0 micron to 50 micron has been 
done for making plastic of recyclable value.  Further consultations with 
stakeholders are underway on three draft models on the subject which have 
been circulated to various stakeholders during Regional Workshop conducted 
by the Ministry and CII on 12th and 13th November, 2018 for comments and 
once the consultation process is over, the f inal EPR mechanism will be 
implemented.  The Committee would await the latest position on the issue. 
[Rec Sl. No.15] 
 
Different Models of Decentralised Solid Waste Management welcomed and 
decentralized model wherever possible recommended 
 

177 
 
 The Committee ar e glad to find that models of decentralized Solid 
Waste Management are being run successfully in various part of the country 
like Ambikapur in Chhattisgarh, Pune in Maharashtra, Bengaluru in 
Karnataka and significant work on Solid Waste Management has been  done 
in Amritsar in Punjab and UT of  Chandigarh.  In respect of Ambikapur,  from  
the document submitted before the Committee,  as also oral deposition by 
witness, the Committee have been enlightened as to how with the help of 
SHGs, RWAs, commercial resi dential bulk generators and through GIS based 
Route Plan work, door to door collection, segregation and recycling has been 
made possible in as high as 3896 ULBs out of 4000 odd ULBs with population 
of less than 3 lakh  Ambikapur Model of Decentralised SWM is being 
replicated. Similarly, the Committee have come across Pune Model of 
Decentralised Solid Waste Management being run as a cooperative of 
ragpickers with support of Kagad Kach Patra Kashtakari Panchayat (KKPKP) 
and Pune Municipal Cooperation by charg ing user charges from households 
for waste collected and where  rag -pickers are running the compost pits and 
ensuring that organic waste is getting composted and in return  they get 
composting fee also.  Similarly about Bengaluru Model of Decentralised Sol id 
Waste Management, the Committee have been informed that with population 
of 1.25 crore with area of 800 sq. kms. and with the city generating  4800 
tonnes of Solid Waste collected everyday from house to house and then 
segregated and sent to plants for co mpost, with Agriculture Department of 
Karnataka and Swachh giving subsidy and under BBMP Budget also.  The 
Committee have also been informed that Bengaluru has also started 
mechanical sweeps which is cost effective and for more environment friendly 

178 
 
as against manual sweeping. As regards, Varanasi, the Committee have been 
informed that through use of IT, cleaning and collection of waste is being 
done.  
  Similarly, the Committee have also been informed that number of 
Decentralised Waste Processing Units (DPU s) are working in Tamil Nadu and 
based on their experience, MOH&UA has issued an Advisory 'Onset and 
Decentralised Composting of Municipal Organic Waste' for compliance by 
States/UTs.  About Goa, the Committee recall that they had been to Waste 
Treatment Plant at North Goa and were very impressed with the Goa model 
of waste management.  In this connection, the Committee have been 
informed that due to higher cost factor, it is not feasible for ULBs.  Similarly, 
the Committee have come across best practices o f decentralized Solid Waste 
Management in Venguala town of Sindhudurg district of Maharashtra and 
Allapuza town in Kerala also.  In this context, the Member -Secretary, Central 
Pollution Control Board while appreciating the ground work-done by informal 
sector has opined before the Committee that wherever possible 
decentralized Solid Waste Management is most welcome.  In view of the 
foregoing, the Committee recommend that decentralized Solid Waste 
Management wherever possible be resorted to in a big way acros s all States 
in a time bound manner. 
[Rec Sl. No.16] 
 Absence of accurate data of waste generation about criticized and 
Government asked to make available tentative five years data of w aste 
generation vis-à-vis compost creation in the country 
 

179 
 
 The Committee are constra ined to note that as per Member -Secretary,  
Central Pollution Control Board who appeared before the Committee, there is  
no reliable data of waste generated in the country.  As per Central Pollution 
Control Board, it is 1.20 lakh tonnes to 1. 40 lakh tonnes per day.  The 
Committee note that Central Pollution Control Board has expressed its 
helplessness before the Committee that non -availability of accurate data is 
biggest handicap.  The Committee have also been informed by CPCB  that 
over the l ast 50 years, the composition of waste had changed a lot and 
currently 9 percent of total waste is of plastic waste alone,  alongwith other 
components.  The Committee have been informed that  after understanding 
the composition of waste the technology for waste processing be accordingly 
designed.  In this context, the Committee have also been informed that with 
a view to get clear picture about waste generated vis -à-vis waste 
composition every ULB should workout for a perspective plan of 5 years 
seeking partnership with non -voluntary organizations and the same may be 
uploaded on public domain for the benefit of common man and for the use of 
policy makers.  The Committee, therefore, recommend MOH&UA to proceed 
on the above lines in consultation with and in co ordination with all State 
Governments and ULBs for getting  a clear perspective on the issue.  
[Rec Sl. No.17] 
Government asked to make use of opportunities in greater Solid Waste 
Management in the country 
 

180 
 
 The Committee's examination of waste processing reveals various 
aspects related with Waste to Compost and Waste to Energy.  As regards 
waste to compost aspects like need for tapping opportunities in this sector,  
waste to compost aspect at household level and policy issues like 
enforcement of mandatory offtake of  a city compost by fertilizer companies,  
need for early payment of compost by ULBs to WTC plants, need for PAN 
India Licence for Waste to Compost, need for ware housing facilties for 
organic manure, need for nutrient based subsidy for organic f ertilizer, 
inclusion of city compost under NIL category under GST, capacity creation 
and promotion of waste to compost etc., have come up before the 
Committee.  Similarly on waste to energy involving need for dis -incentivising 
landfills, creating scientific landfills and their conversion into Parks, capacity 
creation, augmenting capacity building, use of plastic  for road construction, 
and also issues related with C&D waste have also come up before the 
Committee.  
 On the issue of tapping opportunities in t he area of waste to compost, 
the Committee have been apprised by NITI Aayog that current valuation of 
MSW Management in the country is around US$8.5 billion which may  go 
upto US$ 20 billion by 2030 as per concept note prepared by Ministry of 
External Affairs (for Parvasi Bhartiya Diwas Conference on the Role of Indian 
Diaspora) in capacity building for Affordable Waste Management held in July, 
2018 that would open up huge opportunities for public  and private sector 
participation alongwith foreign collabor ation with new technologies etc in 
the area of waste management.  The Committee feel that both industry and 

181 
 
informal sector should work together for utilizing  the above opportunities in 
the area of waste management which will not only give employment  
opportunities but will also help in eradication of problem of solid waste in the 
country. 
 [Rec Sl. No.18] 
Comprehensive household composting recommended by utilizing 50 -60% of 
organic waste 
 
 The second issue concerning waste to composting tha t came up before 
the Committee on which both ASSOCHAM and prominent NGOs were 
unanimous was need for taking up household composting in a big way in the 
country by way of utilizing as high as 50 -60% of available organic waste in 
the country.  In this connection, the Committee have also been informed by a 
prominent NGO viz Chintan that another 20 -25% of plastic waste can be 
recycled in available huge recycling market for serving twin purposes of 
reducing huge cost of collection and segregation on the part of municipalities 
on the one hand and diverting waste from going to dump sites on the other.  
In this context, the Committee have been informed by MOE&F&CC that waste 
processing facilities are mandated to include composting as one of the 
technologies for processing of Bio -degradable waste and standards of 
composting have been prescribed under Schedule II of the SWM Rules, 2016.  
In view of the foregoing, the Committee feel that household composting be 
promoted by MOH&UA in a big way in every nook and corner of the country 
in association with all stakeholder by utilizing the prominent models of 

182 
 
Decentralised Waste disposal that have come up before the Committee and 
reflected in earlier Chapters of the Report. 
[Rec Sl. No.19] 
Enforcement of mandatory offtake of city compost by fertilizer companies 
recommended 
 
 On the aspect of waste to compost, need for enforcement of mandatory 
offtake of city compost by fertilizers companies, the Committee are 
constrained to find from the evidence of representatives of ASSOCHAM that 
over 200 t onnes of city compost is lying unsold,  spread all over India,  in 
various waste to compost plants because companies that were tagged to pick 
up the fertilizers did not honour their agreements.  The Committee have also 
been informed that nearly half of the  Waste to Compost plants are  lying 
closed because there is no offtake of city compost, even after Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers is giving subsidy of 
Rs.1500 per tonne as Market Development Assistance to fertilizers market  
companies.  In this connection, ASSOCHAM while expressing its helplessness 
before the Committee have informed that even the Department of Fertilizer s 
has not been able to enforce the direction of Hon'ble Supreme Court.  In this 
regard the Committee have been informed by ASSOCHAM that both MOH&UA 
and Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers lack both market reach and 
financial wherewithal to avail direct subsidy from Government . ASSOCHAM  
have pleaded before the Committee that route of sale through fertilizer 
companies be continued and they be permitted to continue to procure city 
compost from MSW treatment plants.  The Committee find that suggestions 

183 
 
has 'not been agreed to' by MOH&UA saying that MOH&UA should be given 
the tas k of sale of compost in bulk.  In this context, the Department of 
Fertilizers has claimed before the Committee that sale of city compost by 
marketing companies has  
risen during 2016-17 to 2017-18 from the level of Rs.6,584.00 MT to as high 
as 1.48 lakh MT.  The Committee however do not su bscribe to the views of 
Department of Fertilizers and recommend that strict monitoring of offtake of 
city compost be enforced for making waste to compost industry viable. 
[Rec Sl. No.20] 
Early payment of supply of city compost by ULB to suppliers recommend ed 
and Government asked to examine the idea of opening compost Bank in the 
country 
 
 The Committee's examination has also revealed that non -payment of 
supply of city compost for years together by ULBs have led to closure of  
various Waste to Compost Plants .  In this connection, the Committee have 
been informed by MOH&UA that all closed Plants are being monitored by the 
States and efforts are being made to resolve the disputes. In this connection, 
it also came out before the Committee that since large number  of RWAs are 
putting up decentralized composting machines , there could be a problem of 
surplus city compost production and for that purpose a compost Bank can be 
opened from where the regular bulk compost consumers like CPWD, State 
Horticulture Departments can take city compost as per their needs from time 
to time.  The Committee feel that the idea be favourably examined in the 

184 
 
interest of viability of city compost manufacturing  plants.  The Committee 
would await  as update in this regard. 
[Rec Sl. No.21] 
Need for PAN India Licence, Ware Housing fertilizers nutrient based subsidy 
for city compost and inclusion of city compost under NIL category under GST 
recommended 
 Various other aspects related with Waste to Compost that came up 
before the Committee through  ASSOCHAM include need for pan India licence 
for city compost in place of time consuming State specific licence currently 
prevailing, need for warehousing facilities  for storing city compost as 
thousands of bags of city compost is lying unsold in vario us WTC plants, 
introduction of nutrient based subsidy for city compost in the name of 
Phosphate Rich Organic Manure (PROM),  which is not available currently, 
and need for inclusion of city compost under Nil category under GST.   In this 
context, on the in clusion of city compost under NIL category under GST, the 
Committee find that the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have left the 
issue to Ministry of Finance to comment upon.  The Committee recommend 
that MOH&UA should take up the aforesaid issues with appropriate Ministries 
for making the procedure for WTC simple,  conducive and workable for WTC 
composting facilities in the country to flourish which would be in the interest 
of environment.   On the GST issue, the Committee would like the Ministry of 
Finance to take a positive view in the matter. 
 [Rec Sl. No.22] 
Project, Planning and implementation of Waste to Energy (WTC) plant 
criticized and Government asked to open WTC Plants in all States in the 
country in a big way 

185 
 
 The Committee are constrained t o note that there are only few 
functional Waste to Compost (WTC) Plants in the country and these too are 
running much below their annual installed capacity.  For instance, out of a  
total of 145 WTC Plants in the country with per annum installed capacity o f 
62.32 lakh tonnes,  the per annum  compost production is as low as 13.11 
lakh tonnes. From the State-wise details, the Committee are also constrained 
to note that WTC plants are largely concentrated in a few States viz. 
Karnataka and Maharashtra with  19  plants each, Andhra Pradesh, Uttar 
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu  with 14 plants each, besides Gujarat with 12 such 
plants. The Committee are glad to note that twin States of Karnataka and 
Kerala are moving towards cent percent decentralized composting.  The 
Committee however find that in the remaining States, the number is in single 
digits.  In this Connection, the MOH&UA have candidly admitted before the 
Committee that more number of plants are needed  to process the waste 
effectively.  As regards  projects under construction,  the Committee find that 
150 WTC Plants with capacity of 33.48 MTPA are under construction and / or 
tendering,  and majority of these WTC already have been planned in States 
where such Plants are already working namely 29 Plants in Andhra Prad esh, 
20 Plants in Gujarat, 19 Plants in Tamil Nadu, 14 Plants in Maharashtra  and 
16 Plants in Rajasthan.   
On the issue of making Waste to Compost Plants a pan India presence, 
the Committee have been informed by MOH&UA that a drive for segregation 
of wast e has already been on in all 4041 cities/towns to produce good 
quality of compost and many States like Assam, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, 

186 
 
Jharkhand, Odisha, Arunachal Pradesh, WTC Plants are already set up or in 
the process of being set up.  The Committee, howe ver, find from the State -
wise data placed before the Committee that number of WTC Plants in  
aforesaid States are quite few.  The Committee would like a n explanation 
from MOH&UA in this regard.  In this connection, the Committee have been 
informed by NITI Aayog that vast opportunities might  emerge for expansion 
of Solid Waste Management in the count ry. Member -Secretary, Central 
Pollution Control Board has also outlined the need for preparing a roadmap 
of total waste generated vis -à-vis city compost likely to be generated in 
coming five years from now in the country and the Committee feel that in all 
the States project, planning and implementation of WTC Plants be uniformly 
chalked out in the country expeditiously. 
[Rec Sl. No.23] 
Low level of infrastructure  for promotion of city compost criticized,  
Government asked to take up the promotion of city compost in a big way 
across the country  
 
 Another issue that came up during the course of discussion on the 
aspect of WTC was need for promotion of composting in  the country.  In this 
connection, the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of 
Agriculture and Cooperation and Farmers' Welfare) has laboured to convince 
the Committee by outlining various steps taken like dispensing with the 
requirement of obtaining  certificate for manufacture of city compost under 
Fertilizers (Control) Order, 1985, permitting municipalities to sell city 
compost in bulk, introducing marketeer concept for facilitating city compost 

187 
 
to identified markets in the area where th ere are no dealers' network, 
operationalising e-FMS for routing MDA, adoption of 384 villages by fertilizer  
companies for use of city compost, constitution of State level Steering 
Committee in 11 States for promoting city compost etc.  Similarly, the 
Committee have been informed by Ministry of Agriculture and Famers 
welfare  about measures taken for propagating utilization of compost on 
farm land through advertisements through Krishi Darshan and other 
promotional advertisements in Doordarshan and other TV programmes,  
setting up labs for testing quality of city compost, developing waste 
decomposer by National Center of Organised Farming Ghaziabad (a 
Subordinate Office of the Ministry)  that can be used for various purposes 
including quick composting of bio -waste with shelf life upto three months, in 
situ composting of crop residence by converting bio waste to organic manure 
etc.  The Committee are, however, constrained to find that awareness 
regarding city compost is almost nil among common public . Besides 
infrastructure for quality testing lab is quite less as only 6 labs belonging to 
the Central Organic Public Testing Lab are available for catering to the city 
compost requirement of the entire country.  The Committee, therefore, feel 
that both infrastructur e for testing of city compost and awareness for city 
compost be created in a big way in the country.  
[Rec Sl. No.24] 
Government asked to utilize available technological options for SWM with 
desired level of investment from affluent section of society in a  
comprehensive manner 

188 
 
 The Committee's examination of Waste to Energy (WTE) aspect linked 
with Solid Waste Management  has revealed various issues.  These inter alia 
include use of appropriate Waste to Energy technologies for proper waste 
processing,  need for dis-incentivising landfills, promoting  scientific landfills 
and their conversion into parks, need for capacity creation of Waste to 
Energy Plants, augmenting R&D and capacity building in Solid Waste 
Management, use of plastics for road construction a nd various 'C' and 'D' 
Waste related issues.  On the issue of appropriate technologies for WTE the 
Committee find that NITI Aayog has outlined four technologies for WTE 
processing of (i) Hydrothermal (conversion of wet to green coal), (ii) 
Catalytic  Thermo Chemical process (shell technology),  converting Bio -mass 
and Bio -degradable MSW to liquid fuel (iii) Plasma Gasification (WC 
Technology) which gasify all kinds of waste to energy at 3000 degree 
centigrade and (iv) The Thermal De -polymerisation  which ca n generate 
methane and oil from unsegregated MSW etc.  In this context, MOH&UA has 
observed before the Committee that there are no separate suitable methods 
for metropolitan cities and smaller cities and all processing methods are 
suitable for entire quali ty of waste with suitable quantity however 
segregation of waste in different streams is key  for efficient and economical 
processing.  The MOH&UA has also submitted before the Committee that 
considering typical composition of waste,  composting is highly r elevant in 
India, however, in certain categories of bulk generators like hotels and 
restaurants etc. bio -methanisation process proves to be better and an 
economic option.  Further, segregation and recycling of various streams is 

189 
 
best method for dry waste i n large cities or cluster basis involving many 
smaller cities are better suited for methods of processing dry waste like  
plastic waste.  In this context, NITI Aayog has observed that there is a 
positive co -relation of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) generatio n with 
economic development and accompanying affluence.  In this context, NITI 
Aayog has quoted that as per study by Columbia University, New York, a 
higher standard of living results in more waste and also a greater ability to 
invest in waste management s ystem.  The Committee thus finds that 
technologies options are already available and there is an apparent need for 
higher investment in such  technologies from affluent section of society.   
The Committee, therefore,  recommend the MOH&UA to go for use of 
available technologies for SWM,  with equivalent investment from affluent 
sections of society in the area of SWM,  in the country in a comprehensive 
manner. The Committee also recommended that all out efforts should be 
made to make use of bio gas from organic waste. 
[Rec Sl. No.25] 
Disincentivising landfills and their conversion into Parks recommended  
 The Committee are dismayed to note that as per NITI Aayog the 
country is going to lose as large as 1240 hectares of additional land every 
year for accommoda ting processed/unprocessed MSW seriously threatening 
the environment through ground water and air pollution.  In this connection, 
Center for Science & Environment has informed the Committee that land as a 
resource is too valuable to be wasted for landfills and have advocated for dis-
incentivising it by charging high amount of ti pping fee for bringing waste to 

190 
 
landfills as has been done globally.  In this context, the Committee have 
been informed by ASSOCHAM that the collection efficiency is as low as 50- 
60% in India, and where only 10% of plastic waste gets treated, unlike 
European and North American countries where no landfills are visible as 
whatever waste is available gets converted into products for further use.   
 In this connection, the Committee also  find that public resistance for 
allotment of landfills due to Not In My Backyard (NIMBY) syndrome has been 
the reason behind delay in identification of land in Delhi for landfills also 
Finding a way out ASSOCHAM has pleaded for scientific landfills by way  of 
converting the land fills into parks on the pattern of Mumbai.  The Committee 
also find that on ASSOCHAM's suggestion of allotment of barren land for 
dump site the MOH&UA has observed that landfills site should be selected by 
ULBs/District Administrati on keeping in view siting conditions of landfills 
specified in SWM Rules and MOE&F have also observed on similar lines.  In 
view of above, the Committee feel that landfills should be dis-incentivised  by 
very high rate of ti pping fee from waste deposition in landfills and the 
landfills be scientifically managed by way of converting these into parks on 
the lines of the one done in Mumbai,  by impressing upon ULBs/Panchayats 
etc to take necessary steps in this regard.  
[Rec Sl. No.26] 
 
Setting up WTE Plants with judicious use of WTE technologies recommended  
 The Committee are constrained to note that as per NITI Aayog against 
445 Waste to Energy (WTE) Plants in European Union (EU), 150 WTE Plants 

191 
 
in China and 86 WTE Plants in USA, India is managing with only 8 such Plants 
on solid waste.  The Committee also find that as per data made available by  
Ministry of New and Renewable Sources of Energy, 3 such Plants are in Delhi, 
and 1 each in Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra.  The Committee also find 
that Plants with Agricultural waste and other Wastes are also functioning in 
different States.  In this context, the Committee have been informed by the 
then Secretary, MOUD that object of setting up of WTE plant is nothing but to 
make the cities clean.   
 During the cours e of examination, various merits of WTE plants have 
come up before the Committee like resource recovery, power generation, etc. 
and demerits like technology being highly cost intensive, emission of toxic 
gas and ash from incinerators  in atmosphere etc.  B esides  implementation 
constraints like land availability, single window clearance etc. have also been 
outlined before the Committee by MOH&UA.  In addition to this, Ministry of 
New and Renewable Source of Energy that is responsible for creation of WTE 
plants have also outlined major constraints as inefficient collection 
segregation, transportation and storage of requisite quality and quantity of 
feedstocks. The Committee recommend that  all these pros and cons of WTE 
Plants have to be suitably and judiciou sly addressed in the light of 
composition of waste generated currently in urban areas.  On the issue of 
implementation constraints, the Committee feel that enough provisions are 
already available with SWM 'Rules' at the level of ULBs/Distt. Administration 
to deal with the situation and way out has to be found out in coordination 
and consultation with all stakeholders and public at large.       

192 
 
[Rec Sl. No.27] 
In the light of public protests against Waste to Energy (WTE) Plants in 
certain parts of the country and phasing out of such plants already underway 
across the globe, the Government asked to sparingly go for WTE Plants 
complying the available norms and using the foolproof technologies  
 The Committee are also dismayed to note that there is huge gap 
between overall potential of WTE and actual production.  For instance as 
against the estimated 511 MW of overall potential, the actual WTE 
production is as low as 88.4 MW.  In this connection, various remedial 
measures have been outlined by MOH&UA and NITI Aay og like 35% funds as 
Viability Gap Funding (VGF) by Central Government, mandatory power 
purchase by DISCOMS from WTE Plants,  etc.  The Committee are constrained 
to note that only in Andhra Pradesh and NCT of Delhi, WTE Plants are 
actually coming up where 14 Plants and 2 Plants have been planned.  The 
Committee find that in remaining State of Maharashtra, the matter is at 
initial stage and States of Punjab and Haryana are following cluster based 
projects.  Similarly Uttar Pradesh is incentivizing WTE throug h State Budget.  
In this context, the Committee have also come across Press Reports 
highlighting large amount of public protests against the WTE Plants 
especially in Okhla and surrounding areas of Delhi complaining violation of 
NGT stipulations and pointin g out that phasing out of such plants across the 
globe has already started, the Committee recommend that Government 
should sparingly go for such plants which comply with  the available norms 
and use the foolproof technologies available.  
[Rec Sl. No.28] 

193 
 
Need for capacity building of ULBs and promotion of R&D in SWM sector 
highlighted 
 The Committee are concerned to note that a lot  more is to be done in 
the area of capacity building of ULBs and for promoting R&D in Solid Waste 
Management in the country.  In  this connection, the Committee are 
constrained to find that  as low as 68 training workshops have been 
conducted by Central Pollution Control Board  that too in 8 metro  cities and 
as low as 24 exposure visits were done by National Institute of Urban Affairs.   
In this connection, the Committee have also been informed that 88 e -
learning courses on best SWM practices,  after completion,  have been 
uploaded on SWM portal and 4.12 lakh ULB personnel have been registered 
therein.   Similarly on promotion of R& D in SWM sector, the Committee find 
that Dr. R.A. Mashelkar Committee is at work for dissemination of 
information on viable SWM technologies, their replicability, scalability and 
sustainability for  their possible implementation.  In this connection, the 
Committee also find that MOH&UA has candidly 'agreed' before the 
Committee to the ASSOCHAM's suggestion of introduction of many 
innovative technologies for treatment of SWM.  The Committee feel that in 
view of the challenging scenario of SWM in the country,  the actual workdone 
shown above on the area of augmenting capacity creation of ULBs and also 
promoting R&D in SWM is thoroughly inadequate  and be scaled up in a big 
way.               [Rec Sl. No.29] 
Extensive use of plastic for road construction recommended 
 
The Committee are constrained to note that virtually no headway has 
been achieved in use of plastic for road construction between country's 

194 
 
prominent road construction agency of NHAI and South Delhi Municipal 
Corporation (SDMC) even after an MOU was signed between the two and 
even after an affidavit was filed by the then  Municipal Corporation of Delhi 
way back in 2012 before Hon'ble Supreme Court stating that Ghazipur dump 
site has reached its saturation point and no dumping can be done there.  The 
Committee are constrained to note that status quo is still prevailing  on the 
issue as a representative of MOH&UA during his deposition before the 
Committee has promised the Committee to take up the issue with the level of 
Hon'ble Minister for Housing and U rban Affairs.  The Committee feel that in 
the case of Delhi, there is a need for resolving  the deadlock on the issue 
between NHAI and SDMC so that the eye sore of Ghazipur dump site is 
cleaned and plastic dumped therein is used for road construction purpo ses.  
The Committee also strongly recommend that issue of plastic for road 
construction purposes be promoted in a big way across States/UTs. 
[Rec Sl. No.30] 
 
The Government asked to expeditiously examine and resolve various issues 
related with C&D Waste for making the Cement Plants viable 
 The Committee are constrained to note that various issues related with 
the role of Cement Plants involved in processing of C&D waste particularly 
REF,  need examination and early resolution for making the functional  
Cement Plants financially viable.  These inter alia pertain to giving Minimum 
Support Price (MSP) to RDF using Cement Plants with huge investment of 
Rs.15 to 20 crore for processing non -biodegradable Refuse Derived Fuel 
(RDF) which comprise of plastics, clothe s, textiles, wood pieces, etc. with 

195 
 
good heat value,  mandating Cement Plants to lift 5% of their fuel 
requirement from Solid Waste as is not being done currently, need for higher 
transport subsidy to Cement Plants located at a distance of 200 -400 kms for 
RDF transportation purpose which is unavailable currently, need for 
exempting import duty on equipment like turbines  for Waste To Energy 
Cement Plants for making their operations viable etc.  The Committee find 
that since all these issues are related with  various Ministries, the Committee 
recommend that all these issues be discussed with stakeholders and way out 
on each of these be found  out at the earliest.   
[Rec Sl. No.31] 
Lower utilization of funds under Solid Waste components under Swachh 
Bharat Miss ion (Urban) criticized and Government asked to impress upon 
States/UTs  for utilizing the available funds complying with different 
conditions laid down by Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
 
 The Committee are constrained to note that there have been hu ge gap 
between Mission Allocations vis -à-vis Releases and Utilization Certificates 
(UCs) due vis-à-vis UCs received as on 30.09.2018 in Solid Waste component 
under Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) period  (2014-19) so far.  For instance, 
as against the Mission  allocations of Rs.7,365.82 crore, the releases were as 
low as Rs.3,284.79 crore.  Similarly, as against Rs.1490.65 crore of UCs due,  

196 
 
the total UCs received were as low as Rs.1,116.83 crore.  The Committee's 
examination has revealed that in major benefic iary States of Solid Waste 
Management funds, the scenario of allocation vis -à-vis releases is grim. In 
Maharashtra,  out of allocations Rs.1081.84 crore, the releases were as low 
as Rs.290.34 crore.  Similar was the position in other States of Uttar Prades h 
(Rs.940 crore/Rs.427.73 crore), Tamil Nadu (Rs.690.00 crore/Rs.205 crore), 
Gujarat (Rs.536 crore/Rs.268.11 crore), Karnataka (Rs.512.52 crore/         
Rs. 99.18 crore) and West Bengal (Rs.487.79 crore/Rs.199.80 crore).  The 
Committee have also noticed th at a few States have faired well as well.  
These are Andhra Pradesh (Rs.308.54/Rs.308.54), Rajasthan (Rs.363.46 
crore/Rs.344.26 crore), Madhya Pradesh (Rs.434.01/Rs.301.75 crore), 
Chhattisgarh (Rs.131.53 crore/Rs.93.99 crore), Jharkhand (Rs.122.68 
crore/Rs.92.38 crore), Goa (Rs.9.29 crore/Rs.5.93 crore), Himachal Pradesh 
(Rs.15.22 crore/Rs.9.10 crore).  The Committee also find that majority of 
North Eastern States have also faired well.  On the issue of gap between 
Utilisation Certificates (UCs) vis -à-vis U Cs received, the Committee are 
constrained to note the prominent States from where the due UCs have not 
been received are Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Jharkhand and Rajasthan.  
Various reasons like failure on the part of States/UTs in not furnishing tim ely 
UCs as well as not furnishing physical and financial progress of funds 
released under Ist installment have been attributed as reasons for  lower 
releases by Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs.  Besides, various 
procedural issues like compliance of c onditions like preparation of bankable 
DPRs  by  ULBs   for  SWM   in   consultation  with  State  Governments  duly  

197 
 
approved by State High Powered Committees (HPCs) within the norms of 
MOH&UA etc have also been outlined for lower release of funds by MOH &UA.  
In view of the foregoing, the Committee feel that lessons may be learnt by 
the slow moving States including Delhi from good performing States of  
Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Goa 
and Himachal Pradesh in Solid Wa ste Management so that  actual workdone 
is visible at ground level.  The Committee therefore recommend the MOH&UA 
that necessary interactive exercise be opened between good performing 
States and slow moving States expeditiously for getting the desired resu lts.  
The Committee also recommend that concerned States from whom required 
UCs are pending be asked to submit the same expeditiously.  
[Rec Sl. No.32] 
Initiating remedial steps for strengthening the finances of ULBs like 
reviewing the funding pattern, gen erating resources through interest free 
bonds by ULBs recommended 
 
 The Committee's examination has revealed that inability of ULBs to 
arrange their two third share in SWM projects with one third available from 
Centre by reason of their poor financial position has been shown prominently 
before the Committee, with barely 5% funds available with ULBs for SWM 
purposes with as high as 60 -70% funds deployed for street cleaning and 
remaining 20-30% funds deployed on transportation.  In this connection, it 
has been apprehended before the Committee by Municipal Commissioner of 
South Delhi Municipal Corporation (SDMC) that financially poor Corporations 
might  fail Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) in the country. At the same time,  

198 
 
the Committee have also been informed by the MOH&UA that SWM projects 
are either completely or partially funded by Government of India and also by 
external agencies like JICA, ADB etc., or by private participation, user 
charges, Swawchh Bharat Kosh and also through  tax free Municipal bonds 
etc.  The Ministry has also suggested that funds for SWM can also be 
generated through pooled financing. The Committee feel that although these 
avenues/options are still open and available with ULBs, yet the ULBs still lack 
requisite finances to run SWM proje cts on their own.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the issue of reviewing the funding pattern be 
examined with ULBs in the light of options/avenues available for resource 
generation  and also in the light of experience of good performing States 
enabling them to make SBM(U) a success in the country. 
[Rec Sl. No.33] 
Inadequate mechanism available for implementation of e -Waste 
(Management) Rules, 2016 criticised and Government asked to enhance the 
available mechanism and speed up implementation 
 The C ommittee are constrained to note that as per Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology, e -Waste creates global crisis due to 
environmental degradation and may affect human health, soil and even may 
contaminate ground water.   E -Waste means wastes from electrical and 
electronic equipment whole or part or rejects in the form of  Lead, Mercury, 
Cadmium, Chromium etc. from their manufacturing process that are intended 
to be discarded.  In this connection, the Committee also notice that as per 
Central P ollution Control Board (CPCB), the level of e -Waste generation of 
1.45  lakh tonnes in 2005 may go as high as 8.00 lakh tonnes by 2020,   

199 
 
whereas as per NITI Aayog, India happens to be one of the largest producer 
generating 18.5 lakh tonnes of hazardous waste and importing items yielding 
e-waste of 13.5 lakh tonnes annually which ends up in landfills/incinerators  
releasing cancer causing toxins.  The Committee are dismayed to notice the 
media report,  quoting UN Report,  that out of 44.7 million tonnes of  
electronic waste in 2016 equivalent to some 45 Eifel  Towers, India's  
contribution is as high as 2 million tonnes and despite e -waste 
(Management) Rules, 2016 as high as 80% of e-Wastes like  old lap tops, cell 
phones,  TV etc.  continue to be broken at huge health and environmental 
cost by informal sector.  The Committee note that the country is currently 
undergoing an exciting and unprecedented phase of development and 
economic transformation with heavy dependence on import of electronic 
goods to meet its domestic demand.  
 The Committee also find that since recycling of e -waste is difficult and 
complex in nature, the e -waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2011 
were notified which inter-alia provide for prohibiting  and separating e-waste 
from entering into the Municipal Solid Waste stream , depositing domestic e-
waste such as tube light, CFL lamps, computer hardware at nearest Material 
Recovery Facility (MRF), providing for  Extended Producer Responsibility 
(EPR) etc. and so on.  The Committee also find  that unsatisfied with 
implementation of 2011 Rules the e -waste (Management) Rules, 2016 were 
notified which inter -alia included elaborate EPR, setting up of Producers 
Responsibility Organisations and e -waste exchange assigning specific 
responsibility  to  bulk  consumers  of  electronic  products  for safe disposal,  

200 
 
making mandatory for  every producer to apply before CPCB for EPR 
authorization, making the  producers responsible for providing contact 
details to consumers and  bulk consumers  through their websites, spreading 
of awareness etc.  The Committee also find that Ministry of  Housing and 
Urban Affairs while outlining Physical and Chemical process of recycling of e -
waste in details has also outlined that 178 authorised recyclers and 
dismantlers are currently working in India.  In view of the above, the 
Committee feel that like Solid Waste Management, implementation of e -
waste (Management) Rules, 2016 is far from satisfactory and whatever good 
intentions that are behind these rules, all these are only  on paper, as 
common man as well as, the producer of e -waste and even the CPCB are not 
honest in implementation of these Rules.  The Committee also feel that 178 
authorised recyclers and dismantlers for the vast country like India are too 
less and need to be suitably enhanced to broaden the scope of recycling and 
dismantling of e-waste properly in the country. 
[Rec Sl. No.34] 
In the light of good workdone in developed and developing countries 
especially of Europe, very less  workdone on e -waste management an d 
disposal in the country criticized and Government asked to make use of 
available provisions in e-waste (Management) Rules for desired level of work 
at ground level. 
 The Committee are constrained to note that many developed countries 
like Japan, Netherland, some other countries of Europe and some developing 
countries also  are far ahead in the area of e -waste management in the 
spheres of Extended Producers Responsibility (EPR) through Producers 
Responsibility   Organisation  (PROs),   setting  up   mechanism  for  public  

201 
 
awareness etc., whereas the workdone in India is almost nil and whatever 
works on R&D for e -waste recycling that has been taken up by Ministry of 
Electronics and IT and Ministry of Environment and Forests and Climate 
Change is at Pilot s tage only besides mechanism for public awareness is 
almost nil.  The Committee are also constrained to note  that in the name of 
providing necessary training on e -waste management, the Committee have 
been informed by the MOE&F&CC that a programme is design ed to be 
implemented in 68 cities of the country in first phase in association with 
CPCB within the umbrella framework of Swachh Bharat Mission.  The 
Committee feel that all these facts reveal that vitually no work is undertaken 
by different Ministries in the field of e -waste management which may cause 
havoc to environment,  degrade soil and contaminate ground water also.  
 The Committee also note that e -waste (Management) Rules contains 
many good things like convergence of stakeholders including manufactur ers, 
dealers, e -retailers etc. simplification in registration/authorization for 
dismantling under one system, withdrawing or recall of product from market 
in case of non -compliance,  making State Governments responsible for 
ensuring safety, health and skil l development of workers involved in 
dismantling and recycling operations, assigning the ULBs the duty to collect 
and channelize the orphan products to authorized dismantlers or receivers 
etc.  The Committee however feel that their implementation is not vi sible at 
ground level and is only on paper.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
the MOE&F&CC and allied Ministries to pull up their socks and make use  

202 
 
available provisions under e -waste (Management) Rules, 2016 for treatment 
and disposal of e-waste in an effective and comprehensive manner.                                      
    [Rec Sl. No.35] 
 
Inadequate treatment and disposal of bio -medical waste in the country 
criticized in view of rising level of bio -medical wastes and Government asked 
to open a me ga Bio -Medical Waste treatment programme on the lines of 
Swachhta Sarvekshan, 2018 
 
 The Committee are also constrained to learn that like Solid Waste 
Management, e-Waste Management , the Management of Bio -Medical Waste 
is no better and is actually very pa thetic in the country.  In this context, the 
Committee find that as per NITI Aayog,  India produces 551 tonnes of Bio -
Medical Waste per day which may go upto 776 tonnes by 2022.  In this 
context, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has also outlined two 
challenges before the Committee, one inadequacy of Common Bio -Medical 
Waste Treatment Facilities (CBMWTFs) and second difficulty in setting up of 
Efficient Treatment Plants (ETPs) by less than ten bedded facility, as required 
by Bio-Medical Waste Manag ement Rules, 2016 in case the terminal sewage 
treatment is not available.  With regard to Management of Medical Waste, 
the Committee find that the Bio -Medical Waste Management Rules, 2016 are 
applicable to all persons who generate, collect, release, store,  transport, 
treat or dispose or handle bio -medial waste in any form including hospitals, 
nursing homes, clinics, dispensaries, path ology labs , blood Banks, ayush, 
medical camps, first aid rooms in schools, forensic  labs, research labs and so 
on. These also inter alia provide for pre-treatment  

203 
 
of lab waste, stool sample and stool bags through on site  disinfection or 
sterilization, providing training for health care works etc.  With regard to 
implementation of Bio -Medical Waste Management Rules, 2016, th e 
Committee are dismayed to note the findings of the Committee constituted 
by MOE&F&CC in January, 2017 as per direction of NGT to examine and 
inspect the Bio -Medical Waste generated and its treatment that visited 
prominent hospitals of Delhi viz., RML Hospital, Lady Harding Medical College 
and Hospitals, Palika Hospital, Charak Palika Hospital, Primus Hospital, 
Northern Railway Central Hospital and Lal Path Labs.  The Committee are 
constrained to note that as per aforesaid Committee all these prominent 
Hospitals have been violating the prevailing law of the land.  For instance, 
RML Hospital is discharging effluent in sewerage system of NDMC without 
proper treatment except giving hypochlorite treatment which is not 
adequate.  Similarly, Lady Harding Medical College has also been discharging 
contractual effluent in sewerage.  Likewise in Palika Maternity Hospital 
where Effluent Treatment Plants (ETPs) were installed but were found non -
operational and in Charak Hospital untreated effluent was being discharged 
directly to the sewerage system.  Similarly, in Primus Hospital storage rooms 
for storing red, yellow, blue and black bag were not properly ventilated as 
per Bio -Medical Waste Management Rule, 2016.  In the case of Northern 
Railway Central Hospital and  Lal  Pathology Labs, there was a need for 
installation of ETP for providing collection system for effluents generated in 
these labs.  In this connection, the need for setting up Toxic Substance 
Disposal Facility (TSDF) in Delhi was highlighted before the Committee by  

204 
 
MOE&F&CC.  In the  light of blatant violation of law of the land by prominent 
Hospitals of Delhi, the Committee feel that the over -all scenario of treatment 
and disposal of bio -medical waste may be even worst in small town clinics 
and pathology labs also with no visible sign of supervision and monitoring.  
Meanwhile the Committee have been informed by the MOH&UA that 
MOE&F&CC has constituted a Central Monitoring Committee under 
Chairmanship of Additional Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Wel fare 
including Members from Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Central/State 
Health Secretarial, State Pollution Control Board to review the 
implementation of Bio-Medical Waste Management (BMWM) Rule, 2016. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that a f ull fledged campaign on 
the lines of Swachhata Sarvekshan, 2018 be drawn up in a time bound 
manner for Door to Door Collection, segregation, treatment and disposal of 
Bio-Medical Waste in the country with complete participation of public, 
hospitals, nursing homes, clinics, dispensaries, pathology labs, blood banks, 
medical camps, first aid room in schools, forensic labs, research labs in 
States/UTs for proper implementation of existing laws. 
[Rec Sl. No.36] 
In view of challenging scenario of Hazardous Waste  in the country, 
States/UTs have been asked to frame a roadmap by 2020 for proper 
treatment and disposal of hazardous waste in consultation and coordination 
with registered recyclers, Cement Plants industries etc. 
 
 The Committee note that as per Ministry of Environment and Forest 
and Climate Change, hazardous waste means any waste which by reason of  

205 
 
characteristics such as physical, chemicals, biological, reactive toxic, 
flammable, explosive or corrosive causes danger or is likely to cause danger 
to health or environment whether alone or in contact with other wastes or 
substances. It basically comprises of waste generated during manufacturing 
process of commercial products such as industries involved in petroleum, 
refining, production of pharmaceuticals p aint, electronic products like Lead, 
Acid Batteries, Waste tyres, paper wastes, have been categorized as 
hazardous wastes by MOE&F&CC whereas Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology has informed that with development of modern 
electronic gadgets  such as Cell phone iPOD, Palm Top, Lap Top computers 
etc. also result in high use of different hazardous substances that are 
harmful for environment and human body.  In this connection, the 
Committee are constrained to note that  MOE&F&CC has also highlig hted the 
issue of unscientific disposal of hazardous waste and have underlined the 
need for systematic management of hazardous and other waste in an 
environmentally sound manner by way of prevention, minimization, re -use, 
recycling, utilisation including c o-processing and safe disposal of waste.  In 
this connection, Committee find that as per CPCB the annual hazardous 
waste generation in 2018 was 7.46 million tonnes from 44,000 industries and 
for re -cycling and reuse, there are currently 1080 registered rec yclers, 47 
Cement Plants permitted for co -processing and about 108 industries 
permitted for utilization of hazardous waste.  Besides, there are 40 Common 
Hazardous Waste Treatment, Storage and Disposal Facilities (TSDFs) 
available in 17 States/UTs.  Besides, the hazardous waste can be disposed off  

206 
 
by setting up captive treatment plants.  In this context, while perusing 
Hazardous and other Waste (Management and Transporting Movement) 
Rules, the Committee find that States/UTs have been given the responsibil ity 
for environmentally sound management of hazardous and other wastes like 
setting up of industrial space or sheds for recycling, pre -processing of 
hazardous waste, registering workers involved in recycling, pre -processing, 
undertaking skill development a ctivities etc.  In this connection, it came out 
during the course of evidence of the representatives of MOH&UA that some 
big cities such as Bengaluru has made sufficient storage/sorting facilities. 
The Committee apprehend that hazardous waste management ma y not be 
working well in different States/UTs. MOH&UA was also candid in their 
admission before the Committee that monitoring hazardous waste 
management is essential and the Ministry is encouraging  States/UTs to 
adopt this approach.  The Committee feel th at since the State 
Governments/UTs Administration have been made resp sonsible for 
environmentally sound management of hazardous waste and other wastes 
like setting up of industrial space or sheds for recycling, registering or 
workers involved in recycling for their skill development, the Committee 
recommend that State Governments/UTs Administration should sit together 
with 1080 registered recyclers, 47 Cement Plants permitted for co -
processing and 108 industries permitted for utilization of hazardous waste 
and after understanding  their views chart out a roadmap by 2020 for 
treatment and disposal of hazardous waste at States/UTs level itself by 
suitably enhancing the current level of 40 common Hazardous Waste 

207 
 
Treatment, Storage and Disposal Facilities (TSDFs ) available in 17 
States/UTs or by encouraging captive treatment plants in a big way. 
[Rec Sl. No.37] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;             PINAKI MISRA  
11th February, 2019                Chairperson,                                                                                                               
22 Magha (Saka)1940                                                    Standing Committee on  
                                           Urban 
Develoapment 
 
 
***** 

208 
 
Annexure - IV 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2018-19) 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY, 11TH 
FEBRUARY, 2019 
       
The Committee sat from 1700 hrs. to 1740 hrs. in Committee Room ‘B’, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Pinaki Misra      - Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri  Kapil M. Patil 
3. Shri Charanjeet Singh Rori 
4. Shri Anil Shirole 
5. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
6. Prof. K.V. Thomas 
 Rajya Sabha 
7. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
8. Shri Husain Dalwai 
9. Shri Ahmed Hassan 
10.  Shri K.C. Ramamurthy 
Secretariat 
1. Shri A.K. Shah      - Director 
2. Dr. Jagmohan Khatry    - Under Secretary 
  
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of draft  Report on the subject, 
'Solid Waste Management including Hazardous waste, Medical waste and E-waste'. After 
deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Report with slight modifications and  
authorized the Chairperson to finalize the report taking into consideration the 
consequential changes arising out of factual verification, if any, by the concerned 
Ministries and also to present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 2. The Committee also decided to undertake an on the spot Study to Mumbai and 
Hyderabad from 28th February to 2nd March, 2019. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
 