 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2014-2015) 
                                
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
                 MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
FUNCTIONING OF DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (DDA) PARTICULARLY WITH 
REFERENCE TO AFFORDABLE  HOUSES IN DELHI AND ITS ROLE IN REGULARIZATION OF 
UNAUTHORIZED COLONIES IN DELHI AND MATTER CONNECTED THERETO. 
 
(Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Thirty- First Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban Development on “Functioning of Delhi 
Development Authority (DDA) particularly with reference to affordable  houses in Delhi and its role in 
regularization of unauthorized colonies in Delhi and matters connected thereto.” of the Ministry of Urban 
Development) 
 
 
THIRD REPORT 
 
      
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December 2014,   Agrahayana 1936 (Saka) 
 
3 


2 
 
 
 
THIRD REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2014-2015) 
                                
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
FUNCTIONING OF DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (DDA) PARTICULARLY WITH 
REFERENCE TO AFFORDABLE  HOUSES IN DELHI AND ITS ROLE IN REGULARIZATION OF 
UNAUTHORIZED COLONIES IN DELHI AND MATTER CONNECTED THERETO. 
 
(Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Thirty- First Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban Development on “Functioning of Delhi 
Development Authority (DDA) particularly with reference to affordable  houses in Delhi and its role in 
regularization of unauthorized colonies in Delhi and matters connected thereto.” of the Ministry of Urban 
Development) 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on..  18.12.2014 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on………  18.12.2014 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December 2014,   Agrahayana 1936 (Saka) 


3 
 
 
 
   
 C.U.D No. 88 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2014 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) 
and printed by the Indian Press, Delhi-110033. 
 
 
(i) 

4 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
                                                                                                                                    PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .....................……….…………………..........................….. (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ......................................................................………………………………………. (v) 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government  
 
CHAPTER III Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
 
CHAPTER IV 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration  
 
CHAPTER V Observations /Recommendations in respect of which final  replies 
of the Government are still awaited 
 
 
Annexures 
 
i. Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Urban Development held on 
12.12.2014 ……………………… 
ii. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Govenrment on the recommendations contained in the 
31st  Report of the Committee (15th Lok Sabha)…………………………………………… 
 
 
(ii) 
 

5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2014-2015) 
Shri Pinaki Misra         -        Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Shri Ramesh Bidhuri 
4.  Shri Ram Charan Bohra 
5. Shri Dushyant Chautala 
6.  Shri Ashok Chavan 
7.  Shri Dilip  Kumar Gandhi 
8.  Shri Maheish Girri 
9. Shri R.Gopalakrishnan 
10.  Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua  
11.  Smt. Meenakashi Lekhi 
12. Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
13. Shri P.C. Mohan 
14. Shri Kesineni Nani 
15.  Shri K. Parasuraman 
16.  Shri C. R. Patil 
17.  Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil 
18.  Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
19. Prof. K. V. Thomas 
20. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
21. Dr. Dharam Vira 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Smt. Vandana Chavan 
23. Shri Husain Dalwai 
24. Shri Anil Desai 
25.  Shri Parvez Hashmi  
26. Shri Mukul Roy 
27.  Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna 
28 Shri Satish Sharma 
29. Shri C.P. Thakur 
30. Shri S.Thangavelu 
31.  Shri Khekiho Zhimomi  
* Shri Mukul Roy has been nominated  to this Committee  by Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha  
w.e.f. 9th December, 2014 in place of Md. Nadimul Haque  who has  resigned  from the 
Committee w.e.f.   4 th December, 2014. 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 

6 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain          - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha   - Director 
3. Smt. J.M.Sinha   - Additional Director 
4. Shri Sumit Kumar Grover  - Committee Assistant  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
  

7 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2014-2015) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Third Report (16 th Lok 
Sabha) on the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirty - First 
Report (15 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban Development on “ Functioning of Delhi 
Development Authority (DDA) particularly with reference to affordable  houses in Delhi and its role in 
regularization of unauthorized colonies in Delhi and matters connected theret o. " of the Ministry of 
Urban Development. 
 
2. The Thirty- First Report (15 th Lok Sabha) was presented to Hon’ble Speaker (15 th LS) on 22.04.2014 
and to both the Houses of Parliament on 10 th June, 2014.  Replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 22nd September, 2014.  
 
3. The Standing Committee on Urban Development considered and adopted this Report at their sitting 
held on 12.12.2014. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirty - 
First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
                    PINAKI MISRA 
 12th  December , 2014                                 Chairperson,       
21 Agrahayana,1936 (Saka)                      Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
 
  
    
 
(v) 
 

8 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
1.1 This Report of the Standing Comm ittee on Urban Development (2014 -2015) 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommenda tions contained in 
their Thirty-First Report (Fifteenth Lok  Sabha) on the subject  “Functioning of Delhi 
Development Authority (DDA ) particularly w ith reference t o Affordable Houses in 
Delhi and its role in r egularization o f Unauthorized Colonies i n Delhi a nd Matters 
connected thereto” related to the Ministry of Urban Development which was presented 
to Hon’ble Speaker (15 th LS) on 22.04.2014 and to  both Houses of Parliament on 
10.06.2014. 
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all 26 
recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been categorized as follows: 
(i) Recommendations /Observations, which have been accepted by the Government. 
 (Chapter-II): 
 
Recommendation Nos.  5, 6, 8, 11, 12, 16, 17, 23 and 26    
                                                                                         
          (Total -09) 
(Chapter-II) 
(ii) Recommendations /Observations, which the Committee do  not desire to pursue 
 in view of Government's   replies. (Chapter-III): 
Recommendation No.1 and 9      (Total -02) 
(Chapter-III) 
(iii) Recommendations /Observations, in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter-IV): 
Recommendation Nos. 2, 3, 4,7, 10,13, 14,15,18,19,20,21,22,24 and 25   (Total -15) 
(Chapter-IV) 
(iv) Recommendations /Observations, in respect of which final replies of the 
Government  are, still awaited (Chapter-v): 
     –Nil-                                                         (Total -01) 
(Chapter-V) 

9 
 
1.3 The Committee  desire that specific replies to the comments  contained in 
Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case, not 
later than three months of the presentation of this Report. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of  
their recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.    
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
 
Population Growth, Housing Requirements, Targets and Achievements 
 
1.5 The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
"The Committee observed that Delhi has been witnessing migration of population 
gradually since 1947 till date leading to a critical shortage of urban infrastructure. 
Although there has been a decline in the percentage share of net migrants in the 
decadal growth of population in NCR Delhi from 45 per cent in 1961-1971 to 39.8 per 
cent in 1991 -2001, in absolute terms the number of migrants has increased 
tremendously. As per census 2011, the total population of Delhi is 167.5 lakhs with a 
decadal growth of 2 per cent and density of population of 11,297 per square kilo 
meter. In absolute terms the population has increased by 29 lakh during 2001 -2011 as 
against 44.3 lakh in the previous decade. 
 
According to MPD 2021, natural growth has increased from 55.8 per cent in 1981 to 
59.2 per cent in 1991 and to 60.18 per cent in 2001. W hile there was decrease in the 
net migrants from 44.20 per cent in 1981 to 40.78 per cent in 1991 and to 39.82 per 
cent in 2001. However, a reduction in the rate of natural growth and increase in 
migration between 2001 and 2021 is envisaged in the MPD 2021 . The housing 
activity has been taken up by DDA since 1967 -68 in all the zones of Delhi and from 
time to time. Besides, DDA provides land to MCD and Slum Department of the 
Government of Delhi for construction of night shelters for homeless people. The 
MPD 2021 based on the projected population of 230 lakh by 2021 has estimated an 
additional housing stock requirement of about 24 lakh dwelling units. This includes 
an estimated housing requirements of 20 lakh dwelling units for additional population 
and backlog of about 4 lakh units net shortage and the rest by dilapidated and kuccha 
structures requiring replacement. It has been emphasized that about 40 per cent of 
housing needs can be potentially satisfied through redevelopment/up -gradation of 
existing areas o f Delhi. The remaining 60 per cent of the requirement is to be met 
through 14.4 lakh dwelling units in new areas/urban extension as per zonal 
development plan 2021. However, the Committee are distressed to note that till date 
the DDA has been able to raise only 11.69 lakh dwelling units. 
 
In addition, it is estimated that around 50 -55 per cent of the housing requirement 
would be for the urban poor and the economically weaker sections in the form of 
houses of two rooms or less keeping in view the socio -economic characteristic of the 
population. The magnitude of housing shortage was estimated by a technical group in 
the context of formulation of the 11 th Five Year Plan. This group estimated that the 
housing shortage at the end of 10th Plan to be around 24.7 million for 67.4 million 

10 
 
household. The group further estimated that 99 per cent of the shortage pertains to 
EWS and LIG sector. 
 
With regard to the t argets for construction of low cost housing and LIG housing 
during the last 20 years and the year -wise achievements made thereunder, DDA has 
submitted a half-baked reply that includes only the details of houses constructed under 
LIG, EWS/Janta category during the last 20 years. 
 
The Committee find that out of the total dwelling units constructed by the DDA since 
its inception till date i.e. 3.94 lakhs, the houses constructed for LIG, EWS/Janta 
amount to only 60,721 DUs. In percentage terms it is only 15 per  cent which is far 
away from the 99 per cent shortage in EWS and LIG sectors pointed out by the 
Technical Group during the 11th Five year Plan. So far as the gap between the 
housing requirements projected in MPD 2021 and houses constructed so far is 
concerned, the Committee were informed by DDA that the above cited housing 
demand is to be developed by the year 2021. 
 
The Committee do not understand the logic of DDA how within a span of remaining 7 
years of MPD it will achieve the target. In addition to this  DDA has further tried to 
justify its inability to construct the required dwelling units by stating that sizable 
population of Delhi is accommodated in villages, unauthorized regularized colonies, 
traditional areas and Government housing. The Committee dep lore this attitude of the 
DDA which has failed to perform its duty to construct the houses and develop the city 
as per plan. 
 
The Committee were further informed that as per the MPD 2021 housing is to be 
developed by various agencies such as public, private, Central/State Governments, 
Co-operative societies, residents and associations. As such DDA has been able to 
fulfil the role of facilitator by providing necessary permissions for the same. The 
Committee, however, do not agree with this claim of DDA. 
 
From the replies furnished to the Committee it has been observed that against the 
target of 14.4 lakhs dwelling units till date DDA has constructed only 3.94 lakhs. 
From the year 2003 onwards, DDA has not allotted any land to the Co -operative 
Group Housing Societies for which DDA and the Registrar, Co -operative Societies of 
Delhi Government are passing the buck on each other and also out of 291 JJ Clusters 
in Delhi where Jhuggies have been laid by homeless people on DDA land, action for 
rehabilitation of only 1 jhuggi colony i.e. Kathputali Colony near Shadipur Depot has 
been taken up on a pilot basis.  
 
The DDA has claimed that as per MPD 2021 for new urban extensions development 
of land measuring about 22,000-24,000 hectare will be taken up by private developers 
who are proposed to be involved in development of housing as per the Land Pooling 
Policy as notified by the Central Government on 5 September 2013. The Committee 
are perturbed to note that this land pooling policy is yet to be finalized and it wi ll take 
a pretty long period to put into action. 
 
In view of the above, the Committee are distressed to note that DDA has failed 
miserably to play the role of facilitator/provider for meeting the housing needs after 
56 years of its existence. Therefore, th e Committee strongly desire that DDA should 

11 
 
set year -wise target for construction of affordable houses and adopt multi -pronged 
strategy to achieve the same. The Committee further wish that DDA should finalize 
the Land Pooling Policy at the earliest to invo lve the private sectors and the Co -
operative Group Housing Societies to extend a helping hand to DDA. The Committee 
also recommend that both the DDA and the Registrar, Cooperative Group Housing 
Societies of Delhi Government adopt a healthy and coordinated approach to clear the 
applications for Co-operative Group Housing Societies for allotment of land in a time-
bound manner." 
 
 
1.6 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:- 
 
 
"DDA has replied that Delhi is a metropolitan city with a population of about 1.50 
crores. Every year about 5 lac people migrate to this city. DDA is the biggest 
developing Authority in India. Till date it has constructed more than 3.5 lacs flats. 
Apart fro m this it has also developed large number of residential plots. In spite of 
these efforts it has not been able to fulf ill the demands of growing population. The 
main reasons being constraint of availability of land.  
 
As regards the allotment of land to Co -operative Group Housing Societies,  Shri Raj 
Kumar, Addl. Registrar Co-operative Societies, informed that they are verifying the 
list of members already submitted by various societies and also in pursuance of the 
directions of Hon'ble High Court of Delhi a nd as and when this work is complete, 
DDA would be informed accordingly.  
 
As regards the operationalization of Land Pooling Policy notified on 5.9.13, the status 
is as under:  
 
(i) MPD 2021 Provisions: The Master Plan for Delhi 2021 notified on 
07.02.2007, envisaged planned development in Delhi through assembly of land 
through private participation.  Accordingly, a land policy based on public 
private participation in Delhi as an alternative to the large scale acquisition has 
been notified vide S.O. 2687 (E) dated 05.09.2013, after extensive discussions 
& deliberations with the stake holders, developers and concerned agencies 
responsible for taking development in Delhi along with financial evaluation by 
NCAER. A new chapter 19 has been added to MPD -2021 under the provisions 
of DD Act 1957.  
 
(ii) Status: The action programme for operationalization of the land pooling 
policy including the draft regulations for operationalization of land pooling 
policy and the bud get provisions were considered In the Authority meeting 
held on 10.01.2014 and approved by the Authority vide Item No. 07/2014. As 
a follow up, further progress in the implementation of the policy is as follows:  
 
(a) Finalization of  the regulations for operationalization of the land 
pooling policy: The draft regulations were put up on DDA website on 
29.1.14 for receiving suggestions/views from public.  In response to this, 
about 156 suggestions have been received which have been scru tinized. 
Based on the suggestions received, the regulations have been modified. 

12 
 
The modified regulations along with a number of legal issues for 
operationalization of policy are being processed for legal vetting by 
competent authority. The regulations for operationalization of land 
pooling policy are likely to be finalized and notified under Section 57 of 
DD Act 1957, after approval of Ministry of Urban Development, GOI.   
 
(b) The process of declaration of 95 villages as Development Area of DDA 
and notificatio n of 89 villages as urban villages under section 507 of 
DMC Act has already been initiated for implementing the policy.   
 
(c) Creation of Land Pooling Cell : Creation of Land Pooling Cell was 
approved by Authority in its meetings held in March -13, July-2013 and 
Dec.2013. Presently, the cell is being headed by Addl. Commissioner 
(Plg.) with skeleton supporting staff. The process of strengthening the 
cell is being proposed to speed up the operationalization of the land 
pooling policy. 
 
(iii) Operationalization of polic y requires such regulations which may be legally 
tenable. Therefore, all aspects are being considered for smooth implementation 
as this is a policy which is specific for development for Delhi. 
 
Registrar of Cooperative Societies has submitted that it is responsible for registration 
of Cooperative Societies and to further regulate the management of these Cooperative 
Societies as per the provisions of DCS Acts and rules.  A total of 1974 Group Housing 
Societies are presently registered with the office of RC S, Delhi and 934 Cooperative 
Group Housing Societies have been allotted land so far by DDA as per the 
information provided by DDA. 
  
 The proposal for allotment of land to the Cooperative Group Housing Societies in 
Delhi is considered by DDA.   As per the availability of land with them, DDA 
requests RCS to forward the name of the eligible Cooperative Group Housing 
Societies for consideration of allotment of land to these societies at their end.  DDA 
had previously made such request to RCS vide its letter da ted 04.09.2003.  No further 
requisition in this regard has been received by RCS from DDA so far.  
 
Two writ petitions i.e. WP (C) No. 7553/2012 and WP (C) No. 1283/2014 by 23 
Cooperative Group Housing Societies have been preferred before Hon‟ble High Court  
of Delhi.  The process of verification of members of these societies is being carried 
out by Court Commissioners and office of RCS respectively." 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
 
Problems in construction of Affordable Houses and need for expeditious 
implementation of Fast Track Land Pooling Policy 
 
1.7 The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee observe that the DDA is facing some problems in 
construction of affordable houses. Their problems include shortage of land in Delhi, 

13 
 
high cost of land, development charges and infrastructure cost, difficulties in 
availability of finance to the needy who does not have regular employment and fixed 
monthly income and low -density of housing as per Master Plans norms etc. To 
overcome these p roblems the Committee have  learnt that recently the Central 
Government has introduced land pooling policy besides providing land by the DDA to 
MCD and slum department of the Government of Delhi for constructing night shelters 
for homeless people. During or al evidence the Committee were further informed that 
as there is scarcity of land in Delhi, DDA is now discouraging allotment of land to 
individual applicant; it will instead allot land for construction of multi -storied 
buildings. 
 
The Committee note that the National Urban Housing and Habitat Policy 2007 
had advocated for an effective partnership between the public, private and co -
operative sector for accelerated growth in the housing sector and sustainable 
development of the habitat. It had stated that 10 -15 per cent of land in every new 
public/private housing project or 20 -25 per cent of FAR which is greater will be 
reserved for EWS/LIG housing through appropriate legal stipulations and special 
incentives. Regarding to the role of Co -operative Group Housi ng Society for 
construction of affordable housing, the Committee were informed that in Group 
Housing, the developer shall ensure that minimum 15 per cent of the proposed FAR to 
be constructed for Community Service Personnel/EWS and lower -income category. 
Such flats should have a carpet area between 25 -40 sqm. Prior to the enforcement of 
MPD 2021 it was made applicable to the Co -operative Group Housing Societies to 
contribute Rs. 25,000 per Dwelling Units (DUs), where each DU is constructed in less 
than 92.90 sqm. This was applicable under Notification dated 09.06.1999, for all Co -
operative Group Housing Societies applying for sanction of building plans to make 
contribution to housing for the economically  weaker section. The Committee are 
perturbed to note that DDA has not followed all the above provisions to bind the Co -
operative Group Housing Societies to construct houses for the lower -income group. 
This is evident from the replies furnished by DDA that it was not mandatory on the 
part of the Co -operative Group Housing Societies to construct houses for the lower -
income group because the societies generally construct dwelling units for its bonafide 
members and the Members of a CGHS are enrolled by the Society as per the 
eligibility criteria provided in the Del hi Cooperative Societies Act and rules framed 
thereunder under which the income of an individual is not linked to the eligibility 
criteria. The CGHS constructs dwelling units for its bonafide members who were 
enrolled keeping in view the eligibility criter ia provided by the statute. The 
Committee find the contradictions in the above provisions. In view of the above the 
Committee strongly recommend to bring uniformity in all the policies and rules so 
that it will be mandatory on the part of the Co -operative Group Housing Societies to 
construct houses for the economically-weaker sections. 
 
The Committee further note that in the recently announced Land Pooling 
Policy it has been envisaged that development of land measuring about 22,000-24,000 
hectare will be ta ken up by the private developers. As per the said policy, maximum 
53% of the land is for gross residential use which will provide 50,000 DUs 
approximately for economically weaker sections, for every 1000 hectare of land 
pooled. Further, FAR of 400 is allowed to meet the residential requirement and 15 per 
cent of FAR over and above of the permissible FAR is reserved for EWS housing. 
The Committee note that this policy is still undergoing the process of finalization. 

14 
 
 
Keeping in view the magnitude of shortage  of houses for EWS, mushrooming 
of encroachments of precious Government land and problems in regularization of 
unauthorized colonies in Delhi, the Committee desire that DDA should take concerted 
effort to finalize the Land Pooling Policy and take appropria te action in this regard at 
the earliest. They further desire that DDA should undertake fast track process and 
complete the construction of entire EWS houses within a stipulated timeframe.” 
 
 
 
1.8 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:- 
 
“As regards the finalization of Land P ooling Policy, as notified on 5.09.2013, 
the status given by DDA is as under:  
 
(i) MPD 2021 provisions: The Master Plan for Delhi 2021 notified on 
07.02.2007, envisaged planned development in Delhi through assembly of land 
through private participation.  Accordingly, a land pooling policy based on 
public private participation in Delhi as an alternative to th e large scale 
acquisition has been notified vide S.O. 2687 (E) dated 05.09.2013, after 
extensive discussions & deliberations with the stake holders, developers and 
concerned agencies responsible for taking development in Delhi along with 
financial evaluation by NCAER. A new chapter 19 has been added to MPD -
2021 under the provisions of DD Act 1957.  
 
(ii) Status: The action programme for operationalization of the land pooling 
policy including the draft regulations for operationalization of land pooling 
policy and  the budget provisions were considered In the Authority meeting 
held on 10.01.2014 and approved by the Authority vide Item No. 07/2014. As 
a follow up, further progress in the implementation of the policy is as follows:  
 
(a) Finalization of  the regulations fo r operationalization of the land 
pooling policy: The draft regulations were put up on DDA website on 
29.1.14 for receiving suggestions/views from public.  In response to this, 
about 156 suggestions have been received which have been scrutinized.  
Based on t he suggestions received, the regulations have been modified. 
The modified regulations along with a number of legal issues for 
operationalization of policy are being processed for legal vetting by 
competent authority. The regulations for operationalization of land 
pooling policy are likely to be finalized and notified under Section 57 of 
DD Act 1957, after approval of Ministry of Urban Development, 
Government of India.   
 
(b) The process of declaration of 95 villages as Development Area of DDA 
and notification o f 89 villages as urban villages under section 507 of 
DMC Act has already been initiated for implementing the policy.   
 
(c) Creation of Land Pooling Cell : Creation of Land Pooling Cell was 
approved by Authority in its meetings held in March -13, July-2013 and 
Dec.2013. Presently, the cell is being headed by Addl. Commissioner 

15 
 
(Planning) with skeleton supporting staff. The process of strengthening 
the cell i s being proposed to speed up the operationalization of the land 
pooling policy. 
 
(iii) Operationalization of policy requires such regulations which may be legally 
tenable. Therefore, all aspects are being considered for smooth implementation 
as this is a policy which is specific for development for Delhi. 
 
As regards the construction of entire EWS houses within a stipulated 
timeframe, the targets for construction of affordable houses have been prepared. 
As on date, 25242 houses are under construction and 37215 houses are likely to be 
taken up for construction . Besides, DDA has already taken up 3000 DUs in Kalkaji 
and 2400 DUs for Kathputli for In-situ rehabilitation.” 
  
 
1.9 In the 31st Report, the Committee had expressed their concern for huge shortage 
of h ouses in Delhi particulary for Economically Weaker Section(EWS). DDA h ad 
informed the Committee that Land Pooling P olicy notified on 5.9.2013 would address 
the magnitude  of problems of housing shortage. Therefore, they had recommended 
finalisation of the said policy at the earliest. However, from the Actin Taken Replies, the 
Committee are concerned to note that the regulations for operationalisation of Land 
Pooling Policy is yet to get the final approval of Ministry of Urban Development. The 
process of declaration of 95 villages as Development Area of DDA and notification of 89 
villages as urban villages under Section 507 of Delhi Municipal Council Act has already 
been initiated for implementing the policy. However, this can be fructified only after th e 
operationalisation of Land Pooling Policy. 
 
 Further in the reply , the Government, has informed that for the construction of 
entire EWS houses within a stipulated time -frame, the targets for construction of 
affordable houses have been prepared. As on date, 25242 houses are under construction 
and 37215 houses are likely to be taken up for construction.  Besides, DDA has already 
taken up 3000 DUs in Kalkaji and 2400 DUs in Kathputli for in -situ rehabilitation.  
However, in the reply of Government , the pr obable dates for completion of these 
projects and present status of the projects are conspicuous by their absence.  The 
Committee, therefore, while expressing the anguish would like to reiterate their 
recommendation that DDA should take concerted effort to  finalize the Land Pooling 
Policy and take appropriate action in this regard at the earliest.  They further desire 
that DDA should undertake  fast track process and complete the construction of entire 
EWS houses within a stipulated timeframe. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
 
Providing basic services to the affordable houses constructed by DDA 
 
1.10 The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that the DDA has constructed LIG and EWS houses 
since 1996-67 in all the zones of Delhi.  The basic services like potable water, well -

16 
 
laid drainage system, sewerage network, sanitation facilities, electricity, recreational 
space, etc. have also been provided for these houses. However, during the local study 
visit of the Committee to Sector 14 of Dwarka, Delhi during the month of December 
2012, the Committee observed that the DDA houses were in dilapidated condition. 
The basic services for the inhabitants were very poor.  
 
The designated areas for park were used for dumping purposes leading to 
many health hazards. When enquired about the same DDA passed the responsibility 
to MCD for poor maintenance by stating that it does not have any role to play once 
these services are transferred to the civic agencies. When the Committee felt that 
DDA should coordinate with the civic agencies for proper maintenance, DDA has 
stated that it has started interacting with the MCD and Delhi Jal Board to address the 
issues related to adequate supply of water. The Committee are distressed to note that 
the DDA initiate d action to redress the grievances of the inhabitants of sector 14, 
Dwarka, Delhi only after their interference. Therefore, the Committee strongly 
recommend that DDA should play pro -active role and send its officials for 
undertaking physical verifications in all the zones of Delhi and take up the matter with 
MCD for proper maintenance of EWS houses.” 
 
 
1.11 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as under: 
 
“DDA has replied that the services of all the colonies have been transferred to 
local B odies i.e. MCD, DJB, PWD & DISCOMS for their maintenance after 
completion of the~ services.  
 
As far as maintenance of EWS houses is concerned , DDA is working out to 
frame a policy for complete civil & electrical services maintenance for 30 years.”   
 
 
 
1.12 In the reply, the Ministry has informed that all the LIG and EWS colonies have 
been transferred to local bodies i.e. MCD, DJB, PWD and DISCOMS for their 
maintenance after completion of the services.  But the core issue of poor basic services 
in DDA flats remains unresolved.  The Committee feel that the only way to resolve this 
issue is by the way of pro-active role by DDA.  
The Committee are happy to note that DDA is working out to frame a policy for 
complete civil & electrical services maintenance for  30 years.  However, the Committee 
desire that Ministry should finalize and operationalize this policy for complete civil and 
electrical services before the next financial year. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
 
Need for integrated approach for slum development 
 
1.13 The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee observe from the replies of DDA that the main reason for 
creation of slums in Delhi is lack of housing infrastructure for low -income group 
people such as daily wagers, rag -pickers, hawkers,  etc. Another reason is non -

17 
 
utilization of land earmarked for the schools, hospitals, green areas, etc. by the 
concerned agencies. 
 
The Committee note that the Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board 
(DUSIB) had come into existence on 1st July, 2010 whose mandate are as under: 
 
"Creation of Housing stock for the poor sections of the society and for the 
implementation of provisions of Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) Act, 
1956.” 
 
Envision for improvement of the living conditions of the slum dwellers, 
including the JJ Clusters (jhuggie jhopri basties), in order to make Delhi a „Slum Free 
City". 
 
The Committee note that no such Project Team has been constituted under 
DUSIB. However, one or two pilot projects are being proposed to be taken up on PPP 
basis on Mumbai pattern for in -situ development of JJ clusters on DUSIB lands. The 
Sr. Commissioner (LM) has been designated nodal officer for monitoring of in -situ 
development schemes. A project report for in -situ development of JJ clusters is being 
prepared by Engineering Wing in consultation with the Land Management, Finance, 
Legal Departments. 
 
The Committee further observe that Delhi Government has made Delhi Urban 
Shelter Improvement Board (DUSIB) as nodal agency for Slum Free Plan of Action 
for whole of D elhi under Rajiv Awaas Yojana of Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Poverty Alleviation, Government of India. There are 685 JJ Clusters in Delhi which 
are owned by various land owning agencies. About 51% clusters are on DDA land, 
8% each on Railway and MCD, 6% each on Delhi Government and CPWD/L&DO, 
15% on DUSIB lands, 2% Delhi Cantt., 1% each on NDMC and others. 
 
On the question of the role of DDA in improvement of slums in Delhi, the 
Committee also observe that DDA provides land to MCD &  Slum Deptt. for 
constructing night shelters for homeless people. As of now there are 291 JJ clusters in 
Delhi where jhuggies are existing on DDA land. Action for rehabilitation of these 
jhuggy dwellers is being taken by DDA by way of In -situ development. The 
Committee are constrained to note that only one project for Kathputali Colony near 
Shadipur Depot was awarded to the developer and in the month of February, 2014 the 
inhabitants have been shifted to Anand Parvat, Delhi.  
 
The work for construction of 3 000 EWS houses for jhuggy dwellers at A -14 
Kalkaji Extension has been awarded. And for balance works, action is being taken on 
priority. 
 
From the above, the Committee feel that the dream to make Delhi a slum free 
State cannot be realized. Neither the Stat e Government of Delhi nor DDA has taken 
any concrete action in this regard. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that 
the DDA should in coordination with DSUIB, take positive action at the earliest. 
 
At the same time the Committee want to express th eir anguish on the fact that 
these JJ clusters have not taken shape overnight. There must be a pretty long time. 

18 
 
The Committee fail to understand as to what DDA and other agencies were doing 
when these JJ Clusters were coming up. They hold all these agenci es responsible for 
this mess that has been created in Delhi and now they are passing buck to one and 
another. This is not acceptable to the Committee. They take note of the DDA reply 
that since 2007 no JJ Clusters has come up. The Committee want that at le ast from 
now all the agencies involved should gear up themselves and check the rise of JJ 
Clusters. The Committee want that individual responsibility should be fixed for any 
lapse in this regard. They want to be apprised of the position in this regard 
periodically stating the position of JJ clusters in Delhi before and after presentation of 
this report.” 
 
 
1.14 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“DDA has replied that at present about 291 JJ Clusters are existing on 
DDA land. DDA has started action for rehabilitating the residents of these JJ 
clusters by way of In -Situ Development. As a pilot project In -Situ Development 
of JJ Cluster at Kathputly Co lony near Shadipur Depot consisting of about 2800 
jhuggies has been taken up. Transit accommodation has been provided for 
shifting these Jhuggie Dwellers.  
 
The main hurdle is the resistance of Jhuggie dwellers to shift to the transit 
Camp. DDA is following DSU IB guidelines for id entifying t he eligible Jhuggie 
Dwellers. The work of In -Situ rehabilitation at A -14, Kalkaji has already been taken 
up. The work of in-situ rehabilitation at Jailorwala Bagh is also being taken up.   
 
 
The Committee’s suggestions have been noted for compliance by DDA.  
 
Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board has replied that the policy of Slum 
Clearance under the Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) Act, 1956 has been 
abandoned by the Government of India during 1985 and no action is being taken by 
the Slum & JJ Departmen t / DUSIB since then.  No housing stock under this scheme 
is being created by the Slum & JJ Deptt / DUSIB after 1985.  
 
Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board has further replied that presently 685 
JJ Clusters have been identified for improvement of living conditions of slum 
dwellers.  DUSIB is a Nodal Agency for the purpose of relocation of prioritized JJ 
Clusters as per the rehabilitation policy of UD Department, GNCTD.  The status of 
the prioritized clusters is as under:- 
 
Total No. of prioritized jhuggi clusters   :  91 
Total No. of jhuggi clusters surveyed    :  68 
Total No. of JJ clusters where process of determination is going on: 26 
 
 
Details of 26 Clusters:- 
 
Total No. of jhuggies surveyed    :  8019 
Total No. of JJ Dwellers appeared    :  4731 

19 
 
Total No. of JJ Dwellers found eligible   :  3763 
Total No. of JJ Dwellers found ineligible   :  968 
Total No. of beneficiaries possession given to  :  266  
 
DUSIB is constructing flats under JNNURM Scheme and about 18,000 flats 
are at various stage of construction.” 
 
   
1.15 From the reply of the Government, the Committee note that  DDA has started 
action for rehabilitating residents of JJ clusters by way of in- situ Development.   
 The Committee, infer from the reply that as on date  out of 291 JJ clusters,  only 
three projects have been taken up physically.  Moreover, these projects are at their 
initial stages only.  The Committee fail to understand as to how the DDA will cater to 
the in-situ development of all the 291 clusters existing on its land at this s nail’s pace of 
progress.  
 
 Even the reply of the Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board (DUSIB) has 
brought nothing but disappointment to the Committee as out of 685 JJ Clusters that 
have been identified  for improvement of living conditions of slum dwellers, only 91  
clusters have been prioritized and out of that only 68 have been surveyed so far. 
 Further, DUSIB is constructing 18,000 flats under JNNURM Scheme which are 
at various stages of construction, while the extended period of JNNURM itself is about 
to expire. 
 The Committee , while expressing its disappointment, strongly reiterate its 
recommendation that if the dream to make Delhi a slum free State is to be realized, 
then DDA in coordination with DSU IB, has to take positive action in expeditious 
manner. Since Urban Development Ministry is the nodal ministry, the Committee feel 
that they should take a pro -active role and time -bound approach in expiditing the 
matter. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
 
Unauthorized Colonies where more than 50% of area is un-built 
 
 
1.16 The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee have been informed that the work related to 
regularization of 1,639 unauthorized colonies is being undertaken, 
coordinated, monitored and supervised by Government of National Capital 
Territory of Delhi (GNCTD), including 246 colonies falling on DDA land. 
The following criteria were to be followed: 
 
(a) The colony should have 10% built up area as per 2002 aerial photographs.  
 
(b) The colony should have more than 50% built up area as per aerial photographs 
of 2007.  
 

20 
 
(c) Boundary of such colonies were delineated by Survey of India/ GSDL and 
were finalized vide order dated 4.9.2012 issued by GNCTD. 
 
The Committee are aware that a large n umber of unauthorized colonies which 
have applied for regularization, are not covered under guidelines issued for in this 
regard. 
 
The main reason for non -inclusion in the ambit of regularization as well as 
development is that those colonies were having le ss than 50 per cent built up area as 
on 8th February 2007. 
 
The Committee are of the view that keeping the issue of regularization of all 
such colonies in abeyance will keep a good number of urban poor at bay from their 
right of leading a dignified life wi th all civic amenities. Furthermore, it will fail to 
check the alleged thefts of electricity and water, to which the residents of such 
colonies are compelled to, thus, leading to a loss of revenue to the exchequer. 
 
Therefore, the Committee recommend stron gly for relaxation in norms for 
regularization of all such colonies so that development work is carried out. In addition 
to this, the Committee fail to understand the logic behind announcing 'the 
regularization of unauthorized colonies' and without making any substantial efforts in 
making it a reality. The Committee feel that the public was cheated as the 
announcement of regularization of 1639 unauthorized colonies turned out to be a 
farce. Hence, the Committee, while deploring the dilly -dallying tactics of  parties 
involved strongly recommend that keeping in view the ground realties of the Capital 
of India the regularization as well as development in all such colonies should be 
completed within a time limit of 3 years.” 
 
1.17 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“The Government of India has already framed regulations for regularisation of 
unauthorised colonies inhabited by non -affluent sections in Delhi which have been 
notified in official gazette on 24.3.2008. Further amendments  to the regulations have 
been carried out and notified on 16.6.2008 and 6.6.2012. GNCTD is coordinating and 
supervising the entire process of regularization of unauthorized colonies in Delhi. 
1639 colonies have applied for regularisation on the basis of pu blic notice issued by 
GNCTD.  GNCTD has identified 895 colonies for regularization. The order for 
development works in 895 regularised colonies has already been issued by GNCTD 
and the basic services such as roads, drinking water and sewerage system etc. a re 
being undertaken in 895 unauthorised colonies (UCs) and other such UCs which 
fulfill the criteria laid down in the regulation dated 24.3.2008.” 
 
 
 
1.18 The Committee note  that the order for development works in identified 895 
colonies has already been i ssued by GNCTD and the basic services such as roads, 
drinking water and sewerage system etc. are being undertaken in 895 unauthorized 
colonies and other such UCs which fulfill the criteria laid down in regulation dated 
24.03.2008. 

21 
 
 From the reply of the Ministry, the Committee can easily gather the fact that the 
core of the rec ommendation of the committee have  been  only partially implemented 
and the process of regularisation of remaining 744 colonies have not been initiated at all 
by the GNCTD.  Hence, the Committee are of the view that the regularisation process 
for these 744 colonies should be done at the earliest(within six months) .The 
recommendation was aimed at providing a dignified life to the residents of those 
colonies  and the Committee further recommed that the Government should carry the 
development works for urban poor(residing in these colonies) in proper spirit alongwith 
audio visual proof. 
The Committee desire that the regularization as well as development of all 1639 
colonies should be completed within a time limit of 2 years and 6 months. 
 
Recommendation(Serial No. 12) 
 
Preparation of Layout Plans by Resident Welfare Associations (RWAs) 
 
1.19 The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
"The Committee are informed that Resident Welfare Associations (RWAs)/Resident 
Societies are required to get the layout plan revised and submit the same for approval, 
so that regularization process can be expedited. As per order of GNCTD, the layout 
plans to be submitted by RWAs/ Resident Society need to have proper planning 
inputs. Local Bodies requested there institutes viz. School of Planning and 
Architecture(SPA), I.P. University and Jamia University to take up preparation of 
layout plans for RWAs with proper town planning inputs. The payment t o these 
institutes is to be made by RWAs. The Committee note that RWAs are not coming 
forward to take initiative despite the fact that letters were sent to RWAs to get the 
layout plan within the limits set by GNCTD. 
 
The Committee have been further enlight ened about the initiative taken by South 
Delhi Municipal Corporation (SDMC) for preparation of layout plans. During this 
SDMC got four layout plans prepared through the School of Planning and 
Architecture and approved by its own Standing Committee. The pay ment for the 
preparation of these layout plans has been made by Corporation, which shall be 
recovered from the RWAs before release of layout/ regularization plan.  
 
The Committee while appreciating the efforts of SDMC, desire that all the local 
bodies across Delhi should follow their foot - steps and complete the preparation of 
layout plans for all the remaining colonies also. Furthermore, the Committee desire 
that in the preparation of these lay out plans, the RWAs of all the concerned colonies 
should also be involved. In this regard, prior notice to the RWAs should be sent for 
attending the meeting. For the recovery of payment of preparation of these layout 
plans from the RWAs, the Committee would like to recommend imposition of cess on 
water supply bills o f the residents of such colonies only. But this course should be 
taken only when the RWAs do not deposit the payment for preparation of plan. 
 
The Committee would also like to put a note of caution in this regard that the cess 
should be imposed only on the  residents of these unauthorized colonies. This should 
be done for limited time period till the recovery of payment of lay out plan." 
 

22 
 
  
1.20 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"Govt. of National Capital Territory of Delhi has stated the process of mapping of 
exact area using the modern equipment is under process of tender with the 
Government of NCT of Delhi.  The next step of preparation of layout plan would be 
taken up after.  The recommendation related to imposition of ce ss on water supply 
bills, in case the Resident Associations do not deposit the fee for preparation of plan, 
would be considered by the Govt. of NCT of Delhi at the time of preparation of layout 
plan." 
 
1.21 The Committee may be apprised of the Action Taken  in this regard within three 
months of presentation of the Report. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
 
Fate of Unauthorized Colonies posing hindrances in generating infrastructure facilities 
 
1.22 The Committee had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee have been informed that the unauthorized colonies falling 
under the jurisdiction of local bodies or DDA and posing hindrance in 
providing infrastructure facilities or fall in the area of Right of Way (RoW) of 
existing/ proposed railway lines,  master plan roads, major/ trunk water supply 
& sewerage lines, regional park, along with the area posing hindrance in the 
provisions of infrastructural facilities, are not eligible for regularization as per 
clause 3.3 9b of notification dated 24.03.2008 o f Regulations for 
Regularization of unauthorized colonies in Delhi, issued by DDA would be 
deleted from the regularization process by GNCTD.  
 
The Committee are fully in consonance with the notification issued by DDA. 
But the issue that is agitating the mind of the Committee is the unexpected and 
stoic silence of GNCTD and DDA on the fate of residents of such colonies. 
From the foregoing the Committee can infer that these colonies are on the 
verge of removal. Thus, the Committee strongly recommend that all such 
colonies should be re -located to suitable places with minimum possible 
displacement, so that the livelihood earnings of residents are not adversely 
affected. 
 
If needed, specific and requisite amendments should be made in the 
notification to address this concern of the Committee and cater to the needs of 
residents of all such colonies.” 
 
1.23 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“Government of NCT of Delhi has stated that the regulation mandates plotting 
of DDA hindrances.  MoUD is of the view that it is for GNCTD to take action 
for rehabilitation for replaced persons as per their policy.”  
 
 

23 
 
1.24 The Committee are anguished to note the reply of the Government.  No doubt , it 
is for GNCTD to take action for rehabilitation of the replaced as per their policy.  
However, the Committee are of the view that it is for the government to ensure that the 
rehabilitation of such colonies takes place to suitable places with minimum possible 
displacement, so that the livelihood earnings of  residents are not adversely affected.  
Thus, the GNCTD should take timely action for relocation of such colonies and a 
regulatory authority as the agency to provide land  and DDA should ensure for its strict 
compliance. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
 
Encroachment of DDA Lands and fixing the responsibility of officials whose negligence 
resulted in encroachment 
 
1.25 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The unauthorized colonies are a reality not only in Delhi but in all the major 
urban cities across the nation. The Committee feel one of the main reasons for 
this is that the common land in urban villages, Towns/ Cities is being usurped 
by influential people for self and illegal occupants protected by Vote Bank 
Politics. 
 
This is clearly reflected in the information provided by the Ministry and DDA 
where they have stated that reclaiming the land that has been encroached prior 
to the year 2007 is not possible due to GNCTD Special (Provision) Act, 2011 
extended up to 31.12.2014. Therefore, t he Committee would like to 
recommend that Land Records should be surveyed and mutations done as per 
Revenue records. Each Khasra Khatauni with division should be recorded. 
This should be done at par with amended Waqf Lands Acts, 2013. 
 
Moreover, as per the  Annual Report 2010 -11 the most important function of 
Land Management Department of DDA is to protect DDA land from 
encroachments. Thus, it is quite clear that the duty for checking unauthorized 
occupation of DDA land and vacating the encroached land is ca st on the 
officers concerned. The officials are supposed to detect and verify the 
encroachments and get them removed. However, the data provided by DDA 
speaks otherwise as 1402.16 acre of DDA land is under encroachment in 
various parts of Delhi, while duri ng last five years only 402.428 acre of land 
could be reclaimed by DDA. This data is contrary to the claim that as and 
when the case of any encroachment on DDA land comes to the notice of Delhi 
Development Authority (DDA), action to remove it was taken as per law. This 
is clearly indicative of inaction on the part of DDA officials. This has resulted 
in the burden on the resources of State Government as well as DDA. The 
Committee are of the view that if the concerned officials perform their duties 
honestly and diligently, then it will become impossible for the encroachers to 
lay hands on the Government land. They are of the view that the encroachment 
should be nipped in the bud. The Committee have come to know that 
Government of Delhi has created a sub -divisional level Special Task Force to 
check encroachment on the public land. Their assistance is being obtained 

24 
 
whenever any new encroachment is noticed. But Committee regret that 
measures to reclaim the encroached land have utterly failed. The Committee, 
therefore, would like to recommend that the accountability of officials be fixed 
with deterrent punishment whose negligence/ favoritism/involvements in 
corrupt practices has resulted in the encroachment. The Committee are of the 
view that concerted efforts be m ade to identify the concerned officials. The 
Committee insist that the Ministry and DDA should fix responsibility in those 
matters after digging the old cases and if the connivance of officials is proved, 
exemplary punishment should be inflicted on them. A  status report in this 
regard should be submitted to the Committee within three months of the 
presentation of the report incorporating the position before and after 
presentation of this report.” 
 
1.26 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as under:- 
 
“GNCTD has replied that the issue relates to DDA.  DDA has replied that the 
unscrupulous elements who do not have the fear of law are always ready to 
encroach the Govt. Lands. The available work force under Land Management 
Department is insuffic ient to protect the large chunks of DDA's open land 
which could not be put to use for decades, though the lands were acquired for 
Planned Development of Delhi.  
 
Encroaching a public land by un -lawful elements became a regular feature in 
Delhi in view of t he uncontrolled population living and further migrating to 
Delhi, which has insufficient planned housing. Removal and demolition of 
encroachments on DDA land is a time consuming affair, which requires 
approval of the higher authorities, checking the court cases, stay orders etc., 
sensitiveness from the law and order point of view, checking whether any 
encroachment is protected by Special (Provision) Act, 2011 extended upto 
31.12.2014 applicable in Delhi.  
 
Within the means available in the DDA the Land Mana gement Department 
conducts encroachment removal programs after due approvals. In cases where 
the involvement of official is found, disciplinary actions are taken. Matters of 
such connivance are examined by the Vigilance Department of DDA.” 
 
 
1.27       The Committee are perturbed to note that the work force under Land 
Management Department is insufficient to protect the DDA’s open land.  But this is no 
excuse to accept  the encroachment of DDA’s land by un -lawful elements.  The 
Committee strongly recommen d that the work force under Land Management  
Department should be increa sed and the encroachment of DDA land                        
should be prevented  to save scarce resources for future planned development. The 
Committee also recommend that DDA should con struct the boundary wall around all 
the open land under its purview to  prevent encorachments. 
 
 
 
 
 

25 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
 
Delay in Land Allotment by DDA and RCS to Cooperative Group Housing Societies 
waiting for years 
 
1.28 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
"The Delhi Co -operative Societies Act 1972 has helped to achieve new heights in 
establishing the culture of Co -operative Group Housing Societies (CGHS). The Act 
aimed to facilitate the voluntary formation and democratic functioning of co-operative 
societies as people‟s institutions based on self help and mutual aid to enable them to 
promote their economic and social betterment and to provide for regulation and 
management, functional autonomy of such societies. Thus, the moot question remains 
whether the Act and the concerned organizations (DDA & RCS) responsible for 
implementing the same have been able to fulfill the expectations of public or not. 
 
The Committee were informed by the public representatives through representations 
as well as during the course of oral evidence that Delhi Development Authority has 
neither offered land to the Co -operative Group Housing Societies nor sought 
recommendations from Registrar Co -operative Societies, NCT of Delhi after the stay 
Order dated 18th Jun e 2004 CWP(C) No. 10066/2004 for the operation and effect of 
communication dated 25 th March 2004 whereby additional list of 35 societies was 
sent by Registrar Co-operative Society for land allotment. And, likewise the Registrar 
Co-operative Society did not send recommendation after the above said order. 
 
Further the Committee were also mad e aware of response to Lok Sabha unstarred 
question No.4546 fixed for 20 August 2010 and as well as of the observation of the 
High Court of Delhi where it has categorically emphasized in its order dated 03rd 
October 2005 in WP (C) No. 10066/2004 and CM. 10514/2005 that we would not like 
a single genuine society or a genuine member to be either harassed or denied their 
right of allotment. 
 
On this issue, DDA put forth the reason that DDA has allotted land to all such eligible 
societies, whose names were forwarded by RCS to DDA from time to time and no 
case is pending for allotment of land in DDA. The scope of carving out further land 
for allotment to CGHS can be considered on receipt of further recommendation from 
RCS. 
 
As regards developing and further a llotting of land to Cooperative Group Housing 
Societies, DDA further informed the Committee that this requires large scale 
acquisition and the same can be taken up by DDA only on land being made available 
by the State Government. DDA is always prepared to develop and allot land to 
CGHS. 
 
From the submission of DDA, it appeared that RCS was not active in allotting land to 
CGHS. But when the Committee inquired the RCS office in this regard, their reply 
which is produced below, compelled the Committee to think  otherwise of DDA. "As 
per section 9(1) (f) of Delhi Co -operative Societies Act, 2003, the confirmation of 
availability of land to the Co -operative Group Housing Society from land allotting 

26 
 
agency is required by this office at the time of applying for regi stration. However, no 
application for registration of Co -operative Group Housing Societies alongwith the 
confirmation of availability of land from Delhi Development Authority as stated 
above has been received in last ten years" 
 
From the foregoing the Comm ittee find lack of transparency and sincerity on the part 
of both RCS as well as DDA, at least in connection with allotment of land to CGHS. 
It appears that RCS and DDA are in connivance and are responsible for delay in land 
allotment to the Cooperative Group Housing Societies. This attitude of RCS and DDA 
of passing the buck to each other leads to nothing but the harassment of members of 
such societies, who have been dreaming of a roof over their heads for decades and 
suffering financially as well as mentally. 
 
The Committee noted with pain that the citizenry are compelled to approach judiciary 
for its intervention and order to RCS Delhi for verification of documents and thus 
recommend in unequivocal terms that RCS should be totally transparent in its 
working by clearly mentioning on its official website all the documents and 
permissions required to be submitted by CGHS while applying for land allotment. 
 
At the same time, the Committee further recommend DDA to take up this issue of 
allotment of land to all remaining eligible CGHS waiting for the same on priority 
basis after completing the required exercise without any further delay, within a span 
of 3-4 months. The Committee would like to have a quarterly progress report in this 
regard." 
 
 
1.29 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as under:- 
 
 
"Registrar of Cooperative Societies has submitted that it is responsible for registration 
of Cooperative Societies and to further regulate the management of these Cooperative 
Societies as per the provisions of DCS Acts and rules.  A total of 1974 Group 
Housing Societies are presently registered with the office of RCS, Delhi and 934 
Cooperative Group Housing Societies have been allotted land so far by DDA as per 
the information provided by DDA. 
  
 The proposal for allotment of land to the Cooperative Group Housing 
Societies in Delhi is considered by DDA.   As per the availability of land with them, 
DDA requests RCS to forward the name of the eligible Cooperative Group Housing 
Societies for considerat ion of allotment of land to these societies at their end.  DDA 
had previously made such request to RCS vide its letter dated 04.09.2003.  No further 
requisition in this regard has been received by RCS from DDA so far.  
 
Two writ petitions i.e. WP (C) No. 7 553/2012 and WP (C) No. 1283/2014 by 
23 Cooperative Group Housing Societies have been preferred before Hon‟ble High 
Court of Delhi.  The process of verification of members of these societies is being 
carried out by Court Commissioners and office of RCS respectively. 
 
DDA has replied that it allots land to the CGHS on the basis of recommendations 
made by RCS. RCS is already seized of the matter and the work related to verification 
of members of societies is going on and the further course of action will be t aken on 
receipt of specific recommendations from the RCS." 

27 
 
 
1.30 The Committee note that DDA and Registrar Cooperative Societies(RCS) are the 
concerned organisations responsible for implementation of Delhi Cooperative So cieties 
Act 1972 K eeping in mind  the plight of the citizen s of Delhi in general and registered 
coopertive societies who are waiting for land allotment in particular, the Committee had 
strongly recommended to maintain transparancy in the functioning of both the 
organisations and facilatitate each other while alloting land to eligib le CGHS without 
passing the buck  on each other.  At the same time, the Committee had further 
recommended DDA to take up this issue of allotment of land to all  the remaining 
eligible CGHS waiting for the same , on p riority basis after completing the required 
exercise without any further delay. 
  But the Committee are constrained to note that instead of furnishing a proactive 
and responsive action , both RCS and DDA  are still passing the blame on each other 
despite Committee's advice and observations. RCS has stated that as per the availibility 
of land,  DDA has requested RCS to forward the name of the eligible Cooperative 
Grouping Housing  Societies at their end. DDA had  previously made such request to 
RCS vide its letter dated 4. 9. 2003. After that no further requisition has been received 
by RCS from DDA. DDA  has replied that it allots land to the CGHS on the basis of 
recommendations made by RCS.  
The Committee while noting the fact that DDA Vice - Chairman had subm itted 
before the Committee that land and plots earmarked for the group housing purpose in 
the lay out plan of the DDA such as Dwarka, Narela, Rohini etc. are available ,  deplore 
such an irresponsive attitude on the part of the RCS and DDA . The Committee strongly 
feel  that there is an urgent need to have a totally transparent mechanism. Therefore, 
they recommend all information such as (i) availability of land with DDA(ii) allotment 
of land to CGHS (iii)  date of submission of applicat ion to RCS (iv) status of application 
reasons for rejection, if any, should be made available online. Beside s, the Committee 
also desire that specific timeline should be fixed for verification of membership by RCS 
and allotment of land to the CGHS by DDA . Above all, the Committ ee wish to 
emphasize that all the pending cases with RCS and DDA should be resolved at the 
earliest. 
 
 
 
 

28 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18) 
 
CONVERSION OF PROPERTY FROM LEASEHOLD TO FREEHOLD 
 
1.31 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
 
"The Committee observe that allotment of DDA built up flats and flats of CGHS 
made upto 1992 was on leasehold basis. But, the residential and commercial plots and 
flats are being allotted on free-hold basis w.e.f. 1.1.2007, the lease -hold properties are 
being converted i nto freehold as per policy and guidelines issued by Ministry of 
Urban Development in the year 1991. 45 days is the prescribed period for converting 
DDA built up flats and CGHS flats and 90 days for other properties. From the data 
submitted by DDA, the Comm ittee observe that during the last five years from 
1.12.2007 to 30.11.2012, 24,589 number of applications have been received from 
Housing Department of DDA for conversion of leasehold to freehold and 27,157 
applications have been disposed of. Still, 944 ap plications are pending. From the 
Cooperative Group Housing Societies DDA has received 6,612 applications and it has 
disposed of 1254 applications. 5,458 applications are still pending. The Committee 
have learnt that the main reasons for such large -scale pe ndency are because 
deficiencies are not completed by the applicants such as non -submission of required 
documents and non -deposit of demanded amounts such as ground rent, misuse, 
damage charges, etc. 
 
DDA has further submitted that it has started online app lication for conversion from 
leasehold to freehold in the year 2012. Keeping in view the pendency of large number 
of flats/plots for conversion of leasehold to freehold non submission of required 
documents and non-deposit of demanded amount, the Committee are of the view that 
only by extending the facility for online application is not the solution to the problem. 
From the above, the Committee are compelled to conclude that the process is not at all 
transparent. There is an urgent need to make the system tr ansparent and people 
friendly. In this regard the Committee recommended that the DDA in its website 
should clearly make a mention about the list of documents and the amount required 
for conversion of leasehold to freehold. Further while submitting the appl ication, 
DDA should give receipt of the application along with the list of documents received 
from the applicants. This will not only release the burden of DDA but also facilitate it 
to do the needful within the prescribed time -frame. Further, this will st op harassment 
of public by the DDA officials. 
 
The Committee further observe that one of the reasons attributed for slow clearance of 
applications for conversion of leasehold to freehold is non -deposit of demanded 
amount such as ground rent, misuse and dam age charges which many a time exceed 
the cost of the plots or flats. Recently DDA has decided to provide a special one time 
relief, where in a maximum period for levy of misuse charges will be restricted to five 
years from the date of detection of misuse. The Committee welcome such people 
friendly steps. At the same time the Committee are of view that to stop misusing the 
flats by carrying out unwanted alterations/extensions, DDA should undertake regular 
physical verification of all the DDA built flats and CGHS flats every year and 
maintain proper records thereof and provide stringent punishment so that people will 

29 
 
not dare to carry out any unwanted alteration/extension in the flats without prior 
permission of DDA." 
 
 
1.32 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as under:- 
 
"DDA has replied that it does not undertake regular physical verification of the built 
up flats and group housing flats as it may invite protest/criticism from public that the 
officials of the DDA are harassing the flat own ers. The verification is undertaken as 
and when any complaint in this regard is received. It was also noted that the services 
of almost all the societies and DDA colonies have been transferred to the MCD and 
necessary action in this regard is to be taken by MCD.  
 
As on 31st May, 2014, out of the 105473 applications received in Housing Department 
for conversion of DDA flats from leasehold to freehold, 104070 applications have 
been disposed of and 1913 applications are pending. To clear pendency of conversion 
applications, reg ular monitoring at various levels is undertaken. Apart from this, 
various Lok Shivirs have been organized recently in which large number of cases 
have been disposed of.  
 
In order to streamline and bring more transparency in the process of conversion of 
properties from leasehold to freehold, DDA has undertaken many steps including 
setting up of Nagrik Suvidha Kendras (NSK) at Dwarka, Rohini, Laxmi Nagar and at 
I.N.A., Vikas Sadan. At these NSKs, complete application form regarding conversion 
of property int o freehold is received and the applications are processed in a time 
bound manner. The application form for conversion has also been simplified.  
 
It is also intimated that as per present policy, unauthorized construction is not a bar to 
allow conversion of flat from leasehold to freehold. Enforcement Cell of the Housing 
Department regularly checks unauthorized construction/encroachment in DDA built 
flats in areas which are still under the jurisdiction of DDA and have not yet been 
handed over to the concerned municipal authorities. " 
 
 
1.33 With regard to conversion of properties from leasehold to freehold, DDA has 
undertaken many steps including setting up of Nagrik Suvidha Kendras(NSK) at 
Dwarka, Rohini, Lakshmi Nagar and INA, Vikas Sadan. As a result as on  31st May, 
2014 out of 105473 applications received by DDA , 104070 applications have been 
disposed of and only 1913 applications are pending. This is a welcome step. The 
Committee desire that DDA should organise more NSK in all parts of Delhi and the 
frequency of such NSK should be increased to clear the pending cases. 
 However, the Committee do not agree with the rep ly of DDA that Enforcement 
Cellof the Housing Department regularly check una uthorised 
construction/encroachment in DDA -built flats. In many Co operative Group Housing 
Societies and DDA Houses, unauthorised constructions are still there and the 
unauthorised construction is an  ongoing process. Therefore, the Committee desire that 
DDA should make regular visit s at least twice in a year to ensure a v igilant eye on the 
illegal constructions. 
 
 

30 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19) 
 
ALLOTMENT OF ALTERNATIVE PLOTS/FLATS 
 
1.34 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
 
"The Committee observe that as of now DDA has acquired land in 240 villages for 
undertaking various types of development in Delhi. DDA allots alternative plots to the 
villages on the basis of the recommendations received from the Land and Building 
Department of GNCTD. Necessary guidelines in this regard have been issued by 
GNCTD. No separate guid elines have been issued by DDA. The allotment of an 
alternative plot is made by DDA as per seniority fixed on the basis of date of taking of 
physical possession of acquired land by Land and Building Department of GNCTD, 
for respective size category and zon e before holding draws of lots. Till now 10,675 
alternative allotments have been made to the farmers whose land had been acquired. 
As on date, 68 recommendations letters issued by the Land and Building Department 
of NCT of Delhi are lying pending due to non-availability of plots of respective size. 
 
Further, the Committee observe that the affected people from whom DDA is 
acquiring land spent their hard earned money to buy a single flat/plot. By acquiring a 
particular area for any developmental purpose, peop le residing in that area are not 
only deprived of their property, but also their livelihood. Further, during oral 
evidence, the Committee came to know that all over Delhi people are airing 
grievances, because DDA acquires the land and pay compensation after many years of 
taking possession but at the older rates. In many a cases, DDA has taken over one 
independent house but given them one EWS flat. Therefore, the Committee are pained 
to conclude that people are not adequately compensated. 
 
The Committee are further distressed to note that DDA acquires the land, for various 
development purposes but does not have its own policy for paying compensation and 
it is totally dependent on the policy for project affected persons evolved by the 
Government of NCT of Delh i. The Vice -Chairman, DDA during oral deposition has 
admitted that whether it is land for land or value for value or whether it is providing 
accommodation, is a policy matter and he will definitely raise it in the right quarters 
and a conscious decision wi ll be taken so that the interests of the affected persons are 
protected. 
 
In view of the above state of affairs, the Committee recommend that instead of 
depending upon the policy of Government of Delhi, DDA should evolve its own 
policy and extend adequate and timely compensation as per market rate on the date of 
paying compensation. The Committee also desire that compensation should be paid in 
a stipulated timeframe. " 
 
 
 
 
 
 

31 
 
 
1.35 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as under:- 
 
"The land is acquired by the Land Acquisition Collectors (LACs) appointed by Govt. 
of NCT of Delhi and the compensation is also paid by LACs as per provisions of the 
Land Acquisition Act. The nodal secretariat in this regard is Land and Building 
Department of Govt. of NCT of Delhi.  
 
As regards, allotment of alternative plots/flats is concerned as a part of rehabilitation 
package, the same is allotted by the DDA on the basis of specific recommendations 
made by Land and Building Department of Govt. of NCT of Delhi.  
 
The compensation was being paid as per the provisions of Land Acquisition Act 1894 
on receipt of the demands by the Land & Building Dept., GNCTD.   The Govt. of 
India has reviewed the policy relating to payment of compensation and new Act „The 
Right to Fair Compensation & Tr ansparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement Act -2013‟ has been made applicable w.e.f. 01.01.2014 and therefore, 
revised rates, which are more than the market rates, would now be paid to the farmers, 
whose land is to be acquired by the Govt. 
 
Under Section 15 of the Delhi Development Act, 1957, the DDA takes possession of 
the land acquired by the Central Government for the purpose of development or for 
any other purpose. Section 15 of the DD Act read as follows: 
 
Section 15: Compulsory Acquisition of Land 
 
(i) If in the opinion of the Central Government, any land is required for the purpose of 
development, or for any other purpose, under this Act, the Central government may 
acquire such land under the provision of the Land Acquisition Act 1.69 984 (1 of 
1894). 
(ii) Where any land has been acquired by the Central Government, that Government may, 
after it has taken possession of the land, transfer the land to the Authority or any local 
authority for the purpose for which the land has been acquired on p ayment by the 
Authority or the local authority the compensation awarded under that Act and of the 
charges incurred by the government in connection with the acquisition. 
 
As regards new Act of land acquisition i.e. "The Right to Fair Compensation and 
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013", the 
central government is currently in the process of consultations with the state governments 
and other stake holders and contemplating certain modifications/amendments in the Act 
to address certain issues. " 
 
1.36 The Committee note that now the compensation in case  of  eviction of private 
land/flat will be paid at the revised rate as per the  "The Ri ght to Fair Compensation 
Transparancy in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act 2013 which has 
been made applicable w.e.f. 1.1.2014. However, the Committee are distressed to note 
that their recommendation for DDA to evolve its own Policy for paying compensation 
has not been considered. Still DDA is dependent on Government of NCT of Delhi  in this 
regard. The Committee strongly feel that as part of social responsibility , DDA should 
ensure that the right compensation is being paid to the affected people in time.  

32 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20) 
 
CRITERIA FOLLOWED IN ALLOTMENT OF LAND FOR CONSTRUCTION OF 
HOTELS, MALLS, SCHOOLS etc. 
 
1.37 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
"The Committee observe that as per Master Plan 3% of land acquired  under the 
acquisition, development and disposal of land in Delhi is utilized for commercial use. 
From 2006 onwards DDA has disposed of 158 commercial plots and 24 plots for 
hotels. The Committee are, however, distressed to note that during the last ten ye ars 
only 23 sites have been allotted for bus depots against the demand of 31 by the 
GNCTD. Five sites are under process. In remaining 3 cases, the site requested at I.P 
extension is under encroachment whereas in Rohini Sector 11 and Ghazipur no land is 
available. Against the demand of 35 police stations by the Delhi Police, DDA has 
allotted 25 sites, 5 sites for allotment are under process. In remaining 5 cases 
allotment cannot be made as no site is available. 
 
During the period 2002 to 2013, DDA has allotted 7 hospital sites and 16 sites for 
Senior Secondary schools and 2 sites for secondary schools. The Committee were 
further informed that the facilities such as school, hospitals, markets, and commercial 
areas are assigned as per the population requi rement. There is no preference given in 
Master Plan for developing a land parcel/pocket for commercial areas in comparison 
to the land for public or semi public use like school and hospital. 
 
However, the number of allotment of land for commercial plots fo r malls have 
outnumbered the allotment of plots/sites for necessary infrastructural facilities for 
schools, hospitals, bus depots and police stations. Keeping in mind the growing 
population of Delhi, their health problems, education and law and order probl em, the 
Committee strongly recommend that DDA should make necessary changes in the 
Master Plan to give preference to these basic infrastructure. The Committee were 
further informed that sanction for Building plans are much faster and quicker, if all 
the documents required for are attached. 
 
For this the Committee desire that for faster processing and clearance, DDA in its 
website should upload the details of documents required along with the planning 
parameters for any building and these should be advertise d in the print and electronic 
media for creating awareness among the people. The Committee also desire that 
effective public participation should be ensured in this direction to yarn good results." 
 
 
 
 
1.38 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as under: 
 
"DDA has submitted that Master Plan is a policy document wherein provisions 
including plan norms and development control norms are stipulated for planned 
development.  However, development of basic infrastructure i.e. schools, hospitals, 
bus depots and police stations are developed by the local bodies/government agencies 

33 
 
concerned except in case of schools and hospitals are also developed by private 
developers. Generally, sites for these facilities are earmarked in the Zonal 
Development Plan for the respecti ve planning Zones as per the requirement of Zone.  
The allotment of plots is done by the Land Disposal department as and when the 
requests are received from the GNCTD/Government agencies/private developers. 
 
The main contention of the committee is that all  the documents required for the 
sanction of Building plans should be uploaded in DDA website for quicker & faster 
processing & clearance. In this regard, it is submitted that the documents which are 
required for the issuance of permits are already in DDA w ebsite & is also available in 
the counter of building section of DDA, Ground Floor, D -Block, Vikas Sadan in the 
form of "Handbook for Building Permit Procedure".  
 
1.39 While examining the subject "Functioning of Delhi Development Authority 
(DDA) particula rly with reference to Affordable Houses in Delhi and its role in 
regularization of Unauthorized Colonies in Delhi and Matters connected thereto " the 
Committee had observed that the number of allotment of land for commercial plots for 
malls had out numbered the allotment of plots/sides for necessary infastructral facilities 
for school, hospitals bus depots and police stations. Therefore, they ha d recommended 
that DDA should make necessary changes in the Mast er Plan to give preference to these 
basic infrastructure. The Committee are concerned to note that DDA has not taken any 
action in this regard and have given a routine reply that site for these facilities are 
earmarked in the Zonal Development Plan for respective planning zones as per the 
requirement of zo ne. The Committee condemn the apathetic attitude of DDA towards 
their important recommendations. Therefore, they wish to reiterate their earlier 
recommendation to review the Zonal Plan and bring necessary changes to build up the 
required infrastructure like schools, hospitals, bus depots and police stations. 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21) 
 
CONSTRUCTION OF COMMUNITY HALLS IN THE VILLAGES WHEREFROM 
DDA HAS TAKEN LAND 
 
1.40 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
"DDA is required to undertake various developmental works in the villages 
wherefrom it has taken land. However, the Committee are distressed to note that from 
its inception till date DDA has constructed only 44 community halls in various zones. 
It has completed construction of 28 community cen tres in the year 1996 -97. 
Afterwards, the number has drastically reduced to 11 during the entire 6 years from 
1997-98 to 2003-04. This has further been reduced to 4 during the 3 years from 2004 -
05 to 2006 -07. Out of the completed 44 community centres only 18 were functional 
during the period January 2012 to August 2013, while 20 community centres in all the 
zones i.e, South, Dwarka, North, East and Rohini are in planning stage. In the South 
zone, out of 8 community centres, 7 are still in the planning stage  and construction of 
only one community centre is in progress. In Dwarka zone out of 4 community 
centres 2 are in planning stage and 2 are in progress. In North zone, one community 
Hall is in progress. In East zone all the 6 are in planning stage. 

34 
 
 
From th e above, the callous attitude of DDA towards fulfilling its obligations 
becomes clear. The Committee fail to understand this lackadaisical approach of DDA 
and deplore it vehemently. They want that DDA should come out of its slumber and 
act swiftly in this regard." 
 
 
1.41 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as under: 
  
 
i) "Community halls with DDA   -  56  
ii) Community halls with RWA   -  20 
iii) Community halls with NGO    -  06 
iv) Total Community halls constructed  - 82 
v) Community halls under progress   -  25  
vi) Community halls in Planning stage   -  33  
vii) Community halls in conceptual stage  -  20 " 
 
 
1.42 The Committee note that since its inception , till date DDA has built 56 
community halls. Construction of 25 community halls are under progres 33 communi ty 
halls are in planning stage and 25 are in conceptual stage. Keeping in mind the growing 
number of population in Delhi and their social needs, the Commi ttee strongly 
recommend that DDA should make concerted efforts to complete the construction of all 
the community halls and make them operational at the earliest. 
 
 
Recommendation(Serial No. 22) 
 
 
NEED TO REDEEM IMAGE BY DDA 
 
1.43 The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
"The Committee note that the DDA has claimed that for the last 55 years it has been 
innovating in terms of technology, management techniques and improving public 
interface in order to reach its customers in a better and friendly manner for ensuring 
timely delivery of services. The Citizen Charter detailing schedule of various 
transactions has been published. Many processes which have maximum public 
interface have been made online like conversion of leasehold to freehold, booking of 
temporary allotment of space for marriages and social functions etc., allowing the 
corrupt practices with pri or appointment etc, However, the Committee are distressed 
to observe that DDA's has ruined its image before general public by remaining 
inactive and allowing the corrupt practices in deteriorating. Since 2003, DDA has not 
allotted any land to any cooperative group housing society, DDA and RCS are passing 
the buck on each other for not discharging their responsibilities with regard to 
allotment of land. 
 
DDA has failed to maintain the capital city including Yamuna River which is getting 
dirtier day by day. D DA has proved its failure to provide houses and basic amenities 

35 
 
to inhabitants of Delhi. DDA officials have grossly failed in checking fraud in 
allotting venues for marriages and other social functions, in checking the growth of 
slums and unauthorizedd occupation of land under its purview. 
 
Conversion of leasehold to freehold, in checking unauthorized construction and 
alteration in DDA built houses and CGHS, etc. While taking oral evidence of 
representatives of CGHS, the Committee learnt that people are agg rieved because 
DDA is harassing them by not giving adequate and timely compensation, it is only 
after the interface of the Committee the problems of two Residents Welfare 
Associations were solved.  
 
In view of the above, the Committee feel that DDA has fai led to live up to the 
expectations of the people of Delhi. Against this backdrop, the Committee wish to 
recommend that there is an urgent need to refurbish the image of this premier 
organization by taking proactive and timely steps under intimation to the Committee." 
 
 
1.44 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as under: 
 
 
(i) "DDA has taken major steps for computerization of all Departments now 
for which the study has been made by consultants and shortly RFP will be 
issued for selection of the agency who would take -up the task of 
computerization of all branches/divisions of DDA . In this endeavor the 
efforts will be made to automate each and every activity of DDA so that 
public can avail services at their door step and from anywhere through web 
enabled IT applications.  
 
(ii) With regard to conversion from leasehold to freehold of DDA  flats, 
application form has been simplified and the new brochure/booklet has been 
issued. This has also been uploaded on DDA's website. A user friendly portal 
for Nagrik Suvidha Kendra has been made operational. Computerized Nagrik 
Suvidha Kendras have been established in 4 locations in Delhi where general 
public can .avail the services of DDA. This process has been very useful to the 
general public a s the public can now avail services of DDA near to their 
residence. At the recently established four Nagrik Suvidha Kendras, assistance 
is provided to the public for submission of complete application forms.  
 
(iii) As far as checking of unauthorized construction and alteration in DDA flats 
are concerned, Enforcement cell of the Housing Department regularly checks 
unauthorized construction and encroachment in areas which are still under the 
jurisdiction of DDA and have not yet been handed over to the concerned 
municipal authorities.  
 
(iv) E-Auction for properties has been implemented.  
 
(v) On line booking of vacant sites for marriage/religious functions. 
 
(vi) Daily public hearings instead of two days a week.  
 

36 
 
(vii) All payment details of DDA flats and Group Housing Society flats have been 
placed on web site so that general public can reconcile their payment made;  
 
(viii) Provision of on line payment through payment gateway of various banks and 
through NEFT/RTGS has been made so that general public can make 
payments from anywhere as per their convenience . This saves the time of the 
general public and also gives the convenience to them.  
 
(ix) To enforce punctuality the process of installation of attendance machines has 
started in DDA and the same have been installed in Vikas Sadan and in due 
course the attendance machines will be installed throughout DDA.  
 
(x) On line viewing mechan ism about the status of the requests of general public 
about conversion of DDA flats and Group Housing Society flats has been 
made and now the general public can see the status of their applications on 
line from anywhere.  
 
(xi) In the direction of computerizat ion of land records some more progress has 
been made and now 22 more villages have been digitized and have been 
placed at DDA's web site. Now out of 240 acquired villages total 207 villages 
have been digitized and the details have been placed at DDA's web site.  
 
(xii) The process of issuing water bills on line has been started and the water bills 
of Rohini Wing have been computerized and now general public can deposit 
their water bills of Rohini locality on line . In the due .course this system will 
be incorporated in all other localities of DDA as well. " 
 
1.45 The Committee had expressed their concern over the depleting image of DDA. 
Therefore, they had recommended to refurbish the image by taking proactive and 
timely steps. The Committee note that some steps have been taken DDA. However , as a 
permier orgainsation , it has definitely fai led to deliver its objectives. T he 
Ministrty/DDA has not taken required action with regard to the recommendation of the 
Committee on allotment of land to CGHS, maintaince of the capital city including 
Yamuna river, construction of houses for EWS and providing basic amenities, checking 
the growth of slums and unauthorised occupation of land under its purview etc. The 
DDA should chalk out a viable approach for making Delhi a city of international stature 
and any concrete suggestion(s) by the DDA before the Committee in this regard  would 
be welcome.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 24) 
 
EXPEDITE THE ACTION IN CORRUPTION CASES AGAINST THE DDA 
OFFICIALS 
 
1.46 The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
"The Committee observe that to bring transparency in the functioning of DDA/MCD 
to root out corruption and provide better, quick and people friendly services, DDA has 
initiated some steps. The Committee are informed that file tracking system has been 
implemented in the vigilance branch and the same is under implementation in other 

37 
 
branches, sensitive branches are being randomly inspected by vigilance branch to see 
delays in handling of files and presence of outsiders etc. Vigilance helpline has been 
launched on the occasion of Vigilance Awareness Week 2012 and its number is 
09650713388. 
 
From the information furnished by DDA the Committee can easily gather the fact that 
amongst the 82 corruption cases against the DDA officials for last more than 10 years 
w.e.f 2003, 41 are under trial, 12 are under investigation, 4 have been acquitted, 1 is 
RDA case, 1 has been discharged, 1case is under CBI investigation and 3 cases have 
been closed by CBI and 19 convictions are there. 
 
This information of DDA is indicating towards the slow pace of trials and poor rate of 
conviction in the corruption cases against the DDA officials. This appears to be an 
eye wash. The Committee are of the view that such a slow pace of progress in cases 
and very low rate of conviction fails ba dly to act as deterrent for other officials, from 
indulging in corrupt practices. Rather it tends to give a boost to unscrupulous 
elements. 
 
Thus, the Committee would like to recommend that the trials and investigations 
should be expedited and guilty be br ought to the book at the earliest. Moreover, this 
should not only remain restricted to these cases only that have been brought to the 
notice of the Committee. Rather, the speedy trial should become a regular feature in 
DDA." 
 
1.47 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as under: 
 
"DDA has replied that as regards the action against corruption cases, these are being 
dealt by the concerned investigating agencies i.e. CBI/ACB, GNCTD and Delhi 
Police.  These agencies themselves initiate cases pert aining to corruption and other 
malpractices and file cases in the relevant courts. DDA however facilitates 
investigation as well as prosecution in all such cases." 
 
1.48 The Committee are constrained to note that regarding their recommendation to 
expedite the  action in corrruption cases against the DDA officials, DDA has given a 
very vague reply. The Committee are well aware of the fact that CBI/ACB, GNCTD and 
Delhi Police are the investigating agencies. However, the Committee are of the view th at 
Ministry of Urban Development should issue necessary directions to these agencies to 
complete the investigating process in a t ime bound-manner to secure speedy judgement. 
Moreover, the Committee also want the Ministry to monitor the cases at the highest 
level so t hat justice can be done in a time -bound period and unscrupulous element s do 
not take advantage of the situation. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 25) 
 
INTRODUCTION OF SINGLE WINDOW SYSTEM 
 
1.49 The Committee had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that DDA is a 56 years old agglomeration dealing with 
the matters of government, private and semi private agencies. It deals with 

38 
 
many sensitive matters. The Committee are disheartened to note that DDA has 
introduced single window system just in three areas and that too from the year 
2012. The facility has been introduced for only selected activities viz. 
conversion of leasehold to freehold of CGHS flats, DDA flats and Samasya 
Nidhan. While expressing their satisfaction for this endeavor of DDA, the 
Committee want that all activities of DDA should come under its umbrella. 
They also want that a strong monitoring mechanism be put in place in the 
initial years to check as to whether the system is benefitting the public. 
 
Though much delayed, the Committee welcome the introduction of single 
window system in DDA for bringing in transparency in its activities. 
However, they would like the DDA to introduce the single window system in 
all the areas of functioning.”  
 
1.50 In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry have stated as under: 
 
“DDA has replied that in the process of issuing building permits many 
agencies/organizations are also get involve like Delhi Urban Art Commission, 
Delhi Fire Service, Delhi Pollution Control Committee, Director Ge neral 
Explosives, and Airport Authority of India etc. as per law. The respective 
agencies are required to check the documents & drawings within their 
mandate & as per their own expertise. The one window system may not 
address these issues in detail & there fore clearance of building permits in one 
window system may not be desirable. This will also facilitate to avoid 
unwanted mishaps.” 
  
1.51 The Committee understand the apprehensions of the Government.  However, the 
Committee feel that the DDA should form a  comprehensive policy, in consultation with 
other agencies so that the public may get speedy disposal of their cases. 
 
 
 

39 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 5) 
 
Need for adopting modern designing in the houses constructed by DDA 
 
2.1 The Committee observe that the quality of designing and materials used in the DDA 
houses are not as per the expectations of the people and there is a need to adopt modern 
concepts and technologies. DDA Vice -Chairman during oral evidence, has assured the 
Committee that pre -fabricated technologies are now being adopted by which the quality of 
designing will definitely be improved. He has further assured that while constructing the MIG 
and LIG houses in future th e modern designing in line with Private Group Housing Societies 
will definitely be taken care of. He also admitted that there is an urgent need to change the 
designing of houses and adoption of modern technologies in this regard. 
 
Therefore, the Committee recommends that DDA should take concrete action in this 
regard and keep its assurances given to the Committee in a time-bound manner. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
2.2 DDA has replied that with passage of time, the specification of material used for 
construction is being changed as per details mentioned below: 
  
(i) Kota stone flooring is being replaced by granite flooring.  
(ii) Mosaic flooring is being changed in rectified/vitrified tile flooring. 
(iii) M.S. Windows are being replaced with Aluminum Windows.  
(iv) The p rovision of grit wash plaster on external surface is being 
discontinued.  
(v) The G.I./C.I., pipes are being replaced with HDPE/P.E. AL.PE/PVC 
pipes etc. in water supply and drainage.  
 
To keep a watch on quality of construction in most of the new projects 3rd  party 
quality check has been introduced. 
 
New technology in the form of prefabricated houses is being adopted for construction 
of LIG/EWS houses. This technology minimizes the human error, gives good quality & 
construction is done at fast pace. Presently about 50,000 LIG/EWS houses are being 
constructed using this technology.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
 
Awareness Drive about affordable housing 
 
2.3 The Committee observe that the awareness regarding any housing scheme amongst 
the target population is done at the time of launching the scheme. Wide publicity is given 

40 
 
through the print media and also through press conferences, press releases, etc. which are 
covered by both audio-visual and other media. 
 
Since DDA has recently launched the land pooling policy, the Committee desire that 
wide publicity should be given in print and electronic media for creating awareness 
amongst the general public about the b enefits, terms and conditions and procedural 
aspects so that public at large may derive benefit of the scheme to the maximum. 
 
Reply of the Government 
   
2.4 DDA has replied that due awareness regarding land pooling policy and affordable 
housing is being ensured, through various modes of communication, right from the 
conceptual stage to its final approval.  Large participation of the public and discussion with 
all the stakeholders were ensured at the formulation stage itself by publishing notices in 
leading newspapers in the month of April, 2013 and respondents to the notice were even 
invited for discussion with the senior officers.    
 
The operationalization of  the policy, which is at formulation stage, is also being 
discussed at various fora so as to create awareness and invite suggestions and objections from 
the general public.  These efforts are being supplemented by press releases, one to one 
discussions and statements in various newspapers on as to how land pooling policy is going 
to ensure affordable housing for masses in the years to come.  In future, DDA will ensure that 
the Committee‟s suggestions are fully complied with. 
 
 (Recommendation Serial No. 8) 
 
Setting up of the Escrow Fund for maintenance of EWS Housing 
 
2.5 The Committee observe that an escrow fund was established in pursuance of 
condition no. VI of Annexure to the Gazette Notification of Government of India dated 
09.06.1999. The receipt in this account was to be from the contribution @25,000/ - per 
dwelling unit of size 1,000 sq. ft or more plinth area. Fund available in the account was to be 
operated by DDA under specific direction of the Ministry of Urban Development. Now, 
DDA is in the process of framing procedures/guidelines for setting up the ESCROW fund for 
long term maintenance of EWS housing in respect of in situ rehabilitation of JJ Clusters 
which are currently under construction. 
 
The Committee recommend that DDA should expeditiously set up this fund and make 
available the fund for maintenance of EWS at the earliest.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.6 DDA has replied that there is an ESCROW Account which takes care of EWS 
housing. The same will be used to take care of long term maintenance of EWS housing in 
respect of in situ rehabilitation of JJ Clusters which are currently under construction.  
 
  

41 
 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 11) 
 
Regular follow up of the progress of regularization of Unauthorized Colonies falling 
under its purview 
 
2.7 The Committee were informed that in exercise of powers conferred under section 57 
of Delhi Development Act 1957 (61 of 1957) the Delhi Development Authority with the 
approval of Union Government notified "Regulation for Regularization of unaut horized 
colonies in Delhi" vide Gazette Notification No. S.O. 683(E) dated 23.03.2008 and 
subsequently few amendments therein notified vide Gazette Notification No. S.O. 1452(E) 
dated 16.06.2008 and further amendment was notified vide Gazette Notification No. S.O. 
1297(E) dated 06.06.2012. 
 
The role of DDA inter -alia includes assessment of built –up percentage of the colony 
as per aerial photographs with respect to colonies falling within the Development Area of 
DDA. 
 
The DDA has completed this exercise and submitted its report to Government of 
National Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD). Further, the Authority has also de -notified all 
the unauthorized colonies falling within the Development Area of DDA, hence the entir e 
work is to be done by the local body.  
 
The Committee are of the view that no doubt the entire work of development in these 
colonies is to be done by Local Bodies but since the land belongs to DDA, it is the moral 
responsibility of DDA to ensure that the work gets completed expeditiously and efficiently in 
a time bound manner. If it is not done, the issue will keep on lingering and the problem would 
aggravate with the passage of time. 
 
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that the DDA should coordi nate with 
local bodies through its 'unauthorized colonies cell' and set a time frame for development of 
all the colonies falling within the Development Area of DDA and get the work done within 
that time frame. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.8 DDA has replied  that the process of regularization of unauthorized colonies 
commenced with the notification of "Regulations for Regularization of Unauthorized 
colonies in Delhi" notified vide Gazette Notification No. S.O 683(E) dated 24.03.2008  
and amendment therein not ified vide gazette notification No. S.O 1452(E) dated 16.06.2008 
and further amendment was notified vide Gazette Notification No. S.O 1297(E) dated 
06.06.2012.  
 
As per the regulation the work related to regularization of unauthorized colonies is 
being undertaken, coordinated, monitored and supervised by GNCTD.  
 
As per notified policy for regularization of unauthorized colonies in Delhi the role of 
DDA is limited to marking of hindrances i.e. Master Plan and Zonal Plan roads on the layout 
plans submitted b y RWA through Govt. of Delhi. Secondly once the Govt. of Delhi declare 

42 
 
the unauthorized colonies fit for regularization, the change of land use as per Delhi 
Development Act under section 11A is initiated by DDA for those colonies falling in non 
compatible use as per Master Plan 2021.  
 
On the above recommendation of the Hon'ble Committee, it is submitted that DDA in 
its authority meeting held on 11.3.2008 resolved to de -notify unauthorized colonies falling 
within the Development Area of DDA to facilitate De velopment work and processing of 
layout plan by single agency.  
 
This has been reported to the Hon'ble Committee and it has been suitably included in 
its report.  As far as DDA land falling within the unauthorized colonies is concerned the Land 
Management Department of DDA has already reported that a request has been made to Govt. 
of Delhi not to regularize vacant land of DDA falling within the layout plan of unauthorized 
colonies.  
 
The Hon'ble Committee has recommended that "DDA should coordinate with loc al 
bodies through the "unauthorized colonies cell" and set a time frame for development of all 
the colonies falling within the Development Area of DDA and get the work done within that 
time frame.  
 
The unauthorized colonies cell of DDA is acting as nodal agency and actively 
coordinating with GNCTD as well as Local bodies so that the process of regularization is 
carried out in time bound manner.  
 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 12) 
 
Preparation of Layout Plans by Resident Welfare Associations (RWAs) 
 
2.9 The Committee are informed that Resident Welfare Associations (RWAs)/Resident 
Societies are required to get the layout plan revised and submit the same for approval, so that 
regularization process can be expedited. As per order of GNCTD, the layout plans to be 
submitted by RWAs/ Resident Society need to have proper planning inputs. Local Bodies 
requested there institutes viz. School of Planning and Architecture(SPA), I.P. University and 
Jamia University to take up preparation of layout plans for RWAs with proper town planning 
inputs. The payment to these institutes is to be made by RWAs. The Committee note that 
RWAs are not coming forward to take initiative despite the fact that letters were sent to 
RWAs to get the layout plan within the limits set by GNCTD. 
 
The Committee have been further enlightened about the initiative taken by South 
Delhi Municipal Corporation (SDMC) for preparation of layout plans. During this SDMC got 
four layout plans prepared throug h the School of Planning and Architecture and approved by 
its own Standing Committee. The payment for the preparation of these layout plans has been 
made by Corporation, which shall be recovered from the RWAs before release of layout/ 
regularization plan.  
 
The Committee while appreciating the efforts of SDMC, desire that all the local 
bodies across Delhi should follow their foot - steps and complete the preparation of layout 
plans for all the remaining colonies also. Furthermore, the Committee desire that i n the 
preparation of these lay out plans, the RWAs of all the concerned colonies should also be 

43 
 
involved. In this regard, prior notice to the RWAs should be sent for attending the meeting. 
For the recovery of payment of preparation of these layout plans fr om the RWAs, the 
Committee would like to recommend imposition of cess on water supply bills of the residents 
of such colonies only. But this course should be taken only when the RWAs do not deposit 
the payment for preparation of plan. 
 
The Committee would also like to put a note of caution in this regard that the cess 
should be imposed only on the residents of these unauthorized colonies. This should be done 
for limited time period till the recovery of payment of lay out plan. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
2.10 Govt. of National Capital Territory of Delhi has stated the process of mapping of 
exact area using the modern equipment is under process of tender with the Government of 
NCT of Delhi.  The next step of preparation of layout plan would be taken up afte r.  The 
recommendation related to imposition of cess on water supply bills, in case the Resident 
Associations do not deposit the fee for preparation of plan, would be considered by the Govt. 
of NCT of Delhi at the time of preparation of layout plan. 
 
2.11  For comments of the Committee please refer to Para no. 1.21 of Chapter. 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 16) 
 
INSENSITIVE ATTITUDE OF DDA AND RCS TOWARDS CO -OPERATIVE 
GROUP HOUSING SOCIETIES 
 
2.12 A representation was received from the Secretary, Loknayak Co-operative Group 
Housing Society Ltd. (Regd.), Rohini, New Delhi. In the representation, the Secretary of the 
CGHS has informed that DDA is not according the credit of ground rent for the amounts 
deposited by the society from 12/01/1990 to 17/07/2000. 
 
After the intervention of this Committee, the issue was resolved by DDA and the 
credit of the ground rent for the amounts deposited by the society was given to them by DDA 
after verifying all the fourteen challans in question. The Society was pursuing this  issue with 
DDA since 2010. 
 
Similarly, a representation was received from the Secretary, Aviation Cooperative 
Group Housing Society Ltd. (Regd.), Delhi. In the representation the appellant had informed 
the Committee that the Registrar Cooperative Societie s has wrongfully issued notice against 
their society; under section 96(1) of the RCS Act. The notice was issued against the society in 
the year 2006, without even conducting a proper inquiry. He had requested to remove this 
section altogether from the Act. 
 
Thus the Committee had to intervene, and ask RCS office to look into the matter. In 
his letter no. F/47/Policy/68/RCS/2013/1289 dated 18.12.2013 to the Secretary Ministry of 
Urban Development, the Registrar Co-operative Society informed as under: 
 
"The S tanding Committee was assured that the question of withdrawal of notice to 
Aviation CGHS Ltd., will be re -examined in three months' time for an appropriate 

44 
 
decision. The matter has been considered and the said notice has already been 
withdrawn." 
 
These two cases are indicative of the callous attitude of both DDA and RCS office in 
their public dealing and are contrary to tall claims of customer satisfaction made by both the 
offices before the Committee. The Committee can only infer that this is only the tip of the 
iceberg and the problem is grave than that. 
 
While deploring the attitude of DDA and RCS, the Committee strongly recommend 
that DDA and RCS should mend their ways of public dealing and prepare a time frame of 
resolving all sort of problems that are being commonly faced by the public, in relation to their 
respective offices. As the Committee cannot call for every case before them for getting a 
solution for them they call upon the DDA and RCS to formulate a mechanism which keep a 
watch on the officials who are responsible for cropping up of such avoidable problems. They 
also recommend that such officials should be suitably punished in the above mentioned cases, 
the Committee would recommend that the delinquent officials be identified and punished 
suitably.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.13 Registrar of Cooperative Societies (RCS) has replied that recommendation no. 16 (ii) 
i.e. withdrawal of notice to Aviatioin CGHS Ltd. By RCS pertain exclusively to RCS.  In this 
regard, RCS has submitted that the said notice under Section 96 (i) of DCS Act , 2003 for 
winding up of Cooperative Societies have already been withdrawn by this office vide letter 
no. F. 47/1630/GH//East/5235-5236 dated 10.12.2013.   
 
DDA has pointed out that the delay in giving the credit to Lok Nayak Co -operative 
Group Housing Society (Lok Nayak CGHS) Rohini, for the amounts deposited by the 
society, occurred because the Society  could not deposit the copies of 13 challans or intimate 
the numbers of the challans as these were stated to be destroyed by rain water which entered 
in the office of the Society located in its basement.  In the absence of details of challans, 
bank/branch in which the amount of ground rent was deposited, it was difficult to trace out 
the 15-20 years old payments from available manual record. 
 
However, the credit of the ground rent to the Lok Nayak Cooperative Group Housing 
Society Limited, Rohini for the amounts deposited by the society has been given to the 
society by DDA after verifying all the fourteen challans.   
 
To improve the public service delivery in DDA, Nagrik Suvidha Kendras (NSKs) 
have been set up and have become operational. The four NSKs cater to the four different 
geographical divisions of Delhi. T he monitoring of the cases are being done online.  Further, 
DDA has been organizing Lok shivirs (special camps) to cater to the public services at 
different areas of Delhi. 
 
 
  

45 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 17) 
 
COMPUTERISATION OF LAND RECORDS BY DDA 
 
2.14 The Committee observe that DDA is a 56 year old institution set up to plan and 
develop the city of Delhi as per plan. It has been acquiring land for undertaking various 
development purposes. 
 
As of now, the total acquired land with the DDA is 90,326 acre. Out of that 76,887 
acre of land have been handed over to DDA and the remaining 13,439 acre of awarded land is 
yet to be handed over to DDA. The Committee have learnt that the matter of taking over the 
land is being pursued with land & building Department o f GNCTD. The Committee are of 
the view that Delhi is the capital city of India, but in many parts of Delhi there is no planned 
development. People are undertaking construction haphazardly in many villages without 
getting plan approved from the competent au thorities and without undertaking various safety 
measures. People are forced to live in these localities due to inherent compulsions. As a result 
the inhabitants are at serious risk. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that the 
matter related to handing over of the remaining land should be pursued vigorously with Land 
and Building Department of GNCTD and digitized the same so that DDA can initiate steps to 
develop these areas as per the plan. 
 
 
The Committee further note that computerization of acqu ired land records have been 
made by the DDA. However, out of the acquired land in 240 villages, only 185 villages have 
so far been digitized. The Committee fail to understand that despite the computerization 
process having been started in 1986, why the lan d records of remaining 55 villages have not 
been digitized so far. Keeping in view the scarcity of land, encroachment of DDA land and 
problems of regularization of unauthorized colonies, the Committee are of the view that all 
sincere efforts be made in digitizing the entire land records without further loss of time. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.15 GNCTD has replied that the issue relates to DDA.  DDA has replied that it has 
pursued the matter vigorously with Land &  Building Department, GNCTD, for taking over 
the possession of remaining 13439 acres of land.  A special drive to take possession of 
acquired land from Land Acquisition Collectors was organized and 184 acres of land was 
taken over.  After coming into force the „The Right To Fair Compensation & Transparency in 
Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation And Resettlement Act -2013‟ w.e.f. 1.1.2014, the Land & 
Building Department, GNCTD have been asked to intimate the status of awards and hand 
over the possession of land.   
 
The digitization of land records has already been undertaken and progress is given as 
under: -  
 
i) Out of total 240 villages, land records in respect of 201 villages have been 
digitized and balance 39 villages are in process of digitization.  
 
ii) The up-dating of acquisition data for 60 villages out of 160 no. of villages has 
been completed.  
 

46 
 
iii) MOU has been signed by DDA with GSDL to obtain the digitized data 
available with the portal of GSDL for the Delhi and also to know the built -up 
position of various DDA lands in different time gaps since 2007. 
 
 
 (Recommendation Serial No. 23) 
 
TRANSPARENCY IN THE FUNCTIONING OF DDA/MCD 
 
2.16 The Committee observed that DDA has taken following steps in ensuring 
transparency in its functioning:- 
 
1 Online conversion of leasehold to freehold of Group Housing Flats and DDA flats has 
been started from 01.09.2012. Information on freehold conversion process has been 
uploaded on the DDA website. 
 
2 Two activities have been brought under ESLA, i.e. Electronic Service Level 
Agreement and therefore, these activities are monitored regularly and activities have 
to be completed within 45 days, i.e. conversion from lease hold to free hold for group 
housing flats and DDA flats is done in 45 days. 
 
3 Citizens' Charter of various activities has already been prepared and task is to be 
completed as per Citizens' Charter. 
 
4 Installation of CCTVs is under process in the Vikas Sadan Office of DDA where 
major public dealing activities are being conducted. 
 
5 Directions have been issued to place on the  website all procedures, rules and 
regulations, so as to increase transparency. 
 
6 To reduce the movement of touts in various branches, the exit/entry points in Vikas 
Sadan have been reduced from seven to three. 
 
7 Record Management is being improved. 
 
8 The inf ormation regarding various draws of plots, flats and housing schemes are 
being uploaded on the DDA website for greater transparency. 
 
9 File tracking system has been implemented in the Vigilance branch and the same is 
under implementation in other branches. 
 
10 The sensitive branches are being randomly inspected by Vigilance branch to see 
delays in handling of files, presence of outsiders, etc. 
 
11 E-tendering system has been implemented in DDA to increase transparency and check 
pooling of tenders. Efforts are bein g made for getting on e -payment gateway for 
submission of cost of tender and earnest money deposit. 
 
12 Vigilance helpline has been launched on the occasion of Vigilance Awareness Week, 
2012 and its number is 09650713388. 

47 
 
 
13 To curb the nuisance of tent mafia, the booking of parks, community halls and vacant 
sites for tents have been computerized and online booking has been implemented 
w.e.f. 7.11. 2012. 
 
14 Conversion of DDA built up flats from Leasehold to Freehold has been brought in the 
purview of the Delhi (Ri ght of Citizen to Time Bound Delivery of Services), Act, 
2011." 
 
The Committee note that DDA has tried to cover its each and every activity it the list. 
However, incidence of fraud have been recurring and being frequently reported in various 
forms of media  from time to time despite putting all procedures, rules and regulation, file 
tracking system, random inspection sensitive branches by the vigilance to check delays in the 
handling of files, presence of outsiders and launching of vigilance helpline in plac e. With 
regard to fraud in allotment of marriage venues through touts/mafias, DDA has admitted that 
such cases have reduced. The Committee are compelled to infer that fraud cases are still 
persisting and the so called transparent system is only on the pape r not in practice. As per the 
rule DDA officials are supposed to undertake field visits to the marriage venues to physically 
verify the facts, however, they connive with the touts/mafias in facilitating the continuation 
of corrupt practices. 
 
In view of th is, the Committee recommend that accountability of senior officials be 
fixed in case of violation any steps mentioned above and deterrent punishment should be 
inflicted on them. Only then, the people could expect a truly transparent mechanism. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 2.17 DDA has replied that as regards the menace of tent mafia in allotment of marriage 
functions sites to touts, a detailed report has been given with various recommendations 
wherein it has been recommended that accountability for senior off icials should be fixed in 
case of violation of any steps mentioned above and deterrent punishment should be inflicted 
on them. 
 
In this regard, it is worthwhile to mention that apart from the measures mentioned in the 
report, DDA is continuously making eff orts to make the system relating to allotment of sites 
for social functions more transparent to check the so called tent mafia.  In this regard, 
following improvements were suggested which have been agreed and approved for strict 
compliance: 
 
(i) To cancel all  multiple bookings detected by the system on same card/ID/IP 
address w.e.f. 01.01.2014 and unlock and make those slots available to the public.  
Their security would be forfeited as well for multiple bookings. This will act as a 
deterrent for such malpractice. 
 
(ii) The System Department should record the same name of bride, groom and their 
parents at the time of booking for marriage itself so that fictitious names can be 
checked later on. 
(iii) The SE(HQ) in the concerned Zones must make their JEs download the 
software/application system, developed by the System Department and ensure that 
on day of each function, the JE responsible for the area would go to the site and 

48 
 
take a picture showing the name of the bride/groom written on the 
pandal/board/invitation card, with  marriage site as backdrop and 2 general 
pictures of the pandal at the site (one long shot and one close up of entry area) and 
upload the same on the DDA website slot for monitoring the temporary use of the 
plot for marriage/other function. 
 
(iv) The misused cards located by the database would be blocked from making 
marriage bookings for future. 
 
Apart from this, some other steps have also been considered to curb the menace of 
tent mafia e.g. construction of Kalyan Mandapam wherein DDA would construct some hal f 
built structure to facilitate interested persons to put their tents for their particular functions as 
per their suitability etc.  More so, this is an ongoing process for which necessary suggestive 
measures are being taken to improve the system on day to day basis. 
 
East MCD has replied that no such construction work for affordable housing scheme 
was taken up by them. However, under the erstwhile Corporation a scheme namely Dr. 
Ambedkar Awas Yojna, meant for allotment of quarters to Safai Karamcharis of MC D was 
based upon the draw of lots on Hire-Purchase Basis Flats. This was purely on the aid of Govt. 
of India. After construction, the department had allocated the dwelling units in a transparent 
manner, in the presence of dignitaries. 
 
 In the functioning of IT Deptt., Advertisement Deptt.& Remunerative Project Cell 
of EDMC also, the following efforts on transparency have been made:- 
 
(i) Work of installation of CCTV camera in EDMC (HQ) building has been completed 
and system is working properly. 
(ii) Seven services of EDMC came under e -SLA all relevant information are available 
on public domain. 
(iii) Citizen Charter of various activities has already been prepared, uploaded on public 
domain and task has to be completed as per Citizens‟ Charter. 
(iv) A Call Centre, number 155303 , 24x07 basis, has been established and working in 
EDMC (HQ) since March 2013 in order to provide single window & time bound 
solution for the problems of corporation issues to the citizen of EDMC area. 
(v) All citizens can meet to the concerned officers betwee n 11 AM to 01 PM to get the 
update of their grievances/application. 
(vi) All information regarding tender process, allotment of parking & advertisement, 
parking & advertisement polices, authorized parking & advertisement sites, maps 
of parking sites etc. are available on the official website of EDMC. 
(vii) During tender time, this department uploads all relevant information on the official 
website of EDMC apart from this the same has also published in newspaper for 
broader publicity. 
(viii) All information regarding detail s of elected & nominated members as well as 
officers is also available on official website of EDMC. 
The Vigilance Department of MCD has also given their specific comments upon point 
No. 6 & 9 of the Recommendation No. 23 in respect of MCD/EDMC, which are s tated 
below:- 
 
(i) To reduce the movement of touts in various branches, the exit/entry points in Vikas 
Sadan have been reduced from seven to three. 

49 
 
  
(ii) EDMC (HQ) is located in Udyog Sadan, Patparganj Industrial Area which houses 
various offices of Delhi  Government also. Therefore, it may not be practical to reduce the 
number of entry/exit gates in the building. Moreover, restriction on entry/exit gates may not 
be effective to control the movement of touts. Moreover, Vigilance Deptt. has not received 
any complaint regarding presence of touts in EDMC (HQ). 
 
(iii) In order to discourage presence of touts, EDMC has simplified the procedures for 
obtaining various licenses from various deptt. The Corporation has already engaged a private 
agency to assist licens e seekers and to issue trade licenses. It is proposed to extend the same 
procedure in other deptt., also. 
 
(iv) File tracking system has been implemented in the Vigilance branch and the same is 
under implementation in other branches. 
 
(v) At present moveme nt of files within Vigilance Department and out of Vigilance 
Department is done through the manual system. In order to introduce online file tracking 
system the requisite infrastructure and software are required. The staff will have to be trained 
in using the software.  
 
(vi) A request has been made to Director (IT) to implement file tracking system in 
Vigilance Department in consultation with DDA/NIC.” 
 
South DMC has given following comments:- 
 
(i)  Conversion to Free hold of properties transferred from GO I/L&E has been started w.e.f. 
24.05.2013 brochure already uploaded on site of SDMC. Special camps organized for reply 
of queries and completion of documents by public in December 2013 itself. 
(ii) Based on the manpower and resources available with SDMC, time for conversion to 
free hold has been fixed for 120 days. 
 
(iii) Being a local body since every work is attributed to public hence. No citizen charter 
for activities carried out by land and Estate has been prepared till date as tasks are being 
carried out/dispose d off to the optimum caliber of manpower and resources available with 
department. 
 
(iv) Online sanction of building plan has been implemented for fresh proposals in 
Residential plotted Development, Industrial Properties and Properties situated in Notified 
Roads, Village Abadis, Special Areas, Extension, etc. thereby resulting into quick and 
expeditious sanction. 
 
(v) All the procedures, rules and regulations are available on the website of South Delhi 
Municipal Corporation website i.e. BBL -1983, MOD -2021, D MC Act -1957, important 
Circulars, list of Notified Roads, List of Empanelled Architects/ Strl. Engineers, List of 
Building plans sanctioned, Unauthorized construction booked, etc. 
(vi) Sanction of building plan in Residential plotted Development and plans for Factory 
Buildings (Except Flatted Factory) have been brought under e-SLA 

50 
 
(vii) All the tenders are invited through e -tendering system only to increase transparency 
and check pooling of tenders. 
(viii) The EDIS System is applicable in South DMC and gene rally the estimates are 
prepared on line on the EDIS System. 
(ix) All the payments to contractors are made through RTGS system only. 
(x) On line receiving of requisitions for testing of samples and uploading of test results of 
various Engg. Material being tested has been introduced. Only delivery of sealed samples of 
materials is being done in the physical form against the print out of the online requisition 
made, duly stampled and signed by the concerned officer and that too by the departmental 
person duly authorized by EE concerned. This process is being duly checked by Auditors, as 
mandated under relevant ISO-certification. 
 
(xi) The booking of Community Halls is already computerized on first come first served 
basis is undertaken through Citizen Service B ureaus in each of the four Municipal Zones 
under South Delhi Municipal Corporation on payment of requisite fee and document for the 
period of MCD erstwhile. 
(xii)  The Layout plans, office records, circular etc. pertaining to Town Planning 
Department have been uploaded on SDMC‟s website (www.mcdonline.gov.in). There are 
two entry/exist points in Town Planning Deptt.  The records are maintained by R.K.(T) 
and administrative staff. The old records have been scanned an d files/records are kept in the 
Central Record room at MCD‟s office, Civil lines. 
 
(xiii) To curb the nuisance of tent mafia, the booking of parks for marriages and functions 
have been computerized and online booking has already in progress in South Delhi Municipal 
Corporation. 
 
(xiv) The sensitive departments are being randomly inspected to check delay in handling of 
files, attendance of staff etc. 
 
(xv) Mid-day meals of schools are also checked time to time by the officers nominated by 
Department of Education. Third party evaluation is also done through MHRD/Govt. of 
GNCTD. 
(xvi) The Vigilance Department conducts inquiries on complaints received from various 
sources as well as from public. 
(xvii) Special drives are also launched during occasion of Vigilance Awareness Week. 
 
The reply on behalf of North Delhi Municipal Corporation(NDMC) is as under:- 
(i)  The conversion of lease hold to free hold in respect of shops which were transferred 
by the Govt. of India (L&DO and DOE) to MCD, was started w.e.f. J une 2013 and wide 
publicity was made through the MCD‟s website and through the Associations of the markets. 
The information is available on the MCD‟s website as well as the booklets for sale is 
available at the office of L&E Deptt. North DMC. 
(ii)  The deficiency letters are issued in a time bound manner and as soon the deficiency is 
rectified, the case for conversion is processed. 

51 
 
(iii)  The conversion of license to lease hold and then to free hold of MCD‟s properties 
(Residential/commercial), is under pro cess for deciding the rates of conversion however, 
mutations/transfers on the request are being carried out in a set manner as approved by the 
Corporation. 
(iv)  In this regard it is worthwhile to mention that there is no complaints/grievance 
pending against the Deptt. except the cases where deficiency still persites. 
(v) Online sanction of building plans has been implemented. 
(vi) All the tenders are invited through e -tendering system only to increase transparency 
and check pooling of tenders. 
(vii) The EDIS System is applicable in North DMC and the estimates are prepared online 
on the EDIS system. 
(viii) All the payments to contractors are made through RTGS system only. 
(ix) Online receiving of requisitions for testing of samples and  uploading of test res ults of 
various Engg. Material being tested have been introduced. Only delivery of sealed samples of 
materials is being done in the physical form against the print out of the online requisition 
made, duly stamped and signed by the concerned officer and tha t too by the departmental 
person duly authorized by EE concerned. This process is being duly checked by Auditors, as 
mandated under relevant ISO-certification. 
(x) Installation of CCTVs in public areas is under process in all six zones. The CCTVs 
are already installed in four out of six zones. 
(xi) All the procedures, rules and regulations are placed on North DMC website. 
(xii) Citizen Charter in the shape of booking rules of Community Halls has already 
uploaded on Municipal Website. 
(xiii) Rules regarding booking of Community Halls have already uploaded on Municipal 
Website. 
(xiv) The Layout plans, office records, circular etc. pertaining to Town Planning 
Department have been uploaded on North DMC‟s website (www. mcdonline.gov.in). There 
are two entry/exist points in Town Planning Department. The records are maintained by R.K. 
(T) and administrative staff. The old records have been scanned and files/records are kept in 
the Central Record Room at MCD‟s office, Civil lines. 
 
(xv) To curb the nuisance of tent m afia, the booking of parks for marriages and functions 
have been computerized and online booking has already in progress in North Delhi Municipal 
Corporation. 
(xvi) The sensitive departments are being randomly inspected to check delay in handling of 
files, attendance of staff etc. 
(xvii) Mid-day meals of schools are also checked time to time by the Vigilance Department. 
(xviii) The Vigilance Department has conduct inquiries on complaints received from various 
sources as well as from public. 

52 
 
(xvix) Special drives are also launched during occasion of Vigilance Awareness Week. 
 
 
 (Recommendation Serial No. 26) 
 
NEED TO ELIMINATE THE PRESENCE OF TOUTS/AGENTS IN DDA 
 
2.18 The Committee observed that DDA has initiated some steps to bring in transparency 
in the functioning of DDA/MCD. To reduce the movement of touts in various branches, the 
exit/ entry points in Vikas Sadan have been reduced from seven to three. File tracking system 
has been implemented in the vigilance branch to see delays in handling of files, presence of 
outsiders. Installation of CCTVs is under process in the Vikas Sadan Office of DDA where 
major public dealing activities are being conducted. Directions have been issued to place on 
the website all procedures, rules and regulations so as to increase transparency. 
 
The Committee note with concern that despite all these systems in place DDA has not 
been able to eliminate the existence of touts/ agents in its office. While taking a serious view 
on this, the Committee strongly desire that DDA should  strictly ensure the compliance of the 
above steps initiated by it. The Committee further desire that CCTV should be installed in all 
the rooms of DDA at the earliest and the records of register at reception office of DDA 
should be periodically monitored i n order to see the name of frequently visited persons so 
that his/ her entry can be put under watch.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.19 DDA has replied that CCTV cameras have already been installed all over the Vikas 
Sadan including entry and exit points, and  in all the rooms/branches dealing with public and 
are being monitored. The control screen of these CCTV cameras has also been provided to 
various HODs who could monitor simultaneously about any unwanted happenings which can 
be avoided.  As regards the rec ords of Reception Office the same has been computerized and 
photo cards are also being issued to visitors to keep a check on touts/agents. Besides, 
instructions have been issued that the public dealings in every department would be held on 
all working days  from 2.30 PM to 4.30 PM and the concerned Branch Staff is present for 
public dealing in the newly constructed Facilitation Centre meant for this purpose. 
 
As recommended by the Committee, frequent inspections will continue to be carried 
out by DDA at the Reception Office to check the frequency of visiting persons. 
 
 
  

53 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Serial No. 1) 
 
Need for Amendment in the Delhi Development Act, 1957 
 
3.1 As per Section 3(3) of the Delhi Development Act, 1957, the Administrator of the 
Union Territory of Delhi is the ex -officio chairman of DDA while the Vice -Chairman is 
appointed by the Central Government. However, with the enactment of Constitution (Sixty-
Ninth Amendment) Act, 1991 conferring the statehood to Delhi, the nomenclature of 
administrator was changed to Lt. Governor. 
 
In this regard, the Committee observe that the vice -chairman of DDA is under the 
dual control of Lieutenant Governor of Delhi as well as the Union Ministry of Urban 
Development. This at times could create complex situations for him while taking vital 
decisions. Not only the Vice -Chairman but the organization on the whole gets affected in its 
working, as all the decisions in DDA are taken in the name of the Lieutenant Governor of 
Delhi, while the implementation part of the same is under the control of Union Ministry of 
Urban Development. This often creates problem in the independent working of DDA and 
badly affect s its efficiency. This unique character of the Act surprises rather baffles the 
Committee. The Committee with the help of their own research find that there is hardly any 
other law which provides such a dual control. Therefore, the Committee desire that th e 
present situation should be deliberated upon in detail with all the stakeholders and a suitable 
solution should be brought into. 
 
Further, the Committee observe that DDA is an organization having the major 
responsibility of dealing with land and its plan ned development in Delhi has to often deal 
with legal and judicial matters, but the legal and judicial member in the Authority‟s 
composition is conspicuous by its absence . In view of this the Committee feel that this is a 
big drawback in the organization and its working. 
 
Thus, the Committee strongly recommend that one judicial & legal expert should also 
be inducted into the „Authority‟ as its member. To bring these suggested changes to effect, 
the Delhi Development Act, 1957 may be suitably amended at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
3.2 As regards the Committee‟s observation that the Vice -chairman of DDA is under the 
dual control of Lieutenant Governor of Delhi as well as the Union Ministry of Urban 
Development, it is submitted that almost all the policy issues of DDA are decided by the 
Authority (DDA Board) under the chairmanship of the Lt. Governor, Delhi and only a few 
issues requiring amendment of the Act or the Master Plan of Delhi etc. are referred to the 
Ministry of Urban Development. All other day to day administrative issues are decided by the 
Vice Chairman/Lieutenant Governor. This arrangement has been working well for the last 
about 57 years and no need was ever felt for changing the structure. 
 

54 
 
So far as induction of a judicial/legal expe rt in the Authority as its Member is 
concerned, the observations of the Committee appear to be for the sake of better functioning 
and to safeguard DDA's interest in legal matters by the Committee. However, it is stated that 
at present, there is a full-fledged Legal Department in DDA headed by a Chief Legal Advisor 
being appointed from the judicial officers of Delhi or State Higher Judicial Services. CLA is 
supported by one Addl. Chief Legal Advisor, four Dy. Chief Legal Advisors, Senior Law 
Officers, Junior  Law Officers & Legal Assistants posted in the different departments of 
DDA.  These Legal Officers are deputed to various courts and are responsible for monitoring 
of pending legal matters of DDA. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
 
Redevelopment and Up-gradation of existing areas 
 
3.3 The Committee observe that MPD -2021 recommends re -development of existing 
urban areas with enhanced FAR as there is a limitation in the development of new areas due 
to shortage of land. It has been assessed that around 40% of housing needs can be potential ly 
met through re -development/up gradation of existing areas of Delhi. The Committee are 
constrained to note that DDA is now considering specific guidelines/ regulations for the same 
purposes and no specific areas have so far been taken up for this purpose. Very recently DDA 
has taken up for retro-fitting and redevelopment of unsafe buildings in Delhi. However, it has 
taken up only one such project in East Delhi as a case study.  
 
The Committee deplore the lackdaisical attitude of DDA in regard to redevelop ment 
and upgradation of existing area. The Committee strongly feel that the MPD 2021 has so far 
remained on paper only. Therefore, the Committee recommend that DDA should expedite 
concrete action in this regard. The Committee observe that MPD -2021 further recommends 
influence zone upto 500 mtrs on both sides along MRTS and major transport corridor which 
is envisaged as intensive development zone. As such re -development schemes in the 
influence zone upto 500 mtr. on both sides of the MRTS/major transport cor ridor are to be 
prepared. DDA has prepared draft regulations/guidelines for development as influence zone 
and sent to Ministry of Urban Development on 5 May 2010 for their approval. DDA is also 
working on the modalities of influence zone as Transit Oriente d Development (TOD) which 
is envisaged as higher intensive mix use /mixed income development along transport 
corridors. DDA has published a public notice on 21 December 2012 identifying four TOD 
corridors and a pilot project at Karkardooma for inviting suggestions from public. 
 
The Committee recommend that DDA should complete the procedural formalities in 
this regard at the earliest and take concrete action thereof under intimation to them. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
3.4 DDA has replied that the position regarding retrofitting of private buildings in 
Delhi is as under:  
 
(i) The retrofitting of private buildings in Delhi was proposed to be undertaken 
by DDA in September, 2012, on the suggestion of Hon‟ble L.G.  
 
(ii) However, on detailed examination, it was realized that this is not the mandate of 
DDA rather this job falls under the purview of local Municipal Corporation 

55 
 
because of the following reasons: 
 The private houses in unauthorized & resettlement colonies and jhuggii jhopri 
clusters fall under the jurisdiction of Municipal Corporations. 
 These Municipal bodies are empowered to take action against the unsafe 
structures under Article 348, 349 of Municipal Act. 
 Municipal bodies collects revenue in the form of House Tax.  
 Municipal Corporations are in a better position to collect the requisite information 
for the purpose of retrofitting/ reconstruction of these unsafe structures. 
 
(iii) Accordingly, the agenda item on these lines was put up to Authority in its meeting 
held on 27.12.2013 wherein Hon‟ble LG desired that a more 
comprehensive policy needs to be framed after detailed examination of the 
matter.  
 
(iv) Accordingly, matter was referred to the Pr. Secretary (UD), GNCTD by 
EM/DDA vide letter no. CE(Projects) 5(6)13/DDN254 dated 19 -02-2014 for 
drafting comprehensive policy in the matter in consultation with local Municipal 
Corporation.  
 
Draft regulations for redevelopment of Influence Zone along MRTS and Major 
Transport Corridors; and Underutilised/Low Density Area; Special Area, Resettlement 
Colonies, Villages, Unauthorised Colonies and JJ Clusters forwarded by DDA vide lette dated 
8.6.2012 to MoUD were considered and DDA was directed to finalise the ToD chapter and to 
send a comprehensive proposal to MoUD.   
 
The matter regarding the implementation of guidelines given in MPD 2021 and 
retrofitting and redevelopment of unsafe buildings in Delhi is to be seen by concerned local 
bodies / Engineering Deptt., DDA. 
 
The Transit Oriented Development (TOD) policy has been deliberated, discussed and 
approved at the following forums:  
 
(i) The TOD Task Force was formed by the 23 rd GBM of UTTIPEC on 21.5 .10 
for developing TOD policy for the city and pilot projects along MRTS 
corridors.  
 
(ii) The draft chapter comprising of TOD norms and standards was recommended 
by the Management Action Group (MAG) on 27.08.12 and subsequently 
presented to Advisory Group meeting under Hon'ble LG on 30.08.12, wherein 
it received in-principle approval.   
 
(iii) Authority in its meeting dated 5.10.12 approved notification of following 4 
corridors and Karkardooma TOD Pilot Project along with the draft TOD 
policy for public information:  
 
Corridor 1: Chattarpur Metro Station to Arjangarh Metro Station;  
Corridor 2:  Peeragarhi metro station to Tikri Kalan metro station; 
Corridor 3: Dwarka mor metro station to Dwarka Sector 21 metro station;  
Corridor 4:  Nehru Place metro station to Badarpur metro station, and 
Karkardooma TOD Pilot Project.  

56 
 
 
(iv) As per approval of 40 th Governing Body meeting dated 21.11.12, a series of 
21 workshops with all stakeholder groups of Delhi/NCR were conducted in 
the months of Feb-July 2013. Findings were incorporated in the TOD policy.  
 
 
(v) As per further suggestions of Commissioner Planning, DDA, the draft Chapter 
20.0 Transit Oriented Development was revised and discussed with all senior 
officers of Planning Dept. of DDA for over 6 months.  
 
(vi) The final revised TOD policy was incorporated as part of the Chapter 12.0: 
TRANSPORTATION of the Master Plan of Delhi 2021, and recommended by 
the 17 th MAG on Transport under Commissioner cum Secy. (Transport) 
GNCTD held on 16.05.14, as well as t he 13 th meeting of the Management 
Action Group (MAG) on Common Platform for Building Approvals under 
E.M. DDA held on 16.06.14. At both meetings, it was recommended to be 
placed at the next Advisory Group Meeting under the chairman of LG.  
 
(vii) At the 13 th meeting of Advisory Group to be held under the Chairmanship of 
the Hon'ble L.G., Delhi on 11.06.2014, the TOD policy was placed for 
discussion as part of the Chapter 12: TRANSPORTATION. The Section 12.4: 
Principles of TOD were approved by the Advisory Group.  
 
 
  

57 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
    Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
 
Population Growth, Housing Requirements, Targets and Achievements 
 
4.1 The Committee observed that Delhi has been witnessing migration of population 
gradually since 1947 till date leading to a critical shortage of urban infrastructure. Although 
there has been a decline in the percentage share of net migrants in the decadal growth of 
population in NCR De lhi from 45 per cent in 1961 -1971 to 39.8 per cent in 1991 -2001, in 
absolute terms the number of migrants has increased tremendously. As per census 2011, the 
total population of Delhi is 167.5 lakhs with a decadal growth of 2 per cent and density of 
population of 11,297 per square kilo meter. In absolute terms the population has increased by 
29 lakh during 2001-2011 as against 44.3 lakh in the previous decade. 
 
According to MPD 2021, natural growth has increased from 55.8 per cent in 1981 to 59.2 per 
cent in 1991 and to 60.18 per cent in 2001. While there was decrease in the net migrants from 
44.20 per cent in 1981 to 40.78 per cent in 1991 and to 39.82 per cent in 2001. However, a 
reduction in the rate of natural growth and increase in migration between 200 1 and 2021 is 
envisaged in the MPD 2021. The housing activity has been taken up by DDA since 1967 -68 
in all the zones of Delhi and from time to time. Besides, DDA provides land to MCD and 
Slum Department of the Government of Delhi for construction of night  shelters for homeless 
people. The MPD 2021 based on the projected population of 230 lakh by 2021 has estimated 
an additional housing stock requirement of about 24 lakh dwelling units. This includes an 
estimated housing requirements of 20 lakh dwelling uni ts for additional population and 
backlog of about 4 lakh units net shortage and the rest by dilapidated and kuccha structures 
requiring replacement. It has been emphasized that about 40 per cent of housing needs can be 
potentially satisfied through redevel opment/up-gradation of existing areas of Delhi. The 
remaining 60 per cent of the requirement is to be met through 14.4 lakh dwelling units in new 
areas/urban extension as per zonal development plan 2021. However, the Committee are 
distressed to note that till date the DDA has been able to raise only 11.69 lakh dwelling units. 
 
In addition, it is estimated that around 50 -55 per cent of the housing requirement would be 
for the urban poor and the economically weaker sections in the form of houses of two rooms 
or less keeping in view the socio-economic characteristic of the population. The magnitude of 
housing shortage was estimated by a technical group in the context of formulation of the 11 th 
Five Year Plan. This group estimated that the housing shortage at th e end of 10th Plan to be 
around 24.7 million for 67.4 million household. The group further estimated that 99 per cent 
of the shortage pertains to EWS and LIG sector. 
 
With regard to the targets for construction of low cost housing and LIG housing during th e 
last 20 years and the year -wise achievements made thereunder, DDA has submitted a half -
baked reply that includes only the details of houses constructed under LIG, EWS/Janta 
category during the last 20 years. 
 

58 
 
The Committee find that out of the total dwel ling units constructed by the DDA since its 
inception till date i.e. 3.94 lakhs, the houses constructed for LIG, EWS/Janta amount to only 
60,721 DUs. In percentage terms it is only 15 per cent which is far away from the 99 per cent 
shortage in EWS and LIG sectors pointed out by the Technical Group during the 11th Five 
year Plan. So far as the gap between the housing requirements projected in MPD 2021 and 
houses constructed so far is concerned, the Committee were informed by DDA that the above 
cited housing demand is to be developed by the year 2021. 
 
The Committee do not understand the logic of DDA how within a span of remaining 7 years 
of MPD it will achieve the target. In addition to this DDA has further tried to justify its 
inability to construct the required dwelling units by stating that sizable population of Delhi is 
accommodated in villages, unauthorized regularized colonies, traditional areas and 
Government housing. The Committee deplore this attitude of the DDA which has failed to 
perform its duty to construct the houses and develop the city as per plan. 
 
The Committee were further informed that as per the MPD 2021 housing is to be developed 
by various agencies such as public, private, Central/State Governments, Co -operative 
societies, residents and a ssociations. As such DDA has been able to fulfil the role of 
facilitator by providing necessary permissions for the same. The Committee, however, do not 
agree with this claim of DDA. 
 
From the replies furnished to the Committee it has been observed that ag ainst the target of 
14.4 lakhs dwelling units till date DDA has constructed only 3.94 lakhs. From the year 2003 
onwards, DDA has not allotted any land to the Co -operative Group Housing Societies for 
which DDA and the Registrar, Co -operative Societies of De lhi Government are passing the 
buck on each other and also out of 291 JJ Clusters in Delhi where Jhuggies have been laid by 
homeless people on DDA land, action for rehabilitation of only 1 jhuggi colony i.e. 
Kathputali Colony near Shadipur Depot has been taken up on a pilot basis.  
 
The DDA has claimed that as per MPD 2021 for new urban extensions development of land 
measuring about 22,000 -24,000 hectare will be taken up by private developers who are 
proposed to be involved in development of housing as per the Land Pooling Policy as notified 
by the Central Government on 5 September 2013. The Committee are perturbed to note that 
this land pooling policy is yet to be finalized and it will take a pretty long period to put into 
action. 
 
In view of the above, the  Committee are distressed to note that DDA has failed miserably to 
play the role of facilitator/provider for meeting the housing needs after 56 years of its 
existence. Therefore, the Committee strongly desire that DDA should set year -wise target for 
construction of affordable houses and adopt multi -pronged strategy to achieve the same. The 
Committee further wish that DDA should finalize the Land Pooling Policy at the earliest to 
involve the private sectors and the Co-operative Group Housing Societies to extend a helping 
hand to DDA. The Committee also recommend that both the DDA and the Registrar, 
Cooperative Group Housing Societies of Delhi Government adopt a healthy and coordinated 
approach to clear the applications for Co -operative Group Housing Societies for allotment of 
land in a time-bound manner." 
 
 
 
 

59 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.2 DDA has replied that Delhi is a metropolitan city with a population of about 1.50 
crores. Every year about 5 lac people migrate to this city. DDA is the biggest developing 
Authority in India. Till date it has constructed more than 3.5 lacs flats. Apart fro m this it has 
also developed large number of residential plots. In spite of these efforts it has not been able 
to fulf ill the demands of growing population. The main reasons being constraint of 
availability of land.  
 
As regards the allotment of land to Co -operative Group Housing Societies,  Shri Raj Kumar, 
Addl. Registrar Co-operative Societies, informed that they are verifying the list of members 
already submitted by various societies and also in pursuance of the directions of Hon'ble 
High Court of Delhi and as and when this work is complete, DDA would be informed 
accordingly.  
 
As regards the operationalization of Land Pooling Policy notified on 5.9.13, the status 
is as under:  
 
(iv) MPD 2021 Provisions: The Master Plan for Delhi 2021 notified on 
07.02.2007, envisaged planned development in Delhi through assembly of land 
through private participation.   Accordingly, a land policy based on public 
private participation in Delhi as an alternative to the large scale acquisition has 
been notified vide S.O. 2687 (E) dated 05.09.2013, after extensive discussions 
& deliberations with the stake holders, develope rs and concerned agencies 
responsible for taking development in Delhi along with financial evaluation by 
NCAER. A new chapter 19 has been added to MPD -2021 under the provisions 
of DD Act 1957.  
 
(v) Status: The action programme for operationalization of the land pooling 
policy including the draft regulations for operationalization of land pooling 
policy and the budget provisions were considered In the Authority meeting 
held on 10.01.2014 and approved by the A uthority vide Item No. 07/2014. As 
a follow up, further progress in the implementation of the policy is as follows:  
 
(d) Finalization of  the regulations for operationalization of the land 
pooling policy: The draft regulations were put up on DDA website on 
29.1.14 for receiving suggestions/views from public.  In response to this, 
about 156 suggestions have been received which have been scrutinized.  
Based on the suggestions received, the regulations have been modified. 
The modified regulations along with a numbe r of legal issues for 
operationalization of policy are being processed for legal vetting by 
competent authority. The regulations for operationalization of land 
pooling policy are likely to be finalized and notified under Section 57 of 
DD Act 1957, after approval of Ministry of Urban Development, GOI.   
 
(e) The process of declaration of 95 villages as Development Area of DDA 
and notification of 89 villages as urban villages under section 507 of 
DMC Act has already been initiated for implementing the policy.   
 

60 
 
(f) Creation of Land Pooling Cell : Creation of Land Pooling Cell was 
approved by Authority in its meetings held in March -13, July-2013 and 
Dec.2013. Presently, the cell is being headed by Addl. Commissioner 
(Plg.) with skeleton supporting staff. The process of  strengthening the 
cell is being proposed to speed up the operationalization of the land 
pooling policy. 
 
(vi) Operationalization of policy requires such regulations which may be legally 
tenable. Therefore, all aspects are being considered for smooth implementa tion 
as this is a policy which is specific for development for Delhi. 
 
Registrar of Cooperative Societies has submitted that it is responsible for registration of 
Cooperative Societies and to further regulate the management of these Cooperative Societies 
as per the provisions of DCS Acts and rules.  A total of 1974 Group Housing Societies are 
presently registered with the office of RCS, Delhi and 934 Cooperative Group Housing 
Societies have been allotted land so far by DDA as per the information provided by DDA. 
  
The proposal for allotment of land to the Cooperative Group Housing Societies in Delhi is 
considered by DDA.   As per the availability of land with them, DDA requests RCS to 
forward the name of the eligible Cooperative Group Housing Societies for c onsideration of 
allotment of land to these societies at their end.  DDA had previously made such request to 
RCS vide its letter dated 04.09.2003.  No further requisition in this regard has been received 
by RCS from DDA so far.  
 
Two writ petitions i.e. WP (C) No. 7553/2012 and WP (C) No. 1283/2014 by 23 Cooperative 
Group Housing Societies have been preferred before Hon‟ble High Court of Delhi.  The 
process of verification of members of these societies is being carried out by Court 
Commissioners and office of RCS respectively. 
Comments of the Committee 
  
4.3 For comments of the Committee please see Paragarph No. 1.9 of Chapter I of the 
Report. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
 
Problems in construction of Affordable Houses and need for expeditious 
implementation of Fast Track Land Pooling Policy 
 
4.4 The Committee observe that the DDA is facing some problems in construction of 
affordable houses. Their problems include shortage of land in Delhi, high cost of land, 
development charges and infrastructure cost, diffi culties in availability of finance to the 
needy who does not have regular employment and fixed monthly income and low -density of 
housing as per Master Plans norms etc. To overcome these problems the Committee has 
learnt that recently the Central Government  has introduced land pooling policy besides 
providing land by the DDA to MCD and slum department of the Government of Delhi for 
constructing night shelters for homeless people. During oral evidence the Committee were 
further informed that as there is scarcity of land in Delhi, DDA is now discouraging allotment 
of land to individual applicant; it will instead allot land for construction of multi -storied 
buildings. 

61 
 
 
 The Committee note that the National Urban Housing and Habitat Policy 2007 had 
advocated for an effective partnership between the public, private and co -operative sector for 
accelerated growth in the housing sector and sustainable development of the habitat. It had 
stated that 10 -15 per cent of land in every new public/private housing project or 2 0-25 per 
cent of FAR which is greater will be reserved for EWS/LIG housing through appropriate 
legal stipulations and special incentives. Regarding to the role of Co -operative Group 
Housing Society for construction of affordable housing, the Committee were  informed that in 
Group Housing, the developer shall ensure that minimum 15 per cent of the proposed FAR to 
be constructed for Community Service Personnel/EWS and lower -income category. Such 
flats should have a carpet area between 25 -40 sqm. Prior to the e nforcement of MPD 2021 it 
was made applicable to the Co -operative Group Housing Societies to contribute Rs. 25,000 
per Dwelling Units (DUs), where each DU is constructed in less than 92.90 sqm. This was 
applicable under Notification dated 09.06.1999, for all Co-operative Group Housing Societies 
applying for sanction of building plans to make contribution to housing for the economically  
weaker section. The Committee are perturbed to note that DDA has not followed all the 
above provisions to bind the Co -operative Group Housing Societies to construct houses for 
the lower-income group. This is evident from the replies furnished by DDA that it was not 
mandatory on the part of the Co -operative Group Housing Societies to construct houses for 
the lower -income group because the societies generally construct dwelling units for its 
bonafide members and the Members of a CGHS are enrolled by the Society as per the 
eligibility criteria provided in the Delhi Cooperative Societies Act and rules framed 
thereunder under which the income of an individual is not linked to the eligibility criteria. 
The CGHS constructs dwelling units for its bonafide members who were enrolled keeping in 
view the eligibility criteria provided by the statute. The Committee find the contradictions in 
the above provisions. In view of the above the Committee strongly recommend to bring 
uniformity in all the policies and rules so that it will be mandatory on the part of the Co -
operative Group Housing Societies to construct houses for the economically-weaker sections. 
 
The Committee further note that in the recently announced Land Pooling Policy it has 
been envisaged that development of land measuring about 22,000 -24,000 hectare will be 
taken up by the private developers. As per the said policy, maximum 53%  of the land is for 
gross residential use which will provide 50,000 DUs approximately for economically weaker 
sections, for every 1000 hectare of land pooled. Further, FAR of 400 is allowed to meet the 
residential requirement and 15 per cent of FAR over an d above of the permissible FAR is 
reserved for EWS housing. The Committee note that this policy is still undergoing the 
process of finalization. 
 
Keeping in view the magnitude of shortage of houses for EWS, mushrooming of 
encroachments of precious Government land and problems in regularization of unauthorized 
colonies in Delhi, the Committee desire that DDA should take concerted effort to finalize the 
Land Pooling Policy and take appropriate action in this regard at the earliest. They further 
desire that DDA should undertake fast track process and complete the construction of entire 
EWS houses within a stipulated timeframe. 
 
  

62 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.5 As regards the finalization of Land Pooling Policy, as notified on 5.09.2013, the status 
given by DDA is as under:  
 
(i) MPD 2021 provisions: The Master Plan for Delhi 2021 notified on 
07.02.2007, envisaged planned development in Delhi through assembly 
of land through private participation.  Accordingly, a land pooling 
policy based on public private participation in Delhi as an alternative to 
the large scale acquisition has been notified vide S.O. 2687 (E) dated 
05.09.2013, after extensive discussions & deliberations with the stake 
holders, developers and concerned agencies responsible for taking 
development in Delhi along with financial evaluati on by NCAER. A 
new chapter 19 has been added to MPD -2021 under the provisions of 
DD Act 1957.  
(ii) Status: The action programme for operationalization of the land 
pooling policy including the draft regulations for operationalization of 
land pooling policy and the budget provisions were considered In the 
Authority meeting held on 10.01.2014 and approved by the Authority 
vide Item No. 07/2014. As a follow up, further progress in the 
implementation of the policy is as follows:  
 
(a) Finalization of the regulations for operationalization of the land 
pooling policy: The draft regulations were put up on DDA website 
on 29.1.14 for receiving suggestions/views from public.  In 
response to this, about 156 suggestions have been received which 
have been scru tinized. Based on the suggestions received, the 
regulations have been modified. The modified regulations along 
with a number of legal issues for operationalization of policy are 
being processed for legal vetting by competent authority. The 
regulations for operationalization of land pooling policy are likely 
to be finalized and notified under Section 57 of DD Act 1957, after 
approval of Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India. 
 
(b)   The process of declaration of 95 villages as Development Area of 
DDA and notification of 89 villages as urban villages under section 
507 of DMC Act has already been initiated for implementing the 
policy.   
 
(c) Creation of Land Pooling Cell : Creation of Land Pooling Cell 
was approved by Authority in its meetings held in March -13, July-
2013 and Dec.2013. Presently, the cell is being headed by Addl. 
Commissioner (Planning) with skeleton supporting staff. The 
process of strengthening the cell is being proposed to speed up the 
operationalization of the land pooling policy. 
 
(iii) Operationalization of policy requires such regulations which may be 
legally tenable. Therefore, all aspects are being considered for smooth 
implementation as this is a policy which is specific for development for 
Delhi. 

63 
 
 
As regards the construction of entire EWS houses within a stipulated 
timeframe, the targets for construction of affordable houses have been prepared. 
As on date, 25242 houses are under construction and 37215 houses are likely to be 
taken up for construction . Besides, DDA has already taken up 3000 DUs in Kalkaji 
and 2400 DUs for Kathputli for In-situ rehabilitation. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
  
4.6 For Comments of the Committee please see Paragraph No. 1.9 of Chapter I of the 
Report 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
 
Providing basic services to the affordable houses constructed by DDA 
 
4.7 The Committee note that the DDA has constructed LIG and EWS houses since 1996 -
67 in all the zones of Delhi. The basic services like potable water, well -laid drainage system, 
sewerage network, sanitation facilities,  electricity, recreational space, etc. have also been 
provided for these houses. However, during the local study visit of the Committee to Sector 
14 of Dwarka, Delhi during the month of December 2012, the Committee observed that the 
DDA houses were in dila pidated condition. The basic services for the inhabitants were very 
poor.  
 
 The designated areas for park were used for dumping purposes leading to many health 
hazards. When enquired about the same DDA passed the responsibility to MCD for poor 
maintenance by stating that it does not have any role to play once these services are 
transferred to the civic agencies. When the Committee felt that DDA should coordinate with 
the civic agencies for proper maintenance, DDA has stated that it has started interacting with 
the MCD and Delhi Jal Board to address the issues related to adequate supply of water. The 
Committee are distressed to note that the DDA initiated action to redress the grievances of 
the inhabitants of sector 14, Dwarka, Delhi only after their interfe rence. Therefore, the 
Committee strongly recommend that DDA should play pro -active role and send its officials 
for undertaking physical verifications in all the zones of Delhi and take up the matter with 
MCD for proper maintenance of EWS houses. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.8 DDA has replied that the services of all the colonies have been transferred to local 
Bodies i.e. MCD, DJB, PWD & DISCOMS for their maintenance after completion of the ~ 
services.  
As far as maintenance of EWS houses is concerned , DDA is working out to frame a 
policy for complete civil & electrical services maintenance for 30 years. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
 
4.9 For Comments of the Committee please see Paragraph No. 1.12 of Chapter I of the 
Report. 

64 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
 
Need for integrated approach for slum development 
 
4.10 The Committee observe from the replies of DDA that the main reason for creation of 
slums in Delhi is lack of housing infrastructure for low -income group people such as daily 
wagers, rag-pickers, hawkers, etc. Another reason is non-utilization of land earmarked for the 
schools, hospitals, green areas, etc. by the concerned agencies. 
 
The Committee note that the Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board 
(DUSIB) had come into existence on 1st July, 2010 whose mandate are as under: 
 
"Creation of Housing stock for the poor sections of the society and for the 
implementation of provisions of Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) Act, 
1956.” 
 
Envision for improvement of the living conditions of the slum dwellers, 
including the JJ Clusters (jhuggie jhopri basties), in order to make Delhi a „Slum Free 
City". 
 
The Committee note that no such Project Team has been constituted under 
DUSIB. However, one or two pilot projects are being proposed to be ta ken up on PPP 
basis on Mumbai pattern for in -situ development of JJ clusters on DUSIB lands. The 
Sr. Commissioner (LM) has been designated nodal officer for monitoring of in -situ 
development schemes. A project report for in -situ development of JJ clusters is being 
prepared by Engineering Wing in consultation with the Land Management, Finance, 
Legal Departments. 
 
The Committee further observe that Delhi Government has made Delhi Urban 
Shelter Improvement Board (DUSIB) as nodal agency for Slum Free Plan of Ac tion 
for whole of Delhi under Rajiv Awaas Yojana of Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Poverty Alleviation, Government of India. There are 685 JJ Clusters in Delhi which 
are owned by various land owning agencies. About 51% clusters are on DDA land, 
8% each on R ailway and MCD, 6% each on Delhi Government and CPWD/L&DO, 
15% on DUSIB lands, 2% Delhi Cantt., 1% each on NDMC and others. 
 
On the question of the role of DDA in improvement of slums in Delhi, the 
Committee also observe that DDA provides land to MCD & Slu m Deptt. for 
constructing night shelters for homeless people. As of now there are 291 JJ clusters in 
Delhi where jhuggies are existing on DDA land. Action for rehabilitation of these 
jhuggy dwellers is being taken by DDA by way of In -situ development. The 
Committee are constrained to note that only one project for Kathputali Colony near 
Shadipur Depot was awarded to the developer and in the month of February, 2014 the 
inhabitants have been shifted to Anand Parvat, Delhi.  
 
The work for construction of 3000 EWS houses for jhuggy dwellers at A -14 
Kalkaji Extension has been awarded. And for balance works, action is being taken on 
priority. 

65 
 
 
From the above, the Committee feel that the dream to make Delhi a slum free 
State cannot be realized. Neither the State Go vernment of Delhi nor DDA has taken 
any concrete action in this regard. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that 
the DDA should in coordination with DSUIB, take positive action at the earliest. 
 
At the same time the Committee want to express their anguish on the fact that 
these JJ clusters have not taken shape overnight. There must be a pretty long time. 
The Committee fail to understand as to what DDA and other agencies were doing 
when these JJ Clusters were coming up. They hold all these agencies r esponsible for 
this mess that has been created in Delhi and now they are passing buck to one and 
another. This is not acceptable to the Committee. They take note of the DDA reply 
that since 2007 no JJ Clusters has come up. The Committee want that at least from 
now all the agencies involved should gear up themselves and check the rise of JJ 
Clusters. The Committee want that individual responsibility should be fixed for any 
lapse in this regard. They want to be apprised of the position in this regard 
periodically stating the position of JJ clusters in Delhi before and after presentation of 
this report. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
4.11 DDA has replied that at present about 291 JJ Clusters are existing on DDA land. 
DDA has started action for rehabilitating the residents of these JJ clusters by way of In -
Situ Development. As a pilot project In -Situ Development of JJ Cluster at Kathputly 
Colony near Shadipur Depot consisting of about 2800 jhuggies has been taken up. 
Transit accommodation has been provided for shifting these Jhuggie Dwellers.  
 
The main hurdle is the resistance of Jhuggie dwellers to shift to the transit Camp . DDA is 
following DSUIB guidelines for id entifying the eligible Jhuggie Dwellers. The work of In -
Situ rehabilitation at A -14, Kalkaj i has already been taken up . The wo rk of in-situ 
rehabilitation at Jailorwala Bagh is also being taken up.   
 
The Committee‟s suggestions have been noted for compliance by DDA.  
 
Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board has replied that the policy of Slum Clearance under 
the Slum Areas (Improvement and Clearance) Act, 1956 has been abandoned by the 
Government of India during 1985 and no action is being taken by the Slum & JJ Department / 
DUSIB since then.  No housing stock under this scheme is being created by the Slum & JJ 
Deptt / DUSIB after 1985.  
 
Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board has further replied that presently 685 JJ Clu sters 
have been identified for improvement of living conditions of slum dwellers.  DUSIB is a 
Nodal Agency for the purpose of relocation of prioritized JJ Clusters as per the rehabilitation 
policy of UD Department, GNCTD.  The status of the prioritized clusters is as under:- 
 
Total No. of prioritized jhuggi clusters   :  91 
Total No. of jhuggi clusters surveyed    :  68 
Total No. of JJ clusters where process of determination is going on: 26 
 

66 
 
 
Details of 26 Clusters:- 
 
Total No. of jhuggies surveyed    :  8019 
Total No. of JJ Dwellers appeared    :  4731 
Total No. of JJ Dwellers found eligible   :  3763 
Total No. of JJ Dwellers found ineligible   :  968 
Total No. of beneficiaries possession given to  :  266  
 
DUSIB is constructing flats under JNNURM Scheme and about 18,000 flats 
are at various stage of construction. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
  
4.12 For comments of the Committee please see Paragarph No. 1.15 of Chapter I of the 
Report. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
 
Unauthorized Colonies where more than 50% of area is un-built 
 
4.13 The Committee have been informed that the work related to regularization of 1,639 
unauthorized colonies is being undertaken, coordinated, monitored and supervised by 
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD), including 246 colonies falling 
on DDA land. The following criteria were to be followed: 
 
(a) The colony should have 10% built up area as per 2002 aerial photographs.  
 
(b) The colony should have more than 50% built up area as per aerial 
photographs of 2007.  
 
(c) Boundary of such colonies were delineated by Survey of India/ GSDL and 
were finalized vide order dated 4.9.2012 issued by GNCTD. 
 
The Committee are aware that a large number of unauthorized colonies which 
have applied for regularization, are not covered under guidelines issued for in this 
regard. 
The main reason for non -inclusion in the ambit of regularization as well as 
development is that those colonies were having less than 50 per cent built up area as 
on 8th February 2007. 
 
The Committee are of the view that keeping the issue of regularization of all 
such colonies in abeyance will keep a good number of urban poor at bay from their 
right of leading a dignified life with all civic amenities. Furthermore, it will fail to 
check the alleged thefts of electrici ty and water, to which the residents of such 
colonies are compelled to, thus, leading to a loss of revenue to the exchequer. 
 
Therefore, the Committee recommend strongly for relaxation in norms for 
regularization of all such colonies so that development work is carried out. In addition 
to this, the Committee fail to understand the logic behind announcing 'the 

67 
 
regularization of unauthorized colonies' and without making any substantial efforts in 
making it a reality. The Committee feel that the public was che ated as the 
announcement of regularization of 1639 unauthorized colonies turned out to be a 
farce. Hence, the Committee, while deploring the dilly -dallying tactics of parties 
involved strongly recommend that keeping in view the ground realties of the Capit al 
of India the regularization as well as development in all such colonies should be 
completed within a time limit of 3 years. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.14 The Government of India has already framed regulations for regularisation of 
unauthorised colonies inhabited by non-affluent sections in Delhi which have been notified in 
official gazette on 24.3.2008. Further amendments to the regulations have been carried out 
and notified on 16.6.2008 and 6.6.2012. GNCTD is coordinating and supervising the entire 
process of regularization of unauthorized colonies in Delhi. 1639 colonies have applied for 
regularisation on the basis of public notice issued by GNCTD.  GNCTD has identified 895 
colonies for regularization. The order for development works in 895 regularised  colonies has 
already been issued by GNCTD and the basic services such as roads, drinking water and 
sewerage system etc. are being undertaken in 895 unauthorised colonies (UCs) and other such 
UCs which fulfill the criteria laid down in the regulation dated 24.3.2008. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
4.15 For comments of the Committee please see Paragraph No.  1.18 of Chapter I of the 
Report. 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
 
Fate of Unauthorized Colonies posing hindrances in generating infrastructure facilities 
 
4.16 The Committee have been informed that the unauthorized colonies falling under the 
jurisdiction of local bodies or DDA and posing hindrance in providing infrastructure facilities 
or fall in the area of Right of Way (RoW) of existing/ proposed railway lines, master plan 
roads, major/ trunk water supply & sewerage lines, regional park, along with the area posing 
hindrance in the provisions of infrastructural facilities, are not eligible for regularization as 
per clause 3.3 9b of notification dated 24.03. 2008 of Regulations for Regularization of 
unauthorized colonies in Delhi, issued by DDA would be deleted from the regularization 
process by GNCTD.  
 
The Committee are fully in consonance with the notification issued by DDA. But the 
issue that is agitating the mind of the Committee is the unexpected and stoic silence of 
GNCTD and DDA on the fate of residents of such colonies. From the foregoing the 
Committee can infer that these colonies are on the verge of removal. Thus, the Committee 
strongly recommend tha t all such colonies should be re -located to suitable places with 
minimum possible displacement, so that the livelihood earnings of residents are not adversely 
affected. 
 

68 
 
If needed, specific and requisite amendments should be made in the notification to 
address this concern of the Committee and cater to the needs of residents of all such colonies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.17 Government of NCT of Delhi has stated that the regulation mandates plotting of DDA 
hindrances.  MoUD is of the view that it is for GNCTD to take action for rehabilitation for 
replaced persons as per their policy. 
 
      
Comments of the Committee 
 
4.18 For comments of the Committee please see Paragraph No. 1.24 of Chapter I of the 
Report. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
 
Encroachment of DDA Lands and fixing the responsibility of officials whose negligence 
resulted in encroachment 
 
4.19 The unauthorized colonies are a reality not only in Delhi but in all the major urban 
cities across the nation. The Committee feel one of the main reason s for this is that the 
common land in urban villages, Towns/ Cities is being usurped by influential people for self 
and illegal occupants protected by Vote Bank Politics. 
 
This is clearly reflected in the information provided by the Ministry and DDA where 
they have stated that reclaiming the land that has been encroached prior to the year 2007 is 
not possible due to GNCTD Special (Provision) Act, 2011 extended up to 31.12.2014. 
Therefore, the Committee would like to recommend that Land Records should be sur veyed 
and mutations done as per Revenue records. Each Khasra Khatauni with division should be 
recorded. This should be done at par with amended Waqf Lands Acts, 2013. 
 
Moreover, as per the Annual Report 2010 -11 the most important function of Land 
Management Department of DDA is to protect DDA land from encroachments. Thus, it is 
quite clear that the duty for checking unauthorized occupation of DDA land and vacating the 
encroached land is cast on the officers concerned. The officials are supposed to detect a nd 
verify the encroachments and get them removed. However, the data provided by DDA speaks 
otherwise as 1402.16 acre of DDA land is under encroachment in various parts of Delhi, 
while during last five years only 402.428 acre of land could be reclaimed by D DA. This data 
is contrary to the claim that as and when the case of any encroachment on DDA land comes 
to the notice of Delhi Development Authority (DDA), action to remove it was taken as per 
law. This is clearly indicative of inaction on the part of DDA o fficials. This has resulted in 
the burden on the resources of State Government as well as DDA. The Committee are of the 
view that if the concerned officials perform their duties honestly and diligently, then it will 
become impossible for the encroachers to  lay hands on the Government land. They are of the 
view that the encroachment should be nipped in the bud. The Committee have come to know 
that Government of Delhi has created a sub -divisional level Special Task Force to check 
encroachment on the public la nd. Their assistance is being obtained whenever any new 
encroachment is noticed. But Committee regret that measures to reclaim the encroached land 
have utterly failed. The Committee, therefore, would like to recommend that the 

69 
 
accountability of officials b e fixed with deterrent punishment whose negligence/ 
favoritism/involvements in corrupt practices has resulted in the encroachment. The 
Committee are of the view that concerted efforts be made to identify the concerned officials. 
The Committee insist that t he Ministry and DDA should fix responsibility in those matters 
after digging the old cases and if the connivance of officials is proved, exemplary punishment 
should be inflicted on them. A status report in this regard should be submitted to the 
Committee within three months of the presentation of the report incorporating the position 
before and after presentation of this report. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.20 GNCTD has replied that the issue relates to DDA.  DDA has replied that the 
unscrupulous elements who do not have the fear of law are always ready to encroach the 
Govt. Lands. The available work force under Land Management Department is insufficient to 
protect the large chunks of DDA's open land which could not be put to use for decades, 
though the lands were acquired for Planned Development of Delhi.  
 
Encroaching a public land by un-lawful elements became a regular feature in Delhi in 
view of the uncontrol led population living and further migrating to Delhi, which has 
insufficient planned housing. Removal and demolition of encroachments on DDA land is a 
time consuming affair, which requires approval of the higher authorities, checking the court 
cases, stay orders etc., sensitiveness from the law and order point of view, checking whether 
any encroachment is protected by Special (Provision) Act, 2011 extended upto 31.12.2014 
applicable in Delhi.  
 
Within the means available in the DDA the Land Management Depar tment conducts 
encroachment removal programs after due approvals. In cases where the involvement of 
official is found, disciplinary actions are taken. Matters of such connivance are examined by 
the Vigilance Department of DDA. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
4.21 For comments of the Committee please see Paragraph No. 1.27 of Chapter I of the 
Report. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
 
Delay in Land Allotment by DDA and RCS to Cooperative Group Housing Societies 
waiting for years 
 
4.22 The Delhi Co -operative Societies Act 1972 has helped to achieve new heights in 
establishing the culture of Co -operative Group Housing Societies (CGHS). The Act aimed to 
facilitate the voluntary formation and democratic functioning of co -operative societies as 
people‟s institutio ns based on self help and mutual aid to enable them to promote their 
economic and social betterment and to provide for regulation and management, functional 
autonomy of such societies. Thus, the moot question remains whether the Act and the 
concerned organ izations (DDA & RCS) responsible for implementing the same have been 
able to fulfill the expectations of public or not. 
 

70 
 
The Committee were informed by the public representatives through representations as well 
as during the course of oral evidence that De lhi Development Authority has neither offered 
land to the Co -operative Group Housing Societies nor sought recommendations from 
Registrar Co -operative Societies, NCT of Delhi after the stay Order dated 18th June 2004 
CWP(C) No. 10066/2004 for the operation and effect of communication dated 25 th March 
2004 whereby additional list of 35 societies was sent by Registrar Co -operative Society for 
land allotment. And, likewise the Registrar Co -operative Society did not send 
recommendation after the above said order. 
 
Further the Committee were also made aware of response to Lok Sabha unstarred question 
No.4546 fixed for 20 August 2010 and as well as of the observation of the High Court of 
Delhi where it has categorically emphasized in its order dated 03rd October 20 05 in WP (C) 
No. 10066/2004 and CM. 10514/2005 that we would not like a single genuine society or a 
genuine member to be either harassed or denied their right of allotment. 
 
On this issue, DDA put forth the reason that DDA has allotted land to all such eli gible 
societies, whose names were forwarded by RCS to DDA from time to time and no case is 
pending for allotment of land in DDA. The scope of carving out further land for allotment to 
CGHS can be considered on receipt of further recommendation from RCS. 
 
As regards developing and further allotting of land to Cooperative Group Housing Societies, 
DDA further informed the Committee that this requires large scale acquisition and the same 
can be taken up by DDA only on land being made available by the State Gove rnment. DDA 
is always prepared to develop and allot land to CGHS. 
 
From the submission of DDA, it appeared that RCS was not active in allotting land to CGHS. 
But when the Committee inquired the RCS office in this regard, their reply which is produced 
below, compelled the Committee to think otherwise of DDA. "As per section 9(1) (f) of Delhi 
Co-operative Societies Act, 2003, the confirmation of availability of land to the Co -operative 
Group Housing Society from land allotting agency is required by this office at the time of 
applying for registration. However, no application for registration of Co -operative Group 
Housing Societies alongwith the confirmation of availability of land from Delhi Development 
Authority as stated above has been received in last ten years" 
 
From the foregoing the Committee find lack of transparency and sincerity on the part of both 
RCS as well as DDA, at least in connection with allotment of land to CGHS. It appears that 
RCS and DDA are in connivance and are responsible for delay in land allotment to the 
Cooperative Group Housing Societies. This attitude of RCS and DDA of passing the buck to 
each other leads to nothing but the harassment of members of such societies, who have been 
dreaming of a roof over their heads for decades and suffering financially as well as mentally. 
 
The Committee noted with pain that the citizenry are compelled to approach judiciary for its 
intervention and order to RCS Delhi for verification of documents and thus recommend in 
unequivocal terms that RCS sho uld be totally transparent in its working by clearly 
mentioning on its official website all the documents and permissions required to be submitted 
by CGHS while applying for land allotment. 
 
At the same time, the Committee further recommend DDA to take up this issue of allotment 
of land to all remaining eligible CGHS waiting for the same on priority basis after completing 

71 
 
the required exercise without any further delay, within a span of 3 -4 months. The Committee 
would like to have a quarterly progress report in this regard." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.23 Registrar of Cooperative Societies has submitted that it is responsible for registration 
of Cooperative Societies and to further regulate the management of these Cooperative 
Societies as per the provisions of DCS Acts and rules.  A total of 1974 Group Housing 
Societies are presently registered with the office of RCS, Delhi and 934 Cooperative Group 
Housing Societies have been allotted land so far by DDA as per the information provided by 
DDA. 
  
The proposal for allotment of land to the Cooperative Group Housing Societies in Delhi is 
considered by DDA.   As per the availability of land with them, DDA requests RCS to 
forward the name of the eligible Cooperative Group Housing Societies for consideration of 
allotment of land to these societies at their end.  DDA had previously made such request to 
RCS vide its letter dated 04.09.2003.  No further requisition in this regard has been received 
by RCS from DDA so far.  
 
Two writ petitions i.e. WP (C) No. 7553/2012 and  WP (C) No. 1283/2014 by 23 Cooperative 
Group Housing Societies have been preferred before Hon‟ble High Court of Delhi.  The 
process of verification of members of these societies is being carried out by Court 
Commissioners and office of RCS respectively. 
 
DDA has replied that it allots land to the CGHS on the basis of recommendations made by 
RCS. RCS is already seized of the matter and the work related to verification of members of 
societies is going on and the further course of action will be taken on rece ipt of specifi c 
recommendations from the RCS. 
Comments of the Committee 
  
4.24 For comments of the Committee please see Paragarph No. 1.30 of Chapter I of the 
Report. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18) 
 
CONVERSION OF PROPERTY FROM LEASEHOLD TO FREEHOLD 
 
4.25 The Committee observe that allotment of DDA built up flats and flats of CGHS made 
upto 1992 was on leasehold basis. But, the residential and commercial plots and flats are 
being allotted on free-hold basis w.e.f. 1.1.2007, the lease-hold properties are being converted 
into freehold as per policy and guidelines issued by Ministry of Urban Development in the 
year 1991. 45 days is the prescribed period for converting DDA built up flats and CGHS flats 
and 90 days for other properties. From the data submitted b y DDA, the Committee observe 
that during the last five years from 1.12.2007 to 30.11.2012, 24,589 number of applications 
have been received from Housing Department of DDA for conversion of leasehold to 
freehold and 27,157 applications have been disposed of . Still, 944 applications are pending. 
From the Cooperative Group Housing Societies DDA has received 6,612 applications and it 
has disposed of 1254 applications. 5,458 applications are still pending. The Committee have 
learnt that the main reasons for such  large-scale pendency are because deficiencies are not 

72 
 
completed by the applicants such as non -submission of required documents and non -deposit 
of demanded amounts such as ground rent, misuse, damage charges, etc. 
 
DDA has further submitted that it has started online application for conversion from 
leasehold to freehold in the year 2012. Keeping in view the pendency of large number of 
flats/plots for conversion of leasehold to freehold non submission of required documents and 
non-deposit of demanded amou nt, the Committee are of the view that only by extending the 
facility for online application is not the solution to the problem. From the above, the 
Committee are compelled to conclude that the process is not at all transparent. There is an 
urgent need to make the system transparent and people friendly. In this regard the Committee 
recommended that the DDA in its website should clearly make a mention about the list of 
documents and the amount required for conversion of leasehold to freehold. Further while 
submitting the application, DDA should give receipt of the application along with the list of 
documents received from the applicants. This will not only release the burden of DDA but 
also facilitate it to do the needful within the prescribed time -frame. Fur ther, this will stop 
harassment of public by the DDA officials. 
 
The Committee further observe that one of the reasons attributed for slow clearance of 
applications for conversion of leasehold to freehold is non -deposit of demanded amount such 
as ground rent, misuse and damage charges which many a time exceed the cost of the plots or 
flats. Recently DDA has decided to provide a special one time relief, where in a maximum 
period for levy of misuse charges will be restricted to five years from the date of det ection of 
misuse. The Committee welcome such people friendly steps. At the same time the Committee 
are of view that to stop misusing the flats by carrying out unwanted alterations/extensions, 
DDA should undertake regular physical verification of all the DD A built flats and CGHS 
flats every year and maintain proper records thereof and provide stringent punishment so that 
people will not dare to carry out any unwanted alteration/extension in the flats without prior 
permission of DDA." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.26 DDA has replied that it does not undertake regular physical verification of the built up 
flats and group housing flats as it may invite protest/criticism from public that the officials of 
the DDA are harassing the flat owners. The verification is un dertaken as and when any 
complaint in this regard is received. It was also noted that the services of almost all the 
societies and DDA colonies have been transferred to the MCD and necessary action in this 
regard is to be taken by MCD.  
 
As on 31 st May, 2014, out of the 105473 applications received in Housing Department for 
conversion of DDA flats from leasehold to freehold, 104070 applications have been disposed 
of and 1913 applications are pending. To clear pendency of conversion applications, regular 
monitoring at various levels is undertaken. Apart from this, various Lok Shivirs have been 
organized recently in which large number of cases have been disposed of.  
 
In order to streamline and bring more transparency in the process of conversion of properties  
from leasehold to freehold, DDA has undertaken many steps including setting up of Nagrik 
Suvidha Kendras (NSK) at Dwarka, Rohini, Laxmi Nagar and at I.N.A., Vikas Sadan. At 
these NSKs, complete application form regarding conversion of property into freeho ld is 
received and the applications are processed in a time bound manner. The application form for 
conversion has also been simplified.  

73 
 
 
It is also intimated that as per present policy, unauthorized construction is not a bar to allow 
conversion of flat fr om leasehold to freehold. Enforcement Cell of the Housing Department 
regularly checks unauthorized construction/encroachment in DDA built flats in areas which 
are still under the jurisdiction of DDA and have not yet been handed over to the concerned 
municipal authorities.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
  
4.27 For comments of the Committee please see Paragarph No. 1.33 of Chapter I of the 
Report. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19) 
 
ALLOTMENT OF ALTERNATIVE PLOTS/FLATS 
 
4.28 The Committee observe that as of now DDA  has acquired land in 240 villages for 
undertaking various types of development in Delhi. DDA allots alternative plots to the 
villages on the basis of the recommendations received from the Land and Building 
Department of GNCTD. Necessary guidelines in this  regard have been issued by GNCTD. 
No separate guidelines have been issued by DDA. The allotment of an alternative plot is 
made by DDA as per seniority fixed on the basis of date of taking of physical possession of 
acquired land by Land and Building Depart ment of GNCTD, for respective size category and 
zone before holding draws of lots. Till now 10,675 alternative allotments have been made to 
the farmers whose land had been acquired. As on date, 68 recommendations letters issued by 
the Land and Building Department of NCT of Delhi are lying pending due to non -availability 
of plots of respective size. 
 
Further, the Committee observe that the affected people from whom DDA is acquiring land 
spent their hard earned money to buy a single flat/plot. By acquiring a particular area for any 
developmental purpose, people residing in that area are not only deprived of their property, 
but also their livelihood. Further, during oral evidence, the Committee came to know that all 
over Delhi people are airing grievances, beca use DDA acquires the land and pay 
compensation after many years of taking possession but at the older rates. In many a cases, 
DDA has taken over one independent house but given them one EWS flat. Therefore, the 
Committee are pained to conclude that people are not adequately compensated. 
 
The Committee are further distressed to note that DDA acquires the land, for various 
development purposes but does not have its own policy for paying compensation and it is 
totally dependent on the policy for project affect ed persons evolved by the Government of 
NCT of Delhi. The Vice -Chairman, DDA during oral deposition has admitted that whether it 
is land for land or value for value or whether it is providing accommodation, is a policy 
matter and he will definitely raise i t in the right quarters and a conscious decision will be 
taken so that the interests of the affected persons are protected. 
 
In view of the above state of affairs, the Committee recommend that instead of depending 
upon the policy of Government of Delhi, DD A should evolve its own policy and extend 
adequate and timely compensation as per market rate on the date of paying compensation. 
The Committee also desire that compensation should be paid in a stipulated timeframe. " 

74 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
4.29 The land is acquired by the Land Acquisition Collectors (LACs) appointed by Govt. 
of NCT of Delhi and the compensation is also paid by LACs as per provisions of the Land 
Acquisition Act. The nodal secretariat in this regard is Land and Building Department of 
Govt. of NCT of Delhi.  
 
As regards, allotment of alternative plots/flats is concerned as a part of rehabilitation 
package, the same is allotted by the DDA on the basis of specific recommendations made by 
Land and Building Department of Govt. of NCT of Delhi.  
 
The compensation was being paid as per the provisions of Land Acquisition Act 1894 on 
receipt of the demands by the Land & Building Dept., GNCTD.   The Govt. of India has 
reviewed the policy relating to payment of compensation and new Act „The Rig ht to Fair 
Compensation & Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act -
2013‟ has been made applicable w.e.f. 01.01.2014 and therefore, revised rates, which are 
more than the market rates, would now be paid to the farmers, whose lan d is to be acquired 
by the Govt. 
 
Under Section 15 of the Delhi Development Act, 1957, the DDA takes possession of the land 
acquired by the Central Government for the purpose of development or for any other purpose. 
Section 15 of the DD Act read as follows: 
 
Section 15: Compulsory Acquisition of Land 
 
(iii) If in the opinion of the Central Government, any land is required for the purpose of 
development, or for any other purpose, under this Act, the Central government may 
acquire such land under the provision of t he Land Acquisition Act 1.69984 (1 of 
1894). 
(iv) Where any land has been acquired by the Central Government, that Government may, 
after it has taken possession of the land, transfer the land to the Authority or any local 
authority for the purpose for which the  land has been acquired on payment by the 
Authority or the local authority the compensation awarded under that Act and of the 
charges incurred by the government in connection with the acquisition. 
 
As regards new Act of land acquisition i.e. "The Right to Fair Compensation and 
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013", the central 
government is currently in the process of consultations with the state governments and other 
stake holders and contemplating certain modificatio ns/amendments in the Act to address 
certain issues. " 
 
Comments of the Committee 
  
4.30 For comments of the Committee please see Paragarph No. 1.36 of Chapter I of the 
Report. 
 
 

75 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20) 
 
CRITERIA FOLLOWED IN ALLOTMENT OF LAND FOR CONSTRUCTION OF 
HOTELS, MALLS, SCHOOLS etc. 
 
4.31 The Committee observe that as per Master Plan 3% of land acquired under the 
acquisition, development and disposal of land in Delhi is utilized for commercial use. From 
2006 onwards DDA has disposed of 158 c ommercial plots and 24 plots for hotels. The 
Committee are, however, distressed to note that during the last ten years only 23 sites have 
been allotted for bus depots against the demand of 31 by the GNCTD. Five sites are under 
process. In remaining 3 cases , the site requested at I.P extension is under encroachment 
whereas in Rohini Sector 11 and Ghazipur no land is available. Against the demand of 35 
police stations by the Delhi Police, DDA has allotted 25 sites, 5 sites for allotment are under 
process. In remaining 5 cases allotment cannot be made as no site is available. 
 
During the period 2002 to 2013, DDA has allotted 7 hospital sites and 16 sites for Senior 
Secondary schools and 2 sites for secondary schools. The Committee were further informed 
that the facilities such as school, hospitals, markets, and commercial areas are assigned as per 
the population requirement. There is no preference given in Master Plan for developing a 
land parcel/pocket for commercial areas in comparison to the land for public o r semi public 
use like school and hospital. 
 
However, the number of allotment of land for commercial plots for malls have outnumbered 
the allotment of plots/sites for necessary infrastructural facilities for schools, hospitals, bus 
depots and police statio ns. Keeping in mind the growing population of Delhi, their health 
problems, education and law and order problem, the Committee strongly recommend that 
DDA should make necessary changes in the Master Plan to give preference to these basic 
infrastructure. Th e Committee were further informed that sanction for Building plans are 
much faster and quicker, if all the documents required for are attached. 
 
For this the Committee desire that for faster processing and clearance, DDA in its website 
should upload the de tails of documents required along with the planning parameters for any 
building and these should be advertised in the print and electronic media for creating 
awareness among the people. The Committee also desire that effective public participation 
should be ensured in this direction to yarn good results." 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.32 DDA has submitted that Master Plan is a policy document wherein provisions 
including plan norms and development control norms are stipulated for planned development.  
However, development of basic infrastructure i.e. schools, hospitals, bus depots and police 
stations are developed by the local bodies/government agencies concerned except in case of 
schools and hospitals are also developed by private developers. Generally, sites for these 
facilities are earmarked in the Zonal Development Plan for the respective planning Zones as 
per the requirement of Zone.  The allotment of plots is done by the Land Disposal department 
as and when the requests are received from the GNCTD/Governme nt agencies/private 
developers. 
 
The main contention of the committee is that all the documents required for the sanction of 
Building plans should be uploaded in DDA website for quicker & faster processing & 

76 
 
clearance. In this regard, it is submitted that the documents which are required for the 
issuance of permits are already in DDA website & is also available in the counter of building 
section of DDA, Ground Floor, D-Block, Vikas Sadan in the form of "Handbook for Building 
Permit Procedure.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
  
4.33 For comments of the Committee please see Paragarph No. 1.39 of Chapter I of the 
Report. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21) 
 
CONSTRUCTION OF COMMUNITY HALLS IN THE VILLAGES WHEREFROM 
DDA HAS TAKEN LAND 
 
4.34 DDA is required to undertake various developmental works in the villages wherefrom 
it has taken land. However, the Committee are distressed to note that from its inception till 
date DDA has constructed only 44 community halls in various zones. It has completed 
construction of 28 commu nity centres in the year 1996 -97. Afterwards, the number has 
drastically reduced to 11 during the entire 6 years from 1997 -98 to 2003-04. This has further 
been reduced to 4 during the 3 years from 2004 -05 to 2006 -07. Out of the completed 44 
community centres only 18 were functional during the period January 2012 to August 2013, 
while 20 community centres in all the zones i.e, South, Dwarka, North, East and Rohini are in 
planning stage. In the South zone, out of 8 community centres, 7 are still in the planning stage 
and construction of only one community centre is in progress. In Dwarka zone out of 4 
community centres 2 are in planning stage and 2 are in progress. In North zone, one 
community Hall is in progress. In East zone all the 6 are in planning stage. 
 
From the above, the callous attitude of DDA towards fulfilling its obligations becomes clear. 
The Committee fail to understand this lackadaisical approach of DDA and deplore it 
vehemently. They want that DDA should come out of its slumber and act swiftly in this 
regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 
4.35 
  
 
(i)"Community halls with DDA   -  56  
(ii) Community halls with RWA  -  20 
(iii)Community halls with NGO   -  06 
(iv)Total Community halls constructed - 82 
(v)Community halls under progress   -  25  
(vi)Community halls in Planning stage  -  33  
(vii)Community halls in conceptual stage -  20  
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
  
4.36 For comments of the Committee please see Paragarph No. 1.42 of Chapter I of the 
Report. 

77 
 
Recommendation(Serial No. 22) 
 
 
NEED TO REDEEM IMAGE BY DDA 
 
4.37 The Committee note that the DDA has claimed that for the last 55 years it has been 
innovating in terms of technology, management techniques and improving public interface in 
order to reach its customers in a better and friendly manner fo r ensuring timely delivery of 
services. The Citizen Charter detailing schedule of various transactions has been published. 
Many processes which have maximum public interface have been made online like 
conversion of leasehold to freehold, booking of tempora ry allotment of space for marriages 
and social functions etc., allowing the corrupt practices with prior appointment etc, However, 
the Committee are distressed to observe that DDA's has ruined its image before general 
public by remaining inactive and allow ing the corrupt practices in deteriorating. Since 2003, 
DDA has not allotted any land to any cooperative group housing society, DDA and RCS are 
passing the buck on each other for not discharging their responsibilities with regard to 
allotment of land. 
 
DDA has failed to maintain the capital city including Yamuna River which is getting dirtier 
day by day. DDA has proved its failure to provide houses and basic amenities to inhabitants 
of Delhi. DDA officials have grossly failed in checking fraud in allotting venues for 
marriages and other social functions, in checking the growth of slums and unauthorizedd 
occupation of land under its purview. 
 
Conversion of leasehold to freehold, in checking unauthorized construction and alteration in 
DDA built houses and CGHS , etc. While taking oral evidence of representatives of CGHS, 
the Committee learnt that people are aggrieved because DDA is harassing them by not giving 
adequate and timely compensation, it is only after the interface of the Committee the 
problems of two Residents Welfare Associations were solved.  
 
In view of the above, the Committee feel that DDA has failed to live up to the expectations of 
the people of Delhi. Against this backdrop, the Committee wish to recommend that there is 
an urgent need to refurbish the image of this premier organization by taking proactive and 
timely steps under intimation to the Committee." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
4.38 (a)DDA has taken major steps for computerization of all Departments now for 
which the study has been made by consultants and shortly RFP will be issued for 
selection of the agency who would take -up the task of computerization of all 
branches/divisions of DDA . In this endeavor the efforts will be made to automate each 
and every activity of DDA so that public can avail services at their door step and from 
anywhere through web enabled IT applications.  
 
(b)With regard to conversion from leasehold to freehold of DDA flats, application form has 
been simplified and the new brochure/booklet has been issued. This has also been uploaded 
on DDA's website. A user friendly portal for Nagrik Suvidha Kendra has been made 
operational. Computerized Nagrik Suv idha Kendras have  been established in 4 locations in 
Delhi where general public can .avail the services of DDA. This process has been very useful 

78 
 
to the general public a s the public can now avail services of DDA near to their residence. At 
the recently established four Nagrik Suvidha Kendras, assistance is provided to the public for 
submission of complete application forms.  
 
(c) As far as checking of unauthorized construction and alteration in DDA flats are 
concerned, Enforcement cell of  the Housing Department regularly checks unauthorized 
construction and encroachment in areas which are still under the jurisdiction of DDA and 
have not yet been handed over to the concerned municipal authorities.  
 
(d)E-Auction for properties has been implemented.  
(e)On line booking of vacant sites for marriage/religious functions. 
(f)Daily public hearings instead of two days a week.  
(g) All payment details of DDA flats and Group Housing Society flats have been placed on 
web site so that general public can reconcile their payment made;  
(h) Provision of on line payment through payment gateway of various banks and through 
NEFT/RTGS has been made so that general public can make payments from anywhere as per 
their convenience. This saves the time of the general public and also gives the convenience to 
them. 
(i) To enforce punctuality the process of installation of attendance machines has start ed in 
DDA and the same have been installed in Vikas Sadan and in due course the attendance 
machines will be installed throughout DDA.  
(j)On line viewing mechanism about the status of the requests of general public about 
conversion of DDA flats and Group H ousing Society flats has been made and now the 
general public can see the status of their applications on line from anywhere. 
(k)In the direction of computerization of land records some more progress has been made and 
now 22 more villages have been digitized and have been placed at DDA's web site. Now out 
of 240 acquired villages total 207 villages have been digitized and the detail s have been 
placed at DDA's web site.  
(l) The process of issuing water bills on line has been started and the water bills of Rohini 
Wing have been computerized and now general public can deposit their water bills of Rohini 
locality on line . In the due .course this system will be incorporated in all other localities of 
DDA as well.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
  
4.39 For comments of the Committee please see Paragarph No. 1.45  of Chapter I of the 
Report. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 24) 
 
EXPEDITE THE ACTION IN CORRUPTION CASES AGAINST THE DDA 
OFFICIALS 
 
4.40 The Committee observe that to bring transparency in the functioning of DDA/MCD to 
root out corruption and provide better, quick and people friendly services, DDA has initiated 
some steps. The Committee ar e informed that file tracking system has been implemented in 
the vigilance branch and the same is under implementation in other branches, sensitive 
branches are being randomly inspected by vigilance branch to see delays in handling of files 

79 
 
and presence of  outsiders etc. Vigilance helpline has been launched on the occasion of 
Vigilance Awareness Week 2012 and its number is 09650713388. 
 
From the information furnished by DDA the Committee can easily gather the fact that 
amongst the 82 corruption cases agains t the DDA officials for last more than 10 years w.e.f 
2003, 41 are under trial, 12 are under investigation, 4 have been acquitted, 1 is RDA case, 1 
has been discharged, 1case is under CBI investigation and 3 cases have been closed by CBI 
and 19 convictions are there. 
 
This information of DDA is indicating towards the slow pace of trials and poor rate of 
conviction in the corruption cases against the DDA officials. This appears to be an eye wash. 
The Committee are of the view that such a slow pace of progres s in cases and very low rate 
of conviction fails badly to act as deterrent for other officials, from indulging in corrupt 
practices. Rather it tends to give a boost to unscrupulous elements. 
 
Thus, the Committee would like to recommend that the trials and investigations should be 
expedited and guilty be brought to the book at the earliest. Moreover, this should not only 
remain restricted to these cases only that have been brought to the notice of the Committee. 
Rather, the speedy trial should become a regular feature in DDA." 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
4.41 DDA has replied that as regards the action against corruption cases, these are being 
dealt by the concerned investigating agencies i.e. CBI/ACB, GNCTD and Delhi Police.  
These agencies themselves initiate  cases pertaining to corruption and other malpractices and 
file cases in the relevant courts. DDA however facilitates investigation as well as prosecution 
in all such cases. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
  
4.42 For comments of the Committee please see Paragar ph No. 1.48  of Chapter I of the 
Report. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 25) 
 
INTRODUCTION OF SINGLE WINDOW SYSTEM 
 
4.43 The Committee note that DDA is a 56 years old agglomeration dealing with the 
matters of government, private and semi private agencies. It deals with many sensitive 
matters. The Committee are disheartened to note that DDA has introduced single window 
system just in three areas and that too from the year 2012. The facility has been introduced 
for only selected activities viz. conversion of lea sehold to freehold of CGHS flats, DDA flats 
and Samasya Nidhan. While expressing their satisfaction for this endeavor of DDA, the 
Committee want that all activities of DDA should come under its umbrella. They also want 
that a strong monitoring mechanism be put in place in the initial years to check as to whether 
the system is benefitting the public. 
 

80 
 
Though much delayed, the Committee welcome the introduction of single window 
system in DDA for bringing in transparency in its activities. However, they would like the 
DDA to introduce the single window system in all the areas of functioning. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
4.44 DDA has replied that in the process of issuing building permits many 
agencies/organizations are also get involve like Delhi Urban Art Commi ssion, Delhi Fire 
Service, Delhi Pollution Control Committee, Director General Explosives, and Airport 
Authority of India etc. as per law. The respective agencies are required to check the 
documents & drawings within their mandate & as per their own expert ise. The one window 
system may not address these issues in detail & therefore clearance of building permits in one 
window system may not be desirable. This will also facilitate to avoid unwanted mishaps. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
  
4.45 For comments of the Committee please see Paragarph No. 1.51 of Chapter I of the 
Report. 
  

81 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
                  PINAKI MISRA 
 12th  December , 2014                               Chairperson,       
21 Agrahayana,1936 (Saka)                        Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
  

82 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2014-2015) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 
FRIDAY, 12 DECEMBER, 2014 
       
The Committee sat from 1530 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room  „C‟ Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Pinaki Misra      - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Shri Rajendra Agrawal 
3. Shri Ram Charan Bohra 
4. Shri Dushyant Chautala 
5.  Shri Maheish Girri 
6.  Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi 
7.  Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil 
8.  Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
9. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
10. Dr. Dharam Vira 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11.  Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna 
12.  Shri Khekiho Zhimomi  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R.K. Jain   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha   - Director 
3. Smt.  J. M.  Sinha   - Additional Director 
4. Smt. K. Rangamani N. -  Under Secretary  
 

83 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft   Reports on 
(i)Demands for Grants (2014 -15) of the Ministry of Urban Development (ii)   Demands for 
Grants (2014 -15)  of the Ministry of Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation; and (iii) Action 
Taken Report on the observations/ recommendations contained in the Thirty - First Report 
of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (Fifteenth Lok Sabha)  on “Functioning of 
Delhi Development Authority (DDA) particularly with reference to affordable  houses in 
Delhi and its role in regularization of unauthorized colonies in Delhi and matters connected 
thereto” one by one. After deliberations, the Committee adopted all the reports  
unanimously without any change.   
3. *****   *****  *****   *****  
4. The Committee then authorised the Chairperson to present the reports to both the 
Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
                 ***** 
 
***** This portion of the Minutes does not relate to the Report.  

84 
 
 
ANNEXURE II 
                                            [Vide para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY – FIRST 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBANDEVELOPLMENT 
  
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
I.  Total number of recommendations                                                     26 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government:                  09 
Recommendation Nos. 5,6, 8,11,12,16,17, 23 and 26 
 
Percentage to total recommendations       (34.61%) 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:                                    02 
Recommendation Nos. 1 and 9       
Percentage to total recommendations                                                  (7.69%) 
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of                   15                         
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation No. 2, 3,4,7,10,13,14,15,18,19,20,21,22,24 and25 
 
Percentage to total recommendations                                                (57. 70%) 
                             
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final        
          
replies of the Government are still awaited:                                                 -Nil- 
 
Percentage to total recommendations                                                      (00%) 