 
        STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
          URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
                   (2016-2017) 
           SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
                                        MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
                                      (2016-2017) 
  
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 
Eleventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban Development on 
Demands for Grants (2016-2017)  of the Ministry of Urban Development} 
 
 
                                       FOURTEENTH  REPORT 
 
      
 
 
                                   LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                                 NEW DELHI 
 
 
23 December, 2016, 02 Pausa1938 (Saka) 
14 


2 
 
FOURTEENTH  REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2016-2017) 
 
                                
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 
Eleventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban Development on 
Demands for Grants (2016-2017)  of the Ministry of Urban Development} 
   
   Presented to Lok Sabha on  ………. 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  …………... 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
23 December, 2016, 02 Pausa1938 (Saka) 


3 
 
 
   C.U.D No. 100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2012 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth 
Edition) and printed by the Indian Press, Delhi-110033. 
 
  

4 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .....................……….…………………..........................…..         
(iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ......................................................................……………………………………….         
(v) 
CHAPTER I 
Report.................................................................................................................... 
 
1 
CHAPTER II 
Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government  
13 
CHAPTER III Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
44 
 
CHAPTER IV 
Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration  
46 
CHAPTER V Observations /Recommendations in respect of which final  replies of 
the Government are still awaited 
51 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
I. Minutes of the 5 th Sitting of the Standing Committee on Urban Development(2016 -17) held on 
23.12.2016.  
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations is contained in the  
Eleventh Report(16th Lok Sabha). 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2016-2017) 
Shri Pinaki Misra         -        Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
      LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Ramesh Bidhuri 
3. Shri Ram Charan Bohra 
4.  Shri Dushyant Chautala 
5. Shri Ashok  Shankarrao Chavan 
6.  Dr. Dharam Vira Gandhi 
7. Shri Dilip  Mansukhlal Gandhi 
8.  Shri Maheish Girri 
9.  Shri R.Gopalakrishnan 
10. Shri Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
11.  Shri  Srinivas Kesineni Nani 
12. Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi 
13. Shri P.C. Mohan 
14. Shri K. Parasuraman 
15.  Shri Kapil Moreshwar Patil 
16. Shri Alok Sanjar 
17.  Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
18.  Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
19. Prof. K. V. Thomas 
20. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
21. Shri Pradhan Baruah 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri R.S. Bharathi 
23. Dr. Subhash Chandra 
24. Shri Husain Dalwai 
25. Shri Anil Desai 
26.  Shri Parvez Hashmi  
27. Shri K. G. Kenye 
28. Shri Mahesh Poddar 
29. Shri K.C. Ramamurthy 
30. Shri Ajay Sancheti 
31. Shri Dharamapuri Srinivas 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi            -      Joint Secretary 
 2. Shri D.S Malha         - Director 
 3. Ms. Amita Walia                        - Additional Director 
 4. Dr.(Maj.) Jagmohan Khatry       - Committee Officer 
(iv) 
 

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2016 -2017) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the 14th Report (16 th Lok 
Sabha) on the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Reco mmendations contained in 
the Eleventh Report (16 th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban Development on “Demands 
for Grants (2016-2017) " of the Ministry of Urban Development. 
2. The Eleventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 02 May, 2016 and laid on the table of 
Rajya  Sabha on  2 May, 2016.  Replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the 
Report were received in August 2016 
3. The Standing Committee on Urban Development considered and adopted this Report at their 
sitting held on 23 December, 2016. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Eleventh Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the Obs ervations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
                   PINAKI MISRA 
23 December, 2016                               Chairperson,     
02 Pausa,1938 (Saka)                                      Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
 
 (v)  
  

7 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (201 6-2017) 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in their Eleventh Report ( Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2016-2017) of the Ministry of Urban Development 
which was presented to Parliament on 02.05.2016. 
1.2 Action Taken Replies have been received from the  Government in respect of 
all the 22 recommendations contained in the Report.  These h ave been categorized 
as follows: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government. (Chapter-II): 
 Recommendation Nos. 1, 3,4,5, 7,8,9,11, 14,15,16,17, 19, 21 and 22 
               (Total -15) 
(Chapter-II) 
(ii) Recommendations /Observations, which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government's   replies. (Chapter-III): 
Recommendation No.  18                                   (Total -01) 
(Chapter-III) 
(iii) Recommendations /Observations, in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter-IV): 
 Recommendation Nos. 6,12 and 13                                               
                                                                                                 (Total - 03) 
(Chapter-IV) 
(iv) Recommendations /Observations, in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are, still awaited (Chapter-V): 
           Recommendation No.  2, 10 and 20                                                  (Total –03) 
(Chapter-V) 

8 
 
 
1.3 The Committee  desire that specific replies to the comments  contained in 
Chapter-I  and Chapter-V of this Report may be furnished to them at the earliest and 
in any case, not later than three months of the presentation of this Report. 
1.4 The Committee will now like to comment on  the action taken by the 
Government on some of their recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.   
Recommendation (Serial No.6) 
 
CAPACITY BUILDING OF URBAN LOCAL BODIES (ULBs) UNDER  -AMRUT  
MISSION 
 
1.5 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
"The Committee note that the Ministry of Urban Development has selected 493 
cities under AMRUT mission and its implementation lies with State Governments 
and further down with Urban Local Bodies (ULBs). They find that there is a lack of 
implementation of the programes and policies of the central Ministry by the 
respective State Governments and Urban Local bodies and the main hurdle is lack 
of capacity building of these authorities. They further note that recently the Ministry 
have taken up the latest initiatives like ‗ Ease of Doing Business and the 
development of model building byelaws‘ which are extremely desirable by the urban 
local bodies. The Committee are apprised that a complete eco-system of capacity 
building was thought of while designing the AMRUT Mission. There is lot of 
buoyancy with a lot of stress on th e individual capacity building of workers on the 
job and capacity building of the engineers in the class rooms under this mission. 
There is  also a provision of 3 to 5  Project Design and Management Consultants 
(PDMCs) to help the cities and the States in project monitoring and also other 
activities that the cities would like to do as a part of capacity building and helping in 
project monitoring.  
The Committee are of the opinion that Ministry will have to take proactive role 
in implementing and taking lead  in strengthening the local body mechanism to 
ensure that the aims and objectives of the AMRUT are achieved in a time bound 
manner. They feel that ULBs are not performing at the optimal level, may be 
because of lack of funds, lack of capacity building, lac k of technical expertise etc. 
The Committee strongly feel that central Ministry should act as a facilitator & guide 
to strengthen the ULBs. Main issues are that there is a limited understanding of 
reforms in cities/states. There are no regulations requirin g provision of certain 
minimum level of services to be provided by ULBs. Therefore, all out efforts should 
be made to strengthen the ULBs. 
The Committee further feel that Management of water supply and sewerage 
system under  AMRUT should be the primary func tion of ULBs. They should be 
given responsibility for water supply and distribution in their territorial jurisdictions 
whether based on their own source or on collaborative arrangements with para -
statal and other service providers. Municipal Corporations m ay be given 
responsibility for the entire water supply programme from development to 
distribution. For smaller and medium sized ULBs, a phased transfer of 

9 
 
responsibilities for management of the distribution networks should be developed. 
Further, Para -statal agencies should be accountable to ULBs. The Committee 
desire that for strengthening ULBs, the Government should consider the adoption of 
a common categorization of urban bodies across the country with a provision of 
adequate staffing to improve clarity i n their definition so as to assist a systematic 
planning process." 
 
1.6 In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:   
 
"Under the Mission 497 cities/ towns have been selected until now under AMRUT. 
The Capacity Building of Urban Local Bodies is supported under the AMRUT so as 
to achieve urban reforms and implementation of projects in Mission mode. The 
States have to prepare  annual plan for capacity building for Individual as well as 
Institutional capacity building.  Capacity Building is also supported through Capacity 
Building for Urban Development (CBUD) programme.  
 Constitution of professionalization of municipal cadre is  one of the reforms 
under AMRUT which have components like i. Establishment of municipal cadre, ii. 
Cadre linked training etc. and to be achieved by the States within 36 months. The 
Mission has provision to support reforms." 
1.7 The Committee have been apprised that the States have to prepare 
annual plan for capacity building for individual and as well as institutional 
capacity building. There is also a Capacity building programme for 
development under AMRUT Mission. The Committee  note that AMRUT has 
provisions for supporting reforms such as constitution of professionalization 
of municipal cadre. There is also a provision of cadre linked training which is 
to be achieve d by State with in 36 months  as stated by the Secretary, Ministry  
of Urban Development during the Demands for Grants(2016 -17) evidence for 
working together in improving urban governance . The Ministry is silent about 
the suggestion of the Committee about specifically strengthening of ULBs , 
their staffing etc. T herefore, the Committee reiterate  that management of 
water supply and sewerage under AMRUT should be  the  prime function of 
ULB's and they should be empowered to implement these schemes with their 
own resources and resources prov ided by Centre and States. The o ther 
agencies of States should co -operate with ULB's in implementation of water 
supply distribution and sewerage system. Further, para-statal agencies should 
be made accountable to ULB's. The Committee also desire that the ULBs  
should be strengthened and t here should be a common categorization of 
urban bodies across the country. There should be adequate staff in ULBs with 
phased transfer of responsibility for man agement of distribution netwo rk to  
improve clarity. 

10 
 
  

11 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.12) 
EXPEDITIOUS COMPLETION OF GURGAON-DWARKA EXPRESSWAY 
1.8 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee are aware that the Northern Peripheral Road (NPR) stretch has 
been planned as an alternate link road between Delhi and Gurgaon, and is expected 
to greatly ease the traffic situation on the Delhi -Gurgaon Expressway.  The 
Committee note the delayed progress/completion of Dwarka Expressway connecting 
Dwarka and Gurgaon regions of NCR of Delhi and they were apprised by the 
Ministry that the  requisition for acquisition of land for Dwarka Expressway has been 
sent to Land & Building Department, Government of National Capital Territory of 
Delhi (GNCTD). The matter has also been taken up with Chief Secretary, GNCTD for 
acquisition of land in vill age Bamnoli and Bijwasan. However, since the process 
under new Land Acquisition Act is cumbersome and time consuming, the land has 
not been acquired yet. Similarly, a proposal relating to Faridabad and Gurgoan 
(Gwal Parbat) road via Jaunpur and Mandi was t o be converted into National 
Highway. A proposal is already pending with GNCTD for a long time. The Committee 
expect that Ministry of Urban Development should take up the matter at the highest 
level with PWD Department of GNCTD to expedite the approval of the project as this 
will connect two cities of Haryana with NCT and facilitate the travel time and allow 
seamless flow of traffic. They also desire that  the same may be notified and 
implemented at the earliest. 
The Committee are of the considered view tha t these  stretches are very 
important because these will connect  Dwarka with National Highway 8 at Kherki 
Dhaula and will pass Pataudi Road and  also the Faridabad and Gurgoan road via 
Jaunpur and Mandi will be converted into National Highway  that will facilitate direct 
access therein.  Hence, the Committee strongly recommend the Ministry to 
proactively pursue this matter with GNCTD, and DDA so as to resolve any conflict, if 
any, at the highest level  and complete this much needed Gurgoan - Dwarka 
Expressway link  and Faridabad and Gurgoan National Highway expeditiously for the 
benefit of the large number of  people in the region."            
   Reply of the Government 
1.9 In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:   
" Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for pursuing the matter with the 
concerned." 
 
1.10 The Committee feel  that the Northern Peripheral Road (NPR), alternate 
link road between Delhi and Gurugram is of paramount importance because it 
will greatly ease the traffic situation . The Committee note that Ministry of 
Urban Development has acceded for pursuing the matter with concerned 
authorities for speedy implementation of this project. But at  the same time, 
Ministry has not given any time plan and action plan. I nfact, the reply of the 

12 
 
Government is evasive i.e.,  without clearly stating  with whom and  at which  
level the matter has been taken up by the Ministry. 
 The Committee are of  the firm view that these stretches are very 
important because these will connect Dwarka with National Highway No.8 
which will smoothen the traffic in the  long run. Hence, the Committee strongly 
recommend the Ministry to proactively pursue with GNCTD and DDA so as to 
resolve any conflict and at the same time Ministry should come up with proper 
action plan and efforts taken/ outcomes regarding this project in a time- bound 
manner under intimation to the Committee periodically. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.13) 
 
RECRUITMENT OF STAFF IN NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION PLANNING BOARD 
(NCRPB) 
1.11 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRPB)  was 
constituted in 1985 with the objective of preparation of a plan for the development of 
NCR and coordinating and monitoring the implementation of the said plan. They are 
apprised that as of now, NCRPB has an acute shortage of staff with only a staff 
strength of 51.  NCRPB has been provided Rs. 4.4 Crore under non -plan head and 
Rs. 50 Crore under plan head. The Committee feel that over a period of time, the 
NCRPB activities have increased manifold in respect of financing and monitoring of 
project implementation.   
The Committee are apprised that in year 2011, Ministry of Urban 
Development has approved the creation of five temporary posts to function as 
Project Management Unit (PMU) of NCRPB and also they considered to revive the 2 
posts after the due ap proval of Ministry of Finance.  In year 2012, again a proposal 
for creation of 39 additional posts had already been forwarded to MoUD. However, in 
2015, the matter was reconsidered and it was decided to pursue the creation of 13 
posts only. Further, 2 post s of Joint Directors, which had lapsed, as they had been 
lying vacant since 2012, have been revived in 2015. Revival of one post of Deputy 
Director is under process.  
The Committee acknowledge that although, the responsibility of 
implementation of the projects financed by the NCRPB lies with the concerned State 
agencies but still closer monitoring and follow up of such projects by NCRPB is very 
essential for timely utilization of funds and scheduled completion of projects.  
Keeping in view the working profile of the NCRPB and exigencies of work they 
are doing, the Committee recommend that appropriate staff strength and adequate 
funds should be sanctioned and approved to the NCRPB by the Ministry of Urban 
Development in consultation with Ministry of Finance i n  a time bound manner under 
intimation to the Committee. " 
  

13 
 
 
1.12 In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:   
"National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRPB) forwarded a proposal for creation 
of 39 additional posts to this Ministry in 2012.  Subsequently, the proposal was 
forwarded to Ministry of Finance, which raised certain queries. NCRPB forwarded 
detailed clarifications/ justifications on the queries raised by the Ministry of Finance, 
and the same were forwarded to the M inistry of Finance for seeking their approval in 
the matter. 
However, in 2015, the matter was reconsidered and it was decided to pursue 
the creation of 13 posts only. Further, 2 posts of Joint Directors, which had lapsed, 
as they had been lying vacant sinc e 2012, have been revived in 2015 and one post 
of Deputy Director has been revived in February, 2016." 
 
1.13  The Committee note that Ministry of Urban Development has pursued 
the matter with Ministry of Finance for providing appropriate staff strength and 
adequate funds to NCRPB  as requested by the board in 2012 . But the 
Committee are perturbed to note that only 12 out of 39 post were considered 
and 2 post of Joint Directors and 1 post of Deputy Director have been revived 
in 2015 & 2016 respectively.  They are concerned  that at this rate the NCRPB 
would never be able to complete the projects  in time mainly due to inadequate 
staff strength. Further the Committee wish to reiterate its recommendation that 
adequate staff and adequate funds is the need of hour for strengthening and 
empowering the NCRPB. Hence , the Committee strongly recommend the 
Ministry to vigoursly pursue with Ministry of Fin ance for revival of rest of 
posts in NCRPB immediately under intimation to the Committee.   
Recommendation (Serial No.14) 
INCLUSION OF DELHI UNDER NATIONAL HERITAGE CITY DEVELOPMENT 
AND AUGMENTATION YOJANA (HRIDAY) SCHEME 
1.14 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 "The Committee note that the Ministry of Urban Development has  launched the 
National Heritage City Development and Augmentation Yojana 
(HRIDAY) scheme on 21 st January, 2015, with a focus on holistic development of 
heritage cities with the  aim to preserve and revitalize soul of the heritage city to 
reflect the city‘s unique character by encouraging aesthetically appealing, 
accessible, informative  and secured e nvironment. Over a duration of 27 months 
and a total outlay of Rs. 500 Crores, the Scheme is being implemented in 12 
identified Cities namely, Ajmer, Amaravati, Amritsar, Badami, Dwarka, Gaya, 
Kanchipuram, Mathura, Puri, Varanasi, Velankanni and Warangal. The scheme is 
implemented in a mission mode. The Committee appreciate that this Scheme 

14 
 
supports development of core heritage infrastructure projects which shall include 
revitalization of urban infrastructure for areas around heritage identified sites.  The  
Committee are surprised to note that  Delhi, the Capital of India, which has 
impressive cultural and heritage value besides being marked of glorious historic 
significance has not been included under HRIDAY Scheme. T he Committee 
recommend to the Ministry o f Urban Development for including Chandni Chowk 
and some other areas in Delhi as the HRIDAY city in the next phase. 
 
1.15 In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:   
"The proposal for inclusion of ‗Chandni Chowk‘, Delhi is noted and  the same would 
be considered at the time of expansion of the Scheme." 
 
1.16 The Committee note that Ministry of Urban Development is willing to 
consider the proposal for inclusion of ‘Chandini Chowk’, Delhi under HRIDAY 
scheme at the time of expansion of the scheme. The Committee are of the view 
that there should be a holistic development of heritage cities  under this 
scheme. Delhi, being the capital city of India, has a glorious culture and 
heritage value and hence, its  impressive heritage infrastructure projects 
should be preserved by revitalising urban infrastructure around these sites. 
Therefore, the Committee desire that status regarding inclusion of Chandini 
Chowk and other areas in Delhi as the HRIDAY city in next phase should be 
conveyed to the Committee in a time-bound manner.  
Recommendation (Serial No.16) 
  DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (DDA) 
1.17 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
"The Committee observe that DDA is facing some problems in construction of 
affordable houses. Their problems include shortage of land in Delhi, high cost of 
land, development charges and infrastructure cost, difficulties in availability of 
finance by the needy i.e. without regular employment, fixed monthly income and low -
density of housing as per Master Plans norms etc. To overcome these problems the 
Committee have learnt that recently the Central Government has introduced Land 
Pooling Policy vide Notification No. 2687 (E) dated 5 September, 2013.   
The Committee note that Delhi has a population of above 1.50 crores. Every 
year about 5 lakh people migrate to this city. DDA is one of the biggest Urban 
Development  Authority in India. Yet till date, it has cons tructed only about 3.5 lakh 
flats. It has not been able to fulfill the demands of growing population. The primary 
reasons are lack of availability of land. In this connection, the Master Plan for Delhi 
2021 notified on 07.02.2007, envisaged planned develop ment in Delhi through 
assembly of land by private participation.  Under this Land Pooling policy, DDA shall 
act as Land Pooling Agency (LPA) and Developer Entity (DE) (a landowner or a 
group of landowners or a developer) shall be permitted to pool land and  undertake 

15 
 
construction as per prescribed norms and guidelines. Each dweller entity will get an 
equitable return irrespective of land uses assigned to their land and DDA should also 
ensure minimum displacement.  The Committee also note that the Ministry of  Urban 
Development has approved the regulations for implementation of Land Pooling 
Policy on 26.05.2015 but the same is yet  to be notified by the DDA.  
The Committee are informed that there are certain issues pending with 
Government of National Capital Te rritory of Delhi (GNCTD) which needs resolution 
before notification of the regulations. Land Pooling Policy will be applicable in 95 
villages which are required to be declared as development area of DDA under 
Section 12 of Delhi Development Act, 1957. This  matter has already been taken up 
by DDA with Land & Building Department of GNCTD in Aug, 2014. Out of these 95 
villages, 89 villages have to be declared as urban villages under Delhi Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1957 to initiate the development work and imp lementation of the 
policy.   
The Committee note that the concerned MCDs i.e. MCD (South) and MCD 
(North) have already taken up the matter with Urban Development Department of 
GNCTD for issue of final notification. GNCTD has exempted stamp duty for first 
transfer/ surrender of land i.e. by the Developers Entities to DDA.  The exemption of 
second transfer i.e. return of land by DDA to the DEs is also required and DDA has 
taken up the same with GNCTD. 
 The Committee are happy  to note that the Ministry of Urban Development 
has been following up the matter with DDA to expedite the notification of the 
regulations for operationalization of the Land Pooling Policy through reminders at 
regular intervals. At the same time, the Commit tee strongly feel that there is an 
urgent need to have a totally transparent mechanism in the DDA in this regard. 
Therefore, they desire that all information such as (i) availability of land with DDA (ii) 
allotment of land to Cooperative Group Housing Soci eties (CGHS) (iii) date of 
submission of application to RCS (iv) status of application and reasons for rejection, 
if any, should be made available online. The Committee are aghast to note that the 
process of allotment of land to CGHS is stalled because of inaction of Registrar 
Cooperative Societies, Delhi and non -operationalization of Land Pooling Policy by 
GNCTD. The Committee desire that Government of NCT of Delhi should be 
sensitized towards this issue in larger public interest so that difficulties faced by large 
number of people intending to have dwelling unit, which have been stalled due to 
red-tapism, could be solved. Besides this, the Committee also desire that specific 
timeline should be fixed for implementation of guidelines of Land Pooling Policy a nd 
issue necessary notification for all the Master Plan Zones notified under notification 
dated 5 th September, 2013 of the Ministry of Urban Development. Further, 
verification of membership by Registrar Cooperative Societies (RCS) and allotment 
of land to all eligible Cooperative Group Housing Societies (CGHS)  by DDA should 
be expedited.  The Committee wish to emphasize that all the pending cases with 
RCS & DDA should be resolved at the earliest and at the same time all the pending 
issues related to Land P ooling Policy (Appendix -III) between Ministry of Urban 
Development and GNCTD should be resolved and regulations of this policy should 
be notified at the earliest. 
 
 The Committee have observed that in many cases land is required for 
community welfare like,  green belt, community hall, parks, recreation centres and 
parking spaces etc., from the overall land available in the area in proximity for the 
use of  people living therein. However, the concerned Municipal Corporations take 
undue time to clear such sanc tion/allotments. For example, a Bhatti -Bans village in 
Delhi (NCT) required only 20 acres of land for community welfare since long time. 

16 
 
However, GNCTD, DDA and MCD the concerned agencies for alloting the land for 
the purpose have been passing the buck and  applying delay tactics. In the process, 
the people are suffering for want of services/ facilities. The Committee urge the 
Ministry to take up the matter at highest level with these authorities to expedite the 
matter and allot the land within a time frame under intimation to the Committee failing 
which the official responsible for the same be penalised." 
1.18 In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:   
 
    "The Land Pooling Policy has been notified by Government of India vide 
notification S.O. 2687 (E) dated 5.9.2013 as part of Chapter – 19 on Land Policy in 
MPD-2021.  The regulations to operationalize the land pooling policy have been 
approved by Ministry of  Urban Development (MoUD) on 26.5.2015 with few 
additions/modifications.  
 
1. The Modifications to Chapter 19.0 of MPD -2021 on Land Pooling Policy and 
the modifications in approved regulations for operationalization of land pooling 
policy were discussed in va rious Authority meetings as well as in its meeting 
held on 27.4.2016. 
2. There are some other pre -requisites for operationalization of this land pooling 
policy, such as, declaration of development area under Section 12 of DD Act 
1957 and villages as Urban Vil lages under Section 507 of DMC Act 1957, 
which have to be notified by the GNCTD. 
3. Matter has been taken up with Delhi Government/ MCD for declaration of 
development area and declaring the villages as urban villages and said issues 
are still under considerat ion of Land and Building Department, Urban 
Development Department and Directorate of Local Bodies of GNCTD.  Once 
the notifications are issued by the concerned department of GNCTD, the Land 
Pooling Policy will be operationalized/ announced for participatio n of land 
holders/Developer Entity (DE)within due course of time. 
4. DDA has been allotting land as per the requirement of the area and requests 
received from various agencies for Community services.   DDA has also taken 
initiatives to reduce the time taken f or allotment of land for ongoing projects 
and for Govt./ Semi Govt. agencies and framed a time bound SOP for 
disposal of requests for allotment of land.  
5. The allotment of land to all eligible Group Housing Cooperative Societies for 
which recommendations were received from Registrar, Co-operative Societies 
has already been made.   
6. DDA has informed that it has not received any request for allotment of 20 
acres of lands for community welfare from Bhatti Bans village in DDA." 
 
 
 

17 
 
1.19  The Committee had observed that in many cases land is required for 
community welfare from the overall land available in the area for use of the 
people living there.   They had also urged the Ministry to take up the matter at 
the highest level to expedite the sanctions/allotments of land.  They, however, 
find that still the matter has not been resolved so far as the Ministry, GNCTD, 
DDA and MCDs are passing on the buck and delaying the matter regarding 
finanalization of regulations to operationalize the land pooling policy notified 
in 2013 . The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterate their earlier 
recommendation to  take up  the matter at the  highest level for resolving the 
same expeditiously failing whi ch the  officers/officials  responsible for the 
same be penalized and the Committee be kept apprised. 
Recommendation (Serial No.17) 
 
COMPREHENSIVE LEGISLATION FOR MASS RAPID TRANSIT AND ISSUES    
OF TRANSPORT PLANNING 
 
1.20 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
"Rapid urbanization of Indian Cities and other Centers, increasing economic 
activities require robust multi model, cost effective, reliable and efficient transport 
network. However, the Committee note that there is no legislation at present which 
covers the requirements of urban transport comprehensively. The Motor Vehicles Act 
deals with the licensing of vehicles, Railway Act covers inter -city traffic, Metro 
Construction Act deals with the specific issues related to construction of the metro 
rail, and Tramways Act deals with tramways within the road surface. Other modes of 
mass rapid transit such as the bus rapid transit, the light rail transit, the mono rail 
and several other guided modes of transport and issues of transport planning, multi -
modal integration, safety, tariff and financing are not covered under any Act. 
   
The Committee are apprised that the Urban Transport plans and activities are 
being undertaken by the Ministry as per National Urban Transport Policy (NUTP) 
2006.  They are also apprised that a comprehensive legislation is required to provide 
legislation for other modes of mass rapid tran sit and issues of transport planning, 
multi-modal integration, safety, tariff and financing.  The Committee feel that Urban 
Transport Plan have to be implemented over a period of time and hence require 
continuity. To take care of these and several other as pects, an agency needs to be 
made responsible for providing integrated Urban Transport inter alia encompassing 
other modes of mass rapid transit and issues of transport planning, multi model 
integration, safety, tariff and financing through comprehensive l egislative support. A 
comprehensive Urban Transport Act to cover all aspects of urban transport is the 
need of the hour.  Hence the Committee recommend the ministry to formulate a 
comprehensive Urban transport Act to cater the requirements of urban transpo rt 
comprehensively and bring about integrated transport planning with in a time bound 
manner." 
 
 

18 
 
1.21 In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:   
 
"Urban transport is intertwined with urban development, which is a State subject.  
Government of India (GoI) has formulated National Urban Transport Policy (NUTP), 
2006, under which issues relating to urban transport including Bus Rapid Transit, 
Metro, Monorail etc and multi model integration have been covered. Further, this 
Ministry is also helping State Governments/cities in setting up of Unified Metropolitan 
Transport Authority (UMTA). UMTA has been formed in many States/cities and other 
States/cities  are in the process of its formation. Urban transport constitutes various 
elements li ke road transport, metro, monorail, suburban train, waterways, NMT, 
space for pedestrians and physically challenged persons etc. Majority of urban 
mobility depends upon road transport and issues related to this is dealt by Ministry of 
Road Transport and Hi ghways (MoRTH) Highways wherein a new  Road Transport 
& Safety Bill which covers various aspects of road transport, is under consideration.  
Similarly matters regarding waterways are dealt by Ministry of Shipping.  There is 
Railway Act, 1989 which also gov erns suburban trains. Construction, operation and 
maintenance of Metro Rail Projects are governed by the Metro Railway (Construction 
of Works) Act, 1978 and Metro Railway (Operation & Maintenance) Act, 2002. In 
addition, various States have different acts/ rules which govern different modes of 
urban transport.. 
 GoI acts as a facilitator for urban transport projects by providing guidance, 
arranging loans and central assistance. However, all proposal of central assistance 
for urban transport are initiated by State Govt/UT and approved by GoI  after 
intensive consultations with various stakeholders. While approving the project, 
provisions of the existing policy, Acts/Rules/Regulations are taken into consideration.  
GoI has also made provision of upto 20% Viable  Gap Funding (VGF) in case of 
Public Private Partnership (PPP) projects. State Governments have also 
implemented Mass Transit Projects either through PPP and/or through its own 
funding without any financial assistance of GoI.    
Deliberations have been mad e regarding the formulation of a comprehensive 
Urban Transport Act at national level and after taking into consideration various 
aspects as entailed above, it is felt that in the present context, the NUTP, 2006, 
addresses urban transport requirements adequately." 
 
1.22 The Committee note that Urban Transport issues  including Bus Rapid 
Transit, M etro, Monorail and multimodal integration has been covered under 
National Urban Transport Policy (NUTP) 200 6. Unified Metropolitan Transport 
Authority (UMTA) has been formed in many  States and other State s/cities are 
in the process of formation. 
 The Committee have been apprised that Gov ernment of India has made 
provision of upto 26% Viability Gap Funding (VGF) in case of Public Private 
Partnership (PPP) projects. The Committee feel that urban transport plan have 
to be implemented in a shortest time frame but  still deliberations are going on  
with many stakeholders for formulations of a Comprehensive Urban Transport 
Act  at the national level. The Committee note that although in present context, 

19 
 
the NUTP 2016 address es urban tra nsport requirements adequately but still 
there is a long way to go for resolving many issues in urban transport sector. 
The Committee are of the firm view that a comprehensive legislation is the 
need of the hour for resolving issues ranging from transport planning, 
multimodal integration, safety, tariff and fina ncing. There should be a agency 
who will be responsible and accountable for implementing integrated urban 
transport inter-alia encompassing other modes of mass rapid transit and as 
well as issues of transport planning. 
 Hence, the Committe e strongly reiter ate its recommendation to 
formulate a comprehensive urban transport authority to cater the requirements 
of urban transport comprehensively and bring integrated transport planning 
within time bound manner. 
  

20 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Serial No.1) 
 SUITABLE ENHANCEMENT OF PLAN -OUTLAY FOR URBAN 
DEVELOPMENT : 
 
2.1 The Committee note  that from this Financial Year i.e., 2016 -17, all the earlier 
three Demands namely, Demand no. 104 -UD, 105 -public w ork, 106 -Stationery & 
Printing have been merged into one Demand, i.e., Demand No. 95 - Ministry of 
Urban Development. The net Budget Estimate (BE) for 2016 -2017 is Rs. 24523 
crore against the proposed outlay of Rs. 63959.53 crore by the Ministry which is 
just 38.34%. The allocations for the Plan schemes and non-plan schemes for 2016-
17 are Rs. 21100.00 crore & Rs. 3423.00 crore as against RE 2015 -16 of Rs. 
15128 crore & Rs. 3180.11 crore,  respectively. This amou nts to enhancement of 
39% and  7.64% for plan and non-plan allocation for the year 2016-17, respectively. 
The Committee also note that the total budgetary allocation  for the Ministry for 
2015-16 was Rs. 18340.10 c rore (RE) and it has been increased to Rs. 24523 
crore in (BE) 2016-17. However, out of total Central Government outlay of Rs. 
1978060.45 crore, only 1.239 % have been given to such an important Ministry with 
such ambitious and important Government schemes in the pipeline. The Committee 
note that the areas where higher allocations were proposed include Metro Rail 
Projects (BE 2016-17 Rs. 9958.68 crore), Swachh Bharat Mission (BE 2016 -17 Rs. 
2300 crore), AMRUT ( BE 2016 -17 Rs. 4090.50 crore) and Development of 100 
Smart Cities (BE 2016-17 Rs. 3205 crore). While the Committee note the allocation 
to the Ministry as well as for various schemes/programmes/activities during 2016 -
17, they desire that these resources should be effectively and entirely utilized for 
the purpose/objective for which they have been granted. Inspite of the allocation 
over the years, the Committee find that the process of urbanization has not been 
accompanied by a corresponding increase in the supply of basic urban services. 
Similarly, the supply of land and housing has not kept pace with the increase in 
urban population.   The Committee are of the opinion that at this laggardly pace, 
long term futuristic plans for urban development is still a distant dream. The 
Committee are of the view tha t for making this dream realized the need of the hour 

21 
 
is to strengthen the ULBs and that can be done by (i) enhancing the budgetary 
allocation of the Ministry of Urban Development at RE stage; (ii) providing upto 
100% grants to the financially weaker ULBs for their capacity development; (iii) 
imparting training to the personnel working in the ULBs ;(iv) sharing the success 
stories of strong ULBs like Mumbai and Hyderabad with other ULBs which are 
lagging behind; (v) monetizing land assets; and (vi) proper implementation of Urban 
Reforms. The Committee strongly feel that for implementation of the above stated 
measures the Government will definitely require more funding for execution of 
various urban development programmes of the Ministry, and, therefore, the Ministry 
of Urban Development should pursue with  the Ministry of Finance to provide 
additional funds for proper implementation of their scheme, at Revised Estimates 
stage. They also desire that the Ministry should explore alternative ways to mobilise 
the required wherewithal, such as, funding through public private partnership, multi-
lateral funding agencies, external commercial borrowings, by issuance of urban 
infrastructure bonds enhance avenues for higher internal generation of revenues 
etc. to generate more funds for urban development programmes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
2.2 The Ministry had taken up the issue of adequate provisioning for 
implementation of various schemes with the Ministry of Finance at the level of 
Hon‘ble Urban Development Minister an d Secretary (UD, vide D.O. Nos. 
269(D)/UDM/VIP/16 dated 17.02.2016 and G -20017/11/2015-Bt.(UD)(Pt.)dated 
10.02.2016 respectively . As a result the Plan Allocation for 2016 -2017 got 
enhanced from Rs. 17400 Cr. to Rs. 21100 Cr.  Keeping in view the pace of 
expenditure, Ministry has  projected additional requirements in  the first batch of 
Supplementary Demands for Grants. 
 
 For augmenting resources and for improving the efficiency of urban services, 
the Ministry of Urban Development is expecting to use Public-Private-Partnerships 
extensively in the Smart City Mission,  Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban 
Transformation  (AMRUT) and Swachh Bharat Mission. 
 
  

22 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.3) 
 
SMART PARKING MANAGEMENT FOR SMART GROWTH IN NEW  
DELHI MUNICIPAL COUNCIL (NDMC) AREAS : 
 
2.3 The Committee are of the view that for making the city smart, there should be 
minimal vehicular movement on the roads and surface parking.   The Committee are 
apprised that 9 roads out of 24 roads evaluated by Central Road Research Institute 
(CRRI) were to be completed during the year 2015 -16 in continuation of the Riding 
Quality Improvement Programme. The remaining 15 roads shall be taken up during 
the year 2016 -17. A provis ion of Rs.132.42 crore has been kept for Roads and 
Pavements in BE 2016-17, out of this, Rs.42.94 crore is for capital expenditure. They 
further note that 116 existing parking spaces would be converted into sensor -based 
parking spaces linked with a central ized mobile-based Smart Parking Management 
System on PPP model. The Committee feel that Centralized parking database will 
help in disseminating real -time parking availability to public while at the same time 
provide inputs on effective parking planning in NDMC area. This would go a long 
way in making people friendly parking . The Committee are of the considered opinion 
that parking is a central issue in community development and plays a major role 
and has become a time -consuming and problematic factor in th e daily lives of 
city administrators, residents, employers, employees, traders and retailers.  In the 
absence of proper parking management, on road and off road parking creates 
pressure on the pedestrian space. They feel that since city can never have enoug h 
land for parking the adoption of smart parking, management system will be of greater 
importance and has become the need of the present time as it can be useful for paid 
parking purposes. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that smart parking 
management system including electronic and personnel free system should be 
implemented by the NDMC with full vigour and spirit in a time bound manner under 
intimation to the Committee.  
 The Committee are aware that at times the NDMC has been adopting a 
whimsical approach and simply increases parking charges to exploit the situation, 
rather than to come out with some out of the box solutions to address parking 
problems in NDMC areas. The Urban Development Ministry should look into these 
issues more emphatically rather than adopting an easy way by simply releasing huge 
funds to NDMC without assessing its utilization on people centric issues, such as 

23 
 
parking, congestion of roads, dust pollution control, cleanliness, etc., on measurable 
parameters. 
 Reply of the Government 
 
2.4 Recommendation of the Committee is noted for compliance in a time bound 
manner by New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC). 
 
 2. NDMC has informed that it has presently been managing parking in 
 association with Delhi Integrated Multi -Modal Transit System Limited 
 (DIMTS), a Joint Venture of the Government of National Capital Territory of 
 Delhi (GNCTD) and IDFC Foundation.  
 
 3. Keeping future needs in mind, Smart Parking has been envisaged as 
 one of the project of the Smart City Proposal of NDMC along with projects of 
 parking for intermediate transport, multi -level automated parking, smart bus -
 stops. 
 
 4. With the proposed sensor based parking management system, citizens 
 can get online information about the availability of the parking space. Its  
 usage charges and the route map on their smart mobile phone.   
 
 5.  Following are NDMC‘s key objectives from the proposed parking 
 management and parking guidance initiative:  
a. To uniquely identify al l parking slots through sensor and/or video based and 
other smart parking technology solutions.  
b. To enable accurate information on availability of parking slots in real time 
through monitoring entry and exit of each vehicle in each parking lot.  
c. To enable parking guidance system to direct drivers to available parking 
spot. 
d. To enable users to pay on the spot / reserve parking spots via citizen mobile 
app or online portal.  
e. To reduce circling, leading to savings of time and fuel.  
f. To help in reducing overall congestion and general improvement in quality of 
life. 
g. To view a live video feed of parking and no -parking zones on mobile 
platform. 
h. To detect and report parking violations in no -parking and loading zones via 
video. 
i. To get central report management of park ing occupancy, revenue, and 
enforcement. 

24 
 
 6. To achieve the above mentioned goals, NDMC proposes to appoint a 
 Concessionaire for a period of five to seven years on private public 
 partnership (PPP) basis, who will be responsible for following: 
 a.  To upg rade all parking lots in NDMC area with parking sensors, 
parking guidance and management system, installation of cameras and other 
equipment required for this purpose.  Proposed system s hould have the 
capability to uniquely identify each motorist entering any of the parking lots. 
Concessionaire may propose barcoded tickets, magnetic strip cards, Radio 
Frequency Identification (RFID), Smart Cards, QR Coded entry or any other 
technology as deemed fit. 
 b. To depute manpower to manage these parking lots and co llect parking 
charges as per NDMC parking policy.  Comprehensive operation and 
maintenance of all parking sensors and other equipment required for parking 
guidance and management system throughout the concession period. 
 c. To provide a smart handicap friendly parking system. 
 d. The solution provided by Concessionaire shall include end devices for 
parking management and revenue collection and alternate fallback mechanism 
for ensuring smooth working of Smart Parking initiative. 
 e.  All revenues generated f rom Parking should be accounted for and 
tracked. It should be collected online to the maximum extent. Any leakages in 
the same will not be acceptable. 
 7. To finalize the request for proposal, a pretender meeting has been held 
 on 26.05.2016 with prospecti ve bidders and it is expected that a 
 Concessionaire may be selected through open competition bidding within 4 
 months. Thereafter, successful bidder may take another six months‘ time to 
 put such system in place. 
Recommendation (Serial No.4) 
 
SMART SOLUTIONS : SINGLE WINDOW APPROVAL PROCESS SYSTEM IN 
NDMC 
 
2.5 The Committee note that in Delhi under Smart City Mission, New Delhi 
Municipal Council (NDMC) area has been chosen and their different Departments 
are engaged in streamlining procurement and co ntractual processes. Each 
important Project is piloted by a Head of Department (HoD) who coordinates all 
activities pertaining to it within NDMC or with the Ministry concerned. Concurrence 
with regard to availability of budgetary provisions is routed throu gh Finance 
Department; which is again piloted by the respective HoD. They further note that 
NDMC have an in -house Project Management System to monitor all projects. They 

25 
 
have also proposed to develop an IT -enabled contract and vendor management 
system cons isting of supplier/contractor management and the full cycle of tender 
administration. The Committee are of the considered opinion that most project are 
delayed on account of delay in project approvals. There is an immediate 
requirement of greater transparency in administrative approvals, easy availability of 
information to all stakeholders on procedural and documentation requirements, time 
frame and authority responsible for various approvals, status of pending 
applications along with reason s for delay beyond prescribed time etc. Hence, there 
is a strong need for a single window approval process system. The Committee feel 
that for making the  Smart Cities Mission  successful, the process of project 
approvals needs to be simplified. The Committee desire that a  net-enabled system 
could be developed for this purpose so as to have simplification of prescribed 
procedures under extant laws. Re -engineering of the regulatory processes is also 
necessary to reduce ground level hassles to make administration and compliance 
easy. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that NDMC should implement 
the simplified process of project approvals and single wind ow approval process 
system in a time-bound manner so that they could achieve the target of making their 
area as a smart city under the mission and may become a model ULB for other 
ULBs in all States/UTs to follow their footsteps. 
Reply of the Government 
2.6    Committee‘s recommendation is noted for compliance by NDMC. 
 2. NDMC has informed that it is in the process of developing standard 
operating procedures in order to rationalize internal processes for delivering services 
to its citizens. This is being done in order to introduce greater transparency and 
speed in decision-making.  
 3. As per directives of Government of India under Ease of Doing 
Business, NDMC has started ‗On -line Approval of Building Plans‘ for construction 
permits giving good and hassle free services to the citizens.  A single window online 
common application form has been introduced for all the external agencies and on 
line payment system and calculator for calculating the fees etc. has been 
incorporated. 
 4. In this system, External Agencies such as Delhi Metro Railway 
Corporation (DMRC), Delhi Urban Art Commission (DUAC), Archaeological Survey 
of India (ASI), etc. have been given 15 days‘ time frame to issue NOC‘s/ clearances. 

26 
 
NDMC has to decide the proposal within 30 days.  This system will ensure 
transparent, simple, fair, hassle free approvals from NDM C. In this regard, NDMC 
Portal has been integrated to vis -a-vis DUAC, Chief Fire Officer (CFO), Airports 
Authority of India (AAI), ASI, National Monuments Authority (NMA), DMRC, etc.   
 5. The system is basically to make this public utility for the convenience of 
the public in general and interface with the public is discontinued.  All the information 
(s) related to the On Line Building Plans sanction will be given to the applicant/ 
Architect through SMS/e-mail. 
Recommendation (Serial No.5) 
INCLUSION OF MORE NUMBER OF CITIES UNDER ATAL MISSION FOR 
REJUVENATION AND URBAN TRANSFORMATION (AMRUT) 
 
2.7 The Committee note that criteria for inclusion of Cities under the Atal Mission 
for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) mission are population of 1 
Lakh or more. Mission mandates a set of 11 reforms which have to be 
implemented by all States and 500 mission cities within a period of 4 years. 
Thrust Areas of Mission are  water Supply, sewerage facilities and septage 
management, storm drains to reduce flooding, pedestrian, non -motorized and 
public transport facilities, parking spaces, reduce pollutio n levels; enhance 
amenity value of cities by creating and upgrading green spaces, parks and 
recreation centers especially for children. The Committee are apprised that 
Government of Rajasthan has been requesting the Ministry of Urban 
Development time and a gain to include the cities like Makrana, Barmer, Karoli, 
Banswara, Jhalawar and Sardar Shahar in AMRUT Mission and the same have 
not been included so far, in spite of having  population of more than 1 lakh. 
Similar requests have been made by other States t oo. Hence, the Committee 
recommend  the Ministry to examine and consider to include these States 
requests for inclusion of their cities in the Mission and provide the required 
assistance to the State Government  in  a time bound manner under intimation to 
the Committee.  
Reply of the Government 
2.8 Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) provides 
for certain criteria for coverage under the Mission. The request from the Govt. of 
Rajasthan had been considered and Jhalawar has been inclu ded as Mission city. 

27 
 
Other cities do not fulfill the criteria of one lakh ULBs population as per census 2011 
and have not been included in the Mission. 
Recommendation (Serial No.7) 
 
URBAN WATER SUPPLY SPECIAL FUNDS FOR WATER STARVED CITIES 
 
2.9 The Committee are apprised that the Ministry has launched Atal Mission for 
Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) to strengthen basic urban 
infrastructure in Mission cities including Metropolitan cities in which universal 
coverage of water supply is  promised. The Committee observe that  a stage has 
come where practically no city in India gets sufficient water to meet the needs of city 
dwellers. In many cities people get water from the municipal sources for less than 
half an hour every alternate day. In dry summer season, taps remain dry for days 
together and people are denied water supply at a time when they need it the most. 
The Committee observe that there is a very bad situation, including law  and order 
problem, in Latur city (Maharashtra) because  of severe scarcity of water. This city 
has been reported to have water supply only once in a month and Manjara Dam near 
Latur has only 1% of water it can hold.  They are perturbed to note that Central 
Government has neither any separate plan to address the water problem nor this city 
has been included under AMRUT mission despite having population of more than 3 
lakhs,. The Committee find this kind of step -motherly treatment to water scarce city 
highly unacceptable. They are of the view that this type of sit uation is not only limited 
to Latur city only. The Committee strongly recommend that Ministry of Urban 
development along with the State Govt. should step in and provide immediate relief 
measures such as creating special package/funds for such water starved  cities 
across the Country or expedite commissioning of water plant to provide water at 
least to meet the basic requirements of water. The Committee also desire the 
Government to achieve the solutions to conserve and preserve water by way of 
minimizing the losses in transmission & distribution system, recycling water through 
treatment plants, rainwater harvesting and rejuvenating the city‘s lakes, sustainable 
use of water and extensive planting of trees etc. The Committee recommend the 
Government to include  Latur City and other such water scarce cities under AMRUT 
with the provision of special funding for them. 
 

28 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.10 The first priority of The AMRUT is to achieve Universal Coverage of Water 
Supply and Sewerage services in the Mission Cities. To mitigate the problem in 
drinking water sector the Water supply component inter -alia, provides for 
rehabilitation of old water supply systems including treatment plants and rejuvenation 
of water bodies specifically for drinking water supply and recharging of ground water.  
 
 Latur is one of the Mission city under AMRUT and the State Govt. of 
Maharashtra in its State Annual Action P lan (SAAP) of 2015 -16 has proposed one 
water supply project worth Rs.60.00 crore in Latur. Earlier, it was inadvertently 
mentioned that Latur is not a Mission city which is regretted.   
 
 The Mission also provides that the State/ULBs while preparing projects should 
examine alternatives, such as water recycling and reuse. Some of the major reforms 
under the Mission, such as to Reducing unaccounted water (non -revenue water) to 
less than 20%, to formulate a policy and action plan for having Rain water harvesti ng 
etc. which are to be implemented by the States /ULBs may help in making adequate 
drinking water availability. 
Recommendation (Serial No.8) 
STRENGTHENING AND PROVIDING MODERN EQUIPMENT TO SANITARY 
WORKERS IN MUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS 
2.11 The Committee observe  that there is no allocation for the year 2015 -16 and 
2016-17 regarding the ―Scheme of Assistance for Mechanical Cleaning of Sewers 
and Septic Tanks‖ (SAMCSS). The Committee are  apprised that this scheme was 
formulated at an estimated cost of Rs. 9356 crore and draft EFC note was circulated 
to different Ministries for comments in December 2013. As of now this scheme has 
been subsumed into AMRUT and SMART cities Missions for providing integrated 
sewerage infrastructure which also inclu des provision of mechanical cleaning of 
sewers and septic tanks. The Committee are of the considered view that it is very 
important to provide modern equipments to Sanitary Workers in Municipal 
Corporations because many a times Sanitary Workers  have lost their lives while 
going unprotected into sewers to clean them.   

29 
 
 The Committee also observe that the task of inspecting, repairing, unblocking 
and maintaining sewers exposes workers to the sordid, sewage gunk that is 
generated in our homes, factories, hot els, hospitals and workplaces each day — an 
odorous mix of human excreta, food waste, plastic, used sanitary materials, and 
industrial effluents. This rotting refuse ferments to produce noxious gases, commonly 
methane, hydrogen sulphide and nitrogen oxide,  which routinely threaten the 
workers‘ lives besides causing respiratory, gastric, spinal and skin diseases.  For 
cleaning sewers, Municipal corporations require simple equipments like suction 
machines, safety gear, oxygen masks, goggles, gumboots, helmets,  etc. The 
Committee are very disappointed with the fact that sewage workers, by being forced 
to enter drains without safety equipment, have been deprived of their safety and 
fundamental rights.  Although there are guidelines available but there is lack of 
implementation of the same by the concerned authorities/agencies. Moreover, these 
sanitary workers are generally outsourced from private contractors and nobody is 
considerate about their plight. Being irregular workers,  they do not get any 
compensation either, in case of any mishap.  
 The Committee feel that the Ministry of Urban development should proactively 
and vigorously pursue strict compliance with guidelines implemented by Urban Local 
Bodies, Municipal Corporations for Mechanical Cleaning of Sewers and Septic Tanks 
so as to strengthen the sanitary workers‘ condition by providing them modern 
equipments in Municipal Corporations throughout the Country. The Committee 
further recommend that the re should be a sufficient budgetary allocation under a 
separate head in AMRUT and Smart City Mission for providing modern equipments 
and adequate compensation for the sewage workers in an unforeseen contingency. 
Reply of the Government 
 
2.12 The Mission has mechanical and biological cleaning of sewers and septic 
tanks as one of the eligible components. Thus the cities may include procurement of 
suitable machinery for the purpose in the State Annual Action Plan under the 
Mission.  
 The operation and maintenance of the systems is primarily a responsibility of 
 State Govt./ Cities and they are expected to follow the safe practices.    

30 
 
 NDMC has informed that the work for Inspections, Cleaning, Repairing and/or 
 unblocking of sewer lines is being done only through machines in NDMC 
 area. 
 2. Since last 3 years none of the sewer line/ manhole had been got 
 cleared through human being. NDMC is having a fleet of 02 Sewer Suction 
 Machines, 03 Pressure Jetting Machines and 02 Super Sucker etc. for day-to-
 day maintenance and repairing of sewer lines. Proper safety equipment is 
 available in NDMC to be used by workers, if required, while entering at 
 manholes.  In this regard, NDMC has informed that no casualty has occu rred 
 during the last 5 years in NDMC area.   
 3. There is 100% mechanization of collection and transportation of 
 municipal solid wastes to disposal site by introducing PPP mode. NDMC has 
 been able to adequately handle its solid wastes management by 100%  door 
 to door collection in its area by deploying adequate infrastructure in terms of 
 vehicles, receptacles for garbage, manpower and correct technology of 
 disposal of complete garbage generated in NDMC area. 
 
 NDMC has deployed 2900 Safai Sewaks, which  are carrying out 
sweeping in all lanes and by -lanes as per the specified beat in NDMC area. 
Adequate instruments such as brooms, shovel, tricycle rickshaws, personal 
protective equipment (mask, gloves, rubber boots, etc.) and traditional 
instruments for collection of garbage are being provided to the staff in order to 
minimize the contact of Safai Sewaks with the garbage. 
 Door to door garbage collection is being done in whole NDMC area 
through tri- cycle rickshaws (144 in number), auto tippers (26 in number of 3 
cubic meter capacity) as well as manual collection with the cooperation of 
community and Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs). 
 All auto tippers are equipped with Public Address (PA) system, which 
 announces its arrival in the area through sir en and social messages of 
 throwing garbage in dustbins etc. 
 Mechanical compactors of requisite capacities have been deployed keeping in 
 view of the feasibility of the movements of the vehicles as well as the quantity 
 of garbage generated in the area. T he compactors of the capacity of 21 cubic 

31 
 
 meter (five in number) and 9 cubic meter (ten in number) have been deployed 
 in the NDMC area. 
 In addition to these compactors, additional vehicles such as open tipper trucks 
 (10 in number of 9 cubic meter capac ity) and small auto tippers (26 in number 
 of 3 cubic meter capacity) are being utilized for collection and transportation of 
 garbage in the narrow lanes as well as for dry and voluminous garbage (dry 
 horticulture waste). NDMC is complying with the requi red criteria of 
 deployment of vehicles in the area depending on the quantum of generation of 
 waste.  
 In addition, NDMC has deployed 02 Mechanical Road Sweepers for main 
 lanes in NDMC area. Civil Department of NDMC is in the process of procuring 
 6 more Mechanical Road Sweepers for deployment in NDMC area. 
 All the vehicle involved in garbage collection and transportation have Global 
 Positioning System (GPS) system installed for effective monitoring. 
 4. Transportation of garbage is being done in a scie ntific manner in 
 covered/ closed containers mounted on vehicles, which are as under: 
 
 
 
 
*  
Open tippers are used for collection of horticulture waste.  
 5. NDMC has constructed state -of-art-garbage transfer station for 
 compaction of garbage to make NDMC area a zero garbage area. Two static 
 compactors have been installed over there along with front end loaders to 
 transport the compacted garbage to treatment  facility. This garbage transfer 
 station is going to be operationalized shortly.  
 DISPOSAL SYSTEM 
1. Waste is segregated at source of generation. 
2. There are 39 Compost Pits in gardens of NDMC for converting Horticulture 
Waste to Compost. 
3. There are four decen tralized waste management units converting horticulture 
waste to Refuse Derived Fuel (RDF) i.e. at Nehru Park, Lodhi Garden Gate 
No.1, Purana Quila Nursery, Talkatora Garden utilizing 01 MT of horticulture 
Compactors 15 
Auto Tippers 26 
Tri-Cycle Rickshaws 144 + 280 
Open Tipper Trucks* 15 

32 
 
waste. 
4. Waste to energy plant at Kidwai Nagar based  on Gasification technology is 
ready and going to be operational shortly, which shall utilize 70 MT of mixed 
garbage /day.  
5. Remaining Municipal Solid Waste collected after segregation is disposed of a 
Waste to energy plant (250 -300 MT) and compost plant (25-35MT) at Okhla. 
Details of Municipal Solid Waste Disposed Of at Waste to Energy Plant, Okhla 
is as under: 
NDMC has informed that in the field of Municipal Solid Waste Management it has 
already:   
(i) Eradicated manual scavenging. 
(ii) Introduced modern and scie ntific municipal solid waste management 
practices. 
(iii) Enabled private sector participation in the sanitation sector. 
(iv) Focusing with great intensity on welfare measures to be adopted for Safai 
Sewaks in Health Department as under: 
(a) Personal protective equipment has been provided to all the Safai Sewaks 
in form of gloves, rubber boots, masks, apron, caps, Tri Cycle Rickshaws, 
etc. 
(b) Group of 8 grassroots level workers i.e. Safai Sewaks, Beldars and Malis 
have been sent to various countries like Japan, Singapore, China etc. so 
that they can themselves observe and learn the best methodology to be 
adopted in the system and bring in the desired change in NDMC. It is for 
the first time in country that any municipality has taken initiative to send 
grassroots level worke rs abroad, which will keep them highly motivated 
and committed. 
(c) Cancer detection camp was organized w.e.f. 03.08.2015 to 27.08.2015 for 
Safai Sewaks in collaboration with Indian Cancer Society so as to detect 
pre-cancerous lesions in Safai Sewaks. Total of  1600 Safai Sewaks 
underwent medical check -up where ENT Specialist, Gynecologist 
Specialist, Surgeon examined the workers. In addition, Screenings for 
Anemia, Hypertension, Tuberculosis Cervical Cancer were also done 
through Mammography, X -Ray Chest, Laryn goscope, Pap‘s smear, 
Hemoglobin, BP Check-up, etc.   In this regard, NDMC has informed that, 
during the cancer detection camp, out of 818 (male) and 456 (female), a 
total number of 66 (male) and 14 (female) were found/ detected pre -
cancerous lesions.   
 
(d) NDMC is no longer doing secondary collection of garbage in masonry 
dustbins. These masonry dustbins either getting converted to Public 
Toilets Utilities or Roll Call Shelters. NDMC has constructed 32 Roll Call 
Shelters out of planed 60 Roll Call Shelters in  entire NDMC area for Safai 
Sewaks, which are providing gender specific toilets facilities & free of cost 
Tea/Coffee to Safai Sewaks.  
 

33 
 
(e) Annual Medical Check-up of Safai Sewaks above 40 years‘ age has been 
initiated from the year 2016.  
 
East Delhi Municipa l Corporation (EDMC), South Delhi Municipal Corporation 
(SDMC) and North Delhi Municipal Corporation (NrDMC) have also informed that 
they take care of storm water drains, their maintenance and de -silting. EDMC, 
SDMC and NrDMC have informed that they have 2 27, 268 and 186 numbers drains 
(more than 4 feet in depth/width) and 586, 18,226 and 755 numbers drains (less than 
4 feet in depth/width) respectively.  These drains are being cleaned and de -silted 
throughout the year by their departmental labour and machi nes as per requirements 
of sites. 
EDMC, SDMC and NrDMC have informed that they undertake regular de -
silting of storm water drains and their staff are provided with protective equipment 
like gloves, gum boots, mask, etc. and where manual cleaning is not fea sible, 
mechanical means are also being used by deploying suction machines/ jetting 
machines. The following equipment is presently held by these local bodies: 
 
EDMC 01 super sucker machine and 02 suction-cum-jetting machines 
SDMC 03 suction machines and 02 suction-cum-jetting machines 
NrDMC 01 super sucker machine, 05 suction machines and 02 poclaims.   
 
Recommendation (Serial No.9) 
 
REMOVAL OF OPEN DEFECATION AND MANUAL SCAVENGING  
 
2.13 The Committee note that as  per 2011 Census, the percentage of urban 
population having toilets within their premise is 81.4%. The percentage of urban 
population using public toilets is 6%. The remaining 12.6% resort to open defecation. 
Out of the aforesaid figure of 81.4%, 32.7% population are connected with piped 
sewerage system, 38.2% are having septic tanks, 8.8% households are having pit 
latrines (single & double, etc.) and 1.7% of households are having insanitary latrines 
(connected to open drains, night soil removed by human etc.) They are apprised that  
insanitary toilets (1.7%) and single pit latrines are to be converted to sanitary toilets 
in addition to providing household/ community toilets for families defecating in open 
under the provision of Swachh Bharat Mission (U). The target of the Mission is to 
provide either a toilet within the premises or a community toilet in vicinity to cover 

34 
 
100% affected population. They note that out of BE 2016 -17 of Rs. 2300 crore for 
SBM (U), approximately Rs. 655 crore is estimated to be available for construction of 
individual household toilet and Rs. 103 crore for construction of community toilets.  
The Committee are anguished with the fact that practice of night soil removal by 
human beings is still largely continuing.  Schemes like Integrated Low Cost 
Sanitation Scheme (ILC S) were aimed to achieve the goal of doing away with such 
practices.  The Committee are apprised that there were 2, 08,323 dry latrines located 
in urban areas  and  being serviced by humans as per the provisional figures 
released by Census of India, 2011. The Ministry informed that under the Integrated 
Low Cost Sanitation Scheme (ILCS), which was continued by M/O HUPA till 
31.3.2014, no demand  for conversion of dry latrines was received from the States.  
They were surprised to note the submission of the Ministry that there were no reports 
of States available with the Ministry regarding old dry latrines  being cleaned by 
humans. In the considered opinion of the Committee,  Ministry do not even have a 
basic assessment of the problem.  Regarding the goal of elimination of open 
defecation by 2019 the Ministry deposed that  under the Swachh Bharat scheme, 58 
cities have declared that they cannot find anybody opting for open defecation in their 
city limits and penal action will be taken against those forcing Safai Karamcharis to 
carry excreta. The Ministry surprisingly ruled out any instances of taking night soil by 
Safai Karamcharis coming to light across country. The Committee note that in 
Swachh Bharat Mission, the endeavour is not only to eliminate manual scaveng ing 
but there should also not be any instance and visible sign of anybody going for open 
defecation. So, the mandate of Swachh Bharat is different from what the mandate of 
the earlier HUPA scheme was.  
The Committee are of the considered view  that self de claration, regarding non -
existence of open defecation, by the States is not an adequate and reliable factor. 
The Committee recommend the Ministry regarding conducting an independent study 
to assess the magnitude of old dry latrines cleaned by human so that  the problem 
could be  addressed accordingly. It is also pertinent to do external verification of city 
by the outside neutral agencies without any pressure and biasness as eliminating 
open defecation is the main aim of improving access to  sanitation worldwide and is a 
proposed indicator for the  Sustainable Development Goals. Further the Committee 
also strongly recommend that the Ministry should closely monitor the implementation 
of National Urban Sanitation Policy by States. Building or providing public toilets in 

35 
 
their respective areas should become the pre -requisite for fina ncing any Central 
Sponsored Scheme. 
In addition to that Behavior Change Communication (BCC) strategy and 
propagation should be adopted under the Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM) by the 
Ministry because if toilets are available, people still need to be convinced  to refrain 
from open defecation and use these toilets. Therefore, the need for  behavior change 
 is critical in addition to the provision of toilets.  
  
Reply of the Government 
2.14 The Ministry has taken services of  Quality Council of India for  conducti ng 
third party audit for verification of open defecation status claimed by the City 
Corporations to provide an independent assessment of the magnitude of open 
defecation in various cities. This audit will be conducted at regular intervals to ensure 
that the city ,once declared ODF,  is able to maintain its status thereafter. 
 The Ministry is giving lot of emphasis on Behaviour Change communication 
through organizing various events, creating awareness through various sources of 
media and providing fund support to the States in this regard. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.11) 
 
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT 
 
2.15     The Committee observe that people living close to some of Delhi‘s landfills 
sites are routinely exposed to extremely polluted air and the  ground water from 
these areas are actually unfit for consumption. As per the Delhi‘s Pollution Control 
Committee status report of air and water quality around Ghazipur, Okhla and 
Bhalswa landfills sites, the suspended particulate matters levels are up to 30 times 
the standards. The Committee also take cognizance of  the environmental crisis 
such as fire in huge garbage Solid Waste dumping ground in Deonar, Mumbai.  
The Ministry apprised the Committee about the policy measures which are 
under consideration of the Ministry viz., Policy for remediation of existing landfills (b)  
Capping of existing landfills and bio mining. The Committee also observe that in 
many Solid Waste Processing Plants including Chandigarh (DADU MAZRA), the 
workers were not provided any safety kits, like gloves or masks etc. while handling 

36 
 
the waste for collecting or processing at land -filled site. The y desire that the issues 
and suggestions made by them during the visit to Chandigarh should be 
expeditiously addressed by the Central Government in coordination with the 
Chandigarh administration. The Committee recommend the Government to 
expeditiously fra me the p olicy for remediation of existing landfills and Capping of 
existing landfills and bio mining to avoid fire and pollution. They also desire that the 
safety kits like gloves or masks etc. should be compulsorily provided to workers 
handling the waste for collecting or processing at land-filled sites. 
During the study visit to Pune in 2014, the Committee were suggested  by 
various NGOs that  instead of corporate sector, the works relating to collection and 
procession of waste should be given to the Rag Pickers Associations who have been 
dealing with this for ages and have gained expertise in this field. The Ministry also 
acceded to the fact that for efficient utilization of untapped resources and source 
segregation of solid waste, the informal institutio n of kabadiwalas and rag pickers 
may be appropriately integrated into the system through recognition and 
strengthening of this sector. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government 
to direct the municipal authorities to set up waste sorting facilities  at suitable 
locations like Municipal gardens, amenities and spaces and permit the unorganised 
sector to use the facility for segregation, of recyclables. They desire that Ministry 
should strive to strengthen the network of informal sector workers and scra p dealers 
for the purpose. The Ministry should also focus on zero Garbage ward Model to 
ensure at source segregation in -situ processing, increase in door step waste 
collection and maximizing dry waste recycling. The Committee also impress upon 
the Ministry  to pursue the State Government for compliance with waste laws, 
especially Government of India Municipal Solid Waste (Management and Handling) 
Rules 2000. 
It is a common sight that sometimes Cow -Dung (Gobar) flows into the drains 
and chokes them besides af fecting the cleanliness of the cities. The Committee 
strongly desire the Ministry to explore the options of getting fuel from Cow -Dung and 
other waste products be included in Solid Waste Management Program under 
Swachh Bharat Mission (U).  
Reply of the Government 
2.16 The Ministry is providing VGF/grant support to the State Governments for 
setting up of projects related to remediation of existing landfills and Capping of 
existing landfill and Biomining. Moreover the Ministry is also providing transaction 

37 
 
advisory services to the State Government for providing technical assistance in 
setting up of these plants. The Ministry has also send advisories to State 
Governments to integrate rag  pickers and kabadiwalas in the sector of waste 
segregation and collection. The Ministry is also organizing exposure visits for officials 
of the Municipal Corporations to various cities which have done exemplary work in 
the field of solid waste management. In this regard visits to Pune were organized 
where the participants were exposed to the practices of zero garbage ward model to 
ensure at source segregation in -situ processing, increase in door step waste 
collection and maximizing dry waste recycling. Under the Solid Waste Management 
financial support   is provided for setting up of biogas plants from cowdung as source 
material. 
Recommendation (Serial No.14) 
INCLUSION OF DELHI UNDER NATIONAL HERITAGE CITY DEVELOPMENT 
AND AUGMENTATION YOJANA (HRIDAY) SCHEME  
2.17 The Committee note that the Ministry of Urban Development has  launched 
the National Heritage City Development and Augmentation Yojana 
(HRIDAY) scheme on 21 st January, 2015, with a focus on holistic development of 
heritage cities with the  aim to preserve and revitalize soul of the heritage city to 
reflect the city‘s unique character by encouraging aesthetically appealing, 
accessible, informative  and secured environment. Over a duration of 27 months and 
a total outlay of Rs. 500 Crores, the Scheme is being implemented in 12 identified 
Cities namely, Ajmer, Amaravati, Amritsar, Badami, Dwarka, Gaya, Kanchipuram, 
Mathura, Puri, Varanasi, Velankanni and Warangal. The scheme is implemented in a 
mission mode. The Committee appreciate that this Scheme supports development of 
core heritage infrastructure projects which shall include revitalization of urban 
infrastructure for areas around heritage identified sites.  The Committee are 
surprised to note that  Delhi, the Capital of India, which has impressive cultural and 
heritage value besides being marked of glorious historic si gnificance has not been 
included under HRIDAY Scheme. T he Committee recommend to the Ministry of 
Urban Development for including Chandni Chowk and some other areas in Delhi as 
the HRIDAY city in the next phase. 
Reply of the Government 
2.18 The proposal for  inclusion of ‗Chandni Chowk‘, Delhi is noted and the same 
would be considered at the time of expansion of the Scheme. 

38 
 
2.19 For comments of the Committee please see para  1.19 of the Chapter-I of the 
Report. 
Recommendation (Serial No.15) 
 
CENTRAL SYSTEM OF DOCUMENTATION ON HARVESTING OF RAIN WATER 
2.20 The Committee are concerned about eight States being declared drought 
affected during the current year. Many of the States are parched for want of water 
leading to mass deaths of people, birds and animals affecting the entire flora and 
fauna of these areas . India is being severely affected by environmental change and 
marked by falling water tables and dead rivers. One of effective solution to this 
growing problem is to conserve water and install water harvesting system forthwith. 
The Committee are of view that rain water harvesting provides an independent water 
supply system and in developed countries it is often used to supplement the main 
supply. It provides water when there is a drought, can help mitigate flooding of low -
lying areas, and reduce demand on wells which may enable groundwater levels to 
be sustained.  
 The Committee are apprised by the Ministry that responsibility of monitoring of 
harvesting of rain water in Delhi and other metropolitan cities across India lies with 
the Urban Local Bodies/Urban Development Authorities of the cit ies concerned. 
They are apprised that most of the States barring North -Eastern States like Manipur, 
Mizoram, etc., have already incorporated the provision of rainwater harvesting in 
their respective building byelaws.   
The Committee note  that the Model Bu ilding Byelaws, 2016 brought out by 
Ministry of Urban Development has a separate chapter on Rainwater Harvesting 
which has recommended the establishment of rain water harvesting Cell in the 
Urban Local Body.  But at the same time the Committee are surprise d to note that 
Ministry of Urban Development has not engaged in appointing any agency for 
assessing the availability and extraction of ground water. Moreover, they have not 
institutionalized any central system of documentation on harvesting of rain water i n 
Delhi and other metropolitan cities across India but only  issued advisory in the form 
of MBBL 2016 and that  it is the responsibility of State Governments /UTs to 
implement this through ULBs.  
Therefore, the Committee are of considered opinion that Cent ral Government 
should endeavor to institutionalize central system of documentation on harvesting of 

39 
 
rain water in Delhi and other metropolitan cities across India and provide capacity 
building, technical expertise and sufficient allocation of funds to ULBs  in this regard.  
They should also engage an agency for assessing the availability and extraction of 
ground water in urban areas across the country on priority basis. 
The Committee strongly recommend that in all future projects to be financed 
by Central Ministry/State Government attached offices, PSUs, the installation of Rain 
Water Harvesting System should be made mandatory. In fact, this system should be 
incorporated in the existing Central and State Government Offices/Residential areas 
in a time bound ma nner wherever feasible. In this regard Central Data Base should 
be created and scrupulously maintained by the Ministry for future planning. 
Reply of the Government 
2.21 There is already a specialized agency viz., Central Ground Water Board 
which is largely responsible for assessing the availability and extraction of ground 
water through out the country. It is reiterated that the responsibility of monitoring of 
harvesting of rain water in Delhi and other metropolitan cities across India lies with 
the Urban Local Bodies / Urban Development Authorities of the cities concerned.  
Regarding Rain Water Harvesting,  Ministry of Urban Development  vide d.o. 
No. K -14011/83/2009-UD.II dated 13.05.2016 has issue d an advisory to all the 
States/UTs. All the States/UTs have been requested to adopt the following 
measures:  
 As per the provisions of Model Building Bye -Laws, 2016, create a monitoring 
cell at ULB level, empanel various agencies for facilitating residents interested 
in having RWH systems installed, etc. 
 A suitable incentive mechanism may also be designed, like rebate in property 
tax for existing building to install RWH systems. 
 Focus may be given on leakages and misuse & overall  improvement in water 
distribution system of the city.  
 Take up special drives for creating rain water harvesting systems not only 
new buildings and public spaces but also in existing buildings of the city.  
 
It is stated that under AMRUT Mission, one of the reforms is that all the States 
to formulate a policy and action plan for having Rain Water Harvesting structures in 
all commercial, public buildings and new buildings on plots of 300 Sq.mts and above. 
Under the Mission, provision of Capacity Building ha s been made and the officials of 

40 
 
Municipal Corporations / Urban Development Authorities shall be sensitized for 
implementing Rainwater Harvesting from time to time.  
The Unified Building Byelaws of Delhi, 2016 has incorporated the provision of 
Water harves ting through storing of water runoff including rainwater in all new 
buildings and reconstructed buildings on plots of 100 sq m. and above shall be 
mandatory. However, the plan sanctioning authorities in NCT Delhi like MCDs, DDA, 
NDMC and Cantonment Board n eed to monitor the implementation and maintaining 
the data base on rainwater harvesting. 
Use of rain water harvesting system is mandatory in CPWD. Instructions 
have been issued to all the field units to provide the rain water harvesting 
system in all the projects to be taken up for construction by CPWD and also 
to provide rain water harvesting system in all the existing buildings.  
CPWD is maintaining data base of the government buildings under its 
jurisdiction where rain water harvesting system has been implemented.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No.16) 
DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (DDA) 
2.22 The Committee observe that DDA is facing some p roblems in construction of 
affordable houses. Their problems include shortage of land in Delhi, high cost of 
land, development charges and infrastructure cost, difficulties in availability of 
finance by the needy i.e. without regular employment, fixed mont hly income and low-
density of housing as per Master Plans norms etc. To overcome these problems the 
Committee have learnt that recently the Central Government has introduced Land 
Pooling Policy vide Notification No. 2687 (E) dated 5 September, 2013.   
The Committee note that Delhi has a population of above 1.50 crores. Every 
year about 5 lakh people migrate to this city. DDA is one of the biggest Urban 
Development  Authority in India. Yet till date, it has constructed only about 3.5 lakh 
flats. It has not b een able to fulfill the demands of growing population. The primary 
reasons are lack of availability of land. In this connection, the Master Plan for Delhi 
2021 notified on 07.02.2007, envisaged planned development in Delhi through 
assembly of land by priva te participation.  Under this Land Pooling policy, DDA shall 
act as Land Pooling Agency (LPA) and Developer Entity (DE) (a landowner or a 

41 
 
group of landowners or a developer) shall be permitted to pool land and undertake 
construction as per prescribed norms  and guidelines. Each dweller entity will get an 
equitable return irrespective of land uses assigned to their land and DDA should also 
ensure minimum displacement.  The Committee also note that the Ministry of Urban 
Development has approved the regulations  for implementation of Land Pooling 
Policy on 26.05.2015 but the same is yet  to be notified by the DDA.  
The Committee are informed that there are certain issues pending with 
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) which needs resolution  
before notification of the regulations. Land Pooling Policy will be applicable in 95 
villages which are required to be declared as development area of DDA under 
Section 12 of Delhi Development Act, 1957. This matter has already been taken up 
by DDA with L and & Building Department of GNCTD in Aug, 2014. Out of these 95 
villages, 89 villages have to be declared as urban villages under Delhi Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1957 to initiate the development work and implementation of the 
policy.   
The Committee note  that the concerned MCDs i.e. MCD (South) and MCD 
(North) have already taken up the matter with Urban Development Department of 
GNCTD for issue of final notification. GNCTD has exempted stamp duty for first 
transfer/ surrender of land i.e. by the Developer s Entities to DDA.  The exemption of 
second transfer i.e. return of land by DDA to the DEs is also required and DDA has 
taken up the same with GNCTD. 
 The Committee are  happy to note that the Ministry of Urban Development 
has been following up the matter with DDA to expedite the notification of the 
regulations for operationalization of the Land Pooling Policy through reminders at 
regular intervals. At the same time, the Committee strongly feel that there is an 
urgent need to have a totally transparent mech anism in the DDA in this regard. 
Therefore, they desire that all information such as (i) availability of land with DDA (ii) 
allotment of land to Cooperative Group Housing Societies (CGHS) (iii) date of 
submission of application to RCS (iv) status of applic ation and reasons for rejection, 
if any, should be made available online. The Committee are aghast to note that the 
process of allotment of land to CGHS is stalled because of inaction of Registrar 
Cooperative Societies, Delhi and non -operationalization of Land Pooling Policy by 
GNCTD. The Committee desire that Government of NCT of Delhi should be 
sensitized towards this issue in larger public interest so that difficulties faced by large 

42 
 
number of people intending to have dwelling unit, which have been stall ed due to 
red-tapism, could be solved. Besides this, the Committee also desire that specific 
timeline should be fixed for implementation of guidelines of Land Pooling Policy and 
issue necessary notification for all the Master Plan Zones notified under noti fication 
dated 5 th September, 2013 of the Ministry of Urban Development. Further, 
verification of membership by Registrar Cooperative Societies (RCS) and allotment 
of land to all eligible Cooperative Group Housing Societies (CGHS)  by DDA should 
be expedited.  The Committee  wish to emphasize that all the pending cases with 
RCS & DDA should be resolved at the earliest and at the same time all the pending 
issues related to Land Pooling Policy (Appendix -III) between Ministry of Urban 
Development and GNCTD should be resolved and  regulations of this policy should 
be notified at the earliest. 
 The Committee have observed that in many cases land is required for 
community welfare like, green belt, community hall, parks, recreation centres and 
parking spaces etc., from the overall lan d available in the area in proximity for the 
use of  people living therein. However, the concerned Municipal Corporations take 
undue time to clear such sanction/allotments. For example, a Bhatti -Bans village in 
Delhi (NCT) required only 20 acres of land fo r community welfare since long time. 
However, GNCTD, DDA and MCD the concerned agencies for alloting the land for 
the purpose have been passing the buck and applying delay tactics. In the process, 
the people are suffering for want of services/ facilities. The Committee urge the 
Ministry to take up the matter at highest level with these authorities to expedite the 
matter and allot the land within a time frame under intimation to the Committee failing 
which the official responsible for the same be penalised. 
Reply of the Government 
2.23     The Land Pooling Policy has been notified by Government of India vide 
notification S.O. 2687 (E) dated 5.9.2013 as part of Chapter – 19 on Land Policy in 
MPD-2021.  The regulations to operationalize the land pooling policy have been 
approved by Ministry of  Urban Development (MoUD) on 26.5.2015 with few 
additions/modifications.  
1. The Modifications to Chapter 19.0 of MPD -2021 on Land Pooling Policy and 
the modifications in approved regulations for operationalization of land pooling 

43 
 
policy were discussed in var ious Authority meetings as well as in its meeting 
held on 27.4.2016. 
2. There are some other pre -requisites for operationalization of this land pooling 
policy, such as, declaration of development area under Section 12 of DD Act 
1957 and villages as Urban Vill ages under Section 507 of DMC Act 1957, 
which have to be notified by the GNCTD. 
3. Matter has been taken up with Delhi Government/ MCD for declaration of 
development area and declaring the villages as urban villages and said issues 
are still under considerati on of Land and Building Department, Urban 
Development Department and Directorate of Local Bodies of GNCTD.  Once 
the notifications are issued by the concerned department of GNCTD, the Land 
Pooling Policy will be operationalized/ announced for participation  of land 
holders/Developer Entity (DE)within due course of time. 
4. DDA has been allotting land as per the requirement of the area and requests 
received from various agencies for Community services.   DDA has also taken 
initiatives to reduce the time taken fo r allotment of land for ongoing projects 
and for Govt./ Semi Govt. agencies and framed a time bound SOP for 
disposal of requests for allotment of land.  
5. The allotment of land to all eligible Group Housing Cooperative Societies for 
which recommendations were received from Registrar, Co-operative Societies 
has already been made.   
6. DDA has informed that it has not received any request for allotment of 20 
acres of lands for community welfare from Bhatti Bans village in DDA. 
Recommendation (Serial No.17) 
COMPREHENSIVE LEGISLATION FOR MASS RAPID TRANSIT AND ISSUES    
OF TRANSPORT PLANNING 
 
2.24 Rapid urbanization of Indian Cities and other Centers, increasing economic 
activities require robust multi model, cost effective, reliable and efficient transport 
network. However, the Committee note that there is no legislation at present which 
covers the requirements of urban transport comprehensively. The Motor Vehicles Act 

44 
 
deals with the licensing of vehicles, Railway Act covers inter -city traffic, Metro 
Construction Act deals with the specific issues related to construction of the metro 
rail, and Tramways Act deals with tramways within the road surface. Other modes of 
mass rapid transit such as the bus rapid transit, the light rail transit, the mono rail 
and several other guided modes of transport and issues of transport planning, multi -
modal integration, safety, tariff and financing are not covered under any Act.   
The Committee are apprised that the Urban Transport plans and activities are 
being undertaken by the  Ministry as per National Urban Transport Policy (NUTP) 
2006.  They are also apprised that a comprehensive legislation is required to provide 
legislation for other modes of mass rapid transit and issues of transport planning, 
multi-modal integration, safet y, tariff and financing.  The Committee feel that Urban 
Transport Plan have to be implemented over a period of time and hence require 
continuity. To take care of these and several other aspects, an agency needs to be 
made responsible for providing integrated Urban Transport inter alia encompassing 
other modes of mass rapid transit and issues of transport planning, multi model 
integration, safety, tariff and financing through comprehensive legislative support. A 
comprehensive Urban Transport Act to cover all aspects of urban transpo rt is the 
need of the hour.  Hence the Committee recommend the ministry to formulate a 
comprehensive Urban transport Act to cater the requirements of urban transport 
comprehensively and bring about integrated transport planning with in a time bound 
manner. 
Reply of the Government 
2.25 Urban transport is intertwined with urban development, which is a State 
subject.  Government of India (GoI) has formulated National Urban Transport Policy 
(NUTP), 2006, under which issues relating to urban transport including Bus Rapid 
Transit, Metro, Monorail etc and multi model integration have been covered. Further, 
this Ministry is also helping State Governments/cities in setting up of Unified 
Metropolitan Transport Authority (UMTA). UMTA has been formed in many 
States/cities and other States/cities  ar e in the process of its formation. Urban 
transport constitutes various elements like road transport, metro, monorail, suburban 
train, waterways, NMT, space for pedestrians and physically challenged persons etc. 
Majority of urban mobility depends upon road transport and issues related to this is 
dealt by Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH) Highways wherein a 
new  Road Transport & Safety Bill which covers various aspects of road transport, is 

45 
 
under consideration.  Similarly matters regarding water ways are dealt by Ministry of 
Shipping.  There is Railway Act, 1989 which also governs suburban trains. 
Construction, operation and maintenance of Metro Rail Projects are governed by the 
Metro Railway (Construction of Works) Act, 1978 and Metro Railway (Op eration & 
Maintenance) Act, 2002. In addition, various States have different acts/rules which 
govern different modes of urban transport.. 
 GoI acts as a facilitator for urban transport projects by providing guidance, 
arranging loans and central assistance.  However, all proposal of central assistance 
for urban transport are initiated by State Govt/UT and approved by GoI  after 
intensive consultations with various stakeholders. While approving the project, 
provisions of the existing policy, Acts/Rules/Regulations are taken into consideration.  
GoI has also made provision of upto 20% Viable Gap Funding (VGF) in case of 
Public Private Partnership (PPP) projects. State Governments have also 
implemented Mass Transit Projects either through PPP and/or through its o wn 
funding without any financial assistance of GoI.    
Deliberations have been made regarding the formulation of a comprehensive 
Urban Transport Act at national level and after taking into consideration various 
aspects as entailed above, it is felt that in  the present context, the NUTP, 2006, 
addresses urban transport requirements adequately. 
2.26 For comments of the Committee please see para 1. 22 of the Chapter-I of the 
Report. 
Recommendation (Serial No.19) 
CPWD TO MAINTAIN COMPUTERIZED DATA BASE OF THE TAINTED 
CONTRACTORS: 
2.27 The Committee note  with dismay that Central Public Works Department 
(CPWD) is not maintaining any centralized database regarding the contractors who 
are found indulging in non -execution  or execution of sub -standard works or leaving 
the work half way leading to undue delay in completion of Government projects. The 
Committee have been apprised that the cases of penalizing the contractors are 
handled on individual contract basis. If they are found guilty, then penalties are 
imposed which includes rejection of substandard work, rectification of defects at the 
cost of contractor, and reduced rate for substandard work if acceptable. The 

46 
 
Committee feel th at the question is not only about penalizing the guilty contractors 
but also it is about loss of valuable time, escalation of cost and many a time loss of 
human lives and property. Construction has  now become a  serious problem area. 
The Committee are of the considered view that it is very important and pertinent to 
maintain this computerized database because it will help in identifying the blacklisted 
contractors well in time and also it will reduce corruption by contractors in 
construction activities. Co mputerized data base will help in automatically debarring 
the tainted contractors from getting the tender besides making it deterrent for the 
defaulting contractors to carry on unchecked. The Computer will cancel their 
proposal immediately and, hence, it w ill help in curbing the corruption levels 
drastically in construction and maintenance. Therefore, the Committee strongly 
recommend  the Government  for maintaining centralized and computerized 
database of tainted contractors in a time -bound manner under in timation to the 
Committee. Once this data base is prepared, the information should be shared with 
all stakeholders. 
Reply of the Government 
2.28  CPWD has made provision in the rules for enlistment of contractors for 
disciplinary action against the contractors who do not execute the works according to 
the terms of contract on time and with good quality, or do not complete it within the 
stipulated time.  The enlistment authority has been given power to demote a 
contractor to a lower class, suspend  business with him for any period, debar him, or 
remove his name from the approved list of contractors indefinitely or for a specified 
period after issue of show cause notice to the contractor.  A centralized list of 
enlisted contractors is available on CPWD website  under the link, www.cpwd.gov.in   
contractors  list of enlisted contractors.  CPWD also maintains a centralized list of 
debarred contractors where disciplinary action is taken by the enlisting authorities.  
This list is also available o n CPWD website under the link,  www.cpwd.gov.in 
contractors   debarred contractors.  Such debarred contractors are ineligible to take 
up any work in CPWD during the period of debarment.  In view of the  above, 
provisions are available to take disciplinary action against the contractor and to make 
them ineligible for tendering, and a computerized data base of tainted contractors is 
available on CPWD website. 
 
  

47 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.21) 
 
EXPEDIOUS COMPLETION  OF PARLIAMENT HOUSE ANNEXE EXTENSION    
BUILDING AND TO IMPROVE  THE PARLIAMENT HOUSE SURROUNDINGS 
ASTHETICALLY 
 2.29         The Committee note that the funds allocated for completion of extension 
of Parliament House Annexe building is a meage r amount of Rs. 23 crore with which 
it appears to be impossible to complete the construction work within the deadline of 
30th June, 2016. The Committee are aware that the deadline for construction of this 
building has already been breached in 2012, 2014 an d 2015. The Committee further 
note that only Rs. 0.85 crore have been provided against the demand of Rs. 15 crore 
for furniture of this building. 
              The Committee are  anguished with the shabby and messy conditions of 
Parliament House surroundings as concrete debris, iron rods, wire mesh etc. can be 
seen lying all over in the vicinity of Parliament House.  The Committee are appalled 
by the filthy conditions around the periphery of this sacred Building. The Committee 
are of the considered opinion that Parliament House is the heart of India and it is 
one of the most magnificent buildings in New Delhi which has one of the brightest 
clusters of architectural gems possessed by any country, besides be the seat of 
power where  about 800 Members of the Pa rliament are seated representing entire 
population of India. Visitors from India and abroad to the capital invariably pay a 
visit to this building. When Swachhta Abhiyan is the prime focus of Prime Minister, 
at least the Parliament House should be kept  ne at and clean. They are  very  
disappointed with the lackadaisical manner of functioning of CPWD and NDMC. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly feel that refurbishing of Parliament House 
surroundings should be done on urgent and priority basis to complete the  work and 
improve the aesthetics and beauty of Parliament House surroundings. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend  the Ministry to expedite the completion 
of Parliament House Annexe building  extension project and also desire the 
allocation of mor e funds under this project for its completion at the earliest. They 
desire that at least now the deadline for its completion should be adhered to under 
direct supervision at the highest level. 
Reply of the Government 
2.30 Besides, the present allocation of  Rs. 64 Crore at Budget Estimates 2016 -
2017, additional funds to the extent of Rs. 46 Crore have been demanded at the 

48 
 
first batch of Supplementary Demands for Grant to meet the requirements for timely  
completion of Parliament House Annexe Building  
It is also submitted that CPWD looks after the Parliament House Complex  
inside the  compound wall of the complex and surroundings outside the compound 
wall are within the jurisdiction of NDMC. CPWD is making constant efforts t o 
maintain the complex neat and clean. The debris and building rubbish received from 
various construction/maintenance activities are removed periodically. The 
construction waste is properly disposed at C&D plant of MCD. The construction of 
boundary wall ar ound Parliament House Annexe is nearing completion and debris 
etc. lying near the wall along GRG Road will be cleaned shortly. Rest of the area, 
except MEG 4 where installation of gate is in progress, has already been cleaned 
and handed over back to NDMC f or improving the surroundings. Restoration 
charges have already been paid to NDMC.   
Recommendation (Serial No.22) 
 
EXPEDITIOUS FORMULATION OF STATUTORY MASTER PLANS FOR INDIAN 
CITIES: 
 2.31    The Committee find that the preparation of statutory Master Plans is done 
under the provisions of respective Town and Country Planning Acts which are 
administered by the State Governments. The Committee  are, however, dismayed to 
note that out of total num ber of 7933 cities and towns across India only 2631 towns 
have statutory Master Plan.  Remaining 5302 towns have yet to prepare a statutory 
master plan. The Central Government have issued Urban & Regional Development 
Plan Formulation & Implementation Guide lines (URDPFI) as advisory for State 
Governments  to prepare their Master Plans within one year for all class -I cities (one 
lakh and above population) on GIS platform.  The reasons for non -formulation of 
statutory Master plan of remaining 5302 towns as cit ed by the Government are lack 
of available qualified town planners in the State Town and Country Planning 
Departments, cumbersome procedure for preparing the plans and lack of availability 
of both spatial and attribute data, and limited exposure to the lat est IT tools and 
techniques. Ministry has also kept aside Rs.500 crore for preparation of GIS based 
master plan which  will shift towards transport based land use planning which should 
be for next 10 to 20 years. 
 

49 
 
         The Committee are of the opinion that the purpose of a Master Plan is to 
promote growth, guide and regulate present and future development of towns and 
cities in a planned way keeping in a view the growth of population and underlying 
requirements relating to services and infrastructure. It is an instrument to work out 
land and infrastructure requirements for various urban and rural uses, and allocate 
land for various uses such as for residential, commercial, parking, community halls, 
green belt, recreation centers etc. to result in harmonious and sustainable 
distribution of activities so that towns/cities are provided with a form and structure 
within which they can perform all their economic and social functions efficiently and 
effectively. The Committee obs erve that the implementation of Master Plans are 
unduly delayed in certain case as long as 20 years. Enumerating the reason, the 
Ministry informed that collection and compilation of information required on various 
parameters from various stake holders is a  time consuming process  and also 
compulsory acquisition of land for public purposes which  is at times opposed 
severely by owners of land, leading to practices of changing land use proposals 
ultimately cause delays in implementation of the Master Plan.  T he Committee also 
note that Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) without exception suffer from very weak 
resource base, lack Town and Country planners, high levels of complacency, poor 
managerial capacity, lack of technical expertise etc. The Committee find that mast er 
plan 2021 of Delhi is yet to be implemented. They exhort this lackadaisical and laid 
back attitude in implementation of the Master Plans of the cities thereby the very 
propose and parameters of Master Plan become redundant. The Committee, 
therefore, str ongly recommend the Government to allocate sufficient funds and 
technical expertise to the State Governments for the capacity building of town 
country planners, and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) at State level. The Ministry should 
address the preparation and i mplementation of Master Plan by State Government in 
a time bound manner and ensure that it does not linger on for decades undoing the 
very objective of the plan. The Ministry should act as a facilitator, mentor and guide 
for the States in formulation of master plans in hand holding manner. The Committee 
recommend that the Government should also monitor the progress of preparation of 
master plans in the States and get expedited the  preparation of statutory master 
plans in remaining 5302 cities because maste r plan is an important instrument for 
guiding and regulating development of towns and cities over a period of time, and 

50 
 
contributes to planned development both conceptually and operationally. The 
Committee may be kept apprised of the same. 
 
The Committee f urther note that Model Building Bye Laws 2004, to regulate 
coverage, height, building bulk, and architectural design and construction aspects of 
buildings so as to achieve orderly development of an area have been  revised now in 
2016. The Committee desire the Government to issue instruction to the State 
Governments/Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) that Model Building Bye Laws, 2016 
should be adhered to while preparing their master plans.  
Reply of the Government 
2.32 It is reiterated that the preparation of Master Plans is essentially the 
responsibility of State Governments.  Under AMRUT Mission, preparation of GIS 
Based Master Plan is a sub -component and also one of the reforms agenda with an 
allocation of  Rs. 515 crore. In order to expedite the preparation of Master Plans, the 
State Governments need to use extensively the GIS and Remote Sensing Technique 
for all the cities with more than one lakh population (500 cities).  Under the Mission, 
capacity building has also been ensured. Ministry of Urban Development has already 
been conducting training programme under NUIS Scheme for the Town Planners 
and supporting staff of State Town and Country Planning Departments, Urban Local 
Bodies and Urban Development Authorities.   
It is also stated that Ministry has been writing to the State Governments to 
complete the preparation of Master Plans in a time bound manner.  
As far as the role of Ministry of Urban Development is concerned, it will 
continuously monitor the progress of t he preparation of Master Plans and it will also 
request all the State Governments to ensure expeditious completion of Master Plans 
and apprise the progress on same Standing Committee from time to time.       
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

51 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE 
IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.18) 
 
METRO RAIL PROJECTS 
3.1 The Committee is aware that Metro rail is a safe, reliable, economical, quick, 
comfortable and effective mass public transit  system. The high -speed Metro rail 
services would allow people living in metropolitan suburbs within a radius of 100 km 
to commute to work, thereby easing pressure on the infrastructure services within the 
city. The Committee find that Metro Rail is runnin g on a route of 310 kilometres in 
India. 533 km of Metro Rail Projects are under construction throughout India. The 
Budget Estimate (BE) and Revised Estimate(RE) for Metro Rail Projects in 2015 -16 
was Rs. 8450.13 Crore and Rs. 9306 Crore respectively. The BE for 2016 -17 is Rs 
10000 Crore. The expenditure for these projects up -to 30th march 2016 was Rs. 9176 
Crore. The Committee note that the proposal for Phase IV of DMRC (104 Km) is 
under consideration of the Ministry. The Committee are apprised that urban transport 
is completely intertwined with urban development, the project proposals of Metro Rail 
are not originated by the Central Government as a matter of policy and have to be 
proposed by the State Government concern ed. Ministry of Urban Development has 
formulated National Urban Transport Policy (NUTP) in April 2006. The NUTP gives 
the broad guidelines on the vision, objectives, integrating land use and transport 
planning, priority to the use of public transport, tech nologies of public transport, 
financing, etc. for an overall development of safe, affordable, quick, comfortable, 
reliable and sustainable urban transport including Metro rail projects in the country.  
The Committee are of the considered view that the demand for metro rail is definitely 
going to increase throughout India. New cities from every State will demand for metro 
rail projects such as demand for elevated metro rail project connecting Delhi to 
Jaipur. Hence, the Committee recommend that the developme nt plans of the cities 
should have adequate provisions for laying the metro rail in the near future. 
Therefore, keeping in view all the advantages of Metrorail, the Committee strongly 
recommend Ministry of Urban Development to act as facilitator, provide s ufficient 
budgetary allocation from the Union Budget for Metrorail Projects within the bigger 

52 
 
metros and as well as independent means of transport in Tier II cities. The Committee 
also desire that in larger public interest and wider coverage, Jaitpur area which is only 
4 km from Badarpur, should be included in Phase-IV of DMRC (Aerocity to Badarpur). 
Further, the Committee also desire that Metro Rail Projects under construction should 
be completed and commissioned as per their schedule so that there are no time and 
cost escalation failing which responsibility be fixed and guilty be penalized for delay. 
Reply of the Government 
3.2 The proposal of metro rail projects received from the state governments are 
generally considered on the basis of the Comprehensive  Mobility Plans of the city 
along with other parameters. Metro rail projects are highly capital intensive but have 
high capacity and hence are recommended only in cases where traffic projections 
show high ridership. Hence, metro rail projects may not be feasible for all cities.   
Ministry of Urban Development is acting as facilitator for metro rail projects 
being assisted by GoI, by way of sanctioning the project, contributing towards equity 
and subordinate debt and other support. For these projects, loan f rom external 
agencies is arranged by Ministry of Finance which also provides sovereign 
guarantee. Ministry of Urban Development proposes to Ministry of Finance (MoF) for 
sufficient budgetary allocation for metro projects. However, final allocation of budge t 
is done by MoF.   
Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Ltd. (DMRC) has informed that the Detailed 
Project Report (DPR) for Phase-IV of Delhi MRTS Project has been submitted to the 
Government of NCT of Delhi (GNCTD) for approval. One of the corridors proposed is 
from Tughlakabad Railway Station to Delhi Aero City. The Jaitpur area is about 4 km 
from Badarpur which is adjacent to Tughlakabad Railway Station. Similarly, Delhi 
Metro Rail from ITO/ Mandi House to YMCA Chowk/ Faridabad via Badarpur is 
already running, which can also serve Jaitpur area. Another corridor from Janakpuri 
(West) to Botanical Garden via Kalindi Kunj Metro Station is under construction in 
Phase III of Delhi Metro, which may also serve Jaitpur area. 
 
  

53 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.6) 
 
CAPACITY BUILDING OF URBAN LOCAL BODIES (ULBs) UNDER    AMRUT  
MISSION 
 
4.1 The Committee note that the Ministry of Urban Development has selected 493 
cities under AMRUT mission and its implementation lies with State Governments 
and further down with Urban Local Bodies (ULBs). They find that there is a lack of 
implementation of the programes and policies of the central Ministry by the 
respective State Governments  and Urban Local bodies and the main hurdle is lack 
of capacity building of these authorities. They further note that recently the Ministry 
have taken up the latest initiatives like ‗ Ease of Doing Business and the 
development of model building byelaws‘ which are extremely desirable by the urban 
local bodies. The Committee are apprised that  a complete eco -system of capacity 
building was thought of while designing the AMRUT Mission. There is lot of 
buoyancy with  a lot of stress on the individual capacity building of workers on the 
job and capacity building of the engineers in the class rooms under this mission. 
There is  also a provision of 3 to 5  Projec t Design and Management Consultants 
(PDMCs) to help the cities and the States in project monitoring and also other 
activities that the cities would like to do as a part of capacity building and helping in 
project monitoring.  
The Committee are of the opini on that Ministry will have to take proactive role 
in implementing and taking lead in strengthening the local body mechanism to 
ensure that the aims  and objectives of the AMRUT are achieved in a time bound 
manner. They feel that ULBs are not performing at the optimal level, may be 
because of lack of funds, lack of capacity building, lack of technical expertise etc. 
The Committee strongly feel that central Ministry should act as a facilitator & guide 
to strengthen the ULBs. Main issues are that there is a li mited understanding of 
reforms in cities/states. There are no regulations requiring provision of certain 

54 
 
minimum level of services to be provided by ULBs. Therefore, all out efforts should 
be made to strengthen the ULBs. 
The Committee further feel that Management of water supply and sewerage 
system  under AMRUT should be the primary function of ULBs. They should be 
given responsibility for water supply and distribution in their territorial jurisdictions 
whether based on their own source or on collaborative arrangements with parastatal 
and other service providers. Municipal Corporations may be given responsibility for 
the entire water supply programme from development to distribution. For smaller 
and medium sized ULBs, a phased transfer of responsibilities fo r management of 
the distribution networks should be developed. Further, Parastatal agencies should 
be accountable to ULBs. The Committee desire that for strengthening ULBs, the 
Government  should consider the adoption of a common categorization of urban 
bodies across the country with a provision of adequate staffing  to improve clarity in 
their definition so as to assist a systematic planning process. 
Reply of the Government 
4.2 Under the Mission 497 cities/ towns have been selected until now under 
AMRUT. T he Capacity Building of Urban Local Bodies is supported under the 
AMRUT so as to achieve urban reforms and implementation of projects in Mission 
mode. The States have to prepare annual plan for capacity building for Individual as 
well as Institutional capa city building.  Capacity Building is also supported through 
Capacity Building for Urban Development (CBUD) programme.  
 Constitution of professionalization of municipal cadre is one of the reform 
under AMRUT which have components like i. Establishment of municipal cadre, ii. 
Cadre linked training etc. and to be achieved by the States within 36 months. The 
Mission has provision to support reforms. 
4.3 For comments of the  Committee please see para 1.10 of Chapter -I of the 
Report. 
Recommendation (Serial No.12) 
EXPEDITIOUS COMPLETION OF GURGAON-DWARKA EXPRESSWAY 
4.4 The Committee are aware that the Northern Peripheral Road (NPR) stretch 
has been planned as an alternate link road between Delhi and Gurgaon, and is 
expected to greatly ease the traffic situation on the Delhi -Gurgaon Expressway. The 

55 
 
Committee note the delayed progress/completion of Dwarka Expressway connecting 
Dwarka and Gurgaon regions of NCR of Delhi and they were apprised by the 
Ministry that the  requisition for acquisition of land for  Dwarka Expressway has been 
sent to Land & Building Department, Government of National Capital Territory of 
Delhi (GNCTD). The matter has also been taken up with Chief Secretary, GNCTD for 
acquisition of land in village Bamnoli and Bijwasan. However, since the process 
under new Land Acquisition Act is cumbersome and time consuming, the land has 
not been acquired yet. S imilarly, a proposal relating to Faridabad and Gurgoan 
(Gwal Parbat) road via Jaunpur and Mandi was to be converted into National 
Highway. A proposal is already pending with GNCTD for a long time. The Committee 
expect that Ministry of Urban Development sho uld take up the matter at the highest 
level with PWD Department of GNCTD to expedite the approval of the project as this 
will connect two cities of Haryana with NCT and facilitate the travel time and allow 
seamless flow of traffic. They also desire that  t he same may be notified and 
implemented at the earliest. 
The Committee are of the considered view that these  stretches are very 
important because these will connect  Dwarka with National Highway 8 at Kherki 
Dhaula and will pass Pataudi Road and  also the Faridabad and Gurgoan road via 
Jaunpur and Mandi will be converted into National Highway  that will facilitate direct 
access therein.  Hence, the Committee strongly recommend the Ministry to 
proactively pursue this matter with GNCTD, and DDA so as to resolve any conflict, if 
any, at the highest level  and complete this much needed Gurgoan - Dwarka 
Expressway link  and Faridabad and Gurgoan National Highway expeditiously for the 
benefit of the large number of  people in the region.             
   Reply of the Government 
4.5  Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for pursuing the matter with 
the concerned. 
4.6 For comments of the committee please see para  1.13 of the Chapter -I of the 
Report. 
  

56 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.13) 
RECRUITMENT OF STAFF IN NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION PLANNING BOARD 
(NCRPB) 
4.7 The Committee note that National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRPB)  
was constituted in 1985 with the objective of preparation of a plan for the 
development of NCR and coordinating and monitoring the implementation of the said 
plan. They are apprised that as of now, NCRPB has an acute shortage of staff with 
only a staff strength of 51.  NCRPB has been provided Rs. 4.4 Crore under non -plan 
head and Rs. 50 Crore under plan head. The Committee feel that over a period of 
time, the NCRPB activities have increased manifold in respect of financing and 
monitoring of project implementation.   
The Committee are apprised that in year 2011, Ministry of Urban 
Development has approved the creation of five temporary posts to function as 
Project Management Unit (PMU) of NCRPB and also they considered to revive the 2 
posts after the due appr oval of Ministry of Finance.  In year 2012, again a proposal 
for creation of 39 additional posts had already been forwarded to MoUD. However, in 
2015, the matter was reconsidered and it was decided to pursue the creation of 13 
posts only. Further, 2 posts of Joint Directors, which had lapsed, as they had been 
lying vacant since 2012, have been revived in 2015. Revival of one post of Deputy 
Director is under process.  
The Committee acknowledge that although, the responsibility of 
implementation of the projects financed by the NCRPB lies with the concerned State 
agencies but still closer monitoring and follow up of such projects by NCRPB is very 
essential for timely utilization of funds and scheduled completion of projects.  
Keeping in view the working profile of the NCRPB and exigencies of work they 
are doing, the Committee recommend that appropriate staff strength and adequate 
funds should be sanctioned and approved to the NCRPB by the Ministry of Urban 
Development in consultation with Ministry of Finance in  a time bound manner under 
intimation to the Committee.  
Reply of the Government 
4.8  National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRPB)  forwarded a proposal for 
creation of 39 additional posts to this Ministry in 2012.  Subsequently, the proposal 
was forwarded to Ministry of Finance, which raised certain queries. NCRPB 
forwarded detailed clarifications/ justifications on the queries raised by the Ministry of 

57 
 
Finance, and the same were forwarded to the Ministry of Finance for seeking their 
approval in the matter. 
However, in 2015, the matter was reconsidered and it was decided to pursue 
the creation of 13 posts only. Further, 2 posts of Join t Directors, which had lapsed, 
as they had been lying vacant since 2012, have been revived in 2015 and one post 
of Deputy Director has been revived in February, 2016.  
4.9 For comments of the Committee please see para 1.16 of Chapter-I. 
  

58 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation (Serial No.2) 
 
MISSION FOR 100 SMART CITIES: 
5.1 The Committee find that the focus of Smart Cities Mission is on sustainable 
and inclusive development and the idea is to look at the compact areas which 
include retrofitting, redevelopment and pan -city initiatives. The Committee note  that 
Rs. 3205 crore  have been earmarked for  2016-17 under the  Mission for  100 Smart 
Cities, but  only Rs. 194 crore  have  been expended out of allocated Rs. 820 crore 
during 2015-16. The Committee note that the Ministry have utilised only 23.659 crore 
of the funds allocat ed to them under Smart City Mission during the year 2015 -16. 
The Committee observe that the selection process of Smart Cities is based on the 
idea of competitive and cooperative federalism and follows a Challenge process to 
select cities in two stages. The  Committee was apprised that in stage -I, based on 
intra-state competition conducted by State/UTs, a list of 98 potential Smart Cities 
have been announced to participate in the  stage -II i.e. city challenge. In stage -II, 
each potential Smart Cities have to prepare their Smart City proposals. 97 short 
listed cities submitted their Smart City proposals which were evaluated by a 
Committee involving a panel of experts. 20 cities had  been finally selected for 
development as Smart Cities in the year 2015-16.  
 
  The Committee observe that other areas of Delhi except NDMC have  not 
been  selected under this mission and  the cities like Gurgaon and  Panchkula, which 
are heavily populated  and have  a population over 5 lakh, are not included despite 
being very import ant economic industrial and employment generating centers with 
true cosmopolitan character and global outlook. However, as per Ministry's 
deposition, when 100 smart cities were selected, State Governments themselves 
selected their areas competitively for b eing considered for development under Smart 
City Mission. The Committee were further informed that in order to spread the 
message of urban transformation in all parts of the Country and to provide an 
opportunity to all the State/UTs, a special fast track h as been provided to top scoring 
cities located in 23 States/UTs to upgrade their proposals in which none of the 
potential cities were able to come in top 20 cities. These cities may submit their 

59 
 
upgraded proposals before 15 th April, 2016 which will be eval uated by panel of 
experts. These proposals which achieve the benchmark set by winning cities will 
become eligible for funding on accelerated basis in 2016 -17. They are also informed 
that Round 2 of the challenge (2016 -17) have opened on 1 st April, 2016 and  the 
remaining  54 cities will complete and submit their revised proposals to the Ministry 
by 30th June, 2016. The 23 cities which are required to upgrade their proposals  and 
which do not need the benchmark by the winning cities will also join in the chal lenge 
of main Round 2. The Ministry expects that upto 40 cities in Round 2 will be 
announced in August 2016. 
 The Committee in their well considered opinion feel that the States should be 
informed and pursued to avail of this opportunity to develop their c ities that provide 
core infrastructure and provide decent quality of life to its citizens and a clean and 
sustainable environment and application of smart solutions. The Committee 
therefore, urge the Ministry to impress upon the State Government of these 2 3 cities 
to upgrade their proposals to match the bench mark so as to be converted into 
project with adequate funding on accelerated basis in 2016 -17. They also desire the 
Ministry to emphatically take up the strategic components of Smart City Mission viz. 
city improvement (retrofitting), city renewal (redevelopment) and city extension 
(Green field development) and a pan -city initiative in which smart solutions are 
applied covering larger parts of the city. This would allow the State Government to 
come forward with their respective cities with proposals meeting the benchmark so 
that in Round 2, once developed these cities can be light houses catalysing the 
creation of Smart Cities. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should fully 
utilise the funds which  have been allocated for the Smart City Mission. In fact, once 
the cities have been identified, they should be funded on accelerated basis through 
Special Purpose Vehicles to attain the objectives. 
 The Committee are of the view that 75 per cent of Delhi area comprises of 
unauthorized colony or those unauthorized colonies which have been subsequently 
regularised. The Committee desire the Government for considering Gurgaon, 
Panchkula and other areas of  Delhi outside NDMC areas for inclusion in the list of 
Smart Cities and to provide adequate funds and technical assistance to the State/UT 
Governments  for making these cities smart as envisaged under the Smart City 
Mission.  
 

60 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
5.2 The Government of India has launched the Smart Cities Mission on 25 June 
2015. The Mission Statement & Guidelines were also released at this event. 
The selection process of Smart Cities is based on the idea of Competitive and Co -
operative Federalism and follows a Challenge process to select cities in two stages.  
 
 Total number of 100 smart cities have been distributed amongst the States 
and UTs on the basis of an equitable criteria. In Stage 1, the State/UT shortlistlisted 
the potential smart cities on the  basis of preconditions and scoring criteria. On the 
basis of recommendation of States/UTs, 98 potential Smart Cities were announced 
by MoUD on 28th August, 2015 to participate in stage 2 of the competition.   
 In the second stage of the competition, 97 po tential Smart Cities except 
Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation (GHMC) submitted their Smart City 
Proposal (SCP) containing the model chosen (retrofitting or redevelopment or 
greenfield development or a mix thereof) and additionally including a Pan -city 
dimension with smart solutions. Those proposals were evaluated by a Panel of 
Experts and based on the assessment, 20 cities located in 12 States were 
announced in FY 2015-16. 
 
 Out of 20 winning Smart Cities in Round 1, Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) 
have been created and incorporated by the 17 cities namely Bhubaneswar, Jaipur, 
Vishakhapatnam, Kakinada, Jabalpur, Bhopal, Indore, Udaipur, Kochi, Pune, 
Solapur, Ahmedabad, Surat, Ludhiana, Belagavi, Davanagere and Guwahati. 
 During Financial Year 2015 -16, Rs. 1496.20 crore was allocated under the 
Smart Cities Mission. Out of which, Rs. 1,475.38 cr. was released. 
 During FY 2016 -17, Rs. 3,205 cr. has been allocated under Smart Cities 
Mission. Of which, Rs. 2,013.80 cr. has been released to these winning smar t cities. 
The fund to the remaining 3 Smart Cities will be released after incorporation of SPVs 
by them. 
 
 In fast track Round, on the basis of evaluation made by a Panel of Experts, 
top 13 cities on accelerated basis have been selected for development as Smart 
Cities. Ministry has already requested these cities to incorporate SPVs. After 

61 
 
incorporation of SPVs by them, the 1 st instalment of Rs. 200 cr. to each city will be 
released.  
 
 The remaining 54 cities and those failing to qualify in the Fast Track 
Competition will be participating in the Main Round 2 of City Challenge Competition 
which has started from 0 1.04.2016. It is expected that up to 40 smart cities will be 
selected during 2016-17. 
 
 As per para 8.2 of Mission Guidelines, b ased on an assessment of the 
performance of States/ULBs in the Challenge, some re -allocation of the remaining 
potential smart ci ties among States may be undertaken by the Ministry . The cities 
like Gurgaon, Panchkula and other areas of Delhi outside NDMC area may be 
considered for inclusion in the list of Smart Cities in due course of time.  
Recommendation (Serial No.10) 
 
USE OF LOW COST TECHNOLOGY FOR SEWAGE WATER TREATMENT 
5.3 The Committee note that the reasons for decreased efficiency and non -
functioning of the Sewerage Treatment Plants (STPs) are primarily attributed to 
deposition/non-removal of silt and sludge in the bottom of the oxidation ponds/waste 
stabilization ponds affecting the treatment system. This conventional technology 
even though widely used is not only expensive but also leads to heaps of deposition 
of silt and sludge. This necessitates looking for newer technolog y which will address 
these issues. The Committee was made aware that Indian Agriculture Research 
Institute (IARI), Pusa, has developed an innovative and eco -friendly waste water 
treatment technology using 'Typha Latifolia ' (a wet land Plant), local media and 
native micro organisms present in waste water for treating sewage water to the 
capacity of 2.2 million litres per day. The technology used in this waste water 
treatment system is associated with just 1% energy requirement of the conventional 
systems, z ero chemical application, zero -sludge generation, 50 -60% reduced cost 
and no skill requirement. The Committee are happy to note that Delhi Development 
Authority is planning to use this technology to treat 50 MLD of Palam drain waters for 
augmenting potable water supply in Dwarka sub-city.  
 The Committee are of the considered view that when such an eco -friendly low 
cost water treatment technology exists, the Government should use it to the utmost 

62 
 
for augmenting the efficiency of Sewerage Treatment Plants. T hey, therefore, 
recommend the Ministry of Urban Development to interact with IARI for adopting this 
technology, and impart training in coordination with IARI to concerned 
Departments/Agencies/States and ULBs for its proper and efficient use. The 
Committee further urge the Government to issue instruction to the State 
Government/Municipalities to adopt this system expeditiously for their all round 
benefits. 
                                          Reply of the Government 
 
5.4 Sewage treatment including Selection of Technology for Sewage treatment 
Plants is the subject matter of ULB / State Govt. However, Ministry will invite Indian 
Agricultural Research Institute (IARI) for presentation in the upcoming workshops on 
sanitation to have more interaction wit h States / ULBs. Ministry may also publish 
about the IARI technology in the Advisories related to sewage treatment. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.20) 
DUST FREE TECHNOLOGY TO BE  ADOPTED BY VARIOUS AGENCIES 
 
5.5 The Committee note that it is widely reported that the major source 
of pollution in the capital is dust particles and not vehicular emissions. Dust particles 
continue to contribute to rising pollution levels in metropolitan cities across India.  
CPWD is using ready -mixed concrete and pre -cast material s to reduce dust at 
construction sites as well as in maintenance of buildings. During the recent Study 
Tour to Trivandrum in January 2016, the Committee had observed that Hindustan 
Prefab Ltd. (HPL) are executing the housing projects under Rajiv Awas Yojna  with 
traditional construction methods like brick and mortar. The Committee were 
surprised to note that HPL themselves were not using any prefab technology for 
construction of those housing projects which were conceived and developed by them 
and is expected from them to promote it. The use of precast elements for roofing and 
flooring can greatly accelerate the pace of construction and make site supervision 
relatively easier, resulting in saving of essential raw materials, thus economizing on 
the overall con struction costs. CPWD deposed that  it is not always feasible to use 
dust free methods due to nature of works in maintenance  and also  they are facing 
difficulties in implementation of this technology in remote locations where skilled 
men, required materials and machinery are not available.  

63 
 
The Committee are of the opinion that dust contributes 52% of particulate 
matter in the air whereas pollutions from vehicles, including trucks and light 
commercial vehicles, accounted for just 6.6%. The recent report by IIT-Kanpur titled 
‗Source Apportionment Study of PM2.5 and PM10‘ carried out in Delhi reveals that 
re-suspension of the dust is also the major source of particulates in the ambient air. 
They further note that, despite National Green Tribunal's directives  to follow the 
construction guidelines of the Ministry of Environment and Forest, nothing much has 
been done to ensure that infrastructure projects such as dividers, drains or even 
certain building projects don't cause dust pollution. Hence, the Committee feel that 
the authorities should crack down on projects violating Ministry of Environment 
Forest & Climate Change 2010 norms on preventing air pollution.  Therefore, the 
Committee are of the opinion that there is a strong need to focus on initiation of 
steps to reduce re -suspension of dust and management/regulation of construction 
activities.  Moreover, in this regard, the instructions issued by Supreme Court and 
National Green Tribunal for reduction of ai r pollution caused by dust during 
construction and maintenance activities should be strictly followed.  Therefore, 
keeping in view all the facts, the Committee strongly recommend that all agencies of 
the Ministry of Urban Development responsible  for const ruction and maintenance 
should adopt Dust free technology and other innovative methods and scrupulously 
follow norms of Ministry of Environment and Forest forthwith. The  Committee further 
desire that there should a provision of penalizing construction sit es and  agencies 
concerned  (Private as well as Govt. agencies namely  CPWD, DDA, NDMC, NBCC 
& all ULBs)  if found flouting the norms and generating high levels of dust in Delhi 
and other cities of the Country.  
The Committee are also well aware that there  is a large scale construction in 
cities like Dubai, Shanghai, New York, London, Singapore and Beijing, etc., and the 
sky scrapers come up in no time, while being dust free and completely safe. They 
appreciate such dust free, eco -friendly technology which leads to such expeditious 
construction. The Committee are of the firm view that at least Government of India 
should adopt such dust free technology in all their Government constructions. They 
strongly recommend that henceforth, all Government buildings, wh ere the 
Government is a vendor, should adopt prefab technology, use of precast elements 
for roofing and flooring as a role model. This will greatly accelerate the pace of 
construction and minimize adverse environmental consequences including heavy 

64 
 
reduction in dust pollution. They also desire that the Government should be pro -
active in introducing this technology and replace traditional construction method like 
brick and mortar. The Ministry should also take care about the use of eco -friendly 
technologies a t the time of demolition activities by controlling  dust at source 
preventing it from becoming air borne.  
Reply of the Government 
5.6 While sharing the concern raised by the Committee on dust pollution 
caused by construction activities, CPWD assures the Committee that the 
instructions issued by the Hon‘ble Supreme Court of India and the National 
Green Tribunal for reduction of air pollution caused by dust during 
construction and maintenance activities are being strictly followed.  CPWD 
has also initiated steps to adopt eco -friendly technologies for speedier and 
dust free construction.  A detailed study of the technologies being used 
internationally and in India has been carried out, and CPWD has decided to 
adopt monolithic concrete construction, and pre -fabricated technology. The 
specifications, and schedule of rates are being finalized, and a detailed note 
has been submitted to the Ministry of Urban Development for consideration.  
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
                                               Pinaki Misra   
23December, 2016                                                                                    
                      Chairperson,                        
02 Pausa, 1936 (Saka)                    Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
  

65 
 
ANNEXURE -I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2016-2017) 
 
MINUTES OF THE 5th  SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY,            
23rd DECEMBER, 2016. 
 
The Committee sat from 1430 hrs. to 1600 hrs. in Committee  Room 'D' 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Pinaki Misra      - Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Sh. Ram Charan Bohra 
3. Sh.Ramesh Bidhuri 
4. Sh. Dilip Mansukhlal Gandhi 
5. Sh. Maheish Girri 
6. Sh. R. Gopalakrishnan 
7. Sh. Choudhury Mohan Jatua 
8. Sh. Charanjeet Singh Rori 
9. Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi 
10. Sh. Alok Sanjar 
11. Sh. Brijbhushan Sharan Singh 
12. Sh. Parvesh Sahib Singh Verma 
RAJYA SABHA 
13. Sh. R. S. Bharthi 
14. Sh. Anil Desai 
15. Sh. Ajay Sancheti 
16. Sh. Mahesh Poddar 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Abha Singh Yaduvanshi - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri D.S. Malha   - Director 
3.  Ms. Amita Walia   - Additional Director 

66 
 
2. ****  ****  ****  ****  **** **** 
3.  ****  ****  ****  ****  ****     **** 
4. ****  ****  ****  ****  ****    **** 
5. Thereafter, Hon'ble Chairperson and the Members  of the Committee 
considered and adopted  Action Taken Reports on Demands for Grants (2016 -17) of 
Ministries of Urban Development and Housing & Urban Poverty Alleviation 
unanimously without any changes. 
 
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings of t he sitting of the Committee has been 
kept.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
**** These portions of the Minutes do not relate to the Report of the Committee. 
  

67 
 
ANNEXURE -II 
                                            [Vide para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTH REPORT 
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN  DEVELOPLMENT ( SIXTEENTH 
LOK SABHA) 
 
I.  Total number of recommendations                                   22 
                               
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government:                  
  Recommendation Nos.           15  
Percentage to total recommendations                                                        
                                                                                                   (68.18%) 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government‘s replies:                     
Recommendation Nos.                                                           01 
    
Percentage to total recommendations                                     (4.54%)  
 
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of                                      
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
Recommendation No.                                                            03 
      
Percentage to total recommendations                                          (13.63%) 
                             
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final                    
replies of the Government are still awaited:                                           03 
 
Percentage to total recommendations                                   (13.63%)
           
           
                              