    STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
          URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
                                (2019-2020) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE SECOND REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2020-2021) 
 
FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
11 September, 2020, 20 Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) 
4 


FOURTH  REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2019-2020) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE SECOND REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2020-2021) 
 
Presented to Speaker on 11.09.2020 
Placed before Chairperson on 14.09.2020 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 04.02.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 04.02.2021 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
11 September, 2020, 20 Bhadarada,1942 (Saka)  


C.U.D. No.: 115 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2019 By Lok Sabha Secretariat  
 
Publish under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by………… 
 

 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                                     
(iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                                        
(v) 
CHAPTER I Report                                                                                               
 
  1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government   
 
19 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
43 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration   
44 
CHAPTER V Observations /Recommendations  in respect of which final  
replies of the Government are still awaited  
47 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
I. Minutes of the Twelfth Sitting of the Committee held on 27.08.2020 -       60 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government o n the recommendations 
contained in the Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) -                                      62                                                                                        
         

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2019-20) 
Shri Jagdambika Pal         -        Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Adv. A.  M. Ariff 
3. Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel 
4. Shri Sanjay Kumar Bandi 
5. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
6. Shri Benny Behanan 
7. Shri Ramcharan Bohra 
8. Shri Hibi Eden 
9. Shri Gautam Gambhir 
10. Shri Syed Imtiaz Jaleel 
11. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
12. Smt Hema Malini 
13. Shri Hasnain Masoodi 
14. Shri P.C. Mohan 
15. Shri C.R. Patil 
16. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
17. Shri Adala Prabhakara Reddy 
18. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
19. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
20. Shri Sudhakar Tukaram Shrangre 
21. Shri Sunil Kumar Soni 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri M. J Akbar 
23. Shri Y.S. Chowdary 
24. Shri Kumar Ketkar 
25. Shri Sanjay Singh 
26. Shri Digvijay Singh$ 
27. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla* 
28. Shri Ram Chander Jangra* 
29. Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki* 
30. Shri Subrata Bakshi# 
31. Vacant 
 
*Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 22.07.2020. 
$ Shri Digvijay Singh, MP, RS has been re-nominated to the Committee  w.e.f. 22nd July, 
2020. 
# Was nominated to the Committee on 22.07.2020, however, he has not taken oath yet. 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri  V.K. Tripathi                             -          Joint Secretary 
2. Shri  A.K. Shah        -       Director 

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2019 -20) having 
been authorized by the Committee, present this Fourth Report (17 th Lok Sabha) on the 
'Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee On Urban Development 
on Demands For Grants (2020-2021)’ of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs. 
2. The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 12 th December, 2019 and laid 
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on same date. The Action Taken Replies of the Government 
on the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 03.06.2020. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at their Sitting held on 
27.08.2020. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
contained in the Secon d Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at 
Annexure-II. 
5. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of appreciation 
for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the Officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
6. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
  
 
 
New Delhi;  
11th September, 2020 
20 Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) 
JAGDAMBIKA PAL,  
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on 
Urban Development 
 
 
 
  

1 
 
Chapter-I 
 
(Report) 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2019 -20) deals 
with action taken by the Government on the O bservations/ Recommendations contained 
in the Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Deman ds for Grants (2020 -21) of the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs which was presented to the Parliament on 03 
March, 2020. 
 
2 Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the 2 7 recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as 
follows: 
 
 (i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the   
 Government: 
  
  1,2,3,5,9,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20 and 21.   
(Total 14) 
          (Chapter-II) 
 (ii) Recommendations/Observations, which the Committee do not   
 desire to pursue in view of Government's replies: 
  
  4 
(Total 1) 
          (Chapter-III) 
 
 (iii) Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which replies of   
 Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
  6 
 
(Total 1) 
          (Chapter-IV) 
 (iv) Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which final replies   
 of the Government are still awaited: 
 
  7,8,10,11,12,22,23,24,25,26 and 27. 
 
   
(Total 11) 
          (Chapter-V) 
 
 
 

2 
 
3 The Committee desire that specific replies to the comments contained in 
Chapter-I and recommendations included in Chapter V of this  
Report may be furnished at the earliest and in any case not later than three month 
from the presentation of this Report. 
 
 
4 The Committee will now deal with and comment upon the action taken by the 
Government on some of their recommendations. 
 
 
 
(Recommendations Serial No. 1) 
STRENGTHENING RESPONSE AND STRATEGY FOR ACHIEVING THE GOAL OF 5 
MILLION ECONOMY BY 2024 RETREATED IN VIEW OF POSSIBLY SLOW DOWN OF 
ECONOMY ARISING OUT OF COVID-19 LOCKDOWNS 
 
 
5 The Committee had recommended: 
 
“The Committee’s examination of Demands for Grants (2020 -21) of Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs that seeks to propose a gross provision of Rs.57,786 Cr 
and net provision of Rs. 50,039 cr . deducting anticipated recoveries is within 
Ministry’s vision of providing ease of living, responsive governance etc is part of 
Government’s response to urbanization challenges by way of implementation of 
prominent flagship programmes of PMAY (U), SCM, SBM (U) and DAY -NULM 
through a Three Level Strategy addressing three big issues of ‘Poverty Alleviation’, 
‘Affordable Housing’ and ‘Cleanliness’ and also covering the areas of Water 
Supply, Sewerage and Improving i nfrastructure, so that urban India can play an 
important role in achieving $5 Trillion Economy target by 2024. The Committee 
however feel that in the light of 2030 development agenda of the United Nations 
with emphasis on sustainable cities and in view of rising urbanization trends 
witnessing as high as 53 cities with more than one million plus population, both the 
response of the Government and strategy available need to be strengthened for 
achieving the intended goals. The Committee therefore recommend th at extra 
efforts are needed to materialise intended goals”. 
 
6 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken reply stated as 
under: 
“From May 2014 onwards, Government embarked on one of the most 
comprehensive programme of urbanization.  C ritical issue of higher funding 
required for urban infrastructure was addressed by substantial increase in 
budgetary allocation under various schemes launched from 2014-15 onwards.  The  

3 
annual average Budgetary allocations during the preceding 10 year p eriod(2004-
05 to 2013 -14) was around 15,800 crore, which has now increased to around Rs. 
47,000crore i.e. more than three times. Taking into account the investment made 
in Urban Sector in past 6 years, Budgetary allocation for 2020-21 and the projected 
investment of Rs.17,74,167 Cr. on urban infrastructure in the National 
Infrastructure Pipeline, MoHUA is targeted to   contribute to achieve the goal of five 
trillion dollar economy by 2024. Scheme-wise details are given below:- 
 
(i) Swachha Bharat Mission – SBM(U) 
 
 The cleanliness initiative that began under the SBM (U) has shown 
impressive success. In order to sustain the results on the ground on a long 
term basis and institutionalize the concept of ‘swachhata’ or cleanliness, it i s 
proposed to extend the SBM (U) for another 5 years. This extension has 
been proposed with a projected financial outlay of Rs. 2,11,869 crores, 
covering sustainable sanitation value chain (toilet construction, 
maintenance, complete fecal sludge management  and waste water 
treatment) and Solid Waste Management value chain (including complete 
processing of Municipal Solid Waste, Construction & Demolition waste 
management and remediation of legacy dumpsites), to ensure holistic 
cleanliness across Urban India. 
 
 
(ii)  Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) 
 
 Jal Jeevan Mission (Urban) is being proposed with major objective of 
providing tap water connection to households in all statutory towns. Total 
allocation proposed for this is Rs. 2,7 9,500 crore including central share of 
Rs. 78,800 crore. Public Private Partnership (PPP) is being encouraged 
under the Mission for implementation of projects wherein cities having 
million plus population will be mandated to take up PPP projects worth 
minimum of 10% of their total project allocation. 
 
(iii) Smart Cities Mission 
 
 Smart Cities Mission (SCM) is committed to complete Rs. 2,05,018 
crore worth of projects giving 5 years to each city from the date of selection. 
This investment in urban infrastructure will have  direct and indirect 
contribution to the goal of achieving the country's goal of a five trillion USD 
economy by 2024.   
 
(iv) Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (PMAY) 
 
 Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (Urban) [PMAY -(U)] was launch ed on 
25 June 2015 to provide pakka house with basic amenities to all eligible    

4 
beneficiaries of urban India by the year 2022. At present, PMAY (U) is one 
of   the largest housing schemes of the world covering urban India. 
 
 The PMAY (U) has proved to be a significant policy initiative towards 
India’s global commitment in achieving   the Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDGs), particularly the SDG number 11 that   envisages ‘making 
cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable’, to 
ensure access for all to adequate and affordable housing   and basic 
services and upgrade slums by 2030. 
 
 The scheme of PMAY (U) is rapidly   moving towards achieving the 
vision for providing a pucca house to every   household by 2022. It has 
achieved a mil estone of approving more than 1 crore   houses in its 50 th 
Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee (CSMC) meeting held on 
27th December, 2019. Out of 1.04 crore   houses approved as on 
31.03.2020, about 64 lakh have been grounded for construction of w hich 
nearly 34 lakh houses have been completed and   delivered. 
 
 For the first time in the history   of urban India, this housing scheme 
has the coverage of all the 4521   statutory towns of the country. In addition, 
planning areas of all   Development Au thorities have also been covered 
under PMAY (U). This scheme   has brought a paradigm shift in approach 
by including non -slum beneficiaries   in its ambit as against earlier housing 
schemes. 
 
 Construction activities have strong forward and backward linkag es 
with other sectors in the economy.   Therefore, the impact on employment 
can be both direct and indirect. The   total investment made in the 
construction of the houses is churning the   economy through providing 
direct employment coupled with induced im pact on   broadly 21 sectors of 
the economy like steel, cement, glass, brick, wood and   certain consumer 
durables etc. As on 31.03.2020, the total investment made   under PMAY 
(U) is Rs. 6.31 lakh crore with a committed Central Assistance of   Rs. 1.65 
lakh crore. 
 While more houses will  be sanctioned to saturate the demand of the 
States/UTs, the thrust is now on   implementation and successful 
completion of the projects to achieve the target of Housing for All by 2022. 
 
 
(v) Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana -National Urban Livelihoods Mission 
(DAY-NULM) 
 
 Vision 2024  include the action plan of Universal social mobilization 
of urban poor into Self -Help Groups (SHGs) and their federations by 
bringing 1 crore women into the SHG fold, facilitating livelihood  

5 
 
opportunities for 40 lakh beneficiaries, establishing City Livelihood Centres 
(CLCs) in 100 Million Plus and Smart Cities, to provide a platform for the 
urban poor to market their services and access information on self -
employment, skill training and other benefits and issuing vending certificates 
to 10 lakh street vendors by 2024, which would help in addressing their 
livelihood concerns”. 
  
 7 The Committee appreciate the action taken reply of the Ministry of Housing 
and urban Affairs (MoH&UA) detailing out the ongoing as also future steps that are 
planned under four prominent Missions that inter alia include extension of SWM (U) 
for another 5 years with huge investment for ensuring holistic cleanliness across 
urban area for achieving the goal of taking c ountrys' economy to F ive Billion 
Economy by 2024. The Committee however apprehend that on going lockdowns 
arising out of Covid -19 with forced migration of labo ur from one place to other in 
huge number accompanied with relati vely high degree of job losses in  other 
sectors of economy , the optimism of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs for 
realizing the objective set out may get delayed and may go beyond even 2024. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate that both the response and strategy of the 
Government be re-strengthened for the desired purpose. 
 
 
(Recommendation Srl. No. 03) 
MOPPING UP NECESSARY RESOURCES FOR URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE 
REITERATED 
 
8 The Committee had recommended: 
 
 “The Committee recall that while reviewing the Demands for Grants (2019 - 
20) of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, they had come across that High 
Powered Expert Committee (set up within the MoHUA in 2011) had recommended 
a projected investment requirement of Rs.39 lakh crore for capital investment from 
2011-2032 at 2009-10 prices for replenishing the deficit in allocations over the  

6 
years for achieving service delivery and also for meeting future needs of cities. The 
Committee were informed that ne cessary replenishment is being done by arriving 
at three fold hike in annual average budgetary allocation from the level of 
Rs.15,800 crore between 10 years period from 2003-2004 to 2013-14 to as high as 
Rs.44,000 crore (inclusive of Extra Budgetary Resour ce (EBR) i.e. 2014 -15 
onwards till 2019-20 with even higher allocation of Rs. 50,029 crore for BE (2020 -
21). In this context, the Committee have been informed that MoHUA has projected 
investment of Rs.17.74 lakh crore for different Missions during the peri od from 
2019 to 2025 with Rs. 5.73 lakh crore for ‘Metro Urban Transport’, Rs.5.40 lakh 
crore for ‘Affordable Housing’, Rs.2.79 lakh crore for ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’, Rs. 2.01 
lakh crore for ‘Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) SBM(U)’, Rs.1.31 lakh crore for 
‘Smart City Mission; and Rs. 0.47 lakh crore for AMRUT. 
 
In this connection, the MoHUA has submitted before the Committee that the 
Mission-wise flow of investment approved by the Government together with Central 
Government share thereon during the last five ye ars and expected flow for future. 
For instance, for RRTS, Metro, Government approved investment is Rs.1.81 lakh 
with Central Government financial contribution of Rs.74,000 crore, for AMRUT 
Mission Rs.77,640 crore with States coming up with higher investmen t for SBM(U) 
Rs.62,000 crore, for Smart Cities Mission Rs. 2.05 lakh crore and for PMAY(U) 
Rs.1.80 lakh crore with approval of Rs.60,000 crore as Extra Budgetary Resources 
(EBR) and raising of Rs.43,000 crore with more EBR. In this context, the MoHUA 
hopeful that through National Infrastructure Pipeline (NIP) launched during 2019 -
20 Budget would give fillip to sustain the momentum in supplementing the efforts of 
States in development of urban infrastructure also. The Committee while 
appreciating the work  done by the MoHUA in this regard, feel that a lot is to be 
done for mopping up necessary funds for over -all urban infrastructure as 
recommended by High Powered Expert Committee set up by the Ministry way back 
in 2011”. 
 
9 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Af fairs in their action taken replies stated as 
under: 
“Details of the financing various schemes of the Ministry are given below: 
 
Jal Jeevan Mission (Urban)  is being proposed with major objective of 
providing tap water connection to households in all statutory towns. Total 
allocation proposed for this is Rs.2,79,500 crore including central share of 
Rs.78,800 crore. Public Private Partnership (PPP) is being en couraged 
under the Mission for implementation of projects wherein cities having 
million plus population will be mandated to take up PPP projects worth 
minimum of 10% of their total project allocation which will supplement funds 
required for urban infrastructure development. 

 
7 
 
MRTS & Metro Projects - Many cities are aspiring to have rail based public 
transport system, which would also attract investments from various 
sources. National Infrastructure Pipeline projects for mass transit with 
investments from various sourceshave been envisaged to be implem ented 
in the next 5 years. Further, in order to provide cost -effective rail -based 
transport solution for Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities with lower ridership, MoHUA 
has formulated Standards for Light Urban Rail Transit System named 
Metrolite, which can be impleme nted at a lesser cost as compared to Metro 
Rail System. A number of Metro Rail/RRTS projects are under 
implementation in the country under different models like 50:50 equity 
sharing between the Centre and State, fully Central owned, fully State 
owned, Priv ate initiative and under Public Private Partnership. The Metro 
Rail Policy, 2017 issued by the Government of India also promotes the 
private contribution under Public Private Partnership mode for unbundled 
components. At present about 700kilometers of metr o rail is operational in 
18 cities and about 900kilometers of Metro/RRTS lines are under 
implementation in cities across the country under different implementation 
models.  Development of Metro Rail system is an ongoing process, planning 
for which is initi ated by the respective State Governments. Besides the 
above, the Ministry has undertaken the task of standardizing specifications 
of Rubber Tyre Electric driven Articulated Bus system with exclusive right of 
way named Metroneo which can be implemented at a  cost lesser than that 
of Metrolite and suitable for smaller cities, thus providing another option for 
planning public mobility. Under National Infrastructure Pipeline, announced 
in Budget 2020 projected investment for Metro projects is Rs. 5.70 lakh 
crore. 
 
Smart Cities Mission (SCM) - Out of the total Rs. 2,05,018 crore worth of 
projects proposed to be implemented under the SCM, only 45% is to be 
funded from budgetary sources (50:50 contribution by Central and 
States/UTs Governments), 21% from Public Private Partnership (PPP), 21% 
from Convergence and 13 % from others (Loans/Debts, Municipal Bonds, 
own resources etc.). Hence, under SCM, every effort is being made for 
enhancing funds for overall urban infrastructure development. 
 
Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (PMAY-Urban) - The investments   to fund 
PMAY (U) are from Government of India grants, States/UTs, Urban Local   
Bodies, Beneficiaries and other sources including private partners (in PPP   
projects). For affordable housing under PMAY (U), an investment of  nearly 
Rs.6.95 lakh crore has been estimated for construction of hitherto validated 
demand of 1.12 crore   houses. Out of the estimated investment, Rs.1.54 
lakh crore has been spent upto 31st March 2019. Thus, the share of 
investment in the affordable housing   sector through National Infrastructure  

8 
in Pipeline is about Rs. 5.41 lakh   crore during the years 2019 -20 to 2021-
22. The amount of Central assistance   involved in the above estimation is 
approximately Rs. 1.80 lakh crore which   is arranged/ t o be arranged 
through budgetary allocation as well as Extra   Budgetary Resources (EBR) 
on year -on-year basis for implementation of the PMAY(U) projects. As on 
31.03.2020, the Ministry has spent Rs. 69,178 crore   of central assistance 
(Rs. 26,178 crore fr om budgetary allocations and Rs. 43,000 crore from 
EBR) upto FY 2019 -20. Ministry will approach the Union Cabinet for 
additional EBR in the range of Rs. 60,000 crore toRs. 80,000 crore shortly 
as EBR of Rs. 43,000 crore has already been utilized. 
 
Swachh B harat Mission – SBM(U) - The proposed SBM (U) 2.0 has 
estimated a financial outlay of Rs 2,11,869 crores, including Central Govt. 
share of Rs. 48,941 crores. A large part of this amount will be used in 
creation of infrastructure. For example, more than Rs.  20,000 crores are 
estimated for SWM projects, which would include setting up MRF facilities, 
setting up waste processing plants, strengthening existing facilities, etc. 
Another Rs. 6,000 crores is proposed to be spent in remediating legacy 
dumpsites, setting up Construction & Demolition waste processing facilities. 
In sanitation, more than Rs 4,000 crores are expected to be spent in 
constructing additional IHHL, CT/PT, and upgrading existing infrastructure. 
In Waste water treatment, an estimated outlay of more than Rs. 31,000 
crores has been proposed, including procurement of desludging vehicles, 
strengthening of existing on -site sanitation system, diversion of wastewater 
to sewer network in all cities with population less than 1 lakh. It is expected 
that S BM (U) 2.0 will lead to significant enhancement of national 
infrastructure”.  
 
10 The Committee appreciate the elaborate action taken reply of Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs detailing out Mission wise progress of work done as 
also of requirement of funds under Jal Jeewan Sakti Mission, MRTS & Metro 
Projects, Smart Cities Mission (SCM), PMAY  (Urban), Swachh Bharat Mis sion, 
showcasing therein so urcing of funds from different sources like Public Private 
Partnerships (PPP) going  for cheaper made of transport like ‘Metrolite’, ‘Metroneo’ 
(Tyred Metro) for smaller towns under MRTS & Metro Projects, arrangement of 
funds for  PMAY (U), on -going requirement and planned investment for Swachh 
Bharat (Urban)-2. The Committee welcome these initiatives taken for ongoing and  

9 
future requirements . The Committe e however apprehend that the on going slow 
down economy arising out of COVID-19 pandemic may badly hit the 
implementation of prominent urban infrastructure related programmes ret arding 
the investments planned thereunder. The Committee , therefore, reiterate that 
mapping up necessary resources for these prominent Missions be ar ranged 
expeditiously. Inadequate steps for last mile connectivity criticised and ensuring 
last mile connectivity by Delhi Metro reitreated.  
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
EXAMINING THE ISSUE OF FREE RIDE FOR VULNERABLE SOCIETY IN 
DELHI METRO AND USEOF SMALL  AGGREGATORS FOR ENSURING LAST 
MILE CONNECTIVITY IN DELHI METRO –REITERATED 
 
 
11 The Committee had recommended: 
 
"The Committee’s examination has revealed that two prominent issues of 
permitting free ride for women in Delhi Metro and ensuring last mile connectivity by 
promotion of small aggregators had come up before the Committee while 
examining the Demands for Grants (2019 -20). The Committee feel that possible 
ways and measures should be taken into consideration by the Ministry to provide 
for affordabl e and safe transportation services to the vulnerable sections of the 
society including the women, the children (the students) and the aged. 
 
 On the issue of ensuring last mile connectivity, the Committee have been 
informed about the details of Metro Feede r Bus, e -rickshaw services, E -scooter 
services, cycle sharing services and need for promoting use of Metro lite has been 
highlighted. The Committee apprehends that the issue of ensuring last mile 
connectivity by small aggregators still remains to be addres sed and needs to be 
examined afresh". 
 
12 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken reply stated: 
“Efforts of the Government are focused towards providing affordable and safe 
transportation services to the general public including the  women, the children (the 
students) and the aged. To ensure fairness and transparency, Metro Rail fare is 
fixed by Fare Fixation Committee, chaired by serving or retired judge of High Court  

10 
 
in terms of extant provisions of Metro Railways (Operation an d Maintenance) Act, 
2002, which takes into account issues concerning all stakeholders.  The 
recommendation of Fare Fixation committee is binding on the metro rail 
administration. 
Regarding use of small aggregators for ensuring last mile connectivity in Del hi 
Metro, besides big aggregator [UBER], DMRC has tied -up with small aggregators, 
who are providing e-rickshaw and auto-rickshaw aggregation services.  
These are: -  
E-Rickshaw aggregation (operational) and e-auto services (planned) 
A fleet of 800 e -rickshaws are operational from 20 metro stations serving over 1 
lakh passengers on weekdays by two Operators of which one of the Operators is 
an aggregator. In addition, demo services have also been started from 9 additional 
metro stations, which would be regularized soon. 
To enhance the services, it is planned to introduce the services from additional 33 
additional metro stations with the help of existing and newly selected e -rickshaw 
operators (who are into aggregation of e-rickshaws as well). 
DMRC has also app roached Hon’ble Supreme Court to lift cap of 1 lakh auto -
rickshaws in the Delhi region and to allow bulk registration of e -autos in DMRC’s 
Operator name. 
 
Aggregation of auto-rickshaws 
DMRC has tied up with an auto -rickshaw aggregator. One auto -rickshaw 
aggregation booth service is operational from HUDA City Centre metro station and 
Operator has been permitted to operate booths from 4 additional metro stations [in 
Gurgaon and NOIDA regions].  
 
Besides the above, proposals from various entities / aggregators are also favorably 
considered by DMRC and to address the land requirement for stabling / parking / 
pick-up & drop -off points for vehicles. DMRC is embarking upon a Multimodal 
Integration plan for seamless connectivity. Demarcation and development of 
Multimodal integration influence zone of 300 -meter radius around 96 metro 
stations is under consideration. Of these 96 stations, ‘Good For Construction’ 
drawing of 60 stations have been issu ed to all the implementing agencies in 
February-2020. Target date for completion of MMI works at site for 60 stations is 
now June -2021 (earlier planned by Mar -2021 but due to COVID -19 scenario 
completion is expected to extend by at least3 months). Execution/completion of the 
works would enable integration of various modes of transport and in ensuring last 
mile connectivity. In addition to the above, the following Last Mile services are 
available from metro stations: - 
Metro Feeder Buses  
Presently, 174 MIDI  feeder CNG Non -AC buses are being run on 32 STA 
approved routes which connect 69 metro stations. DMRC is also in the process to 
procure 100 AC e-buses to be operated on 10 new routes.  
 

11 
 
Procurement order has already been placed in Dec 2019 and the e -buses are 
expected to be supplied within one year.  
 
Cab Aggregation 
As on date, UBER (CAB Aggregator) kiosks are operational from 11 metro stations 
and it is planned to extend the services from 210 metro stations for door to door 
connectivity.  
 
E-Scooter Services  
E-Scooter services by DMRC authorized operator are operational from 4 metro 
stations. The services will soon be initiated from 3 more metro stations.  
 
Cycle Sharing Services  
Pedal bicycle sharing services by 4 operators are operational from 16 metro 
stations. 2 operators are providing battery operated cycle services from 36 metro 
stations (service yet to be operationalized at few stations). 
MoHUA has also issued standard specifications for Light Urban Rail Transit 
system named Metrolite, suitabl e for cities with lower projection of ridership, which 
can be implemented at much lesser cost. This system would provide low cost Rail 
based Mass mobility solution with a feel of conventional metro system. Metrolite 
can also act as a feeder to high capacity Metro system”. 
 
13 The Committee are constrained to note that steps taken for ensuring last 
mile connectivity by Delhi Metro are too less and are in formulative stages and 
hardly serve the purpose. For instance, tying up with small aggregators planned in 
a total of 33 Metro Stations, approaching Hon'ble Supreme Court for allowing bulk 
registrations of e -rikshaw in DMRC operator name, coming up with Multi Model  
Integration Plan  (MIP) for seamless connectivity etc are yet to take off. The 
Committee feel that with daily ridership of over 20 lakh passengers work done or 
proposed to be alone hardly serves any purpose in view of rising ridership of 
passengers. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that all other efforts be made in 
this regard.” 
 
 

12 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
EXPEDITIOUS ACTION ON LOW COST METROLITE WORK FOR URBAN 
TRANSPORT NEEDS OF TIER-II AND TIER-III EARLIER REITERATED 
 
 
14 The Committee had recommended: 
 
"The Committee are constrained to find that currently the per km cost of 
construction of Metro Rail Network is as high as Rs.500 crore to Rs.700 crore as 
compared to Metrolite that costs as low as Rs.100 crore to Rs.125 crore.  The 
Committee’s examination has revealed that a s per National Infrastructure Pipeline 
(NIP) out of total investment on Metro Projects to the tune of Rs.5.73 lakh crore 
from 2019-20 to 2024-25, an amount as high as Rs.1.05 lakh has been devoted for 
Metrolite works. The Committee find that as perpostevid ence reply of MoHUA 
Metrolite system is suitable for cities with lower projection of ridership besides it 
can also be used as a feeder system to existing metro system. The Committee 
also feel that under ‘Make in India Initiative’, the level of encouraging domestic 
manufacturing of metro components with foreign collaboration be promoted in big 
way as the system is more viable and sustainable due to its low capital costs, 
maintenance and operational costs. The Committee recommend that the State 
Governments may follow the Kochi Metro by moving to Metrolite projects for the 
works which are under approval. The Committee feel in view of the low cost of 
construction Metrolite projects on the lines of Kochi be taken up in other States for 
meeting theurban transport requirements of Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities expeditiously". 
 
15 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken reply stated: 
"Kochi Metro Rail Limited has informed that they are studying the feasibility of 
adopting Metrolite for the proposed Phase-III Aluva to Angamaly with Airport link 
corridor of Kochi Metro Rail Project and has  
appointed M/s. UMTC for preparation of Detailed Project Report for the same. All 
the other States have also b een informed about the Standard specifications of 
Metrolite with a request that they may adopt Metrolite as prime mode of mass 
urban transit as per their requirements". 
 
16 The Committee are constrained to note that ‘status quo’  in is  prevailing in 
the area of promoting low cost Metro like ‘Metrolite’ for Tier II and Tier III towns as 
Kochi Metro Rail is currently standing the same and matter has not moved beyond 
the DPR preparation whereas other State Governments are yet to adopt the same  

13 
as per their requirements. The Committee apprehend with this pa ce of work it may 
take years to implement low cost Metrolite work for specified towns resulting 
technology getting outdated with accompa nied time and cost overruns. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate that expeditious action be taken on low cost 
Metrolite work in Tier II and Tier III towns. 
 
(Recommendation No. 8 ) 
 
 EXPEDITING METRO RAIL PROJECT FOR AGRA REITERATED 
 
17 The Committee had recommended: 
 
"The Committee’s examination has revealed that prominent place of tourist 
attraction Agra is awaiting Metro  Rail Network work due to imposition of general 
embargo on environmental angle by the Hon’ble Supreme Court. The Committee 
recall that this issue was taken up by the Committee last year also. The Committee 
has been informed that after the Hon’ble Supreme Court has accorded permission, 
the matter is before Monitoring Committee again to be submitted before Hon’ble 
Supreme Court. The Committee feel that all out efforts be made for early clearance 
of Agra Metro Project from Hon’ble Supreme Court". 
 
18 The Ministry of Housing and urban Affairs replied as under: 
 
"Uttar Pradesh Metro Rail Corporation Limited (UPMRCL) has informed that in 
May, 2019, they requested the Taj Trapezium Zone Pollution (Prevention and 
Control) Authority to grant “No Objection” for execut ion of the Agra Metro Rail 
Project. The Taj Trapezium Zone Pollution (Prevention & Control) Authority held a 
High Level Meeting on 10 -6-2019, wherein the representatives of UPMRCL also 
participated. The Taj Trapezium Zone Pollution (Prevention & Control) A uthority on 
14-6-2019 communicated the minutes of the meeting stating that as per orders of 
Hon’ble Supreme Court dated 22 -3-2018 passed in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 13381 
of 1984 titled as M.C.Mehta Vs. Union of India & Others, the orders of “Status quo” 
in entire Taj Trapezium Zone  (TTZ) Area have been passed, which  are presently 
effective. The Taj Trapezium Zone Pollution (Prevention & Control) Authority also 
communicated that as regards the Status quo, it shall be necessary for UPMRCL 
to get the status clarified at the level of Hon’ble Supreme Court. 
 
UPMRCL has filed I.A. Nos. 163898 and 163904 (under Writ Petition (C) No. 
13381 of 1984) seeking permission of the Hon’ble Supreme Court for allowing the  

14 
 
public activities pertaining to Agra Metro Rai l Project. Hon’ble Supreme Court vide 
its order dated 04.12.2019 referred the matter to Central Empowered Committee 
(CEC) for considering the impact of Agra Metro Rail Project on the environment 
and directed it to submit a report within a period of four we eks. Pursuant to above 
orders of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, CEC submitted its report to Hon’ble 
Supreme Court on 10.02.2020.  
 
Subsequent to the filling of CEC report with the Hon’ble Supreme Court on 10 -2-
2020, the matter is awaiting to be listed for hearing. Ms Aishwarya Bhati, Additional 
Advocate General mentioned the matter before the Hon’ble Supreme Court on 2-3-
2020 and the Hon’ble Supreme Court was pleased to pass the orders to list the 
case after the Holi vacation before the appropriate bench. Howev er, due to the 
spread of corona virus pandemic and the nationwide lock -down, which is still 
continuing, the matter could not be listed. 
 
UPMRCL has informed that they would diligently pursue the matter with Advocate 
General of Uttar Pradesh and Additional Advocate General of Uttar Pradesh for 
early listing and hearing of the case by the Hon’ble Supreme Court once the 
lockdown is lifted”. 
 
19 The Committee are constrained to note that Metro Rail network for tourist 
towns of Agra has been badly delayed and the project is being shuttling between 
Taj Trepeziem Zone Pollution (Prevention and Control) Authority for NOC proposes 
and Central Empowered  Committee (CEC) and finally the matter is before Hon'ble 
Supreme Court to be heard over for hearing after the lockdown is listed. Since the 
aforesaid Metro Rail Network  
project is badly delayed the Committee reiterate it expeditious  reaction after 
getting Hon'ble Supreme Court’s node. 
 
 
(Recommendation Srl. No. 11) 
EARLY FINALISATION OF NIRMAL KAUSHAL VIKASH YOJANA RETREATED 
 
20 The Committee had recommended: 
 
 

15 
“The Committee appreciate that MoHUA has come out with Nirmal Kaushal Vikash 
Yojana for three years period from 2020 -21 to 2022 -23 with budgetary 
requirements of Rs.656 crore beginning with Rs.50.00 crore for BE (2020 -21) that 
seeks to give quality vocational training for workers in construction industry. The 
Committee also find that 12 champ ion service sectors have been identified for 
global service exports and enhancing the share of services to GDP for 
implementation set up jointly by MoHUA, National Skill Development Corporation 
(NSDC) is currently under consideration of Government and will  be finalised by 
April, 2020. The Committee feel that this is good initiative and be finalized 
expeditiously”. 
 
21 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has stated: 
 
“A meeting of the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) chaired by the Cabinet 
Secretary was held on 06.02.2020, for reviewing various sectors under the 
Champion Service Sector Scheme, in which it was decided that Ministry of 
Housing & Urban Affairs and other Ministries/Departments may examine how 
the skilling component of their Schemes can be imp lemented through the M/o 
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship  (MoSDE). Accordingly, a proposal to 
involve MoSDE, National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) and relevant 
Sector Skill Councils in implementation of NKVY was considered and it was 
decided to request MoSDE to take up implementation of NKVY. In this regard, 
a reference from MoHUA has already been sent to MoSDE and their response 
is awaited”. 
22 The Committee are constrained to note that not much progress has been 
made with regard to implement ation of prominent scheme of Nirmal Kaushal 
Vikash Yojana (NKVY) for imparting vocational training for construction worker 
except holding of a meeting of Committee of Secretaries (Cos) chaired by 
Cabinet Secretary hold on 6 th February, 2020 wherein it was decided that 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs with other Ministries would examine 
implementation of skill component through Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurships (MoSDE) for which necessary proposal has bee n sent to 
MoSDE. The Committee therefore, reiterate that early action be taken for 
implementation of NKVY Scheme so it benefit the construction workers.    

16 
(Recommendation Srl. No. 16) 
PROMOTION OF LATEST TECHNOLOGIES FOR EARLY COMPLETION OF 
HOUSES AND INCENTIVIZING BETTER PERFORMING STATES REITERATED 
23 The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee’s examination has revealed that pace of sanctioning of houses is 
not commensurate with houses grounded and houses completed. For instance as 
against the 103 lakh houses sanctioned as low as 60.51 lakh houses are under 
construction and still lower i.e 32.08 lakh houses have been completed. In this 
connection it came out before the Committee that out of four verticals of 
Beneficiaries Led Construction ( BLC), Affordable Housing Partnership (AHP), 
Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) and In Situ Slum Rehabilitation (ISSR) in 
AHP time taken for tendering house construction etc is three years and half and in 
BLC it is relatively less whereas in CLSS beneficia ry is allowed to go for aready 
built houses. In this connection it also came out before the Committee that the 
pace of construction is being quickened by fast tracking construction under Light 
Houses Projects (LHPs) for affordable housing in Indore, Rajkot , Chennai, Ranchi, 
Agartala and Lucknow. The Committee feel that such drive should be opened 
across the States so that long gestation period usually taken is considerably 
reduced. The Committee also find that with reference to vertical of Beneficial Led 
Construction component of PMAY(U) States of Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh 
and UT of Jammu & Kashmir have petitioned before MoH&UA for suitably 
enhancing the available limit ofRs.1.50 lakh per beneficiary. The Committee feel 
that the issue be favorably exam ined within MoH&UA for The Committee also 
appreciate at the idea of incentivizing States which are performing well should also 
be promoted as has been opined by Secretary MoH&UA for faster completion of 
houses across the States. The Committee also apprecia te that MoH&UA has 
opened an ‘Angikar’ campaign from 2 ndOct, 2019 onwards wherein beneficiaries 
have been allowed to converge with different Missions of MoH&UA and other 
Central Ministries like Health and Family Welfare, Jal Shakti, Ministry of Petroleum 
and Natural Gas, Power, Youth & Sports and Women and Child Development for 
imbibing best practices in water and energy conservation, Waste Management, 
Health Sanitation and Hygiene. The Committee recommend that Angikar 
Campaign should be open in a big way f or making it beneficiary friendly and 
people oriented”. 
 
24 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in Action taken reply stated as under: 
 
“The Ministry is runn ing a full -fledged Technology Sub-Mission (TSM) under 
PMAY-U Mission with the objective of promotion and   adoption of fast pace  

17 
 
construction tec hnologies by the States/Union Territories (UTs). The TSM 
facilitates adoption of modern, innovative and   green technologies and building 
material for faster and quality construction   of houses. It also facilitates preparation 
and adoption of layout designs and   building plans suitable for various geo-climatic 
zones. Moreover, it assists   States/Cities in deploying disaster resistant and 
environment friendly   technologies. 
Building Materials and T echnology Promotion   Council (BMTPC), an autonomous 
organization under the aegis of M/o Housing   and Urban Affairs is mandated to 
identify, evaluate and promote emerging   construction systems which are safe, 
sustainable and environment-friendly and   ensure cost effective and faster delivery 
of quality houses  suiting to   different geo -climatic conditions of the country. 
BMTPC has so far evaluated   and certified 36 new housing systems/technologies 
under Performance Appraisal   Certification Scheme (PACS ). As of now, Central 
Public Works Department   (CPWD) has issued Schedule of Rates (SoRs) for 29 
innovative and alternate   technologies.  
In order to showcase the field   application of new emerging technologies which 
are cost effective and speedy   cons truction, MoHUA has taken an  initiative to 
construct Demonstration   Housing Projects under PMAY -U Mission through 
BMTPC in various States/UTs. So   far, BMPTC has completed 5 DHPs at Nellore 
(Andhra Pradesh), Bhubaneswar   (Odisha), Bihar Sharif (Bihar), Hyderabad 
(Telangana) and Lucknow (Uttar   Pradesh).  Also, DHPs at Panchkula, Haryana 
and Agartala, Tripura are under progress and BMTPC has recently floated   
tenders for DHPs at Chimbel, Goa and Ahmedabad, Gujarat. 
Further, under the overall purview of TSM component of PMAY-U Mission, MoHUA 
has   launched Global Housing Technology Challenge - India (GHTC -India) to 
identify   and mainstream a basket of innovative and alternative technologies from   
across the globe that are sustainable, eco -friendly and disaster resilient   and can 
deliver maximum number of dwelling units in minimum time and   cost.  GHTC -
India envisages to choose   the best and cost effective technology for affordable 
housing in India so   that the identified technologies could be used by  both public 
and private   sector. 
As a part   of GHTC -India, six Light House Projects (LHPs) have been awarded 
through open   bidding process for construction of about 1000 houses each at six 
locations   in the country namely Indore (Madhya Pradesh), Rajk ot (Gujarat), 
Chennai   (Tamil Nadu), Ranchi (Jharkhand), Agartala (Tripura) and Lucknow 
(Uttar   Pradesh) by using six distinct housing construction technologies out of 54   
innovative and alternate construction technologies in 6 broad   categories, 
identified   through GHTC -India. These LHPs will serve as live   laboratories for 
different aspects of transfer of technology to the field.   This includes planning, 
design, production of components, construction   practices and learning centre for 
both faculty  and students of   IITs/NITs/Engineering colleges/Planning and 
Architecture colleges, builders, professionals of private and public sectors and  
other relevant stakeholders. For this purpose, periodic interactions, webcasting etc. 
will be organized. 

 
18 
 
Available limit of Rs. 1.50 lakh per beneficiary   under BLC component of PMAY -U 
Mission has been approved by the Cabinet and it   is being implemented in 
accordance with th e spirit of Cabinet approval. Further, the matter as 
recommended by the Committee h as been examined and it   is found that if the 
Central Assistance beyond the existing limit of Rs. 1.50   lakh is considered for the 
States of Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and UT   of Jammu & Kashmir, the 
remaining North -Eastern States and hilly States/ UT viz.   Himachal Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand and UT of Ladakh and other remaining States/UTs   may also 
demand the Central Assistance  beyond the existing limit that would   generate 
additional financial implication on Government exchequer which is   presently n ot 
feasible. 
The 1st phase of ‘Angikar’ campaign   from 2nd Oct, 2019 to 26 Jan, 2020 is over 
now. The Ministry is in   the process of covering all the houses constructed under 
PMAY (U) scheme   under this campaign. Necessary provision would be 
incorporated to make this   campaign beneficiary friendly and people oriented”.   
 
25 The Committee appreciate that the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
(MoH&UA) has outlined before the Committee , the role of Technology  Sub Mission 
under PMAY(U) Mission, Building Material and Technology Promotion council and 
autonomous organization under MoH&UA, Demonstration Housing Projects (DHPs) 
completed as also ongoing at various places, Light House Projects (LHPs) awarded 
through open building for construction 1000 each at six different location s under 
Global Housing Technology challenge India (GHTC -India) for delivery of maximum 
number of units in minimum time and cost and above all , covering housing under 
Angikar campaign for greater convergence and  making it benef iciary friendly  and 
people friendly. The Committee are constrained to note that Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs has not elaborated steps taken for incentivizing better 
performing States under PMAY (U). The Committee also ow e an explanation in this 
regard for arriving at a logical conclusion.  In view of the foregoing, t he Committee 
however reiterate that in the light of on going slow down of economy arising out of 
Covid 19 pandemic, there is a need for accelerating the steps outlined above for 
faster construction of houses under PMAY (U) for securing the goal of Housing for 
all by 2022. 
****** 
  

19 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDTIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GORERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
IN VIEW OF RISING URBANIZATION TRENDS GOVERNMENT ASKED TO DO 
EXTRA EFFORT FOR ACHIEVING THE GOAL OF TAKING COUNTRY’S 
ECONOMY TO FIVE TRILLION DOLLAR BY 2024 
 
 The Committee in their 2nd Report had recommended as under: 
 "The Committee’s examination of Demands for Grants (2020 -21) ofMinistry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs that seeks to propose a gross provision of Rs.57,786 Cr and 
net provision of Rs. 50,039 cr deducting anticipated recoveries is within Ministry’s vision 
of providing ease of living, responsive governance etc is part of Government’s response 
to urbanization challenges by way of implementation of prominent flagship programmes of 
PMAY (U), SCM, SBM (U) and DAY -NULM through a Three Level Strategy addressing 
three big issues of ‘Poverty Alleviation’, ‘Affordable Housing’ and ‘Cleanliness’ and also 
covering the ar eas of Water Supply, Sewerage and Improving infrastructure, so that 
urban India can play an important role in achieving $5 Trillion Economy target by 2024. 
The Committee however feel that in the light of 2030 development agenda of the United 
Nations with e mphasis on sustainable cities and in view of rising urbanization trends 
witnessing as high as 53 cities with more than one million plus population, both the 
response of the Government and strategy available need to be strengthened for achieving 
theintended goals. The Committee therefore recommend that extra efforts are needed to 
materialise intendedgoals." 
 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“From May 2014 onwards, Government embarked on one of the most 
comprehensive programme of urbanization.  Critical issue of higher funding 
required for urban infrastructure was addressed by substantial increase in 
budgetary allocation under various schemes launched from 2014 -15 onwards.  The 
annual average Budgetary allocations during the preceding 10 year period(2004-05 
to 2013 -14) was around 15,800 crore, which has now increased to around Rs. 
47,000crore i.e. more than three times. Taking into account the investment made in 
Urban Sector in past 6 years, Budgetary allocation for 2020 -21 and the projected 
investment of Rs.17,74,167 Cr. on urban infrastructure in the National 
Infrastructure Pipeline, MoHUA is targeted to   contribute to achieve the goal of five 
trillion dollar economy by 2024. Scheme-wise details are given below:- 

20 
(i) Swachha Bharat Mission – SBM(U) 
The cleanliness initiative that began under the SBM (U) has shown impressive 
success. In order to sustain the results on the ground on a long term basis and 
institutionalize the concept of ‘swachhata’ or cleanliness, it is proposed to extend 
the SBM (U) for another 5 years. This extension has been proposed with a 
projected financial outlay of Rs. 2,11,869 crores, covering sustainable sanitation 
value chain (toilet construction, maintenance, complete fecal sludge management 
and waste water treatment) and Solid Waste Management value chain (including 
complete processing of Municipal Solid Waste, Construction & Demolition waste 
management and remediation of legacy dumpsites), to ensure holistic cleanliness 
across Urban India. 
(ii). Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) 
 
Jal Jeevan Mission (Urban) is being proposed with major objective of providing tap 
water connection to households in all statutory towns. Total allocation proposed for 
this is Rs. 2,79,500 crore including central share of Rs. 78,800 crore. Public Private 
Partnership (PPP) is being encouraged under the Mission for implementation of 
projects wherein cities having million plus population will be mandated to take up 
PPP projects worth minimum of 10% of their total project allocation. 
(iii). Smart Cities Mission 
Smart Cities Mission (SCM) is committed to complete Rs. 2,05,018 crore worth of 
projectsgiving 5 years to each city from the date of selection. This investment in 
urban infrastructure will have direct and indirect contribution to the goal of 
achieving the country's goal of a five trillion USD economy by 2024.   
(iv)  Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (PMAY) 
PradhanMantriAwasYojana (Urban) [PMAY-(U)] was launched on 25 June 2015 to 
provide pucca house with basic amenities to all eligible   beneficiaries of urban 
India by the year 2022. At present, PMAY (U) is one of   the largest housing 
schemes of the world covering urban India. 
The PMAY (U) has proved to be a significant policy initiative towards India’s global 
commitment in achieving   the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), particularly 
the SDG number 11 that   envisages ‘making cities and human settlements 
inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable’, to ensure access for all to adequate and 
affordable housing   and basic services and upgrade slums by 2030. 

21 
The scheme of PMAY (U) is rapidly   moving towards achieving the vision for 
providing a pucca house to every   household by 2022. It has achieved a milestone 
of approving more than 1 crore   houses in its 50 thCentral Sanctioning and 
Monitoring Committee (CSMC) meeting held on 27th December, 2019. Out of 1.04 
crore   houses approved as on 31.03.2020, about 64 lakh have been grounded for 
construction of which nearly 34 lakh houses have been completed and   delivered. 
For the first time in the history   of u rban India, this housing scheme has the 
coverage of all the 4521   statutory towns of the country. In addition, planning areas 
of all   Development Authorities have also been covered under PMAY (U). This 
scheme   has brought a paradigm shift in approach by  including non -slum 
beneficiaries   in its ambit as against earlier housing schemes. 
Construction activities have strong forward and backward linkages with other 
sectors in the economy.   Therefore, the impact on employment can be both direct 
and indirect.  The   total investment made in the construction of the houses is 
churning the   economy through providing direct employment coupled with induced 
impact on   broadly 21 sectors of the economy like steel, cement, glass, brick, 
wood and   certain consumer du rables etc. As on 31.03.2020, the total investment 
made   under PMAY (U) is Rs. 6.31 lakh crore with a committed Central Assistance 
of   Rs. 1.65 lakh crore. 
While more houses will   be sanctioned to saturate the demand of the States/UTs, 
the thrust is now  on   implementation and successful completion of the projects to 
achieve the target of Housing for All by 2022. 
(v)  Deendayal Antyodaya Yojana - National Urban Livelihoods Mission (DAY-
NULM) 
Vision 2024  include the action plan of Universal social mobili zation of urban poor 
into Self-Help Groups (SHGs) and their federations by bringing 1 crore women into 
the SHG fold,facilitating livelihood opportunities for 40 lakh beneficiaries, 
establishing City Livelihood Centres (CLCs) in 100 Million Plus and Smart C ities, to 
provide a platform for the urban poor to market their services and access 
information on self -employment, skill training and other benefits and issuing 
vending certificates to 10 lakh street vendors by 2024, which would help in 
addressing their livelihood concerns.” 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, O.M. No.G -20017/5/2020-BUDGET-1-UD  
Dt. 03.06.2020] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 7 of the Report) 

22 
Recommendation (Serial No.2) 
LOWER ALLOCATION THAN PROPOSED FUNDS, REDUCTION OF FUNDS AT 
RE LEVEL AND LOWERUTILISATIONCRITICISED AND GOVERNMENT 
ASKED TO COME UP WITH REALISTIC DEMANDFOR FUNDS 
 
  The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under: 
 “The Committee’s examination has revealed that not only the Ministry 
of Housing and Urban Affairs has been denied the funds as proposed by them 
during the last three years i.e 2018 -19, 2019-20 and 2020-21 but whatever amount 
that was available was also brought down during 2019 -20 in flagship schemes like 
MRTS Metro, 100 Smart Cities Mission and Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) with 
utilisation of funds as on 15.02.2020 on lower side. In this connection the 
Committee are amazed to find that Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs was not 
allowed to spend even beyond a point. The Comm ittee owe an explanation in this 
regard. The Committee also recommend that Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
should come out with realistic demand of funds at Budget estimate level so that no 
reduction takes place at RE level with hundred percent utilisation." 
 
 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"Ministry has been projecting its requirement of funds on the basis of pace of 
expenditure and demand from States/Union Territories and implementing agencies 
under various Schemes/Projects. However, Ministry-wise allocations (BE & RE) are 
made by Ministry of Finance on the basis of resource assessment of the 
Government, the available fiscal space projects final requirement and its utilization 
etc. and other related factors. Basis for pr ojecting demand for funds for various 
schemes are elaborated below:- 
MRTS & Metro Projects 
The metro projects have long gestation period. The outflow of funds depends upon 
actual progress of the projects (which varies from year to year) and requirements 
conveyed by respective metro rail companies. It is submitted that BE (2020 -21) 
was projected based upon realistic demand/ assessment of requirement of funds 
indicated by Metro Rail corporations as per their implementation plan/ works on 
progress in various cities. 
Smart Cities Mission (SCM) 
At present, there are 2117 SCM projects worth Rs. 96,863 crore where work is in 
progress. Further, there are projects worth Rs. 41,029 crore which are in tendering 
stage. To make realistic demands for funds, the grants already released by GoI to  

23 
the smart cities, matching share released by the States/UTS, pace of expenditure / 
implementation by the smart cities and the amount of projects in the pipelines are 
taken into consideration while placing Demands for Grants. 
Swachha Bharat Mission – SBM(U) 
Under SBM (U), Rs. 1300 crores could be disbursed in 2019 -20, out of yearly 
allocation of Rs. 2500 crores. This was because a majority of funds for Solid Waste 
Management was disbursed from 2017-18 onwards. Given that SWM projects have 
a gestation period of approximately 2 years, it is expected that the second 
installment for these projects will become disbursable in 2020 -21. Hence, in 2020 -
21, the disbursements are expected to increase significantly." 
[Ministry of Housing and  Urban Affairs, O.M. No.G -20017/5/2020-BUDGET-1-UD  
Dt. 03.06.2020] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
GOVERNMENT ASKED TO ENHANCE FUNDS FOR OVERALL URB AN 
INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT  
 
2.5  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee recall that while reviewing the Demands for Grants 
(2019- 20) of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, they had come across that 
High Powered Expert Committee (set up within the MoHUA in 2011) had 
recommended a projected investment req uirement of Rs.39 lakh crore for capital 
investment from 2011 -2032 at 2009 -10 prices for replenishing the deficit in 
allocations over the years for achieving service delivery and also for meeting future 
needs of cities. The Committee were informed that nec essary replenishment is 
being done by arriving at three fold hike in annual average budgetary allocation 
from the level of Rs.15,800 crore between 10 years period from 2003 -2004 to 
2013-14 to as high as Rs.44,000 crore (inclusive of Extra Budgetary Resource  

24 
(EBR) i.e. 2014 -15 onwards till 2019 -20 with even higher allocation of Rs. 50,029 
crore for BE (2020 -21). In this context, the Committee have been informed that 
MoHUA has projected investment of Rs.17.74 lakh crore for different Missions 
during the period from 2019 to 2025 with Rs. 5.73 lakh crore for ‘Metro Urban 
Transport’, Rs.5.40 lakh crore for ‘Affordable Housing’, Rs.2.79 lakh crore for ‘Jal 
Jeevan Mission’, Rs. 2.01 lakh crore for ‘Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) SBM(U)’, 
Rs.1.31 lakh crore for ‘Smart City Mission; and Rs. 0.47 lakh crore for AMRUT. 
In this connection, the MoHUA has submitted before the Committee that the 
Mission-wise flow of investment approved by the Government together with Central 
Government share thereon during the last five  years and expected flow for future. 
For instance, for RRTS, Metro, Government approved investment is Rs.1.81 lakh 
with Central Government financial contribution of Rs.74,000 crore, for AMRUT 
Mission Rs.77,640 crore with States coming up with higher invest ment for SBM(U) 
Rs.62,000 crore, for Smart Cities Mission Rs. 2.05 lakh crore and for PMAY(U) 
Rs.1.80 lakh crore with approval of Rs.60,000 crore as Extra Budgetary Resources 
(EBR) and raising of Rs.43,000 crore with more EBR. In this context, the MoHUA 
hopeful that through National Infrastructure Pipeline (NIP) launched during 2019-20  
Budget would give fillip to sustain the momentum in supplementing the efforts of 
States in development of urban infrastructure also. The Committee while 
appreciating the workdone by the MoHUA in this regard, feel that a lot is to be done 
for mopping up necessary funds for over -all urban infrastructure as recommended 
by High Powered Expert Committee set up by the Ministry way back in 2011." 
 
2.6 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"Details of the financing various schemes of the Ministry are given below : 
Jal Jeevan Mission (Urban)  is being proposed with major objective of providing 
tap water connection to households in all statutory towns. Total allocation proposed 
for this is Rs.2,79,500 crore including central share of Rs.78,800 crore. Public 
Private Partnership (PPP) is being encouraged under the Mission for 
implementation of projects wherein cities having million plus population will be 
mandated to take up PPP projects worth minimum of 10% of their total project 
allocation which will supplement funds required for urban infrastructure 
development. 
MRTS &Metro Projects - Many cities are aspiring to have rail based public 
transport system, which would a lso attract investments from various sources. 
National Infrastructure Pipeline projects for mass transit with investments from 
various sourceshave been envisaged to be implemented in the next 5 years. 
Further, in order to provide cost-effective rail-based transport solution for Tier 2 and 
Tier 3 cities with lower ridership, MoHUA has formulated Standards for Light Urban 

25 
 
Rail Transit System named Metrolite, which can be implemented at a lesser cost as 
compared to Metro Rail System. A number of Metro RaiI/RRTS projects are under 
implementation in the country under different models like 50:50 equity sharing 
between the Centre and State, fully Central owned, fully State owned, Private 
initiative and under Public Private Partnership. The Metro Rail Policy , 2017 issued 
by the Government of India also promotes the private contribution under Public 
Private Partnership mode for unbundled components. At present about 
700kilometers of metro rail is operational in 18 cities and about 900kilometers of 
Metro/RRTS l ines are under implementation in cities across the country under 
different implementation models.  Development of Metro Rail system is an ongoing 
process, planning for which is initiated by the respective State Governments. 
Besides the above, the Ministry has undertaken the task of standardizing 
specifications of Rubber Tyre Electric driven Articulated Bus system with exclusive 
right of way named Metroneo which can be implemented at a cost lesser than that 
of Metrolite and suitable for smaller cities, thus providing another option for 
planning public mobility.Under National Infrastructure Pipeline, announced in 
Budget 2020 projected investment for Metro projects is Rs. 5.70 lakh crore. 
Smart Cities Mission (SCM) - Out of the total Rs. 2,05,018 crore worth of projects 
proposed to be implemented under the SCM, only 45% is to be funded from 
budgetary sources (50:50 contribution by Central and States/UTs Governments), 
21% from Public Private Partnership (PPP), 21% from Convergence and 13 % from 
others (Loans/Debt s, Municipal Bonds, own resources etc.). Hence, under SCM, 
every effort is being made for enhancing funds for overall urban infrastructure 
development. 
Pradhan MantriAwasYojana (PMAY -Urban) - The investments   to fund PMAY 
(U) are from Government of India grants, States/UTs, Urban Local   Bodies, 
Beneficiaries and other sources including private partners (in PPP   projects). For 
affordable housing under PMAY (U), an investment of nearly Rs.6.95 lakh crore 
has been estimated for construction of hitherto vali dated demand of 1.12 crore   
houses. Out of the estimated investment, Rs.1.54 lakh crore has been spent upto 
31st March 2019. Thus, the share of investment in the affordable housing   sector 
through National Infrastructure in Pipeline is about Rs. 5.41 lak h   crore during the 
years 2019 -20 to 2021 -22. The amount of Central assistance   involved in the 
above estimation is approximately Rs. 1.80 lakh crore which   is arranged/ to be 
arranged through budgetary allocation as well as Extra   Budgetary Resources 
(EBR) on year -on-year basis for implementation of the PMAY(U) projects. As on 
31.03.2020, the Ministry has spent Rs. 69,178 crore   of central assistance (Rs. 
26,178 crore from budgetary allocations and Rs. 43,000 crore from EBR) upto FY  

26 
 
2019-20. Ministry will approach the Union Cabinet for additional EBR in the range 
of Rs. 60,000 crore toRs. 80,000 crore shortly as EBR of Rs. 43,000 crore has 
already been utilized. 
Swachha Bharat Mission – SBM(U) - The proposed SBM (U) 2.0 has estimated a 
financial outlay of Rs 2,11,869 crores, including Central Govt. share of Rs. 48,941 
crores. A large part of this amount will be used in creation of infrastructure. For example, 
more than Rs. 20,000 crores are estimated for SWM projects, which would include 
setting up MRF facilities, setting up waste processing plants, strengthening existing 
facilities, etc. Another Rs. 6,000 crores is proposed to be spent in remediating legacy 
dumpsites, setting up Construction & Demolition waste processing facilities. In 
sanitation, more than Rs 4,000 crores are expected to be spent in constructing 
additional IHHL, CT/PT, and upgrading existing infrastructure. In Waste water treatment, 
an estimated outlay of more than Rs. 31,000 crores has been proposed, including 
procurement of desludging vehicles, strengthening of existing on -site sanitation system, 
diversion of wastewater to sewer network in all cities with population less than 1 lakh. It 
is expected that SBM (U) 2.0 will lead to significant enhancement of national 
infrastructure." 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, O.M. No.G -20017/5/2020-BUDGET-1-UD  
Dt. 03.06.2020] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 10 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
PROGRESS ON METRO RAIL NETWORK WELCOMED HOWEVER 
GOVERNMENT ASKED TO TAKEREMEDIAL RESOURCES FOR MAKING UP 
THE TARGET WITH PERFORMANCE DURING 2019-20 
  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee’s examination of MRTS/Metro Projects has revealed 
that journey of Metro Rail Network starting  from First Metro Rail Project 
commissioned in Kolkata on 24 thOctober, 1984 and then on 25
th
October, 2002 by 
Delhi Metro to the present level of 691 km Metro currently operational in 18 cities 
with daily ridership of over 85 lakh and about 910 km (includin g 82 km. Delhi -
Meerut RRTS) under construction in 27 cities is appreciable. The Committee, 
however, are glad to find that performance of Metro Rail Projects is above the 
targets however they are constrained to find that was not the case in 2018 -19 
where as against the target of 11.6 kms. The achievement has been as low as 9.95 
km. In this connection, the Committee have been informed that during2019 -
20,33kmMetroRailnetworkhasbeenmadeoperationalwith11.5 km. in Nagpur, 11 km 
in Hyderabad, 5 -6 km in Kochi and 5  km in Kolkata and no let up has been in the 
speed in construction of Metro Rail Network. The Committee find that from post  

27 
evidence reply of the MoHUA thatas against 2.17 lakh crore of amount sanctioned 
as low as Rs.1.14 lakh has been released to Metro Projects. In this connection, the 
Committee also find that CMD, DMRC has also given a brief resume of work taken 
up for Phase IV of Delhi Metro. The Committee, therefore, recommend that project 
planning and implementation needs to be further strength ened for improving the 
performance in FY (2020-21)." 
 
 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"Metro projects are having long gestation period of 4-5years. The financial progress 
of such project depends upon stage of implementation, w hich is dependent upon 
year of sanction. Thus there may be variation in actual route opening and actual 
financial expenditure. It is also worth mentioning that out of 700 km metro line 
operation on date, about 450 route kilometer has been made operational in last six 
years. Further 900 km route length metro is presently under construction in various 
cities.  The Metro Rail Projects availing Central Assistance in the form of Equity, 
SD and PTA are implemented by Joint Venture Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs),  
which are companies with representations in the Board both from Central and State 
Governments. The progress regarding project implementation is reviewed by the 
Board periodically and the problems encountered in project implementation are 
addressed suitabl y. High Power Committee chaired by Chief Secretary of 
respective State Governments also monitors the project and take expeditious 
decisions as required in order to resolve inter -government/ departmental issues 
and issues regarding land acquisition, shiftin g of utilities and other structures in the 
project alignment, multimodal integration and such other matters, where the State 
Government has to facilitate quick action. Steps are taken on a continuous basis by 
respective Metro Rail Companies for review of r esources, recruitment of personnel 
and General Consultants and appropriate utilization of funds for project 
implementation.  
Further, in order to reduce cost and enhance revenue  of metro rail projects, this  
Ministry has written letters to States/UTs/Metro Rail Companies on 06.03.2020 
requesting them to keep various provisions in view while formulating/implementing 
projects, such as provisioning of feeder system to metro rail, last mile connectivity, 
NMT infrastructure, Transit Oriented Development, Value Capture Financing, 
creation of Urban Transport Fund, periodic fare revision to enhance viability of 
metro rail systems, revenue  generation through non fare box revenue like property 
development, advertisement etc., encourage PPP. Further, vide above letter, all 
States/UTs/Metro Companies were once again reminded that MoHUA has issued 
standards for various metro rail components viz. rolling stock, signaling & telecom 
systems, electrical & electromechanical systems and civil engineering structures in  

28 
order to promote indigenization and reduce cost and that Standards for Light Urban 
Rail Transit system named “Metrolite” has als o been issued by this Ministry in July, 
2019.”  
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, O.M. No.G -20017/5/2020-BUDGET-1-UD  
Dt. 03.06.2020] 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
LOWER PHYSICAL AND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE UNDER GPA 
(RES./NON-RES.) SCHEMECRITICIZED AND GOVERNMENT ASKED TO 
REVAMP THE SCHEMES FOR THEIR PROPERIMPLEMENTATION 
  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee’s examination has revealed that Rs.1,288.01 crore has 
been proposed for GPA (Res./ Non-Res.) for BE (2020 -21) as against the lower 
actuals of Rs.864.84 crore in previous year following high demand of additional 
works to be carried out and implementation of revised GPRA Upgradation Scheme. 
The Committee would like a clarification from MoH UA showing details of additional 
demand arising out of Revised GPRA Scheme so as to arrive at logical conclusion 
for seeking step hike of about Rs.4,00crore." 
 
 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
" The BE for GPA(Res/Non -Res) und er Major Head 4216 and 4059 for the year 
2019-20 wasRs. 1050.10 crore. Additional funds were allocated through 
supplementary Grant / Re - appropriation in the year 2019 -20 and final expenditure 
in the year 2019 -20upto 31.03. 2020 wasRs. 1120.15 crore. BE of  Rs. 1288.01 
crorefor the year 2020 -21 is marginally higher over the actual expenditure in the 
year 2019-20 and is to meet the fund required for ongoing and new projects/works 
under GPA." 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, O.M. No.G-20017/5/2020-BUDGET-1-UD  
Dt. 03.06.2020] 
 
 
 

29 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
Government asked to release the share of Committed Central Assistance to 
States for early completion of 103 lakh sanctioned houses 
 
The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee’s examination of State wise Central Assistance 
committed vis-a-vis spent reveal that as against committed Central Assistance of 
Rs. 1.63 lakh cr the level of releases is as low as Rs. 63,699.85 cr and most of the 
States like Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Haryana, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, 
Odisha, Punjab and Tamil Nadu have not received their share of Committed 
Central Assistance. The Committee therefore recommend that their share of 
Central Assistance be released by mobilising timely EBRs Budget Provisions so 
that houses already sanctioned are completed on time." 
 
 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"Central assistance under the scheme of PMAY (U) is being released in 3 
installments   in ratio of 40:40:20. The 1st installment of 40% of central assistance 
is   released on attachment of beneficiary details in PMAY (U) -MIS (in case of   
BLC/ISSR projects) as per approved Detailed Project Reports (DPRs), selection   
of developers, placing of w ork orders, registration under RERA (in case of   AHP 
projects). However, in case of CLSS beneficiaries, the subsidy is   released upfront 
in the beneficiaries’ housing loan account on completion of   procedural steps as 
required in CLSS Awas Portal (CLAP). 
 
2nd installment  of 40% is released based on compliances by States/UTs regarding 
beneficiary   attachments, submission of utilization certifications of at least 70% of 
the   earlier released funds with respect to the projects as well as utilization of   the 
corresponding State/UT share along with commensurate physical progress,   
compliances of Site Scrutiny Reports, Action Taken Report on the observation   of 
Third Party Quality and Monitoring Agency, geo-tagging of the houses etc. 
 
Release of 3rd   ins tallment also requires all the above requirements along with 
Project Completion   Certificates and the achievement of reforms as required under 
the scheme. 
The above compliances are meant to ensure timely grounding/completion of 
sanctioned projects. The Ministry also pursues with the States/UTs through special 
drive   of data compliance and project implementation for completion of requisite    
 

30 
 
compliances, so that subsequent releases can be ensured on time.   
 
EBRs are raised from   time to time to the  meet the requirement of States/UTs and 
also under CLSS on   fulfillment of above mentioned compliances.” 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, O.M. No.G -20017/5/2020-BUDGET-1-UD  
Dt. 03.06.2020] 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
FAILURE ON THE PART OF  STATES NOT FURNISHING UCS CRITICISED 
AND GOVERNMENTASKED TO OPEN UP A DRIVE FOR EXPEDITIOUS 
SUBMISSION OF PENDING UCS 
 
  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee are constrained to note that during 2018 -19 and 2019-
20 as against actual release of Rs. 4,203.66 cr and Rs. 4,266.24 cr, the UCs have 
been received of as low as Rs. 2,754.00 cr and Rs. 1,594 cr. The Committee also 
are constrained to note that States like Bihar, Chhattisgarh,  Gujarat, Kerala, 
Maharashtra and Mizoram have not been able to send their requisite UCs during 
2018-19. The Committee therefore recommend that a special drive be opened 
advising these slow moving States to submit their pending UCs expeditiously." 
 
 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
" As a measure of special drive on the recommendation of the  Hon’ble Committee, 
the States/UTs have been requested to furnish   all the pending UCs without any 
further delay. 
Against the release of Rs. 71,829.90 crore (including EBR release of Rs.43,000 
crore) of central   assistance under PMAY (U) since 2014 -15,UCs for Rs.56501.58 
crore have already been   received. Necessary follow -up is done regularly with the 
States/UTs for expediting the pending UCs of balance amount of Rs.5496.5 0 
crore." 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, O.M. No.G -20017/5/2020-BUDGET-1-UD  
Dt. 03.06.2020] 

 
  
 
31 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
GOVERNMENT ASKED TO HAVE INTER STATE CONFERENCES BETWEEN 
GOOD PERFORMINGSTATES AND SLOW MOVING STATES FOR IMPROVING 
THEIR PERFORMANCE 
 
  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee’s examination of State wise data of houses 
constructed/Grounded/Completed reveal that good performing States are Gujarat, 
Jharkhand, Karnataka, Bihar, Odisha, West Bengal Chhatisgarh, Kerala, Uttar 
Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Manipur, Sikkim, Meghalaya, Assam and J&K etc, whereas 
the poor performing States are Maharashta and Haryana. The Committee desire 
that inter State Conferences be organised between  good performing States and 
poor performing States so that slow moving States may keep pace with good 
performing States for early completion of houses sanctioned." 
 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
" Under the scheme of PMAY (U) , various National/Regional/State/City level   
conference/workshops are organized to disseminate best practices among   
participants. As the scheme has completed 5 years and focus is now to get 
construction  of all the sanctioned houses completed, the Mini stry is pursuing with 
the   States/UTs vigorously and also in the process of organising more such  
conferences to achieve the objective of the scheme." 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, O.M. No.G -20017/5/2020-BUDGET-1-UD  
Dt. 03.06.2020] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16) 
Government asked to promote latest technology for early completion of 
housesincentivising better performing States. 
 
  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee’s examination has revealed that pace of sanctioning of 
houses is not commensurate with houses grounded and houses completed. For 
instance as against the 103 lakh houses sanctioned as low as 60.51 lakh houses 
are under construction and still lower i.e 32.08 lakh houses have been completed. 
In this connection it came out before the Committee that out of four verticals of 
Beneficiaries Led Construction (BLC), Affordable Housing Partnership (AHP),  

32 
 
Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) and In Situ Slum Rehabilitation (ISSR) in  
AHP time taken for tendering house construction etc is three years and half and in 
BLC it is relatively less whereas in CLSS beneficiary 
isallowedtogoforareadybuilthouses.InthisconnectionitalsocameoutbeforetheCommit
teethatthepaceofconstructionisbeingquickenedbyfasttracking construction under 
Light Houses Projects (LHPs) for affordable housing in Indore, Rajkot, Chennai, 
Ranchi, Agartala and Lucknow. The Committee feel that such drive should be 
opened across the States so that long gestation period usually taken is 
considerably reduced. The Committee also find that with  reference to vertical of 
Beneficial Led Construction component of PMAY (U) States of Arunachal Pradesh, 
Chhattisgarh a nd UT of Jammu & Kashmir have pe titioned before MoH&UA for 
suitably enhan cing the available limit ofRs.1.50 lakh per beneficiary. The 
Committee feel that the issue be favourably examined within MoH&UA for The 
Committee also appreciate at the idea of incentivising States which are performing 
well should also be promoted as has b een opined by Secretary MoH&UA for faster 
completion of houses across the States. The Committee also appreciate that 
MoH&UA has opened an ‘Angikar’ campaign from 2 ndOct, 2019 onwards wherein 
beneficiaries have been allowed to converge with different Missio ns of MoH&UA 
and other Central Ministries like Health and Family Welfare, Jal Shakti, Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas, Power, Youth & Sports and Women and Child 
Development for imbibing best practices in water and energy conservation, Waste 
Management, Health Sanitation and Hygiene. The Committee recommend that 
Angikar Campaign should be open in a big way for making it beneficiary friendly 
and people oriented." 
 
2.26 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
" The Ministry is running a full -fledged Technology   Sub -Mission (TSM) under 
PMAY-U Mission with t he objective of promotion and adoption of fast pace 
construction tec hnologies by the States/Union Territories (UTs). The TSM  
facilitates adoption of modern, i nnovative and   green technologies and building 
material for faster and quality construction   of houses. It also facilitates preparation 
and adoption of layout designs and   building plans suitable for various geo -climatic 
zones. Moreover, it assists   St ates/Cities in deploying disaster resistant and 
environment friendly   technologies. 
 
Building Materials and Technology Promotion Council (BMTPC), an autonomous 
organization under the aegis of M/o Housing  and Urban Affairs is mandated to 
identify, evaluate and promote emerging construction systems which are safe, 
sustainable and environment-friendly and ensure cost effective and faster delivery  
of quality houses suiting to different geo-climatic conditions of the countr y. BMTPC 
has so far evaluated and certified 36 new housing systems/technologies under 

33 
 Performance Appraisal   Certification Scheme (PACS). As of now, C entral Public 
Works Department (CPWD) has issued Schedule of Rates (SoRs) for 29 innovative 
and alternate   technologies.  
 
In order to showcase the field   application of new emerging technologies which are 
cost effective and speedy   construction, MoHUA has taken an initiative to construct 
Demonstration   Housing Projects under PMAY -U Mission through BMTPC in 
various States/UTs. So   far, B MPTC has completed 5 DHPs at Nellore (Andhra 
Pradesh), Bhubaneswar   (Odisha), Bihar Sharif (Bihar), Hyderabad (Telangana) 
and Lucknow (Uttar   Pradesh).  Also, DHPs at Panchkula, Haryana and Agartala, 
Tripura are under progress and BMTPC has recently floa ted   tenders for DHPs at 
Chimbel, Goa and Ahmedabad, Gujarat. 
 
Further, under the overall purview of TSM component of PMAY -U Mission, MoHUA 
has   launched Global Housing Technology Challenge - India (GHTC -India) to 
identify   and mainstream a basket of in novative and alternative technologies from   
across the globe that are sustainable, eco -friendly and disaster resilient   and can 
deliver maximum number of dwelling units in minimum time and   cost.  GHTC -
India envisages to choose   the best and cost effec tive technology for affordable 
housing in India so   that the identified technologies could be used by both public 
and private   sector. 
 
As a part   of GHTC -India, six Light House Projects (LHPs) have been awarded 
through open   bidding process for construction of about 1000 houses each at six 
locations   in the country namely Indore (Madhya Pradesh), Rajkot (Gujarat), 
Chennai   (Tamil Nadu), Ranchi (Jharkhand), Agartala (Tripura) and Lucknow 
(Uttar   Pradesh) by using six distinct housing constructi on technologies out of 54   
innovative and alternate construction technologies in 6 broad   categories, identified   
through GHTC -India. These LHPs will serve as live   laboratories for different 
aspects of transfer of technology to the field.   This inclu des planning, design, 
production of components, construction   practices and learning centre for both 
faculty and students of   IITs/NITs/Engineering colleges/Planning and Architecture 
colleges, builders,   professionals of private and public sectors and o ther relevant 
stakeholders.   For this purpose, periodic interactions, webcasting etc. will be 
organized. 
 
Available limit of Rs. 1.50 lakh per beneficiary   under BLC component of PMAY -U 
Mission has been approved by the Cabinet and it   is being implement ed in 
accordance with the spirit of Cabinet approval. Further, the matter as 

 
34 
 
 recommended by the Committ ee has been examined and it is found that if the 
Central Assistance beyond the existing limit of Rs. 1.50   lakh is considered for the 
States of Ar unachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and UT   of Jammu & Kashmir, the 
remaining North -Eastern States and hilly States/UT viz.   Himachal Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand and UT of Ladakh and other remaining States/UTs   may also demand 
the Central Assistance beyond the exist ing limit that would   generate additional 
financial implication on Government exchequer which is   presently not feasible. 
 
The 1st phase of ‘Angikar’ campaign   from 2nd Oct, 2019 to 26 Jan, 2020 is over 
now. The Ministry is in   the process of covering all the houses cons tructed under 
PMAY(U) scheme under this campaign. Necessary provision would be 
incorporated to make this  campaign beneficiary friendly and people oriented. 
  
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, O.M. No.G -20017/5/2020-BUDGET-1-UD  
Dt. 03.06.2020] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 25 of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17) 
GOVERNMENT ASKED TO LOOK INTO VARIOUS ISSUES RELATING TO 
ACHIEVEMENT OFTARGETS, EXPEDITING UCS AND FASTER 
IMPLEMENTATION OF REFORMS AGENDA UNDER AMRUT SCHEME 
2.27  The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee’s examination has revealed that under AMRUT Scheme Rs. 
7300 cr have been proposed for BE (2020 -21) which is higher than actual (2019 -20) of 
Rs. 5,850.54 cr by reasons of increased pace of implementation of AMRUT Projects. In 
this connection t he Committee are happy to note that out of approved plan size of Rs. 
77,640 cr with Central share of Rs. 35,930 cr the total projects taken up has grown up to 
Rs. 83,851 cr. In this connection the Committee find that 92% of total AMRUT are for 
Water Supply and Sewerage and Septage. The Committee however are constrained to 
note that in Water connection and Sewerage connection the performance is below 
target. For instance, current Water connections against the target of 139 lakh, the 
achievement was 71 lakh c onnections only, similarly, for sewerage connections as 
against the target of 145 lakh sewerage connection, the achievement was as low as 43 
lakh. Similarly, the work done on implementation of reform agenda like replacement of 
Energy Efficient Light as against the target of 100 lakh, the actual work done was 74 
lakh. The Committee are also constrained to note that as against the prime area of 

35 
 
 Water Supply and Sewerage the majority of works that have been contracted pertain to 
Green Space and Parks. The  Committee feel that there is a need for reviewing the 
issue. The Committee are also constrained to note in other area like credit rating, 
issuing Municipal bonds, implementing Online Building Permission System (OBPS), the 
work needs to be enhanced. In this connection on the issue of strengthening finances of 
ULBs as part of implementation of Reform agenda under AMRUT  Scheme the 
Secretary, MoH&UA candidly admitted before the Committee that urban local bodies at 
local level political system is not in favour of enhancing taxes on water and house. 
Therefore there is a need to bring in a large part of urban population within the ambit of 
Tax regime as has been done in cities like Nagpur, Hyderabad and Lucknow for this 
MoH&UA is working on e-portal through which maximum items of ULBs are to be put on 
public domain for enhancing tax ability of ULBs. The Committee also find from the post 
evidence reply that States have shown an increasing trend in percentage of own 
resources to total resources. However the Committee  feel a big drive be opened to 
increase their resources on their own for making them self sustainable. On financial 
performance the Committee are also constrained to find that out of Rs. 18,435.81 cr 
Central Assistance released as low as Rs. 13,586.09 cr o f UCs have been received and 
only few States of Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Rajashthan, Punjab, Gujarat, Chhatisgarh, 
Bihar etc have timely furnished their UCs. The Committee  therefore feel that necessary 
corrective steps be taken up urgently." 
 
2.28 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 " Achievement of targets 
As on 16.04.2020, against State Annual Action Plans worth Rs.77,640 crore, works 
worth Rs. 75,426 crore (97%) have already been grounded. This includes 2,621 
completed projects wo rth Rs.9,783 crore and 2,779 projects in progress worth 
Rs.65,643 crore. Some States have taken up projects in excess of approved 
SAAPs for which entire excess amount will be borne by the States.  298 projects 
worth Rs.5791 crore are under tendering and pr ojects worth Rs.3,731 crore are at 
DPR stage. So far 77.64 lakh new water tap connections against target of 139 lakh 
and 44.62 lakh new sewer connections against target of 145 lakh have been 
provided.Some delay in timely completion of projects is due to following:  
▪ Several AMRUT projects are huge infrastructure projects having longer 
gestation period and involve activities - preparation of DPRs & approval by State 
High Powered Steering Committee (SHPSC), selection of eligible bidders, issuance 
of tender, receipt and award of contract. Prolonging any one or more of these 
activities due to various reasons including Model Code of Conduct delayed the 
projects.  
 

36 
▪ In some of the States, revision of SAAPs was necessitated due to local 
constraints or change in priorities. 
▪ Some States which were short of funds resorted to financial assistance from 
external agencies such as World Bank, ADB etc. The modalities of acquiring funds 
from such agencies delayed the projects. 
▪ Monsoons and natural calamities like floods hampered plann ing and physical 
progress in some of the States. 
▪ Retendering resorted to in many tenders due to lack of adequate bids or lack 
of eligible contractors. 
In order to fast -track the implementation of projects, regular review is being 
undertaken through video conferences and visits of senior officers to the States. 
As on date, 435 projects worth Rs.6,791 crore have progress above 90% and 529 
projects worth Rs.12,620 crore have progress 70 -90% and these projects are likely 
to be completed by March -2021. Similarly, 1,468 projects worth Rs.30,995 crore 
are having progress in excess of 50% and are likely to be completed by the end of 
2021.  
 States are being advised to expedite the balance projects having progress below 
50% and also to drop the non-starter projects if they are not likely to take off.  
The projects worth Rs.9,500 crore which are yet to be awarded, are being targeted 
for award by June 2020 so that they could be completed in next two years. 
 
• Expediting UCs 
Against Rs. 22,487.15 crore released to the States/UTs for projects by March 
2020,Rs. 16,097.83 crore were released by March 2019. The UCs therefore, due in 
FY 2020-21 are for Rs.16,097.83 crore only, against which UCs worth Rs.16545.14 
crore ( including UCs which were not due) have been received. Necessary follow -
up is done regularly with the States/UTs for  expediting the due and  pending UCs 
of balance amount of Rs. 637.18  crore. 
 
 Implementation of reforms 
Under reform agenda of AMRUT, substantial progress has been made. The major 
achievements/status are as under: 
▪ Replacement of streetlights with LED lights: The conversion of street lights to 
LED lights is a continuous process and the target is being revised upwards 
regularly as more and more towns are being covered under the program.  

37 
▪ Credit rating: Work for awarding credit rating has been awarded for all 485 
AMRUT cities and completed in 469 cities. 163 cities have received Investible 
Grade Rating (IGR i.e. BBB- or above rated cities), including 36 cities with rating 
of A- and above. 
▪ Online Building Permissio n System: Online Building Permission System has 
been implemented in 2,056 towns/cities across the country including 444 
AMRUT cities. This has resulted in a quantum jump in India’s rank in the 
construction permits component of World Bank’s Doing Business R eport (DBR) 
to 27 in 2020 from 181 in 2018. 
▪ Issuance of Municipal Bonds:  In order to enable ULBs to raise funds through 
municipal bonds, SEBI has recently constituted ‘Municipal Bonds Development 
Committee’ to follow -up and advice on issues related to regu lation and 
development of primary and secondary market for issuance of municipal debt 
securities. Lucknow and Ghaziabad have initiated the process for issuance of 
Municipal Bonds.  
Reforms are being consideredfor continuation in the proposed Jal Jeevan Mission 
(Urban)." 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, O.M. No.G -20017/5/2020-BUDGET-1-UD  
Dt. 03.06.2020] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18) 
GOVERNMENT ASKED TO ADVISE STATE GOVERNMENTS OF UTTAR 
PRADESH FOR EFFECTIVEURBAN TRANSPORT SYSTEM IN AGRA AND 
MATHURA TOWNS 
 
2.29  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee’s examination has come across prominent issues 
relating to urban transport in two UP towns of Mathura and Agra which are facing 
the problem of traffic congestion due to arrival of vehicles from different adjoining 
States ferrying tourists. With a view to sort out the issue a Comprehensive Mobility 
Plan preferably by bus transport for Agra was suggested by Secretary, MoH&UA 
with a rider that an initiative has to come from State Government. It was also 
suggested by Secretary, MoH&UA that Metroli te can be useful for boththe towns. It 
also came out before the Committee that there is a need for bringing Mathura 
under NCR for getting the benefit of infrastructure that is otherwise available in  

38 
 
NCR towns. In this connection the Committee have inf ormed that the proposal is 
being considered by the NCR Planning Board shortly. The Committee therefore 
find that MoH&UA should advise the State Governments in the matter so that traffic 
problem of the prominent towns of Agra and Mathura are resolved early." 
 
2.30 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"Urban transport, which is an integral part of urban development, is a State subject. 
Accordingly, respective State Governments/Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) are 
responsible for initiating suitable proposals for planning and development of urban 
transport infrastructure.  The State Government of Uttar Pradesh has been 
requested by this Ministry to take necessary action for tackling the traffic 
congestion due to vehicular traffic by following  an integrated approach through 
adoption of Comprehensive Mobility Plans for deciding on the appropriate 
measures/mode of public mobility suitable for the cities of Agra and Mathura." 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, O.M. No.G -20017/5/2020-BUDGET-1-UD  
Dt. 03.06.2020] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19) 
LOWERING OF FUNDS OF RE (2019 -20) AND HUGE UNSPENT FUNDS 
UNDER SCMCRITICISED AND MOH&UA ASKED TO TAKE REMEDIAL STEPS 
FOR COURSECORRECTION 
 
2.31  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee find that Rs. 6,450.00 cr has been proposed for BE(2020 -21) 
for Smart City Mission Scheme. The Committee’s examination of allocation vis -a-
vis utilisation during 2018 -19 and 2019-20 reveal that as against the higher RE 
(2018-19) of Rs. 6,169.03 cr actuals expenditure was as low as Rs.4,496.46cr as 
on 31.12.18 Further the BE (2019-20) of Rs. 6,450.00 cr has been brought down to 
Rs.3,450.00cr with actuals expenditure at Rs. 2,30 5.76 cr as on 31.12.2019. The 
Committee has been informed that time taken in various stages of implementation 
has been the reasons for reduction at RE (2019 -20). The Ministry is optimistic of 
utilising the available amount for BE (2020 -21) with initial 18 months of execution 
work getting over after the selection of Smart Cities requiring funds like a 
established laboratory that require money after necessary development of system. 
The Committee feel that reduction  should  have  been  avoided  had  MH&UA  
been  really  aware aboutrealistic position at ground level. In this connection the 
Committee are concerned to note that the rate of utilisation of funds is also not well 
For instance during 2018-19 and 2019-20 as on 31.12.2019 as against the  

39 
releases of Rs. 5,855.60 cr and Rs. 2,298.35 cr these UCs received have been as 
low as Rs.2,346.94cr and Rs. 631.14 cr respectively. In this context the Committee 
appreciate that during 2018 -19 Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand, West Bengal , Sikkim have performed well however other States like 
Bihar, Tamil Nadu, Punjab, Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra etc. are 
lagging behind. The Committee find that although MoH&UA has mentioned steps 
taken like field visits, city reviews etc they how ever recommend that the States that 
are slow moving be properly advised to submit their pending UCs expeditiously." 
 
 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
" Projects under 100 Smart Cities Mission are implemented by a city level Spe cial 
Purpose Vehicle (SPV) established and incorporated under Companies Act, 2013 
by the respective Urban Local Bodies (ULB) and States/UTs on 50:50 joint venture 
basis. 
Budget Estimates (BE) 2019-20 were made on the basis of funds already released 
by GoI to the smart cities, matching share released by the States / UTs, pace of 
expenditure / implementation by the smart cities and the amount envisaged in the  
projects in pipelines. 
Further, grants from GoI are released to cities only after 70% of funds earli er 
released to the cities both by GoI and matching share of State/UT Governments 
are utilised. Since, many cities were unable to meet the required parameter for 
further release of funds during 2019-20, Revised Estimates (RE) 2019-20 had to be 
reduced in or der to allow for time needed by States and cities to meet the criteria. 
There never arose a situation of shortage of funds provided by Government.  
Against Rs.19661.28 crore released to the States/UTs for projects by March 2020, 
Rs. 16,324.02crore were rel eased by March 2019. The UCs,  therefore, due in FY 
2020-21 are for Rs. 16,324.02crore only, against which UCs worth Rs. 12,491.49 
crore have been received. Necessary follow -up is done regularly with the 
States/UTs for expediting the  due and pending UCs of  balance amount of Rs.  
2,491.95 crore. 
Ministry is rigorously following it up with the cities to expedite implementation of the 
projects through field visits by officials of the Government of India at various levels, 
conducting regional workshops, conduct ing regular review through telephonic calls 
and video conferences, writing letters at the highest levels, fixing of targets and 
regular monitoring of achievements, etc." 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, O.M. No.G -20017/5/2020-BUDGET-1-UD  
Dt. 03.06.2020] 
 
 
 

40 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20) 
UNEVEN PROGRESS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF SMART CITIES PROJECTS 
ACROSS STATES CRITICIZED AND STRICTER MONITORING MECHANISM 
ACCOMMODATED FOR FASTER IMPLEMENTATION 
2.33 The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee’s examination has revealed that 100 Smart Cities 
Mission that was started on 25 thJune, 2015 for providing one infrastructure giving 
decent quality of life to its citizens for the purpose of liveability, economic ability and 
sustainability through Area Based and Pan city development by way of taking up 
5151 projects with likely investment of Rs.2.01 lakh crore during the Mission period 
largely 45% from Government, 21% PPP and 21% from convergence is currently at 
implementation stage as cities selected on  
differentRoundsfromJanuary,2016toJanuary,2018neededaperiodof60monthsforimpl
ementationi.ewithtotalMissiondurationof60monthsthetotal city months come to 
60x100=6,000 city months for the purpose. The Committee have further been 
informed that in aggregate during 3.2 years of time spent on Smart City Mission 
work that comes to 3,6600 city months i.e. 61% and as such during this period as 
high as 4,508 projects worth Rs.1.63 lakh or 80% are tendered stage, 3,665 
projects worth Rs.1.20 lakh or 59% are at Grounded stage and 1560 projects with 
Rs.25 lakh crore 12.5% areat completed stage in the forms of Integrated Command 
and Control Centre (ICCC) Smart Roads, Smart Solar, Smart Metro, PPP Vibrant 
Public Spaces. The Committee have been informed that pace of progress of 
Mission has increased in the last 1.5 years. In this connection, the Committee have 
been informed by Secretary, MoHUA that it takes 17 -18 months for starting the 
projects. 
The Committee has examined the progress of project s in terms of ‘Projects 
Tendered’, ‘Works Ordered’ and ‘Works Completed’ as on 31.01.2020. The 
Committee find that on ‘Project Tendered’ the good performing States are 
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Uttar 
Pradesh, Rajasthan, Maharashtra and Telangana etc. Similarly on ‘Work Ordered’ 
the States which have faired well are Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, 
Gujarat, Chhattisgarh and Maharashtra etc. Finally on ‘Work Completed’ the States 
that have done well are Gujarat , Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh and Rajasthan. The Committee have been informed 
that monitoring mechanism is already put in place for implementation of Smart City 
Mission in the form of city review through Video Conf erencing, holding Smart Cities 
Events etc. In terms of comparative State-Wise, project wise analysis of completed 
projects, the Committee find that States of Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, 
Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh etc. have faired well in 
Command and Control Centres, whereas in Smart Roads, Karnataka, Madhya 
Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh etc. have faired well. The similar is the situation in other  

41 
areas. The Committee feel that only few States have progressed and  other Sta tes 
are lagging behind. In this connection, the Committee also appreciate that MoHUA 
has paired 20 best performing cities that need improvement. The Committee 
recommend that available monitoring mechanism be so strengthened expeditiously 
to trigger faster implementation of SCM projects across the concerned States." 
 
2.34 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"The uneven progress of implementation of Smart cities projects owes to the 
selection of these 100 cities in four rounds, spread  over more than 2 and half 
years. However, it is noticed that some cities have learnt from the efforts taken by 
the cities selected in previous rounds and this has helped in accelerating the 
implementation of projects by cities selected in later rounds. 
The Mission constantly monitors the progress across 100 cities with an online MIS 
and a Project Monitoring Dashboard. Regular review meeting (at Center/State/City 
levels) are conducted to focus on the cities with slower implementation. 
The Ministry is regula rly interacting with the States/Smart Cities through Video 
Conferences, review meetings, field visits, Workshops etc. at various levels to 
assess the performance of the cities and to handhold them for improving the 
same." 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, O.M. No.G -20017/5/2020-BUDGET-1-UD  
Dt. 03.06.2020] 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21) 
Irregularities reported in Smart City work criticized and good work done 
welcomed and Government asked its replication across the country 
2.35  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee’s examination of 100 Smart Cities Mission has 
revealed various issues like frequent changes in Smart City project specially in 
Jaipur, no worthwhile workdone in Smart Cities of Sri Nagar and Jammu, 
irregularity in Smart Cities of Patna etc. Besides, the Committee’s examination has 
also revealed that no much progress has been visible in Smart City work at Smart 
City of Aurangabad, Raipur and Patna also. The Committee recall that these issues 
were taken up by the Committee in their DFG (2019 -20) Report also.  The 
Committee feel that there is a need for putting one extra effort so that complaints  

42 
are generally addressed. In this connection, the Committee also appreciate that 
fairly good work has been done in Smart cities of Surat and Indore. The Committee 
recall that in Indore they had an occasion to see the innovating projects like ‘Gaiki 
Roti ATM’, ‘Nekki  ki Deevar’ Censure based waste collection. The Committee feel 
that all these projects ne ed to be replicated in other States also so that Smart City 
Mission is used for the benefit of common man and society at large." 
 
 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
" Some of the steps taken by Smart Cities Mission are as under: 
• Good projects of Smart Cities are awarded through the India Smart Cities 
Awards every year.  
• The concept of Sister Cities has been launched, wherein top 20 cities have 
been paired with the bottom 20 cities to undertake a 100 days challenge to 
improve perf ormance. For instance, Surat and Indore have been paired to 
help Saharanpur and Guwahati respectively. Apart from helping these cities 
individually, the knowledge sharing on the common platform helps other 
cities to learn and replicate the success stories of better performing cities. 
• Regular review meeting, weekly newsletter of the Mission, City Performance 
Sheet (emailed every Monday to each city), Compendium of best practices 
are some of the mediums of knowledge sharing and replication of good 
practices. 
• SmartNet platform is a repository of all the work that happens within the 
Mission and has been a good source of peer-to-peer learning for cities." 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, O.M. No.G -20017/5/2020-BUDGET-1-UD  
Dt. 03.06.2020] 
 
 
 
 
  

43 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
LOWER UTILISATION OF FUNDS FOR MRTS/METRO PROJECTS CRITICIZED 
AND GOVERNMENTASKED TO MAKE ALL OUT EFFORTS FOR FULL AND 
JUDICIOUS UTILISATION OF FUNDS 
 
  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under:  
“The Committee’s examination of allocation vis -à-vis utilization of funds 
under MRTS and Metro Projects during 2018 -19 and 2019 -20 reveals that actual 
expenditure is lower than RE level. For instance, as against the Rs.15,600 crore 
and Rs.18,890.06 crore of RE (2018 -19) and (2019 -20), the level of expenditure 
was Rs.14,433 crore in FY (2018 -19) and Rs. 15,985,57 crore as on date and 
additional expenditure is expected in the remaining part of FY. In this connection, 
the Committee have been informed by MoHUA that requirement of funds depends 
upon project implementation which vary from year to year and expenditure against 
projected RE (2019 -20) is likely to be ac hieved. The Committee also find for BE 
(2020-21) Rs.20,000 crore have been proposed. The Committee apprehend that as 
the MoHUA has not been able to utilize full RE amount in 2018 -19 and RE(2019 -
20) of Rs.18,890 crore may not likely to be spent in remaining part of the FY (2019-
20) when expenditure level is as low as Rs.15,985.57 crore as on date. The 
Committee recommend that all out efforts be made to avail the precious funds 
being given for MRTS/Metro Projects." 
 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
" The RE for FY 2019-20 for MRTS and Metro Projects was Rs. 18890.06 crore out 
of whichRs. 18,850.94 crore were allocated to Metro and RRTS projects while 
allocation has been fully utilized and disbursed to respective Metro Rail 
projects.The remaining RE o f Rs. 39.12 crore was meant for Urban Transport 
Planning & Capacity Building programme and Efficient & Sustainable City Bus 
Services Project, out of which Rs.23.37 crore have been utilized. Thus out of the 
total of Rs. 18890.06 crore provided for in the RE for 2019-20,an expenditure of Rs. 
18874.31 crore (99.92%) has been incurred. As regards, BE 2020 -21 it is 
submitted that the projections have been made based upon realistic demand/ 
assessment of requirement of funds indicated by Metro Rail corporations as  per 
their implementation plan/ works under progress in various cities and is likely to be 
released towards the expenditure during the current year 2020-21." 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, O.M. No.G -20017/5/2020-BUDGET-1-UD  
Dt. 03.06.2020] 

44 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
EXAMINING THE ISSUE OF FREE RIDE FOR VULNERABLE SOCIETY IN 
DELHI METRO AND USEOF SMALL AGGREGATORS FOR ENSURING LAST 
MILE CONNECTIVITY IN DELHI METRO –REITERATED 
 
2.11  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee’s examination has revealed that two prominent issues 
of permitting free ride for women in Delhi Metro and ensuring las t mile connectivity 
by promotion of small aggregators had come up before the Committee while 
examining the Demands for Grants (2019 -20). The Committee feel that possible 
ways and measures should be taken into consideration by the Ministry to provide 
for af fordable and safe transportation services to the vulnerable sections of the 
society including the women, the children (the students) and the aged. 
On the issue of ensuring last mile connectivity, the Committee have been 
informed about the details of Metro Feeder Bus, e -rickshaw services, E -scooter 
services, cycle sharing services and need for promoting use of Metro lite has been 
highlighted. The Committee apprehends that the issue of ensuring last mile 
connectivity by small aggregators still remains to be a ddressed and needs to be 
examined afresh." 
2.12 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"Efforts of the Government are focused towards providing affordable and safe 
transportation services to the general public including the women, th e children (the 
students) and the aged. To ensure fairness and transparency, Metro Rail fare is 
fixed by Fare Fixation Committee, chaired by serving or retired judge of High Court 
in terms of extant provisions of Metro Railways (Operation and Maintenance) Act, 
2002, which takes into account issue s concerning all stakeholders. The 
recommendation of Fare Fixation committee is binding on the metro rail  

45 
administration. Regarding use of small aggregators for ensuring last mile 
connectivity in Delhi Metro, besides big aggregator [UBER], DMRC has tied-up with 
small aggregators, who are providing e -rickshaw and auto -rickshaw aggregation 
services.  
These are: -  
E-Rickshaw aggregation (operational) and e-auto services (planned) 
A fleet of 800 e -rickshaws are operational from 20 metro stations serving over 1 
lakh passengers on weekdays by two Operators of which one of the Operators is 
an aggregator.             In addition, dem o services have also been started from 9 
additional metro stations, which would be regularized soon. 
To enhance the services, it is planned to introduce the services from additional 33 
additional metro stations with the help of existing and newly selected e-rickshaw 
operators (who are into aggregation of e-rickshaws as well). 
DMRC has also approached Hon’ble Supreme Court to lift cap of 1 lakh auto -
rickshaws in the Delhi region and to allow bulk registration of e -autos in DMRC’s 
Operator name. 
Aggregation of auto-rickshaws 
DMRC has tied up with an auto -rickshaw aggregator. One a uto-rickshaw 
aggregation booth service is operational from HUDA City Centre metro station and 
Operator has been permitted to operate booths from 4 additional metro stations [in 
Gurgaon and NOIDA regions].  
Besides the above,proposals from various entities / aggregators are also favorably 
consideredby DMRC and to address the land requirementfor stabling / parking / 
pick-up & drop -off points for vehicles. DMRC is embarking uponaMultimod al 
Integration planfor seamless connectivity. Demarcationand development of 
Multimodal integration influence zone of 300-meter radius around 96 metro stations 
is under consideration. Of these 96 stations,‘Good For Construction’drawing of 60 
stations have b een issued to all the implementing agencies in February -2020. 
Target date for completion of MMI works at site for 60 stations is now June -2021 
(earlier planned by Mar -2021 but due to COVID -19 scenario completion is 
expected to extend by at least3 months). Execution/completion of the works would 
enable integration of various modes of transport and in ensuring last mile 
connectivity. 

46 
In addition to the above, the following Last Mile services are available from metro 
stations: - 
Metro Feeder Buses  
Presently, 174 MIDI feeder CNG Non-AC buses are being run on 32 STA approved 
routes which connect 69 metro stations. DMRC is also in the process to procure 
100 AC e-buses to be operated on 10 new routes. Procurement order has already 
been placed in Dec 201 9 and the e -buses are expected to be supplied within one 
year.  
Cab Aggregation 
As on date, UBER (CAB Aggregator) kiosks are operational from 11 metro stations 
and it is planned to extend the services from 210 metro stations for door to door 
connectivity.  
E-Scooter Services  
E-Scooter services by DMRC authorized operator are operational from 4 metro 
stations. The services will soon be initiated from 3 more metro stations.  
Cycle Sharing Services  
Pedal bicycle sharing services by 4 operators are operationa l from 16 metro 
stations. 2 operators are providing battery operated cycle services from 36 metro 
stations (service yet to be operationalized at few stations). 
MoHUA has also issued standard specifications for Light Urban Rail Transit system 
named Metrolite, suitable for cities with lower projection of ridership, which can be 
implemented at much lesser cost. This system would provide low cost Rail based 
Mass mobility solution with a feel of conventional metro system. Metrolite can also 
act as a feeder to high capacity Metro system." 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 13 of the Report) 
 
 
 
 

47 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
GOVERNMENT ASKED TO PERSUADE THE STATE GOVERNMENTS FOR 
LOW COST METROLITE WORKS FOR THEIR URBAN TRANSPORT NEEDS 
OF TIER 2 AND TIER 3 CITIES 
 
The Committee had recommended as under: 
" The Committee are constrained to find that currently the per km cost of 
construction of Metro Rail Network  is as high as Rs.500 crore to Rs.700 crore as 
compared to Metrolite that costs as low as Rs.100 crore to Rs.125 crore.  The 
Committee’s examination has revealed that as per National Infrastructure Pipeline 
(NIP) out of total investment on Metro Projects t o the tune of Rs.5.73 lakh crore 
from 2019-20 to 2024-25, an amount as high as Rs.1.05 lakh has been devoted for 
Metrolite works. The Committee find that as perpostevidence reply of MoHUA 
Metrolite system is suitable for cities with lower projection of rid ership besides it 
can also be used as a feeder system to existing metro system. The Committee also 
feel that under ‘Make in India Initiative’, the level of encouraging domestic 
manufacturing of metro components with foreign collaboration be promoted in big  
way as the system is more viable and sustainable due to its low capital costs, 
maintenance and operational costs. The Committee recommend that the State 
Governments may follow the Kochi Metro by moving to Metrolite projects for the 
works which are under a pproval. The Committee feel in view of the low cost of 
construction Metrolite projects on the lines of Kochi be taken up in other States for 
meeting theurban transport requirements of Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities expeditiously." 
 
2.14 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"Kochi Metro Rail Limited has informed that they are studying the feasibility of 
adopting Metrolite for the proposed Phase -III Aluva to Angamaly with Airport link 
corridor of Kochi Metro Rail Project and has appointed M/ s. UMTC for preparation 
of Detailed Project Report for the same. All the other States have also been 
informed about the Standard specifications of Metrolite with a request that they 
may adopt Metrolite as prime mode of mass urban transit as per their 
requirements." 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, O.M. No.G -20017/5/2020-BUDGET-1-UD  
Dt. 03.06.2020] 

48 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
GOVERNMENT ASKED TO EXPEDITE METRO RAIL PROJECT FOR AGRA 
  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee’s examination has revealed that prominent place of 
tourist attraction Agra is awaiting Metro Rail Network work due to imposition of 
general embargo on environmental angle by the Hon’ble Supreme Court. The 
Committee recall that this issue was taken up by the Committee last year also. The 
Committee has been informed that after the Hon’ble Supreme Court has accorded 
permission, the matter is before Monitoring Committee again to b e submitted 
before Hon’ble Supreme Court. The Committee feel that all out efforts be made for 
early clearance of Agra Metro Project from Hon’ble Supreme Court." 
 
 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
" Uttar Pradesh Metro Rail Corporation Limited (UPMRCL) has informed that in 
May, 2019, they requested the Taj Trapezium Zone Pollution (Prevention and 
Control) Authority to grant “No Objection” for execution of the Agra Metro Rail 
Project. The Taj Trapezium Zone Pollution (Preventi on & Control) Authority held a 
High Level Meeting on 10 -6-2019, wherein the representatives of UPMRCL also 
participated. The Taj Trapezium Zone Pollution (Prevention & Control) Authority on 
14-6-2019 communicated the minutes of the meeting stating that as per orders of 
Hon’ble Supreme Court dated 22 -3-2018 passed in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 13381 
of 1984 titled as M.C.Mehta Vs. Union of India & Others, the orders of “Status quo” 
in entire Taj Trapezium Zone(TTZ) Area have been passed, which  are presently 
effective. The Taj Trapezium Zone Pollution (Prevention & Control) Authority also 
communicated that as regards the Status quo, it shall be necessary for UPMRCL to 
get the status clarified at the level of Hon’ble Supreme Court. 
UPMRCL has filed I.A. Nos. 163898 and 163904 (under Writ Petition (C) No. 13381 
of 1984) seeking permission of the Hon’ble Supreme Court for allowing the public 
activities pertaining to Agra Metro Rail Project. Hon’ble Supreme Court vide its 
order dated 04.12.2019 referred the matter to Central Empowered Committee 
(CEC) for considering the impact of Agra Metro Rail Project on the environment 
and directed it to submit a report within a period of four weeks. Pursuant to above 
orders of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, CEC submitted its report to Hon’ble Supreme 
Court on 10.02.2020.  
 

49 
Subsequent to the filling of CEC report with the Hon’ble Supreme Court on 10 -2-
2020, the matter is awaiting to be listed for hearing. MsAishwaryaBhati, Additional 
Advocate General mentioned the matter before the  Hon’ble Supreme Court on 2-3-
2020 and the Hon’ble Supreme Court was pleased to pass the orders to list the 
case after the Holi vacation before the appropriate bench. However, due to the 
spread of corona virus pandemic and the nationwide lock -down, which i s still 
continuing, the matter could not be listed. 
UPMRCL has informed that they would diligently pursue the matter with Advocate 
General of Uttar Pradesh and Additional Advocate General of Uttar Pradesh for 
early listing and hearing of the case by the Ho n’ble Supreme Court once the 
lockdown is lifted." 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, O.M. No.G -20017/5/2020-BUDGET-1-UD  
Dt. 03.06.2020] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
GOVERNMENT ASKED TO LOOK INTO VARIOUS ISSUES CONCERNING 
REQUIREMENT OF FLATSFOR MPS IN BD MARG AND DEVELOPMENT OF 
TWO PARKS BY CPWD IN DELHI 
 
  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee’s examination has revealed that various prominent 
issues of requirement of funds for construction of flats for MPs at BD Marg, 
preparedness for New Parliament Building and issue of development of parks 
opposite 27-28 DDU Marg and in the vicinity of DMRC Park, Staff Colony Saket by 
the CPWD came up before the Committee. On the issue of making available funds 
for construction of flats for MPs at BD Marg, it came out before the Committee that 
out of cost of Rs. 103.00 crore for the project, only Rs.32.12 crore has been spent 
for flats that are scheduled to be completed by March, 2020. It also came out 
during the course  of evidence that a demand of Rs.200 crore has been received. 
The Committee find from the post evidence replies ofMoHUA that CPWD has 
requested for additional funds in supplementary Demands for Grants II for current 
financial year 2019 -20. The Committee fe el that required amount should be made 
available for pending work at the earliest. 
As regards work on New Parliament Building, the Committee have been 
informed that DPR work would be over by March, 2020 followed by tendering so 
that the New Parliament come s up before Monsoon Session 2022. In this context, 
the Committee find from post evidence replies that proposed building is proposed  

50 
to be constructed at Plot No.-118, adjacent to existing Parliament with concept plan 
currently being finalized with Lok Sabha Secretariat. The Committee expect that 
update on the issue be apprised to them. 
On the issue of development of Parks opposite 27 -18 DDU Marg and in the 
vicinity of DMRC park, Staff Colony Saket by the CPWD, the Committee find from 
the post evidence replies from MoH&UA that CPWD has agreed to develop the 
park. The Committee desire that it should be expedited." 
 
 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"  
I. Construction of 76 flats for MPs at BD Marg: 
Additional funds amounting to Rs.70 crores were provided through 
supplementary Demands for Grant and Second batch to incur the additional 
expenditure on B D Marg Project. Pending contractual liabilities for works 
completed have been paid in March 2020. However, the work at present is 
fully stopped due to lockdown as per orders of Central Govt., as well as 
State Government since 22 nd March, 2020 due to prevailing condition of 
Pandemic of Covid-19. 
II. New Parliament Building: 
DPR work is under progress. Other necessary approvals are also under 
progress.  
III. Development of Parks: 
The landopposite 27 -28 DDU Marg is being considered for the family Court 
(under GNCT Delhi). 
IV. DMRC Park, Staff Colony Saket 
The land near Metro Station Sak et is being developed as Park and will be 
completed by September 2020." 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, O.M. No.G -20017/5/2020-BUDGET-1-UD  
Dt. 03.06.2020] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11 
CONCEIVING OF NIRMAL KAUSHAL VIKASH YOJANA FOR TRAINING 
CONSTRUCTION WORKERS WELCOMED AND ITS EARLY 
IMPLEMENTATION RECOMMENDED 

 
51 
 
  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee appreciate that MoHUA has come out with Nirmal  
Kaushal Vikash Yojana for three years period from 2020-21 to 2022 -23 with 
budgetary requirements of Rs.656 crore beginning with Rs.50.00 crore for BE 
(2020-21) that seeks to give quality vocational training for workers in construction 
industry. The Committee also find that 12 champion  service sectors have  been 
identified for global service exports and enhancing the share of services to GDP for 
implementation set up jointly by MoHUA, National Skill Development Corporation 
(NSDC) is currently under consideration of Government and will be finalised by 
April, 2020. The Committee feel that this is good initiative and be finalized 
expeditiously." 
 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
" A meeting of the Committee of Secretaries (CoS) chaired by the Cabinet 
Secretary was held on 06.02.2020,  for reviewing various sectors under the 
Champion Service Sector Scheme, in which it was decided that Ministry of Housing 
& Urban Affairs and other Ministries/Departments may examine how the skilling 
component of their Schemes can be implemented through th e M/o Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship(MoSDE). Accordingly, a proposal to involve 
MoSDE, National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) and relevant Sector Skill 
Councils in implementation of NKVY was considered and it was decided to request 
MoSDE to take up implementation of NKVY. In this regard, a reference from 
MoHUA has already been sent to MoSDE and their response is awaited." 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, O.M. No.G -20017/5/2020-BUDGET-1-UD  
Dt. 03.06.2020] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
ARRANGING MORE FUNDS TO MEET PMAY (U) REQUIREMENTS 
RECOMMENDED 
  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee are constrained to find that as against the estimated 
tentative demand of Rs. 1.79 lakh cr for construction of 112 lakh houses by 2022, 
the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has been able to sanction as high as 103 
lakh houses for which R s. 1.63 lakh cr has been approved as Committed Central 
Assistance out of which Rs. 63,676 cr has been released to States, out of which  

52 
UCs of as high as Rs. 51,000 cr have been received. In this context the MoH&UA 
has got Cabinet approval for raising R s. 60,000 cr of EBR for the period of four 
years (Rs 8000 cr in 2017 -18, Rs. 20,000 cr in 2018 -19, Rs. 15,000 cr in 2019 -20) 
out of which Rs. 43,000 cr has been released and balance Rs. 17,000 cr are to be 
raised. Further the MoH&UA has also informed that Rs. 10,000 cr has been 
provisioned for 2019 -20 and Rs. 10,000 cr has been provisioned for 2020 -21. 
Besides this the Committee have also been informed for FY (2020 -21) and FY 
(2021-22) the MoH&UA plans to approach the Union Cabinet for considering the 
EBR i n the range of Rs. 60,000 cr to Rs. 8,000 cr. The Committee feel that 
necessary funds for PMAY (U) requirement should bearranged expeditiously as the 
level of sanctioning will rise further so as to reach the target of 112 lakh houses 
finally by 2022." 
 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"To meet the validated   demand of about 1.12 lakh houses under the scheme of 
PMAY (U), the total   requirement of fund for central assistance has been estimated 
to nearly Rs. 1.80 lakh crore. Apar t from year -on-year budgetary support, the 
Ministry is using   EBR for providing central assistance under the scheme. 
Presently, the   Ministry has the approval of the Cabinet for raising EBR of Rs. 
60,000.00   crore of which Rs. 43000 crore has already be en raised and balance 
would be raised in FY 2020-21. Keeping in view the huge requirement of funds, the   
Ministry will approach the Cabinet for considering more EBR in the range of   Rs. 
60,000 crore to Rs. 80,000 crore for successful implementation of th e   scheme 
under the Housing for All Mission by 2022." 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, O.M. No.G -20017/5/2020-BUDGET-1-UD  
Dt. 03.06.2020] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 22) 
SLOW WORKDONE ON THREE ODF PROTOCOLS OF CRITICISED AND 
GOVERNMENT ASKED TO MORE FASTEN FOR ACHIEVING THE GOAL BY 
2024 
  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee’s find that work on three Protocols of ODF+ (Toilet 
with Water, maintanance and hygiene) ODF++ (Toilets with sludge and septage 
management) and Water Plus (Toilet with treating and reuse of water) are to be 
completed by 2024. However the Committee are constrained to note that the 
ground situation is not commensurating with the assigned timeline. For instance out 
of 4320 cities declared ODF as low as 1276 cities have been certified as ODF+ and 
still lower level of cities i.e 411 have been certified as ODF++. The Committee also 
find that ODF work is yet to take place in some ULBs and West Bengal and the 

53 
 Committee have been apprised by the Secretary, MoH&UA that the work 
will be over by March, 2020. The Committee feel that there is a need to move faster 
with regard to the coverage of three Protocols of ODF+, ODF++ and Water Plus so 
as to adhere the time l ine of 2024. In this connection the Committee during the 
course of evidence came across a peculiar  position while quoting a survey it was 
highlighted before the Committee prominently that as high as 80% of Toilets in East 
Delhi Area are th oroughly un usable for want of proper mainte nance and the 
Committee were apprised by the Commissioner EDMC that the related survey was 
old and the position was not all that bad as per the survey available. In view of 
ground reality the Committee do not subscribe to the view s of the EDMC and 
recommend that all out efforts be made on the part of MoH&UA under sanitation 
component for required level of maintenance in the affected area." 
 
2.16 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
" As per the guidelines of 2014 of Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban), the target was 
to achieve Open Defecation Free (ODF) Status for all 4,041 statutory towns of India 
by 2 ndOctober 2019. A robust mechanism to measure the outcomes and progress 
was accordingly introduced in 2016 i.e.  the ODF Protocol. Well before the deadline 
of 2nd October 2019, 99% of the cites were declared as ODF. The remaining 1%  
accounts for  48 ULBs of West Bengal which have not yet  formally declared 
themselves as ODF. The Hon’ble Minister for H&UA had writte n to the Chief 
Minister of West Bengal in July 2019 to ensure that all cities are declared as ODF. 
A high level meeting chaired by Secretary, H&UA was also held on 5 thNovember 
2019 in Kolkata along with  the representatives of the State and ULBs  to review  
the ODF status and timelines for achieving the same. This was followed by a Video 
Conference review chaired by Secretary H&UA on 4th February 2020. However, 
the situation has not changed inspite of repeated requests and support of the 
Ministry. 
The ODF+ a nd ODF++ protocols were introduced additionally to ensure 
sustainability to the progress attained. As on date,  1306 cites have been certified 
as ODF+ and 489 cities have been certified as ODF++. ULBs are ready for ODF+ 
and ODF++ inspections but field insp ections are on hold due to the prevailing 
conditions of lockdown. The ODF+ and ODF++ progress is expected to surge as 
soon as the  inspections are completed.  Despite that, if any shortfall is noticed, 
MoHUA will continue motivating all ULBs to achieve all ODF protocals. 
The Delhi Toilet Survey was proposed to be conducted in two rounds, i.e. 
November 2019 (Round 1) and March 2020 (Round 2) respectively. The detailed 
findings of Round 1 were duly shared by the Ministry  with all ULBs for corrective 

54 
 action. The survey quoted above by Commissioner EDMC has also been 
conducted in December 2019. The progress in improvement of toilet conditions by 
EDMC was scheduled to be checked in Round 2 of the survey i.e. March 2020. 
However due to the prevailing con ditions of COVID -19, the survey had to be 
deferred." 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, O.M. No.G -20017/5/2020-BUDGET-1-UD  
Dt. 03.06.2020] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 23) 
LOWER UTILISATION OF RELEASES BY STATES UNDER SBM (U) 
CRITICIZED GOVERNMENTASKED TO PERSUADE THE CONCERNED 
STATES TO IMPROVE THEIR UTILISATION 
 
2.15  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee’s examination has revealed that a sum of Rs.2,300 
crore has been proposed for BE (2020 -21) as against lower actual of Rs.1,020.02 
and RE of Rs.1300 crore during 2019 -20. The Committee find that during 2019 -20, 
the BE of Rs.2650 crore were brought down to Rs.1300 crore on the ground that 
Solid Waste Management Projects were capital intensive wit h completion time of 
one to three years and as such funds released for SWM component during 2017 -
18 and 2018 -19 were mostly first instalment against which subsequent demand 
have not been received from the States/UTs resulting in lowering of funds at RE 
(2019-20) and the same may be received during 2020 -21. Thus higher funds have 
been proposed for 2020-21. The Committee’s examinationofMissionallocationvis-à-
visreleasesandutilisationfrom2015-16 onwards has revealed that as against the 
Mission allocation of Rs .14,013 crore, the releases have been also was Rs.9790 
crore and level of utilization is still lower at Rs.7307 crore. The Committee also find 
on explanation of MoHUA that on date a total cumulative grant released is 
Rs.10,198.48 crore for which UCs are do ne only upto March, 2018 i.e. 
approximately Rs.6337 crore as against Rs.7307 crore were received which 
includes some UCs which will be done in 2020 -21. In terms of releases and their 
utilisation, the Committee find that good performing States are Chhattisg arh, 
Gujarat, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram, Meghalaya, West 
Bengal, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu etc. 
whereas like Karnataka and Kerala are lagging behind. The Committee 
recommend that special drive  be opened for persuading the slow moving States to 
improve their improvement." 
 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 

55 
"Ministry has been  raising regularly the issue of lower utilisation of funds with the 
concerned States/UTs which are lagging behind by holding regular video 
conferences,  communicating through letters & emails and also through telephone 
calls as well as guiding them to increase their fund utilisation. As a result of the 
same many States/UTs have responded well and so me are still lagging  behind 
when compared with others States/UTs. 
However, due toprevailing conditions of pandemic Covid -19, the progress of some 
States/UTs may get affected to be slow.  But despite all hardships under the 
circumstances, MoHUA will ensure  to keep the momentum of Swachh Bharat 
Mission (Urban) and make further progress." 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, O.M. No.G -20017/5/2020-BUDGET-1-UD  
Dt. 03.06.2020] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 24) 
FULL UTILISATION OF SWM FUNDS BY SOME STATES APPRECIATED AND 
POOR PERFORMANCEBY SLOW MOVING STATES CRITICISED AND ASKED 
TO IMPROVE THEIR UTILISATION LEVEL 
  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee’s examination of releases vis -à-vis utilisation under 
Solid Was te Management component of SBM (U) from 2015 -16 onwards has 
revealed that out of Rs. 5026 cr of releases, the total utilization is as low as Rs. 
3470 cr. The Committee from the States wise details are glad to find that States of 
Arunachal Pradesh, Andhra P radesh, Chhattisgarh, Nagaland, Rajashthan, 
Mizoram, Sikkim and Tamil Nadu have utilised hundred percent of releases and 
States like Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya, Jharkhand, Telangana,  Punjab  
and  Uttar  Pradesh  and  soon  have  faired  well.  The  Committee are however 
constrained to  note  that  Bihar,   Karnataka,  Kerala,  Maharashtra, Odisha, 
Haryana, Tripura, Manipur etc. are lagging behind. The Committee therefore 
recommend that a special drive be opened with slow moving States to improve 
their tally also." 
 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
" As already elaborated while furnishing details of action taken by the Government 
to the Recommendation  No. 23 above, Ministry has been raising the issue of lower 
utilisation of funds with the States/UTs which are lagging behind by way of  holding 
regular video conferences, communicating  through letters & emails and also 
through telephone calls to guide them for  increasing their fund utilisation. As a 
result of which,  many State/UTs have responded well but some are still lagging as 
compared with others States/UTs especially for Solid Waste Management  

56 
component. The issue of less utilisation vis-à-vis Solid Waste Management is being 
raised consistently with all the States/UTs.  States like Maharashtra, Haryana, 
Bihar, Tripura and Odisha have already submitted their SWM proposals during the 
year 2019 -20 against which Rs. 238.68 Cr. for Maharashtra, Rs. 57.66 Cr. for 
Haryana, Rs. 39.87 Cr. for Bihar, Rs. 10.57 Cr. for Tripura and Rs. 100.45 Cr. for 
Odisha were released for Solid Waste Management Component during the year 
2019-20. 
Further, as recommended by the Hon’ble Committee, Ministry will take up the issue 
with slow moving States and advise them to improve their uti lisation vis-a-vis Solid 
Waste Management component." 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, O.M. No.G -20017/5/2020-BUDGET-1-UD  
Dt. 03.06.2020] 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 25) 
GOVERNMENT ASKED TO OPEN UP A NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF 
SANITATION AND SOLID WA STEMANAGEMENT (SWM) AT INDORE FOR 
EXEMPLARY WORK DONE IN THE AREA OF SANITATION AND SWM 
 
  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee are glad to find that MoH&UA is going to open a 
regional Centre at Indore as part of  National Urban Leadership Hub being 
developed by strengthening the existing infrastructure that is currently with National 
Institute of Urban Affairs Delhi. The Committee recall that they have recently visited 
Indore and were quite impressed with the exem plary level of cleanliness that has 
not only been awarded the cleanest city recognition in the Country three times in a 
row but also have a rare distinction of hundredpercent Municipal Waste Treatment. 
The Committee feel that in the light of above exemplar y work done in Sanitation 
and Solid Waste Management, Indore may be favorably considered for opening up 
National Institute for Sanitation and Solid Waste Management so that example of 
Indore can be replicated elsewhere in the Country.” 
 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"There is a requirement to setup an autonomous state of art institute to deal with 
the emerging challenges of the above sectors through application of knowledge 
and technology. The institute will play a pivotal role in implementation of policies 
and programs of the Ministry in a more efficient and cost effective manner, 
including Technical Co-operation and Networking with National and International  

57 
Agencies and technical institutes and sharing technology and best practices, 
Setting up standards, Certification and assessment of proven technologies, 
providing Technical Support to the States/Cities, including Appraisal of Technical 
Reports/DPRs, etc. Thus, an institute is proposed in the proposal for extension of  
Swachh Bharat Mission -Urban beyond March 2021." 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, O.M. No.G -20017/5/2020-BUDGET-1-UD  
Dt. 03.06.2020] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 26) 
GOVERNMENT ASKED TO START THE WORK ON BIO MINING AT GAZIPUR 
LAND FILL SITE INDELHI FOR ITS REMOVAL AS WAS DONE BY INDORE 
 
  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee note that during the course of evidence of the 
representatives of MoH&UAaprominent issue of converting Delhi’s landfillsite in to a 
park as has been done by Indore Municipal Corporation came up before the 
Committee in a big way. The Committee from the post evidence reply find that as 
desired by them a visit of Commissioner, EDMC, Joint Secretary in Charge of SBM 
(U) in MoH&UAalong with local MP took place and it was agreed to continue bio 
mining of land fill site and use of output for RDF and C&D plants with NHAI 
agreeing to take initial 5000 MT of soil for road construction. The Committee 
recommends that work as agreed be started expeditiously on the pattern of Indore.” 
 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
" East Delhi Municipal Corporation(EDMC) has already taken steps in this regard.  
As a follow -up to the visit of the Hon'ble Member of Parliament, Ministry has 
requested National Highway Authority of India to start picking up screened material 
from EDMC’s Ghazipur dumpsite." 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, O.M. No.G -20017/5/2020-BUDGET-1-UD  
Dt. 03.06.2020] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 27) 
ENHANCING EMPLOYMENT, CREATION OF URBAN SHELTERS AND 
DETERMINATION OFVENDING ZONES RECOMMENDED 
 
2.15  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 

58 
 “The Committee examination of the Scheme of 
DeenDayalAntyodayaYojana – National Urban  Livelihood Mission (DAY -NULM) 
reveals that Rs. 795 cr have been proposed for BE (2020 -21) for this scheme of 
Urban Poverty Alleviation focusing on livelihood creation. While reviewing 
allocation vis -à-vis utilisation of the last two years i.e 2018 -19 and 2019-20, the 
Committee find that the allocation has been enhanced from the level of Rs. 310 cr 
in 2018-19 to Rs. 750 cr in 2019 -20 and the utilisation of funds during 2019 -20 is 
even higher i.e Rs. 680 cr as on 15.02.2020. In the context of low performance  on 
number of beneficiaries provided skill training, the Committee have been informed 
that it was owing to factors like general election in some States and shifting from 
the Skill Development Management System to Skill India  Mission Portal and the 
performance has improved further. The Committee are however constrained to 
note that the MoH&UA has left the issue of providing employment to State and City 
Governments. The Committee therefore feel that the MoH&UA should also on their 
own the responsibility for t his. The Committee also find that two prominent issues 
of creation of Urban Shelters and determination of Vending Zones in the country 
have come up before the Committee. The Committee therefore feel that a lot more 
is needed at the level of MoH&UA so that the have nots take shelters on these 
urban shelters and common venders is given a proper designated place for selling 
their articles without fear of being uprooted.” 
 
2.16 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
" Needs for enhancing employment :The Ministry is continuously monitoring the 
progress of Employment through Skill Training & Placement (ESTP) and Self -
Employment Programme (SEP) Component, with an aim to create additional 14 
lakh livelihoods. Tie -ups with employers directly and adoption of Recruit -Train-
Deploy (RTD) model through the Sector Skill Councils are being explored for 
improved placement. 
Shelter Provisions for Urban Homeless : In order to improve shelter availability 
for the urban homeless, the Ministry has taken a n umber of initiatives like 
continuation of O&M support till March 2021 for the shelters which had completed 5 
years on March 2020 in view of the COVID -19 pandemic, allowing buildings to be 
taken on rent for running of shelters, uploading of information of s helters on DAY-
NULM portal in the public domain, geo -tagging of shelters and linking of 
schools/colleges to the shelters. 
 
 
 

59 
Vending zones for street vendors : The States have been advised to finalize the 
Town Vending Plans (TVPs) and demarcate Vending Zones as per the provisions 
of the Street Vendors Act, 2014. A provision has also been made in the MIS of 
DAY-NULM for update of the information by the States/UTs." 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, O.M. No.G -20017/5/2020-BUDGET-1-UD  
Dt. 03.06.2020] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
        Jagdambika Pal  
11thSeptember, 2020        Chairperson,           
20th Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka)   Standing Committee on Urban Development  

60 
ANNEXURE -I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2019-2020) 
 
Extracts of the Minutes of Fourteenth Sitting of the Committee on Urban 
Development held on Thursday the 27th August, 2020 
 The Committee sat from 1100 hours to 1515 hours in Committee Room 
No.1,   Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, First Floor, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 Shri Jagdambika Pal        -        Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha  
2.   Prof. S P Singh Baghel 
3. Shri Sanjay Kumar Bandi 
4. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5. Shri Ramcharan Bohra 
6. Shri P C Mohan 
7. Shri C R Patil 
8. Smt Aparajita Sarangi 
9. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale  
Rajya Sabha  
10. Shri Kumar Ketkar 
11. Shri Sanjay Singh 
12. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
13. Shri Ram Chander Jangra 
14. Shri Digvijaya Singh 
Secretariat 
1. Shri A.K.Shah    Director 
 
Ministry of Housing And Urban Affairs 
 
1. Shri Durga Shanker Mishra             Secretary 
2. Sh Amrit Abhijat    Joint Secretary (HFA) 
3. Smt. D. Thara    Joint Secretary 
4. Sh Ram Sajiwan Singh   Director (HFA-I) 
5. Sh Raj Kumar Gautam   Director (HFA-V) 
6. Sh V P Singh     Director 
 
Representative of State Government of Rajasthan 
 
1.  Sh Bhaskar A Sawant   Pr Secy UDH 

61 
 
2. Sh Bhawani Singh Detha  Secretary LSG 
 
3. Sh N C Mathur   Chief Engineer, Jaipur Municipal   
      Corporation 
  
4. Sh Anil Singhal   Chief Engineer, Jaipur Municipal   
      Corporation 
 
5. Sh Devraj Solanki   Chief Engineer (Jaipur City &   
      Distt) PHED 
 
6. Sh Ambut Tyagi   SE, Water Resources Department 
Representative of State Government of  Haryana 
 
1. Sh Siddhi Natha Roy  Additional Chief Secretary 
 
2. Sh Vinay Pratap Singh  Commissioner, Municipal Corporation   
      Gurgaon 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed  Shri Ram Chand Jangra, MP (RS) 
on his nomination to serve as Member of the Standing Committee on Urban 
Development for the remaining term of the Committee.   
 
*  *  * 
16. Thereafter the Committee thanked the witnesses and asked them to send 
written notes to the Committee Secretariat replies to which were not readily 
available with them. 
17. The Committee then took up for consideration two Draft Action Taken 
Reports on First and Second Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants 
(2019-20) and (2020-21) relating to Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs on action 
taken by Government thereon an d adopted the Draft Reports without any 
amendments. The Committee also authorized to finalise the Reports after factual 
verification from the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs for their presentation to 
Parliament.  
18. The Committee then adjourned. 
 A verbatim record is kept for record.  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
* Matter not related with the Report. 

62 
ANNEXURE-II 
[Vide para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SECOND REPORT OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN  DEVELOPLMENT (S EVENTEENTH LOK 
SABHA) 
 
I.  Total number of recommendations                         27 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government:                                                                              14   
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5, 9, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 and 21 
Percentage to total recommendations                                           (51.85 %)                                     
          
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:                             1 
Recommendation No. 4 
Percentage to total recommendations                                              (3.70%)                
            
  
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of             
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:            1 
Recommendation No.  6 
Percentage to total recommendations                                              (3.70%) 
 
 
V.         Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final     
replies of the Government are still awaited:                                       11 
Recommendation Nos.  7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 and 27    
Percentage to total recommendations                                             (40.74%) 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 