 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
(2022- 2023) 
                   
   
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
          
 
               MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
                                           
  
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirteenth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs 
(2021-2022) on the subject, ‘Implementation of Metro Rail Projects – An Appraisal’] 
 
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
      
 
 
                                   LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                                 NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana 1944 (Saka) 
 
16 


 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH  REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
(2022-2023) 
 
                                
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs (2021-2022) 
on the subject, ‘Implementation of Metro Rail Projects – An Appraisal’] 
   
 
 
   Presented to Lok Sabha on 20.12.2022 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20.12.2022 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana 1944 (Saka) 


 
 
 
 
   C.U.D No. 132 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2022 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Seventeenth 
Edition) and printed by ................ 
 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                                     (iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                                      (v) 
CHAPTER I Report                                                                                               1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government   
7 
CHAPTER III Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
27 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration   
35 
CHAPTER V Observations /Recommendations in respect of which final  replies of the 
Government are still awaited  
38 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
I. Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Committee held on 16.12.2022.                                      39 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Thirteenth  Report  (17th Lok Sabha).                                                                                         40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS (2022-23) 
 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh        -        Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Adv. A. M. Ariff 
3. Shri Sanjay Kumar Bandi  
4. Shri Shrirang Appa Barne  
5. Shri Benny Behanan  
6. Shri Ramcharan Bohra  
7. Shri Hibi Eden  
8. Shri Gautam Gambhir  
9. Shri Syed Imtiaz Jaleel 
10. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
11. Smt. Hema Malini  
12. Shri Hasnain Masoodi  
13. Shri P.C. Mohan  
14. Shri C.R. Patil  
15. Shri S. Ramalingam 
16. Shri Adala Prabhakara Reddy  
17. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi  
18. Shri M V V Satyanarayana  
19. Shri Sudhakar Tukaram Shrangare 
20. Shri Sunil Kumar Soni 
21. Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur 
RAJYA SABHA 
22. Shri Subhasish Chakraborty 
23. Shri R. Girirajan 
24. Smt. Jebi Mather Hisham  
25. Shri Ram Chander Jangra  
26. Shri Kumar Ketkar 
27. Dr.  K. Laxman 
28. Ms. Kavita Patidar 
29. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
30. Dr.  Kalpana Saini 
31. Shri Sanjay Singh 
 
SECRETARIAT 
          1.      Shri V.K. Tripathi        -      Joint Secretary 
          2.      Ms Archna Pathania                         - Director 
          3.      Ms Swati Parwal        -      Deputy Secretary 
          4.      Shri Mukesh Kumar                    - Asst. Comm. Officer 
 
  
(iv) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs (2022-2023) having 
been authorized by the Committee, present this Sixteenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee on the subject, ‘Implementation of Metro Rail Projects – An Appraisal’  of the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs. 
2. The Thirteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 19 July, 2022 but had been laid on the table 
of Rajya Sabha on 07.04.2022. The Action Taken Replies of the Government to all the recommen dations 
contained in the Report were received on 03 August, 2022. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on 16 December, 2022. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
Thirteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
5. For the facility of  reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
                      Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh  
alias Lalan Singh 
16 December, 2022                                   Chairperson,        
25 Agrahayana,1944 (Saka)                     Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs 
 
 
  
 
 
 
(v)            

1 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs (2022-23) 
deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
their Thirteenth Report ( Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject, ‘ Implementation of 
Metro Rail Projects – An Appraisal’ of the Ministry of  Housing and Urban Affairs which 
was presented to Lok Sabha on 9th May, 2022. 
1.2 Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the 21 R ecommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as 
follows: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government: 
 Recommendation Serial Nos. 1, 3, 4, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19, 20, 
21 
(Total - 16) 
(Chapter-II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations, which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of Government's replies: 
Recommendation Serial No.  2, 7, 8                  (Total - 03) 
(Chapter-III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which replies of Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee: 
      Recommendation Serial Nos.  5, 18      
(Total - 02) 
(Chapter-IV) 
                       
(iv) Recommendations / Observations, in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
   Recommendation Serial No.   Nil                                           (Total -  0) 
   (Chapter-V) 
 

2 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that specific replies to the Comments of the Committee as 
contained in Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished to them at the earliest and in any 
case, not later than three months from the presentation of this Report. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.    
 Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
Adoption of Less Capital intensive MetroLite and MetroNeo networks  
 
1.5  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee note that metro projects are capital intensive in nature 
involving huge investment on the part of Ministry accounting for about 43 percent of 
total BE in 2021-22 of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs. The Committee have been 
further apprised that per kilometre cost of construction of metro projects range from  Rs. 
37 cr to Rs. 220 crores for elevated metro, Rs. 100 crores to Rs.1126 crores for 
underground metro and Rs. 84 to Rs. 122 crores for At Grade metros. On the other 
hand, MetroLite can be constructed at 40% cost of Metro train while MetroNeo (tyred 
metro) can be constructed at 25% of the cost of metro.  The standards for MetroLite and 
MetroNeo have also been issued by the Ministry in July 2019 and November, 2020, 
respectively. They w ill provide a similar experience and ease of travel in terms of 
comfort, convenience, safety, punctuality, reliability, & environment -friendliness as that 
of a conventional metro system. Both are suitable for smaller cities with lower ridership 
that are as piring for rail -based mass transit system and can also be used as feeder to 
high capacity metro rail systems. They are more viable and sustainable due to their very 
less capital, operation and maintenance costs. Apart from decongesting smaller cities, 
they will also reduce pollution. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to promote and incentivize 
MetroLite and MetroNeo in smaller cities aspiring for rail-based mass transit system and 
also as feeder to high capacity metro systems, wherever possib le. The Committee also 
desire to be informed of the specific measures taken to persuade/ incentivize adoption 
of MetroLite and MetroNeo systems.” 
 
1.6 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"Urban transport, which is an integral part of urban development, is a state 
subject. Hence, respective State Government/Union Territory (UT) is responsible for 
initiating and developing urban transport infrastructure including Mass Rapid Transit 
System. The Central Government considers financial as sistance for such projects in 
cities or urban agglomerates, based on feasibility of the proposal and availability of 
resources, as and when posed by the concerned State Government/Union Territory 
(UT). MoHUA has already issued standards for MetroLite and M etroNeo system. 
Selection of Metro Rail/MetroLite/MetroNeo is done as per traffic studies conducted 

3 
 
during DPR stage. Govt. of Uttar Pradesh and Union Territory of Jammu &Kashmir have 
already proposed MetroLite system for Gorakhpur and Srinagar/Jammu respe ctively. 
Similarly, Govt. of Maharashtra and Govt. of Uttarakhand have already proposed 
MetroNeo system in Nashik and Dehradun respectively." 
1.7 The Committee had recommended the Ministry to promote and incentivize 
MetroLite and MetroNeo  systems in smaller cities aspiring for rail -based mass 
transit systems and also as feeder to high capacity metro systems, wherever 
possible. The Committee also desired to be informed of the specific measures 
taken to persuade/incentivize adoption of MetroLite and MetroNeo systems. 
 In its reply, inter alia, the Ministry have stated that Urban Transport being a 
State Subject most of the urban transport infrastructure projects including Mass 
Rapid Transit Systems (MRTS) are initiated and developed by the res pective 
States and Ministry only funds those projects looking to its feasibility. 
The Committee appreciate that the Ministry have issued standards for MetroLite 
and MetroNeo and some cities viz. Gorakhpur, Srinagar/Jammu, Nashik and 
Dehradun have also proposed these systems. However, the Committee are 
concerned that about 40 -45 percent of the total budget of the Ministry is 
earmarked for metro projects alone leaving little for other urban infrastructure 
projects. The Committee are also aware that several me tro projects are attracting 
less than expected average daily ridership and also operating on losses. Since, 
the Ministry is responsible for approving and funding metro projects in various 
States, the onus obviously lies on the Ministry to approve and fund feasible 
MRTS technology only (Metro/MetroLite/MetroNeo). The Committee, therefore, 
desire the Ministry to exercise greater caution and discretion at DPR approval 

4 
 
stage and fund only those projects which are adopting most feasible MRTS 
technology for a given city looking to its total population and traffic needs. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18) 
Registering for Carbon Credits 
1.8  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
“The Committee are aware that a carbon credit is a tradable permit or certificate 
that provides the holder of the credit the right to emit one ton ne of carbon dioxide or an 
equivalent of another greenhouse gas – it’s essentially an offset for producers of s uch 
gases. Several metro projects have registered/applied for Green House Gas (GHG) 
emission under two platforms viz. Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) under 
UNFCCC and the Gold Standard Registry (GS) to demonstrate emission reduction. The 
Committee have b een apprised that Delhi metro has earned 4.4 million carbon credits 
from CDM and GS projects, Kochi & Lucknow metros have stated that their registration 
for Carbon Credits is under process while Nagpur metro will apply for it after 
commissioning of the pro ject, Bhopal and Indore metros on the other hand have 
informed that their stations and depot are being planned/designed for India Green 
Building council (IGBC) Platinum Rating leading to Carbon Credits in due course. 
Hyderabad, Kanpur and Agra metros have not registered for Carbon Credits. 
Ahmedabad, Surat, Patna, Bengaluru, Jaipur and Kolkata metros have not provided any 
information regarding carbon credits. On the other hand Pune and Mumbaimetros have 
merely informed that their projects are under implemen tation remaining silent on the 
issue of meeting power requirements from renewables. Since several metros are either 
using or planning to use renewable energy to a considerable extent to meet their 
requirements, the Committee feel that it is important to ensure that all these metro rail 
networks are registered for carbon credits so that th ey earn benefits for being 
environment friendly. However, the Ministry have informed that it is merely desirable for 
metro networks to register for carbon credits and not a mandate. That is perhaps the 
reason why several metro networks have not yet registe red for it. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend the Ministry to impress upon all the metro rail projects and 
ensure that they register for carbon credits. The Committee are of the view that it may 
be made mandatory to make metro rail networks to register for carbon credits.”   
 
1.9 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“M/o Housing and Urban Affairs has requested Metro Rail Corporations, who have not 
yet registered for Carbon Credits, to explore economic benefits of registration.” 
 
1.10 Observing the benefits of registration for Green House Gas (GHG) emission 
that accrued to Delhi Metro, the Committee had recommended the Ministry to 

5 
 
impress upon all the metro rail projects and ensure that they register for carbon 
credits mandatorily. In Reply, t he Ministry have stated that they ha d requested 
Metro Rail Corporations  who have not yet registered for Carbon Credits, to 
explore economic benefits of registration . The Committee are of the opinion that 
being the nodal Ministry for metro operat ions, the Ministry can do much more in 
this regard. The Committee feel that a tleast the upcoming metros can be 
persuaded to register for GHG emissions. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
the Ministry to make GHG emission  mandatory for all upcoming metros , apart 
from persuading metros in operation.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20) 
Need for a platform for sharing ideas and experience 
 
1.11  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
“The Committee have been apprised that there is a centralized institutional 
mechanism / system named ‘Indian Metro Rail Organizations Society’ (I Metro), 
headquartered at New Delhi in place to provide a common platform for all Metro Rail 
Companies, Regional Rapid Transit System (RRTS) /Mono Rai l Organization, etc. in 
India in terms of sharing knowledge, experience, information, best practices, 
innovations in all aspects of urban rail transport and learn from one another in order to 
improve performance of members. The Committee were further infor med that at present 
I Metro governing body consists of 15 members of various Metro Rail Organizations and 
under the Presidentship of Secretary (MoHUA). The forum also helps in coordination of 
the members with Government and other stake holders. However, th e Committee note 
that Kolkata, the oldest metro and Patna metro are not the members of I metro so far. 
The Committee are of the opinion that such robust centralized institutional 
mechanism/ system to share the experiences and to exchange ideas in implement ation 
and operations of the Metro rail projects in India can help metros learn from experiences 
of each other, discuss the problems and arrive at solutions. The Committee appreciate 
Ministry for launching the initiative of I – Metro. However, it feels that  I – Metros can be 
made more robust and an effective platform. The Committee desire that I – Metros is 
revitalized and metros are encouraged to share ideas and experiences on this platform 
and all the metro networks are brought under its fold.” 
1.12 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 

6 
 
“Metro Rail Corporations are already utilizing I -Metro platform for exchange the ideas 
and knowledge. M/o Housing and Urban Affairs has further requested  Metro Rail 
Corporations to make optimum uti lization of I -metro platform for sharing knowledge, 
experiences, information, exchange ideas, best practices and innovation amongst each 
other in all aspects of urban rail transport and learn from one -another in order to 
improve implementation and operation of Metro Rail Projects.”   
 
1.13 Appreciating the Ministry for launching the initiative of I -Metro platform for 
sharing experiences and exchanging ideas between different metro networks, the 
Committee felt that it could be made more robust and an effective platform. The 
Committee further desired that I -Metros was revitalized and metros are 
encouraged to share ideas and experiences on this platform and all the metro 
networks are brought under its fold. T he Committee also observed that a few 
metros viz. Kolkata and Patna were not on this platform and desired the Ministry 
to bring all metro corporations on I-metros platform.  
 In its reply, the Ministry have not stated whether Kolkata and Patna metros 
have joined this platform. The Committee would , therefore, liked to be apprised 
about current status in this regard and steps taken to make this platform more 
robust. 
***** 
 
 

7 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GORERNMENT 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
NEED TO HAVE A SINGLE AND COMPREHENSIVE METRO ACT 
 
2.1  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee observe that  presently Metro Rail Projects are governed 
by  three  Central  Acts viz. (i) Metro Railways (Construction of Works) Act, 1978; (ii) the 
Calcutta Metro Railways (Operation and Maintenance) Temporary Provisions Act, 1985; 
and, (iii)  Metro Railways (Operation and Maintenance) Act, 2002  whose objective is to 
(i) provide for the cons truction of works relating to metro railways in the metropolitan 
cities and for matters connected therewith  (ii) make temporary provisions for the 
operation and maintenance of Calcutta metro railway and for matters connected there 
with pending the making of regular arrangements for such operations and maintenance 
and (iii) operation and maintenance and to regulate the working of the metro railway in 
the national capital region, metropolitan city and Metropolitan area, respectively.  
The Metro Railways (Ope ration and Maintenance) Act, 2002 (the Metro Act) 
states that it extends in the first instance to the National Capital Region and the Central 
Government may, by notification, after consultation with the State Government, extend 
this Act to such other metro politan area and metropolitan city, except the metropolitan 
city of Kolkata. 
 
MoHUA have apprised the Committee that each state has separate Tramway Act 
and some of them actually started metro works under those Acts. For instance, 
Hyderabad metro was originally started under AP Tramways Act. Later, to get uniformity 
for all the Metros, Hyderabad Metro was also brought under the Central Metro Act, i.e., 
the Metro Railways (Operation and Maintenance) Act, 2002. 
 
The Committee have further been informed that the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs (MoHUA) are in the process of drafting the Metro Rail (Construction, 
Operation, Maintenance and Administration) Bill, 2021 which upon enactment, will 
replace the three existing Metro Acts namely, the Metro Railways (Construction of 
Works) Act, 1978, the Metro Railways (Operation and Maintenance) Act, 2002 and the 
Calcutta Metro Railways (Operation and Maintenance) Temporary Provisions Act, 1985 . 
Further, the Metro Act does not support PPP projects.  
 As many metro projects are under planning, development and operating phases 
in different cities under different models – exclusive ownership of State Govts, JV with 
Central Govt, PPP basis, private ownership, etc. and many more cities are expected to 
take up the different kinds of metro projects- MRTS, LRTS  MetroLite, MetroNeo, etc, as 
part of addressing urban transport issues, the Committee feel that there is a 
requirement of a  comprehensive  legislation. The Committee while welcoming the 

8 
 
MoHUA’s initiative to enact a s ingle legislation in place of existing three Metro Acts, 
hope that such comprehensive legislation aid and enable the smooth setting up and 
functioning of metro rail networks at the earliest." 
 
2.2 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"The relevant provisions of draft Metro Rail (Construction, Operation, Maintenance and 
Administration) Bill has been finalized and circulated to State Government/UTs for 
comments." 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, OM No. G-20011/2/2020-UT-II Dated the 3rd 
August, 2022] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
Setting of Unified Metropolitan Transport Authority (UMTA) 
 
2.3  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
“The Committee note that the Metro Rail Policy, 2017 provide for an integrated 
approach in planning and management of urban transport wherein the State 
Governments are required to constitute Unified Metropolitan Transport Authority 
(UMTA) as a statutory body which would be respons ible for preparation of 
Comprehensive Mobility Plan for the city, organize investments in urban transport 
infrastructure, establish effective coordination among various urban transport agencies, 
manage the Urban Transport Fund (UTF), etc. The Committee fur ther note that for all 
metro rail projects taken up with central assistance it will be mandatory for the State 
Governments to give commitment to set up and operationalise UMTA in the city within a 
year and the cities where metro projects are already under implementation, UMTA 
should be constituted within a year.  
The Committee have been apprised that UMTA has been constituted in 
Bengaluru, Kochi, Pune, Chennai, Hyderabad, Lucknow, Kanpur and Agra cities. On the 
other hand, UMTA for Patna, Bhopal, Indore and  Nagpur metros are under process. 
However, it is disheartening to note that Delhi metro, which began its operations in 2002 
has not yet constituted UMTA. Gujarat (Surat, Indore metros), Mumbai, Jaipur and 
Gurugram (Rapid metro) have also not constituted UM TA so far. The Committee are 
dismayed to note that despite a lapse of more than 4 years, out of 12 states where 
Metro rail net work has either commenced or is under construction, six states are yet to 
constitute UMTA, viz.,  NCT of Delhi, Karnataka, Gujara t, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra (in r/o Mumbai only) and Rajasthan.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to take up and encourage 
setting up of UMTA in the states where its supported metro networks are, either 
operational or under construction, without any further delay.” 

9 
 
2.4 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"M/o Housing and Urban Affairs has requested respective State Governments to take 
necessary action for setting up of UMTA, as envisaged in the Metro Rail Policy,  2017 at 
the earliest." 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, OM No. G-20011/2/2020-UT-II Dated the 3rd 
August, 2022] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
Need for implementation of National Policy on Transit Oriented Development  
 
2.5  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
“The Committee are glad to note that Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, GoI 
has issued National TOD policy on 01.05.2017, which aims to promote planned and 
sustainable urban centres with  high density, mixed land -use development within an 
influence zone of 500 -800 meters of mass transit stations. This policy aims to enable 
transformation of cities from private vehicle dependent development to public transport -
oriented development. The Comm ittee note that Transit Oriented Development 
increases the accessibility of the transit stations by creating pedestrian and Non -
Motorised Transport (NMT) friendly infrastructure like footpaths and cycle tracks that 
benefit large number of people, thereby increasing the ridership of the transit facility and 
improving the economic and financial viability of the system. Many cities have 
strengthened their public transport by developing MRTS such as metro rails and BRTS. 
The Committee feel that National TOD pol icy will help these cities to formulate city 
specific policies to efficiently use these systems. Transit Oriented Development will not 
only increase ridership of metro projects, it will also reduce traffic congestion, pollution, 
travelling time of commuters and overall health benefits to city dwellers. 
 The Committee, however are disappointed to note that (i) states/ cities namely 
Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Bihar, Gujarat and Mumbai are yet to formulate TOD policy; (ii)   
Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, Telangana, West B engal, Rajasthan, Kerala, Maharashtra, 
Nagpur and Pune have only notified TOD and none has developed TOD so far; and, (iii) 
Actual Transit Oriented Development has not happened along any metro until now. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to exhort, persuade and prod the state 
governments to implement Transit Oriented Development  along metro stations in 
respective states. The Committee further recommend the Ministry to persuade every 
metro project to implement TOD along atleast one  metro stati on on pilot basis and 
thereafter build upon the gains.” 
2.6 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"M/o Housing and Urban Affairs has requested respective StateGovernments  for taking 
necessary action for implementation of Transit Orient Development (TOD), as 
envisaged in the Metro Rail Policy, 2017 at the earliest." 

10 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, OM No. G-20011/2/2020-UT-II Dated the 3rd 
August, 2022] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
Need for coverage of Kochi water metro under FAME II 
2.7  The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee are aware that Kochi metro is constructing Kochi water metro to 
connect islands around Kochi and increase ridership of Kochi metro, for which it is 
purchasing battery operated boats. Kochi Water Metro being an urban electric transport 
system, which perfectly align with the objectives of FAME scheme being operated by 
Ministry of Heavy Industries, and inland watercrafts are classified under vehicles for 
various requirements such as insurance, inclusion in FAME scheme which will expedite 
the adoption of electric mobility in the sector.  
The Committee feel that benefits of FAME II scheme subsidy can be extended to 
battery operated boats and charging infrastructure of Kochi Water Metro as it is an 
urban electric transport system, which perfectly ali gn with the objectives of FAME 
scheme.  The Committee are of the opinion that Extension of benefits of FAME II 
scheme to electric vehicles operating in water can act as a catalyst for adoption of e -
boats and thereby reduce dependence on polluting diesel vessels. The Committee have 
also been apprised that Kochi Metro Rail Ltd. had submitted the application for inclusion 
of Kochi Water Metro Transport in FAME -II Scheme to Department of Heavy Industries 
and Ministry of Heavy Industries & Public Enterprises and the same is not yet approved.  
The Committee, in view of the advantages of water metro in enlarging the   
catchment area for Kochi metro and also a pollution free mode of transport, strongly 
recommend the Ministry to take up inclusion of batteryoperated b oats and charging 
infrastructure of Kochi Water Metro under FAME II scheme with Ministry o f Heavy 
Industries immediately.” 
 
2.8 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"Kochi Metro has informed that as per the recommendation, reminder  letter has been 
sent to Ministry of Heavy Industries for including Kochi Metro under Fame II." 
 
 [Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs,OM No. G-20011/2/2020-UT-II Dated the 3rd 
August, 2022] 
 
 
 
 

11 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
Robust First and Last Mile Connectivity will increase Ridership of Metros 
2.9  The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that Metro Rail Policy, 2017 stipulates that every proposal 
for Metro Rail should necessarily include proposals for feeder systems that help to 
enlarge the catchment area of each metro station at least to 5 kms. The Committee has 
been apprised that Last mile connectivity through pedestrian pathways, Non -Motorized 
Transport (NMT) infrastructure, and induction of facilities for para transit modes wi ll be 
essential requirements for availing any central assistance for the proposed metro rail 
projects. State governments are required to commit provisioning of feeder systems for 
the metro rail proposed for availing central financing assistance. 
 The Committee, however, express concern that all metro networks do not 
have all these First and Last Mile Connectivity facilities. The Committee are 
disappointed to note that (i) Lucknow metro does not have infrastructure for Feeder Bus 
System; (ii) Patna and Ahmed abad Metro do not have facility of Non -motorised 
transport infrastructure while Surat metro have not provided information about it; (iii) 
Patna and Ahmedabad metros do not have facility for para transit modes; (iv) Kochi, 
Patna, Ahmedabad and Kolkata metro s do not have or planned public bike sharing 
stations while Pune and Surat metros have not provided a clear reply; and, (v) Lucknow, 
Ahmedabad and Kolkata metros do not have infrastructure for Feeder Buses while 
Pune metro has not provided specific reply on this aspect. 
    It is heartening to note that Nagpur and Jaipur phase 1A metros have parking 
space at all stations but the Committee is also disappointed to note that Patna metro 
has not made provision for parking space at any station (barring one stati on in corridor 
II). No specific reasons are provided for not providing this basic provision at metro 
stations in corridor I and II (except in one station) which may lead to many commuters 
not opting metro. 
The Committee are of the opinion that presence of First and Last Mile 
Connectivity is something that makes metro networks ‘Mass Transportation Systems’ in 
true sense and it should be made mandatory for all the metro stations. Further, the 
ridership is directly proportional to presence of First and Last Mi le connectivity. In the 
absence of First and Last Mile Connectivity, the projected ridership cannot be achieved. 
It is, therefore, recommended that the Ministry may make it mandatory for all the metro 
stations to make provision for First and Last Mile Conn ectivity – wherever possible for 
operational metros and necessary for upcoming ones. The Committee further 
recommend that for upcoming metro stations no approval should be given until the DPR 
has a provision for First and Last Mile Connectivity." 
 
2.10 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"M/o Housing and Urban Affairs has requested Metro Rail Corporations to take all 
necessary steps for implementation of First and Last Mile connectivity at Metro 
Stationsas envisaged in Metro Rail P olicy, 2017 and the provisions laid down in 
Sanction Orders issued by the Ministry, at the earliest.” 
 

12 
 
 [Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs,OM No. G-20011/2/2020-UT-II Dated the 3rd 
August, 2022] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
Formation of Fare Fixation Committee 
2.11  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
“The Committee note that Fare of Metro Rail Corporations is fixed as per 
Sections 33 to 37 of Metro Railways (Operation & Maintenance) Act, 2002. The initial 
fare is fixed by metro project itself, thereafter, the fares are fixed by a Fare Fixation 
Committee (FFC) comprising of a Chairperson who is has been a judge of a High Court 
and two other Members who are nominees of Central govt. & State govt. The 
recommendations of FFC are binding on metro railway administration. The Committee 
have been apprised that the Central Government takes necessary action for constitution 
of Fare Fixation Committee (FFC) after receipt of request from concerned State 
Govt/Metro Rail Companies. So far four FFCs have been constituted for Delhi metro 
(the last being in 2016) and two  for Mumbai metro line 1 (last in 2018) while FFC for 
Bangalore metro is under process. For all other metros, initial fare is applicable. In view 
of the foregoing, the Committee suggest/ recommend that: 
(i)  FFCs should be constituted at intervals as speci fied in the act or the 
regulations made thereunder; and,   
(ii)  all the relevant factors that goes into the cost of running metro may be taken 
into consideration in fixing fares while keeping in view the affordability factor also. 
Otherwise, the Committee  believe that many commuters may opt for other 
modes of transport defeating the very purpose of setting up of metro rail 
networks.” 
 
2.12 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“Section 33 of the Metro Railway (Operations and Maintenance) Act, 2002 states 
that “the Metro Railway Administration may fix the fare under this section without 
recommendations of the Fare Fixation Committee on the initial opening of the metro 
railway.” The Central Gove rnment takes necessary action for constitution of Fare 
Fixation Committee (FFC) on receipt of request from concerned State Govt/Metro Rail 
Companies." 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs,OM No. G-20011/2/2020-UT-II Dated the 3rd 
August, 2022] 
 
 
 
 

13 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
Payment of Fares through Single Card across Metro networks and other Mass 
Rapid Transit Systems throughout country 
2.13  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee appreciate that on 4 March 2019, Hon’ble Prime Minister, 
launched the indigenously developed and internationally accredited ‘One Nation One 
Card’ National Common Mobility Card (NCMC) and Automatatic Fare Collection (AFC) 
Gate- SWAGAT. The Committee are aware that NCMC has  been developed to enable 
seamless travel by metro rail and other transport systems across the country. The 
Committee has been apprised that it is an Open Loop Card, which means a customer 
may use the same card for travel across the country through differe nt modes and also 
use it for retail purchases. The Committee have also been informed that Department of 
Financial Services (DFS) have directed banks to issue all new Debit Cards compliant 
to NCMC standards which is expected to allow fast deployment of digital payments due 
to standardized implementation process and enable rapid digital penetration.  
 The Committee are glad to note that t he complete NCMC eco-system consisting 
of Automatic Fare Collection (AFC) system software, Validation Terminal, Metro Gate,  
Common Mobility Card and interfacing with banking system was developed 
indigenously under the aegis of MoHUA by C -DAC in collaboration with Bharat 
Electronics Ltd (BEL) and NPCI and tested for international standards by EMVco 
accreditation agency in France and that it can be used for transit throughout the country 
if transit operators have NCMC compliant system. The Committee have further been 
apprised that these NCMC cards can be accepted in all operational metros by providing 
NCMC compliant hardware and instructions have been issued to Metro Corporations to 
take steps for transition to full interoperability on existing metro lines and to ensure full 
interoperability of NCMC in metro lines that are yet to be made operational from the day 
of commencement of operations itself. 
The Committee are of the opinion that payment through single card will enable 
hassle free and seamless movement of people across different modes of public 
transportation in various cities and it can do wonders in attracting people towar ds mass 
transportation systems. Besides increasing ridership of metro networks, it will also 
reduce traffic congestion and air pollution. 
The Committee, however, are disappointed to note that despite its launch about 
two years ago, the NCMC compliant syste ms have not been installed by Kolkata, 
Jaipur, Lucknow, Kanpur, Chennai and Gujarat metros so far. Moving at this pace, 
operationalising NCMC fully across entire country’s metro and other mass transit 
networks seems a far -fetched dream. The Committee also apprehend that without 
involving Ministry of Roads, Transport and Highways and State Governments, the 
operationalisation of NCMC across all transit networks throughout country may not be 
possible. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Ho using and Urban 
Affairs may take up suitable steps in coordination with other stake holders for 
operationalisation of National Common Mobility Card across all transit networks 
throughout the country at the earliest and across all metro networks immediately.” 

14 
 
2.14 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"It is submitted that M/oHousing and Urban Affairs has already issued 
instructions to end exclusive arrangements and implement full interoperability in metro 
corporations. For upcoming m etros, instructions have been issued to ensure 
implementation of NCMC from commencement of operation itself. 
Further, M/oHousing and Urban Affairs has taken up the matter with M/oRoad Transport 
&Highway and M/o Railways to implement NCMC in SRTUs and Sub -Urban Railways 
respectively in phased and time bound manner.” 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs,OM No. G-20011/2/2020-UT-II Dated the 3rd 
August, 2022] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
Delhi Metro: Need to augur non-fare-box revenue 
2.15  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
“The Committee note that Delhi Metro Rail Project is presently operating around 
390 kms of metro network having 285 stations with Actual Average Daily Ridership 
(AADR) of 26.14, 28.00, 25.86 , 25.93 and 50.65 lakhs in 2015 -16, 2016-17, 2017-18, 
2018-19 and 2019 -20, respectively, against Average Daily Ridership required for 
Breakeven of 16.07, 18.59, 16.26, 17.03 and 38.24 lakhs, respectively, in the same 
years. Thus, Delhi metro have been gett ing more no. of Actual Average Daily 
Passengers than is required for achieving Breakeven. The Committee further note that 
Actual Average Daily earnings of Delhi Metro for the years 2010 -11, 2011-12, 2012-13, 
2013-14, 2014 -15, 2015 -16, 2016 -17, 2017 -18, 201 8-19 and 2019 -20 have been Rs. 
2.57, 3.50, 4.17, 4.51, 4.99, 5.57, 5.97, 8.29, 9.82 and 10.95 crore against Average 
daily earnings Required for Breakeven of Rs. 1.39, 1.71, 2.35, 2.71, 3.35, 3.86, 4.39, 
5.72, 7.00 and 8.58 Crores for the same years respect ively. The Committee also note 
that Delhi metro has been repaying its loans taken from JICA, timely from its operational 
revenues.The Committee note that though, DMRC is making profits at operating level, It 
is yet to make net profits. The Committee while appreciating the operational 
performance of DMRC which has improved considerably, t hey are concerned to note 
that DMRC is continuously incurring net losses despite (i) average daily earnings being 
higher than the average daily earnings required for breakev en, (ii) increase in average 
daily ridership in all the phases operational since 2011 -12 to 2019 -20, (iii) continuous 
increase in Fare Box collections since 2002 -03 (iv) timely repayment of loans to JICA.  
The Company claimed that it has been making losses  because of high Depreciation & 
Amortisation expenses which consumes major chunk of income, interest and principal 
repayments on loans.  
The Committee while agreeing with the view that performance of the metro 
projects may not be assessed purely on economic considerations given the benefits that 
such infrastructure projects brings to the Society as a whole such as reducing traffic 
congestion, pollution, providing reliable, comfortable, convenient and affordable 

15 
 
transport solutions to the millions in cities.  Therefore, the Committee are of the opinion 
that there is a need to enhance non fare box revenues viz. commercial development of 
land and advertising revenues, etc. in the long run to make itself sustaining and 
profitable and accordingly recommend that al l possible avenues of Non -Fare-Box 
revenue generation should be explored to increase profitability of Delhi metro.” 
 
2.16 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“DMRC has informed following for Non Fare Box Revenue  throughProperty 
Development/ Property Business:  
 Non-fare-box revenue hasbeen included while carrying out the financial analysis 
of the projects as mandated by the Metro Rail Policy, 2017 issued by 
M/oHousing and Urban Affairs. 
 Efforts are continuously being made to aug ment the non -fare box revenue 
through Property Development. Higher non -fare box revenue generation during 
Phase-I was made, which can be attributed to long term (perpetual) leasing of 
land plots for residential and commercial development. 
a) DMRC is making al l out efforts to increase its non -fare box revenues through 
advertising and leasing of bare spaces and built -up shops available at its stations.   
Following activities are being carried out/planned to increase the non -fare box 
revenue in coming years:- 
 
i. Licensing of advertisement rights inside stations and outside civil structures on 
entire DMRC network. 
ii. Awarding co-branding/semi naming rights of metro stations.  
iii. Licensing of advertisement rights inside and outside metro trains. 
iv. Licensing of built -up/bare spaces available at metro stations for shops, offices, 
kiosks, ATMs etc. 
v. Licensing of spaces for installation of telecom towers and In -Building Solutions at 
stations and tunnel area. 
vi. Licensing of spaces for installation of Automatic Vending Machines (AVMs). 
vii. Exploring possibility for installing Dual Display Information System (DDIS) and 
Digital Advertisement Panels inside tunnel sections. 
b) DMRC is approaching/encouraging various Govt. Organizations and PSUs to take 
up co -branding/semi-naming rights of statio ns through simplified formalities like 
single tender and negotiation basis.  So far, six metro stations have been allotted for 
co-branding to various Govt. Organizations and PSUs.   Few undertakings of State 
Govts. like M/s Madhya Pradesh Laghu Udyog Nigam  Ltd, M/s Punjab Agro Juices 
Ltd, M/s Horticulture Produce Marketing & Processing Corporation Ltd  and M/s 
Mother Dairy (a subsidiary of National Dairy Development Board) have already 
shown interest in taking up spaces at metro stations for installing thei r kiosks/retails 
shops and the allotment process are in final stages. 

16 
 
Non-fare box revenue through feeder services 
In this regard, DMRC is striving to enhance the presence of last mile connectivity 
services from as many Metro Stations as practically possib le. By doing so, DMRC 
intends to enhance the metro ridership which directly increases the fare box revenues. 
In addition, other modes of revenue generations such as advertisements in buses, 
revenue sharing with LMC service providers are being explored to increase the non-fare 
box revenue." 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs,OM No. G-20011/2/2020-UT-II Dated the 3rd 
August, 2022] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
Lucknow Metro- Timely completion of project 
 
2.17  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
“The Committee desire to bring on record their appreciation for the UPMRC for 
completion of Lucknow  Metro Rail Project 36 days before the deadline, a rare feat in 
completion of the  projects in urban transport infrastructure sector and thereby, avoiding 
any cost overrun. This is particularly praiseworthy when most of the metro projects are 
delayed and h ave extended deadlines. The Committee, thus, suggest that MoHUA 
should project Lucknow Project as a ‘role model’ for all under construction projects and 
the learnings from this project may be shared with other metro corporations which are 
executing the projects.” 
2.18 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"The suggestion of the Committee has been suitably communicated to all Metros." 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs,OM No. G-20011/2/2020-UT-II Dated the 3rd 
August, 2022] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
Viability Gap Funding issue in Hyderabad Metro 
2.19  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
“The Committee have been apprised that Hyderabad Metro is the world’s largest 
Metro Rail project in Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode and around 90% of the 
project cost has been financed by the private sector - first time for a Metro project of this 
magnitude in the world. This project was undertaken by the Government of Telangana 
under the Public Private Partnership (PPP) model of funding through Viability Gap 

17 
 
Funding (VGF) scheme of Government of India. The actual project cost was Rs.18,411 
crore (Rs.1,204 crore VGF released by GoI and Rs. 17,207 crore by L&TMRHL). The 
Committee note that fare and non -fare box revenue collection of Hyderabad Metro Rail 
Corporation was rising since inception until FY 2020 -21 when it plummeted due to 
Covid pandemic. The Committee further note that the actual average daily ridership has 
remained very low, for instance, Rs.2.76 lakhs in 2019 -20 vis -à-vis ‘average daily 
ridership required for breakeven’ which stands at 19 lakhs.  
The Committee also note that Hyderabad metro h as suffered a loss of  Rs. 1,767 
crore in FY 2020 -21 and a cumulative loss of Rs. 3,279 crore so far. Huge debt of Rs. 
13,252 crore and a high interest burden of 9.1% (as against -2% for Government 
projects) are mainly contributing to the losses. The inter est burden is coming to about 
Rs.1,200 crore per annum.  
The Committee has also been apprised that out of the total VGF sanctioned 
grant of Rs.1,458 crore, only Rs.1204 crore has been released to Hyderabad metro and 
Rs 254 crore VGF has been withheld by De pt. of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance. 
In this context, the Committee has been apprised by DEA, MoF that balance amount 
has not been released owing to violation of the VGF Guidelines by Hyderabad metro, 
i.e., revision of fares. However, the Committee has been apprised that Hyderabad metro 
initially began under the AP Tramways Act and later on, it came under the Central Metro 
Act which permitted revision of fares. Accordingly, Hyderabad metro revised its fares. 
Hyderabad metro has submitted a request to DEA, MoF for release of balance Rs. 254 
crore which is under consideration. Looking to the huge loss that Hyderabad metro is 
incurring, the Committee desire that VGF issue is resolved at the earliest by DEA, MoF.” 
2.20 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure has informed that the matter is under 
consideration and will be disposed of expeditiously." 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs,OM No. G-20011/2/2020-UT-II Dated the 3rd 
August, 2022] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
Maximization of Non-Fare Box Revenues 
2.21  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee are aware that Non-Fare Box Revenues are generated from 
sources such as advertisements, property development, naming rights, co -naming 
rights, feeder buses, consultancy works, external projects, etc. The Committee have 
been apprised that the percentage of total revenues generated by Delhi Metro Phase I, 
II and III from Fare Box ranged from 24.16% in 2005 -06 to 56.95% in 2019 -20, Kochi 
metro generated 78.14% of its revenues from fares in 2017 -18 which reduced to 
60.38% in 2019 -20, Gujarat metro generated 97 to 100 percent of its revenues from 

18 
 
Fare Box in last three years though only 6.5 km stretch is operational so far, Chennai 
metro raised 74.4 to 81.6% from fares, revenues from fares component for Hyderabad 
metro rose from 41% in 2017 -18 to 62% in 2019 -20 while Lucknow me tro generated 
about 73% from fares barring the COVID year and Mumbai Metro Line 1 generated 86 -
89% of its revenues since 2014 -15 (barring COVID year), which is quite high. The 
Committee have further been informed that under Non-Fare Box, Delhi metro generated 
revenues from property development, advertisements, naming rights, property business, 
feeder buses, consultancy works and external projects. The Committee note with 
dismay that percentage of revenues generated from fare collection is quite high for most 
of the metros and there is a need to increase revenues from Non-Fare Box. 
The Committee are of the opinion that maximization of revenue from Fare Box 
collections may negatively impact ridership and it may prevent metro projects from 
becoming a true mass transportation system and thus defeat the entire objective of 
developing metro projects. Therefore, the Committee recommend the Ministry to 
persuade and impress upon metro projects to explore all possible avenues of 
maximization of revenues from Non -Fare B ox. The Committee also desire that 
information about various sources Non -Fare Box revenue generation is also made 
available on I-metros platform of the Ministry so that there is cross board learning. They 
also would like to be apprised of the experience of  raising Non Fare Box revenues by 
the major metros of the world including the share of such revenues in the total revenues 
of these metros.”  
2.22 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"M/o Housing and Urban Affairs has requested  Metro Rail Corporations to take 
necessary action for all possible avenues of maximization of revenue from Non -Fare-
Box alongwith sharing the information about various sources of Non -Fare Box revenue 
generation on I-Metros platform.  
 As regards raising of Non Fare Box revenue by the major metros of the world, no 
such data is available with the Ministry." 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs,OM No. G-20011/2/2020-UT-II Dated the 3rd 
August, 2022] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16) 
Green Energy initiatives by metro projects  
2.23  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee note  that several Metro networks viz. Nagpur, Chennai, 
Hyderabad, Delhi, Lucknow, Ahmedabad, Surat, Kolkata, Pune, Bhopal and Indore are 
adopting energy conservation measures and development of green sources of power 
such as solar energy. It is heartening to note that Nagpur metro has planned to meet 
65% of its total operational energy requirements through solar powe r, while Kochi and 
Pune metros have planned to meet 60% of their total operational energy requirements 
through solar power. The Committee are, disappointed to observe that Patna, 

19 
 
Bengaluru, Kanpur and Agra metros have not provided information about solar p ower 
generation in their networks. Similarly, Mumbai Metro has not provided specific reply 
w.r.t. Line 1 to 12. It has merely stated that approximately 2.3 MW of renewable power 
is installed or proposed to be installed in different office buildings/depots of Metro Line 
3 which appears too less for size and magnitude of 12 lines of Mumbai metro. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should encourage 
mandatory sourcing of power from renewables especially solar, by the metro rail 
networks to t he maximum extent that the technology permits. The Committee also 
suggest that green energy measures viz. solar power be compulsorily be made part of 
DPR of metro projects and the Ministry before approving any metro may examine 
whether it has green energy provisions or not. The Committee also desire to be 
apprised of the steps taken in this regard.” 
 
2.24 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"M/oHousing and Urban Affairs has requested Metros to take all possible steps 
formaximum uti lization of renewable energy sources, as envisaged in National Urban 
Transport Policy, 2006. The replies received from metros in this regard are as under:- 
Sl. 
No. 
Metro Company Observation / reply 
1. Bangalore Metro Rail 
Corporation Limited 
Presently, the power requirements are met through the 
State Government owned Bangalore Electricity Supply 
Company. The distribution company is also purchasing 
power from non -conventional energy sources including 
solar. As part of green initiates, Solar Roo f Top Photo 
Voltaic System of 1.5 MWp have been installed at 5 
Stations of newly commissioned Reach -4 extension 
section under CAPEX Model, a saving of Rs 1 Crore per 
annum approximately is expected with the current 
energy tariff.  
2. Chennai Metro Rail 
Corporation Limited 
1. Renewable Energy- Solar Power 
 
CMRL has so far commissioned 6.4 MWp Solar Power at 
its Koyambedu Depot roof top and Ground level, Elevated 
Metro Stations Roofs, Under Ground Metro Stations, 
Ancillary Buildings etc. with average per day generation of 
23,000 KWH.  So far 287 lakhs KWH have been 
generated and 24,421,830 Tonnes of CO2 emission 
avoided. 
 
2. Energy Conservation and Technology absorption  
a) Regenerative Braking in train 
 b) Energy efficient equipment and methods 
c) Provision of PSD 
d) Buildings are designed for green buildings ratings. 
 

20 
 
Proposed work for green energy initiatives in future  
It is proposed to install solar panels and roof top system in 
the upcoming Phase 2 project of CMRL like what has 
been done in Phase1 project.  
Energy efficient equipment specification are being 
incorporated in the tendering stage itself to achieve 
energy efficiency.  
CMRL Phase 2 Trains will be with regenerative braking 
and with the minimum bench mark energy efficiency of 48 
kwh per 1000 GTKM. 
3. Delhi Metro Rail 
Corporation 
It is mentioned that DMRC is meeting 65% of its day time 
energy requirements from renewable sources energy 
since Dec. 2019 and efforts to harness solar energy from 
roof-top solar plants were initiated in August 2014, itself. 
All future elevated stations and depots are planned with 
roof-top solar plants. 
 
Regarding the recommendation of the Committee to make 
sourcing of power from renewables, especially solar, 
mandatory may not be the right step, because electrical 
energy consti tutes nearly 30% of the operating cost of a 
metro system and there are number of regulatory issues 
faced by the metro organization(s), while sourcing 
renewable power through Open Access, as Electricity is a 
concurrent list subject and each State Electricity Regulator 
issues guidelines / orders from time to time, which 
adversely affect the financial viability of such Power 
Purchase Agreements. 
4. Kochi Metro Rail 
Corporation 
Green energy Initiatives taken by KMRL are as follows 
1. Solar Power generation (54% energy neutrality 
achieved) 
2. Rain Water Harvesting 
3. Biodegradable waste management  
4. Tree plantation & auditing 
5. Vertical gardens & Median Beautification  
6. Organic vegetable farming 
5. Mumbai Metro Rail 
Corporation Limited 
Following initiatives are being planned/taken in MMRC 
towards Green Energy initiatives by metro projects 
i.e., Solar Energy: 
i) Planning to purchase 50 MVA solar power 
(Approx. 35% of total power requirement of MML-
3) through open access. 
ii) Each RSS & All Covered sheds/OCC shall have 
Roof Top Solar PV plant with Grid Interactive Net 
metering. 
Further, in pursuit of its green commitments, MMRC has 
installedRooftop Mounted 17.6 kWp Solar PV plantat 

21 
 
MMRC Transit Office Building. 
6. Pune Metro Rail 
Corporation Limited 
Pune Metro is implementing e nergy conservation 
measures and adopting the green sources like solar 
energy.  
All Pune Metro Stations and Depots, integration of 
Rooftop Solar Power installation work is under progress 
and Pune Metro is committed to install a total of 11 MWp 
solar plants. 
7. Jaipur Metro Rail 
Corporation 
JMRC has installed 100 KW Power capacity Solar Panels 
on the roof top of JMRC Depot under JMRC Phase -1A 
Project. 
8. Hyderabad Metro 
Rail Corporation 
Limited 
Hyderabad Metro has installed a captive solar capacity of 
8.35 MWp at its depots and on station roof tops. This 
caters to about 15% of the energy requirements of 
Hyderabad Metro. 
9. UP Metro Rail 
Corporation 
At Lucknow Metro a total of 1.032 MW power is being 
generated through Roof top solar power plants at present. 
10. Gujarat Metro Rail 
Corporation 
For Ahmedabad Metro Rail Project Phase-1 
GMRC had appointed GERMI (Gujarat Energy Research 
and Management Institute) as third party engineering 
consultant, to study the solar energy harnessing capacity 
in both depot buil dings, From the identified capacity 200 
kW capacity of grid connected rooftop solar power plant 
installed at Apparel park depot (RCC buildings) on 23.02 
2019 under CAPEX model (User owns the plant). 
 
Moreover, 406 kW of identified solar power plant capacit y 
(on RCC buildings) at both depots is planned for 
installation in this year. Also, GMRC has requested the 
Govt. of Gujarat to allot 100 acres of land to develop 
ground mounted solar PV plant of approx. 25 MW capacity 
at suitable location nearby Ahmedabad,  the matter is 
being pursued with the State Government. 
11. Nagpur Metro Rail 
Corporation 
Nagpur Metro has decided to install 10,000 kWp Solar PV 
systems at station rooftops, depot buildings, boundary 
walls, spare land etc.   
 
4500 KWp Solar PV systems ha ve already been installed 
and a tender for 6000 KWp is being floated. 
 
Due to restrictions in Net -metering regulations of the state 
(max. 1 MW per consumer Number) Nagpur Metro has 
been constrained for installation of total exploitable 
potential of 14 MWp. 
 
This integrated roof top, grid connected solar power 
system over the Metro stations of Nagpur  Metro Rail 

22 
 
Project will meet upto 50% of energy requirement 
including traction, Metro station facilities, property 
development and EV charging also. 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs,OM No. G-20011/2/2020-UT-II Dated the 3rd 
August, 2022] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17) 
Development of Solar Power on RESCO model by metro projects 
2.25  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
“The Committee note that RESCO model of Solar Power development is a zero -
investment model in which the consumer pays only for the electricity generated, while 
the solar plant is owned by th e RESCO developer. One can enjoy the electricity that is 
generated without worrying about any of the associated operations and maintenance 
issues. In return, all one need to do is pay a pre -decided monthly tariff which is lower 
than prevailing grid electri city tariff. The Committee have also been apprised about 
Nagpur metro being the  Greenest Metro by integration of Rooftop Solar Energy right 
from inception stage to meet 65% of energy requirements under RESCO PPP Model. 
Kochi metro has also adopted this model. 
The Committee feel that adoption of this model will ensure generation of 
green energy by Metro networks without extra financial burden on metros for capacity 
creation. This can augment country’s efforts in meeting climate change targets. The 
Committee, therefore desire that MoHUA may consider encouraging states to adopt 
RESCO model for Solar Power generation on metro rooftops, depots and other possible 
areas.”  
2.26 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
It is mentioned that mo st of the Metros have either adopted RESCO model or taking 
necessary steps for adopting the same for Solar Power generation on metro rooftops, 
depots and other possible areas. The replies received from Metros in this regard are 
under:- 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Metro Company Observation / reply 
1. Bangalore Metro Rail 
Corporation Limited 
Further to the existing installed capacity of 1.5 MWp  Roof 
Top Solar System, tenders have been invited under 
RESCO model for 40 stations of Phase -2 Project and 2 
depots of Phase -1 Project which shall be operational in 
the next two years. 
Expected Solar power generation capacity shall be around 
20MWp and savi ng of Rs.14.81 Crore per annum 
approximately is expected due to this initiative with 
respect to current energy tariff. 

23 
 
2. Chennai Metro Rail 
Corporation Limited 
CMRL has installed the solar power plant of 6.386 Mwp in 
various locations of Elevated, Underg round stations and 
Depot of Phase 1 & Phase 1 Extension corridors  from   
2016 to 2022 under RESCO model. So far, solar 
generation is 287 lakh KWH (from April 2016 to June 
2022) and the average generation of solar power is 
23,000 KWH per day and the CO2 em ission avoided of 
approx. 24,421 tons. Also, CMRL planned to install   solar 
power plant in Phase 2 corridors. 
3. Delhi Metro Rail 
Corporation 
DMRC has already adopted RESCO Model ( No Capital 
cost and No investment on maintenance of plant ) for its 
roof-top solar plant as well as for sourcing solar power 
from Rewa Ultra Mega Solar project, to meet 65% of its 
day time energy requirements from renewables, since 
December 2019. 
As on 30.06.2022, DMRC has commissioned 37 MWp of 
roof-top solar pl ants on its stations and depot, and plans 
to achieve 40 MWp by December 2022 on its own 
premises, and 50 MWp in totality by Dec. 2022  (after 
including 10 MWp installed on Noida -Greater Noida line 
constructed by DMRC for Noida Metro Rail Corpn.). 
4. Kochi Metro Rail 
Corporation KMRL has installed and commissioned solar power 
project for an installed capacity of 9.9MWp on the roofs of 
Metro station buildings and Depot buildings &amp; other 
areas through RESCO (Renewable Energy Service 
Company) model. Presently with the above capacity of the 
plant, KMRL is able to achieve 54% energy neutrality.  
An additional solar power project with a capacity of 
655KWp is under execution. Once the project is 
completed, KMRL is likely to enhance its energy neutrality 
to 58%. 
5. Jaipur Metro Rail 
Corporation 
JMRC is planning to install Solar Plant at Rooftop at all the 
stations & Depot and similar locations to encouragement 
of solar energy. 
6. Pune Metro Rail 
Corporation Limited 
Pune Metro has adopted RESCO PPP model for 
integration of Rooftop Sola r power model.  At present, 
Pune Metro has awarded 5.00 MWp Solar Plant 
Installation on Station roofs and Depots under RESCO 
Model out of which 0.5 MWp is commissioned and 
balance work is in progress. Further the process for 
selection of a developer for in stallation of 4 MWp will be 
initiated soon under RESCO Model. Moreover, PMRP 
targeted to complete 11 MWp solar plants on its premises 
by 2024-25. 
7. Hyderabad Metro Hyderabad Metro has installed a captive solar capacity of 

24 
 
Rail Corporation 
Limited 
8.35 MWp, which is on RESCO model at a tariff equivalent 
to the grid tariff. Since Hyderabad Metro is operated by a 
private party, i.e. the Concessionaire L&TMRHL, it is not 
extended the subsidy being provided by the Solar Energy 
Corporation of India (SECI) under prevailing rules. 
8. UP Metro Rail 
Corporation Limited 
At Lucknow Metro a total of 1.032 MW power is being 
generated through Roof top solar power plants at present 
in RESCO model. 
9. Gujarat Metro Rail 
Corporation 
 RESCO model is not allowed in Gujarat State. 
 GMRC has installed 200 KW Grid connected 
Rooftop solar power plant at Apparel park depot in 
CAPEX model. 
 Further, 406 kW capacity of Grid connected solar 
power plant is identified and planned for 
installation. 
10. Nagpur Metro Rail 
Corporation 
All, the Solar PV plants at Nagpur Metro Rail Project are 
being installed in RESCO (PPP) mode, wherein a Power 
Purchase Agreement (PPA) is signed with a solar PV 
developer for 25 years and MahaMetro can procure the 
energy, thus generated, at a predetermined ta riff, which is 
much cheaper than the tariff offered by the local Discom. 
 
 [Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs,OM No. G-20011/2/2020-UT-II Dated the 3rd 
August, 2022] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19) 
Regenerative Braking System 
 
2.27  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
“The Committee are aware that Regenerative Braking System  (RBS) is 
an energy recovery  mechanism that slows down a moving vehicle or object by 
converting its kinetic energy into a form that can be either used immediately or stored 
until needed. In this mechanism, the electric  traction motor  uses the vehicle's 
momentum to recover energy that would otherwise be lost to the brake discs as heat. 
The Committee have been informed that adoption of Regenerative braking systems  by 
metro projects are resulting in power saving and reutilization. For in stance, 
Regenerative Braking system adopted by L&T Metro Hyderabad is stated to be resulting 
in 35% power regeneration and reutilization. The Committee have also been apprised 
thatall the metro rail projects are following the regenerative braking and setti ng up solar 
panels which are leading to considerable reduction in power consumption and savings 
in expenditure on power. The Committee are happy to note that various operational and 
under construction metro rail projects have adopted the regenerative braki ng system in 
rolling stocks viz. Delhi Metro, Nagpur Metro, Pune Metro, Metro Railway Kolkata, 
Jaipur Metro, Patna Metro, Lucknow Metro, Kanpur Metro, Chennai Metro, Ahmedabad 

25 
 
Metro, Surat Metro, Kochi Metro, Mumbai Metro Line -1, Mumbai Metro Line -3, Bhopal 
Metro, Indore Metro, NCRTC, etc.  
 The Committee appreciate the Ministry for promoting Regenerative Braking 
System which ensures energy saving thereby making the metro projects more energy 
efficient. The Committee also desire the Ministry to ensure that Regenerative Braking 
Systems are adopted in all upcoming metro projects including MetroLite projects.” 
 
2.28 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“Various operational and under construction metro rail projects have adopted the 
regenerative braking system in rolling stocks.  The recommendation of the Committee is 
noted.” 
 [Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs,OM No. G-20011/2/2020-UT-II Dated the 3rd 
August, 2022] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20) 
Need for a platform for sharing ideas and experience 
 
2.29  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
“The Committee have been apprised that there is a centralized institutional 
mechanism / system named ‘Indian Metro Rail Organizations Society’ (I Metro), 
headquartered at New Delhi in place to provide a common platform for all Metro Rail 
Companies, Regional Rapid Transit System (RRTS) /Mono Rai l Organization, etc. in 
India in terms of sharing knowledge, experience, information, best practices, 
innovations in all aspects of urban rail transport and learn from one another in order to 
improve performance of members. The Committee were further infor med that at present 
I Metro governing body consists of 15 members of various Metro Rail Organizations and 
under the Presidentship of Secretary (MoHUA). The forum also helps in coordination of 
the members with Government and other stake holders. However, th e Committee note 
that Kolkata, the oldest metro and Patna metro are not the members of I metro so far. 
The Committee are of the opinion that such robust centralized institutional 
mechanism/ system to share the experiences and to exchange ideas in implement ation 
and operations of the Metro rail projects in India can help metros learn from experiences 
of each other, discuss the problems and arrive at solutions. The Committee appreciate 
Ministry for launching the initiative of I – Metro. However, it feels that  I – Metros can be 
made more robust and an effective platform. The Committee desire that I – Metros is 
revitalized and metros are encouraged to share ideas and experiences on this platform 
and all the metro networks are brought under its fold.” 
2.30 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“Metro Rail Corporations are already utilizing I -Metro platform for exchange the ideas 
and knowledge.  M/o Housing and Urban Affairs has further  requested Metro Rail 
Corporations to make optimum utilization of I -metro platform for sharing knowledge, 
experiences, information, exchange ideas, best practices  and innovation amongst each 

26 
 
other in all aspects of urban rail transport and learn from one -another in order to 
improve implementation and operation of Metro Rail Projects.”   
 [Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs,OM No. G-20011/2/2020-UT-II Dated the 3rd 
August, 2022] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.13 of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21) 
Requirement of a Central Database for Metro Projects 
 
2.31  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
“The Committee note that the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs provide 
substantial funds for funding Metro projects every year which accounted for about 43.1 
per cent of the Budget Estimates in 2021 -22 and 31.2 per cent for 2022 -23. However, 
the Committee are dismayed to note that the Ministry does not have a Central database 
of various metro projects funded by it. The Committee feel that a Centralized database 
containing data on various facets of functioning of the Metrorail networks is imperative 
from the policy making perspective viz. data about funds released vis-a-vis utilized, 
physical progress, ridership, First and Last Mile Connectivity, Fare and Non -Fare Box 
revenue, Green Energy initiatives, etc. The Committee areglad that the Ministry have 
also agreed to the need of maintaining a centralized database for various metro 
projects. The Committee, therefore, desire that a robust central database on various 
facets of metro projects must be created and maintained at the earliest.  The database 
may be ma de in such a way that as and when any updates in the metro rail networks 
take place, the same should get reflected in the central base.” 
2.32 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“A centralized database IT platform is under development for various Urban Transport 
projects including metro projects funded by Government of India.”   
 [Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs,OM No. G-20011/2/2020-UT-II Dated the 3rd 
August, 2022] 
*** 

27 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
LAYING OF ANNUAL REPORTS BEFORE THE PARLIAMENT 
 
3.1  The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that Section 13 of the  Metro Railways (Operation and 
Maintenance) Act, 2002 stipulates that the Central Government shall cause the annual 
report of the Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety to be laid after its receipt before 
each House of the Parliament. The Committee note that barring Kolkata metro, 
Hyderabad metro and Jaipur metro, the annual reports of various operational and under 
construction metro projects are being laid before each house of the Parliament or are 
under preparation for laying. The Committee desire that as per present practice the 
annual report of all the operational and under construction metros, funded by the central 
government, must be laid in both the Houses of Parliament in a timely manner without 
fail." 
3.2 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
" The replies received from Hyderabad Metro, Jaipur Metro and Ministry of Railways (for 
Kolkata Metro) for laying of Annual Reports in both the Houses of Parliament are as 
under:- 
Sl. 
No. 
Metro Company Reply 
1 Hyderabad Metro Rail 
Corporation 
Since Hyderabad Metro Rail Project is a State 
Government Project, its annual reports are being placed 
in both the Houses of State Legislature 
2. Jaipur Metro Rail 
Corporation 
Jaipur Metro Rail Corporation is funded by State 
Government. 
3 Ministry of Railway 
(Kolkata Metro) 
Kolkata Metro is not a company  but a Government 
Railway hence laying of annual report which is 
requirement of The Company Act 2013 is not applicable. 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, OM No. G-20011/2/2020-UT-II Dated the 3rd 
August, 2022] 
 
 

28 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
Need for setting up of Water Metro Networks in Cities with Waterways 
Connectivity 
3.3  The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee note that Kochi Water Metro is a unique project envisaged for 
developing modern water transport infrastructure, connecting 10 island villages by 
constructing 38 Jetties, in the Greater Kochi region. The water metro network covering a 
route length of 76 km having 38 terminals with 78 Nos. of battery -operated boats 
provide inter -modal connectivity between Jetties, Bus terminals and Metro networks. 
The Committee observe that apart from connecting island villages around Kochi, it is 
also expected to increase ridership of  metro and have environmental benefits. The 
Committee are of the view that such water metro like that of Kochi has potential to 
connect coastal zones and areas having inland water bodies with mass transportation 
systems, thereby boosting economic activity as well ensuring social welfare. The 
Committee, therefore, suggest MoHUA to explore possibility and encourage building 
such water metros in areas having water networks viz. Rivers, Canals, etc. and impress 
upon states which have such water bodies to build them.” 
 
3.4 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
" Urban Transport, which is an integral part of urban development, is a State subject. 
Hence, respective State Governments are responsible for initiating, developing and 
funding urban transport infrastructure including Water Metro Projects." 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs,OM No. G-20011/2/2020-UT-II Dated the 3rd 
August, 2022] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
Low Actual Average Daily Ridership vis. a. vis. Actual Average Daily Ridership 
required for Breakeven: Need for increase of Ridership 
3.5  The Committee had recommended as under: 
"It is disheartening for the Committee to observe that barring Delhi and Mumbai 
Line 1, most of the operational metros viz. Bengaluru metro, Hyderabad metro, 
Lucknow metro, Chennai metro, Kolkata metro and Kochi met ro has low ridership. 
Bengaluru Metro had  Actual Average Daily Ridership (AADR) of 1.48, 3.40, 4.52, 4.89 
and 0.96 lakhs only in 2016 -17, 2017-18, 2018-19, 2019-20 and 2020 -21, respectively, 
against Average Daily Ridership required for Breakeven of 7.65, 10.09, 12.32, 13.19 
and 18.54 lakhs, respectively, in the same years. Thus, Bengaluru metro has been 

29 
 
constantly witnessing low ridership than it is required for Breakeven. Similarly, 
Hyderabad Metro has very low Actual Average Daily Ridership (AADR) i.e. 0 .67, 1.26, 
2.76, and 0.65 lakhs only in 2017 -18, 2018 -19, 2019 -20 and 2020 -21, respectively, 
against Average Daily Ridership required for Breakeven of 19.00 lakhs for all these 
years. Lucknow Metro also had Actual Average Daily Ridership (AADR) of 0.537 an d 
0.258 lakhs only in 2019-20 and 2020-21, respectively, against Average Daily Ridership 
required for Breakeven of 0.943 lakhs for all these years. Thus, Lucknow metro also 
does not have sufficient ridership for breakeven. The Committee further note that 
Kolkata Metro had Actual Average Daily Ridership (AADR) of 5.40 to 5.84 lakhs only in 
Pre Covid times against 15 lakhs required for Breakeven. Thus, actual ridership is 
merely one-third (approx) of the ridership required for breakeven. Kochi Metro too had 
Actual Average Daily Ridership (AADR) of 0.35, 0.35, 0.51 and 0.19 lakhs only in 2017 -
18, 2018 -19, 2019 -20 and 2020 -21, respectively, against Average Daily Ridership 
required for Breakeven of 0.59, 0.40, 0.64, and 1 lakh, respectively, in the same years. 
Jaipur metro also had dismally low Average Daily Ridership than it is required for 
breakeven. And Chennai Metro had Actual Average Daily Ridership (AADR) of 10,923, 
23,301, 50,312, 92,000 and 45,393 only in 2017 -18, 2018 -19, 2019 -20 and 2020 -21, 
respectively against Average Daily Ridership required for Breakeven of 92209, 108694, 
204903, 253989 and 433644 for all these years. 
The dismal performance of the majority of the metro rail networks in terms of 
carrying passengers enough to breakeven even after six to  seven years of continuous 
operations shows that (i) faulty DPRs, (ii) lack of proper planning to provide first and last 
mile connectivity, (iii) provision of parking  at metro rail stations , (iv) need for increasing 
catchment area, etc. The  Committee ar e of the view that if metro rail projects are to be 
made as mass transportation medium in true sense and operate them on sustainable 
basis the commuters are to be weaned away from using private vehicles, a compelling 
proposition should be made available to them in terms of comfort,  convenience, quality, 
affordability and reliability, etc. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to: 
i. deliberate upon the reasons for low ridership vis -à-vis the projected ridership for 
all the above-mentioned metros; 
ii. take concrete steps to increase ridership of all metro projects and update the 
Committee of the steps taken in this regard to increase ridership; and 
iii. to ensure that ridership estimation which forms the basis for selection of type of 
metro (conventional or m etrolite or metroneo) must be accurate and be realistic 
to the extent possible.” 
3.6 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“Metro Rail Corporations are taking various measures to increase ridership as 
mentioned below in the replies furnished by them. COVID -19 has also badly affected 
the operations of Metro system in the past two years. However, Ministry has requested 
Metro Rail Corporations to make all possible efforts to increase ridership. 
 
REPLY OF METRO COMPANIES: 
Sl. 
No. 
Metro 
Company 
Observation / reply 

30 
 
1. Bangalore 
Metro Rail 
Corporation 
Limited 
1) As per DPR, for Phase 1 projected ridership was 8.20 
lakh passengers per day in 2007, 10.20 lakh passengers 
per day in 2011 and 16.10 lakh passengers per day in 
2021. While Phase 1 of the project was supposed to 
commence fulltime operations in 2007, it started revenue 
services partially from 2011 with Reach -1 
commencement and the project became fully operational 
by June -2017. The factors like land acquisition issues, 
traffic diversions,  water table, public utility services, 
environmental clearances, tree clearances, technical 
problems, etc which are beyond the control of the 
company, caused delay in implementation of project. As a 
result, the projections in the DPR could not be achieved.  
After full implementation of the Phase 1 in 2017, the 
actual average ridership (boarding) per day has been 
increasing steadily, being 3.40 lakhs, 4.52 lakhs, and 4.89 
lakhs for the FY 2017 -18, 2018 -19 and 2019 -20 
respectively.  
 
However, the Breakeven boardings per day to cover the 
operating expenditures for these years are 2.50 lakhs, 
3.46 lakhs and 4.19 lakhs respectively, while the actual 
boardings per day are more as indicated above. 
 
The performance was severely affected by Covid 19 
during FY 2020 -21 and 2021 -22. The results of the first 
quarter of FY 2022 -23 have been encouraging, the first 
three months registering the average boardings of 3.65 
lakhs, 4.07 lakhs and 4.61 lakhs per day respectively. 
2) The following measures have been taken to improve 
ridership, which will improve revenue.  
i) Last mile connectivity is improved in co -ordination 
with BMTC, facilitating connectivity through Mopeds, 
Electric bikes and bicycles services. 
ii) Parking facilities are provided in most of the stations 
iii) To encourage conn ectivity bus bays are provided in 
some important stations. 
iv) Road Over Bridges are provided at metro stations 
which are in close proximity to Indian railway stations 
and state bus stations. 
v) Metro trains are run with punctuality of above 99.5% 
to attract to commuters  
vi) Digital mode introducedfor commuter to top -up the 
smart cards. However, The Commuters can recharge 
the cards through Namma Metro Mobile App, PayTM 
,PhonePe, Amazon Pay and BMRCL website. 
vii) Travel Concessions are provided with discount of 5% 

31 
 
on smar t cards and 10% on group tickets to attract 
commuters. 
viii) One day, three and five day passes are introduced to 
attract and facilitate tourists and short stay visitors of 
Bangalore. 
3) The recommendation of the Committee regarding 
reasonably accurate estimation of ridership will be kept in 
mind in future DPR preparation.  
 
2. Chennai Metro 
Rail 
Corporation 
Limited 
Phase -1 Stations of CMRL have been commissioned in Stages 
from 2015 & started with approx. 12,000 Passengers per day 
and completed its 45 kms  by 2019 and reached approx. 1 lakhs 
passenger per day.  Phase -1 to further 9Kms covering 9 metro 
Stations and currently reached ridership of approx. 1.8 Lakhs 
passengers per day. 
 
However, the same was less compared to the projected 
ridership considered in the DPR. 
 
Meanwhile due to COVID -19 Pandemic, lockdown, restrictions 
on travelling, social distancing norms etc, the ridership has been 
severely affected in FY 2020 -21 and FY 2021 -22. After 
relaxation in travelling norms/ covid protocol etc the ridershi p 
has started picking up and reached around 1.8 lakh average per 
day. Efforts are being taken for improving first and last mile 
connectivity for increase in ridership. Also various promotional 
events are being planned for increase in ridership.  
 
3. Kochi Metro 
Rail 
Corporation 
Measures taken by KMRL to increase the ridership is as follows 
 Flexi fare Implementation for non peakhours(06:00 -08:00 
hrs. & 20:00 hrs. to 23:00 hrs.) 
 
 Discounted Passes Launched : Student Day Pass, 
Student Monthly Pass, Covid Warriors, Weekly Pass, 
Monthly Pass. 
 
 Discounted Ticket : 
50 % discount for Scout, Guides, NSS, Zero Value 
Ticket to Mentally Challenged & 50% discounted to one 
accompanying person,  Zero Value Ticket to Old age 
person (70 Years & more than 70 , 50% discou nted to 
one accompanying person). 
 

32 
 
 Kochi Metro Whats app Bot: 
   Various Travel Offer Creative & Video developed & put inside 
Trains & Station.Visit to School, Colleges, Institute, 
Corporates.Cycle Rally conducted.Brand Ambassador 
Concept implemented. 
 
4. Jaipur Metro 
Rail 
Corporation 
(i) The basic reason for the low ridership as compared to 
projected is small operational section of 12 kms. As per DPR, 
expected Ridership of Jaipur Metro is based on operation of 
Phase-I & Phase -2. Commercial operation of Ph ase-1A started 
on 03.06.2015 and Phase -1B started late on 23.09.2020. In 
present scenario, it is not possible to evaluate ridership as 
compared to projected ridership as Phase -2 is yet to be 
completed. Expansion in future will increase ridership. 
 
(ii) Jai pur Metro is providing facilities of Mass Rapid Transit 
System in the city of Jaipur with punctuality of 99.88%. All Jaipur 
metro stations are having parking facility. Jaipur Metro has 
started Feeder Service to its passengers for First / Last Mile 
connectivity wherever possible. 
(iii) Noted for future compliances. 
5. UP Metro Rail 
Corporation 
i. Lucknow Metro was commissioned on 06.09.2017 in small 
priority section of 8.9 km. However complete corridor of 23km 
(North-South corridor) of Lucknow metro was ope rational on 
09.03.2019. 
 
• An average of 54250 passengers travelled daily in Lucknow 
Metro before the COVID -19 pandemic since 09.03.2019. During 
this period, the maximum daily ridership was 71586. 
 
• During the first and second COVID waves, the operation o f 
Lucknow Metro remained closed for about seven months. 
 
• After the first wave of COVID -19, an average of 22323 
passengers travelled daily in Lucknow Metro. 
 
• In the month of December after the second wave of COVID -19, 
an average of 54192 passengers trav elled daily in Lucknow 
Metro. 
 
• After COVID-19, the maximum daily ridership has been 69406. 
 
 Metro operations remained completely closed during the 
first and second waves of COVID -19 pandemic. Like 
other metros, there was a decrease in the number of 
passengers after the resumption of operations. However, 
in comparison to the other metros, Lucknow Metro had 

33 
 
the fastest recovery in the number of passengers. 
 
Steps taken to increase ridership include: 
 
 Some city bus routes parallel to the metro alignment 
have been rationalised by the district administration. 
 The ridership of metro will increase by rationalising 
and banning/controlling the routes of autos etc. by the 
district administration. Action is being taken in this 
regard in coordination with the State Government. 
 MoU with two wheeler and taxi service to provide last 
mile connectivity at metro stations has been done. 
6. Gujarat Metro 
Rail 
Corporation 
Presently for Ahmedabad  metro rail Phase -1, only 06 out of 32 
stations are operational; the reach under operation is at one end 
of the city and not connected to the prominent place of the city. 
Ridership is less on account of this. 
Once the entire Phase -1 is commissioned, riders hip is likely to 
increase. Efforts shall also be made to increase ridership once 
the entire phase is commissioned. 
7. Pune Metro 
Rail 
Corporation 
12 Km. of Priority Sections which are part of Corridor -1(PCMC-
Swargate) & Corridor 2 (Vanaz -Ramwadi) are oper ational since 
6th March, 2022 and rest of the corridor is under implementation 
and expected to be fully operational by March 2023. Pune Metro 
has taken various steps for enhancing ridership as under: 
1. More emphasis to be done on ‘Downloading the Pune 
Metro mobile Apps’ through effective PR. The very ‘First 
Ride’ should be given @50% off on downloading the 
Mobile App. The mobile app should be downloaded at the 
TOM to avail this offer. 
2. More publicity and awareness campaign should be done 
through PR-Social Media Handles, Print & Radio (FM) to 
promote ‘Celebration on Wheel’ to induce citizens to 
come in large numbers to have the experiential 
celebrations on board the train. 
3. Enhancement of visibility at the stations on Feeder 
Services-Announcements on -board the st ations and few 
Standees and Banners at the Platform Level too. 
4. More ‘Metro Samvaad’ & ‘Educational Tours’ for the 
Educational Institutions. 
5. Allowing the use of Bicycles on-board the trains. 
6. Integrated Employee and School Mobility initiated for 
Corporates, Factories, Industrial Zones and Educational 
Institutions. 
7. Exploring Integrate Tourism with MTDC on Week -ends 
and public Holidays for conducted City Tour integrate with 
Metro Ride. 
8.  Integrated Airport Shuttle Services. 

34 
 
9. Integrated Cab Services and Taxi Opera tors (Mumbai -
Pune). 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs,OM No. G-20011/2/2020-UT-II Dated the 3rd 
August, 2022] 
*** 
  

35 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
Adoption of Less Capital intensive MetroLite and MetroNeo networks  
 
4.1  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee note that metro projects are capital intensive in nature 
involving huge investment on the part of Ministry accounting for about 43 percent of 
total BE in 2021-22 of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs. The Committee have been 
further apprised that per kilometre cost of construction of metro projects range from  Rs. 
37 cr to Rs. 220 crores  for elevated metro, Rs. 100 crores to Rs.1126 crores for 
underground metro and Rs. 84 to Rs. 122 crores for At Grade metros. On the other 
hand, MetroLite can be constructed at 40% cost of Metro train while MetroNeo (tyred 
metro) can be constructed at 25% of the cost of metro.  The standards for MetroLite and 
MetroNeo have also been issued by the Ministry in July 2019 and November, 2020, 
respectively. They will provide a similar experience and ease of travel in terms of 
comfort, convenience, safety, punctuality, reliability, & environment -friendliness as that 
of a conventional metro system. Both are suitable for smaller cities with lower ridership 
that are aspiring for rail -based mass transit system and can also be used as feeder to 
high capacity metro rail systems. They are more viable and sustainable due to their very 
less capital, operation and maintenance costs. Apart from decongesting smaller cities, 
they will also reduce pollution. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to promote and incentiv ize 
MetroLite and MetroNeo in smaller cities aspiring for rail-based mass transit system and 
also as feeder to high capacity metro systems, wherever possible. The Committee also 
desire to be informed of the specific measures taken to persuade/ incentivize adoption 
of MetroLite and MetroNeo systems.” 
 
4.2 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"Urban transport, which is an integral part of urban development, is a state 
subject. Hence, respective State Government/Union Territory (UT) is responsible for 
initiating and developing urban transport infrastructure including Mass Rapid Transit 
System. The Central Government considers financial assistance for such projects in 
cities or urban agglomerates, based on feasibility of the proposal and availability of 
resources, as and when posed by the concerned State Government/Union Territory 
(UT). MoHUA has already issued standards for MetroLite and MetroNeo system. 
Selection of Metro Rail/MetroLite/MetroNeo is done as per traffic studies conducted 

36 
 
during DPR stage. Govt. of Uttar Pradesh and Union Territory of Jammu &Kashmir have 
already proposed MetroLite system for Gorakhpur and Srinagar/Jammu respectively. 
Similarly, Govt. of Maharashtra and Govt. of Uttarakhand have already proposed 
MetroNeo system in Nashik and Dehradun respectively." 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, OM No. G-20011/2/2020-UT-II Dated the 3rd 
August, 2022] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.7 of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18) 
Registering for Carbon Credits 
4.3  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
“The Committee are aware that a carbon credit is a tradable permit or certificate 
that provides the holder of the credit the right to emit one tone of carbon dioxide or an 
equivalent of another greenhouse gas – it’s essentially an offset for producers of such 
gases. Several metro projects have registered/applied for Green House Gas (GHG) 
emission under two platforms viz. Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) under 
UNFCCC and the Gold Standard Registry (GS) to demonstrate emission reduction. The 
Committee have been apprised that Delhi metro has earned 4.4 million carbon credits 
from CDM and GS projects, Kochi & Lucknow metros have stated that their registration 
for Carbon Credits is und er process while Nagpur metro will apply for it after 
commissioning of the project, Bhopal and Indore metros on the other hand have 
informed that their stations and depot are being planned/designed for India Green 
Building council (IGBC) Platinum Rating le ading to Carbon Credits in due course. 
Hyderabad, Kanpur and Agra metros have not registered for Carbon Credits. 
Ahmedabad, Surat, Patna, Bengaluru, Jaipur and Kolkata metros have not provided any 
information regarding carbon credits. On the other hand Pun e and Mumbaimetros have 
merely informed that their projects are under implementation remaining silent on the 
issue of meeting power requirements from renewables. Since several metros are either 
using or planning to use renewable energy to a considerable ex tent to meet their 
requirements, the Committee feel that it is important to ensure that all these metro rail 
networks are registered for carbon credits so that they earn benefits for being 
environment friendly. However, the Ministry have informed that it i s merely desirable for 
metro networks to register for carbon credits and not a mandate. That is perhaps the 
reason why several metro networks have not yet registered for it. Therefore, the 
Committee recommend the Ministry to impress upon all the metro rail  projects and 
ensure that they register for carbon credits. The Committee are of the view that it may 
be made mandatory to make metro rail networks to register for carbon credits.”   
 
4.4 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
 

37 
 
“M/o Housing and Urban Affairs has requested Metro Rail Corporations, who have not 
yet registered for Carbon Credits, to explore economic benefits of registration.” 
 
 [Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs,OM No. G-20011/2/2020-UT-II Dated the 3rd 
August, 2022] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.10 of the Report) 
*** 

38 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
         SHRI RAJIV RANJAN SINGH  
NEW DELHI;                                                                               alias LALAN SINGH 
   16 December, 2022               Chairperson,           
25 Agrahayana 29, 1944 (Saka)                                Standing Committee on Housing  
and Urban Affairs 
 
  

39 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Housing and Urban 
Affairs held on Friday, 16 December, 2022 
The Committee sat from 1530 hours to 1630 hours in Main Committee Room, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh        -        Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
  2.  Shri Sunil Kumar Soni 
  3. Shri Benny Behanan 
  4.  Shri Syed Imtiaz Jaleel 
  5. Shri Hasnain Masoodi 
Rajya Sabha 
6. Dr. Kalpana Saini 
7. Shri Ram Chander Jangra 
8. Shri Kumar Ketkar 
9. Shri R. Girirajan 
10. Smt Jebi Mather Hisham 
11. Dr. K. Laxman 
12. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
13 Shri Sanjay Singh 
Secretariat 
1. Shri V.K. Tripathi                     Joint Secretary 
2. Ms Archna Pathania      Director 
3. Ms Swati Parwal       Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, Hon'ble  Chairperson welcomed Members of the Standing 
Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs to the Sitting of the Committee and thereafter, 
**** **** **** **** **** **** **** **** **** **** **** **** **** **** **** **** **** **** **** **** **** 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the Draft Report on Action Taken 
by the Government on the Thirteenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the subject,  
Implementation of Metro Rail Projects – An Appraisal’ relating to Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs and adopted the Draft Report without any modifications. 
   The Committee then adjourned.  

40 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
[Vide para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY FIFTH 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN  DEVELOPLMENT 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
I.  Total number of recommendations                         21 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted  
by the Government:                                                                              16  
    
Recommendation Nos. 1, 3, 4, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19, 20 and 
21 
Percentage to total recommendations                                               (76.19 %)                                     
          
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:                             03 
Recommendation Nos. 2, 7, 8 
Percentage to total recommendations                                                (14.28 %)                
            
  
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of             
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:            02 
Recommendation Nos. 5, 18 
Percentage to total recommendations                                                (09.52%) 
 
V.         Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final     
replies of the Government are still awaited:                                       00 
Recommendation No.  Nil    
Percentage to total recommendations                                             (00.00%) 