1 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2020-21) 
                   
   
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
          
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
                                            
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty Fourth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban Development on the 
Subject "Rainwater Harvesting in Metropolitan Cities (2018-19)”] 
 
 
SIXTH REPORT 
 
      
 
                                   LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                                 NEW DELHI 
 
 
March 2021/ Phalguna 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
6 


2 
 
SIXTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2020-21) 
                   
   
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
          
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
                                            
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty Fourth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Urban Development on the 
Subject "Rainwater Harvesting in Metropolitan Cities (2018-19)”] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17 .03.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  17.03.2021 
      
 
                                   LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                                 NEW DELHI 
 
 
March 2021/ Phalguna 1942 (Saka) 
 


3 
 
C.U.D. No: 117 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(C)  2019 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Publish under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by ............................. 

4 
 
(i) 
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
                         
 
 Composition Of The Committee..................................................... (ii) 
 Introduction .................................................................................... (iv) 
  
 
 
CHAPTER I Report.............................................................................................    
                                                                                            
1 
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted  
by the Government.......................................................................... 
 
9 
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies...................... 
 
26 
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of  
the Government have not been accepted by the Government  
and require reiteration..................................................................... 
 
 
27 
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final 
 replies of the Government are still awaited.................................... 
 
28 
Annexures 
Annexure-I Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee held on 
12.02.2021...................................................................................... 
 
36 
Annexure-II Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained the Twenty Fourth Report (16th Lok 
Sabha)............................................................................................. 
 
 
38 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

5 
 
(ii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2020-21) 
   Shri Jagdambika Pal         -        Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Adv. A.  M. Ariff 
3. Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel 
4. Shri Sanjay Kumar Bandi 
5. Shri Benny Behanan 
6. Shri Ramcharan Bohra 
7. Shri Hibi Eden 
8. Shri Gautam Gambhir 
9. Shri Syed Imtiaz Jaleel 
10. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
11. Smt Hema Malini 
12. Shri Hasnain Masoodi 
13. Shri P.C. Mohan 
14. Shri C.R. Patil 
15. Shri S Ramalingam 
16. Shri Adala Prabhakara Reddy 
17. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
18. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
19. Shri Sudhakar Tukaram Shrangre 
20. Shri Sunil Kumar Soni 
21. Shri M V V Satyanarayana 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri M. J Akbar 
23. Shri Subrata Bakshi  
24. Shri Y. S. Chowdary  
25. Sh Ram Chander Jangra  
26. Shri Kumar Ketkar 
27. Sh Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla  
28. Sh Digvijaya Singh 
29. Shri Sanjay Singh  
30. Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki  
31. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
 

6 
 
 (iii)  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 1. Sh Vinod Kumar Traipathy  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Sh A K Shah    - Director 
 3. Dr Jagmohan Khatry  - Under Secretary 
 
 

7 
 
(iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Urban Development ( 2020-21) having been 
authorized by the Committee, present this Sixth Report (17 th Lok Sabha) on the action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Fourth Report (16 th Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee on the subject " Rain Water Harvesting in Metropolitan Cities ” (2018-19) of the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs. 
2. The Twenty Fourth  Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 07.01.2019 and laid on the table of 
Rajya Sabha on same date . The Action Taken Replies of the Government to all the recommendations 
contained in the Report  were received on 29th October  2019. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on  12th February, 2021 is 
given at Annexure-I. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommenda tions contained in the 
Twenty Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Re commendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
               JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
16 March,2021                               CHAIRPERSON,       
25 Phalguna,1942 (Saka)                               Standing Committee on Urban Development 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committ ee on Urban Development ( 2020-21) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in their Twenty Fourth  Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject "Rain 
Water Harvesting in Metropolitan Cities " which was presented to Parliament on 07th 
January, 2019. 
 
1.2. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the 20 recommendations contained in the Report.  These have been categorized as 
follows: 
 (i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the   
Government: 
 Recommendation Nos. 1,2,3,4,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14, and 15  
               (Total -13) 
(Chapter-II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations /Observations, which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government's replies: 
Recommendation No.  Nil                                        (Nil) 
(Chapter-III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations /Observations, in respe ct of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 Recommendation Nos.                                                                                                                                                  
                               (Nil) 
(Chapter-IV) 
 
(iv) Recommendations /Observations, in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are, still awaited: 
           Recommendation No.5, 6,16,17,18, 19 and 20   
                                                        (Total -7) 
(Chapter-V) 
 
1.3. The Committee desire that specific replies to the comments contained in 
Chapter-I  and Chapter -V of this Report may be furnished to them at the earliest and in 
any case, not later than three months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
1.4. The Committee will now like to comment on the action taken by the Government 
on some of their recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.   
 

2 
 
GOVERNMENT’S APPROVAL FOR APPROVAL FOR COMPREHENSIVE AND 
TIME-BOUND  PROGRAMME FOR RAINWATER HARVESTING WELCOMED AND 
EXPEDITIOUS FORMULATION AND IMPLEMENTATION THEREOF 
RECOMMENDED  
 
Recommendation (Serial No.1) 
 
 1.5  The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
"The Committee's are constrained to find that Metropolitan cities are 
currently experiencing a peculiar situation of acute shortage of drinking water in 
the summer season and flooding in the monsoon season. Moreover, availability of 
water is still unpredictable and erratic in most part of the year. At the same time 
ground water table (pre -monsoon) when compared to decadal level has fallen in 
many Metropolitan cities like Bengaluru, Chennai, Kolkata, Ranchi, Hyderabad and 
many more cities ,whereas it  has fallen 100% in prominent towns of Allahabad, 
Ghaziabad, Kanpur, Lucknow, Meerut and Banaras. This according to Ministry of 
Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation (MOWRRD&GR) has 
led to serious problems with quality and availability of ground water. This is 
because most of the rainfall is just 100 hours out of 8660 hrs. in a year as a result 
the rainfall on the surface tends to flow and as large as 85,565 MCM of surplus run-
off can be harnessed to augment the ground water. In this con nection, the 
Committee have been informed by NITI Aayog that the country is not water scarce 
as out of 1 ,123 BCM of utilizable water resources (690 BCM is surface water and 
433 BCM is ground water) as large as 571 BCM is lost due to inefficient 
management of water for utilization purpose resulting in huge dependence on 
ground water which caters to 55% of total water supply demand in the country, 
60% of utilization requirement, 70% of requirement of rural water supply and 30% 
of urban water supply at the sam e time. The Committee find that as per 2011 
Census, out of total population of India 1 ,210.50 million, 377.10 million is urban 
population which may grow to 575 million by 2030 and to 875 million by 2050 and 
available civic amenities may not be able to keep  pace with this rising population. 
In this connection, the Committee find that National Water Policy on Urban Water 
Supply inter alia also outlines that urban and rural domestic water should preferably 
be from surface water in conjunction with ground water  and rain water. The 
Committee also find that MOWRRD&GR have also held the view before the 
Committee that most of the traditional water harvesting systems in cities have been 
neglected and fallen into disuse, worsening the urban water scenario and 
suggesting that one of the solution to the urban water crisis is rain water 
harvesting capturing the run off. In this connection, the Committee find that 
Committee on Water Resources (2014 -15) in Para 14 of their Fourth Report of 
Sixteenth Lok Sabha presented to t he Parliament in May, 2015 had underlined the 
need for modernization of present flood forecasting infrastructure in the country so 
that tangible infrastructure is visible in non -flood prone States and reiterated the 
same in their Action Taken Report. Meanw hile, MOWRRDGR have also opined 
before the Committee that countries like Germany, Japan, United States and 
Singapore  are also adopting rain water harvesting and there is a need to 

3 
 
implement the rain water harvesting on a serious note in the country, inclu ding 
urban areas which are suffering from decline in ground water level. The Committee, 
therefore, are fully convinced that a massive nationwide and time bound 
programme for intended purpose be launched for 'Rain Water Harvesting' in the 
country without fu rther loss of time. To begin with and what is imminently doable 
rain water harvesting systems should be mandatorily installed in all Government 
and public premises". 
 
1.6 In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:   
 
“The Comprehensive and time bound program on implementing rainwater 
harvesting has to be taken up in a massive manner so as to ensure implementation. 
The internal good practices need to be replicated in our cities . However for effective 
implementation of rai nwater harvesting it has to be e nsured that they are cost 
effective and Resident Welfare Associations  (RWAs) and Community Building 
Organizations (CBOs) need to facilitate its construction as well as maintenance.” 
 
1.7 The Committee are glad to note that Mini stry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
are in agreement  the Committee that a comprehensive and time -bound 
programme on implementing Rain Water Harvesting in a massive manner and for 
replication of good practices in cities for cost effective implementation maki ng 
Residential Welfare Associations (RWAs), Community Building Organisations 
(CBOs) facilitator for construction and maintenance.  They feel that such  a 
programme be expeditiously formulated and implemented.  
TREATING WATER CONSERVATION MEASURES AS INTEGRAL PART OF 
SWACHH BHART ABHIYAN BY THE MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN 
AFFAIRS WELCOMED AND EARLY IMPLEMENTATION OF TIME BOUND 
COMPREHENSIVE PROGRAMME ON RAIN WATER HARVESTING 
RECOMMENDED 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
 
          1.8   The Committee had recommended as under: 
               
 "During the Committee's examination both the Ministries of WRRD&GR  
and MOHUA argued before the Committee that water is State subject thus it is 
the responsibility of State Governments/UTs Administrations. In this c onnection, 
the MOWRRD&GR in their submission before the Committee have contended 
before the Committee that as per Constitution of India Seventh Schedule Entry 
50 of List I and Entry 17 of List II 'Water' is a State subject, therefore, all 
initiatives on water management including conservation and artificial recharge to 
ground water is primarily States' responsibility. The Committee feel that leaving 
the important subject of rain water harvesting to States/UTs on the ground that 
subject of 'Water' and urban development including urban planning and urban 

4 
 
water supply is a 'State subject', is thoroughly inappropriate on the ground that 
'Swachh Bharat Mission' a mega programme for sanitation is already being run in 
the country even when the subject of 'sanitatio n' is 'State' subject. The 
Committee, therefore, feel that the above view points raised before and in the 
light of importance of the subject matter, the issue may be re-visited and a mega 
programme on rain water harvesting be launched on the  analogy of 'Swachh 
Bharat Mission'." 
    
1.9 In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:   
 
 “The water conservation measures invariably to become the integral part 
of Swachh Bharat Abhiyan and every City must take steps to create awareness 
for constructing a RWH in all types of  buildings and urban local body/ Urban 
Development Authority to incentivize through audio visual publicity . Although the 
RWH and Urban P lanning are  State subjects , Ministry of housing and urban 
affairs (MOHUA), through continuous p ersuasion, sha ll impress  upon all the 
State Governments and UT administration s to go all out in implementing RWH  
and integrate the same in Urban Planning Process” 
 
1.10 The Committee appreciate that as recommended by the Committee the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has revisited the issue of treating ‘Water’ 
as State subject on the ground that nation wide ‘Swachh Bharat Abhiyan’ 
currently being implemented and opening  that water conservation measures 
invariably integral to Swachh Bharat Abhiyan and appropriate city authority are to 
take appropriate rain harvesting measures with necessary persuasion being 
given by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs for integratin g the same in 
urban planning process.  The Committee, therefore, feel that Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs should work on formulation of comprehensive and time bound 
rain water programme in the country. 
TAKING UP THE ISSUE OF ENSURING PROPER COMPLIANCE OF RAIN WATER 
HARVESTING MEASURES WITH MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
AND CLIMATE CHANGE (MOE&F&CC) BEFORE GRANTING ENVIRONMENTAL 
CLEARANCE TO DEVELOPMENTAL PROJECTS REITERATED  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
 
1.11 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
"The Committee's examination has revealed that the role of the Ministry of 
Environment and Forest and Climate Change (MOE&F&CC) is to accord 
Environmental clearance to Developmental Projects of Building and construction 
projects and Area Developmen tal Project, Airport Projects, Industrial Projects, 
Coal Mining Project by ensuring compliance of stringent conditions which are 
both project specific and general in nature covering various aspects including 

5 
 
rain water harvesting. The Committee while glanc ing through the rain water 
harvesting provisions for all the developmental projects find that these provisions 
are quite important however their actual implementation is hardly seen at ground 
level. For instance for building and construction projects, the requirement of 
complete plan for rain water harvesting, adequate provision for open storage and 
recharge where local laws are not available etc. are mandatory. Similarly, for 
industrial projects maximum possible rain water harvesting and minimizing water 
consumption in steel plants by segregating used water and recycling treated 
water are the conditions to be complied with. Like wise for non -coal mining 
projects usage of mined out area is mandatory for rain water harvesting 
purposes. The Committee have been  informed by MOE&F&CC that these 
conditions have to be complied with by project proponents. The Committee 
apprehend that aforesaid conditions may not be complied with in letter and spirit 
across the States/UTs. They, therefore, recommend that Ministry of E FCC should 
take up the issue with implementing agencies so that strict compliance of rain 
water harvesting is ensured in real terms by project proponents in developmental 
projects.” 
 
1.12 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in the action taken reply have stated 
as under: 
 
 “Ministry of Environment  and Forest and Climate Change (MoE&F&CC) 
needs to ensure proper compliance of Rainwater Harvesting measures before 
granting environmental clearance of developmental projects and make 
mandatory that all construction and development projects to construct rainwater 
harvesting structure” 
 
1.13 The Committee appreciate that Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has 
conceded before that the need for greater compliance of Rain Water Harvesting 
norms by Ministry of Environment and Forests and Climate Change (M oE&F&CC) 
before granting environmental clearances to developmental projects and the 
Committee therefore recommend that the issue of greater compl iance should be 
taken up with MoE&F&CC expeditiously.     
CONSTITUTION OF COMMITTEE UNDER CPCB TO WORK ON REPORT ON 
STRUCTURES AND COST FOR OBTAINING UPDATED DATA ON GROUND 
WATER RECHARGE WELCOMED AND EARLY FINALIZ ATION OF THE REPORT 
RECOMMENDED. 
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
1.14 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 "The Committee are constrained to note that the nodal Ministry of Water 
Resource, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation (MOWR,RD&GR) is not 
equipped with latest data about ground water recharge and is managing with 

6 
 
data available in Master Plan for Artificial Recharge to Ground Water, 2013 
brought out by Central Ground Water Board (CGWB). In this connection, the 
Ministry has admitted candidly before the Committee that there is need for 
updating of Master Plan incorporating the data generated by different agencies in 
coordination with States. As per aforesaid Master Plan a total of 1.11 crore 
artificial recharge structures in Urban and Rural areas in the country comprising 
around 88 lakh recharge structures/facilities utilizing rainwater directly f rom roof 
top and more than 23 lakh artificial recharge and rainwater harvesting structures 
for conserving surplus runoff to augment the groundwater resources to be 
constructed. The Committee anticipate that since five years have already gone 
by, the demand of artificial recharge structures might have also increased. In this 
connection, the NITI Aayog has informed the Committee that it has developed a 
Composite Water Management Index to guage the performance of States in the 
field of management of water reso urces. In view of the above, the Committee 
strongly recommend expeditious updation of data regarding artificial recharge 
and also urge the MOWR,RD&GR to make use of the composite Water 
Management Index brought out by NITI Aayog for assessing the exact 
magnitude of work to be taken in hand". 
  
 
1.15 In their action taken reply, the Ministry have stated as follows:   
 
 “A committee is b eing co nstituted u nder CGWB with m embers fr om 
concerned State/UTs to finalize a n ind icative report w ith tentative l ist o f 
structures and tentative cost and submit the same to Ministry by 31th Dec 2019.” 
 
1.16 The Committee are glad to note that Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
has constituted a Committee under Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) to 
work on indicative report with tentative list of structure and cost to be submitted 
by 31st December, 2019 for obtaining updated data on artificial recharge of ground 
water.  The Committee would like to know the latest update on the issue for 
arriving at logical conclusions.   
IN THE ABSENCE OF DATA ABOUT WATER MANAGEMENT IN THE COUNTRY 
ASSESSMENT OF WATER MANAGEMENT IN THE COUNTRY BY ASSESSING 
FIVE DIFFERENT SOURCES OF WATER WITH USE OF INTERNATIONAL 
EXPERTISE REITERATED. 
 
(Recommendation No 6) 
 
1.17      The Committee had recommended: 
 
“The Committee are disappointed to note that though there are multiple 
Central agencies viz., Central Water Mission (CWM), Central Water Commission 
(CWC), Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) and Ganga Flood Control Commission 
(GPCC) are working under nodal Ministry of WR,RD and GR, yet the data of water 

7 
 
management in urban areas is not available in the country nor any exercise has 
been done by MOHUA in this regard. Besides, the Ministry are in the process of 
preparing a water budget on the lines  of financial budget that too is in preliminary 
stage with 11 States viz., Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, West Bengal, Uttarakhand, 
Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Tamil Nadu and 
Arunachal Pradesh coming forward with State Specific Act ion Plan (SSAP) in Phase 
I and remaining States being taken up in Phase II. The Committee have also noted 
that very recently a Coordination Committee has been constituted to go into the 
current and future demand vis -à-vis availability of water including dr inking for 
domestic purposes in the major cities and to suggest an action plan accordingly 
and soon its report is expected. The Committee's examination has also revealed 
that Geographic Information System (GIS) technology a map based advance tool 
integrating various thematic pieces of information to assist in evolving solutions for 
management of water resources has already been adopted by Chhattisgarh, 
Tripura, Meghalaya, Telangana, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal for rainwater harvesting. 
The Committee feel that p rominent States viz., Maharashtra, Karnataka, Gujarat, 
Andhra Pradesh housing prominent Metropolitan cities of Mumbai, Pune, 
Bangaluru, Ahmedabad, Surat and Visakhapattam as also NCT of Delhi are lagging 
behind in adopting the GIS Technology for rainwater harvesting. In view of the 
fact that there are as many as 46 Metropolitan cities in the county, there is a need 
to adopt GIS Technology across all the States/UTs for rainwater harvesting 
purposes. The Committee are also constrained to note that the Committ ee's 
suggestion of creation of a sustainable infrastructure by use of excellent 
technologies available through satellite mapping of ground water for assessing the 
water needs of each city by use of five sources of water, sea water, rain water, 
ground water and reservoir has not been addressed at all by the nodal Ministry of 
WRRD&GR. In this context, the MOWR,RD&GR have merely elaborated the 
standard reply that water being 'State' subject, initiatives on water governance is 
primarily the responsibility of St ates and has spelt out goals of National Water 
Mission that inter alia pertain to areas like studies on impact of climate change in 7 
river basins, capacity building and tracing of stakeholders, workdone on 
conservation of water, minimizing wastage etc. In this context, the Committee find 
that as per Fifth Report of the Committee on Water Resources (2015 -16) Para 12, 
a pilot scheme has been started in Indore district of Madhya Pradesh for 
strengthening the Satellite Application Centres (SACs) in 8 States na mely 
Maharashtra, Karnataka, Kerala, Chhattisgarh, Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, West 
Bengal and Assam to assist MGNREGA functioning in better planning of water 
connection and structures and the Committee had recommended its extension to 
remaining seven States. This was also reiterated in their Action Taken Report . The 
Committee would like to know further action taken in this regard. In view of the 
foregoing, since the Report of the Coordination Committee to assess the demand 
and availability of drinking water for domestic purpose in major cities is expected 
shortly and work on water budget is underway, the Committee recommend that 
the Ministry should also taken into account their suggestion that five sources of 
water, sea water, rain water, ground water and wat er to be used for reservoirs for 
assessing the demand of each city in a time bound manner for creation of 
infrastructure by making use of available technological advancement and be 

8 
 
expeditiously implemented by using the expertise of WAPCO Ltd which has 
international expertise in surveys for effective and integrated development of 
water resources with specialization in areas like flood control and river 
management” 
 
1.18  The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken replies 
have stated: 
 
“Using GIS Technology for water management comes within the domin of Central 
Ground Water Board (CGWB) as the same maintains a data of surface and ground 
water resources. GIS for urban areas used for preparing the master plan can provide 
a layer which make give details of spatial distribution of water resources” 
 
1.19.  While noticing absence of data of water management in the 
country even when multiple agencies like Central Water Mission, Ganga 
Flood Control Commission etc, are at work and work of Water budget is at 
initial stage that too in few  States, and a R eport of Coordination Committee 
to assess the demand and availability of water in the country is yet to come 
the Committee had recommended the Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation (WRRD and GR) to assess the demand 
of each city by five sources of water viz., sewerage water, sea water , rain 
water, ground water, reservoir water a time bound manner by using 
international technological advance and expertise for effective and 
integrated development of water resources with specialization in areas like 
flood control and river management in the country. In response thereto, the 
Committee have been merely formed that using GIS Technology for water 
Management comes under Central  Flood Water Board and using GIS for 
urban area can provide a layer which may give details of special distribution 
of water resources. The Committee feel that reply of the Government is too 
short and does not cover the full sweep of the recommendation. The  
Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation in-toto and urge the 
Government to re -visit the entire issue and submit the same before the 
Committee for coming to logical conclusion. 
***** 

9 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
COMPREHENSIVE AND TIME BOUND PROGRAMME ON RAIN WATER 
HARVESTING RECOMMENDED IN THE LIGHT OF INTERNATIONAL 
EXPERIENCES 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.1) 
 
2.1 The Committee's are constrained to find that Metropolitan cities are  
currently experiencing a peculiar situation of acute shortage of drinking  
water in the summer season and flooding in the monsoon season. Moreover,  
availability of water is still unpredictable and erratic in most part of the year.  
At the same time ground wa ter table (pre -monsoon) when compared to  
decadal level has fallen in many Metropolitan cities like Bengaluru, Chennai,  
Kolkata, Ranchi, Hyderabad and many more cities ,whereas it has fallen  
100% in prominent towns of Allahabad, Ghaziabad, Kanpur, Lucknow,  
Meerut and Banaras. This according to Ministry of Water Resources, River  
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation (MOWRRD&GR) has led to serious  
problems with quality and availability of ground water. This is because most  
of the rainfall is just 100 hours out of  8660 hrs. in a year as a result the  
rainfall on the surface tends to flow and as large as 85,565 MCM of surplus  
run-off can be harnessed to augment the ground water. In this connection,  
the Committee have been informed by NITI Aayog that the country is no t 
water scarce as out of 1123 BCM of utilizable water resources (690 BCM is  
surface water and 433 BCM is ground water) as large as 571 BCM is lost due  
to inefficient management of water for utilization purpose resulting in huge  
dependence on ground water w hich caters to 55% of total water supply  
demand in the country, 60% of utilization requirement, 70% of requirement  
of rural water supply and 30% of urban water supply at the same time. The  
Committee find that as per 2011 Census, out of total population of India 
1210.50 million, 377.10 million is urban population which may grow to 575  
million by 2030 and to 875 million by 2050 and available civic amenities may  
not be able to keep pace with this rising population. In this connection, the  
Committee find that N ational Water Policy on Urban Water Supply inter alia  
also outlines that urban and rural domestic water should preferably be from  
surface water in conjunction with ground water and rain water. The 
Committee also find that MOWRRD&GR have also held the view before the 
Committee that most of the traditional water harvesting systems in cities 
have been neglected and fallen into disuse, worsening the urban water 
scenario and suggesting that one of the solution to the urban water crisis is 
rain water harvesting c apturing the run off. In this connection, the 
Committee find that Committee on Water Resources (2014 -15) in Para 14 of 
their Fourth Report of Sixteenth Lok Sabha presented to the Parliament in 

10 
 
May, 2015 had underlined the need for modernization of present flood 
forecasting infrastructure in the country so that tangible infrastructure is 
visible in non -flood prone States and reiterated the same in their Action 
Taken Report. Meanwhile, MOWRRDGR have also opined before the 
Committee that countries like Germany , Japan, United States and Singapore  
are also adopting rain water harvesting and there is a need to implement the 
rain water harvesting on a serious note in the country, including urban areas 
which are suffering from decline in ground water level. The Com mittee, 
therefore, are fully convinced that a massive nationwide and time bound 
programme for intended purpose be launched for 'Rain Water Harvesting' in 
the country without further loss of time. To begin with and what is 
imminently doable rain water harve sting systems should be mandatorily 
installed in all Government and public premises. 
 
2.2  The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken replies have 
stated: 
 
“The Comprehensive and time bound program on implementing rainwater 
harvesting has to be taken up in a massive manner so as to ensure 
implementation. T he internal good practices need to be replicated in our cities . 
However for effective implementation of rai nwater harvesting it has to be e nsured 
that they are cost effective and Resid ent Welfare Associations  (RWAs) and 
Community Building Organizations  (CBOs) need to facilitate its construction as 
well as maintenance.” 
 
2.3 The Committee are glad to note that Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
are in agreement  the Committee that a c omprehensive and time -bound 
programme on implementing Rain Water Harvesting in a massive manner and for 
replication of good practices in cities for cost effective implementation making 
Residential Welfare Associations (RWAs), Community Building Organisatio ns 
(CBOs) facilitator for construction and maintenance.  They feel that such  a 
programme be expeditiously formulated and implemented. 
 
 
TREATING THE RAIN WATER HARVESTING ISSUE AS STATES GOVERNMENTS' 
RESPONSIBILITY CRITICIZED AND GOVERNMENT ASKED TO RE-VISIT THE 
ISSUE AS A MEGA PROGRAMME VIZ., SWACHH BHARAT ABHIYAN (SBM) ON 
SANITATION BEING STATE SUBJECT IS ALREADY UNDER IMPLEMENTATION. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
               
2.4 During the Committee's examination both the Ministries of WRRD&GR 
and MOHUA argued before the Committee that water is State subject thus it 
is the responsibility of State Governments/UTs Administrations. In this 
connection, the MOWRRD&GR in their submissio n before the Committee 
have contended before the Committee that as per Constitution of India 

11 
 
Seventh Schedule Entry 50 of List I and Entry 17 of List II 'Water' is a State 
subject, therefore, all initiatives on water management including 
conservation and a rtificial recharge to ground water is primarily States' 
responsibility. The Committee feel that leaving the important subject of rain 
water harvesting to States/UTs on the ground that subject of 'Water' and 
urban development including urban planning and ur ban water supply is a 
'State subject', is thoroughly inappropriate on the ground that 'Swachh 
Bharat Mission' a mega programme for sanitation is already being run in the 
country even when the subject of 'sanitation' is 'State' subject. The 
Committee, there fore, feel that the above view points raised before and in 
the light of importance of the subject matter, the issue may be re -visited and 
a mega programme on rain water harvesting be launched on theanalogy of 
'Swachh Bharat Mission'. 
    
2.5.  The Ministry  of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken replies have 
stated: 
 
“The water conservation measures invariably to become the integral part of 
Swachh Bharat Abhiyan and every City must take steps to create awareness for 
constructing a RWH in all types of  buildings and urban local body/ Urban 
Development Authority to incentivize through audio visual publicity . Although the 
RWH and Urban P lanning are state subjects , Ministry of housing and urban 
affairs (MOHUA), through continuous Persuasion , shell i mpress upon all the 
state governments and UT administration s to go all out in implementing RWH  
and integrate the same in Urban Planning Process” 
 
2.6. The Committee appreciate that as recommended by the Committee the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs h as revisited the issue of treating ‘Water’ 
as State subject on the ground that nation wide ‘Swachh Bharat Abhiyan’ 
currently being implemented and opening that water conservation measures 
invariably integral to Swachh Bharat Abhiyan and appropriate city authority are to 
take appropriate rain harvesting measures with necessary persuasion being 
given by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs for integrating the same in 
urban planning process.  The Committee, therefore, feel that Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs should work on formulation of comprehensive and time bound 
rain water programme in the country. 
 
ABSENCE OF WORK DONE ON RAIN WATER HARVESTING CRITICIZED AND 
GOVERNMENT ASKED TO PLAY A PROACTIVE ROLE ON THE ISSUE 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
 

12 
 
2.7. The Committee are constrained to note that rain water harvesting 
work has not been done in desired measures in Metropolitan cities. The 
shortage of drinking water in the Summer season and the massive water 
logging in monsoon season has been an annual  feature for decades together 
and has become the order of the day. The Committee feel that the common 
man is facing tremendous hardship due to shortage of drinking water in the 
summer season and the country at large has been experiencing huge loss of 
life and property with floods marooning the cities, towns and villages badly 
affecting the normal life for months together. Of equal importance is the 
tremendous loss to the national economy due to such natural disasters. In 
this connection, both the Ministry o f Water Resources, River Development 
and Ganga Rejuvenation (MOWRRD&GR) as also the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs have enumerated a number of steps taken for rain water 
harvesting. The MOWRRD&GR have laboured to convince the Committee by 
elaborating on details of steps taken which inter alia include tackling the 
issue of inadequate management of water by coming up with a National 
Perspective Plan (NPP) envisaging inter -state transfer of water for 
augmenting irrigation, power generation for incidenta l benefits which 
include drinking water supply, emphasising holistic management of water in 
the country including urban areas as outlined in National Water Policy, 
apprising the progress of Model Bill across the States by enacting suitable 
legislations for roof top rain water harvesting , coming up with Master Plan 
for Artificial Recharge to Ground Water, 2013 for augmenting ground water 
resources and very recently constituting a Coordination Committee with 
Secretary, MOWRRD&GR as its Chairperson and concer ned Ministries along 
with Advisor, NITI Aayog as Members for optimal utilization of Monsoon 
rainfall. Similarly, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs on their part 
have also submitted their Report Card before the Committee clarifying that 
their role is limited in overall management of water resources to the measure 
to be undertaken by States/ULBs in the sectors of urban planning and 
building plan permissions besides supplementing the efforts of States and 
Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) in the sectors of Urb an Planning and Urban Water 
Supply through its flagship programmes looking after supply of water in 
urban areas under Atal Mission for Urban Rejuvenation and Urban 
Transformation, focusing primarily on supplying water to all the urban 
households in 500 AMR UT cities. The MOH&UA have also submitted about 
issuing guidelines for urban and Regional Planning (Urban and Regional 
Development Plan Formulation and Implementation (URDEFI), 2014 Model 
Building Bye Laws (MBBL), inter alia mandating ULBs and Urban Develo ping 
Agencies (UDAs) to implement rain water harvesting mainly on buildings. In 
this connection, the MoH&UA have also informed the Committee that due 
importance to rain water harvesting is being given in Smart Cities Mission 
and AMRUT Mission. The Committe e however find that at ground level, the 
steps outlined above by both the MOWRRD&GR and MOH&UA are barely 
visible. The Committee find that various parts of the country like 
Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Assam and so on have been 
severely affe cted by floods. Recently Kerala also witnessed colossal loss of 

13 
 
life and property due to unprecedented floods. The Committee feel that these 
are more than sufficient indicators for nodal Ministry of WRRD&GR to go in 
for rain water harvesting in a big way b y leading the nation in a proactive 
manner in association with Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs and other 
concerned Ministries without any further loss of time. 
 
2.8. The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken replies have 
stated: 
 
“Ministry shell facilitate the State Governments and UT A dministrations in 
adopting the provisions of Urban and Regional Development Plans Formulation 
and Implementation (URDPFI) G uidelines 2014 and Model Building Bye Laws 
(MBBL) 2016 in the right honest and also continuously advise them to strengthen 
the enforcement thereby ensuring proper implementation and maintenance." 
  
THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS AND CLIMATE CHANGE 
ASKED TO ENSURE GREATER COMPLIANCE O F RAIN WATER HARVESTING 
MEASURES BEFO RE GRANTING ENVIRONMENTAL CLEARANCE OF 
DEVELOPMENTAL PROJECTS 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
 
2.9. The Committee's examination has revealed that the role of the Ministry of 
Environment and Forest and Climate Change (MOE&F&CC) is to accord 
Environmental clearance to Developmental Projects of Building and construction 
projects and Area Developmental Project, Airport Projects, Industrial Projects, 
Coal Mining Project by ensuring compliance of stringent conditions which are 
both project specific and general in nature covering various aspects including 
rain water harvesting. The Committee while glancing through the rain water 
harvesting provisions for all the developmental projects find that these 
provisions are quite important however their actual implementation is hardly seen 
at ground level. For instance for building and construction projects, the 
requirement of complete plan for rain water harvesting, adequate provision for 
open storage and recharge where local laws are not available etc. are mandatory. 
Similarly, for industrial projects maximum possible rain water harvesting and 
minimizing water consumption in steel plants by segregating used water and 
recycling treated water are the conditions to be complied with. Like wise for non -
coal mining projects usa ge of mined out area is mandatory for rain water 
harvesting purposes. The Committee have been informed by MOE&F&CC that 
these conditions have to be complied with by project proponents. The Committee 
apprehend that aforesaid conditions may not be complied w ith in letter and spirit 
across the States/UTs. They, therefore, recommend that Ministry of EFCC should 
take up the issue with implementing agencies so that strict compliance of rain 
water harvesting is ensured in real terms by project proponents in develo pmental 
projects. 
 

14 
 
2.10. The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken replies have 
stated: 
 
 “Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) needs to 
ensure proper compliance of Rainwater Harvesting measures before granting 
environmental clearance of developmental projects and make mandatory that all 
construction and development projects to construct rainwater harvesting 
structure” 
 
2.11. The Committee appreciate that Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has 
conceded before that the need for greater compliance of Rain Water Harvesting 
norms by Ministry of Environment and Forests and Climate Change (M oE&F&CC) 
before granting environmental clearances to developmental projects and the 
Committee therefore recommend that the issue  of greater compl iance should be 
taken up with MoE&F&CC expeditiously.   
 
ROLE OF CENTRAL GROUND WATER BOARD CRITICIZED OVER CONSTANT 
DECLINE IN GROUND WATER LEVEL IN MAJOR CITIES 
 
(Recommendation No 7) 
 
2.12. The Committee's examination has revealed that Central Ground Water 
Board that is responsible for National Aquifer Mapping, monitoring of ground 
water regime in the country, estimation of ground water resources etc. has 
miserably failed in its role taking into account the fact that as high as 66% wells  
in the country have registered decline in ground water level as Pre - Monsoon 
(April-May, 2018) water level when compared with decadal average 2008 -2017 in 
certain pockets in all States/UTs of the country. In this connection, the Committee 
are also constra ined to note that the level of such decline is quite huge and 
alarming in metropolitan cities. The Committee are constrained to note that many 
prominent metropolitan cities which have registered decline are Bengaluru, 
Chennai, Kolkata, Ranchi, Vishakhapatt anam, Hyderabad, Mumbai, Guwahati and 
Indore. For instance in Bengaluru, out of 25 wells analysed as high as 22 wells 
have registered decline in ground water level. Similarly, in Chennai 10 out of 11 
wells have registered decline. Like -wise in Kolkata 12 o ut of 14 wells have 
registered decline and same is case with remaining States. Further, the 
Committee are also constrained to note that in many other cities viz., Allahabad, 
Ghaziabad, Kanpur, Lucknow, Meerut and Banaras have experienced 100% fall in 
ground water level. The Committee are also alarmed to note that as per NITI 
Aayog, Bangaluru City will be hit by Day Zero by 2020. Apart from Bengaluru, 20 
other cities including New Delhi may also meet the same fate in 2020. Various 
reasons such as increase in  ground water withdrawal in localized areas to meet 
the ever increasing demand of cities, reduction in natural ground water recharge 
owing to urbanization/ concretization, unregulated use of ground water due to 
limited availability of surface water, inadeq uate water supply by concerned 
Municipalities etc., have been attributed before the Committee as reasons for 

15 
 
decline in Ground Water in major cities. The Committee have also been informed 
that water being 'State' subject extraction and management of ground  water 
comes under the purview of State Governments, the Ministry of WRRD&GR plays 
an advisory role and as directed by Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA), 30 
States/UTs have enacted suitable legislations for compulsory roof top rainwater 
harvesting. The  Committee feel in spite of almost all the States having enacted 
laws for roof top harvesting, the decline in ground water level is quite huge. The 
Committee, therefore, are compelled to conclude that the laws for rain water 
harvesting have not been able to serve the intended purposes and have remained 
on paper. They, therefore, recommend MOWRRD&GR and MOH&UA to take up 
the issue with State Governments/ULBs/UAAs for stricter enforcement of the laws 
for achieving the desired results at ground level. 
  
2.13. The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken replies have 
stated: 
 
“Ministry of Housing and Urban A ffairs stated that this has been already  been 
replied by Ministry o f Jal Shakti , Department of W ater Resources River 
Development And Ganga  Rejuvenation and sent  to Lok Sabha secretariat . O n 
the other hand Ministry of Water Resources River Development a nd Ganga 
Rejuvenation stated that this pertains to Ministry of Housing And Urban Affairs. 
 
ABSENCE OF MONITORING MECHANISM FOR GROUND WATER RE CHARGE 
DURING THE LAST TWO YEARS CRITICIZED, GOVERNMENT ASKED TO 
PERSUADE STATE GOVERNMENTS/UTS FOR STRICTER ENFORCEMENT OF 
AVAILABLE NORMS 
 
(Recommendation No 8) 
 
2.14. The Committee are perturbed to note that work done on the issue of 
reducing dependence on ground water for water supply in the country has 
been far from satisfactory and it was only due to the intervention of Hon'ble 
Supreme Court, the Government had to co nstitute Central Ground Water 
Authority (CGWA) for regulation and control of ground water development 
and management in the country on 10 December, 1996. The Committee find 
that as per CGWA norms, the country has been divided into four categories of 
safe, semi critical, critical and over exploited areas mandating varying degree 
of recharge measures to be undertaken by industries and even higher degree 
of recharge measures for water intensive industries like packaged drinking 
water, soft drink and so on. In this context, the Committee find that there 
are a total of 6584 assessment Units, 1034 over exploited, 253 critical, 681 
semi critical and 4520 safe units, with CGMA notifying 162 areas for 
regulation of ground water development banning therein tubewells e xcept 
for drinking and domestic purposes and compulsory obtaining of NOC for 
industries/infrastructure and mining projects. The Committee also find that 

16 
 
from 2006 to 2011 Chief Secretaries of 14 affected States/UTs of Andhra 
Pradesh, Haryana, Gujarat, Punjab, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu etc., and NHAI, 
CRRI, CPWD, State PWDs, Indian Railways, Residential Group Housing 
Societies, Industrial establishments and soon have been asked to take 
suitable steps for recharge and rain water harvesting measures. In this 
connection, the progress of aquifer mapping in 32 different States/UTs has 
been placed before the Committee and the road map for covering the 
remaining areas by 2025 has also been conveyed. Besides, progress of 
enacting suitable legislations in 15 different S tates/UTs has also been 
apprised. The Committee however are constrained to note that there is no 
compliance of the directions of CGWA during the last two years by 
MOWRRD&GR from State Governments, NHAI, CRRI, CPWD, Indian 
Railways, Residential Group Housing Societies and so on. In this context, the 
Committee also find that the Committee on Water Resources in their Fifth 
Report (Para 10), Sixteenth Lok Sabha have inter alia desired the 
Government to take pro -active and concerted efforts to encourage all 
States/UTs to follow up action on Master Plan for Artificial Recharge to 
Ground Water in India and also to undertake a comprehensive review 
thereof. The Committee feel that the real problem lies in poor compliance of 
available provisions due to which all these  good provisions remain only on 
paper. The Committee, therefore, recommend MOWRRD&GR CGWB to play a 
pro-active role in this regard and persuade State Governments for stricter 
implementation of available provisions for reducing dependence on ground 
water for different purposes in metropolitan cities. 
 
2.15. The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken replies have 
stated: 
"In order to reduce the dependence on ground water for different purposes, 
extraction of ground water for industries, infrastructure units and mining projects 
23 States/UTs is being regulated by Central Ground Water Author ity at Central 
level through provisions given under  the Environment (Protection) Act , 1986. 
Further, balance 13 States/UTs are regulating  ground water de velopment 
through State Ground Water Authorities / through Government  orders. Also 
efforts are being made by government to ensure water conservation and water  
harvesting to have sustainable water management . Some of the steps taken are 
as under: 
 
• Hon'ble Prime Minister has written a letter to all sarpanchs on 08.06.2019 
regarding the importance o f water conservation and ha rvesting a nd 
exhorted them to a dopt all  appropriate measures to make wa ter 
conservation a mass movement. 
• Government of India has launched the Jal S hakti Abhiyan w.e.f. 0 I Ju ly 
2019 w hich is a time bound ca mpaign with a mission m ode approac h 
intended to improve water availability including ground water conditions in 
the water stressed blocks. 

17 
 
• The Mi nistry i s ca rrying o ut an IEC cam paign for awar eness genera tion 
among sta keholders o n the importance of water cons ervation a nd 
rainwater harvesting for augmenting the ground water resources. 
• National Water Awards have been instituted and conferred to winners with 
the objectives of en couraging the stakeholders to adopt holistic approach 
towards wa ter resources management and also to ge nerate c ompetition 
towards effective water conservation/harvesting in the country. 
• Various N on-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) a nd 
individuals/Industrial establishments have a lso taken m easures fo r 
sustainable management of ground water. 
 
These i nitiatives have been h ighlighted b y t he M inistry of Water R esources, 
RD&GR and are available on its website through a separate link for the benefit of 
all, 
 
• To further encourage general public in management of water resources an 
interactive link h as been a ctivated in Ministr y w ebsite where th e best 
practices can be submitted by all concerned for benefit of others. 
• NWM has initiated a semin ar series 'WATER TALK' to promote dialogue 
and in formation sharing a mong participants o n variety o f water related 
topics. The aim of 
• 'WATER TALK' is to stimulate awareness, build capacities of stakeholders 
and encourage people to become a ctive participants t o s ustain li fe by 
saving water on earth. 
• National Water Mission has initiated p reparation of State S pecific Wa ter 
Plans for water sector". 
 
GOVERNMENT ASKED TO PERSUADE STATE GOVERNMENTS/UTS/ULBS/UDAS 
TO USE TRADITIONAL PRACTICES OF ROOF WATER HARVESTING AND 
OTHER SIMPLE TECHNOLOGIES OUTLINED BY NITI AAYOG. 
 
(Recommendation No 9) 
 
2.16. The Committee are constrained to note that centuries old traditional 
rain water harvesting technologies in the form of Aahar -Pynes in South 
Bihar, Bawadis in Rajasthan, Bhandaras in Maharashtra, Bundela and 
Chandela tanks in Madhya Pradesh, Naulas in Uttra khand etc. have been put 
into disuse and low cost and affordable rain water harvesting technologies 
for roof top and drive way run off technologies brought out by NITI Aayog 
that are already available with State Governments/UTs have not been 
implemented in  desired measures. The Committee also are constrained to 
note that whatever work that has been done is in Pilot Project stages in over 
exploited areas in nine States and works on Base Line Framework for Water 
Recycling has been undertaken by NITI Aayog alo ne. In this context, the 
Ministry of Water Resources and River Development, and Ganga 
Rejuvenation and Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs were unanimous 
before the Committee about need for revival of traditional rain water 

18 
 
harvesting technologies, train ing and transfer of technology and finding 
ways to store or divert the flood flows and its utilization for agriculture and 
for other purposes. In this connection, the Committee feel that technologies 
outlined by NITI Aayog for roof top and Drive Way Rainfa ll Harvesting like 
Sumps and Open Well, Percolation Wells and other methods are quite 
workable that can be used in a big way by flat owners and office complexes 
alike. The Committee are also constrained to find that both the Ministry of 
Water Resources, Ri ver Development and Ganga Rejuvenation and Ministry 
of Housing and Urban Affairs have forsaken their role in this regard by taking 
the shelter behind 'Water' being State Subject and thereby leaving this 
important subject as a responsibility of State Govern ments. The Committee, 
therefore, observe that although various rain harvesting technologies both 
traditional and otherwise are already available with the State Governments, 
yet there is virtually no work done at ground level for the intended purpose. 
In this context, the Committee on Water Resources (2015 -16) in their Tenth 
Report (Para 6) presented to the House in August, 2016 had inter alia 
underlined the need for inter -Ministerial approach for revival of traditional  
such bodies for Rain Water Harvesting purposes. The Committee, therefore,  
even at the cost of sounding repetitive recommend that both the Ministry of 
Water Resource, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation and Ministry of 
Housing & Urban Affairs should persuade State Governments to take all out  
efforts for revival of traditional rain water technologies and workable 
technologies outlined by NITI Aayog on priority basis in a time bound 
manner. 
 
2.17. The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken replies have 
stated: 
"Efforts are being made by government to ensure water conservation and water 
harvesting to have sustainable water management in the country. Some of the 
steps taken are as under: 
 
• Hon'ble Prime Minister h as written a letter t o a ll sarpanchs o n 08 .06.2019 
regarding the importance of water conservation and harvesting and exhorted 
them to a dopt all appropriate measures to make water conservation a mass 
movement. 
• The issue of water conservation was discussed with the concerned Ministers 
and offi cials of th e S tate Governments by Mi nister, Jal Shakti in a m eeting 
held on 11.6.2019. 
• Cabinet Secretary discussed the issue of wa ter conservation with th e Chief 
Secretaries of the States through video-conference on 21.05.2019. 
• An 'Inter Ministerial C ommittee' under th e Chairmanship of S ecretary (W R, 
RD & GR ) has been constituted t o t ake fo rward th e s ubject of 'Water 
Conservation Related Activities for Optimum Utilization of Monsoon Rainfall' 
which meets from time to time to discuss the issue of water conservation. The 
committee includes of ficers from different S tates/UTs. Last m eeting of t he 
Inter-Ministerial Committee was held on 01/05/2019. 

19 
 
• Government of lndia has launched the Jal Shakti Abhiyan w.e.f. 01 July 2019 
which is a t ime bound campaign with a mission mode approach i ntended to 
improve w ater a vailability including gro und water conditions in the w ater 
stressed blocks. 
• The M inistry is carrying o ut an IEC campaign for a wareness g eneration 
among stakeholders on the importance of wa ter conservation and rainwater 
harvesting for augmenting the ground water resources. 
• National Water Awards have been instituted and conferred to winners with the 
objectives of encouraging the stakeholders to adopt holistic approach towards 
water resources man agement a nd also to generate compe tition towards 
effective water conservation/harvesting in the country. 
• Various No n-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) a nd i ndividuals/Industrial 
establishments have also t aken measures for s ustainable management of 
ground water. 
• These initiatives have been highlighted by the Ministry of Water Resources, 
RD&GR a nd are available on it s we bsite th rough a separa te link for the 
benefit of all. 
• To fu rther encourage ge neral pu blic in man agement o f water res ources an 
interactive link ha s been activated in Ministry we bsite w here the best 
practices can be submitted by all concerned for benefit of others. 
• NWM has initiated a seminar series 'WATER TALK' to promote dialogue and 
information sharing among participants on variety of water related topics. The 
aim of 
• 'WATER T ALK' is to stimulate aw areness, build capacities of sta keholders 
and encourage people to become active participants to sustain life b y saving 
water on earth. 
• National Water Mission has initiated preparation of State Specific Water Plans 
for water sector". 
 
GOVERNMENT ASKED TO PROMOTE RAIN WATER HARVESTING IN A BIG 
WAY 
 
(Recommendation No 10) 
 
2.18. The Committee note that the issue of Rain Water harvesting has not 
been getting the required level of attention at Government level as has been 
candidly admitted before the Committee by none other than Secretary, 
Housing & Urban Affairs. This is in spite o f development of a time bound 
national strategy for water conservation for long term water sustainability 
being acknowledged by NITI Aayog. In this connection, the Committee are 
constrained to note that not much progress has been made. The various 
issues a nd Government's/NITI Aayog's stand thereto has also been 
submitted before the Committee. These inter alia are need to bring a law on 
rain water harvesting in the country with only 15 States enacting suitable 
legislation, inclusion of rain water harvesting in schools for desired level of 
promotion with only some schools doing needful, separating drinking water 
with other uses for rain water harvesting purposes with NITI Aayog 
emphasizing for Strategic Baseline Framework for Water Recycling and 

20 
 
agreeing for i ts use in new projects and constructions, using MPLADs funds 
for renovating jheels with funding from State Governments, using the 
unutilized space of nalas in cities for rain water harvesting with NITI Aayog 
holding that proposal requires in -depth examination and dredging of ponds 
and canals with Ministry of Water Resource & River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation observing that the issue is State Subject and as such rain water 
harvesting can be done by State Governments. In this connection, the 
Committee also find that as per Para 17, Fifth Report, Committee on Water 
Resources, the Ministry had organized 'India Water Weeks' in 2012, 2013 
and 2015 to resolve water related issues and create awareness on ground 
water by giving a plateform for interaction with s takeholders policy maker, 
etc. and Ministry of Panchayati Raj and Department of Land Resources are 
also engaged in water conservation through watershed development. The 
Committee however feel that although all these efforts have been put in, yet 
their impact is not visible at ground level. In this connection, the Committee 
are glad to note that Jharkhand is the only State that has come out with a 
scheme for awareness generation of protection of ground water and artificial 
recharge by grant of 25,000/ - for c onstruction of artificial recharge 
structures. The Committee feel that all these issues concerning promotion of 
rain water harvesting are quite relevant in present context particularly the 
issue of inclusion of rain water harvesting across all the schools has been 
acknowledged by NITI Aayog also. It is time that best practices in this regard 
were identified and taken forward for implementation wherever feasible. In 
this context, Committee's examination has revealed that Ministry of Water 
Resources, Rural De velopment and Ganga Rejuvenation are carrying out 
various awareness campaigns through Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC) activities for water management and constructive 
through special campaigns like 'Jal Bachao, Vedio Banao, Puruskar Pao" and  
broadcast of audio spots on Radio Channels started in 10th July and to 
continue till November, 2018. The Committee feel that public at large is quite 
unaware about such moves like many other Government moves due to lack 
of sufficient publicity. The Commit tee, therefore, recommend that all these 
issues be taken up with State Governments and more and more States 
should come out with scheme for promotion of RWH so that importance of 
rain water harvesting is well recognized through print and electronic media 
among all the stakeholders and it becomes a peoples' movement in a big 
way. 
 
2.19. The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken replies have 
stated: 
"To p romote a wareness generation and to convey t he message of wat er 
conservation to all stake-holders including general publ ic, a number of steps 
have been taken by the government. Some of the step s in this di rection are as 
under: 
 

21 
 
• Hon'ble Prime M inister h as w ritten a letter t o a ll sarpanchs o n 08.06.2019 
regarding the importa nce of water co nservation and harvesting and exhorted 
them to adopt a ll appropriate measures to make water conservation a mass 
movement. 
• Government of India has launched the Jal Shakti Abhiyan w.e.f. 01 July 2019 
which is a time bo und campaign with a mission mode approach intended to 
improve water ava ilability including gro und water conditions i n the water 
stressed blocks. 
• The Mi nistry is carrying o ut a n IEC campa ign for awareness generat ion 
among stakeholders on the importance of wate r conservation and ra inwater 
harvesting for augmenting the ground water resources. 
• National Water Awards have been instituted and conferred to winners with the 
objectives of encouraging the stakeholders to adopt holistic approach towards 
water r esources manageme nt and a lso to generate competition t owards 
effective water conservation/harvesting in the country. 
• Various No n-Governmental Or ganisations (NG Os) and indi viduals/Industrial 
establishments have a lso take n measures for s ustainable management of 
ground water. These initiatives have been highlighted by the Ministry of Water 
Resources, RD&GR and are available on its we bsite through a separate lin k 
for the benefit of all. 
• To fu rther encourage genera l p ublic in managemen t of wa ter r esources an 
interactive lin k has been act ivated in Ministry we bsite w here the bes t 
practices can be submitted by all concerned for benefit of others. 
• NWM has initiated a seminar series 'WATER TALK' to promote dialogue and 
information sharing among participants on variety of water related topics. The 
aim of  'WATER TALK' is to s timulate a wareness, build c apacities o f 
stakeholders and encourage people to become active participants to s ustain 
life by saving water on earth. 
 
IMPLEMENTATION OF RAIN WATER HARVESTING LAW AND GUIDELINES 
CRITICIZED AND GOVERNMENT ASKED TO PERSUADE STATES/UTS FOR 
THEIR EFFECTIVE IMPLEMENTATION 
 
(Recommendation No 11) 
 
 
2.20. The Committee note that although the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs have come out with Model Building Bye-laws, 2016 and as many as 32 
States have made necessary provisions about rain water harvesting in their 
respective State laws and the Ministry of Housing of Urban Affairs have also 
claimed before the Committee that approval to Building Plan and issuing 
Occupancy-cum-Completion Certificate are issued only after rain water 
harvesting provisions are adhered to, yet the Committee are hardly 
convinced that in actual terms it is being done thereby making the objective 
of Rain Water Harvesting to recharge ground water and augmenting overall 
water availability completely a farce. The Committee are constrained to note 
that mandatory provisions for Rain Wat er harvesting in MBBL, 2016 
regarding compulsory rain water harvesting for 100 sq. water for residential 

22 
 
plotted Houses, avoiding concrete, paving and use of permeable material in 
open parking spaces for Group Housing Societies, storage and recharge pits 
percolation walls for public and semi public buildings and so on are hardly 
seen as implemented at ground level and whatever work that is being done is 
for namesake only. In this connection, the Committee are shocked to note 
that only Municipal Corporations  of Madurai, Mumbai, Hyderabad, Bengaluru 
have constituted rain water harvesting cells for monitoring implementation 
of rain water harvesting provision and in respect of other cities no such 
implementation report has been provided. The Committee can, there fore, 
very well surmise that elaborate Urban Greening Guidelines, 2014 
highlighting impact of concretisation of payment of trees, requiring Greening 
of roads by planting of trees along National and State Highways, city roads 
specifying clearly about spacin g of trees to be planted, kinds of trees to be 
planted and maintained together with area -wise specifications, updating of 
technology for transplantation of trees etc. are not been implemented at all 
at ground level. In this context, the Committee on Water Resources in their 
Fifth Report, (Para 9), Sxiteenth Lok Sbha presented to the Parliament on 
December, 2015 have also endorsed the same view. The Committee, 
therefore, conclude that a lot more is still desired on the issue and the modus 
operandi needs to b e revisited urgently. The Committee at the same time 
also underline the need for RWH Monitoring mechanism already operating in 
four places mentioned above be operationalised in other cities also without 
any further loss of time. The Committee would like to  be apprised of the 
same on priority basis. 
 
2.21. The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken replies have 
stated: 
"MoHUA shall proactively pursue with the States/UTs to implement the RWH and 
also strengthen the enforcement by ULBs/UDAs". 
 
NEED FOR PROPER MONITORING OF RWH VIOLATIONS AT STATE LEVEL 
STRESSED 
 
(Recommendation No 12) 
 
 
2.22. The violations of RWH provisions in the form of misuse of RWH space 
allocated in building plan for parking purposes have been subject matter of 
intense debate before the Committee during the current examination and the 
Committee are anguished to note a non -committal reply from MOH&UA that 
Building Plan approvals and issue of occupancy cum certificate (OCC) are not 
issued until the provisions are m ade for RWH. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the issue should be taken up with all seriousness with State 
Governments and implementing agencies and details of such violations be 

23 
 
obtained from different State Governments for their perusal for reach ing at 
logical conclusion. 
 
2.23. The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken replies have 
stated: 
"This would require effective monitoring at ULB/UDA level and they need to 
ensure that while granting Occupancy completion certificate, t he buildings have 
to be adhere provisions of RWH". 
 
GOVERNMENT ASKED TO IMPRESS UPTO STATE GOVERNMENTS TO EMULATE 
THE GOOD WORK DONE BY SOME STATE GOVERNMENTS ON RAIN WATER 
HARVESTING. 
 
(Recommendation No 13) 
 
2.24 The Committee find from the status of incorporation of RWH provision 
in State Building Bye Law that only a few States have faired well in RWH 
work. The Committee find that West Bengal and Tamil Nadu have made RWH 
mandatory for all buildings, whereas other States have made RWH in terms 
of roof top and size of plots. Haryana, has made rain water harvesting 
compulsory for plot owners with roof top areas of more than 100 sq. metres, 
whereas Delhi has made water harvesting through storing of water run off 
including rain water in all new buildings on  plots of size more than 105 sq. 
metres mandatory . Similarly, Kerala has made RWH mandatory for 
residential building of 100 sq. metres of floor area or more and plot areas of 
200 sq. or more. In respect of other States, it is at varying level. In this 
connection, the Committee appreciate that Tamil Nadu have been futuristic 
about RWH by coming up with a Draft Master Plan, 2016 for RWH and Uttar 
Pradesh is in the process of coming up with Master Plan/Zonal Plan for RWH 
purposes. Similarly Andhra Pradesh, Ta mil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh have 
been innovative towards RWH work. The Committee find that State 
Government of Andhra Pradesh on its own has come up for RWH for 
constructing RWH at Government cost for constructions with open space of 
not less than 200 sq. m etres by recovering the cost of construction with 
penalty and Uttar Pradesh has made it compulsory to develop ponds/water 
bodies in 5% of total area proposed for housing societies of 20 acres and 
above. The Committee feel that such steps are progressive an d may be 
emulated by other State Governments so that work on RWH can be started in 
a more focused and in a time bound manner for getting the expected result 
in near future. The Committee recommend both MOWRRD&GR and MOH&A 
to persuade the State Governments to move faster on this issue to augment 
the water supply for urban population which is increasing at a fast pace. 
 

24 
 
2.25. The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken replies have 
stated: 
"The issue of wa ter conservation/harvesting was discussed with the concerned 
Ministers a nd officia ls of the S tate Gove rnments by Mi nister, Jal Shakti in a 
meeting held o n l I .6.2019. C abinet Sec retary disc ussed t he i ssue of w ater 
conservation with the Chief Secretaries of t he States through video-conference 
on 21.05.20 I 9. An 'Inter Ministerial Committee' under th e C hairmanship of 
Secretary (WR, RD & GR) has been constituted to take forward the subject of 
'Water Co nservation R elated A ctivities for Optimum Utilization of Monsoon 
Rainfall' which m eets from tim e to time to discuss the issue of wa ter 
conservation. Th e co mmittee includes officers fro m diff erent S tates/UTs. Last 
meeting of the Inter-Ministerial Committee was held on 01/05/20l9". 
 
NEED FOR HOLDING CONSULTATIONS FOR WATER AVAILABILITY THROUGH 
RAIN WATER HARVESTING IN URBAN AREAS BEYOND THE BOUNDARIES OF 
AMRUT AND SMART CITIES MISSION HIGHLIGHTED 
 
(Recommendation No 14) 
 
2.26. The Committee are constrained to note that Ministry of Housing & Urban 
Affairs have not discussed the issue of water availability through RWH in urban 
areas beyond the boundaries of AMRUT and Smart Cities Mission and whenever 
such discussions are held these were held within MOH&UA. The Committee have 
been informed that last such discussions were held in December, 2017 an d the 
first time the issue was deliberated upon at National Workshop on Transforming 
Urban Landscape, 3rd Anniversary of PHA(U) AMRUT and Smart Cities Mission 
held on 27 -28 July, 2018 at Lucknow wherein detailed discussions took place 
among stakeholders to  improve water supply through conservation measures 
including RWH. The Committee recommends that more and more such national 
level workshops be organized for the purpose of data mining for ascertaining real 
assessment of water availability through RWH even  beyond the ambit of AMRUT 
and Smart Cities Mission. 
 
2.27. The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken replies have 
stated: 
"Consultations can be organized for ensuring water availability even the areas 
not covered under the AMRUT and Smart Cities Mission". 
 
SPORADIC WORKDONE ON RWH IN CERTAIN CITIES, STATES CRITICIZED 
AND GOVERNMENT ASKED TO EXTEND THE SAME THROUGHOUT THE 
COUNTRY 
 
(Recommendation No 15) 
 

25 
 
 
2.28. The Committee are constrained to note that some cities and States 
have done commendable work for RWH, however it is sporadic and sparse. 
For instance Chennai has done good work by opening up an awareness 
campaign about RWH, through 'Rain Centres' in the office premises of 
Chennai Metro Water Supply and Sewarage Board (CMWSSB) and  has 
become first city with 100% RWH city in the country. Delhi has also 
witnessed some work by Delhi Jal Board in the form of giving 10% rebate in 
property tax for RWH for consumers on 100 sq. meter plot with 1.5 times 
increase in case of non compliance f or plot owners of 500 sq. mt. and above. 
RWH work done by DDA, DMRC, CPWD have also been outlined before the 
Committee. Similar other best practices in other cities of Bengaluru and 
Hyderabad have been outlined before the Committee. Likewise, the 
MOWRRDGR in their submission before the Committee have also showcased 
the work done on Artificial Recharge Schemes implemented by Central 
Ground Water Board (CGWB) in urban areas during erstwhile VII and IX Plan 
periods in various cities of Chandigarh, Delhi, Jaipu r, Jammu, Bengaluru, 
Indore, Bhubneswar, Lucknow, Aligarh, Allahabad, Ranchi, Nagpur, Chennai 
and Hyderabad under different Schemes. NITI Aayog also outlined before the 
Committee various RWH works undertaken at city and State level 
showcasing work done in prominent cities of NCT of Delhi, Indore, Kanpur, 
Hyderabad, Mumbai, etc. and by State Governments of Madhya Pradesh, 
Gujarat, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, outlining various RWH steps taken such as 
CGWA banning drilling of tube wells and notified areas (South an d South 
West Delhi) and adjoining areas of Faridabad, Gurugram and Ghaziabad 
incentivizing rebate on property tax etc., for RWH work in Indore and Uttar 
Pradesh. The Committee however feel that the good work done is limited to 
certain cities and with limited number of States. They, therefore, recommend 
that RWH works be undertaken and promoted in a big way also in other 
States for augmenting availability of water for meeting the requirement in 
urban areas. 
 
2.29. The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in  their action taken replies have 
stated: 
"MoHUA shall facilitate exchange of good practices to all the States/UTs to 
ensure that RWH becomes a pan India practice". 
***** 
 
 
 
 

26 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------NIL------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

27 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------------------NIL------------------------------------- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

28 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THEGOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED  
 
NON-AVAILABILITY OF UPDATED DATA FOR GROUND WATER RECHARGE 
CRITICIZED AND EXPEDITIOUS UPDATION OF DATA RECOMMENDED  
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
5.1 The Committee are constrained to note that the nodal Ministry of 
Water Resource, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation 
(MOWR,RD&GR) is not equipped with latest data about ground water 
recharge and is managing with data available in Master Plan for Artificial 
Recharge to Ground Water, 2013 brought out by Central Ground Water Board 
(CGWB). In this connection, th e Ministry has admitted candidly before the 
Committee that there is need for updating of Master Plan incorporating the 
data generated by different agencies in coordination with States. As per 
aforesaid Master Plan a total of 1.11 crore artificial recharge structures in 
Urban and Rural areas in the country comprising around 88 lakh recharge 
structures/facilities utilizing rainwater directly from roof top and more than 
23 lakh artificial recharge and rainwater harvesting structures for conserving 
surplus runoff to augment the groundwater resources to be constructed. The 
Committee anticipate that since five years have already gone by, the demand 
of artificial recharge structures might have also increased. In this 
connection, the NITI Aayog has informed the Comm ittee that it has 
developed a Composite Water Management Index to guage the performance 
of States in the field of management of water resources. In view of the 
above, the Committee strongly recommend expeditious updation of data 
regarding artificial recharge and also urge the MOWR,RD&GR to make use of 
the composite Water Management Index brought out by NITI Aayog for 
assessing the exact magnitude of work to be taken in hand. 
  
5.2 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken replies have 
stated: 
 
“A committee is being constituted under CGWB with members from concerned 
State/UTs to finalize an indicative report with tentative list of structures and 
tentative cost and submit the same to Ministry by 31th Dec 2019.” 
 
 
 

29 
 
Comments of the Committee 
5.3 The Committee are glad to note that Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
has constituted a Committee under Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) to 
work on indicative report with tentative list of structure and cost to be submitted 
by 31st December, 2019 for obtaining updated data on artificial recharge of ground 
water.  The Committee would like to know the latest update on the issue for 
arriving at logical conclusions.   
USE OF SATELLITE TECHNOLOGY FOR MAPPING OF GROUND WATER FOR 
ASSESSING WATER NEEDS OF URBAN TOWNS RECOMMENDED 
 
(Recommendation No 6) 
 
5.4 The Committee are disappointed to note that though there are multiple 
Central agencies viz., Central Water Mission (CWM), Central Water 
Commission (CWC), Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) and Ganga Flood 
Control Commission (GPCC) are working under nodal Mi nistry of WR,RD and 
GR, yet the data of water management in urban areas is not available in the 
country nor any exercise has been done by MOHUA in this regard. Besides, 
the Ministry are in the process of preparing a water budget on the lines of 
financial budget that too is in preliminary stage with 11 States viz., Andhra 
Pradesh, Telangana, West Bengal, Uttarakhand, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Tamil Nadu and Arunachal Pradesh coming 
forward with State Specific Action Plan (SSAP)  in Phase I and remaining 
States being taken up in Phase II. The Committee have also noted that very 
recently a Coordination Committee has been constituted to go into the 
current and future demand vis -à-vis availability of water including drinking 
for dome stic purposes in the major cities and to suggest an action plan 
accordingly and soon its report is expected. The Committee's examination 
has also revealed that Geographic Information System (GIS) technology a 
map based advance tool integrating various them atic pieces of information 
to assist in evolving solutions for management of water resources has 
already been adopted by Chhattisgarh, Tripura, Meghalaya, Telangana, Tamil 
Nadu, West Bengal for rainwater harvesting. The Committee feel that 
prominent States  viz., Maharashtra, Karnataka, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh 
housing prominent Metropolitan cities of Mumbai, Pune, Bangaluru, 
Ahmedabad, Surat and Visakhapattam as also NCT of Delhi are lagging 
behind in adopting the GIS Technology for rainwater harvesting. In view of 
the fact that there are as many as 46 Metropolitan cities in the county, there 
is a need to adopt GIS Technology across all the States/UTs for rainwater 
harvesting purposes. The Committee are also to note that the Committee's 
suggestion of creation  of a sustainable infrastructure by use of excellent 
technologies available through satellite mapping of ground water for 
assessing the water needs of each city by use of five sources of water, sea 
water, rain water, ground water and reservoir has not been  addressed at all 
by the nodal Ministry of WRRD&GR. In this context, the MOWR,RD&GR have 

30 
 
merely elaborated the standard reply that water being 'State' subject, 
initiatives on water governance is primarily the responsibility of States and 
has spelt out goal s of National Water Mission that inter alia pertain to areas 
like studies on impact of climate change in 7 river basins, capacity building 
and tracing of stakeholders, work done on conservation of water, minimizing 
wastage etc. In this context, the Committ ee find that as per Fifth Report of 
the Committee on Water Resources (2015 -16) Para 12, a pilot scheme has 
been started in Indore district of Madhya Pradesh for strengthening the 
Satellite Application Centres (SACs) in 8 States namely Maharashtra, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Chhattisgarh, Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, West Bengal and 
Assam to assist MGNREGA functioning in better planning of water connection 
and structures and the Committee had recommended its extension to 
remaining seven States. This was also reiterated in their Action Taken 
Report. The Committee would like to know further action taken in this 
regard. In view of the foregoing, since the Report of the Coordination 
Committee to assess the demand and availability of drinking water for 
domestic purpose in maj or cities is expected shortly and work on water 
budget is underway, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should also 
taken into account their suggestion that five sources of water, sea water, 
rain water, ground water and water to be used for reservoir s for assessing 
the demand of each city in a time bound manner for creation of 
infrastructure by making use of available technological advancement and be 
expeditiously implemented by using the expertise of WAPCO Ltd which has 
international expertise in sur veys for effective and integrated development 
of water resources with specialization in areas like flood control and river 
management.  
 
5.5 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken replies have 
stated: 
“Using GIS Technology for water management comes within the domain of 
Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) as the same maintains a data of surface 
and ground water resources. GIS for urban areas used for preparing the master 
plan can provide a layer which make give details of spatial distribution of water 
resources” 
5.6  While noticing absence of data of water management in the 
country even when multiple agencies like Central Water Mission, Ganga 
Flood Control Commission etc, are at work and work of Water budget is at 
initial stage tha t too in few States, and a Report of Coordination Committee 
to assess the demand and availability of water in the country is yet to come 
the Committee had recommended the Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation (WRRD and GR) to assess the demand 
of each city by five sources of water viz., sewerage water, sea water, rain 
water, ground water, reservoir water a time bound manner by using 
international technological advance and expertise for effective and 

31 
 
integrated development of water resources with specialization in areas like 
flood control and river management in the country. In response thereto, the 
Committee have been merely formed that using GIS Technology for water 
Management comes under Central Flood Water Board and using G IS for 
urban area can provide a layer which may give details of special distribution 
of water resources. The Committee feel that reply of the Government is too 
short and does not cover the full sweep of the recommendation. The 
Committee, therefore, reitera te their recommendation in-toto and urge the 
Government to re -visit the entire issue and submit the same before the 
Committee for coming to logical conclusion. 
 
ABSENCE OF REQUIREMENT OF FUNDS FOR RWH IN THE COUNTRY 
CRITICIZED AND GOVERNMENT ASKED TO UPDAT E THE DATA 
EXPEDITIOUSLY 
 
(Recommendation No 16) 
 
 
5.7 The Committee note with concerned that the nodal Ministry of 
WR,RD&GR  responsible for RWH work in the country does not have updated 
data regarding requirement of funds for artificial recharge structur es in 
urban areas and is managing with five year old Master Plan for Artificial 
Recharges to Ground Water in India, 2013 estimating the total requirement 
of Rs.79,179 crore for constructing 1.11 crore RWH and Artificial Structures 
in the country. In this c onnection, the CGWA was candid in its admission 
before the Committee that the data needs updation. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that requirement of funds for RWH as also for 
Artificial Structures be expeditiously assessed for getting factual positio n 
without wasting any further time. 
 
5.8 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken replies have 
stated: 
"A committee is being constituted under CGWB with members from concerned 
State/UTs to finalize an indicative report with tentative  list of structures and 
tentative cost and submit the same to Ministry by 31th Dec 2019". 
 
HUGE GAP BETWEEN DEMAND VIS -À-VIS ACTUAL WORKDONE FOR RWH 
CRITICIZED AND GOVERNMENT ASKED TO ASSESS THE DEMAND VIS -À-VIS 
AVAILABILITY OF FUND FOR RWH UNIFORMLY IN THE COUNTRY 
 
 
(Recommendation No 17) 
 
5.9 The Committee's examination has revealed that work done so far for RWH 
has not been commensurate with the quantum of demand for such works in the 

32 
 
country. For instance, against the total requirements of funds amounting to Rs. 
17,985.39 crores for constructing around 88.00 lakh RWH structures in the 
country (as per relevant Master Plan, 2013), works for as low as 6.76 crore have 
been done in different States/UTs during Eighth to Eleventh Plan periods that too 
only in few States/UTs of NCT of Delhi, Chandigarh and States of Jammu and 
Kashmir, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya, Odisha, Uttar Pradesh, 
Jharkhand, Nagaland, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Telangana and Rajasthan. The 
Committee find that the above informat ion furnished before the Committee is 
incomplete and does not cover all the States/UTs. They, therefore, recommend 
MOWRRD&GR to make a complete assessment of existing vis-à-vis likely demand 
of RWH works alongwith cost involved in different States/UTs in consultation with 
MoH&UA, State Governments, ULBs, UDAs etc. in a time bound manner for 
getting an over view on the subject matter. 
 
5.10 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken replies have 
stated: 
"A committee is being constituted under CGWB with members from concerned 
State/UTs to finalize an indicative report with tentative list of structures and 
tentative cost and submit the same to Ministry by 31th Dec 2019". 
SLOW IMPLEMENTATION OF RWH PROJECTS UNDER SMART CITIES 
MISSION CRITICIZED AND GOVERNMENT ASKED TO EXPEDITE THE SAME 
 
(Recommendation No 18) 
 
5.11 The Committee's examination has revealed that a total of 45 RWH 
projects at the cost of Rs.1133.6 crore in different States are under 
implementation out of which only three projects one at New Delhi Municipal 
Committee worth Rs.1.1 crore, second at Ajmer worth Rs.1.8 crore and third 
at Surat worth Rs.0.5 crore have been completed and as many as 31 projects 
are under DPR preparation and 8 projects are under Tendering/Work Orde r 
stage and remaining are under DPR approval stage. The Committee are 
disappointed to find that prominent RWH projects that are under DPR 
preparation stage are New Town Kolkata Project worth Rs.180.6 crore, 
Tirupati Project worth Rs.200.00 crore, Aligarh P roject worth Rs.70 crore, 
Madurai Project worth Rs.50.00 crore, Agartala Project worth Rs.30.2 crore 
and other important cities of Kohima, Kanpur, Kochi and so on are also 
witnessing the same fate. Similarly, prominent Rain Water Harvesting 
projects that a re under Tendering Work Orders issued scenario are Sagar 
Project worth Rs.299.1 crore, three Tirupati Projects and other projects at 
Faridabad and Gwalior. Besides, two projects at Vadodara are at DPR 
approval stage. The Committee feel that such a large nu mber of Rain Water 
Harvesting projects at DPR preparation stage does not reflect well on the 
over-all functioning of MOH&UA. They, therefore, recommend for expeditious 
clearance of various projects under implementation for their early 
completion for intended purpose. 

33 
 
 
5.12 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken replies have 
stated: 
"Since the last 12 months cities, under Smart City Mission (SCM)  have made 
changes to the projects that was proposed by them. Earlier Rain water 
Harvesting was part of the larger infrastructure development projects, whereas 
now the cities have identified RWH as separate projects. As of 18 December 
2019 there are 58 rainwater harvesting projects worth Rs 379.04 Crore that are 
under various stages of implementation. The implementation status is provided in 
table below and the list of projects is given in annexure 1" 
 Current Status of RWH projects under SCM: 
Projects status No of Projects Cost in Rs Crore 
DPR approved 3 33.92 
DPR under Preparation  22 208.2 
Tender issued 4 18.91 
Work completed 9 20.39 
Work order issued 20 97.62 
Grand total 58 379.04 
 MIS as on 18th December 2019 
 
SLOW IMPLEMENTATION OF WATER SUPPLY PROJECTS UNDER AMRUT 
CRITICIZED 
 
(Recommendation No 19) 
 
5.13 While reviewing the project, planning and implementation of projects 
undertaken for RWH under AMRUT scheme, the Committee find that 
MOH&UA have furnished two sets of data, one showing status of 
implementation of water supply projects under AMRUT and second  details of 
rain water projects taken up by States/UT under AMRUT. The Committee are 
dismayed to note that large number of projects worth crores of rupees are 
either stuck up at 'Contract awarded' stage or at 'tendering stage' leaving 
only a few as complet ed. For instance as against the total projects worth 
Rs.37,741.94 crore as many as projects worth Rs.25,265.65 crore are at 
'Contract awarded' stage and projects worth Rs.12,195.1 crore are at 
tendering process and projects worth a measely Rs.281.18 crore only have 
been completed. The Committee's examination of State-wise data reveal that 
Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, Bihar, 
Chhattisgarh are the prominent States where most of such projects are 
pending. For instance in Ta mil Nadu out of total project worth Rs.6505.65 
crore, projects worth Rs.4101.98 crore are at 'tendering' and projects worth 
Rs.2351.72 crore are under 'contract awarded'. Likewise in Uttar Pradesh, 

34 
 
out of total project worth Rs.4427.68 crore, projects wort h Rs.3096.08 crore 
are 'under Tendering' and projects worth Rs.1327.24 are under 'Contract 
awarded'. In Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, Bihar projects worth 
crores are at 'Contract awarded' stage. In view of the foregoing, the 
Committee feel that a ll this does not augur well for this scheme and 
MOH&UA should pull up their socks and work out a time bound programme 
for their expeditious completion. The Committee also would like to know in 
what way these projects are going to promote RWH in different S tates/UTs. 
The Committee would like an explanation in this regard. 
 
 
LESS WORKDONE FOR RAIN WATER HARVESTING UNDER AMRUT SCHEME 
CRITICIZED GOVERNMENT ASKED TO EXPAND IT MANIFOLD ACROSS THE 
COUNTRY FOR INTENDED PURPOSE 
 
(Recommendation No 20) 
 
5.14 The Comm ittee's examination of work done for RWH under AMRUT 
Scheme of MOH&UA reveal that almost nil progress of work has been 
reported throughout the country and whatever work has been done is in few 
cities of Kochi, Kollam and Shimla that too is in preliminary s tages. The 
Committee feel that the tall claim of MOH&UA that RWH requirement has 
been taken care under AMRUT scheme does not hold good. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that RWH work under AMRUT scheme be scaled up in 
a big way across all the States/UTs for serving the intended purposes. 
 
5.15 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken replies have 
stated for recommendation No. 19 and 20: 
(i) The Atal Mission for Rejuvenation And Urban Transformation was 
launched on 25th June 2015 in  500 cities. The thurst areas of the mission 
are water supply, sewerage and septage management, storm water 
drainage, non-motorised urban transport and green spaces and parks. Of 
the total approved action plans worth Rs 77640 crore, projects worth Rs 
39,011 crore are in water supply sector.  Of these, work has been 
completed for 377 projects worth Rs 3886 crore (10%), contacts have 
been awarded and work in progress for 861 projects worth Rs 34046 crore 
(87%) and remaining projects are under tendering. 
(ii)  The projects related to water supply are huge infrastructure projects and 
acquired longest gestation period. At present water supply projects are 
showing significant progress and about 79 projects worth Rs 2,723 crore 
have above 90% progress at present. 
(iii)  In Tamil Nadu contacts have been awarded for projects worth Rs 6095 
crore including completed projects worth Rs 110 crore. Likewise in Uttar 

35 
 
Pradesh contracts have been awarded for projects worth Rs 3899 crore 
including completed projects worth Rs 16 6 crore. Further, the projects are 
progressing well in the states of Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, 
Karnataka and Bihar where projects worth Rs 670 crore for already 
completed 
RAINWATER HARVESTING UNDER AMRUT 
(i) Under the water supply component of the Missi on, projects related to 
augmentation of existing water supply, water treatment plants, 
rehabilitation of old water supply systems, rejuvenation of water bodies 
specifically for drinking water supply and recharging of groundwater etc 
can be taken up by the States/ UTs to enhance water supply in the 
Mission cities. Rain Water Harvesting is one of the subcomponents water 
supply 
(ii)  In addition, one of the key reform under AMRUT is adopting Model 
Building Bye Laws (MBBL) by the state and one of the milestone of MBBL 
is “State to formulate a policy and action plan for having rain water 
harvesting structures in all commercial, public buildings and new buildings 
on plots of 300 sq metres and above” 
(iii)  Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) has issued s eparate 
guidelines for urban and regional planning (URDPFI) and Model Building 
Bye Laws (MBBL) for Urban Local Bodies and Urban Development 
Authorities (UDAs) to implement rainwater harvesting. ULBs/UDAs are 
primarily responsible to ensure implementation o f rainwater harvesting in 
buildings within their jurisdiction. Till date, 33 States/ UTs have amended 
their building bye laws or issued guidelines in this regard 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
               JAGDAMBIKA PAL 
16 March,2021                               CHAIRPERSON,       
25 Phalguna,1942 (Saka)                               Standing Committee on Urban Development 
 
 

36 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
                                            [Vide Para 3 of the Introduction] 
 
 
 


37 
 
Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs 
1. Shri Durga Shanker Mishra   Secretary 
2. Ms. D. Thara      Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Vinay Pratap Singh    Director 
 
Delhi Development Authority 
4. Shri Anurag Jain     Vice Chairman, DDA 
National Capital Region Planning Board 
5. Smt. Archana Agarwal    Member Secretary 
Town and Country Planning Organisation 
6. Shri R. Srinivas     Town & Country Planner 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for taking evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Housi ng & 
Urban Affairs on the subject "Need for formulating Master Plans for every city in the 
country for holistic development". 
 *  *  *  *  *  * 
6. The Committee then took up for consideration Draft Reports (i) on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Obser vations/Recommendations contained in 24th 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Rainwater harvesting in Metropolitan Cities' ; and (ii) 
25th Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Solid Waste management Including Hazardous 
Waste, Medical Waste and E-waste and adopted the same without any modification. 
7. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept. 
 The Committee then adjourned 
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
* Matter not related to the Report. 

38 
 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
                                            [Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY FOURTH 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPLMENT 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
I.  Total number of recommendations                          20 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government:                              13 
Recommendation Nos. 1,2,3,4,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14 and 15  
Percentage to total recommendations                                           (65%)                                     
          
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:                           0 
Percentage to total recommendations                                              (0%)                
                                         
     
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of                                       
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:         0 
Recommendation Nos. - 
Percentage to total recommendations                                             (0%) 
                             
 
V.         Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final                    
replies of the Government are still awaited:                                       07 
Recommendation No.  5,6, 16,17,18,19 and 20    
Percentage to total recommendations                                              (35%) 