 
    STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
          URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
                                (2019-2020) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
FIRST REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN 
DEVELOPMENT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2019-2020) 
 
 
 
THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
11 September, 2020, 20 Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) 
 
THIRD  REPORT 
 
3 


STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2019-2020) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
FIRST REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN 
DEVELOPMENT ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2019-2020) 
 
 Presented to Speaker on 11.09.2020 
Presented to Chairperson on 14.09.2020 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 04.02.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 04.02.2021 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
11 September, 2020, 20 Bhadarada,1942 (Saka)  
 
 
 


 C.U.D. No.: 114 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2019 By Lok Sabha Secretariat  
 
Publish under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by………… 
 
 
 

(i) 
CONTENTS 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                           (iv)                            
 
CHAPTER I  Report    
                                                                                            
01 
CHAPTER II* Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government   
 
12 
CHAPTER III* Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
 
41 
CHAPTER IV* Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration   
 
46 
CHAPTER V* Observations /Recommendations in respect of which final  
replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
52 
 
APPENDICES 
I. Extracts of the Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the   - 55 
 Committee held on 27 Aug 2020.  
      
 
II. Analysis of the action taken by the Government on the  - 58 
 recommendations contained in First Report (17th Lok Sabha) 
 
III. Annexure-I of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. -  59 
 G-20017/12/2020-Budget-I-UD dated 6th August, 2020 
   

(ii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2019-20) 
Shri Jagdambika Pal         -        Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Adv. A.  M. Ariff 
3. Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel 
4. Shri Sanjay Kumar Bandi 
5. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
6. Shri Benny Behanan 
7. Shri Ramcharan Bohra 
8. Shri Hibi Eden 
9. Shri Gautam Gambhir 
10. Shri Syed Imtiaz Jaleel 
11. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
12. Smt Hema Malini 
13. Shri Hasnain Masoodi 
14. Shri P.C. Mohan 
15. Shri C.R. Patil 
16. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
17. Shri Adala Prabhakara Reddy 
18. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
19. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
20. Shri Sudhakar Tukaram Shrangre 
21. Shri Sunil Kumar Soni 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri M. J Akbar 
23. Shri Y.S. Chowdary 
24. Shri Kumar Ketkar 
25. Shri Sanjay Singh 
26. Shri Digvijay Singh$ 
27. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla* 
28. Shri Ram Chander Jangra* 
29. Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki* 
30. Shri Subrata Bakshi# 
31. Vacant 
 
*Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 22.07.2020. 
$ Shri Digvijay Singh, MP, RS has been re-nominated to the Committee  w.e.f. 22nd July, 2020. 
# Was nominated to the Committee on 22.07.2020, however, he has not taken oath yet. 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri  V.K. Tripathi                             -          Joint Secretary 
2. Shri  A.K. Shah   - Director 
 
 

(iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2019 -20) 
having been authorized by the Committee, present this Third Report (17 th Lok Sabha) on 
the 'Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee On Urban 
Development on Demands For Grants (201 9-2020)’ of the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs. 
2. The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 12 th December, 2019 and laid on 
the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same date. The Action Taken Replies of the Government 
on the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 06.08.2020. 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted th e Draft Report at their Sitting held on 
27.08.2020. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
contained in the First Report (Seventeent h Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at 
Annexure-II. 
  
5. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of appreciation 
for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the Officials of Lok Sabha  Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
6. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
  
 
New Delhi;  
11th September, 2020 
20 Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) 
JAGDAMBIKA PAL,  
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on 
Urban Development. 
 
 

 1 
 
Chapter-I 
 
(Report) 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2019 -20) 
deals with action taken by the Government on the O bservations/ 
Recommendations contained in the  First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants ( 2019-20) of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
which was presented to the Parliament on 11 December, 2019. 
 
1.2 Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of 
all the 26 recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized 
as follows: 
 
 (i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the  
  Government: 
  
  1,2,3,4,5,6,8,13,16,17,18,19,23,24,25 and 26   
(Total 16) 
          (Chapter-II) 
 (ii) Recommendations/Observations, which the Committee do not  
  desire to pursue in view of Government's replies: 
  
  7,12,14 and 15 
(Total 4) 
          (Chapter-III) 
 
 (iii) Recommendations/Observations, , in respect of which replies of  
  Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
  9,10,20 and 22 
 
(Total 4) 
          (Chapter-IV) 
 (iv) Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which final replies  
  of the Government are still awaited: 
 
  11 and 21  
 
   
(Total 2) 
          (Chapter-V) 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that specific replies to the comments contained 
in Chapter-I and recommendations included in Chapter V of this Report may 
be furnished at the earliest and in any case , not later than three month 
from the presentation of this Report. 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with and comment upon the action 
taken by the Government on some of their recommendations. 
 
Finding ways and m eans for reducing huge dependence on budget of 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Af fairs for Metro Rail Projects for enhancing 
allocations for housing and urban development related schemes reiterated. 
 
 Recommendations (Serial No. 2) 
 
1.5 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee while perusing the overview of Demands for Grants (2019 -
20) of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs find that out of total amount 
of Rs, 48,032.17 crore, as high as Rs. 19,152 crore is allocated to MRTS & 
Metro projects and rest for three pr ominent schemes of AMRUT (Rs. 7300 
crore), PMAY (U) (Rs. 6853.26 crore) and Mission for 100 Smart Cities (Rs. 
6450 crore) alongwith schemes with lesser outlays. The Committee also 
find this has been the trend of allocation during the previous year. The 
Committee are also dismayed to note that enhancement of allocation has 
been witnessed for Metro Projects whereas for other schemes the allocation 
has been by and large static. The Committee feel that ways and means 
should be found out in consultation with Sta te Governments/UTs for 
possible reduction in huge outlay on Metro Works so that adequate funds 
for other Schemes are given in the budget of MoH&UA”. 
 
 
 
 

3 
1.6 The Ministry of Housing and urban Affairs in their action taken reply had 
stated as under: 
 
“While Metro Projects are Capital intensive in nature and expenditure is 
booked in Capital Section, expenditure under other schemes is booked in 
Revenue Section of the Grant. Other schemes of the Ministry excluding 
General Pool Accommodation (GPA) is booke d in Revenue Section of the 
grant. There is also a focus of the Government to enhance the capital 
expenditure. Further, Standards for Light Urban Rail Transit System 
named "Metrolite" has been issued by this Ministry in July, 2019, cost of 
which is likely to be lesser than that of high capacity metro rail system 
being developed presently in the country,. The Operation and Maintenance 
(O&M) cost of this system is also expected to be much lesser than that of 
high capacity metro rail system. Increase in budgetary  
allocation for Metro projects over the years has been due to increase in 
metro network in cities across the country on continuous basis year to 
year. Development of metro rail system in the country has evolved over the 
years. With the standardization and indigenization, there has been a 
continual reduction in cost of metro components, which may reduce fund 
requirements for Metro projects. Even, under the National Infrastructure 
Pipeline announced in Budget 2020, 32.3% of the projected investment of 
over Rs.17 crore during the period from 2019 to 2025 of Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs is for Metro Projects. Further, Government 
arranges additional funds for schemes based on requirements. For example 
EBR of Rs.60,000 crore has been approved for fund ing PMAY(U) and 
Ministry will approach the Union Cabinet for additional EBR in the range of 
Rs.60,000 crore to Rs.80,000 crore as EBR of Rs.43,000 crores has already 
been utilized. Similarly, funds for other schemes(s) are demanded at the 
R.E. / Supplementary stage on the basis of demands from States/ UTs and 
additional requirements under Schemes”. 
 
 
1.7 The Committee appreciate that Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
has started going for cheaper Metro urban transport by issuing Standards for 
light urban Rail Transit System named Metrolite in July, 2019 resulting in 
lesser O peration and Maintenance (O&M) cost alongwith indigenation that 
may reduce fund requirements for Metro Projects. In this context while the  
 
 

4 
Committee reviewing the action taken replies on Demands for Grants (2020-
21) find that Kochi Metro Rail Corporation (KMRC0 has already started 
preparing DPR on me trolite at specified strech  in Kochi and Ministry of 
Housing and urban Affairs have also asked different State Governments to 
work on this area (Reference action taken reply to Recommendation Srl No. 
7, Second Report ) The Committee, therefore, reiterate that Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs should open work on cheaper mode of urban 
transport including ‘Metroneo’ i.e  ‘tyred Metro ’ in a big way so that 
precious resources are made available for other housing and urban 
development projects. 
 
Expeditious completion of works under different Missions under Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs reiterated 
 
(Recommendation Srl No. 3) 
 
1.8 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee are dismayed to note that Report Card of the MoH&UA - 4 
- for achieving the Goals of 'Ease of living', 'Responsive Governance', clean 
and sustainable development, Economic Growth and livelihood 
opportunities through an integrated strategy covering 4300 cities in the 
country through five Missions of AMRUT, SBM (U), PMAY (U), SCM and 
DAY-NULM has not been encouraging. In this context the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs has labored to convince the C ommittee by 
arguing their Mission wise achievements. The Committee however find that 
there are grey areas where a lot more is still to be done on slow progress on 
Credit Rating of cities under AMRUT, slow progress on SWM component 
under SBM(U) characterize d by polluted cities, huge gap between houses 
sanctioned viz -a-viz houses grounded/constructed under PMAY (U), low 
level of completion of projects for various reasons under SCM and low level 
of placement given to trained and certified skilled persons as compared to  
 
 
 

5 
 
persons given training for skill development under DAY-NULM Mission. The 
Committee feel that the work done on different Missions has to be 
accelerated to the desired level. The Committee, therefore, feel that the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs should take appropriate steps in this 
regard”. 
  
1.9 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action taken reply has stated 
as under: 
 
 “Under 100 Smart Cities Mission, the Ministry is regularly monitoring the 
implementation schemes / progress of cities to accelerate the pace of 
execution. Projects worth Rs. 1,63,000 crore worth under Smart Cities 
Mission have been tendered (80% of the total projects worth 2,05,018 crore) 
of which projects worth approximately Rs. 1,20,000 crore (viz 60% of the 
total projects proposed) have been grounded as on 31 January 2020. 
Projects worth more than 25,000 crore have been completed. Over the last 
19 months beginning June 2018, there has been a 225 percent increase in 
tendered projects, 290 percent increase in projects grounded and 390 
percent increase in projects completed. As regards AMRUT, out of the 500 
Mission cities, 13 cities have been merged with nei ghbouring cities 
resulting in 487 AMRUT cities. Of these, two cities namely Amaravati 
(Andhra Pradesh) and Kavaratti (Lakshadweep) do not have Urban Local 
Body (ULB) and hence credit rating is not possible for these cities. As of 
now, out of 485 AMRUT citi es, 469 cities have completed credit rating. 
Credit rating work has not been completed in 12 cities of West Bengal, 1 
city each in Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Manipur and Arunachal Pradesh. 
Efforts are being made to complete the credit rating work of these  
remaining towns. - 5 - Under PMAY (U), 1.03 crore houses have been 
sanctioned under PMAY (U) as on 24.02.2020. Of the sanctioned houses, 
nearly 62 lakh houses have been grounded for construction of which over 
32 lakh houses have been completed. Duration o f construction of houses 
varies from 12 months to 36 months in different verticals of the scheme. 
Houses under BLC vertical take comparatively less time, 12 to 18 months 
in general, whereas, in AHP and ISSR the construction takes 24 months to 
36 months and attains progressive completion during project cycle. This is 
a normal project cycle where various statutory compliances are secured. 
The Ministry through various review meetings, field visits, video 
conferencing etc. is pursuing all the participating States/UTs for grounding 
of all the sanctioned houses/projects so that these could be completed 
within the scheme period i.e. by the year 2022. A special drive for Data 
compliance and Project implementation from 15th February 2020 has been 
undertaken and pursued vigorously with States/UTs to streamline the  
 
 
 

6 
  
 
 actions pending at State/UT or Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) level and ensure 
timely project implementation to enable smooth flow of project funding and 
their timely completion. The MoHUA is committed to improve the placement 
percentage of skill trained candidates under Employment through Skill 
Training and Placement (ESTP) component of DAY -NULM. The States/UTs 
have been advised to discontinue skill training in courses where the 
placement percentage is low and assign more targets to courses which have 
higher placement percentage. Further, the mission incentivises the 
'Training Providers' with placement higher than 70% and instructions have 
been issued to take penal action against the 'Train ing Providers' having 
placement below 30%. MoHUA collaborates with Sector Skill Councils 
(SSCs) and autonomous industry -led bodies to enhance placement of 
trained beneficiaries. In December 2019, MoHUA has signed an MoU with 
the Indian Plumbing Skills Council to train and place 21,000 candidates in 
plumbing sector on a Recruit, Train and Deploy (RTD) Model. In order to 
enhance self-employment opportunities for Self -Help Group members, the 
courses with duration less than 200 hours have been approved for skil l 
training. Further, the progress of skill training and placement is reviewed 
on a regular basis with the States/UTs. The recommendations of 
Committee have been duly noted and all possible steps would be taken to 
implement the same”. 
 
1.10 The Committee ap preciate the comprehensive reply of Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs showing on going projects under different 
Missions. The Committee are however constrained to note that large 
number of projects in Smart Cities Mission,  and PMAY(U) are currently in 
implementation stage by reason of long gesta tion. The Committee while 
witnessing expeditious completion of on  going projects feel that pace of 
implementation of projects under Smart Cities Mission can be accelerated 
by doubling the video conferences in present day lockdown situation arising 
out of corona crisis. Projects under PMAY (U) can move faste r by impressing 
upon State/UT Governments to use latest technologies in con struction for 
greater yield in less time. In this connection the Committee also appreciate  
 

7 
that Ministry of Housing and urban Affairs has opened a special d rive for 
data compilation and p roject implementation from 15 th January, 2020. The 
Committee also appreciate that under DAY -NULM Sta tes/UTs have been 
advised to discontinue skill training  where placement percentage is low and 
have started incentivizing training providers for good work and penalising 
others with placement below 30%. The Committee also find that pace of 
Solid Waste Mana gement and making the cities garbage free can be made 
faster by bringing in more cities in garbage free cities categories , since only 
4 cities i.e Indore, Ambikapur, Navi Mumbai and Mysur u are Garbage Free 
Cities with 5 Star Rating and 57 cities have been  rated as 3 Star Rating  
currently. The Committee therefore reiterate for expeditious completion of 
works under different Mission under the on going lockdown scenario be 
taken up.  
 
 
Ensuring Door-to-Door connectivity by Delhi Metro reiterated. 
  
(Recommendation Srl No 8) 
 
1.11 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that there is an urgent need for ensuring door to door 
connectivity of Delhi Metro by use of 'Cab aggregator services' as occupancy 
level of feeder buses being run by DMRC has been as low as 30% . The 
Committee find that the suggestion h as been welcomed by Secretary, 
MoHUA and has conveyed that a subsidiary company under DMRC is 
already formed for looking after all these issues, The Committee also find 
that for ensuring last mile connectivity through Yulu scooter and small 
buses, a propos al has already been sent by DMRC to Transport 
Department of Government of NCT of Delhi twice way back on 10th 
October, 2017 and 26 November, 2018. In this connection, the Committee  
 
 
 

8 
 
are dismayed to note that e -rickshaws that are operational in as low  as 15 
Metro Stations, Yulu - 13 - bikes are being run in another 25 Metro 
stations with Yuber Kiosks are operational only in 3 metro stations. The 
Committee also find that by December, 2019, 47 stations are likely to be 
covered and has a plan to cover all  the 210 stations subsequently. Since, 
the subject matter pertaining to ensuring last mile connectivity pertains to 
State Government of NCT of Delhi, the Committee impress upon MoHUA to 
take up this issue with Government of NCT of Delhi for desired results”. 
 
1.12 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action taken reply stated as 
under: 
 
“GNCTD, State Governments of Haryana and Uttar Pradesh have been 
requested to take necessary steps towards multimodal integration and 
provide last mile connectivity of Delhi Metro. DMRC has taken measures 
towards last mile connectivity which are as follows:  
 
• CAB aggregator Kiosks : UBER (CAB Aggregator) kiosks are operational 
from 3 metro stations, viz. Rajiv Chowk, Dwarka Sec -21 and Sikanderpur . 
In addition, there are other last mile connectivity initiatives undertaken by 
DMRC as given below:  
 
• Metro Feeder Buses : Presently, 174 MIDI feeder CNG Non -AC buses are 
being run on 32 STA approved routes which connect 70 metro stations. 
DMRC is also i n the process to procure 100 AC e -buses to be operated on 
10 new routes. Procurement order has already been placed in Dec 2019 
and thee-buses are expected to be supplied within one year.  
 
• E-Rickshaw Services: A fleet of 800 e -rickshaws are operational f rom 15 
stations serving 1 lakh passengers on weekdays. To enhance the service, 
spaces at 24 metro stations has been allotted recently and the selection of 
more e-rickshaw operators is also in process.  
 
• E-Scooter Services: E-Scooter services by DMRC authorized operator are 
operational from 4 metro stations. The services will soon be initiated from 3 
more metro stations. 
  
• Cycle Sharing Services : - 14 - Pedal bicycle sharing services by 5 
operators are operational from 21 metro stations. 2 operators are providing 
battery operated cycle services from 27 metro stations (service yet to be 
operationalized at few stations)”. 
 
 
 

9 
1.13 The Committee appreciate that in compliance of their 
recommendation Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has taken up the 
issue of Door -to Door connectivity of Delhi Metro with Government of NCT 
of Delhi, State Governments of Uttar Pradesh and Haryana hav e also 
elaborated steps taken by DMRC in the field of CAB Aggregrator Kiosks, 
Metro Feeder Bus, E -Rickshaw, Buses/AC Buses, e -rickshow services etc. 
The Committee are however constrained to note that works for ensuring 
Door-to-Door connectivity by Delhi Me tro taken in hand are thoroughly 
inadequate for achieving the same in real sense in the light of huge gap 
between Door to Door connectively by DMRC given by 800 e -rickshow and 
others vis-à-vis total ridership of Delhi Metro. For instance the Door to Door 
connnectivety given is around 1 lakh passengers whereas the  daily 
passengers in Delhi Metro of as high as 25 lakh passengers. The Committee 
also notice that response of Government of NCT of Delhi and State 
Governments of Uttar Pradesh and Haryana is yet to  come. The Committee 
therefore reiterate that efforts should be made or achieving Door -to-Door 
connectivity in a big way by Delhi metro. 
 
Opening up Door -to-Door Awareness about sanitation for making it people 
programme reiterated. 
 
(Recommendations Srl No. 16) 
 
1.14 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
 
 

10 
 
“The Committee's examination has revealed that MoH&UA has 
candidly admitted before them the need for citizen participation 
saying it as an integral part of SBM at the same time outlining the 
work done by MoH&UA about making the common man aware about 
three Protocols i.e ODF+, ODF++ and Water+, currently being 
implemented and about 'Swachhta App' and other mediums like 
print, electronic media and social media including google, Facebook 
and YouTube. I n this context the Committee were unanimous that 
complaints regarding garbage collection have been coming from their 
constituencies especially from East Delhi area even after tall claim of 
MoH&UA about maintaining cleanliness drive through 'Swachhta 
App' e tc. The Committee therefore recommends that Door to Door 
campaign be extended across all States/UTs in big way in cities for 
making Swachhta Abhiyan as people's programme”. 
 
 
1.15 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action taken reply has stated 
as under: 
 
“Given that the SBM Urban is a 'Jan Andolan', it is imperative that every 
citizen and every stakeholder gets involved proactively in taking forward the 
mandate of 'swachhata' within their spheres of influence. MoHUA has 
periodically been running  various multi -media campaigns (audio, video, 
outdoors, social media) to engage with citizens and make them aware of 
various components of SBM. MoHUA has partnered with Department of 
Field Publicity to hold nearly 1000 on -field outreach events across 250 
cities for targeted behaviour change and messaging around SBM 
components. MoHUA is running a radio series titled 'swachhata selfie' 
where every Monday, good practices from across the country are aired on 
AIR channels, along with phone -in by citizens to give  their feedback on 
overall cleanliness in their cities, or to pose related queries. This 
programme has been very well received by cities and proving to be a good 
success.The Swachhata hi Seva campaign of 2019 has garnered 
participation from more than 7 cro re urban residents, across 3200 cities, 
from more than 1,06,000 events, and more than 7700 MT of plastic waste 
has been collected. Additionally, the Swachh Survekshan survey, and all 
the certification protocols (be it ODF, ODF+, ODF++, Star rating for 
Garbage Free cities) have a component of 'citizen feedback' and 'citizen 
validation' as part of the scoring system, designed for greater citizen 
outreach and ownership among citizens. For example, a heartening feature 
of the Swachh Survekshan survey has been t he exponential rise in citizen 
participation: while 1 lakh citizens provided their feedback in 2016, 18 lakh  
 
 
 

11 
 
feedbacks were collected in 2017. This figure went up to 38 lakh in 2018 
and 64 lakh in 2019. The Swachh Survekshan 2020 recorded more than  1. 
75 crore citizens' feedback - testimony to the way the Swachh Bharat 
Mission has captured the psyche and mind -space of citizens, and turned it 
into a true Jan Andolan”. 
 
1.16 The Committee appreciate the work done under the mandate of 
‘Swachhata’ by Mi nistry of Housing and Urban Affairs through multi media 
campaign to make it people’s programme by way of partnering with 
Department of Field Publicity for holding 1000 on -field outreach events 
across 250 cities for targeted behavior change, garnering participation of 7 
crore urban residents across 3200 c ities under ‘Swachhata Hi Sewa 
Compaign 2019 ’, collecting 7700 MT of plastic w aste besides increasing 
level of citizen participation in Swachh Survekshan Survey undertaken from 
time to time. The Committee are however constrained to note in light of 
37.7 crore as per 2011 census urban population , the  participation of 7 
crore urban residents is very low and n eeds to cover all urban population. 
The Committee therefore, reiterate that all out efforts be made for making 
Door-to-Door awareness campaign about sanitation as people’s programme. 
******** 

12 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Huge resource mobilization in a phased manner  recommended for 
addressing the twin challenges of rising urban population and upscaling the 
country's Economy from Three Trillion Dollar to Five Trillion Dollar by 2024 
and then to Ten Trillion Dollar Economy by 2030. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
 
2.1 The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee's examination of Demands for Grants (2019 -20) of Ministry 
of Housing and Urban Affairs amounting to Rs. 55,057 crore at gross level andRs. 
48,032 crore in net terms for Urban development and housing schemes reveal 
that country is facing twin challenges of rising urban population from 38 crore in 
Census 2011 to as high as 60 crore in 2031, posing a challenging situation of 
arranging for basic urban infrastructure of water, shelt er, power on the one hand 
and present Government's resolve of taking the country's Three Trillion Dollar 
Economy to Five Trillion Dollar Economy by 2024 and then to Ten Trillion Dollar 
Economy by 2030. Viewing the demand and availability of funds scenario and 
taking into account the total budgetary allocation of Rs. 1.58 lakh crore during 
the last ten years (from 2004 -2005 to 2013 -14) to Rs. 2.68 crore during the six 
years i.e 2014 onwards witnessing the three times increase in budgetary 
allocations from th e level of Rs. 15,800 crore to Rs. 44,000 crore including extra 
budgetary resources, the Committee find that there is an urgent need for huge 
resource mobilization in a phased manner by 2024 and then by 2030 so that the 
Housing and Urban Affairs related sc hemes do not starve for want of funds and 
intended goal of successfully strengthening the country's economy is realized. 
 
 
2.2 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action taken reply has stated 
as under: 
 
"Ministry would like to appreciate the conc ern raised by the Hon'ble 
Committee regarding need for mobilization of huge resource for 
implementation of various schemes of Ministry to address the challenges of  
 
 
 

13 
 
rising urban population and contributing towards strengthening the 
country's economy. Ministry has been projecting its requirement of funds 
on the basis of pace of expenditure and demand from State(s)/Union 
Territories and implementing agencies under various Schemes/Projects. 
However, Ministry-wise allocations are made by Ministry of Fina nce on the 
basis of resource assessment of the Government, the available fiscal space 
and other related factors. Ministry will seek additional funds at the stage of 
Revised Estimates/Supplementary Demand for Grants, if required during 
2020-21. Apart from B udgetary sources, Ministry has been additionally 
funding Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana(Urban) through Extra Budgetary 
Resources(EBR) and Rs. 60,000 crore have been approved by the 
Government. After exhausting this amount, Ministry will approach the 
Government again for considering more EBR in the range of Rs. 60,000 
crore to Rs. 80,000 crore in FY 2020 -21 and FY 2021 -22 as per 
requirement. Ministry is also encouraging implementation of projects 
through Public Private Partnership (PPP) apart from assisting Citi es/ULBs 
to raise funds through issuance of municipal bonds after improving their 
credit rating".  
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. G-20017/12/2020-Budget-
I-UD dated 6th August, 2020] 
 
Government asked to find ways and means for reducing huge dependence on 
budget of MoHUA for funds for Metro Projects with a view to increase 
allocations for housing and urban development related Schemes. 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
 
2.3 The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee while perusing the overview of Demands for Grants (2019 -
20) of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs find that out of total amount of Rs, 
48,032.17 crore, as high as Rs. 19,152 crore is alloca ted to MRTS & Metro 
projects and rest for three prominent schemes of AMRUT (Rs. 7300 crore), PMAY 
(U) (Rs. 6853.26 crore) and Mission for 100 Smart Cities (Rs. 6450 crore) 
alongwith schemes with lesser outlays. The Committee also find this has been the 
trend of allocation during the previous year. The Committee are also dismayed to 
note that enhancement of allocation has been witnessed for Metro Projects 
whereas for other schemes the allocation has been by and large static. The 
Committee feel that ways and means should be found out in consultation with 
State Governments/UTs for possible reduction in huge outlay on Metro Works so 
that adequate funds for other Schemes are given in the budget of MoH&UA. 
 
 
 

14 
 
2.4 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action taken reply has stated 
as under: 
 
"While Metro Projects are Capital intensive in nature and expenditure is 
booked in Capital Section, expenditure under other schemes is booked in 
Revenue Section of the Grant. Other schemes of the Ministry excluding 
General Pool Accommodation (GPA) is booked in Revenue Section of the 
grant. There is also a focus of the Government to enhance the capital 
expenditure. 
 
Further, Standards for Light Urban Rail Transit System named "Metro  lite" 
has been issued by this Minis try in July, 2019, cost of which is likely to be 
lesser than that of high capacity metro rail system being developed 
presently in the country,. The Operation and Maintenance (O&M) cost of 
this system is also expected to be much lesser than that of high cap acity 
metro rail system. 
 
Increase in budgetary allocation for Metro projects over the years has been 
due to increase in metro network in cities across the country on 
continuous basis year to year. Development of metro rail system in the 
country has evolve d over the years. With the standardization and 
indigenization, there has been a continual reduction in cost of metro 
components, which may reduce fund requirements for Metro projects. 
 
Even, under the National Infrastructure Pipeline announced in Budget 
2020, 32.3% of the projected investment of over Rs.17 crore during the 
period from 2019 to 2025 of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs is for 
Metro Projects. Further, Government arranges additional funds for 
schemes based on requirements. For example EBR o f Rs.60,000 crore has 
been approved for funding PMAY(U) and Ministry will approach the Union 
Cabinet for additional EBR in the range of Rs.60,000 crore to Rs.80,000 
crore as EBR of Rs.43,000 crores has already been utilized. Similarly, 
funds for other sche mes(s) are demanded at the R.E. / Supplementary 
stage on the basis of demands from States/ UTs and additional 
requirements under Schemes". 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. G-20017/12/2020-Budget-
I-UD dated 6th August, 2020] 
 

15 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
2.5 (See Para No. 1.7 of Chapter-I) 
 
Slow progress on work done on four Missions of MoH&UA criticized and 
Government asked to accelerate pace of the implementation for 
achievement of the Missions’ goals. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
 
 
2.6 The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee are dismayed to note that Report Card of the MoH&UA  for 
achieving the Goals of 'Ease of living', 'Responsive Governance', clean and 
sustainable development, Economic Growth and livelihood opportunities through 
an integrated strategy covering 4300 cities in the country through five Missions of 
AMRUT, SBM (U), PMAY (U), SCM and DAY -NULM has not been encouraging. In 
this context the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has labored to convince 
the Committee by arguing their Mission wise achievements. The Committee 
however find that there are grey areas where a  lot more is still to be done on slow 
progress on Credit Rating of cities under AMRUT, slow progress on SWM 
component under SBM(U) characterized by polluted cities, huge gap between 
houses sanctioned viz -a-viz houses grounded/constructed under PMAY (U), lo w 
level of completion of projects for various reasons under SCM and low level of 
placement given to trained and certified skilled persons as compared to persons 
given training for skill development under DAY -NULM Mission. The Committee 
feel that the work d one on different Missions has to be accelerated to the desired 
level. The Committee, therefore, feel that the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs should take appropriate steps in this regard. 
 
2.7 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action taken  reply has stated 
as under: 
 
"Under 100 Smart Cities Mission, the Ministry is regularly monitoring the 
implementation schemes / progress of cities to accelerate the pace of 
execution. Projects worth Rs. 1,63,000 crore  worth under Smart Cities 
Mission have been tendered (80% of the total projects worth 2,05,018 crore) 
of which projects worth approximately Rs. 1,20,000 crore (viz 60% of the 
total projects proposed) have been grounded as on 31 January 2020.  
 
 
 

16 
 
Projects worth more than 25,000 crore have been completed. Over the last 
19 months beginning June 2018, there has been a 225 percent increase in 
tendered projects, 290 percent increase in projects grounded and 390 
percent increase in projects completed. 
 
As rega rds AMRUT, out of the 500 Mission cities, 13 cities have been 
merged with neighbouring cities resulting in 487 AMRUT cities. Of these, 
two cities namely Amaravati (Andhra Pradesh) and Kavaratti (Lakshadweep) 
do not have Urban Local Body (ULB) and hence cre dit rating is not possible 
for these cities. As of now, out of 485 AMRUT cities, 469 cities have 
completed credit rating. Credit rating work has not been completed in 12 
cities of West Bengal, 1 city each in Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Manipur 
and Arunacha l Pradesh. Efforts are being made to complete the credit 
rating work of these remaining towns. 
 
Under PMAY (U), 1.03 crore houses have been sanctioned under PMAY (U) 
as on 24.02.2020. Of the sanctioned houses, nearly 62 lakh houses have 
been grounded for c onstruction of which over 32 lakh houses have been 
completed. 
 
Duration of construction of houses varies from 12 months to 36 months in 
different verticals of the scheme. Houses under BLC vertical take 
comparatively less time, 12 to 18 months in general, w hereas, in AHP and 
ISSR the construction takes 24 months to 36 months and attains 
progressive completion during project cycle. This is a normal project cycle 
where various statutory compliances are secured. 
 
The Ministry through various review meetings, fi eld visits, video 
conferencing etc. is pursuing all the participating States/UTs for grounding 
of all the sanctioned houses/projects so that these could be completed 
within the scheme period i.e. by the year 2022. 
 
A special drive for Data compliance and P roject implementation from 15th 
February 2020 has been undertaken and pursued vigorously with 
States/UTs to streamline the actions pending at State/UT or Urban Local 
Bodies (ULBs) level and ensure timely project implementation to enable 
smooth flow of project funding and their timely completion. 
 
The MoHUA is committed to improve the placement percentage of skill 
trained candidates under Employment through Skill Training and 
Placement (ESTP) component of DAY -NULM. The States/UTs have been 
advised to discont inue skill training in courses where the placement 
percentage is low and assign more targets to courses which have higher 
placement percentage. Further, the mission incentivises the 'Training  
 
 
 

17 
 
Providers' with placement higher than 70% and instructio ns have been 
issued to take penal action against the 'Training Providers' having 
placement below 30%. 
 
MoHUA collaborates with Sector Skill Councils (SSCs) and autonomous 
industry-led bodies to enhance placement of trained beneficiaries. In 
December 2019, MoHUA has signed an MoU with the Indian Plumbing 
Skills Council to train and place 21,000 candidates in plumbing sector on a 
Recruit, Train and Deploy (RTD) Model. 
 
In order to enhance self -employment opportunities for Self -Help Group 
members, the courses with duration less than 200 hours have been 
approved for skill training. Further, the progress of skill training and 
placement is reviewed on a regular basis with the States/UTs. 
 
The recommendations of Committee have been duly noted and all possible 
steps would be taken to implement the same. 
 
Further, regarding Solid Waste Management (SWM), there has been 
significant progress made under SBM (U) on the Solid Waste Management 
component, where pace of progress has accelerated manifold in the last two 
years. At the time of launch of the Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) in 
October 2014, a mere 18% of municipal solid waste was being scientifically 
processed (as per Kasturirangan report), with the rest being dumped in 
landfills. Waste processing capacity was also li mited - at 26,000 tonnes per 
day of waste across processes such as composting, bio -methanation, RDF 
and waste to energy plants. In the last five years, waste processing has 
gone up by more than three times, and is currently at 60%. Moreover, 
capacity of waste processing has also been enhanced by more than 4 times, 
and is currently at 1.06 lakh tonnes per day. Overall, as per information 
furnished by States & UTs up till December 2019, total municipal waste 
generation is about 1.49 lakh metric tonnes per day, 96% of total wards are 
covered with door to door collection, 74% of total wards are practicing 
waste collection in segregated manner (leading to some segregation) and 
60% of total municipal waste is being processed. 
 
This progress has been made possible through a multi -pronged approach: 
policy and regulatory reforms, innovative initiatives by MoHUA, citizen 
outreach initiatives, and capacity building of ULBs, to achieve all round 
progress across the entire SWM value chain - segregation of waste at 
source, door to door collection, transportation, processing and final 
disposal. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
18 
 
Policy reforms: A variety of policy interventions were taken to encourage 
processing of waste into value added products such as Waste to compost, 
waste to electricity, waste to RDF, use of plastics in road construction, etc. 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. G-20017/12/2020-Budget-
I-UD dated 6th August, 2020] 
 
 
2.8 The innovative initiatives include: 
 
• Swachh Survekshan annual cleanliness survey, which ranks all cities on 
multiple cleanliness parameters, through a triangulated data collection 
process including selfreporting of progress by ULBs, field assessment to 
validate and verify ULBs' claims of progress, and citizen s' feedback to cross 
check their perception on their cities' overall cleanliness. The Swachh 
Survekshan, which has grown in scale and coverage every year, has today 
not only emerged as one of the world's largest urban sanitation survey but 
also enthused cities with a healthy spirit of competition towards cleanliness 
and swachhata. 
 
• Star rating protocol for Garbage free cities - The Star Rating protocol has 
been devised in a holistic manner to include all components of SWM 
(including parameters like cleanl iness of drains & water bodies, plastic 
waste management, managing construction & demolition waste, etc.) which 
are critical drivers for achieving garbage free cities. As on date, 4 cities 
(Indore, Ambikapur, Navi Mumbai and Mysuru) have been one -time 
certified as 5 -star cities, 57 cities have been one -time certified as 3 -star 
cities, and 4 cities have been one-time certified as 1-star cities. 
 
• For citizen outreach, MoHUA has been undertaking various multi -media 
and onground campaigns to involve all stake holders to take responsibility 
in managing their waste. Additionally, the Swachhata hi Seva campaign 
(11th Sept - 27th Oct 2019) with the theme of plastic waste shramdaan was 
held in a bid to build up a mass movement to curb use of single -use 
plastic. MoHU A engaged with Cement Manufacturing Association to map 
46 cement plants within 100 - 200 km from different ULBs, where plastic 
waste can be sent to CMA collection points and subsequently to cement 
plants for use as alternative fuel. MoHUA has also partnere d with NHAI to 
identify 1500 points where the plastic waste may be used for road 
construction. Additionally, cities have been asked to set up adequate 
Material Recovery Facilities (MRFs) to handle the segregation, processing 
and recycle of plastic waste. P arallely, cities have been asked to engage 
local NGOs, SHGs and entrepreneurs to come up with viable alternatives to 
plastic bags (cloth bags from recycled old clothes) and disposable cutlery (  
 
 

 
 
19 
 
e.g. bio -degradable cutlery, setting up bartan bhanda rs, garbage clinics, 
etc) 
 
MoHUA has also been building ULB capacities through regular 
dissemination of technical advisories on every component of SWM, holding 
workshops and exposure visits for officials and also providing need based 
hand holding support (  e.g. DPR preparation, evaluation of locally -relevant 
technologies, etc). 
 
On an ongoing basis, MOHUA is encouraging cities to push for complete 
source segregation of waste, and to set up Material Recovery Facilities 
(MRFs) to act as collection ( on paymen t of requisite fees), sorting, further 
segregation, recycling and processing units, Currently, there are 237 
functional MRFs handling "'14,900 tonnes per day waste. MOHUA is also 
engaging with cities to identify all bulk waste generators, notify them about  
their responsibility to manage their own waste, and enforce the same. This 
would take care of approx. 20% of the wet waste. The issue of legacy 
landfills is a major SWM challenge that cities are facing. MOHUA is 
exploring various technologies to address t his issue of Scientific landfilling 
and dumpsite remediation. MOHUA is actively encouraging that 
Construction and Demolition waste should be segregated separately, as 
well as collected, transported, processed and recycled separately. In 
processing, while d ecentralized and centralized composting (including on -
site processing options by bulk waste generators) are preferred options for 
processing waste, Waste to Energy is being encouraged wherever 
composting is not feasible, to ensure that minimal waste reache s the 
landfill. In Waste to energy, all kinds of technological options are being 
encouraged by the Ministry. MoHUA is now encouraging ULBs to push the 
mandate of decentralized composting with special emphasis on adoption of 
decentralized waste management by Bulk Waste Generators, in compliance 
with SWM Rules 2016, home composting by households, scientific land 
filling and land remediation and also management of plastic and 
construction and demolition waste in an integrated manner. All of these 
focused initiatives have resulted in the multi-fold progress in SWM that has 
been summarized above". 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. G-20017/12/2020-Budget-
I-UD dated 6th August, 2020] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
2.9 (See Para No. 1.10 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
 

 
 
20 
 
Need for making the metro transport viable highlighted 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
 
2.10 The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee have noted that the investment on Metro Projects has risen 
from the level of Rs10,000 crore in 2016 -17 to Rs.19,152 crore in 2019 - 20 i.e. 
almost doubled in the form of ‘Pass Through Assistance to all Metros, and Equity 
to all Metros and Grants to DMRC / Other Metro for covering the capital cost and 
not for running the operations. It also came out before the Committee that cost of 
construction of Metro is almost double than that of  Golden Quadrilateral 
Network. In this context, the Committee have been informed that Metro Rail 
Policy, 2017 aims atfocusing on systematic planning and implementation of 
metro rail system and to act as a guide to State Governments/UT Administration 
for preparing comprehensive proposals for metro rail projects and fo r ensuring 
financial sustainability during operations of metro rail. Besides, it emphasizes on 
commitment of concerned State Governments for financial support to metro rail 
companies for reducing costs and maximizing revenue. In this context, the 
Secretary, MoHUA has admitted before the Committee that the cost of Metro is 
very high, however, it has been brought down to 20% to 30% by standardizing 
civil works, electric systems etc. and by offering consultancy services in other 
Metro projects in Dhaka and Ist anbul and under ‘Make in India’ programme 
products are being exported to Brisbane, Johanesberg and manufacturing 
automatic gate collection locally which was earlier imported. The Secretary, 
MoHUA at the same time have legitimized the huge cost. The Committ ee, 
however, feel that more and more such steps be encouraged with a view to keep 
the cost of Metro project lower thereby reducing the dependency on the Union 
Budget gradually in future. 
 
2.11 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action taken reply  has stated 
as under: 
 
"Increase in budget allocation has been due to increase in metro network in 
cities across the country on continuous basis year to year. The golden 
quadrilateral is for connecting major cities through road network which is 
entirely a different mode of transport. Development of metro rail system in 
the country has evolved over the years. With the standardisation and 
indigenisation, there has been a continual reduction in cost of metro 
components. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
21 
 
MoHUA has issued standards for various metro rail components viz. rolling 
stock, signalling & telecom systems, electrical & electromechanical systems 
and civil engineering structures to promote indigenisation and reduce cost. 
 
Further, Standards for Light Urban  Rail Transit System named "Metrolite" 
has been issued by this Ministry in July, 2019, cost of which is likely to be 
lesser than that of high capacity metro rail system being developed 
presently in the country. The Operation and Maintenance cost (O&M) of 
this system is also expected to be much lesser than that of high capacity 
metro rail system. This system is suitable for cities with lower projection of 
ridership. It can also be used as a feeder system to existing metro system. 
State Governments have been requested to adopt 'Metrolite' as a prime 
mode of urban transport in cities where projected ridership is lower. 
 
Metro Rail Policy, 2017 envisages adoption of various measures by the 
State Governments like Transit Oriented Development, Value Capture 
Financing, creation of Urban Transport Fund, Public Private Partnership 
(PPP) etc. to enhance viability of metro rail system. Metro Rail Companies 
also resort to revenue generation through non fare box revenue like 
property development, advertisement etc 
 
Accordingly, State Governments/UTs/Metro Rail Companies have been 
advised to keep the above provisions in view while 
formulating/implementing the projects in order to reduce cost and enhance 
revenue of metro rail projects and thereby reducing the dependency on t he 
Budgetary resources/State exchequer". 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. G-20017/12/2020-Budget-
I-UD dated 6th August, 2020] 
 
Promoting cheaper Metro Transport recommended 
  
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
 
2.12 The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee also find as against per kilometer cost of Rs.300 crore in 
elevated Metro work, the Ministry of HoUA has started working on cheaper Metro 
like ‘Metro Light’ with cost as low as Rs.120 -125 crore and Tyred Metro with still 
lower at Rs.60-80 crore. The Committee have been informed  that for Metro Light 
a 20 km long project is ready and is currently awaiting approval of Government of 
NCT of Delhi.  However, for ‘New Metro’ is in formative stage. The Committee 
recommend that State Government of NCT of Delhi be impressed upon for early  
 
 

 
 
22 
 
clearance and work on Tyred Metro be taken up expeditiously for promoting 
cheaper ‘Metro Transport’ in the country which is need of the hour. 
 
 
2.13 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action taken reply has stated 
as under: 
 
"Urban Transport is an integral part of Urban Development which is a State 
Subject. Responsibility of planning and development of urban transport 
projects including metro rail lies with the State Governments/UTs. Central 
Government considers financial assistance to such projects depending 
upon feasibility of projects and availability of resources, when proposed by 
State Governments/UTs concerned. Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) 
has submitted DPRs for remaining three corridors of Delhi MetroPhase -IV 
Projects. Out of these three corridors one corridor namely; Rithala -
BawanaNarela (22.915 Km.) is proposed for Metrolite. DMRC has submitted 
another DPR for Metrolite corridor between Kirti N agar and Bamnoli village 
comprising 19 km to GNCTD. DMRC has been advised to obtain the 
approval of GNCTD expeditiously. 
 
This Ministry has undertaken the task of formulating standards for rubber 
tyre-based mass rapid transit system named 'Metroneo' with exclusive right 
of way as an option for public transport in smaller cities and constituted a 
Committee for formulation of standards". 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. G-20017/12/2020-Budget-
I-UD dated 6th August, 2020] 
 
Slow progress of implem entation on prominent Metro Networks for various 
reasons criticized and their expeditious completion recommended 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
 
2.14 The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee are dismayed to note that progress of work on prominent 
Metro Projects of Mumbai Line 3, Bangalore Phase II, Ahmedabad Phase I has 
been as low as 48%, 36% and 47% for various reasons. For instance the 
Committee find that Mumbai Line 3 work wa s affected by litigation on 
construction in night and tree cutting and transplantation in Aarey area and 
delay in Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ), Forest clearances, whereas work for  
 

 
 
23 
 
Bangalore Phase II was delayed following delay in land acquisition due to late 
approvals from various State Government Departments and delay in shifting of 
utilities. Similarly late sanctioning of JICA loan after project approval and 
consequently delay in finalization of tenders were the reasons for impeding 
implementation of Ahmedabad PhaseI. The Committee also find that other 
prominent Metro Projects of Delhi and Lucknow have also faced land acquisition, 
Resettlement and Rehabilitation (R&R) issues due to socio -economic problems. In 
this context, the Committee find that MoHUA has argued before the Committee 
that implementing agencies/MoHUA are at close coordination with concerned 
State Governments to address the related issues. Since, these prominent cities 
badly need these Metro Projects and as Metro work has not gained momentum on 
the lines of Delhi Metro, the Committee conclude that close coordination of 
implementing agencies with State Governments and MoHUA was hardly visible. 
The Committee, further, feel that concerted efforts be made to accelerate the pace 
of implementation so that on-going Metro works are timely completed. 
 
 
2.15 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action taken reply has stated 
as under: 
 
"Mumbai Line 3, Bangalore - Phase-II and Ahmedabad metro projects are 
implemented by Joint Venture Specia l Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) which are 
companies with representation in the Board both from Central and State 
Governments. The progress of these projects is monitored by the Board of 
the SPVs constituted for the purpose. In addition, a High Powered 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary of the respective 
State Governments, also monitors to take expeditious decisions on matters 
critical to the implementation of the project like land acquisition, shifting of 
utilities and other structures in the pro ject alignment, multimodal 
integration and such other matters where the State Government has to 
facilitate quick action". 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. G-20017/12/2020-Budget-I-UD 
dated 6th August, 2020] 
 
Ensuring Door to Door connectivity of Delhi Metro by ‘Cab aggregator 
services’ welcomed and MoHUA asked to pursue the issue with NCT of Delhi 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
 
 
 

 
 
24 
 
2.16 The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee note that there is an urgent need for ensuring door to door 
connectivity of Delhi Metro by use of ‘Cab aggregator services’ as occupancy level 
of feeder buses being run by DMRC has been as low as 30%. The Committee find 
that the suggestion ha s been welcomed by Secretary, MoHUA and has conveyed 
that a subsidiary company under DMRC is already formed for looking after all 
these issues. The Committee also find that for ensuring last mile connectivity 
through Yulu scooter and small buses, a proposa l has already been sent by 
DMRC to Transport Department of Government of NCT of Delhi twice way back 
on 10th October, 2017 and 26 November, 2018. In this connection, the 
Committee are dismayed to note that e -rickshaws that are operational in as low 
as 15 Metro Stations, Yulu bikes are being run in another 25 Metro stations with 
Yuber Kiosks are operational only in 3 metro stations. The Committee also find 
that by December, 2019, 47 stations are likely to be covered and has a plan to 
cover all the 210 statio ns subsequently. Since, the subject matter pertaining to 
ensuring last mile connectivity pertains to State Government of NCT of Delhi, the 
Committee impress upon MoHUA to take up this issue with Government of NCT 
of Delhi for desired results. 
 
 
2.17 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action taken reply has stated 
as under: 
 
 
"GNCTD, State Governments of Haryana and Uttar Pradesh have been 
requested to take necessary steps towards multimodal integration and 
provide last mile connectivity of Delhi Metro.  
DMRC has taken measures towards last mile connectivity which are as 
follows:  
 
• CAB aggregator Kiosks: 
  
UBER (CAB Aggregator) kiosks are operational from 3 metro stations, viz. 
Rajiv Chowk, Dwarka Sec-21 and Sikanderpur. In addition, there are oth er 
last mile connectivity initiatives undertaken by DMRC as given below:  
 
• Metro Feeder Buses  
 
Presently, 174 MIDI feeder CNG Non -AC buses are being run on 32 STA 
approved routes which connect 70 metro stations. DMRC is also in the 
process to procure 100 AC e -buses to be operated on 10 new routes. 
Procurement order has already been placed in Dec 201 9 and thee -buses 
are expected to be supplied within one year.  
 

 
 
25 
 
• E-Rickshaw Services  
 
A fleet of 800 e -rickshaws are operational from 15 stations serving 1 lakh 
passengers on weekdays. To enhance the service, spaces at 24 metro 
stations has been al lotted recently and the selection of more e -rickshaw 
operators is also in process. 
  
• E-Scooter Services  
 
E-Scooter services by DMRC authorized operator are operational from 4 
metro stations. The services will soon be initiated from 3 more metro 
stations.  
 
• Cycle Sharing Services  
 
Pedal bicycle sharing services by 5 operators are operational from 21 metro 
stations. 2 operators are providing battery operated cycle services from 27 
metro stations (service yet to be operationalized at few stations)". 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. G-20017/12/2020-Budget-
I-UD dated 6th August, 2020] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
2.18 (See Para No. 1.13 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
Revamp of monitoring mechanism of two schemes of 10% lump sum 
provision for North -East and North East Regional Urban development 
projects recommended in view of time and cost over runs on completed 
projects 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
 
2.19 The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee are dismayed to note that two urban development schemes 
of (i) Other Projects under 10% lump sum provision for North East and (ii) North 
East Region Urban Development Project (NERUDP) with the objective of providing 
water supply, solid Waste Management etc in North East States by Asian  
 

 
 
26 
 
Development Bank (ADB) availing annual funds to the tune of around Rs. 150.00 
crore and Rs. 250.00 crore from Parliament through Budget of MoH&UA with full 
utilization have been lagging behind in physical performance. For instance the 
Committee find that under ‘Other Projects under 10% lump sum provisions’ out 
of 430 projects taken up only 306 projects were completed. Similarly in other 
scheme of ‘North East Regional Under Development Project (NERUDP)’ out of 84 
projects sanctioned only 65  projects have been completed as on June, 2019. The 
Committee are distressed to note that both the Schemes have time overruns. The 
Committee are also dismayed to note that no independent evaluation has been 
done in the scheme of ‘Other Projects under 10% l ump sum  provision for North 
East’.In this connection the Committee have been informed by MoH&UA that 
projects have been reviewed/monitored by MoH&UA. In Committee’s opinion the 
above facts and figures do not prima facie support the contention of MoH&UA. 
They therefore feel that a total revamp of monitoring of projects is essential for 
the purpose of bringing about transparency and judicious use of public money. 
They therefore recommend that MoH&UA to take time bound action accordingly. 
 
 
2.20 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action taken reply has stated 
as under: 
 
"The existing monitoring and review mechanism is rigorous one and is 
being done at Centre as well as State level. The Ministry through various 
review meetings, field visits, video con ferencing etc. is reviewing the 
physical progress of all the sanctioned projects so that the same could be 
completed in time-bound manner. A Central Level Steering Committee and 
Investment Programme Management Unit (IPMU) within Ministry of HUA 
and a state  level steering committee and State Investment Programme  
Management & Implementation Unit (SIPMU) has been established in each 
project states to monitor the physical progress of projects. 
 
In order to complete the ongoing projects in a time bound manner, the 
physical and financial progress of these schemes will be monitored through 
more frequent periodical reviews, field visits and video conferencing by 
senior officers of Ministry. However, the concerns raised by the Hon'ble 
Standing Committee have been noted and suitable action would be taken 
accordingly". 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. G-20017/12/2020-Budget-
I-UD dated 6th August, 2020] 
 
Government asked to open up Door to D oor awareness campaign about 
sanitation for making it People’s programme. 

 
 
27 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16) 
 
2.21 The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under: 
 
 
 The Committee’s examination has revealed that MoH&UA  has candidly 
admitted before them the need for citizen participation saying it as an integral 
part of SBM at the same time outlining the work done by MoH&UA about making 
the common man aware about three Protocols i.e ODF+, ODF++ and Water+, 
currently being implemented and about ‘Swachhta App’ and other mediums like 
print, electronic media and social media including google, Facebook and 
YouTube. In this context the Committee were unanimous that complaints 
regarding garbage collection have been coming from t heir constituencies 
especially from East Delhi area even after tall claim of MoH&UA about 
maintaining cleanliness drive through ‘Swachhta App’ etc. The Committee 
therefore recommend that Door to Door campaign be extended across all 
States/UTs in big way in  cities for making Swachhta Abhiyan as people’s 
programme. 
 
2.22 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action taken reply has stated 
as under: 
 
"Given that the SBM Urban is a 'Jan Andolan', it is imperative that every 
citizen and every stakeholder gets involved proactively in taking forward the 
mandate of 'swachhata' within their spheres of influence. MoHUA has 
periodically been running various multi -media campaigns (audio, video, 
outdoors, social media) to engage with citizens and make them aware o f 
various components of SBM. MoHUA has partnered with Department of 
Field Publicity to hold nearly 1000 on -field outreach events across 250 
cities for targeted behaviour change and messaging around SBM 
components. MoHUA is running a radio series titled 'sw achhata selfie' 
where every Monday, good practices from across the country are aired on 
AIR channels, along with phone -in by citizens to give their feedback on 
overall cleanliness in their cities, or to pose related queries. This 
programme has been very we ll received by cities and proving to be a good 
success.The Swachhata hi Seva campaign of 2019 has garnered 
participation from more than 7 crore urban residents, across 3200 cities, 
from more than 1,06,000 events, and more than 7700 MT of plastic waste 
has been collected.  
 
Additionally, the Swachh Survekshan survey, and all the certification 
protocols (be it ODF, ODF+, ODF++, Star rating for Garbage Free cities) 
have a component of 'citizen feedback' and 'citizen validation' as part of the  
 

28 
 
scoring system, designed for greater citizen outreach and ownership among 
citizens. For example, a heartening feature of the Swachh Survekshan 
survey has been the exponential rise in citizen participation: while 1 lakh 
citizens provided their feedback in 2 016, 18 lakh feedbacks were collected 
in 2017. This figure went up to 38 lakh in 2018 and 64 lakh in 2019. The 
Swachh Survekshan 2020 recorded more than 1. 75 crore citizens' 
feedback - testimony to the way the Swachh Bharat Mission has captured 
the psyche  and mind -space of citizens, and turned it into a true Jan 
Andolan". 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. G-20017/12/2020-Budget-
I-UD dated 6th August, 2020] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
2.23 (See Para No. 1.16 of Chapter-I) 
 
Un even releases of SWM funds across States/UTs criticized the Government 
asked to proactively pursue uniform utilization of funds across States/UTs. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17) 
 
2.24 The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under: 
 
The Committee’s examination of component wise total Mission allocations viz -a-
vis releases during 2017 -18 and 2018 -19 has revealed that as compared to 
Mission allocation, the release are quite low. For instance, as against the total 
Mission allocation for IHHLs of Rs. 3757.03, the releases during 2017 -18 and 
2018-19 has been as low as Rs. 531.80 crore and 469.33 crore. Similarly for CTs 
as against the total Mission allocation of Rs. 654.76 crore, the releases during 
2017-18 and 2018-19 were as low as Rs. 22 5.06 crore and Rs. 190.43 crore. The 
reason for less releases as given by the MoH&UA is that IHHLs and CTs are 
demand driven. The Committee also are constrained to find that the same is the 
story about SWM component where as against the total Mission alloc ation Rs. 
7,365 crore, the releases during 2017 -18 and 2018 -19 were as low as Rs. 
1,302.60 crore and Rs. 1,576.01 crore. In this connection the Committee have 
been informed that MoH&UA had limited role on the issue as various 
essentialities like preparation of intensive ground work, preparation of DPRs and 
their approval at the level of State High Power Committee headed by Chief 
Secretary are to be complied with. In this context, the MoHUA has informed that 
for strengthening capacity building for ULBs, SBM( U) promoted, funded and 
conducted city-tocity learning exposures for all ULBs through National Institute  
 
 
 

29 
 
of Urban Affairs and organized capacity building workshops in collaboration with 
Ministry of Environment and Climate Change and Central Polluti on Control 
Board (CPCB) and National Productivity Council (NPC) alongwith ULBs.  
 
The Committee are also constraint to note that under SWM the level of releases 
across the States/UTs during 2017 -18 and 2018 -19 has been uneven. For 
instance the major beneficiaries have been Andhra Pradesh, Gujrat, Chhatisgarh, 
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, 
Maharashtra and Punjab whereas the States that are lagging behind are Odisha, 
Bihar, Delhi and Uttarakhand. The Committee find that the  whole of North -East 
States have almost drawn blank. The Committee find that since Solid Waste a 
common problem of the States, the MoH&UA should proactively pursue all the 
States to work in close coordination and consultation so that uniform work on 
this area is ensured. 
 
 
 
2.25 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action taken reply has stated 
as under: 
 
"All States/ UTs have benefited equally from the SBM. However, some 
States/UTs, for various reasons, lag behind in demanding funds from Govt. 
Funds are released specifically on demand from the State/UTs who have to 
submit specific proposals approved by its State High Power Committee 
(SHPC). 
 
One of the reasons for limited funds demand for SWM projects was the 
initial groundwork required to be do ne before submission of demands for 
these projects. States have to make analysis of the existing gap in the SWM 
infrastructure, prepare DPRs, get the DPRs approved from SHPC and then 
submit the proposal to MoH&UA which takes time. Besides this the 
gestation period for actual materialization of the project on ground also 
determines the releases for 2 nd installment. Accordingly, States/UTs are 
being asked to expedite and submit proposals demanding 2nd instal lments 
for the Solid Waste Management projects along  with their progress reports 
of all Solid Waste Management projects. 
 
In order to accelerate releases to states, MoHUA, as part of its Mission 
governance approach, conducts monthly VC meeting to review progress of 
states, including releases. An online port al to track proposals, releases and 
financial progress has now helped to Mission to make all transactions 
transparent systematic. Regular reconciliation of UC status, review of 
progress of proposals, focused handholding of ULBs to build their  
 
 
 

30 
 
capacities - are now helping to accelerate the progress of fund release 
under the Mission". 
 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. G-20017/12/2020-Budget-
I-UD dated 6th August, 2020] 
 
 
Government asked to ensure that use of technologies at Municip al 
Commissioner level should be SWM Rules and relevant provision of Task 
Force on WTE complaint bearing in mind local needs. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18) 
 
2.26 The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under: 
 
The Committee are dismayed to note that Solid Waste processing is as low as 
57% in the country as a result heaps of untreated solid waste are commonly seen 
in cities. In this context, two issues of prominent importance have come up before 
the Committee, on e is use of single technology in the country in the light of 
frequent change in technologies for Solid Waste Management by changing the 
tender norms allowing various technologies for Solid Waste processing at local 
Municipal Commissioner level especially i n Maharashtra. Second is issue of non -
viability of Public Private Partnership (PPP) in the area of Waste to Energy (WTE) 
because of moisture content of as high as 70% with nil returns. The Committee’s 
examination has revealed that both the two suggestions have not found favour 
from with MoHUA on the ground  that they are not involved in tendering process 
which is generally done at State Government level as ‘Sanitation’ being State 
‘Subject’ and issue of opting for technology/technologies for WTE lies with S tate 
Governments/UT Administrations  depended upon local requirements. The 
MoHUA while citing relevant SWM Rules, 2016, relevant text Report on Task 
Force on WTE, etc. have opined that no single technology is recommended by 
MoHUA. Further, MoHUA has also informed that PPP in WTE work is essential for 
two broad reasons,  one lack of expertise of ULBs/ State Government on WTE 
work and flow of funds has to come from private sources. In this connection, the 
Committee find that various steps taken for Solid Waste Management and 
Guidelines of Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) on Disposal of Legacy 
Waste have been outlined by MoHUA. In this context, the Committee have also 
been informed about advisories on Waste -to-Wealth and decentralized 
compositing of municip al waste. In this context, the Committee are constrained 
to note that main issue of presence of moisture content of as high as 70% in  
 
 
 

31 
 
Waste is hardly addressed by MoHUA  and needs to be examined in great details. 
The Committee at the same time feel that WTE work taken up at Municipal 
Commissioner level should be SWM Rules and WTE Task Force Report compliant 
bearing in mind local needs leaving no room for conflict and controversy. 
 
 
 
2.27 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action taken reply has stated 
as under: 
 
 
"As per Solid Waste Management Rules 2016, segregation in to three 
streams i.e. WET waste (Biodegradable), Dry Waste (Non -biodegradable) 
and Domestic hazardous waste must be followed by all ULBs. So far 73% of 
total wards are practicing waste collection in segregated manner.  
 
SWM Rules 2016 also states that,  
 
(a) bio -methanation. microbial composting/ verm i-composting. anaerobic 
digestion or any other appropriate processing for bio -stabilization of 
biodegradable wastes.  
 
(b) waste to energy processes including refused derived fuel for combustible 
fraction of waste or supply as feedstock to solid waste based power plants 
or cement kilns/" 
 
 In normal conditions, Dry waste (combustible fraction) should not 
have very high moisture content and it is suitab le for waste to energy 
plants. The focus of Ministry is on source segregation after which there is 
negligible moisture in non recyclable portion of dry waste which is used by 
Waste to Energy plants". 
 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. G-20017/12/2020-Budget-
I-UD dated 6th August, 2020] 
 
Government asked to ensure association of local MP in Smart City Mission 
work in concerned Smart Cities for purposeful work. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19) 
 
 
 
 

32 
 
2.28 The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee are dismayed to note that although the Smart Cities 
Mission (SCM) was launch on 25 June, 2015 selection of cities as late as 21 
January, 2016 to June, 2018 has led to late start of implementation of SCM in 
actual terms. In this context, the Committee have been informed by MoHUA that 
every selected Smart city gets 60 months i.e. five years’ time to get projects 
completed undergoing different stages of incorporation of Special Purpose 
Vehicle, appointment of Project M anagement Consultants (PMCs), preparation of 
DPRs, tendering etc. MoHUA has also informed that with actual time taken is 
three years, the projects would be completed by January, 2019 and May 
2023.The Committee appreciate that MoHUA has showcased before the  
Committee the over -all scenario of actual workdone in terms of ‘Projects 
Tendered’ ‘Work Orders Issued’ ‘Project Completed; Field visits undertaken to 
States/UTs, Apex level of conferences CEOs of Smart Cities organized from time 
to time impacting acceler ation of on -going implementation and their completion. 
Besides, steps taken like relaxing norms for ULBs for issuing municipal bonds, 
engaging agencies both within and abroad such as USAID for raising municipal 
bonds etc for ensuring financial sustainabili ty of Smart Cities and promoting 
leveraging of other sources of finances to have a multiplier effect at Government 
of India level.  
 
 However, during the course of evidence of the representatives of MoHUA 
the over-all functioning of Smart Cities Mission in different places came up before 
the Committee raising a big question mark on on -going Smart Cities Mission 
works. The Committee find that non -association of local MPs in Smart City work 
in Surat, Bhubneswar, Jaipur, Aurangabad and Raipur etc has come up as major 
issue. The Committee find that situation is so grave that even a need for 
dedicated officer for Smart City work in Aurangabad has been raised before the 
Committee as these works are not been taken care of at the level of Municipal 
Commissioner. Besides the need for underground drainage badly needed in the 
prominent city of Raipur was also highlighted before the Committee and MoH&UA 
were of the view that AMRUT cities are free to include such projects in their 
SAAPs as per their service level improvem ent plans (SLIPs) and the State 
Government of Chhatisgarh has not taken up any underground drainage project 
for Raipur.If required, the State Government can take up such project by revision 
of SAAPs which however is not advisable at this stage as the Mission is scheduled 
to end on 31st March, 2020. In the light of gravity of the situation, the Committee 
feel that the project for underground drainage system under AMRUT Scheme be 
taken up in Raipur as a special case. The Committee All these issues, the 
Committee feel do not augur well with over -all project planning and 
implementation although MoHUA has claimed before them that all is well. The 
Committee feel that the available mechanism should suitably address these 
issues and the same may be apprised to the Committee. 
 
 
 

33 
 
2.29 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action taken reply has stated 
as under: 
 
"Under AMRUT, the responsibility of identification and implementation of 
project lies with the State Government. State Annual Action Plans (SAAPs) 
of all States/UTs for the entire Mission period, as submitted by the 
concerned States/UTs, have already been a pproved in first three years of 
the Mission itself and State/UT wise allocation of CA has already been 
made. There are no untied funds available under the Mission to grant 
additional CA for projects/reallocation to the States/UTs. Hence, States 
need to tak e up such projects under a different scheme. Regarding Raipur 
it is stated that painting a town is not an admissible component under 
AMRUT.  
 
The Smart Cities Mission Statement & Guidelines clearly spell out the need 
and role of the Smart City Advisory For um (SCAF) in each of the 100 cities. 
The suitable section of Guidelines 'Para. 13 - Mission Monitoring' is as 
below -  
 
"13.3 City Level -  
 
A Smart City Advisory Forum  will be established at the city level for all 
100 Smart Cities  to advise and enable collaboration among various 
stakeholders and will include the District Collector, MP , MLA Mayo0 
CEO of SPV, local youths/ technical experts/ and at least on e member 
from the area who is a, 
 i. President/ secretary representing registe red Residents Welfare 
Association 
  
ii. Member of registered Tax Payers Association/ Rate Payers Association  
 
iii. President/ Secretary of slum level federation and  
 
iv. Members of a Non -Governmental Organization (NGO) or Mahtla Mandali 
I Chamber of Commerce I Youth Associations.  
 
The CEO of the SPV will be the convener of the "Smart City Advisory 
Forum". 
 
Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs has been reiterating the important role 
of Smart City Advisory Forums (SCAFs) in the implementation of Smart 
Cities Mission from time to time since the launch of Smart Cities Mission in 
2015.  
 
 
 

34 
 
In the past, the instructions were issued to States/UT /CEOs of Smart 
Cities on 5.9.2016, 28.3.2017, 2.1.2018, 4.5.2018, 5.7.2018 and against 
on 21.8.2018 to set up smart  City Advisory Forums(SCAFs) in the Smart 
Cities in accordance with the guidelines of SCM and convene its regular 
meetings.  
 
As the creation of SCAF in a smart City and active functioning of it is vital 
for collaboration between all stakeholders at every stage of implementation 
of Smart City projects, it was reiterated again on 2.12.2019 to ensure that 
meetings of the SCAF are held regularly by all Smart Cities.  
 
Recently, after the meeting of Hon'ble Standing Committee in December, 
2019, the Smart Cities CEOs and Principal Secretaries (Urban 
Development) in all States/UTs have been advised on 26.12.2019 to 
conduct regular meetings of the SCAF and to convene at least one meeting 
of SCAF within the stipulated period.  
 
All CEOs were yet again strongly reminded in this regard during the 3rd 
Apex Conference Meeting of Smart Cities Mission held at Vizag on 24 -25 
January 2020.  
 
As directed by the Hon'ble Members of the Standing Committee on Urban 
Development in its recent meeting in December, 2019, all the CEOs of 
Smart Cities have been advised on 2.1.2020 to invariably attend DISHA 
meetings when they are invited for the same. (Copies of these references are 
enclosed herewith)". 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. G-20017/12/2020-Budget-
I-UD dated 6th August, 2020] 
 
Government asked to ensure availability of funds for maintaining pace of 
sanctions of houses for ‘Housing for All’ goal 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 23) 
 
2.30 The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee’s examination has revealed that PMAY (Urban) that was 
started in 25 June, 2015 for ensuring ‘Housing for All’ in urban areas upto 2022 
has an allocation for 2019 -20 of Rs.6853.26 crore. The Committee’s examination 
has been on two issues, one ‘quantum of funds required’ and the other ‘houses  
 
 
 
 

35 
 
needed’. In this context of quantum of funds  required, the Committee find that in 
addition to budgeted amount, Rs.60,000 crore of Budgetary Resources (EBR) has 
been approved for the scheme for the period of four years from the Financial Year 
2017-18 to 2021 out of which the MoHUA has been able to raise and release 
Rs.33,000 crore and MoHUA is in the process of raising another Rs.15,000/ - 
from HUDCO for Financial Year 2019-20. In this connection, the MoHUA has also 
informed the Committee that pace of sanctions also depend on release of State 
share, Beneficiary share etc. for receiving funds.  
 
In this context, the Committee find that as on 28.10.19 there is an estimated 
demand of Rs.1.80 lakh crore a nd a total Central Assistance (CA) 
sanctioned/committed is Rs.1.42 lakhcrore,out of which Rs.57,896 crore has 
been released and these are as per pace of sanctions. The Committee also find 
that requirement of funds for Financial Year 2019-20, the Ministry of Finance has 
already been approached for appropriate budgetary allocation and 
remainingRs.12,000 crore as EBR in 2020 -21 . The Committee feel that un -
hindered availability of funds of the mega programme be ensured by timely 
availability of State share, Be neficiary share etc. so as to achieve the goal of 
‘Housing for All’ by 2022. 
 
2.31 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action taken reply has stated 
as under: 
 
"Apart from the budgetary allocation of Rs. 6,853.26 crore, the Ministry has 
raised and disbursed EBR of Rs. 15,000.00 crore in FY 2019 -20. Thus, out 
of the Rs. 60,000 crore of EBR approved by the Cabinet, Ministry has so far 
raised Rs. 43,000 crore. The Ministry will raise the balance EBR of Rs. 
17,000.00 crore in phases by 2020 -21 as per requirement. For additional 
requirement of fund, Ministry will seek approval of the Cabinet in 
consultation with Ministry of Finance for raising more EBR fund.  
 
As on 24.02.2020, a total of 1.03 crore houses have been sanctione d which 
involve committed central assistance of Rs. 1.64 lakh crore. Of the 
committed central assistance, nearly Rs. 68,000.00 crore has already been 
released. Ministry is constantly pursuing with the States/UTs through 
review meetings, video conferences, special drive for data compliance and 
project implementation for streamlining the process of fund release from 
Centre as well as from States/UTs for ensuring timely completion of 
projects". 
 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. G-20017/12/2020-Budget-
I-UD dated 6th August, 2020] 
 
 
 

36 
 
2.32 The Committee also find that in the light of total estimated demand of 
1.12 lakh houses by 2022 on supply side construction of houses for 
‘Housing for All’, as low as 90.01 lakh  houses have been sanctioned so far 
and MoHUA is optimistic of reaching beyond 1 crore houses with the 
monthly pace of  houses of 2 to 3 lakh by March,2020.In this connection, 
the Committee are constrained to note there is huge gap between houses 
sanctioned vis -à-vis houses grounded for construction and houses 
constructed. For instance, as against 73.10 lakh houses sanctioned, as low 
as 41.23 lakh houses have been grounded for construction and as low as 
22.74 houses have been constructed. From component -wise break up of 
data, the Committee find biggest share of houses has been of Beneficiary 
Led Construction (BLC) followed by Affordable Housing in Partnership, 
Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme (CLSS) and In -Situ Slum Development (ISSR). 
The Committee feel that wi th a view to speed up construction of houses, 
there is a need to accelerate performance on all the components of PMAY(U) 
Scheme for holistic results at ground level. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 24) 
 
 
2.33 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action  taken reply has stated 
as under: 
 
"The PMAY (U) scheme architecture has demand based approach in the 
spirit of cooperative federalism with 4 verticals of which an eligible 
beneficiary can choose any one of them and thus, the magnitude of  
 
 
 
 

37 
 
demand in each vertical and corresponding progress differs from vertical to 
vertical. The States/UTs are mandated to undertake a demand survey in 
their respective cities and towns based on eligibility criteria laid down in 
the scheme guidelines adopting a cafeteria approach to choose from any 
one of the 4 verticals of the scheme, depending on the suitability/choice of 
the beneficiaries.  
 
The overall validated demand for 1.12 crore houses is the outcome of 
preferences expressed by beneficiaries during deman d survey. The four 
verticals of PMAY (U) are distinct in nature with regard to implementation 
modalities. Under the scheme, States/UTs approve projects ( except CLSS) 
through State Level Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee (SLSMC) 
headed by the concerned Chief Secretary. They are taken up in the Central 
Sanctioning & Monitoring Committee (CSMC) headed by the Secretary, 
MoHUA, for consideration of grant and release of admissible Central 
Assistance.  
 
As of 24 February 2020, the Ministry has sanctioned 1.03 crore houses out 
of the demand of 1.12 crore houses validated so far by States/UTs. As of 
now, 62 lakh houses have been grounded for construction of which 32 lakh 
houses have been completed.  
 
The construction period of BLC houses, in -general, ranges from 12-18 
month. These houses are constructed by the beneficiaries themselves 
whose readiness to construct the houses depends on the arrangement of 
fund as beneficiary contribution apart from the assistance from Central 
and State Governments. In case of AHP/IS SR projects, the required time 
for completion ranges from 24 to 36 months and attains progressive 
completion during project cycle. This is a normal project cycle where 
various statutory compliances are secured. Further, due to climatic  
conditions, topography of the region etc. construction of houses sometimes 
takes more time.  
 
PMAY (U) projects take time because of the very nature of its construction 
activities. It is desirable that adequate safeguards (selection of 
developer/contractor through a transpare nt process, environmental 
clearances, fire safety measures, land clearances, external infrastructure 
etc.) are taken for such mega projects and therefore the timelines for such 
projects are realistic". 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. G-20017/12/2020-Budget-
I-UD dated 6th August, 2020] 
 
 
 

38 
Accumulation of committed liabilities of earlier year under DAY -NULM 
criticized, the Government asked to take remedial steps in this regard. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 25) 
 
2.34 The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee’s examination of funds for DAY -NULM scheme reveal that 
higher quantum of funds to the tune of Rs.750 crore for BE (2019 -20) as against 
lower RE (2018-19) of Rs.510 crore has been necessitated by var ious reasons like 
extension of DAY -NULM to all statutory towns for their local capacity and 
requirements, as against 790 towns initially covered, accumulation of committed 
liabilities of previous years etc. The MoHUA has informed that the present level of 
funds still fall short of projected requirements of Rs.900 crore for 2019 -20. The 
Committee, however, find that barring the issues of extension of DAY-NULM to all 
statutory towns, additional liability issue of erstwhile HUPA, accumulation of 
committed liab ilities of previous years does not augur well with the over -all 
planning and implementation available with MoHUA. The Committee feel that  
concerted efforts be made to avoid accumulation of liabilities under DAY-NULM. 
 
 
2.35 The Ministry of Housing and Urb an Affairs in action taken reply has stated 
as under: 
 
"The utilisation of funds under DAY -NULM has been increasing since the 
beginning of the Mission in 2014 -15. The release of funds to states/UTs 
depends upon availability of documents from the States/UTs . However, as 
per annual action plans, the activities are executed in anticipation of funds 
by the States/UTs.  
 
As a result of this, at times there is accumulation of the liabilities by 
States/UTs. The contents of the recommendations are, however, noted". 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. G-20017/12/2020-Budget-
I-UD dated 6th August, 2020] 
 
Government asked to address the issue of lower placement of trained and 
certified manpower under DAY-NULM 
 
 
 
 

39 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 26) 
 
2.36 The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee’s examination of different components of DAY -NULM 
Scheme reveal that in the area of setting up micro -enterprises, SHG Bank 
linkages, SHGs formation/ and SHGs given Revolving Fund Support, the 
DAYNULM has performed well and 11 lakh livelihoods created for urban poor 
with Secretary, MoHUA also highlighting the same before the Committee. 
However, the Committee are constrained to note that in the area of number of 
beneficiaries given s kill training, and their placement, the DAY -NULM has not 
performed well. For instance, as against 3.98 lakh beneficiaries given training 
with 2.98 lakh trained and certified, as low as 1.68 lakh got placement during 
2018-19 for various reasons including de lay in release of funds alongwith 
matching State share. The Committee find that position was no diferent in 
previousyear i.e. 2017-18. The Committee, therefore, recommend that reasons for 
low level of placement of trained and certified manpower be suitably  addressed at 
appropriate level in time bound manner. 
 
 
2.37 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action taken reply has stated 
as under: 
 
"The MoHUA is committed to improve the placement percentage of skill 
trained candidates under Employment thro ugh Skill Training and 
Placement (ESTP) component of DAY -NULM. The States/UTs have been 
advised to discontinue skill training in courses where the placement 
percentage is low and assign more targets to courses which have higher 
placement percentage. Furthe r, the mission incentivizes the 'Training 
Providers' with placement higher than 70% and instructions have been 
issued to take penal action against the 'Training Providers' having 
placement below 30%.  
 
MoHUA collaborates with Sector Skill Councils (SSCs) a nd autonomous 
industry-led bodies to enhance placement of trained beneficiaries. In 
December 2019, MoHUA has signed an MoU with the Indian Plumbing 
Skills Council to train and place 21,000 candidates in plumbing sector on a 
Recruit, Train and Deploy (RTD) Model.  
 
In order to enhance self -employment opportunities for Self -Help Group 
members, the courses with duration less than 200 hours have been  
 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
approved for skill training. Further, the progress of skill training and 
placement is reviewed on a regular basis with the States/UTs.  
 
The recommendations of Committee have been duly noted and all possible 
steps would be taken to implement the same". 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. G-20017/12/2020-Budget-
I-UD dated 6th August, 2020] 
 
***** 

41 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
Expeditious examination of free ride for women in Delhi Metro by DMRC 
recommended 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
 
3.1 The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee’s examination has revealed that the issue of free ride for 
women in Delhi Metro has come up before the Committee in a big way. In this 
context, the Committee have been informed by Secretary, MoHUA that the issue 
is currently being examined by  DMRC. In this context, a suggestion has come up 
before the Committee by Secretary, MoHUA that an option can be to identify 
women, these may be school going, working women and so on and depositing the 
specified amount in their accounts with the liberty to use the amount at their free 
will for travelling by bus or by Metro as the case may be. Moreover, the matter 
can be deliberated upon by Fare Fixation Committee (FFC) appropriately before 
which State Government can take up the issue. The Committee’s examina tion 
has also revealed that this  issue had not been examined by 4th FFC which had 
submitted its report way back in September, 2016 and at that point of time this 
was not an issue. In view of the above, the Committee recommend expeditious 
examination of th e issue by DMRC and MoHUA and apprise the Committee 
accordingly. 
 
3.2 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action taken reply has stated 
as under: 
 
"DMRC has informed that the Metro fare collection system is technology 
based and the current level o f technology provided is not capable of 
distinguishing between beneficiaries and non -beneficiaries. Further, Metro 
Rail fare is fixed by Fare Fixation Committee, chaired by serving or retired 
judge of High Court in terms of extant provisions of Metro Railw ays 
(Operation and Maintenance) Act, 2002. Any such concession applicable for 
particular segment of society should be deliberated upon by the statutory 
fare fixation committee. As per the provisions of the said Act the 
recommendation of Fare Fixation commi ttee is binding on the metro rail 
administration". 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. G-20017/12/2020-Budget-
I-UD dated 6th August, 2020] 
 

42 
Government asked to look into the issue of mismatch between financial viz -
a-vis physical performance o f CPWD GPA (Residential/Non residential) 
Scheme. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
 
3.3 The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee note that a some of Rs. 1051.10 crore  has been given in BE 
(2019-20) for CPWD GPA (Residential/Non residential) as against Rs. 847.39 
crore at RE (2018 -19) with actual expenditure at Rs. 806.06 crore. The 
Committee however are constrained to note that physical achievement is not well 
and is b elow the target during 2018 -19 because of non -availability of land. The 
Committee also note that physical performance is below targets during 2016 -17 
and 2017-18. The Committee have been  informed that the issue of availability of 
land has been addressed a s it has been made available at different places and in 
some areas it is being transferred. The Committee however feel that the MoH&UA 
should take up the issue of mismatch between financial and physical 
performance so as to arrive at logical conclusion. 
 
 
3.4 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action taken reply has stated 
as under: 
 
"CPWD has been allotted an amount of Rs.1051.10 crore at BE(2019 -20) 
for General Pool Accommodation (GPA) (Residential / Non -residential). The 
budget is required to i mplement revised GPRA upgradation scheme 2018 
and to carry out additional works. Physical performance is dependent on 
land issues where various challenges are being faced. State Government 
have been approached by MoHUA to resolve the land issues and the sa me 
are being sorted out on priority. The execution and monitoring of projects 
are being done by utilizing modern project monitoring tools after 
acquisition of land. In work construction, physical performance is higher 
than financial performance owing to fund flow. During the current year out 
of 320 residential units, 311 units have been completed upto December, 
2019. Similarly out of 15,319 sq.mts. of office space targeted for the 
current year, 14,890 sq.mts. have been constructed upto December, 2019". 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. G-20017/12/2020-Budget-
I-UD dated 6th August, 2020] 
 
 

43 
Expeditious submission of Pending Utilization Certificate (UCs) in respect of 
SBM (U) funds from being States of Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab 
and Karnataka recommended. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
 
3.5 The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under: 
 
The Committee’s examination of allocation viz -a-vis utilization of funds under 
Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) for twin purposes of sanitation and Solid Waste 
Management reveal that the SBM (U) has been annually availing funds from Rs. 
2500 Crore to Rs. 3000 crore during the last two years viz 2017 -18 and 2018-19 
and Rs. 2650.00 crore have been given at BE (2019 - 20). They however are 
constrained to note that level of Utilization Certificates (UCs) due, has been on 
the rise during the last two years i.e 2016 -17 and 2017 -18 from the level of Rs. 
222 crore (10.89%) to as high as Rs. 843 crore (35.64%). The Committee are 
constrained to not e that prominent States from which the UCs due are Uttar 
Pradesh (Rs. 182.48 crore), followed by Madhya Pradesh (Rs. 163.29 crore), 
Punjab (Rs. 66.31 crore) and Karnataka (Rs. 65.06 crore). In this connection the 
Committee have been assured by the Secretar y, MoH&UA that the concern of the 
Committee have been taken care of. The Committee therefore recommend  that 
MoH&UA to take up the issue with concerned States for early submission of 
pending UCs and apprise them accordingly for arriving at logical conclusion. 
 
 
3.6 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action taken reply has stated 
as under: 
 
"The Solid Waste Projects of Swachh  Bharat Mission (SBM) Scheme is a 
capital intensive with a completion time range of one to three years. The 
SBM has been able to achieve substantial milestone in both physical and 
financial terms in so far mission objectives are concerned. The Utilisation 
certificates are required to be submitted within 12 months of the closure of 
the next financial year in which the grants were released. As on date a total 
cumulative grant released is Rs.10195.37 Crore for which utilization 
certificates are due only up to March 2018, i.e. approximately Rs 6337 
Crore. At the closure of the year 2019-20, as against the due amount of Rs. 
6337 Crore for Utilisation Certificates actual UCs for an amount of Rs. 
7307 Crore were received, this figure also includes some UCs which wi ll be 
due in next financial year i.e. 2020 -21. Issue regarding pending Utilisation 
Certificates is being raised with the all States/UTs from time to time 
through video conference, letters and through emails. Accordingly,  
 

44 
 
States/UTs have been advised to submit all pending Utilisation Certificates 
at the earliest. The latest position of the above 4 States is as under: 
 
(Rupees in Crore) 
S. 
No 
Name of the 
State 
Releases UC due upto 
31.03.2018 
UC Received 
Till date 
1. Madhya Pradesh 748.09 721.36 640.56 
2. Karnataka 559.62 246.86 151.70 
3. Punjab 218.38 193.19 168.69 
4. Uttar Pradesh 1193.20 760.44 911.34 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. G-20017/12/2020-Budget-I-UD 
dated 6th August, 2020] 
 
Government asked to ascertain the exact quantum of ODF in the light of 
less demand of Individual Household Latrine (IHHLs) due to land constraint. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
 
3.7 The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee’s examination has revealed that after t aking up Open 
Defecation Free (ODF) work on 2 nd Oct, 2014, MoH&UA has declared 34 out of 35 
States ODF on 2nd Oct, 2019 and by Dec, 2019 ODF work will be over. Besides 
the Committee have been informed by Secretary, MoH&UA that currently 
necessary upgradation in the form of three more Protocols, ODF+ (Toilet with 
water, maintenance and hygiene), ODF++ (Toilet with sludge and septage 
management) and Water+ (Toilet with treating and reuse of water) are in progress 
across different cities with the goal  to complete the work covering all the three 
Protocols by 2024. The Committee appreciate the intention of the Government. In 
this connection an issue has come up before the Committee that whether non -
availability of land has reduced the demand for Individu al Household Latrines 
(IHHLs), an essential component for making a city ODF thereby putting a big 
question mark on the very aspect of declaring the ODF. In this context a 
representative of Government of NCT of Delhi admitted before the Committee that 
there is no demand for IHHLs as land is not available and in lieu thereof they are 
in the process of asking MoH&UA for Community Toilets (CTs). The Committee 
find that there is a merit on this logic as non -availability of land has reduced the 
demand for  IHHLs in the NCT of Delhi. In this context the Secretary, MoH&UA 
has also informed the Committee that demand of IHHLs in the absence of land is 
being replaced by CTs and where no land is available it is being addressed by 
mobile toilets also. The Committee there fore recommend that MoH&UA may 
review the entire ODF issue on this ground and apprise the Committee 
accordingly for arriving at logical conclusions. 
 

 
45 
 
3.8 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action taken reply has stated 
as under: 
 
"ULBs are required to ensure that if IHHLs cannot be constructed due to 
non-availability of land with the users, alternative arrangements for the 
persons without IHHL in form of Community toilets / Public toilets should 
be provided to avoid open defecation . Also, funds may be used 
interchangeably for construction of CT/PT/IHHL/ Urinals. Further, to 
avoid funds constraints, floating fund amounting to Rs. 408 Crore have 
been created to fulfill the additional requirements of States/UTs beyond 
their mission allocation". 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. G-20017/12/2020-Budget-
I-UD dated 6th August, 2020] 
 
***** 

46 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Government asked to expedite Metro related work in other towns 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
 
4.1 The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee are constrained to note that various issues pertaining to 
Metro related works both existing/expansion have come up before the Committee 
in respect of prominent towns of Kochi, Patna, Agra and Kolkata. In this context, 
Committee’s examination has revealed different aspects related with different 
projects. In respect of Kochi Metro, aspects of developing metro city project for 
ensuring viability of Kochi Metro, particularly when State Government has 
already acquired land and opening Kochi Phase I linking JLN Stadium to 
Kakinada have come up before the Committee. Whereas in respect of Patna and 
Agra Metro, delay in starting Metro work has come up before the Committee. 
Besides, the malfunctioning of coaches in Kolkata Metro has also figured in 
before the Committee. In this context, the Committee have been informed by 
Secretary, MoHUA that developing Metro City project pertained to State 
Government of Kerala for funding purposes and technical support is always given 
by MoHUA whereas Kochi Phase II is constantly being reviewed at the level of MD 
Kochi Metro Rail Corporation and Chief Secretary and soon after necessary 
essentialities are over Metro would run in that stretch. The Committee have also 
been informed that for Patna Metro, DMRC has been given  the work and would 
be operationalized in another five year time, whereas in the case of Agra Metro, 
the Committee have been informed that the subject matter is before Hon’ble 
Supreme Court and Uttar Pradesh Metro has already moved an application to 
start it as an special case, the moment the issue comes up at argument stage. 
The Committee also find that for addressing the issue of malfunctioning of 
coaches in Kolkata Metro, Secretary, MoHUA has assured the Committee that 
although the Kolkata Metro is under Ministry of Railways, yet the efforts would be 
made to resolve in issue in consultation with MD, Kolkata Metro. The Committee 
feel that all out efforts be made for expeditious implementation completion of 
these Metro projects. 
 
 
4.2 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action taken reply has stated 
as under: 
 
"It is submitted that concerted efforts are continuously taken for effective 
monitoring of the implementation of the metro rail projects by the Board of  
 

47 
 
metro companies implementing the said projects, the State Governments 
concerned and the Central Government.  
 
As regards the issue of malfunctioning of coaches in Kolkata Metro, the 
Ministry of Railways has been requested by Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs to address the issue and take suitable remedial measures to resolve 
the same". 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. G-20017/12/2020-Budget-
I-UD dated 6th August, 2020] 
 
Revamping project planning and implementation of NCRPB recommended 
for gainful utilization of assured resources. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
 
4.3 The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee find that NCRPB has been getting and utilizing a uniform 
amount of Rs. 50 crores  from 2016 -17 onwards for financial assistance to 
participating States for infrastructure projects. The Committee are however 
constrained to note that out of 355 infrastructure projects only 262 projects have 
been completed. The Committee’s examination has  revealed that on date out of 
93 ongoing projects as high as 58 projects are only 2 year’s old and DPRs are 
under way and necessary hand holding is done by NCRPB and all vacant posts 
are being filled up within NCRPB.  
 
 The Committee feel that all is not w ell in NCRPB and recommend that 
necessary revamp of activities of NCRPB is done for improving its project 
planning and implementation and also for strengthening its manpower for gainful 
utilization of available resources. 
 
 
4.4 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action taken reply has stated 
as under: 
 
"During the last three years (from January, 2017), NCR Planning Board has 
sanctioned loans for 66 infrastructure development projects with total 
estimated cost of Rs. 4588.54 Cr. and financial assis tance of Rs. 3254.40 
Cr. The project-wise details are enclosed as Annexure- I.  
 
NCRPB provides financial assistance to Participating States and their 
Implementing Agencies for various infrastructure development projects  
 

48 
 
which are of public benefit a nd are being from the stressed sectors viz. 
Water Supply, Sewerage, Sanitation, Drainage,  
 
Solid Waste Management etc.  
 
The projects are being prepared and implemented by respective NCR 
Participating State Governments and their implementing agencies. 
Wherever NCRPB's intervention is sought, it provides hand-holding services 
to the Implementing Agencies in terms of technical and financial support.  
 
During the last three years (from January, 2017), NCR Planning Board has 
sanctioned loans for 66 infrastruct ure development projects with total 
estimated cost of Rs.4588.54 Cr. and financial assistance of Rs.3254.40 Cr.  
 
Out of 93 ongoing projects, 58 projects have been sanctioned during the 
last 2 years and are expected to get completed as per the schedule of 
completion which generally takes 3-5 years". 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. G-20017/12/2020-Budget-
I-UD dated 6th August, 2020] 
 
Government asked to revamp implementation mechanism in different 
States/UTs for improving financial and physica l performance of AMRUT 
works. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20) 
 
4.5 The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee’s examination of AMRUT scheme that was started with the 
objective of providing potable water, sewerage etc. in 500 cities covering 50% of 
urban population has revealed that though the scheme has been getting yearly 
funds ranging from Rs.6400 to Rs.7300 crore which are largely utilized, yet on 
financial and physical fronts, the result are not encouraging. In this context, 
while reviewing the financial performance, the Committee recall that scheme was 
started 25 June, 2015 with total outlay of R s.1 lakh crore, out of which 
Rs.50,000 crore was Central Assistance (CA) spread over five years and MoHUA 
had come out with a Plan called ‘SAAP’ (State Annual Action Plan) of Rs.77,640 
crore with committed Central Assistance of Rs.35,987.20 crore to be rel eased to 
States/UTs in three installments of 20:40:40. In this context, the Committee are 
constrained to note that as low as Rs.22,685 crore have been released to 
States/UTs as on 15.10.2019. The Committee are also constrained to note that 
this has been due to failure on the part of State Governments/UT Administration 
to claim Second and Third installments on account of delay in implementation of  

49 
 
infrastructure projects for various reasons. These inter alia include longer time 
taken in DPRs preparation , their approval at appropriate level, tendering, 
retendering on account of insufficient bidders (in West Bengal) non -maturing of 
finance from ADB (in Punjab), non -availability of contractors for handling huge 
works, revision of SAAPs due to local conditio ns etc. In this connection, the 
Committee find that physical progress is not all that well as out of projects worth 
Rs.81,914 crore as low as Rs.64,500 crore worth of projects are at ‘Contracts 
Awarded’ stage and projects worth as low as Rs.6,468.82 crore are completed as 
on 29.10.19. In this context, the Committee find that Secretary, MoHUA has been 
optimistic before the Committee that in coming two to three years every 
household would get drinking water. The Committee apprehend that in the light 
of poor p osition of releases and implementation constraints, the task appears to 
be difficult unless suitable measures are timely taken. The Committee, therefore, 
feel that a revamp of AMRUT scheme for addressing the above issues is urgently 
desirable. They, therefore, recommend the MoHUA to take appropriate steps and 
apprise the same to the Committee to arrive at a logical conclusion. 
 
 
4.6 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action taken reply has stated 
as under: 
 
"The Mission provides full autonomy to the State/UT with regard to 
identification and development of projects, approval of DPRs, bid process 
management and award of contracts. The State is required to implement 
the projects including the resolution of vario us issues such as making 
available land free from encumbrances for project components, statutory 
clearances, utility shifting, contract management etc.  
 
Generally the sewerage and water supply projects being taken up under the 
Mission have long gestation in terms of period of completion. Therefore, the 
implementation agencies have to be cautious about the various issues 
arising during execution of such projects. It has also been observed that in 
few States there is lack of enough contracting capacity in vi ew of large 
number of these specialized works. Regular monitoring of implementation 
is being carried out at Ministry level and the States are being regularly 
apprised of various issues in implementation of projects and are being 
advised regularly to enhanc e the pace of implementation. The Ministry 
would continue to monitor the programme implementation with clear focus 
on completion of the projects under the Mission". 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. G-20017/12/2020-Budget-
I-UD dated 6th August, 2020] 
 
4.7 The Committee are dismayed to note that large number of 
irregularities in AMRUT works at various places have come up before the  

50 
Committee posing a big question mark over activities being taken up under 
AMRUT Mission. The Committee are cons trained to note that these inter 
alia pertain to irregularities in works of LED lights amounting to thousands 
of crores of rupees in Aurangabad with matter going upto Hon’ble Supreme 
Court, report of tenders being awarded to a single person at Surat and report 
of unnecessary work of painting done in Raipur have come up before the 
Committee. All these suggest that all is not well with AMRUT works across 
States/UTs. The Committee, therefore, recommend that MoHUA should 
review AMRUT works at regular intervals for bringing about fairness and 
transparency in implementation. 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 22) 
 
 
4.8 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action taken reply has stated 
as under: 
 
"Under the AMRUT Mission, the following activities are admissible: projects 
related to water supply, sewerage & septage management, storm water 
drainage, non-motorized urban transport and green spaces & parks.  
 
The States are responsible for all activities  ranging from selection of 
projects to its completion. In case there is specific mention of irregularities 
in AMRUT works, the Ministry would take up these issues with concerned 
State Governments.  
 
As per the information received from Aurangabad Municipal  Corporation 
(AMC), the works of LED streetlights replacement in Aurangabad was taken 
up by AMC from their own funds and not from AMRUT funds. It is relevant 
to mention that AMRUT Mission doesn't include the funding of replacement 
of streetlights with energy efficient LED lights. 
 
 It is also pertinent to mention that painting in the town is not admissible 
item under AMRUT Mission.  
 

51 
 
The Ministry is carrying out review of implementation of AMRUT Mission on 
regular intervals. The review also includes fai rness and transparency in 
implementation". 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. G-20017/12/2020-Budget-
I-UD dated 6th August, 2020] 
 
***** 
 

52 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS, IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Impact assessment at large number of completed projects under HRIDAY 
recommended. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
 
5.1 The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee are constrained to note that outcome of HRIDAY Scheme 
has not been ascertained as on date that was being implemented from 31st 
March, 2014 to 31st March 2019 in 12 pilgrimage towns currently transferred to 
Ministry of Tourism under new scheme  Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual 
Augmentation Drive (PRASAD). In this connection the Committee’s examination 
has revealed that out of 77 projects worth Rs. 448 crore, only 60 projects worth 
Rs. 402 crore have been completed and remaining 17 projects are likely to be 
completed at Municipal level. Keeping in view large number of projects completed, 
the Committee feel that impact assessment of such projects has to be done and 
the same may be apprised to the Committee to come at logical conclusion. 
 
 
5.2 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action taken reply has stated 
as under: 
 
"National Heritage City Development and Augmentation Yojana (HRIDAY), a 
central sector scheme of the Government of India with a total outlay of Rs. 
500 crore, was launche d on 21st January,2015. The mission period of the 
scheme has ended on 31st March, 2019. A total number of 77 Projects 
amounting to Rs. 419.57 crore were approved under the HRIDAY scheme. 
For the approved projects, a total of Rs. 402.08 crore have been rele ased to 
the Cities out of which 61 projects amounting to Rs. 326.27 have been 
completed. The remaining 16 projects which pertain to the finishing works 
to be carried by the Municipal Corporations/Local Bodies.  
 
The Impact assessment of the scheme is under  consideration and the 
outcome of the same will be apprised to the Committee in due course". 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. G-20017/12/2020- 
Budget-I-UD dated 6th August, 2020] 
 
 

53 
The Government asked to speed up credit rating of cities i n a time -bound 
manner 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21) 
 
5.3 The Committee in their original Report had recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee are constrained to note in the area of Credit Rating of cities 
performance of cities is not on expected lines and this has been candidly 
admitted before the Committee by Secretary, MoHUA. The Committee are 
constrained to note that out of 469 cities which had completed Credit Rating as 
low as 163 cities were able to get investable grade. The Committee find that these 
too are unable to raise Bonds. In this connection, it also came out before the 
Committee that out of selected 36 cities only 8 ci ties of Bhopal, Hyderabad, 
Indore, Amarawati, Pune, Vishakhapatnam and Surat could raise Rs.3390 crore. 
In this context, the Secretary, MoHUA informed the Committee that soon 
representatives of 55 cities with their Chief Secretaries would be converging 
before National Stock Exchange and consultations with Credit Raters like SEBI 
and others would take place on improving credit rating of cities possibly by way of 
their properties on book value so that at least 50 cities by 2024 would be able to 
raise their Bo nds. The Committee would await the outcome of the development 
and at the same time recommend a time bound review preferably three/six 
months to assess the situation so that the targeted work is accomplished on or 
before the planned timeline. 
 
 
5.4 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in action taken reply has stated 
as under: 
 
"Ministry is encouraging ULBs to raise funds through issuance of 
Municipal bonds. Credit rating of the Mission cities was a mandatory 
reform under AMRUT in order to assess and improve the financial health of 
the ULBs. After the conclusion of conference on Municipal Bonds, SEBI has 
constituted 'Municipal Bonds Development Committee' headed by 
Executive director, SEBI to advise SEBI on issues related to regulation and 
development of primary and secondary market for issuance of municipal 
debt securities. The c ommittee will facilitate the cities to raise funds 
through municipal bonds in the coming years. 

54 
 
 
Development of Municipal Bond Market will go a long way in making funds 
available for Urban Infrastructure. Progress will be informed to the 
Committee in due course". 
 
 
[Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs OM No. G-20017/12/2020- 
Budget-I-UD dated 6th August, 2020] 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  
11th September, 2020 
20 Bhadrapada, 1942 (Saka) 
JAGDAMBIKA PAL,  
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on 
Urban Development. 

55 
APPENDIX-I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2019-2020) 
 
Extracts of the Minutes of Fourteenth Sitting of the Committee on Urban 
Development held on Thursday the 27th August, 2020 
 
 The Committee sat from 1100 hours to 1515 hours in Committee Room 
No.1,   Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, First Floor, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 Shri Jagdambika Pal        -        Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha  
2.   Prof. S P Singh Baghel 
3. Shri Sanjay Kumar Bandi 
4. Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5. Shri Ramcharan Bohra 
6. Shri P C Mohan 
7. Shri C R Patil 
8. Smt Aparajita Sarangi 
9. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale  
Rajya Sabha  
10. Shri Kumar Ketkar 
11. Shri Sanjay Singh 
12. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
13. Shri Ram Chander Jangra 
14. Shri Digvijaya Singh 
Secretariat 
1. Shri A.K.Shah    Director 
 
Ministry of Housing And Urban Affairs 
 
1. Shri Durga Shanker Mishra             Secretary 

56 
2. Sh Amrit Abhijat    Joint Secretary (HFA) 
3. Smt. D. Thara    Joint Secretary 
4. Sh Ram Sajiwan Singh   Director (HFA-I) 
5. Sh Raj Kumar Gautam   Director (HFA-V) 
6. Sh V P Singh    Director 
 
Representative of State Government of Rajasthan 
 
1.  Sh Bhaskar A Sawant   Pr Secy UDH 
 
2. Sh Bhawani Singh Detha  Secretary LSG 
 
3. Sh N C Mathur    Chief Engineer, Jaipur Municipal 
       Corporation 
 
4. Sh Anil Singhal    Chief Engineer, Jaipur Municipal 
       Corporation 
 
5. Sh Devraj Solanki    Chief Engineer (Jaipur City &  
       Distt) PHED 
 
6. Sh Ambut Tyagi    SE, Water Resources Department 
Representative of State Government of  Haryana 
 
1. Sh Siddhi Natha Roy   Additional Chief Secretary 
 
2. Sh Vinay Pratap Singh   Commissioner, Municipal Corporation 
       Gurgaon 
 
2.  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed  Shri Ram Chand Jangra, MP 
(RS) on his nomination to serve as Member of the Standing Committee on 
Urban Development for the remaining term of the Committee.   
 
*  *  * 
 
 

57 
16. Thereafter the Committee thanked the witnesses and asked them to 
send written notes to the Committee Secretariat replies to which were not 
readily available with them. 
17. The Committee then took up for consideration two Draft Action Taken 
Reports on First and Second Report of the Committee on Demands for 
Grants (2019-20) and (2020 -21) relating to Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs on action taken by Government thereon and adopted the Draft 
Reports without any amendments. The Committee also authorized to finalise 
the Reports after factual verification from the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs for their presentation to Parliament.  
18. The Committee then adjourned. 
 A verbatim record is kept.  
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
* Matter not related with the Report. 

58 
APPENDIX-II 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction) 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIRST REPORT 
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
I. Total number of recommendation:      26 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted  
 by the Government:        16 
 
 Recommendation Nos. 1,2,3,4,5,6,8,13,16,17,18,19,23,24, 
 25 and 26 
 
 Percentage to total recommendations           (61.53%) 
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not  
 desire to pursue in view of Government's replies:    04 
 
 Recommendations Nos. 7,12,14 and 15 
 
 Percentage to total recommendations          (15.38%) 
 
IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies  
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 04 
 
 
 Recommendations Nos. 9,10,20 and 22 
 
 Percentage to total recommendations           (15.38%) 
 
V. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final  
 replies of the Government are still awaited:    02 
 
 Recommendations Nos. 11 and 21 
 
 Percentage to total recommendations          (7.69%) 

59 
APPENDIS-III 
 
 


60 
 
 
 


61 
 
 
 


62 
 
 
