STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
                  URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
                                    (2020-2021) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY FIFTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT ON THE SUBJECT, ‘SOLID 
WASTE MANAGEMENT INCLUDING HAZARDOUS WASTE, MEDICAL WASTE AND 
E-WASTE’ 
 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2021/Phalguna, 1942 (Saka) 
7 


SEVENTH  REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
(2020-2021) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY FIFTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN DEVELOPMENT ON THE SUBJECT 
‘SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT INCLUDING HAZARDOUS WASTE, MEDICAL 
WASTE AND E-WASTE’ 
 
Presented Lok Sabha on 17.03.2021 
       Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17.03.2021 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2021/Phalguna, 1942 (Saka) 
 
  


 
 C.U.D. No.: 118 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2019 By Lok Sabha Secretariat  
 
Publish under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by………… 
 
 

CONTENTS 
 
PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                                     
(iv) 
 
INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                                        
(v) 
CHAPTER I Report                                                                                               
 
  1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government   
 
34 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
49 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration   
50 
CHAPTER V Observations /Recommendations  in respect of which final  
replies of the Government are still awaited  
76 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
I. Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee held on 12.02.2021 -       79 
II. Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) -                                    80                                                                                        
         

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
URBAN DEVELOPMENT (2020-21) 
Shri Jagdambika Pal         -        Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2.  Adv. A.  M. Ariff 
3. Prof. S. P. Singh Baghel 
4. Shri Sanjay Kumar Bandi 
5. Shri Benny Behanan 
6. Shri Ramcharan Bohra 
7. Shri Hibi Eden 
8. Shri Gautam Gambhir 
9. Shri Syed Imtiaz Jaleel 
10. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
11. Smt Hema Malini 
12. Shri Hasnain Masoodi 
13. Shri P.C. Mohan 
14. Shri C.R. Patil 
15. Shri S Ramalingam 
16. Shri Adala Prabhakara Reddy 
17. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
18. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
19. Shri Sudhakar Tukaram Shrangre 
20. Shri Sunil Kumar Soni 
21. Shri M V V Satyanarayana 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri M. J Akbar 
23. Shri Subrata Bakshi  
24. Shri Y. S. Chowdary  
25. Sh Ram Chander Jangra  
26. Shri Kumar Ketkar 
27. Sh Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla  
28. Sh Digvijaya Singh 
29. Shri Sanjay Singh  
30. Dr. Sumer Singh Solanki  
31. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri  V.K. Tripathi                             -          Joint Secretary 
2. Shri  A.K. Shah        -       Director 
3. Shri Mukesh Kumar       -       Asstt. Executive Officer 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (2020 -21) having 
been authorized by the Committee, present this Seventh Report (17 th Lok Sabha) on the 
subject, ‘Solid Waste Management includi ng Hazardous Waste, Medical Waste and E -
Waste.’ 
2. The Twenty Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 1 2th February, 2019 and 
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on same date. The Action Taken Replies of the 
Government on the recommendations contained in t he Report were received on 
05.07.2019. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at their Sitting held on 
12.02.2021. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at 
Annexure-II. 
5. The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of appreciati on 
for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the Officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
6. For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
  
 
 
New Delhi;  
16th March, 2021 
25 Phalguna, 1942 (Saka) 
JAGDAMBIKA PAL,  
Chairperson, 
Standing Committee on 
Urban Development 
 
 
 
 (v)  
 

1 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Urban Development (20 20-21) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in their 
Twenty Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject, ‘Solid Waste Management 
including Hazardous waste, Medical waste and E -waste’ of the Ministry of  Housing and 
Urban Affairs which was presented to Lok Sabha on 12thFebruary, 2019. 
1.2 Action Taken Notes have been received from the Government in respect of all 
the 37 re commendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as 
follows: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government: 
 Recommendation Serial Nos. 3,6,7,15,18,19,20,21,24,27,28,29,31 and 36 
(Total - 14) 
(Chapter-II) 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations, which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of Government's replies: 
Recommendation Serial No. Nil             
(Total -0) 
(Chapter-III) 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which replies of Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee: 
     Recommendation Serial Nos. 1,2,4,5,8,9,10,11,12,13,17,22,23,25,26,30,32,33,34,35 
and 37      
(Total - 21) 
(Chapter-IV) 
                       
(iv) Recommendations / Observations, in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
   Recommendation Serial No. 14 and 16                                            (Total -  2) 
   (Chapter-V) 
 

2 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that specific replies to the Comments of the Committee as 
contained in Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished to them at the earliest and in any 
case, not later than three months from the presentation of this Report. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.    
 Review of SWM in a holistic manner, evolving a national perspective, 
setting up robust infrastructure and bringing about reliable data and reiterated  
(Recommendation Serial Nos.1,2,8,9 and 17) 
1.5 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 (i) “Government asked to review the issue of Solid Waste Management in the        
 country in a holistic manner 
Waste generation is intrinsic to human existence. In the Indian context, it is 
largely due to reasons like over population, rapid industrialization, introduction of 
new gadgets and equipments, changing consumption patterns, etc. in urban 
areas. The Committee are perturbed to note that as per Ministry of Environment 
& Forests and Climate Change, annually 65 million tonnes of waste is generated 
in India out of which as high as 62 million tonnes is Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) 
that includes organic waste, recyclables like paper, plastic etc, 45 -50% of which 
is biodegradable, 20-25% is recyclable and 30-35% as inert/debris.  
The Committee are also deeply concerned to note that only 75 -80% of the MSW 
is collected and as high as 22 -28% remains untreated/unprocessed and is 
deposited indiscriminately in dumping yards and landfill sites.   The Committee 
apprehend that the problem may increase man y fold in years to come,   posing a 
serious health and environmental hazard apart from increasing demand of land 
for dumping untreated/unprocessed waste which the country can ill -afford.  The 
projections of solid waste generation submitted by the Government  to the 
Committee viz., 165 million tonnes in 2031 and 436 million tonnes in by 2050 
bear ample testimony to the Committee's gravest apprehensions. 
After carefully examining the prevailing scenario and on the basis of documents 
and evidence placed before them, the Committee are constrained to conclude 
that in spite of its potentially devastating ramifications solid waste generation and 
its management has not received due attention from the Government.   Thus 
SWM, although it is a part of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
adopted by UN General Assembly in September, 2015 does not appear to be an 
immediate priority of the Government.   It may be per tinent to mention here that 
SDGs are to be achieved by 2030 i.e. just a decade plus later.   The Committee 

3 
 
are also concerned to note that due to this apathy at Government level, Urban 
Local Bodies have not been getting requisite funds for SWM purposes as 6 0-
70% of their expenditure goes for street sweeping and 20 -30% goes towards for 
waste transportation purposes. The Committee are also perturbed to note that 
waste collection efficiency in India is also very low as it ranges between 70 -90% 
in Metros and bel ow 50% in small cities.    It is highly disconcerting to note that 
Door to Door Collection has reached only upto 82% and source segregation has 
not moved beyond 48% in the country. With as high as 22 -28% of waste 
remaining untreated/unprocessed in the count ry and hardly any funds available 
for SWM with ULBs, the Committee recommend that the entire issue of SWM 
needs to be looked into immediately in a comprehensive manner at the highest 
level by a multi -disciplinary mechanism consisting of all stake holders.   The 
Committee further recommends that once a roadmap is laid out by such a multi -
disciplinary mechanism, the Government should make provisions for necessary 
funds and manpower for Solid Waste Management to ULBs in a time bound 
manner particularly on Waste  disposal with utmost promptitude and keeping in 
mind the overall threat to the human health and environmental degradation. 
(Rec. Sl. No.1) 
(ii)  Government asked to open up national initiative for addressing the problem of 
Solid Waste in association with different stakeholders like Central Ministries/State 
Governments  and ULBs 
The Committee's examination has revealed that different kinds of Solid Wastes 
like Municipal waste, Bio -Medical Waste, e-Waste, etc.  are major contributors in 
India.  The Committee  also found that as per NITI Aayog, solid waste can be 
categorized on the basis of origin, contents and hazardous potential, whereas 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has broadly categorized Solid Waste in 
Wet and Dry Wastes.   The Committee find that v arious constituents of solid 
wastes like plastic waste, C&D Waste, e -Waste, bio -Medical Waste etc,   are 
causing a big challenge as a large part of the same remains 
untreated/unprocessed.  For instance, out of the total garbage of 5.6 million 
tonnes annually in India, only 25% is recycled and 10% of total garbage is plastic 
waste alone.   In the case of major metropolitan cities, the Committee found that 
waste generation is as high as 690 mt. in Delhi, 408 mt in Mumbai and 314 mt in 
Bengaluru on a daily basi s.  Similarly, for C&D waste due to progressive pace of 
construction in cities, the C&D waste could be as high as one third of urban 
waste that needs to be recycled.   Likewise, for e -waste that include computers, 
entertainment devices, mobile phones, etc. the major concern is that recycling is 
done by non-formal units by unscientific, unhealthy and non -environment friendly 
methods.  About Bio Medical Waste, the Committee are constrained to note that 
as per Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Bio-Medical Waste, that constitutes 
15-25% of total waste generated in hospitals, has the propensity to cause 
transmission of dreaded HIV, Hepatitis B, Hepatitis C viruses requiring due care 
while handling and their disposal.   As per Review Report prepared by the Expe rt 
Group the Directorate of Government Health Services submitted before the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests and Climate Change (MOE&F&CC) on the 

4 
 
Direction of National Green Tribunal (NGT) there is a need for more Bio -Medical 
Waste Treatment Facilities (CMWTF) in the country, as 200 CMWTFs in 750 
district hospitals are grossly inadequate.  
The Committee's examination has also revealed that as per Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy,   the wet waste like kitchen waste, vegetable fruit market 
waste,  etc and dry waste like sanitary napkins and diapers, Material Recovery 
Facility (MRF) waste like plastic,  glass etc, Refused Derived Fuel (RDF) are also 
causing major problems. 
  
In this context, NITI Aayog has admitted before the Committee that ULBs and 
State Governments being major stakeholders have to come forward for efficient 
collection and segregation at source for Solid Waste Management including 
Municipal Solid Waste. It has also opined that there are large opportunities in the 
area of Solid Waste Manag ement.  The Committee find that since 'Water Supply' 
and 'Sanitation' are 'State' subjects under the Constitution and role of MOH&UA 
is about formulation of policies and assisting States/UTs by providing financial 
assistance for creation of necessary infra structure, the Committee recommend 
that a country -wide full fledged inter -Ministerial initiative be opened with ULBs, 
State Governments etc., to address the problem of Solid Waste in the country in 
a wider perspective. 
(Rec. Sl. No.2) 
(iii) Lack of critical infrastructure for Solid Waste Management at ULB level criticized 
and need for robust infrastructure for SWM purposes recommended 
The Committee's examination of  various shades of opinion like ASSOCHAM, 
prominent NGOs engaged in the field of Solid Waste M anagement like Swachh 
Pune and Center for Science & Environment has revealed that there is a need for 
critical infrastructure for Solid Waste Management in the country.   For instance, it 
has been opined by ASSOCHAM before the Committee that urban solid was te 
management not on 0ly posed great risk to environment and to society but also 
gave an opportunity for resource conservation and ULBs do not have necessary 
wherewithal for that purpose.  In this context, it has also been brought out before 
the Committee that in European and North American countries waste conversion 
into useful products is working well with proper motivation of business people 
with local and federal Governments and are encouraging investment in Solid 
Waste Management business by giving them  tax incentive   free land for 
processing etc.   It has also been submitted before the Committee by 
ASSOCHAM to completely privatise the collection of Solid Waste from 
municipalities.  On the contrary, Swachh Pune has opposed the same and have 
come up with t he idea of handing over the primary waste collection to informal 
sector and to cooperatives that are doing well mainly in Pune and have 
advocated that private sector,   if need be, be   given secondary level depending 
upon the model of the city.   In this con nection, the Ministry of Urban 
Development has 'Not  Agreed' to  the suggestion of ASSOCHAM of completely   
privatizing collection of Solid Waste from Municipalities and have opined that all 

5 
 
models of collections including SHGs, private contractors and coll ection by ULBs 
can be followed and private partners will be selected as per tender conditions. 
The Committee also find that Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has 'Agreed' 
to the ASSOCHAM suggestions of free of cost land for setting up processing 
plants and encouraging best technologies for waste processing. The Committee 
also notice that in regard to ASSOCHAM's suggestion of cost sharing with 
entrepreneurs, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has left the issue at the 
discretion of State Governmen ts.  About the   idea of tax holiday for waste 
processing business, the MOH&UA 'Partially Agreed' and have left it to Ministry 
of Finance to comment upon the same and have opined that GST at lower rate 
be applied on activities of waste management to enable venders to claim impact 
credit.    In this context, the Ministry of Environment & Forests and Climate 
Change (MOE&F&CC) quoting Rule 22 and Rule 15 of SWM Rules, 2016 
providing for timelines to be adhered to by local bodies and Panchayats and 
other concerned agencies for creation of infrastructure, identification of sites for 
SWM purposes, besides Urban Development Department of States/UTs are 
mandated to design policy for minimizing waste going to landfills.  
The Committee have also been informed by Swachh , Pune about ameliorating 
the condition of Scrap Dealers who are working in very unhygienic conditions so 
that recycling of waste progresses on desired lines.   In view of the above facts 
and since these issues are of far reaching ramifications, the Committ ee 
recommend that Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs should sit together with 
concerned Ministries specially MOE&F&CC, Health, Finance, Power etc., State 
Governments/ULBs, other stakeholders for setting up/creation of necessary 
infrastructure and mechan ism for Solid Waste Management in the country in 
shortest possible time. 
(Rec. Sl. No.8) 
(iv) Government asked to concretizing integrated mechanism of industry/ informal 
sector for Solid Waste Management in the country 
The Committee are glad to learn that both ASSOCHAM and prominent NGOs 
have underlined the need for joint efforts by Corporate, Recyclers, etc. with 
Governments/ULBs for tackling the problem of Solid Waste Management 
especially recycling of waste.  In this context, the MOH&UA has submitted before 
the Committee that Solid Waste and Liquid Waste are handled separately and 
the same is planned at the Town Planning stage itself.    In this context, the 
Committee also note submission of the MOE&F&CC that under Rule 15 and Rule 
22 of SWM Rules there is  a well laid down provision for creation of infrastructure 
for different implementing agencies like Panchayats and ULBs also and for 
framing a policy. State UD Departments and implementing agencies have been 
given timelines for infrastructure creation. The  Committee, therefore, recommend 
that Government should work out an integrated mechanism of SWM with industry 
and informal sector expeditiously. 
 
(Rec. Sl. No.9) 

6 
 
(v) Absence of accurate data of waste generation about criticized and Government 
asked to make  available tentative five years data of waste generation vis -à-vis 
compost creation in the country 
The Committee are constrained to note that as per Member -Secretary, Central 
Pollution Control Board who appeared before the Committee, there is no reliable 
data of waste generated in the country.  As per Central Pollution Control Board, it 
is 1.20 lakh tonnes to 1.40 lakh tonnes per day.   The Committee note that 
Central Pollution Control Board has expressed its helplessness before the 
Committee that non -availability of accurate data is biggest handicap.   The 
Committee have also been informed by CPCB   that over the last 50 years, the 
composition of waste had changed a lot and currently 9 percent of total waste is 
of plastic waste alone,   alongwith other components.  The Committee have been 
informed that   after understanding the composition of waste the technology for 
waste processing be accordingly designed.   In this context, the Committee have 
also been informed that with a view to get clear picture about waste generated 
vis-à-vis waste composition every ULB should workout for a perspective plan of 5 
years seeking partnership with non-voluntary organizations and the same may be 
uploaded on public domain for the benefit of common man and for the use of 
policy makers.  The Committee, therefore, recommend MOH&UA to proceed on 
the above lines in consultation with and in coordination with all State 
Governments and ULBs for getting a clear perspective on the issue. 
(Rec. Sl. No.17) 
1.6 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken replies have 
stated as under:- 
(i)  “The Solid Waste Management (SWM) Rules 2016 have clearly laid down 
the end-to-end roadmap for the scientific management of Municipal Solid 
Waste (MSW) keeping in view the threat to human he alth and 
environmental degradation. 
The roadmap given in the SWM Rules needs to be implemented in letter 
and in spirit by the States/UTs and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) who are 
constitutionally responsible for the subject and for carrying out the 
functions. 
Further, the funding required for such MSWM has to be arranged by the 
States/UTs and ULBs whereas the Central Government may provide 
certain Additional Central Assistance (ACA) under various centrally 
sponsored schemes run from time to time such as Swachh Bharat Mission 
(SBM)- Urban, as per guidelines. 
The processing of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) as on date has increased 
to 54% from 19% in 2014 due to the focus brought by Swachh Bharat 
Mission (Urban) upon door-to-door collection of segregated waste which is 
about 90% as on date, integration of informal  waste pickers, collection of 
user fee, anti -littering directions, setting up of material recovery facilities, 

7 
 
in house processing of wet waste by bulk waste generators, processing of 
biodegradable waste into compost and bio -methanation, non -
biodegradable (dry) waste into energy and Refused Derived Fuel (RDF), 
setting up of scientific and land fill for residual waste etc.” 
(Reply to Rec. Sl. No.1) 
(ii) “Water supply and sanitation are State subjects and functions of the 
ULBs. MoHUA has issued several Adviso ries, Manuals and Guidelines for 
the scientific management and administration of water supply and 
sanitation functions by the States/UTs and ULBs after due consultations 
with other Ministries. There is also coordination among the Ministries in 
providing additional support to the States/UTs & ULBs in these functions 
as exemplified in the various centrally sponsored schemes and central 
sector schemes such as SBM-U, Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban 
Transportation (AMRUT) and the National Mission for Cle an Ganga 
(NMCG).” 
(Reply to Rec. Sl. No.2) 
(iii) “As sanitation is a state subject, Ministry is in coordination with all the 
central ministries, State/UTs and ULBs and all stakeholders for 
management of Municipal Solid Waste and supporting the ULBs by 
issuing manuals, guidelines, advisories and motivating their efforts 
through the annual Swachh Survekshans and the Star Rating of Garbage 
Free Cities.” 
 
(Reply to Rec. Sl. No.8) 
(iv) As stated in Sl. No. 8 above, Ministry is advising the States/UTs & ULBs in 
carrying out their statutory responsibility in scientific solid waste 
management through their own Sanitation Staff, through Self -Help Groups 
(SHGs), NGOs, Integration of rag pickers and informal sector, contracting 
to private agencies and also the mix of different options in different wards 
of the ULBs etc. 
 
(Reply to Rec. Sl. No.9) 
   (v) Action taken by CPCB in compliance of above is as given below: 
1. “Annual Report on implementation of SWM Rules,2016: - 
  
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) as mandated under the Solid 
Waste Management Rules, 2016 coordinates with the State Pollution 
Control Boards (SPCBs)/Pollution Control Committees (PCCs) regarding 
implementation of the Solid Wastes Management Rules. C PCB also 
follows up with SPCBs/PCCs for timely submission of Annual Reports on 

8 
 
implementation of the SWM Rules, 2016. The Consolidated Annual Report 
for the year 2017-18 was prepared & submitted to the MoEFCC along with 
recommendations. 
  
2.            Initiatives taken for effective management of SWM Rules, 2016    
  
  
    Guidelines on Legacy Waste: - 
 
CPCB prepared Guidelines on “Disposal of Legacy Waste (old 
MSW)”. The guidelines have been submitted to Hon’ble NGT as 
well as all SPCBs/PCCs for implementation and uploaded on 
CPCB website. 
 
             Guidelines on Buffer Zone: - 
  
CPCB amended Guidelines on “Provision on Buffer Zone around 
waste processing and disposal facilities and submitted to all 
SPCBs/PCCs for implementation and uploaded on CPCB website. 
                
 CPCB prepared “ Guidelines for management of sanitary waste “  and 
uploaded on its website. 
 CPCB prepared “ Selection Criteria for Waste Processing 
Technologies” and uploaded on its website. 
       3.               Directions Issued:- 
 CPCB issued Directions dated 16.01.19 under Section 31A of air (Protection) 
Act, 1981 to East Delhi Municipal Corporation (EDMC), South Delhi Municipal 
Corporation (SDMC), North Delhi Municipal Corporation, New Delhi Municipal 
Corporation, Delhi Can tonment Board (DCB)and imposed Environment 
Compensation for violations of SWM & PWM Rules, 2016. 
  
 CPCB issued Directions on 19.03.19 u/s 5 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 
1986 to all SPCBs/PCCs for setting up of Material Recovery Facilities (MRF) 
prior to WtE plant/energy recovery system.” 
(Reply to Rec. Sl. No.17) 
1.7 The Committee had recommended for comprehensive look on SWM issue 
in the light of rising waste generation with hardly any funds available with ULBs 
for the intended purpose.  The Committee had also recommended national 

9 
 
perspective on SWM covering various t ypes of wastes and for creating  of critical 
infrastructure for SWM purp ose in consultation with Assocha m,  State 
Governments/UTs, NGOs etc. in the light of views expressed by ASSOCHAM / 
NGOs etc.  The Committee had also asked for collection of necessary d ata of 
waste generation vis-à-vis compost creation also.  In the action taken replies the 
Committee are constrained to note that all the prominent recommendations of the 
Committee have not been fully addressed and Ministry has largely termed those 
as ‘State Subject’ or functions of ULBs.  
 The Committee are unhappy to note that Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs has not made available to Committee, the data of waste generation vis -à-
vis compost creation and have merely furnished the various guidelines is sued by 
Central Pollution Control Board. In the light of the foregoing, the Committee 
reiterate their aforesaid recommendations and urge the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs to furnish detailed and comprehensive replies thereto for arriving at 
logical conclusion.  
B. Drawing up Phase -wise Time Table for achieving full source segregation 
and accelerating the process of source segregation reiterated. 
(Rec. Sl. Nos. 5 and 10) 
1.8 The Committee had recommended as under: 
(i) “Drawing up a phase -wise time ta ble for achieving of source segregation 
by October, 2019 recommended 
The Committee are dismayed to note that scenario of source segregation 
is also dismal and whatever progress has been done is limited to few 
States/UTs only. For instance, 48% work done on  source segregation is 
mainly in three States of Chhattisgarh, Karnataka and UT of Puducherry 
with 100% source segregation, followed by Andhra Pradesh with 88%,   

10 
 
J&K with 83%, UT of Chandigarh with 81%   and Tamil Nadu with 80%.   
Other States are experienci ng still lower level of source segregation.   The 
Committee are also constrained to note that in most of the States, it is 
very low.  For instance, in large States of Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh, it 
is as low as 65% and 41% respectively and similar is the p osition of other 
large States.  The Committee are also constrained to learn that in States 
of Assam, Bihar and many other States/UTs it is in single digit.   The 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have also expressed their 
helplessness before the Committ ee that in spite of robust monitoring by 
Ministry and hand holding of States/UTs/ULBs, the matter is taking time 
due to reasons like existing behavioral patterns and failure of the 
authorities in imposing existing rules and so on.   The Committee 
apprehend that with this pace of work, the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs may not be able to achieve the mandate of scientific waste 
management by 2nd October, 2019.   The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that a time table in a phased manner be drawn u p for 
achieving the aforesaid goal by making concerted all out efforts for 
uniform source segregation across the States specially those which are 
lagging far behind.” 
(Rec.Sl.No.5) 
(ii) “Government asked to accelerate the process of source segregation in 
the country 
The Committee have been informed by NITI Aayog that estimated 
Municipal Solid Waste generation in the country is 1.45 lakh tonnes per 
day, which may go still higher,   posing a gigantic challenge to the 
Government.  In this connection, NITI Aayog has also opined that different 
contributors of Waste pose a problem for its management also.   It came 
out during the course of examination that various suggestions from 
ASSOCHAM and NGOs like proper method of segregation/recyclable 
waste at  primary or secondary level, scientific compositing, colour coding 
etc., have come up and these have already been 'agreed to'   by 
MOH&UA.  In this context, as per MOE&F&CC these are mandatory within 
the Solid Waste Management Rules.   The Committee also recall that 
prominent NGOs have also highlighted the need for segregation at source 
on the pattern of Panjim in Goa and Thiruvananthpuram and Alleppe in 
Kerala thereby stopping desegregated waste collection completely.   The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that MOH&UA take  up source 
segregation and its disposal also in a big way, in a time bound manner,    
across the States/UTs specially in those which are lagging behind.” 
(Rec.Sl.No.5) 
1.9 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken reply have 
stated as under: 

11 
 
(i) “The timeline for segregation of waste at source has been laid 
down in the SWM Rules 2016 for the States/UTs & ULBs to follow. 
MoHUA is also motivating the States/UTs & ULBs in Mission mode 
approach under the SBM -U with target completion date of  02.10.2019. 
Ministry is   engaging  and supporting the States/UTs & ULBs in the 
matter.  However, source segregation depends upon behaviour change 
also for which various programs of IEC and public awareness have been 
undertaken.” 
  
(Reply to Rec.Sl.No.5) 
(ii) “Ministry is continuously engaging with the States/UTs and ULBs 
through interactive Video Conferences conducted on regular basis in 
advising and motivating them for accelerating the source segregation of 
waste. It is also made part of the assessment for awards under Swachh 
Survekshan and certification of Garbage Free Star Rating Cities which 
motivate them in accelerating source segregation of waste.” 
  
(Reply to Rec.Sl.No.10) 
1.10 The Committee are constrained to note that in response to prominent 
recommendations of the Committee regarding drawing up a time table in phased 
manner for full source segregation in the country and speeding up the pace of 
progress in the light of uneven progress of source segregation across 
States/UTs, the Ministry of Housin g and Urban Affairs has furnished a routine 
action taken reply saying that Ministry is engaging supporting States/UTs and the 
issue depended upon behavior change/holding of video conferences etc.  The 
Committee do not appreciate the same as it does not spe ll out any time table for 
source segregation as suggested by the Committee.    The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate that Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs should frame out a time table 
for the intended purpose and submit the same before the Committee fo r arriving 
at a logical conclusion.  
 

12 
 
C. Compulsory registration of rag -pickers for waste collection and promoting 
Door to Door Collection by subsiding it by ULBs reiterated 
(Rec. Sl. Nos. 11 and 13) 
1.11 The Committee had recommended as under: 
“Compulsory registration of rag-pickers at State/UT  level recommended 
The Committee note that both ASSOCHAM/ Swachh, Pune have 
suggested for registration of rag pickers for twin purposes of reduction in 
municipal solid waste handling costs and diverting large quantity of wastes 
away from landfills thereby saving the environment.   The Committee also 
note that it has been done in Pune city and even Kerala Government 
already has a website on kabariwalas.   The Committee have also been 
informed that an alliance of ragpick ers is already working in the country.   
The Committee also find that MOH&UA has also 'agreed' for such a move 
and Ministry of Environment and Forests and Climate Change has 
confirmed that States/UT, Urban Development Department are also 
mandated to start a  scheme for registration of rag -pickers and waste 
dealers.  In view of the foregoing, the Committee strongly recommend that 
a system of compulsory registration of rag -pickers be started for desired 
purposes at States/UTs level by Municipalities expeditiously.” 
 (Rec.Sl.No.11) 
“Promoting Door to Door collection of waste by subsiding Waste Collection 
by ULBs recommended 
An issue has come up before the Committee that whether Door to Door 
Collection can be done by subsidizing waste collection by ULBs.   In this 
connection, ASSOCHAM as also prominent NGOs like Swachh Pune 
have been unanimous before the Committee that user charges be taken 
from households for waste collection.   In this context, the Committee have 
been informed by Swachh Pune that their Members are recovering users 
charges from 3 lakh household including 28,000 slum households and 
have suggested before the Committee that waste collection in slums has 
to be subsidized by municipalities.   The Committee have also been 
informed by MOH&UA that it should b e as per SWM Rules.   The 
Committee find that the relevant Rules stipulate that Generator would 
have to pay user fees for waste collection, the Committee recommend that 
Door to Door Collection of Waste by charging users for waste collection be 
started by all ULBs across the States/UTs.   As regards sections like slum 
dwellers the local bodies may include as appropriate measure of subsidy 
to take care of the matter.” 
 (Rec.Sl.No.13) 

13 
 
1.12 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken replies h ave 
stated as under: 
“Ministry also engages with the States/UTs and ULBs in the integration of 
rag pickers in waste management and has issued advisories also. The 
integration is also made part of the assessments under Swachh 
Survekshans and the certificati on of Garbage Free Star Rating of Cities. 
However, the actual registration of rag pickers is to be carried out by the 
States/UTs and ULBs concerned.” 
 
(Reply to Rec.Sl.No.11) 
“Door to Door collection of waste is the fundamental action given in the 
SWM Rules 2016 to be complied with by the States/UTs and ULBs. It 
needs to be carried out in sustainable manner for which user fees have to 
be implemented by the ULBs as given in the Rules. Ministry is motivating 
and encouraging the ULBs in levying of user cha rges through the 
assessments carried out under Swachh Survekshans and the protocol of 
the Star Rating of Garbage Free Cities in which it is advised to collect 
affordable, differential and sustainable model of user fees for door to door 
collection.Ministry has also issued a detailed guidelines regarding user 
charges from bulk generators and other households.” 
 
(Reply to Rec.Sl.No.13) 
1.13  The Committee are constrained to note that on two aspects of 
expeditious compulsory registration of rag pickers for wast e collection by 
Municipalities and promoting Door to Door Collection by subsidizing by ULBs, 
the action taken replies furnished thereto are of routine nature by mentioning 
about issuing of advisories to States/UTs and required registration is to be done 
by States/UTs and ULBs and quoting the Rule provision of levying user charges 
by ULBs on subsidizing of waste collection by ULBs.  The Committee find that full 
sweep of the recommendation made by them has not been addressed in action 
taken replies furnished before them.  They, therefore, reiterate that their aforesaid 

14 
 
recommendations should be well understood and addressed fully in final action 
taken reply of the MOHUA. 
 
C. Adequate funds for handling sanitary waste and higher utilization of funds 
for Solid Waste Management reiterated.  
(Rec.Sl.Nos. 12 and 32) 
 The Committee had recommended as under: 
(i) “Need for tackling sanitary waste by adequate allocation of funds for it s 
appropriate handling 
The Committee's examination has revealed that as per Swachh, Pune as 
high as 2000 tonnes of sanitary waste per day is generated in India and is 
improperly segregated and disposed off by informal recycling workers,   
making them vulnerable to dreaded diseases like HIV, Hepatitis B, C and 
even Ebola virus,   requiring allocation of huge funds for their appropriate 
handling and disposal.  In this connection, the Committee find that Ministry 
of Housing and Urban Affairs have 'agreed' before the Committee that 
waste pickers living in poor conditions by roadside near waste dumps are 
poorest, most marginalized, neglected, vulnerable sections in society.    
Further, the Committee have been inter alia informed by Ministry of 
Environment and Forests and Climate Change that manufacturers or 
brand owners or marketing companies of sanitary napkins and diapers 
shall explore the possibility of using all recyclable materials in their 
products.  The Committee treat the matter as grave and recommend t hat 
appropriate measures be taken for tackling the issue in coordination and 
consultation with Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and also at the 
level of Hospital/Dispensaries and even at PHC level by allocating 
adequate funds for the purpose.” 
(Rec.Sl.No.12) 
(ii) “Lower utilization of funds under Solid Waste components under Swachh 
Bharat Mission (Urban) criticized and Government asked to impress upon 
States/UTs  for utilizing the available funds complying with different 
conditions laid down by Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
The Committee are constrained to note that there have been huge gap 
between Mission Allocations vis-à-vis Releases and Utilization Certificates 
(UCs) due vis -à-vis UCs received as on 30.09.2018 in Solid Waste 
component under Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) period (2014 -19) so 
far.  For instance, as against the Mission allocations of Rs.7,365.82 crore, 
the releases were as low as Rs.3,284.79 crore.   Similarly, as against 
Rs.1490.65 crore of UCs due, the total UCs received were as  low as 

15 
 
Rs.1,116.83 crore.   The Committee's examination has revealed that in 
major beneficiary States of Solid Waste Management funds, the scenario 
of allocation vis -à-vis releases is grim. In Maharashtra,   out of allocations 
Rs.1081.84 crore, the releases  were as low as Rs.290.34 crore.   Similar 
was the position in other States of Uttar Pradesh (Rs.940 crore/Rs.427.73 
crore), Tamil Nadu (Rs.690.00 crore/Rs.205 crore), Gujarat (Rs.536 
crore/Rs.268.11 crore), Karnataka (Rs.512.52 crore/          Rs. 99.18 crore) 
and West Bengal (Rs.487.79 crore/Rs.199.80 crore).   The Committee 
have also noticed that a few States have faired well as well.   These are 
Andhra Pradesh (Rs.308.54/Rs.308.54), Rajasthan (Rs.363.46 
crore/Rs.344.26 crore), Madhya Pradesh (Rs.434.01/Rs.3 01.75 crore), 
Chhattisgarh (Rs.131.53 crore/Rs.93.99 crore), Jharkhand (Rs.122.68 
crore/Rs.92.38 crore), Goa (Rs.9.29 crore/Rs.5.93 crore), Himachal 
Pradesh (Rs.15.22 crore/Rs.9.10 crore).   The Committee also find that 
majority of North Eastern States have  also faired well.   On the issue of 
gap between Utilisation Certificates (UCs) vis -à-vis UCs received, the 
Committee are constrained to note the prominent States from where the 
due UCs have not been received are Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, 
Jharkhand an d Rajasthan.   Various reasons like failure on the part of 
States/UTs in not furnishing timely UCs as well as not furnishing physical 
and financial progress of funds released under Istinstallment have been 
attributed as reasons for  lower releases by Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs.  Besides, various procedural issues like compliance of conditions 
like preparation of bankable DPRs  by  ULBs   for  SWM   in   consultation  
with  State  Governments  duly approved by State High Powered 
Committees (HPCs) w ithin the norms of MOH&UA etc have also been 
outlined for lower release of funds by MOH&UA.   In view of the foregoing, 
the Committee feel that lessons may be learnt by the slow moving States 
including Delhi from good performing States of   Andhra Pradesh, 
Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Goa and Himachal 
Pradesh in Solid Waste Management so that   actual workdone is visible at 
ground level.   The Committee therefore recommend the MOH&UA that 
necessary interactive exercise be opened between g ood performing 
States and slow moving States expeditiously for getting the desired 
results.  The Committee also recommend that concerned States from 
whom required UCs are pending be asked to submit the same 
expeditiously.” 
1.14 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken replies have 
stated as under: 
(i) Public Health and Hospitals being a State subject, the provision of 
healthcare services is the primary responsibility of the respective State/UT 
Governments. Under National Health Missio n, GoI supports States/UTs to 
strengthen their health systems to provide health care services to the 
citizen. This includes support for Bio - Medical Waste Management at 
public health facilities based on the requirements posed by the States/UTs 

16 
 
in their Pro gramme Implementation Plans (PIP) within their overall 
resource envelop. 
Further, Bio- Medical Waste Management is an elementary part of quality 
assurance. Under NHM, financial support is being provided to States/UTs 
for management of Bio Medical Waste und er Quality Assurance and 
Infection Management & Environment Plan (IMEP) which includes 
training, supplies, equipment, operationalization of IMEP services at public 
health facility and also specifically for Bio - Medical Waste Management / 
Common Bio Medical Waste Treatment Facility, etc.  
Details of financial support approved under NHM in FY 2019 -20 for Quality 
Assurance and Infection Management & Environment Plan (IMEP)/ Bio Medical 
Waste Management (BMWM) is as per table below: 
S. 
No. State/ UT 
Quality Assurance and Bio Medical Waste 
Management FY 2019-20 
Quality 
Assurance 
Infection Management & Environment 
Plan (IMEP)/ Bio Medical Waste 
Management (BMWM) 
Amount 
Approved  
(Rs in 
Lakhs) 
Amount 
Approved 
(Rs in 
Lakhs) 
Remarks 
1 Andaman & Nicobar 0.50 0.00   
2 Andhra Pradesh 1,128.10 32.59 Rs 32.59 lakhs for Supplies 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 175.65 190.38 Rs 172.44 lakhs for BMWM 
& Rs 17.94 lakhs Supplies 
4 Assam 1,332.10 299.89 
Rs 203.63 lakhs for 
CBMWTF, Rs 14.25 lakhs 
for IMEP training & Rs 82.01 
lakhs for Supplies 
5 Bihar 1,208.86 909.17 
Rs 292 lakhs for IMEP 
equipment procurement, Rs 
97.17 lakhs for Supplies, Rs 
20.00 lakhs for IMEP training 
& Rs 500.00 lakhs for 
BMWM 
6 Chandigarh 12.00 0.00   
7 Chhattisgarh 618.34 63.13 
 Rs 49.63 lakhs for Supplies, 
Rs 13.50 lakhs for IMEP 
training 
8 Dadra and Nagar 
Haveli 1.15 0.00   
9 Daman and Diu 1.75 2.72 Rs 1.60 lakhs for IMEP 
equipment procurement, Rs 

17 
 
1.12 lakhs for Supplies 
10 Delhi 0.00 8.25 Rs 8.25 lakhs for Supplies 
11 Goa 51.76 0.60 Rs 0.50 for IMEP training, 
Rs 0.10 lakhs for BMWM 
12 Gujarat 3,658.47 122.10 Rs 59.66 lakhs for Supplies, 
Rs 62.44 lakhs for BMWM 
13 Haryana 394.43 68.49 
Rs 25.92 lakhs for Supplies, 
Rs 42.57 lakhs for IMEP 
training 
14 Himachal Pradesh 248.53 3.18 Rs 3.18 lakhs for Supplies 
15 Jammu & Kashmir 612.96 13.49 Rs 13.49 lakhs for Supplies 
16 Jharkhand 2,311.46 609.65 
Rs 300 lakhs for 
Operationalising Infection 
Management & Environment 
Plan at health facilities, Rs 
40.65 lakhs for Supplies, Rs 
269 lakhs for BMWM 
17 Karnataka 2,426.00 67.76 
Rs 57.72 lakhs for Supplies, 
Rs 10.04 lakhs for IMEP 
training 
18 Kerala 2,226.83 30.00 Rs 30 lakhs for IMEP 
training 
19 Lakshadweep 18.50 0.00   
20 Madhya Pradesh 6,363.38 1,095.95 
Rs 931.80 lakhs for 
Operationalising Infection 
Management & Environment 
Plan at health facilities, Rs 
148.85 lakhs for Supplies, 
Rs 15.30 lakhs for BMWM 
21 Maharashtra 1,893.48 291.59 
Rs 121.28 lakhs for 
Supplies, Rs 29.18 lakhs for 
IMEP training, Rs 46.23 
lakhs for liquid waste 
management, Rs 94.90 
lakhs for BMWM 
22 Manipur 195.14 3.49 
Rs 1.89 lakhs for Supplies, 
Rs 1.60 lakhs for IMEP 
training 
23 Meghalaya 142.87 16.38 
Rs 12.24 lakhs for Supplies, 
Rs 4.14 lakhs for IMEP 
training 
24 Mizoram 158.08 1.24 Rs 1.24 lakhs for Supplies 
25 Nagaland 220.25 2.80 Rs 2.80 lakhs for Supplies 
26 Odisha 1,428.75 49.62 Rs 49.62 lakhs for Supplies 
27 Puducherry 134.77 1.17 Rs 1.17 lakhs for Supplies 
28 Punjab 767.25 1,047.20 Rs 1040 lakhs for ETP, Rs 

18 
 
7.20 lakhs for Supplies 
29 Rajasthan 7,707.17 145.23 
Rs 66.38 lakhs for Supplies, 
Rs 78.85 lakhs for IMEP 
training 
30 Sikkim 41.03 3.13 
Rs 0.90 lakhs for IMEP 
equipment procurement, Rs 
1.23 lakhs for Supplies, Rs 1 
lakhs for IMEP training 
31 Tamil Nadu 1,092.20 415.63 
Rs 250 lakhs for 
Operationalising Infection 
Management & Environment 
Plan at health facilities, Rs 
131.22 lakhs for Supplies, 
Rs 34.41 lakhs for IMEP 
training 
32 Telangana   25.50 Rs 25.50 lakhs for Supplies 
33 Tripura 182.56 77.68 
Rs 4 lakhs for IMEP 
equipment procurement, Rs 
23.55 lakhs for Supplies,  Rs 
50.13 lakhs for BMWM 
34 Uttar Pradesh 1,126.88 20,620.11 
Rs 20421.73 lakhs for IMEP 
services, Rs 151.83 lakhs for 
Supplies, Rs. 46.55 lakhs for 
BMWM Plant and 
Sterilization System for 100  
bedded MCH Wing at 
Gorakhpur 
35 Uttarakhand 247.29 19.73 Rs 19.73 lakhs for Supplies 
36 West Bengal 914.93 43.29 Rs 43.29 lakhs for Supplies 
Total 39,043.42 26,281.14   
 
(Reply to Rec.Sl.No.12) 
(ii) “Under Swachh Bharat Scheme, Solid Waste Management projects are 
capital intensive with a completion time  range of 1 -3 years. Further the 
utilisation certificates are required to be submitted within  12 months of the 
closure of the financial year in which the grant has been released. Till date 
Rs. 9008.17 Crores have been released to the States/UTs and against  the 
due amount of Rs. 6338.21 Crores for utilisation certificates (UCs), actual 
UCs for an amount of Rs. 5,401Crores were received in the Ministry. This 
figure also includes some UCs which was due in next financial year i.e. 
2020-21.” 
(Reply to Rec.Sl.No.32) 

19 
 
1.15 The Committee deprecate that action taken replies on their elaborate and 
comprehensive recommendations on arrangement of funds for appropriate 
handling of sanitary waste management and full utilization of SWM funds have 
been very brief and as such  incomprehensive.  Moreover they also are 
constrained to that instead of properly dealing with subject matter on suggested 
lines by the Committee, the MOHUA has termed it as ‘State Subject’ and giving 
State-wise funds given for FY -2019-20 on full utilizati on of SWM funds also the 
action taken reply is silent on opening interactive exercise between good 
performing and slow moving States for getting desired results.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their aforesaid recommendations so that comprehensive fin al 
action taken replies are submitted before them for coming to logical conclusion.  
 
 
D. Need for PAN India Licence promoting Waste to Compost (WTC)  Plants 
and utilizing available technological options reiterated  
(Rec. Sl. Nos. 22, 23 and 25) 
1.16 The Committee have recommended as under: 
(i) “Need for PAN India Licence, Ware Housing fertilizers nutrient based 
subsidy for city compost and inclusion of city compost under NIL category 
under GST recommended 
Various other aspects related with Waste to Compos t that came up before 
the Committee through   ASSOCHAM include need for pan India licence 
for city compost in place of time consuming State specific licence currently 
prevailing, need for warehousing facilities   for storing city compost as 
thousands of bags  of city compost is lying unsold in various WTC plants, 
introduction of nutrient based subsidy for city compost in the name of 
Phosphate Rich Organic Manure (PROM),   which is not available 
currently, and need for inclusion of city compost under Nil categor y under 
GST.   In this context, on the inclusion of city compost under NIL category 
under GST, the Committee find that the Ministry of Housing and Urban 

20 
 
Affairs have left the issue to Ministry of Finance to comment upon.   The 
Committee recommend that MOH&UA should take up the aforesaid issues 
with appropriate Ministries for making the procedure for WTC simple, 
conducive and workable for WTC composting facilities in the country to 
flourish which would be in the interest of environment.   On the GST issue, 
the Committee would like the Ministry of Finance to take a positive view in 
the matter.” 
(Rec.Sl.No.22) 
(ii) “Project, Planning and implementation of Waste to Compost (WTC) plant 
criticized and Government asked to open WTC Plants in all States in the 
country in a big way 
The Committee are constrained to note that there are only few functional 
Waste to Compost (WTC) Plants in the country and these too are running 
much below their annual installed capacity.   For instance, out of a total of 
145 WTC Plants in the country with per annum installed capacity of 62.32 
lakh tonnes,  the per annum  compost production is as low as 13.11 lakh 
tonnes. From the State -wise details, the  Committee are also constrained 
to note that WTC plants are largely concentrated in a few States viz. 
Karnataka and Maharashtra with   19 plants each, Andhra Pradesh, Uttar 
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu   with 14 plants each, besides Gujarat with 12 such 
plants. The Committee are glad to note that twin States of Karnataka and 
Kerala are moving towards cent percent decentralized composting. The 
Committee however find that in the remaining States, the number is in 
single digits.   In this Connection, the MOH&UA have candi dly admitted 
before the Committee that more number of plants are needed   to process 
the waste effectively.   As regards projects under construction,   the 
Committee find that 150 WTC Plants with capacity of 33.48 MTPA are 
under construction and / or tenderin g,  and majority of these WTC already 
have been planned in States where such Plants are already working 
namely 29 Plants in Andhra Pradesh, 20 Plants in Gujarat, 19 Plants in 
Tamil Nadu, 14 Plants in Maharashtra  and 16 Plants in Rajasthan.  
On the issue o f making Waste to Compost Plants a pan India presence, 
the Committee have been informed by MOH&UA that a drive for 
segregation of waste has already been on in all 4041 cities/towns to 
produce good quality of compost and many States like Assam, Goa, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Odisha, Arunachal Pradesh, WTC Plants 
are already set up or in the process of being set up.   The Committee, 
however, find from the State -wise data placed before the Committee that 
number of WTC Plants in aforesaid States are quite few .  The Committee 
would like an explanation from MOH&UA in this regard.   In this 
connection, the Committee have been informed by NITI Aayog that vast 
opportunities might  emerge for expansion of Solid Waste Management in 
the country. Member -Secretary, Central Pollution Control Board has also 
outlined the need for preparing a roadmap of total waste generated vis -à-
vis city compost likely to be generated in coming five years from now in 

21 
 
the country and the Committee feel that in all the States project, plannin g 
and implementation of WTC Plants be uniformly chalked out in the country 
expeditiously.” 
(Rec.Sl.No.23) 
(iii) “Government asked to utilize available technological options for SWM with 
desired level of investment from affluent section of society in a 
comprehensive manner 
The Committee's examination of Waste to Energy (WTE) aspect linked 
with Solid Waste Management has revealed various issues.   These inter 
alia include use of appropriate Waste to Energy technologies for proper 
waste processing,  need for dis-incentivising landfills, promoting   scientific 
landfills and their conversion into parks, need for capacity creation of 
Waste to Energy Plants, augmenting R&D and capacity building in Solid 
Waste Management, use of plastics for road construction and vari ous 'C' 
and 'D' Waste related issues.  On the issue of appropriate technologies for 
WTE the Committee find that NITI Aayog has outlined four technologies 
for WTE processing of (i) Hydrothermal (conversion of wet to green coal), 
(ii) Catalytic   Thermo Chemi cal process (shell technology),   converting 
Bio-mass and Bio -degradable MSW to liquid fuel (iii) Plasma Gasification 
(WC Technology) which gasify all kinds of waste to energy at 3000 degree 
centigrade and (iv) The Thermal De -polymerisation  which can gener ate 
methane and oil from unsegregated MSW etc.   In this context, MOH&UA 
has observed before the Committee that there are no separate suitable 
methods for metropolitan cities and smaller cities and all processing 
methods are suitable for entire quality of w aste with suitable quantity 
however segregation of waste in different streams is key for efficient and 
economical processing.   The MOH&UA has also submitted before the 
Committee that considering typical composition of waste,   composting is 
highly relevant in India, however, in certain categories of bulk generators 
like hotels and restaurants etc. bio -methanisation process proves to be 
better and an economic option.   Further, segregation and recycling of 
various streams is best method for dry waste in large cities or cluster basis 
involving many smaller cities are better suited for methods of processing 
dry waste like plastic waste.  In this context, NITI Aayog has observed that 
there is a positive co -relation of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) generation 
with economic development and accompanying affluence.   In this context, 
NITI Aayog has quoted that as per study by Columbia University, New 
York, a higher standard of living results in more waste and also a greater 
ability to invest in waste management system.   The Committee thus finds 
that technologies options are already available and there is an apparent 
need for higher investment in such technologies from affluent section of 
society.   The Committee, therefore,   recommend the MOH&UA to go for 
use of available technologies for SWM,   with equivalent investment from 
affluent sections of society in the area of SWM,   in the country in a 

22 
 
comprehensive manner. The Committee also recommended that all out 
efforts should be made to make use of bio gas from organic waste.” 
(Rec.Sl.No.25) 
 
1.17 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their action taken reply have stated 
as under: 
(i) “The GST rates are decided on the recommendations of the GST Council 
and the Council has granted exemption from GST to Municipal Solid 
Waste, sewage sludge and clinical waste vide S.No. 110 of notification 
No. 2/2017-Central Tax (Rate) dated 28.06.2017. Compost has also been 
granted an exemption from GST if not packed in a unit container and not 
bearing a brand name vide S.No. 108 of noti fication No. 2/2017 -Central 
Tax (Rate) dated 28.06.2017. Compost packed in unit container and 
bearing a brand name attracts GST rate of 5%.” 
  
(Reply to Rec.Sl.No.22) 
(ii) “The Solid Waste Management (SWM) Rules 2016 have clearly laid down 
the end-to-end roadmap for the scientific management of Municipal Solid 
Waste (MSW) keeping in view the threat to human health and 
environmental degradation. 
The roadmap given in the SWM Rules needs to be implemented in letter 
and in spirit by the States/UTs and Urban Loc al Bodies (ULBs) who are 
constitutionally responsible for the subject and for carrying out the 
functions. 
Further, the funding required for such MSWM has to be arranged by the 
States/UTs and ULBs whereas the Central Government may provide 
certain Additiona l Central Assistance (ACA) under various centrally 
sponsored schemes run from time to time such as Swachh Bharat Mission 
(SBM)- Urban, as per guidelines. 
The processing of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) as on date has increased 
to 54% from 19% in 2014 due to the focus brought by Swachh Bharat 
Mission (Urban) upon door-to-door collection of segregated waste which is 
about 90% as on date, integration of informal waste pickers, collection of 
user fee, anti -littering directions, setting up of material recovery fac ilities, 
in house processing of wet waste by bulk waste generators, processing of 
biodegradable waste into compost and bio -methanation, non -
biodegradable (dry) waste into energy and Refused Derived Fuel (RDF), 
setting up of scientific and land fill for residual waste etc. 

23 
 
Ministry is advising the States/UTs & ULBs to take up decentralised 
processing of wet waste as a corollary to door to door collection of 
segregated wet waste.” 
 
(Reply to Rec.Sl.No.23) 
 
 
(iii) “The States/UTs & ULBs are constitutionally mandated to carry out the 
functions of municipal solid waste management on whole town basis 
including decentralised processing, and for such activities, Ministry is 
advising to collect affordable, differential and sustainable user charges 
depending upon the different economic status / conditions prevalent in the 
society.” 
 
  (Reply to Rec.Sl.No.25) 
1.18 The Committee are constrained to note that important aspects concerning 
Waste to Compost (WTC) like PAN India Licence for WTC, opening warehouses 
for its storage, expeditious setting up of WTC plants etc have hardly been 
addressed in action taken replies by the Ministry.  The Committee, therefore, treat 
the same incomplete and do not accept.    In the light of the above, they reiterate 
their above recommendations and urge for submission of complete final action 
taken before them for arriving at logical conclusion.  
E. Strict enforcement of available provision for Solid Waste Management 
enhancing available mechanism and speeding up implementation of e -
Waste Management Rules framing of roadmap for proper treatment and 
disposal of hazardous waste reiterated 
 
(Rec. Sl. Nos. 4, 34, 35 and 37) 
 
1.19 The Committee had recommended as under: 
 
(i) “Strict enforcement of available provision for Solid Waste Management 
recommended 
The Committee find it deplorable that waste source segregation and waste 
processing is far lower than Door to Door Collection in urban areas of the 
country leading to health and environmental hazards.   For instance, as 
against the 82% 'Door to Door Collect ion of Waste', the 'Waste Source 
Segregation' is as low as 48% and 'Waste Processing’ is a dismal 

24 
 
37.23%.  As regards, 82% Door to Door Collection, the Committee are 
alarmed to note that it is still at very low levels in several States.   For 
instance, Andh ra Pradesh, Goa, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, 
Chhattisgarh and Sikkim are the only States alongwith UTs of A&N 
Islands, Chandigarh, Daman and Diu with 100% Door to Door Collection 
whereas States with higher level of Door to Door Collection are Rajasthan 
(99%), Tamil Nadu (90%), Arunachal Pradesh (96%) etc.   The Committee 
are concerned to note that NCT of Delhi is still far behind at 86%.   The 
Committee are also concerned to note that large States viz. Assam, Uttar 
Pradesh and West Bengal  are slow moving with 43%, 62% and 65% Door 
to Door Collection respectively.   In this connection, the Committee recall 
that in January, 2018, the overall Door to Door Collection was 68.4% 
which has gone upto 82%.   However, looking at prevailing scenario, the 
Committee feel that a lot more needs to be done in this area especially in 
big States like Assam, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal and in other States 
too by accelerating the coverage with available mechanism like Star 
Rating protocol for Garbage Free Cities, IEC activities etc.” 
(Rec.Sl.No.4) 
(ii) “Inadequate mechanism available for implementation of e -Waste 
(Management) Rules, 2016 criticized and Government asked to enhance 
the available mechanism and speed up implementation 
The Committee are constrained to note that as per Ministry of Electronics 
and Information Technology, e -Waste creates global crisis due to 
environmental degradation and may affect human health, soil and even 
may contaminate ground water.    E-Waste means wastes from electrical 
and electronic equipment whol e or part or rejects in the form of   Lead, 
Mercury, Cadmium, Chromium etc. from their manufacturing process that 
are intended to be discarded.   In this connection, the Committee also 
notice that as per Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), the level of e -
Waste generation of 1.45   lakh tonnes in 2005 may go as high as 8.00 
lakh tonnes by 2020,   whereas as per NITI Aayog, India happens to be 
one of the largest producer generating 18.5 lakh tonnes of hazardous 
waste and importing items yielding e -waste of 13 .5 lakh tonnes annually 
which ends up in landfills/incinerators   releasing cancer causing toxins.   
The Committee are dismayed to notice the media report,   quoting UN 
Report,  that out of 44.7 million tonnes of electronic waste in 2016 
equivalent to some 45  Eifel  Towers, India's  contribution is as high as 2 
million tonnes and despite e -waste (Management) Rules, 2016 as high as 
80% of e -Wastes like   old lap tops, cell phones,   TV etc.  continue to be 
broken at huge health and environmental cost by informal sector.  The 
Committee note that the country is currently undergoing an exciting and 
unprecedented phase of development and economic transformation with 
heavy dependence on import of electronic goods to meet its domestic 
demand. 

25 
 
The Committee also find tha t since recycling of e -waste is difficult and 
complex in nature, the e -waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2011 
were notified which inter -alia provide for prohibiting and separating e -
waste from entering into the Municipal Solid Waste stream, depositing  
domestic e -waste such as tube light, CFL lamps, computer hardware at 
nearest Material Recovery Facility (MRF), providing for Extended 
Producer Responsibility (EPR) etc. and so on.   The Committee also find 
that unsatisfied with implementation of 2011 Rules  the e -waste 
(Management) Rules, 2016 were notified which inter -alia included 
elaborate EPR, setting up of Producers Responsibility Organisations and 
e-waste exchange assigning specific responsibility   to  bulk  consumers  
of  electronic  products  for saf e disposal, making mandatory for every 
producer to apply before CPCB for EPR authorization, making the   
producers responsible for providing contact details to consumers and  bulk 
consumers  through their websites, spreading of awareness etc.   The 
Committee also find that Ministry of   Housing and Urban Affairs while 
outlining Physical and Chemical process of recycling of e -waste in details 
has also outlined that 178 authorised recyclers and dismantlers are 
currently working in India.   In view of the above, t he Committee feel that 
like Solid Waste Management, implementation of e -waste (Management) 
Rules, 2016 is far from satisfactory and whatever good intentions that are 
behind these rules, all these are only on paper, as common man as well 
as, the producer of  e-waste and even the CPCB are not honest in 
implementation of these Rules.   The Committee also feel that 178 
authorised recyclers and dismantlers for the vast country like India are too 
less and need to be suitably enhanced to broaden the scope of recycli ng 
and dismantling of e-waste properly in the country.” 
(Rec.Sl.No.34) 
(iii) “In the light of good workdone in developed and developing countries 
especially of Europe, very less workdone on e -waste management and 
disposal in the country criticized and Gove rnment asked to make use of 
available provisions in e -waste (Management) Rules for desired level of 
work at ground level. 
The Committee are constrained to note that many developed countries 
like Japan, Netherland, some other countries of Europe and some 
developing countries also   are far ahead in the area of e -waste 
management in the spheres of Extended Producers Responsibility (EPR) 
through Producers Responsibility    Organisation  (PROs),   setting  up   
mechanism  for  public awareness etc., whereas the w orkdone in India is 
almost nil and whatever works on R&D for e-waste recycling that has been 
taken up by Ministry of Electronics and IT and Ministry of Environment and 
Forests and Climate Change is at Pilot stage only besides mechanism for 
public awareness  is almost nil.   The Committee are also constrained to 
note  that in the name of providing necessary training on e -waste 
management, the Committee have been informed by the MOE&F&CC that 

26 
 
a programme is designed to be implemented in 68 cities of the country  in 
first phase in association with CPCB within the umbrella framework of 
Swachh Bharat Mission.   The Committee feel that all these facts reveal 
that vitually no work is undertaken by different Ministries in the field of e -
waste management which may cause havoc to environment, degrade soil 
and contaminate ground water also. 
The Committee also note that e -waste (Management) Rules contains 
many good things like convergence of stakeholders including 
manufacturers, dealers, e -retailers etc. simplification in 
registration/authorization for dismantling under one system, withdrawing or 
recall of product from market in case of non -compliance,  making State 
Governments responsible for ensuring safety, health and skill 
development of workers involved in dismantling an d recycling operations, 
assigning the ULBs the duty to collect and channelize the orphan products 
to authorized dismantlers or receivers etc.   The Committee however feel 
that their implementation is not visible at ground level and is only on 
paper.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the MOE&F&CC and allied 
Ministries to pull up their socks and make use available provisions under 
e-waste (Management) Rules, 2016 for treatment and disposal of e -waste 
in an effective and comprehensive manner.”                                     
(Rec.Sl.No.35) 
(iv) “In view of challenging scenario of Hazardous Waste in the country, 
States/UTs have been asked to frame a roadmap by 2020 for proper 
treatment and disposal of hazardous waste in consultation and 
coordination with registered recyclers, Cement Plants industries etc. 
The Committee note that as per Ministry of Environment and Forest and 
Climate Change, hazardous waste means any waste which by reason of 
characteristics such as physical, chemicals, biological, reactive to xic, 
flammable, explosive or corrosive causes danger or is likely to cause 
danger to health or environment whether alone or in contact with other 
wastes or substances. It basically comprises of waste generated during 
manufacturing process of commercial products such as industries involved 
in petroleum, refining, production of pharmaceuticals paint, electronic 
products like Lead, Acid Batteries, Waste tyres, paper wastes, have been 
categorized as hazardous wastes by MOE&F&CC whereas Ministry of 
Electronics a nd Information Technology has informed that with 
development of modern electronic gadgets such as Cell phone iPOD, 
Palm Top, Lap Top computers etc. also result in high use of different 
hazardous substances that are harmful for environment and human body.   
In this connection, the Committee are constrained to note that   
MOE&F&CC has also highlighted the issue of unscientific disposal of 
hazardous waste and have underlined the need for systematic 
management of hazardous and other waste in an environmentally so und 
manner by way of prevention, minimization, re -use, recycling, utilisation 
including co -processing and safe disposal of waste.   In this connection, 

27 
 
Committee find that as per CPCB the annual hazardous waste generation 
in 2018 was 7.46 million tonnes fro m 44,000 industries and for re -cycling 
and reuse, there are currently 1080 registered recyclers, 47 Cement 
Plants permitted for co -processing and about 108 industries permitted for 
utilization of hazardous waste.  Besides, there are 40 Common Hazardous 
Waste Treatment, Storage and Disposal Facilities (TSDFs) available in 17 
States/UTs.  Besides, the hazardous waste can be disposed off by setting 
up captive treatment plants.   In this context, while perusing Hazardous 
and other Waste (Management and Transport ing Movement) Rules, the 
Committee find that States/UTs have been given the responsibility for 
environmentally sound management of hazardous and other wastes like 
setting up of industrial space or sheds for recycling, pre -processing of 
hazardous waste, reg istering workers involved in recycling, pre -
processing, undertaking skill development activities etc.   In this 
connection, it came out during the course of evidence of the 
representatives of MOH&UA that some big cities such as Bengaluru has 
made sufficient  storage/sorting facilities. The Committee apprehend that 
hazardous waste management may not be working well in different 
States/UTs. MOH&UA was also candid in their admission before the 
Committee that monitoring hazardous waste management is essential and  
the Ministry is encouraging States/UTs to adopt this approach.   The 
Committee feel that since the State Governments/UTs Administration 
have been made responsible for environmentally sound management of 
hazardous waste and other wastes like setting up of i ndustrial space or 
sheds for recycling, registering or workers involved in recycling for their 
skill development, the Committee recommend that State 
Governments/UTs Administration should sit together with 1080 registered 
recyclers, 47 Cement Plants permitt ed for co -processing and 108 
industries permitted for utilization of hazardous waste and after 
understanding  their views chart out a roadmap by 2020 for treatment and 
disposal of hazardous waste at States/UTs level itself by suitably 
enhancing the current  level of 40 common Hazardous Waste Treatment, 
Storage and Disposal Facilities (TSDFs) available in 17 States/UTs or by 
encouraging captive treatment plants in a big way.” 
(Rec.Sl.No.37) 
1.20 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their Action Taken replies have 
stated as under:- 
(i) “Being a State subject and function of the ULBs, MoHUA continues to 
engage with the States/UTs & ULBs in providing various advisories and 
guidelines and motivating and guiding   their efforts through the annual 
Swachh Survekshans and the Star Rating of Garbage Free Cities.   Star 
rating protocol for Garbage Free Cities has been made integral part of 
Swachh Survekshan to have pan India coverage.” 

28 
 
 
(Reply to Rec. Sl. No.4) 
(ii) “Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Cha nge (MoEF&CC) is the 
nodal agency for policy, planning, promoting and coordinating the 
environmental programmes and has notified the E -Waste (Management) 
Rules, 2016.  The E-Waste Rules, 2016 mandate Central Pollution Control 
Board (CPCB) to prepare guidelines on implementation of E-Waste Rules, 
which includes specific guidelines for extended producer responsibility, 
channelization, collection centres, storage, transportation, environmentally 
sound dismantling and recycling, refurbishment, and random sampli ng of 
EEE for testing of RoHS parameters. 
  
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY), being the 
nodal ministry for Electronics and IT,  is promoting R&D to develop 
technological solutions for e -waste management in environment friendly 
manner.  The e- waste has various components like, printed circuit boards 
(PCBs), plastic, metal etc.   The process for recovery of precious metals 
from PCB under a project jointly implemented by C -MET, Hyderabad and 
E-Parisara, Bengaluru has yielded two ex clusive PCB recycling 
processes,1000Kg/ day capacity and 100Kg/batch, with acceptable 
environmental norms first time in India. 
  
The e -waste also contains plastics, nearly 25% of its weight. Novel 
recovery and conversion of e -waste plastics to value added product had 
also been successfully developed. The developed process is capable to 
convert majority (76%) of the waste plastics to suitable master batch, 
which could be used for virgin plastic products. The toxicity and 
environmental tests were carried out on the developed products from the 
master batch, showed acceptable standard.” 
 
(Reply to Rec.Sl.No.34) 
(iii) “The major concern of e -waste management in India is lack of awareness 
amongst various stakeholders about the hazards associated to the end -of-
life products.  In this direction,  MeitY has been implementing an 
“Awareness Programme on Environmental Hazards of Electronic waste” 
since March 2015 to create awareness among the public about the 
hazards of e -waste recycling by the unorganized sector and to e ducate 
them about alternate methods of disposing their e-waste.  The programme 
has created training tools, content materials, films, printed materials, 
videos and jingles etc. for every strata of the society which are freely 
available on the dedicated webs ite (www.greene.gov.in).   Further, social 
media platforms (Twitter handle and Facebook page), app has also been 
created to provide online status of the activities and show -case the 
activities/ workshops/ carnivals etc. conducted under the programme.” 
 
(Reply to Rec.Sl.No.35) 

29 
 
 
(iv) “Hazardous Wastes are handled broadly under two categories (i) 
Domestic Hazardous Waste and (ii) Industrial Hazardous Waste.   Local 
bodies are required to establish various collection centres so that 
domestic hazardous waste from houses, premises, colonies etc. can be 
deposited into the collection centre and it is channelized for further 
recycling and processing.   For this urban local bodies have to develop a 
mechanism under the State Waste Management Policy framed by 
State/UT depa rtment under the overall guidance of Waste management 
Policy of MOH&UA. 
For Industrial Hazardous Waste, the Industrial Hazardous Waste are 
covered by Hazardous & other waste (Management & Transboundary 
Movement) Rules, 2016 in which authorisation is provid ed by the State 
Pollution Control Boards for generation, handling, collection, reception, 
treatment, transport, storage, reuse, recycling, recovery, pre -processing, 
utilisation including co -processing and disposal of hazardous wastes by 
various industrial units.  These permissions are granted keeping in view 
the adequate recycling facilities available in different cities/Urban Areas for 
which the State and UT departments have to work closely for setting up 
various recycling units including TSDF.” 
(Reply to Rec.Sl.No.37) 
1.21 The Committee are considered to find that prominent recommendations 
regarding strict enforcement of SWM laws, utilizing good provisions in e -waste 
Management Rules like convergence of stakeholders making State Government 
responsible for ensuring safety and  skill development of workers etc. enhancing 
available mechanism for ‘e waste’ management etc. have not been properly 
addressed on desired lines in action taken replies furnished thereto.  The 
Committee are constrained to note that on the aspect of strict enforcement of 
SWM laws, the MOHUA has taken the shelter of ‘State Subject’ whereas on issue 
of e -Waste management has left the same to be handled by Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology and Environment and Forests & Climate 
Change.  The Comm ittee, therefore, reiterate the MOHUA to furnish a 

30 
 
comprehensive final action taken reply covering all aspects raised by them be 
conveyed before them for their consideration.  
 
F. Disincentivising landfills, promoting extensive use of plastic for road 
construction and initiating remedial steps for strengthening the finances of 
Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) reiterated. 
 
(Rec.Sl.Nos.26, 30 and 33) 
1.22 The Committee had recommended as under: 
(i) “Disincentivising landfills and their conversion into Parks recommended 
The Committee are dismayed to note that as per NITI Aayog the country is 
going to lose as large as 1240 hectares of additional land every year for 
accommodating processed/unprocessed MSW seriously threatening the 
environment through ground wate r and air pollution.   In this connection, 
Center for Science & Environment has informed the Committee that land 
as a resource is too valuable to be wasted for landfills and have 
advocated for dis-incentivising it by charging high amount of tipping fee for 
bringing waste to landfills as has been done globally.   In this context, the 
Committee have been informed by ASSOCHAM that the collection 
efficiency is as low as 50 -60% in India, and where only 10% of plastic 
waste gets treated, unlike European and North A merican countries where 
no landfills are visible as whatever waste is available gets converted into 
products for further use.  
In this connection, the Committee also find that public resistance for 
allotment of landfills due to Not In My Backyard (NIMBY) s yndrome has 
been the reason behind delay in identification of land in Delhi for landfills 
also Finding a way out ASSOCHAM has pleaded for scientific landfills by 
way of converting the land fills into parks on the pattern of Mumbai.   The 
Committee also find  that on ASSOCHAM's suggestion of allotment of 
barren land for dump site the MOH&UA has observed that landfills site 
should be selected by ULBs/District Administration keeping in view siting 
conditions of landfills specified in SWM Rules and MOE&F have als o 
observed on similar lines.   In view of above, the Committee feel that 
landfills should be dis -incentivised  by very high rate of tipping fee from 
waste deposition in landfills and the landfills be scientifically managed by 
way of converting these into pa rks on the lines of the one done in 
Mumbai,  by impressing upon ULBs/Panchayats etc to take necessary 
steps in this regard.” 
(Rec.Sl.No.26) 
 

31 
 
(ii) “Extensive use of plastic for road construction recommended 
The Committee are constrained to note that virtually no headway has 
been achieved in use of plastic for road construction between country's 
prominent road construction agency of NHAI and South Delhi Municipal 
Corporation (SDMC) even after an MOU was signed between the two and 
even after an affidavit was filed by the then  Municipal Corporation of Delhi 
way back in 2012 before Hon'ble Supreme Court stating that Ghazipur 
dump site has reached its saturation point and no dumping can be done 
there.  The Committee are constrained to note that status quo is still 
prevailing  on the issue as a representative of MOH&UA during his 
deposition before the Committee has promised the Committee to take up 
the issue with the level of Hon'ble Minister for Housing and Urban Affairs.   
The Committee feel that in the cas e of Delhi, there is a need for resolving   
the deadlock on the issue between NHAI and SDMC so that the eye sore 
of Ghazipur dump site is cleaned and plastic dumped therein is used for 
road construction purposes.   The Committee also strongly recommend 
that issue of plastic for road construction purposes be promoted in a big 
way across States/UTs.” 
  
 (Rec.Sl.No.30) 
(iii) “Initiating remedial steps for strengthening the finances of ULBs like 
reviewing the funding pattern, generating resources through interest  free 
bonds by ULBs recommended 
The Committee's examination has revealed that inability of ULBs to 
arrange their two third share in SWM projects with one third available from 
Centre by reason of their poor financial position has been shown 
prominently befo re the Committee, with barely 5% funds available with 
ULBs for SWM purposes with as high as 60-70% funds deployed for street 
cleaning and remaining 20 -30% funds deployed on transportation.   In this 
connection, it has been apprehended before the Committee b y Municipal 
Commissioner of South Delhi Municipal Corporation (SDMC) that 
financially poor Corporations might fail Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) in 
the country. At the same time, the Committee have also been informed by 
the MOH&UA that SWM projects are eit her completely or partially funded 
by Government of India and also by external agencies like JICA, ADB etc., 
or by private participation, user charges, Swawchh Bharat Kosh and also 
through tax free Municipal bonds etc.   The Ministry has also suggested 
that funds for SWM can also be generated through pooled financing. The 
Committee feel that although these avenues/options are still open and 
available with ULBs, yet the ULBs still lack requisite finances to run SWM 
projects on their own.   The Committee, there fore, recommend that the 
issue of reviewing the funding pattern be examined with ULBs in the light 
of options/avenues available for resource generation and also in the light 
of experience of good performing States enabling them to make SBM(U) a 
success in the country.” 

32 
 
                                  (Rec.Sl.No.33) 
1.23 The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs in their Action Taken Replies has 
stated as under: 
(i) The SWM Rules 2016, have laid down the management of 
landfills/dumpsites including their proper closure. States/UTs and ULBs 
need to implement the same. However, Ministry is encouraging them by 
the inclusion of the landfill/dumpsite assessment in the Swachh 
Survekshans and the protocol for Garbage Free Star Rating of Cities. 
 
(Reply to Rec.Sl.No.26) 
 
(ii) Ministry is encouraging the States/UTs and ULBs in plastic waste 
management including the use of waste plastic in road construction as 
brought out in the Ministry’s Advisory on Plastic Waste Management 
containing the issues, solutions and case  studies, as far as waste plastic 
is concerned. 
(Reply to Rec.Sl.No.30) 
(iii) As SWM is a State subject and function of the ULBs it is their 
responsibility to fund the sector. Ministry is only providing ACAs generic to 
all States and UTs as decided by the Cabinet. Hence, the 
recommendation is not agreeable. 
  
(Reply to Rec.Sl.No.33) 
 
1.24 The Committee are constrained to note that their well reasoned 
recommendations regarding disincentivising landfills and their conversion into 
Parks, promoting extensive use of plastic for road construction and initiating 
remedial steps for strengthening th e finances of Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) like 
reviewing the funding pattern generating resources through interest free bonds 
by ULBs have not been as comprehensively answered commensurating with the 
sweep of recommendations while mentioning that management of landfills has 
been already provided under SWM Rules, use of plastic for road construction is 
being promoted by advisories / case studies with States/UTs and SWM being 
‘State Subject’.  States/UTs are responsible for arranging funds.  The Committee 

33 
 
feel that MOHUA have not even evaluated the valuable suggestions offered by the 
Committee on aforesaid issues and reiterate the same.  
***** 
 
 
  

34 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GORERNMENT 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
STRICT ENFORCEMENT OF AVAILABLE PROVISION FOR SOLID WASTE 
MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDED 
2.1  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee while reviewing the implementation of different Waste 
Management Rules find that there are speci fic Rules for Solid Waste,  Plastic waste, e -
Waste, Bio -Medical Waste, Hazardous Waste.  However, in the light of deposition of 
representatives of ASSOCHAM and prominent NGOs, the Committee find that their 
implementation is only on paper.  The Committee's examination has also revealed that 
for Solid Waste Management, Ministry of Environment and Forests and Climate Change   
(M/o. E&F&CC) is responsible for overall monitoring in the country under Central 
Monitoring Committee (CMC), headed by Secretary (MOE&F& CC),  comprising officials 
from various Ministries. Similarly, the role of different Ministries have also been defined.  
The role of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs is periodic review of measures taken 
by States and ULBs, formulating policy etc. for Solid Waste Management; role of 
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers is to provide market  
development assistance for city compost; role of Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers 
Welfare is to propagate utilization of compost on fa rm land; role of Ministry of Power is 
to decide tariff or charges for power generated from Waste to Energy plants and role of 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy source is to facilitate infrastructure  
creation for Waste to Energy Plants. Besides MOE&F&CC /Central Pollution Control 
Board issues guidelines for management of regular and other waste management.  In 
this context, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has contended before the 
Committee that there is no lack of coordination between Ministries  on Solid Waste 
Management and each Ministry has been 
 given separate mandate and jurisdiction.  The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
candidly admitted before the Committee that a lot more needs to be done on issues like 
anti-littering, segregation of  waste at source, appropriate waste processing etc. since 
the task is related with behavior change of citizens.  In this connection, the Committee 
have been informed by Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs about three bin system for 
collection of waste i.e. Green Bin for Wet Waste, White for Dry Waste and Black Bin for 
Hazardous Waste.  About disposal of waste, the Committee have been informed that, 
wet waste is preferably for compost preparation or bio -methanization (depending upon 
liquid content),  dry w aste for recycling and hazardous for depositing at designated 
collection centers.  On services part, the Committee have also been informed that 
collection at primary level i.e. households level to storage depot and at secondary level 
i.e. picking up from storage to waste processing sites.  

35 
 
 About monitoring part, the Committee have perused the Solid Waste 
Management Rules, 2016 and have noticed that enough provisions are already 
available for making Solid Waste  Management a success.  These, inter alia, pertain to 
responsibility of generator of waste, payment of users  
charges to waste collectors, 'Spot Fine' by ULBs for littering and for non -segregation, 
collection and disposal of sanitary wastes like sanitary pads etc. door to door collection 
by SHGs/ragpickers, infrastructure for Solid Waste Management, making Bulk and 
Institutional Generators like households, Market Associations,  etc. accountable for 
segregating and sorting of wastes in association with ULBs, making Group Housing 
Societies accountable for in house waste handling and composting,  promoting Waste 
to Energy,  etc.  Similarly, role of Central Pollution Control Board/ULBs have been 
sufficiently clear.  In this context, the Committee have also been informed by MOH&UA 
that through IEC campaigns like Swachh Office, Swachh Parks, Swachh RWAs, 
Swachh Schools and also through standard operating procedures,  citizens are being 
motivated to abide by above regulations.  The Committee however are constrained to 
note that even after everything i s available in the 'Rule Book' the progress on Solid 
Waste Management has not moved beyond 82% for door to door collection and 48% in 
segregation at source indicating that the entire well laid out mechanism is only on 
paper. The Committee feel that enough time and efforts have been wasted by now and 
it is time for taking coordinated steps on a war footing to tackle the menace of Solid 
Waste in the country and for strict enforcement of measures available in 'Rule Book'." 
2.2 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"Ministry agree with the recommendations of the Committee. With the close monitoring 
and coordination among various central Ministries,  the processing of Municipal Solid 
Waste (MSW) as on date has increased to 54% from 19%  in 2014 due to the focus 
brought by Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) upon door -to-door collection of segregated 
waste which is about 90% as on date, integration of informal waste pickers, collection of 
user fee, anti -littering directions, setting up of mater ial recovery facilities, in house 
processing of wet waste by bulk waste generators, processing of biodegradable waste 
into compost and bio -methanation, non -biodegradable (dry) waste into energy and 
Refused Derived Fuel (RDF), setting up of scientific and land fill for residual waste etc." 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
A WIDE RANGING DIALOGUE RECOMMENDED WITH STAKEHOLDERS FOR 
ENHANCING WASTE PROCESSING IN THE COUNTRY 
2.3 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee are dismayed to note that scenario of waste processing is quite dismal 
with overall waste processing being as low as 37.23% with only a few States doing well.  
These include Chhattisgarh with 84%, Sikkim with 66%, Telangana with 65%, Madhya 
Pradesh and Meghalaya with 58% each. The remaining States are lagging behind. The 
Committee find that large States viz. Assam, Bihar and Uttar Pradesh are lagging 

36 
 
behind at 35%, 27% and 20% respectively in waste processing.  The Committee feel 
that the lowe r rate of waste processing speaks volumes about working of various line 
Ministries i.e. Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, Environment and Forests and 
Climate Change, Department of Fertilizers, Ministry of Agriculture Cooperation and 
Farmers Welfare et c., for not creating conducive atmosphere for waste composting.  
Besides New and Renewable Energy is also largely responsible for creation of Waste to 
Energy Plants. The Committee, therefore, call upon all the concerned Ministries to sit 
with various stake holders i.e. State Governments, ULBs and representatives of 
Industry/NGOs etc.  for enhancing Waste processing at desired levels in the country." 
2.4 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"Ministry agree with the recommendations of the Committee.With the strict enforcement 
and coordination among various central Ministries,the processing of Municipal Solid 
Waste (MSW) as on date has increased to 54% from 19% in 2014 due to the focus 
brought by Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) upon door -to-door collection of segregated 
waste which is about 90% as on date, integration of informal waste pickers, collection of 
user fee, anti -littering directions, setting up of material recovery facilities, in house 
processing of wet waste by bulk waste genera tors, processing of biodegradable waste 
into compost and bio -methanation, non -biodegradable (dry) waste into energy and 
Refused Derived Fuel (RDF), setting up of scientific and land fill for residual waste etc." 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
STRICT IMPL EMENTATION AND REGULAR INTERACTION WITH PUBLIC FOR 
OPENING UP AWARENESS CAMPAIGN ABOUT GARBAGE COLLECTION AND 
SOURCE SEGREGATION AT SCHOOL LEVEL  RECOMMENDED 
2.5  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee's examinatio n has revealed that various implementation 
constraints are coming in the way of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs for achieving 
complete Door to Door Collection of Wastes, its source segregation and processing due 
to the common belief that garbage clea ring is largely the responsibility of ULBs.  
Additionally, the general public is not habitual of source segregation of waste and as 
such usefulness of waste as source is lost.  Besides problem of availability of land for 
setting up SWM facilities, need for  waste management in land use planning and need 
for polluters to pay, cluster approach for Solid Waste Management have also been 
underlined before the Committee by MOH&UA.  The Committee feel that all these 
implementation constraints can be resolved with s tricter implementation and regular 
interaction with public at large within the wherewithal available with implementing 
agencies by bringing about awareness in garbage collection and source segregation in 
school curriculum for greater impact on the public a t large. Focussed media campaigns 
with judicious use of social media platforms can also be utilised fruitfully for awareness 
generation." 

37 
 
2.6 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"Ministry is advising States/UTs & ULBs to take necessary actions in SWM 
including brining about awareness through media & social media campaigns etc. The 
said campaigns are also part of the assessment under the Swachh Survekshans 
conducted by the Ministry. As regards to awareness in garbage collection and source 
segregation in school curriculum, Ministry of Human Resource and Development 
(MoHRD) has informed that the issues of cleanliness and hygiene are infused in 
chapters based on themes food, water, family and friends, shelter across all the stages. 
Further, the text in the form of stories, poems, travelogues, case studies draws their 
attention toward the issue of pollution, garbage, diseases, health, malnutrition and 
questions that encourage students to critically think and reflect as per their own c ontext 
and weaved in." 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
STRICT IMPLEMENTATION OF EXTENDED PRODUCERS RESPONSIBILITY (EPR), 
RECOMMENDED 
2.7  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee find that some wastes such as CFLs, batteries  etc. that are 
highly toxic and cannot be handled by municipalities are now the responsibility of 
companies manufacturing these so that the environment and public is safeguarded.  In 
this connection, various issues pertaining to  
EPR etc. have come up before the Committee from ASSOCHAM which include need for 
payment of fee for w aste recycled for reducing land fills  instead of collection of tipping 
fee from waste collected, need for bringing unrecog nized sector within the EPR fold, 
increasing the thickness of plastic from 50 micron to 100 micron for making it of 
recyclable value and  need for no ban on plastic without scientific basis,  etc.  In this 
context, on the collection of tipping fee issue, t he Committee have been informed by 
MOH&UA  that both models of tipping can be adopted. On other issue, the MOE&F&CC 
has inter alia informed that thickness of plastic from 40 micron to 50 micron has been 
done for making plastic of recyclable value.  Further  consultations with stakeholders are 
underway on three draft models on the subject which have been circulated to various 
stakeholders during Regional Workshop conducted by the Ministry and CII on 12th and 
13th November, 2018 for comments and once the consu ltation process is over, the final 
EPR mechanism will be implemented.  The Committee would await the latest position 
on the issue." 
2.8 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"The MoE&F&CC has demonstrated the draft models to the sta keholders during 
Regional Workshops conducted by Ministry in coordination with CII on 12 th and 
13thNovember, 2018 at Bangalore. Further, two more regional workshops were 

38 
 
conducted in Ranchi on 19 th and 20 th December 2018 and on 20 th and 21 st January 
2019 at Chandigarh. A visit was made by the Ministry to understand the Indore model of 
implementation of Waste Management Rules viz a viz a meeting was organized with 
Commissioner, Indore Municipal Corporation and their implementing agencies to work 
out if such  model can be adopted under EPR. Further a stakeholders meeting specific 
to the industry (producers) was conducted in the Ministry on 31 st  May, 2019 to 
showcase the model and to receive the comments. The Ministry now is in the process of 
finalizing the gu ideline document on the 'EPR models' discussed with the stakeholders 
for implementation." 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 18) 
GOVERNMENT ASKED TO MAKE USE OF OPPORTUNITIES IN GREATER SOLID 
WASTE MANAGEMENT IN THE COUNTRY 
2.9  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee's examination of waste processing reveals various aspects 
related with Waste to Compost and Waste to Energy.  As regards waste to compost 
aspects like need for tapping opportunities in this sector,  
waste to compost aspect at household level and policy issues like enforcement of 
mandatory offtake of  a city compost by fertilizer companies,  need for early payment of 
compost by ULBs to WTC plants, need for PAN India Licence for Waste to Compost, 
need for ware housing facilties for organic manure, need for nutrient based subsidy for 
organic fertilizer, inclusion of city compost under NIL category under GST, capacity 
creation and promotion of waste to compost etc., have come up before the Committee.  
Similarly on waste to energy involving need for dis -incentivising landfills, creating 
scientific landfills and their conversion into Parks, capacity creation, augmenting 
capacity building, use of plastic  for road construction, and also issues related with C&D  
waste have also come up before the Committee.  
 On the issue of tapping opportunities in the area of waste to compost, the 
Committee have been apprised by NITI Aayog that current valuation of MSW 
Management in the country is around US$8.5 billion which ma y  go upto US$ 20 billion 
by 2030 as per concept note prepared by Ministry of External Affairs (for Parvasi 
Bhartiya Diwas Conference on the Role of Indian Diaspora) in capacity building for 
Affordable Waste Management held in July, 2018 that would open up  huge 
opportunities for public  and private sector participation alongwith foreign collaboration 
with new technologies etc in the area of waste management.  The Committee feel that 
both industry and informal sector should work together for utilizing  the a bove 
opportunities in the area of waste management which will not only give employment  
opportunities but will also help in eradication of problem of solid waste in the country." 
2.10 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 

39 
 
 
"Ministry is recommending that States/UTs and ULBs may adapt various models suiting 
to their own requirements in implementing solid waste management such as own 
Sanitation Staff, through Self -Help Groups (SHGs), NGOs, Integration of rag pickers 
and informal sector, contracting to private agencies and also the mix of different options 
in different wards of the ULBs etc." 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 19) 
COMPREHENSIVE HOUSEHOLD COMPOSTING RECOMMENDED BY UTILIZING 
50-60% OF ORGANIC WASTE 
2.11  The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The second issue concerning waste to composting that came up before the Committee 
on which both ASSOCHAM and prominent NGOs were unanimous was need for taking 
up household composting in a big way in the country by way of utilizing as high as 50 -
60% of available organic waste in the country.  In this connection, the Committee have 
also been informed by a prominent NGO viz Chintan that another 20 -25% of plastic 
waste can be recycled in available huge recycling market for serving twin purposes of 
reducing huge cost of collection and segregation on the part of municipalities on the one 
hand and diverting waste from going to dump sites on the other.  In this context, the 
Committee have been informed by MOE&F&CC that waste  processing facilities are 
mandated to include composting as one of the technologies for processing of Bio -
degradable waste and standards of composting have been prescribed under Schedule 
II of the SWM Rules, 2016.  In view of the foregoing, the Committee feel that household 
composting be promoted by MOH&UA in a big way in every nook and corner of the 
country in association with all stakeholder by utilizing the prominent models of 
Decentralised Waste disposal that have come up before the Committee and refle cted in 
earlier Chapters of the Report." 
2.12 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"Ministry is encouraging the States/UTs and ULBs to pursue home composting and the 
ultimate decentralised processing facilities as the same is used i n the assessment of 
Swachh Survekshans and the protocol for Garbage Free Star Rating of Cities as 
motivating factor." 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 1.31 of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 20) 
ENFORCEMENT OF MANDATORY OFFTAKE OF CITY COMPOST BY FERTILIZER 
COMPANIES RECOMMENDED 
2.13  The Committee had recommended as under: 

40 
 
"On the aspect of waste to compost, need for enforcement of mandatory offtake of city 
compost by fertilizers companies, the Committee are constrained to find from the  
evidence of representatives of ASSOCHAM that over 200 tonnes of  city compost is 
lying unsold, spread all over India,  in various waste to compost plants because 
companies that were tagged to pick up the fertilizers did not honour their agreements.  
The Co mmittee have also been informed that nearly half of the Waste to Compost 
plants are lying closed because there is no offtake of city compost, even after Ministry of 
Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Fertilizers is giving subsidy of Rs.1500 per 
tonne as Market Development Assistance to fertilizers market companies.  In this 
connection, ASSOCHAM while expressing its helplessness before the Committee have 
informed that even the Department of Fertilizers has not been able to enforce the 
direction of Hon' ble Supreme Court.  In this regard the Committee have been informed 
by ASSOCHAM that both MOH&UA and Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers lack both 
market reach and financial wherewithal to avail direct subsidy from Government. 
ASSOCHAM  have pleaded befo re the Committee that route of sale through fertilizer 
companies be continued and they be permitted to continue to procure city compost from 
MSW treatment plants.  The Committee find that suggestions has 'not been agreed to' 
by MOH&UA saying that MOH&UA sh ould be given the task of sale of compost in bulk.  
In this context, the Department of Fertilizers has claimed before the Committee that sale 
of city compost by marketing companies has risen during 2016 -17 to 2017-18 from the 
level of Rs.6,584.00 MT to as high as 1.48 lakh MT.  The Committee however do not 
subscribe to of city compost be enforced for making waste to compost industry viable 
the views of Department of Fertilizers and recommend that strict monitoring of offtake." 
2.14 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"Department of Fertilizer is monitoring mandatory offtake of city compost by 
giving targets to fertiliser companies for co-marketing of city compost at the beginning of 
every financial year and it is reviewed periodicall y through holding review meetings with 
fertilizer marketing companies and compost manufacturing. The review meeting with 
fertiliser marketing companies was organised on 26.12.2018 and review meeting with 
compost manufacturing companies was organised on 27. 12.2018. Due to monitoring 
and efforts made by DoF the sale of the City Compost has gone up from 96584 MT 
(2016-17) to 199062 in the year 2017-18 and 3066301 MT in the year 2018-19." 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 1.34 of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 21) 
EARLY PAYMENT OF SUPPLY OF CITY COMPOST BY ULB TO SUPPLIERS 
RECOMMENDED AND GOVERNMENT ASKED TO EXAMINE THE IDEA OF 
OPENING COMPOST BANK IN THE COUNTRY 
2.15  The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee's examination has also revealed that non -payment of supply of city 
compost for years together by ULBs have led to closure of various Waste to Compost 

41 
 
Plants.  In this connection, the Committee have been informed by MOH&UA that all 
closed Plants are being monitored by the States and efforts are being made to resolve 
the disputes. In this connection, it also came out before the Committee that since large 
number of RWAs are putting up decentralized composting machines, there could be a 
problem of surplus city compost production and for that purpose a compost Bank can be 
opened from where the regular bulk compost consumers like CPWD, State Horticulture 
Departments can take city compost as per their needs from time to time.  The 
Committee feel that the idea be favourably examined in the interest of viability of city 
compost manufacturing plants.  The Committee would await as update in this regard." 
2.15 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"As sanitation is a state subject and  setting up compost Banks is a further downstream 
infrastructural arrangement of composting facilities/plants and is to be examined at 
State/ULBs.” 
  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 1.37 of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 24) 
LOW LEVEL OF INFRASTRUCTURE FOR PROMOTION OF CITY COMPOST 
CRITICIZED,  GOVERNMENT ASKED TO TAKE UP THE PROMOTION OF CITY 
COMPOST IN A BIG WAY ACROSS THE COUNTRY  
2.16  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “Another issue that ca me up during the course of discussion on the aspect of 
WTC was need for promotion of composting in the country.  In this connection, the 
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Department of Agriculture and Cooperation 
and Farmers' Welfare) has laboured  to convince the Committee by outlining various 
steps taken like dispensing with the requirement of obtaining  certificate for manufacture 
of city compost under Fertilizers (Control) Order, 1985, permitting municipalities to sell 
city compost in bulk, intr oducing marketeer concept for facilitating city compost to 
identified markets in the area where there are no dealers' network, operationalising e -
FMS for routing MDA, adoption of 384 villages by fertilizer  
companies for use of city compost, constitution o f State level Steering Committee in 11 
States for promoting city compost etc.  Similarly, the Committee have been informed by 
Ministry of Agriculture and Famers welfare  about measures taken for propagating 
utilization of compost on farm land through adver tisements through Krishi Darshan and 
other promotional advertisements in Doordarshan and other TV programmes,  setting 
up labs for testing quality of city compost, developing waste decomposer by National 
Center of Organised Farming Ghaziabad (a Subordinate  Office of the Ministry)  that can 
be used for various purposes including quick composting of bio -waste with shelf life 
upto three months, in situ  composting of crop residence by converting bio waste to 
organic manure etc.  The Committee are, however, cons trained to find that awareness 

42 
 
regarding city compost is almost nil among common public. Besides infrastructure for 
quality testing lab is quite less as only 6 labs belonging to the Central Organic Public 
Testing Lab are available for catering to the city compost requirement of the entire 
country.  The Committee, therefore, feel that both infrastructure for testing of city 
compost and awareness for city compost be created in a big way in the country." 
2.17 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
a. "Provide flexibility in Fertilizer (Control) Order, 1985 for manufacturing and sale of 
City Compost 
(i)         Action taken (i) Under Clause 14 -15 of the Fertiliser (Control) Order, 
1985, it was earlier required for the Manufacturer of the organic fertiliser including 
City Compost manufacturer to obtain the Certificate of Manufacture for 
manufacture for manufacturing of organic fertiliser from the Registering Authority 
of the state government. IN order to facilitate entrepreneurs who enter in the  
business of manufacturing of city compost, this Ministry has dispensed with the 
requirement of obtaining certificate of Manufacture for manufacturing of organic 
fertiliser /city compost. 
  
(ii)        In the specification of city compost specified in Sche dule IV, the value of 
moisture content is amended from the existing value of 15-25% to 25% maximum 
in order to take into account the tropical weather conditions in the quality 
parameters. 
  
(iii)       In clause 2 (f) of the FCO i.e. definition of dealer, the marketer concept is 
incorporated and the same is defined under the new clause “(ma). This would 
facilitate the manufacturer to sell the city compost through identified marketers in 
the area where he has no dealer network. This would also lead to increa se in the 
consumption of city compost. 
(iv)       In order to encourage the sale of city compost at a competitive low price, 
the GoI under clause 22 (c) of FCO, has notified around 90 units for bulk sale of 
City Compost directly to farmers. 
b. Propagate utilisation of city compost on farm land: 
Action taken: 
The Ministry is regularly pursuing the State Government to encourage the use of 
City Compost: 
i. Vide letter No. 8 -2/2008 dated 15.02.2015 and 13 th April 2016 advisories have 
been issued to the State Governme nts to encourage the manufacture, sale and 
distribution of the use of city compost. 
ii. Vide letter NO 8 -2/2008 org. fmg. 18 th April 2016, the State Governments were 
requested to educate farmers through their Extension machinery to educate the 
farmers on use of various organic fertiliser including city compost. 
iii. An advertisement on promotion of muse of City Compost in the daily local news 
paper was published. 

43 
 
iv. Efforts are being made to disseminate the use of city compost through audio spot 
in Kisan Vani on FM Radio Net Work of AIR, publicity through video spot in Krishi 
Darshan & DD Kisan and print advertisement in news paper. 
v. The discussion on use of City compost on DD Kisan was done. 
vi. All the States in Zonal Conferences both Rabi and Kharif were perused to 
encourage the use of City Compost. 
vii. This Ministry has advised the State Government during Rabi Zonal conference 
advised to assess per annum requirement of organic fertiliser of about 3 
tonne/hectare/per annum as per ICAR recommendation and States were also 
requested to evaluate all sources of organic fertiliser and bio -fertiliser available 
with them and to meet the balance requirement through City Compost.  
(c)        Set up laboratories to test quality of Compost produced by Local authorities or 
their authorised agencies; and 
            Action Taken: 
            There are 6 Central organic fertiliser Regional Centres of Organic farming at 
Bangaluru, Bhubneshwar, Imphal, Jabalpur, and Nagpur. These laboratories have the 
annual analysing capacity of 10,000 samples. Some of the States namely, Maharashtra, 
Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, have established their laboratory 
for testing of Organic Fertiliser/City compost. The present analysing capacity is 
adequate. However, States may acquire new laboratories/strengthen the existing 
laboratories under the National Mission on sustainable Agriculture (NMSA) and 
RashtriyaKrish Vikash Yojna (RKVY)." 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 27) 
SETTING UP WTE PLANTS WITH JUDICIOUS USE OF WTE TECHNOLOGIES 
RECOMMENDED  
2.18  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee are constrained to note that as per NITI Aayog against 445 
Waste to Energy (WTE) Plants in European Union (EU), 150 WTE Plants in China and 
86 WTE Plants in USA, India is managing with only 8 such Plants on solid waste.  The 
Committee also find that as per data made available by  
Ministry of New and Renewable Sources of Energy, 3 such Plants are in Delhi, and 1 
each in Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra.  The Committee also find that Plants with 
Agricultural waste and other Wastes are also functio ning in different States.  In this 
context, the Committee have been informed by the then Secretary, MOUD that object of 
setting up of WTE plant is nothing but to make the cities clean.   
 During the course of examination, various merits of WTE plants have come up 
before the Committee like resource recovery, power generation, etc. and demerits like 
technology being highly cost intensive, emission of toxic gas and ash from incinerators  
in atmosphere etc.  Besides implementation constraints like land availabi lity, single 

44 
 
window clearance etc. have also been outlined before the Committee by MOH&UA.  In 
addition to this, Ministry of New and Renewable Source of Energy that is responsible for 
creation of WTE plants have also outlined major constraints as inefficie nt collection 
segregation, transportation and storage of requisite quality and quantity of feedstocks. 
The Committee recommend that all these pros and cons of WTE Plants have to be 
suitably and judiciously addressed in the light of composition of waste gen erated 
currently in urban areas.  On the issue of implementation constraints, the Committee 
feel that enough provisions are already available with SWM 'Rules' at the level of 
ULBs/Distt. Administration to deal with the situation and way out has to be found  out in 
coordination and consultation with all stakeholders and public at large." 
2.19 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"As States/UTs and ULBs carry out the function of SWM, Ministry is recommending to 
them that Waste to Energ y projects may be taken up in ULBs where the total waste 
generation is more than a certain extent, such as 1000 -2000 TPD and also advised that 
WTE may be taken up as a  last option, keeping in view the sustainability factors, both 
from input site i.e. the availability and essential characteristics of the waste as well as 
the output i.e. electricity sold through power purchase agreements is costly for 
DOSCOMs causing financial   stress  other cheaper renewable electricity options such 
as solar and wind source s are available.”  
 
  
 SBM-I, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs O.M No. H -11013/2/2019-SBM-I 
Dated 05 July, 2019. 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 28) 
IN THE LIGHT OF PUBLIC PROTESTS AGAINST WASTE TO ENERGY (WTE) 
PLANTS IN CERTAIN PARTS OF THE COUNTRY AND PHASING OUT OF SUCH 
PLANTS ALREADY UNDERWAY ACROSS THE GLOBE, THE GOVERNMENT 
ASKED TO SPARINGLY GO FOR WTE PLANTS COMPLYING THE AVAILABLE 
NORMS AND USING THE FOOLPROOF TECHNOLOGIES  
2.20  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee are also dismayed to note that there is huge gap between 
overall potential of WTE and actual production.  For instance as against the esti mated 
511 MW of overall potential, the actual WTE production is as low as 88.4 MW.  In this 
connection, various remedial measures have been outlined by MOH&UA and NITI 
Aayog like 35% funds as Viability Gap Funding (VGF) by Central Government, 
mandatory power purchase by DISCOMS from WTE Plants,  etc.  The Committee are 
constrained to note that only in Andhra Pradesh and NCT of Delhi, WTE Plants are 
actually coming up where 14 Plants and 2 Plants have been planned.  The Committee 
find that in remaining State  of Maharashtra, the matter is at initial stage and States of 

45 
 
Punjab and Haryana are following cluster based projects.  Similarly Uttar Pradesh is 
incentivizing WTE through State Budget.  In this context, the Committee have also 
come across Press Reports h ighlighting large amount of public protests against the 
WTE Plants especially in Okhla and surrounding areas of Delhi complaining violation of 
NGT stipulations and pointing out that phasing out of such plants across the globe has 
already started, the Commi ttee recommend that Government should sparingly go for 
such plants which comply with  the available norms and use the foolproof technologies 
available." 
2.21 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"As States/UTs and ULBs carry out the function of SWM, Ministry is recommending to 
them that Waste to Energy projects may be taken up in ULBs where the total waste 
generation is more than a certain extent, such as 1000 -2000 TPD and also advised that 
WTE may be taken up as a  last option, keeping in view the sustainability factors, both 
from input site i.e. the availability and essential characteristics of the waste as well as   
the output i.e. electricity sold through power purchase agreements is costly for 
DOSCOMs causing financial   stress  other cheaper renewable electricity options such 
as solar and wind sources are available." 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 29) 
NEED FOR CAPACITY BUILDING OF ULBS AND PROMOTION OF R&D IN SWM 
SECTOR HIGHLIGHTED 
2.22  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee are concerned to note that a lot  more is to be done in the area 
of capacity building of ULBs and for promoting R&D in Solid Waste Management in the 
country.  In this connect ion, the Committee are constrained to find that  as low as 68 
training workshops have been conducted by Central Pollution Control Board  that too in 
8 metro  cities and as low as 24 exposure visits were done by National Institute of 
Urban Affairs.   In thi s connection, the Committee have also been informed that 88 e -
learning courses on best SWM practices, after completion,  have been uploaded on 
SWM portal and 4.12 lakh ULB personnel have been registered therein.   Similarly on 
promotion of R&D in SWM secto r, the Committee find that Dr. R.A. Mashelkar 
Committee is at work for dissemination of information on viable SWM technologies, their 
replicability, scalability and sustainability for their possible implementation.  In this 
connection, the Committee also f ind that MOH&UA has candidly 'agreed' before the 
Committee to the ASSOCHAM's suggestion of introduction of many innovative 
technologies for treatment of SWM.  The Committee feel that in view of the challenging 
scenario of SWM in the country, the actual wor kdone shown above on the area of 
augmenting capacity creation of ULBs and also promoting R&D in SWM is thoroughly 
inadequate  and be scaled up in a big way." 
2.23 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 

46 
 
"Ministry is supporting the States/UTs and ULBs in capacity building through training of 
staff, workshops, e -learning modules, guidelines and advisories and exposure visits to 
best practices. A total of 80 workshops were conducted in 43 locations.   a total of 3439 
representatives fro m 1789 ULBs participated from 27 states and 4 UTs. Ministry also 
feels that  all available technologies are being implemented in India and  some new 
technologies are in still not having proven history.  However, other global advancements 
can be adapted to Indian conditions after due diligence of waste quantity and quality." 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 31) 
THE GOVERNMENT ASKED TO EXPEDITIOUSLY EXAMINE AND RESOLVE 
VARIOUS ISSUES RELATED WITH C&D WASTE FOR MAKING THE CEMENT 
PLANTS VIABLE 
2.24  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee are constrained to note that various issues related with the role 
of Cement Plants involved in processing of C&D waste particularly REF,  need 
examination and early resolutio n for making the functional Cement Plants financially 
viable.  These inter alia pertain to giving Minimum Support Price (MSP) to RDF using 
Cement Plants with huge investment of Rs.15 to 20 crore for processing non -
biodegradable Refuse Derived Fuel (RDF) wh ich comprise of plastics, clothes, textiles, 
wood pieces, etc. with good heat value,  mandating Cement Plants to lift 5% of their fuel 
requirement from Solid Waste as is not being done currently, need for higher transport 
subsidy to Cement Plants located a t a distance of 200 -400 kms for RDF transportation 
purpose which is unavailable currently, need for exempting import duty on equipment 
like turbines  for Waste To Energy Cement Plants for making their operations viable etc.  
The Committee find that since a ll these issues are related with various Ministries, the 
Committee recommend that all these issues be discussed with stakeholders and way 
out on each of these be found out at the earliest." 
2.25 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"The issue of RDF has been discussed with other Ministries and the cement 
manufacturers association and the guidelines on usage of RDF in various industries 
have been brought out." 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 36) 
INADEQUATE TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL OF BIO-MEDICAL WASTE IN THE 
COUNTRY CRITICIZED IN VIEW OF RISING LEVEL OF BIO -MEDICAL WASTES 
AND GOVERNMENT ASKED TO OPEN A MEGA BIO -MEDICAL WASTE 
TREATMENT PROGRAMME ON THE LINES OF SWACHHTA SARVEKSHAN, 2018 
2.26  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 

47 
 
 “The Committee are also constrained to learn that like Solid Waste Management, 
e-Waste Management, the Management of Bio -Medical Waste is no better and is 
actually very pathetic in the country.  In this context, the Committee find tha t as per NITI 
Aayog, India produces 551 tonnes of Bio -Medical Waste per day which may go upto 
776 tonnes by 2022.  In this context, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has also 
outlined two challenges before the Committee, one inadequacy of Common Bi o-Medical 
Waste Treatment Facilities (CBMWTFs) and second difficulty in setting up of Efficient 
Treatment Plants (ETPs) by less than ten bedded facility, as required by Bio -Medical 
Waste Management Rules, 2016 in case the terminal sewage treatment is not available.  
With regard to Management of Medical Waste, the Committee find that the Bio -Medical 
Waste Management Rules, 2016 are applicable to all persons who generate, collect, 
release, store, transport, treat or dispose or handle bio -medial waste in any f orm 
including hospitals, nursing homes, clinics, dispensaries, pathology labs , blood Banks, 
ayush, medical camps, first aid rooms in schools, forensic  labs, research labs and so 
on. These also inter alia provide for pre -treatment of lab waste, stool samp le and stool 
bags through on site  disinfection or sterilization, providing training for health care works 
etc.  With regard to implementation of Bio-Medical Waste Management Rules, 2016, the 
Committee are dismayed to note the findings of the Committee con stituted 
byMOE&F&CC in January, 2017 as per direction of NGT to examine and inspect the 
Bio-Medical Waste generated and its treatment that visited prominent hospitals of Delhi 
viz., RML Hospital, Lady Harding Medical College and Hospitals, Palika Hospital,  
CharakPalika Hospital, Primus Hospital, Northern Railway Central Hospital and Lal Path 
Labs.  The Committee are constrained to note that as per aforesaid Committee all these 
prominent Hospitals have been violating the prevailing law of the land.  For inst ance, 
RML Hospital is discharging effluent in sewerage system of NDMC without proper 
treatment except giving hypochlorite treatment which is not adequate.  Similarly, Lady 
Harding Medical College has also been discharging contractual effluent in sewerage.  
Likewise in Palika Maternity Hospital where Effluent Treatment Plants (ETPs) were 
installed but were found non -operational and in Charak Hospital untreated effluent was 
being discharged directly to the sewerage system.  Similarly, in Primus Hospital stora ge 
rooms for storing red, yellow, blue and black bag were not properly ventilated as per 
Bio-Medical Waste Management Rule, 2016.  In the case of Northern Railway Central 
Hospital and  Lal Pathology Labs, there was a need for installation of ETP for provid ing 
collection system for effluents generated in these labs.  In this connection, the need for 
setting up Toxic Substance Disposal Facility (TSDF) in Delhi was highlighted before the 
Committee byMOE&F&CC.  In the light of blatant violation of law of the la nd by 
prominent Hospitals of Delhi, the Committee feel that the over -all scenario of treatment 
and disposal of bio -medical waste may be even worst in small town clinics and 
pathology labs also with no visible sign of supervision and monitoring.  Meanwhile the 
Committee have been informed by the MOH&UA that MOE&F&CC has constituted a 
Central Monitoring Committee under Chairmanship of Additional Secretary, Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare including Members from Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, Cent ral/State Health Secretarial, State Pollution Control Board to review the 
implementation of Bio-Medical Waste Management (BMWM) Rule, 2016. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend that a full-fledged campaign on the lines 
of SwachhataSarvekshan, 2018 be drawn up in a time bound manner for Door to Door 
Collection, segregation, treatment and disposal of Bio-Medical Waste in the country with 

48 
 
complete participation of public, hospitals, nursing homes, cli nics, dispensaries, 
pathology labs, blood banks, medical camps, first aid room in schools, forensic labs, 
research labs in States/UTs for proper implementation of existing laws." 
2.27 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"1.    Just like ‘SwachhtaSarveskshan’ which is a cleanliness of survey of MoHUA, 
similarly MoHFW launched the Kayakalp Award Scheme in May 2015 for tertiary care 
hospitals/institutions of Central Government and under National Health Mission (NHM) 
for public health facilities in States/UTs. The scheme is intended to encourage and 
incentivize Public Health Facilities (PHFs) in the country to achieve a set of standards 
related to cleanliness, hygiene and infection control practices. High performing facilities 
are given  cash awards and Certificate of Commendation bases on periodic 
assessments using the Kayakalp assessment criteria. 
 Under the scheme assessment of health facilities is done using checklists. 
 Currently assessment is being done for hospital / facility upkeep, sanitation and 
hygiene, waste management, infection control, support services, hygiene 
promotion, Kayakalp outside boundary/ patient Feedback. 
2.   The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation 
have launched a joint i nitiative- Swachh SwasthSarvatra in 2016. The objective of the 
Swachh SwasthSarvatra is to maximize gains through convergence and collection, 
funding support and capacity building in: 
 Enabling Gram Panchayats where Kayakalp awarded PHCs are located to 
become ODF. 
 Strengthening Community Health Centers (CHC) in ODF blocks to achieve a 
high level of cleanliness to meet Kayakalp standards through a support of Rs. 10 
lakhs under NHM. 
 Building capacity through training in Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) to 
nominees from such CHC and PHCs. 
3.    Guidelines for Management of Health Care Waste as per Bio -medical Waste 
Management Rules -2016, have been prepared by Dte.GHS and CPCB, in which 
include segregation, collection, pre -treatment, intramural transportatio n and storage of 
bio-medical waste.  The Bio -medical waste segregated and collected from the health 
facilities is transported to common bio -medical waste disposal facilities. Currently, there 
are over 100 common bio -medical waste management facilities in co untry established 
and managed by CPCB, MoEF&CC. However, these facilities are not sufficient to cope 
with the problem and thus there is need for establishing more number of such facilities. 
The necessary comments may also be obtained from the CPCB." 
 
 
 
 
 

49 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

50 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
 
GOVERNMENT ASKED TO REVIEW THE ISSUE OF SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT 
IN THE COUNTRY IN A HOLISTIC MANNER  
 
4.1 The Committee in their 25th Report had recommended as under: 
 "Waste generation is intrinsic to human existence. In the Indian co ntext, it is 
largely due to reasons like over population, rapid industrialization, introduction of new 
gadgets and equipments, changing consumption patterns, etc. in urban areas. The 
Committee are perturbed to note that as per Ministry of Environment &  Fo rests and 
Climate Change, annually 65 million tonnes of waste is generated in India out of which 
as high as 62 million tonnes is Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) that includes organic 
waste, recyclables like paper, plastic etc, 45 -50% of which is biodegradable,  20-25% is 
recyclable and 30-35% as inert/debris.   
 The Committee are also deeply concerned to note that only 75 -80% of the MSW 
is collected and as high as 22 -28% remains untreated/unprocessed and is deposited 
indiscriminately in dumping yards and landfil l sites.  The Committee apprehend that the 
problem may increase many fold in years to come, posing a serious health and 
environmental hazard apart from increasing demand of land for dumping 
untreated/unprocessed waste which the country can ill -afford.  The  projections of solid 
waste generation submitted by the Government to the Committee viz., 165 million 
tonnes in 2031 and 436 million tonnes in by 2050 bear ample testimony to the 
Committee's gravest apprehensions. 
 After carefully examining the prevailing scenario and on the basis of documents 
and evidence placed before them, the Committee are constrained to conclude that in 
spite of its potentially devastating ramifications solid waste generation and its 
management has not received due attention from the G overnment.  Thus SWM, 
although it is a part of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) adopted by UN 
General Assembly in September,2015 does not appear to be an immediate priority of 
the Government.  It may be pertinent to mention here that SDGs are to be  achieved by 
2030 i.e. just a decade plus later.  The Committee are also concerned to note that due 
to this apathy at Government level, Urban Local Bodies have not been getting requisite 
funds for SWM purposes as 60 -70% of their expenditure goes for street  sweeping and 
20-30% goes towards for waste transportation purposes. The Committee are also 
perturbed to note that waste collection efficiency in India is also very low as it ranges 
between 70-90% in Metros and below 50% in small cities.   It is highly dis concerting to 

51 
 
note that Door to Door Collection has reached only upto 82% and source segregation 
has not moved beyond 48% in the country. With as high as 22 -28% of waste remaining 
untreated/unprocessed in the country and hardly any funds available for SWM with 
ULBs, the Committee recommend that the entire issue of SWM needs to be looked into 
immediately in a comprehensive manner at the highest level by a multi -disciplinary 
mechanism consisting of all stake holders.  The Committee further recommend that 
once a roadmap  is laid out by such a multi -disciplinary mechanism, the Government 
should make provisions for necessary funds and manpower for Solid Waste 
Management to ULBs in a time bound manner particularly on Waste disposal with 
utmost promptitude and keep ing in mind the overall threat to  the human health and 
environmental degradation." 
4.2 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“The Solid Waste Management (SWM) Rules 2016 have clearly laid down the 
end-to-end roadmap for the scientific management of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) 
keeping in view the threat to human health and environmental degradation. 
The roadmap given in the SWM Rules needs to be implemented in letter and in spirit by 
the States/UTs and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs ) who are constitutionally responsible for 
the subject and for carrying out the functions. 
Further, the funding required for such MSWM has to be arranged by the States/UTs and 
ULBs whereas the Central Government may provide certain Additional Central 
Assistance (ACA) under various centrally sponsored schemes run from time to time 
such as Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM)- Urban, as per guidelines. 
The processing of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) as on date has increased to 54% from 
19% in 2014 due to the focus broug ht by Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) upon door -to-
door collection of segregated waste which is about 90% as on date, integration of 
informal waste pickers, collection of user fee, anti -littering directions, setting up of 
material recovery facilities, in hou se processing of wet waste by bulk waste generators, 
processing of biodegradable waste into compost and bio -methanation, non -
biodegradable (dry) waste into energy and Refused Derived Fuel (RDF), setting up of 
scientific and land fill for residual waste etc.” 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 1.7 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.2) 
GOVERNMENT ASKED TO OPEN UP NATIONAL INITIATIVE FOR ADDRESSING 
THE PROBLEM OF SOLID WASTE IN ASSOCIATION WITH DIFFERENT 
STAKEHOLDERS LIKE CENTRAL MINISTRIES/STATE GOVERNMENTS AND 
ULBS 
4.3  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 

52 
 
 “The Committee's examination has revealed that different kinds of Solid Wastes 
like Municipal waste, Bio -Medical Waste, e-Waste, etc.  are major co ntributors in India.  
The Committee also find that as per NITI Aayog, solid waste can be categorized on the 
basis of origin, contents and hazardous potential, whereas Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs has broadly categorized Solid Waste in Wet and Dry Wastes.  The 
Committee find that various constituents of solid wastes like plastic waste, C&D Waste, 
e-Waste, bio -Medical Waste etc, are causing a big challenge as a large part of the 
same remains untreated/unprocessed.  For instance, out of the total garb age of 5.6 
million tonnes annually in India, only 25% is recycled and 10% of total garbage is plastic 
waste alone.   In the case of major metropolitan cities, the Committee find that waste 
generation is as high as 690 mt. in Delhi, 408 mt in Mumbai and 314 mt in Bengaluru on 
a daily basis.  Similarly, for C&D waste due to progressive pace of construction in cities, 
the  C&D waste could be as high as one third of urban waste that needs to be recycled.  
Likewise, for e -waste that include computers, entertainm ent devices, mobile phones,  
etc. the major concern is that recycling is done by non -formal units by unscientific, 
unhealthy and non -environment friendly methods.  About Bio Medical Waste, the 
Committee are constrained to note that as per Ministry of Healt h and Family Welfare, 
Bio-Medical Waste,  that constitutes 15 -25% of total waste generated in hospitals,  has 
the propensity to cause transmission of dreaded HIV, Hepatitis B, Hepatitis C viruses 
requiring due care while handling and their disposal.  As per Review Report prepared by 
the Expert Group the Directorate of Government Health Services  submitted before the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests and Climate Change (MOE&F&CC) on the 
Direction of National Green Tribunal (NGT) there is a need for more Bi o-Medical Waste 
Treatment Facilities (CMWTF)  in the country,  as 200 CMWTFs in 750 district hospitals 
are grossly inadequate.   
 The Committee's examination has also revealed that as per Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy,  the wet waste like kitchen wa ste, vegetable fruit market waste,  etc 
and dry waste like sanitary napkins and diapers, Material Recovery Facility (MRF) 
waste like plastic,  glass etc, Refused Derived Fuel (RDF) are also causing major 
problems.  
 In this context, NITI Aayog has admitted  before the Committee that ULBs and 
State Governments being major stakeholders have to come forward for efficient 
collection and segregation at source for Solid Waste Management including Municipal 
Solid Waste. It has also opined that there are large oppor tunities in the area of Solid 
Waste Management.  The Committee find that since 'Water Supply' and 'Sanitation' are 
'State' subjects under the Constitution and role of MOH&UA is about formulation of 
policies and assisting States/UTs by providing financial a ssistance for creation of 
necessary infrastructure, the Committee recommend that a country-wide full  
fledged inter -Ministerial initiative be opened with ULBs, State Governments etc., to 
address the problem of Solid Waste in the country in a wider perspective." 
4.4 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"Water supply and sanitation are State subjects and functions of the ULBs. 
MoHUA has issued several Advisories, Manuals and Guidelines for the scientific 
management and administration of water supply and sanitation functions by the 

53 
 
States/UTs and ULBs after due consultations with other Ministries. There is also 
coordination among the Ministries in providing additional support to the States/UTs & 
ULBs in these functions as exemplified in  the various centrally sponsored schemes and 
central sector schemes such as SBM -U, Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban 
Transportation (AMRUT) and the National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG)." 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 1.7 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
STRICT ENFORCEMENT OF AVAILABLE PROVISION FOR SOLID WASTE 
MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDED 
4.5  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee find it deplorable  that waste source segregation and  
waste processing is far lower than Door to Door Collection in urban areas of the country 
leading to health and environmental hazards.  For instance, as against the 82% 'Door to 
Door Colle ction of Waste', the 'Waste Source Segregation'  is as low as 48% and 
'Waste Processing'  is a dismal 37.23%.  As regards, 82% Door to Door Collection, the 
Committee are alarmed to note that it is still at very low levels in several States.  For 
instance, Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Sikkim 
are the only States alongwith UTs of A&N Islands, Chandigarh, Daman and Diu with 
100% Door to Door Collection whereas States with higher level of Door to Door 
Collection are Rajasthan (99%), Tamil Nadu (90%), Arunachal Pradesh (96%) etc.  The 
Committee are concerned  to note that NCT of Delhi is still far behind at 86%.  The 
Committee are also concerned to note that large States viz. Assam, Uttar Pradesh and 
West Bengal  are slow moving  with 43%, 62% and 65% Door to Door Collection 
respectively.  In this connection, the Committee recall that in January, 2018, the overall 
Door to Door Collection was 68.4% which has gone upto 82%.  However, looking at 
prevailing scenario, the Committee fee l that a lot more needs to be done in this area 
especially in big States like Assam, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal and in other States 
too by accelerating the coverage with available mechanism like Star Rating protocol for 
Garbage Free Cities, IEC activities etc." 
4.6 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"Being a State subject and function of the ULBs, MoHUA continues to engage 
with the States/UTs & ULBs in providing various advisories and guidelines and 
motivating and guiding  their efforts through the annual Swachh Survekshans and the 
Star Rating of Garbage Free Cities.  Star rating protocol for Garbage Free Cities has 
been made integral part of Swachh Survekshan to have pan India coverage." 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 1.21 of the Report) 
 
 

54 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
DRAWING UP A PHASE -WISE TIMETABLE FOR ACHIEVING OF SOURCE 
SEGREGATION BY OCTOBER, 2019 RECOMMENDED 
4.7 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee are dismayed to note that scenario of source  segregation is also 
dismal and whatever progress has been done is limited to few States/UTs only. For 
instance, 48% workdone on source segregation is mainly in three States of 
Chhattisgarh, Karnataka and UT of Puducherry with 100% source segregation, foll owed 
by Andhra Pradesh with 88%, J&K with 83%, UT of Chandigarh with 81% and Tamil 
Nadu with 80%.  Other States are experiencing still lower level of source segregation.  
The Committee are also constrained to note that in most of the States, it is very low .  
For instance, in large States of Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh, it is as low as 65% and 
41% respectively and similar is the position of other large States.  The Committee are 
also constrained to learn that in States of Assam, Bihar and many other States/U Ts it is 
in single digit.  The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have also expressed their 
helplessness before the Committee that in spite of robust monitoring by Ministry and 
hand holding of States/UTs/ULBs, the matter is taking time due to reasons li ke existing 
behavioral patterns and failure of the authorities in imposing existing rules and so on.  
The Committee apprehend that with this pace of work, the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs may not be able to achieve the mandate of scientific waste management 
by 2nd October, 2019.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that a time table 
in a phased manner be drawn up for achieving the aforesaid goal by making concerted 
all out efforts for uniform source segregation across the States specially those which are 
lagging far behind." 
4.8 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"The timeline for segregation of waste at source has been laid down in the SWM 
Rules 2016 for the States/UTs & ULBs to follow. MoHUA is also motivating the 
States/UTs & ULBs in Mission mode approach under the SBM -U with target completion 
date of 02.10.2019. Ministry is  engaging  and supporting the States/UTs & ULBs in the 
matter.  However, source segregation depends upon behaviour change also for which 
various programs of IEC and public awareness have been undertaken." 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 1.10 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
LACK OF CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FOR SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AT 
ULB LEVEL CRITICIZED AND NEED FOR ROBUST INFRASTRUCTURE FOR SWM 
PURPOSES RECOMMENDED 
4.9  The Committee had recommended as under: 

55 
 
"The Committee's examination of various shades of opinion like ASSOCHAM, 
prominent NGOs engaged in the field of Solid Waste Management like Swachh Pu ne 
and Center for Science & Environment has revealed that there is a need for critical 
infrastructure for Solid Waste Management in the country.  For instance, it has been 
opined by ASSOCHAM before the Committee that urban solid waste management not 
only posed gr eat risk to environment and to society but also gave an opportunity for 
resource conservation and ULBs do not have necessary wherewithal for that purpose.  
In this context, it has also been brought out before the Committee that in European and 
North Americ an countries waste conversion into useful products is working well with 
proper motivation of business people with local and federal Governments and are 
encouraging investment in Solid Waste Management business by giving them tax 
incentive  free land for processing etc.  It has also been submitted before the Committee 
by ASSOCHAM to completely privatise the collection of Solid Waste from municipalities.  
On the contrary, Swachh Pune has opposed the same and have come up with the idea 
of handing over the prim ary waste collection to informal sector and to cooperatives that 
are doing well mainly in Pune and have advocated that private sector,  if need be, be  
given secondary level depending upon the model of the city.  In this connection, the 
Ministry of Urban D evelopment has 'Not  Agreed' to  the suggestion of ASSOCHAM of 
completely  privatizing collection of Solid Waste from Municipalities and have opined 
that all models of collections including SHGs, private contractors and collection by ULBs 
can be followed a nd private partners will be selected as per tender conditions. The 
Committee also find that Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has 'Agreed' to the 
ASSOCHAM suggestions of free of cost land for setting up processing plants and 
encouraging best technologies for waste processing. The Committee also notice that in 
regard to ASSOCHAM's suggestion of cost sharing with entrepreneurs, the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs has left the issue at the discretion of State Governments.  
About the  idea of tax holi day for waste processing business, the MOH&UA 'Partially 
Agreed' and have left it to Ministry of Finance to comment upon the same and have 
opined that GST at lower rate be applied on activities of waste management to enable 
venders to claim impact credit.    In this context, the Ministry of Environment & Forests 
and Climate Change (MOE&F&CC) quoting Rule 22 and Rule 15 of SWM Rules, 2016 
providing for timelines to be adhered to by local bodies and Panchayats and other 
concerned agencies for creation of infr astructure, identification of sites for SWM 
purposes,  besides Urban Development Department of States/UTs are mandated to 
design policy for minimizing waste going to landfills.   
The Committee have also been informed by Swachh, Pune about ameliorating 
the condition of Scrap Dealers who are working in very unhygienic conditions so that 
recycling of waste progresses on desired lines.  In view of the above facts and since 
these issues are of far reaching ramifications, the Committee recommend that Ministry 
of Housing and Urban Affairs should sit together with concerned Ministries specially 
MOE&F&CC, Health, Finance, Power etc., State Governments/ULBs, other 
stakeholders for setting up/creation of necessary infrastructure and mechanism for Solid 
Waste Management in the country in shortest possible time." 
4.10 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 

56 
 
"As sanitation is a state subject, Ministry is in coordination with all the central 
ministries, State/UTs and ULBs and all stakeholders for manag ement of Municipal Solid 
Waste and supporting the ULBs by issuing manuals, guidelines, advisories and 
motivating their efforts through the annual Swachh Survekshans and the Star Rating of 
Garbage Free Cities." 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 1.7 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
GOVERNMENT ASKED TO CONCRETIZING INTEGRATED MECHANISM OF 
INDUSTRY/ INFORMAL SECTOR FOR SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT IN THE 
COUNTRY  
4.11  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee are glad to learn that both ASSOCHAM and prominent NGOs 
have underlined the need for joint efforts by Corporate, Recyclers, etc. with 
Governments/ULBs for tackling the problem of Solid Waste Management especially 
recycling of waste.  In this cont ext, the MOH&UA has submitted before the Committee 
that Solid Waste and Liquid Waste are handled separately and the same is planned at 
the Town Planning stage itself.   In this context, the Committee also note submission of  
the MOE&F&CC that under Rule 15  and Rule 22 of SWM Rules there is a well laid 
down provision for creation of infrastructure for different implementing agencies like 
Panchayats and ULBs also and for framing a policy. State UD Departments and 
implementing agencies have been given timeline s for infrastructure creation. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that Government should work out an integrated 
mechanism of SWM with industry and informal sector expeditiously." 
4.12 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"As stated in Sl. No. 8 above, Ministry is advising the States/UTs & ULBs in 
carrying out their statutory responsibility in scientific solid waste management through 
their own Sanitation Staff, through Self -Help Groups (SHGs), NGOs, Integration of rag 
pickers and informal sector, contracting to private agencies and also the mix of different 
options in different wards of the ULBs etc." 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 1.7 of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
GOVERNMENT ASKED TO ACCELERATE THE PROCESS OF SOURCE 
SEGREGATION IN THE COUNTRY 
4.13 The Committee had recommended as under: 

57 
 
"The Committee have been informed by NITI Aayog that estimated Municipal Solid 
Waste generation in the country is 1.45 lakh tonnes per day, which may go still hig her, 
posing a gigantic challenge to the Government.  In this connection, NITI Aayog has also 
opined that different contributors of  
Waste pose a problem for its management also.  It came out during the course of 
examinationthat various suggestions from ASS OCHAM and NGOs like proper method 
of segregation/recyclable waste at primary or secondary level, scientific compositing, 
colour coding etc., have come up and these have already been 'agreed to' by 
MOH&UA.  In this context, as per MOE&F&CC these are mandato ry within the Solid 
Waste Management Rules.  The Committee also recall that prominent NGOs have also 
highlighted the need for segregation at source on the pattern of Panjim in Goa and 
Thiruvananthpuram and Alleppe in Kerala thereby stopping desegregated wa ste 
collection completely.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that MOH&UA take up 
source segregation and its disposal also in a big way, in a time bound manner, across 
the States/UTs specially in those which are lagging behind." 
4.14 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"Ministry is continuously engaging with the States/UTs and ULBs through 
interactive Video Conferences conducted on regular basis in advising and motivating 
them for accelerating the source segregation of waste. It is also made part of the 
assessment for awards under Swachh Survekshan and certification of Garbage Free 
Star Rating Cities which motivate them in accelerating source segregation of waste." 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 1.10 of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
COMPULSORY REGISTRATION OF RAG -PICKERS AT STATE/UT  LEVEL 
RECOMMENDED 
4.15  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee note that both ASSOCHAM/ Swachh, Pune have suggested for 
registration of ragpickers  for twin purposes of reduction in municipal solid waste 
handling costs and diverting large quantity of wastes away from landfills thereby saving 
the environment.  The Committee also note that it has been done in Pune city and even 
Kerala Government already has a website on kabariwalas.  The Committee have also 
been informed that an alliance of ragpickers is already working in the country.  The 
Committee also find that MOH&UA has also 'agreed' for such a move and Ministry of  
Environment and Forests and Climate Change has confirmed that States/UT, Urban 
Development Department are also mandated to start a scheme for registration of rag -
pickers and waste dealers.  In view of the foregoing, the Committee strongly 

58 
 
recommend that a system of compulsory registration of rag -pickers be started for 
desired purposes at States/UTs level by Municipalities expeditiously." 
4.16 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"Ministry also engages with the States/UTs and ULBs in the integration of rag 
pickers in waste management and has issued advisories also. The integration is also 
made part of the assessments under Swachh Survekshans and the certification of 
Garbage Free Star Rating of Cities. However, the actual registration of rag pickers is to 
be carried out by the States/UTs and ULBs concerned." 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 1.13 of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
NEED FOR TACKLING  SANITARY WASTE BY ADEQUATE ALLOCATION OF 
FUNDS FOR ITS APPROPRIATE HANDLING 
4.17  The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee's examination has revealed that as per Swachh,  Pune as high as 
2000 tonnes of sanitary waste per day is  generated in  India and is improperly 
segregated and disposed off by informal recycling workers,  making them vulnerable to 
dreaded diseases like HIV, Hepatitis B, C and even Ebola virus,  requiring allocation of 
huge funds for their appropriate handling and disposal.  In this connection, the 
Committee find that Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have 'agreed' before the 
Committee that waste pickers living in poor conditions by roadside near waste dumps  
are poorest, most marginalized, neglected, vulnerable sections in society.   Further, the 
Committee have been inter alia informed by Ministry of Environment and Forests and 
Climate Change that manufacturers or brand owners or marketing companies of 
sanitary napkins and diapers shall explore the possibility of using al l recyclable 
materials in their products.  The Committee treat the matter as grave and recommend 
that appropriate measures be taken for tackling the issue in coordination and 
consultation with Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and also at the level of 
Hospital/Dispensaries and even at PHC level by allocating adequate funds for the 
purpose." 
4.18 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"Public Health and Hospitals being a State subject, the provision of healthcare 
services is the primary responsibility of the respective State/UT Governments. Under 
National Health Mission, GoI supports States/UTs to strengthen their health systems to 
provide health care services to the citizen. This includes support for Bio - Medical Waste 
Management at public health facilities based on the requirements posed by the 
States/UTs in their Programme Implementation Plans (PIP) within their overall resource 
envelop. 

59 
 
Further, Bio - Medical Waste Management is an elementary part of quality 
assurance. Under NHM , financial support is being provided to States/UTs for 
management of Bio Medical Waste under Quality Assurance and Infection Management 
& Environment Plan (IMEP) which includes training, supplies, equipment, 
operationalization of IMEP services at public h ealth facility and also specifically for Bio - 
Medical Waste Management / Common Bio Medical Waste Treatment Facility, etc.  
Details of financial support approved under NHM in FY 2019 -20 for Quality 
Assurance and Infection Management & Environment Plan (IME P)/ Bio Medical Waste 
Management (BMWM) is as per table below: 
 
S. 
No. State/ UT 
Quality Assurance and Bio Medical Waste Management FY 
2019-20 
Quality 
Assurance 
Infection Management & Environment Plan 
(IMEP)/ Bio Medical Waste Management 
(BMWM) 
Amount 
Approved  
(Rs in Lakhs) 
Amount 
Approved (Rs 
in Lakhs) 
Remarks 
1 Andaman & 
Nicobar 0.50 0.00   
2 Andhra 
Pradesh 1,128.10 32.59 Rs 32.59 lakhs for Supplies 
3 Arunachal 
Pradesh 175.65 190.38 Rs 172.44 lakhs for BMWM & 
Rs 17.94 lakhs Supplies 
4 Assam 1,332.10 299.89 
Rs 203.63 lakhs for CBMWTF, 
Rs 14.25 lakhs for IMEP 
training & Rs 82.01 lakhs for 
Supplies 
5 Bihar 1,208.86 909.17 
Rs 292 lakhs for IMEP 
equipment procurement, Rs 
97.17 lakhs for Supplies, Rs 
20.00 lakhs for IMEP training & 
Rs 500.00 lakhs for BMWM 
6 Chandigarh 12.00 0.00   
7 Chhattisgarh 618.34 63.13 
 Rs 49.63 lakhs for Supplies, 
Rs 13.50 lakhs for IMEP 
training 
8 Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli 1.15 0.00   
9 Daman and 
Diu 1.75 2.72 
Rs 1.60 lakhs for IMEP 
equipment procurement, Rs 
1.12 lakhs for Supplies 
10 Delhi 0.00 8.25 Rs 8.25 lakhs for Supplies 

60 
 
11 Goa 51.76 0.60 Rs 0.50 for IMEP training, Rs 
0.10 lakhs for BMWM 
12 Gujarat 3,658.47 122.10 Rs 59.66 lakhs for Supplies, Rs 
62.44 lakhs for BMWM 
13 Haryana 394.43 68.49 Rs 25.92 lakhs for Supplies, Rs 
42.57 lakhs for IMEP training 
14 Himachal 
Pradesh 248.53 3.18 Rs 3.18 lakhs for Supplies 
15 Jammu & 
Kashmir 612.96 13.49 Rs 13.49 lakhs for Supplies 
16 Jharkhand 2,311.46 609.65 
Rs 300 lakhs for 
Operationalising Infection 
Management & Environment 
Plan at health facilities, Rs 
40.65 lakhs for Supplies, Rs 
269 lakhs for BMWM 
17 Karnataka 2,426.00 67.76 Rs 57.72 lakhs for Supplies, Rs 
10.04 lakhs for IMEP training 
18 Kerala 2,226.83 30.00 Rs 30 lakhs for IMEP training 
19 Lakshadweep 18.50 0.00   
20 Madhya 
Pradesh 6,363.38 1,095.95 
Rs 931.80 lakhs for 
Operationalising Infection 
Management & Environment 
Plan at health facilities, Rs 
148.85 lakhs for Supplies, Rs 
15.30 lakhs for BMWM 
21 Maharashtra 1,893.48 291.59 
Rs 121.28 lakhs for Supplies, 
Rs 29.18 lakhs for IMEP 
training, Rs 46.23 lakhs for 
liquid waste management, Rs 
94.90 lakhs for BMWM 
22 Manipur 195.14 3.49 Rs 1.89 lakhs for Supplies, Rs 
1.60 lakhs for IMEP training 
23 Meghalaya 142.87 16.38 Rs 12.24 lakhs for Supplies, Rs 
4.14 lakhs for IMEP training 
24 Mizoram 158.08 1.24 Rs 1.24 lakhs for Supplies 
25 Nagaland 220.25 2.80 Rs 2.80 lakhs for Supplies 
26 Odisha 1,428.75 49.62 Rs 49.62 lakhs for Supplies 
27 Puducherry 134.77 1.17 Rs 1.17 lakhs for Supplies 
28 Punjab 767.25 1,047.20 Rs 1040 lakhs for ETP, Rs 7.20 
lakhs for Supplies 
29 Rajasthan 7,707.17 145.23 Rs 66.38 lakhs for Supplies, Rs 
78.85 lakhs for IMEP training 
30 Sikkim 41.03 3.13 
Rs 0.90 lakhs for IMEP 
equipment procurement, Rs 
1.23 lakhs for Supplies, Rs 1 

61 
 
lakhs for IMEP training 
31 Tamil Nadu 1,092.20 415.63 
Rs 250 lakhs for 
Operationalising Infection 
Management & Environment 
Plan at health facilities, Rs 
131.22 lakhs for Supplies, Rs 
34.41 lakhs for IMEP training 
32 Telangana   25.50 Rs 25.50 lakhs for Supplies 
33 Tripura 182.56 77.68 
Rs 4 lakhs for IMEP equipment 
procurement, Rs 23.55 lakhs 
for Supplies,  Rs 50.13 lakhs 
for BMWM 
34 Uttar Pradesh 1,126.88 20,620.11 
Rs 20421.73 lakhs for IMEP 
services, Rs 151.83 lakhs for 
Supplies, Rs. 46.55 lakhs for 
BMWM Plant and Sterilization 
System for 100  bedded MCH 
Wing at Gorakhpur 
35 Uttarakhand 247.29 19.73 Rs 19.73 lakhs for Supplies 
36 West Bengal 914.93 43.29 Rs 43.29 lakhs for Supplies 
Total 39,043.42 26,281.14   
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 1.15 of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
PROMOTING DOOR TO DOOR COLLECTION OF WASTE BY SUBSIDING WASTE 
COLLECTION BY ULBS RECOMMENDED 
4.19  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “An issue has come up before the Committee that whether Door to Door 
Collection can be done by subsidizing waste collection by ULBs.  In this connection, 
ASSOCHAM as also prominent NGOs like Swachh Pune have been unanimous before 
the Committee that user cha rges be taken from households for waste collection.  In this 
context, the Committee have been informed by Swachh Pune that their Members are 
recovering users charges from 3 lakh household including 28,000 slum households and 
have suggested before the Commi ttee that waste collection in slums has to be 
subsidized by municipalities.  The Committee have also been informed by MOH&UA 
that it should be as per SWM Rules.  The Committee find that the relevant Rules 
stipulate that Generator would have to pay user fee s for waste collection, the 
Committee recommend that Door to Door Collection of Waste by charging users for 
waste collection be started by all ULBs across the States/UTs.  As regards sections like 

62 
 
slum dwellers the local bodies may include as appropriate m easure of subsidy to take 
care of the matter." 
4.20 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"Door to Door collection of waste is the fundamental action given in the SWM 
Rules 2016 to be complied with by the States/UTs and ULBs. It nee ds to be carried out 
in sustainable manner for which user fees have to be implemented by the ULBs as 
given in the Rules. Ministry is motivating and encouraging the ULBs in levying of user 
charges through the assessments carried out under Swachh Survekshans  and the 
protocol of the Star Rating of Garbage Free Cities in which it is advised to collect 
affordable, differential and sustainable model of user fees for door to door 
collection.Ministry has also issued a detailed guidelines regarding user charges from  
bulk generators and other households." 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 1.13 of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 17) 
ABSENCE OF ACCURATE DATA OF WASTE GENERATION ABOUT CRITICIZED 
AND GOVERNMENT ASKED TO MAKE AVAILABLE TENTATIVE FIVE YEARS 
DATA OF WASTE GENERATION VIS -À-VIS COMPOST CREATION IN THE 
COUNTRY 
4.21 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee are constrained to note that as per Member -Secretary, Central 
Pollution Control Board who appeared before the Committee, there is  
no reliable data of waste generated in the country.  As per Central Pollution Control 
Board, it is 1.20 lakh tonnes to 1.40 lakh tonnes per day.  The Committee note that 
Central Pollution Control Board has expressed its helplessness before the Comm ittee 
that non -availability of accurate data is biggest handicap.  The Committee have also 
been informed by CPCB that over the last 50 years, the composition of waste had 
changed a lot and currently 9 percent of total waste is of plastic waste alone, along with 
other components.  The Committee have been informed that after understanding the 
composition of waste the technology for waste processing be accordingly designed.  In 
this context, the Committee have also been informed that with a view to get clear picture 
about waste generated vis -à-vis waste composition every ULB should workout for a 
perspective plan of 5 years seeking partnership with non -voluntary organizations and 
the same may be uploaded on public domain for the benefit of common man and for the 
use of policy makers.  The Committee, therefore, recommend MOH&UA to proceed on 
the above lines in consultation with and in coordination with all State Governments and 
ULBs for getting a clear perspective on the issue." 

63 
 
4.22 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"Action taken by CPCB in compliance of above is as given below 
2. Annual Report on implementation of SWM Rules,2016: -  
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) as mandated under the Solid Waste 
Management Rules, 2016 coordinates with the State Pollution Control Boards 
(SPCBs)/Pollution Control Committees (PCCs) regarding implementation of the 
Solid Wastes Management Rules. CPCB also follows up with SPCBs/PCCs for 
timely submission of Annual Reports on implementation of the SWM Rul es, 2016. 
The Consolidated Annual Report for the year 2017 -18 was prepared & submitted to 
the MoEFCC along with recommendations. 
  
2.               Initiatives taken for effective management of SWM Rules, 2016     
  Guidelines on Legacy Waste: - 
 CPCB prepared Guidelines on “Disposal of Legacy Waste (old MSW)”. The guidelines 
have been submitted to Hon’ble NGT as well as all SPCBs/PCCs for implementation 
and uploaded on CPCB website. 
      Guidelines on Buffer Zone: - 
  
 CPCB amended Guidelines on “Provision on Buffer Zone around waste 
processing and disposal facilities and submitted to all SPCBs/PCCs for 
implementation and uploaded on CPCB website. 
CPCB prepared “Guidelines for management of sanitary waste “  and uploaded 
on its website. 
 CPCB prepared “ Selection Criteria for Waste Processing Technologies ” and 
uploaded on its website. 
       3.               Directions Issued:- 
 CPCB issued Directions dated 16.01.19 under Section 31A of air (Protection) 
Act, 1981 to East Delhi Municipal Corporation (EDMC),  South Delhi Municipal 
Corporation (SDMC), North Delhi Municipal Corporation, New Delhi Municipal 
Corporation, Delhi Cantonment Board (DCB)and imposed Environment 
Compensation for violations of SWM & PWM Rules, 2016. 
 CPCB issued Directions on 19.03.19 u/s 5 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 
1986 to all SPCBs/PCCs for setting up of Material Recovery Facilities (MRF) 
prior to WtE plant/energy recovery system." 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 1.7 of the Report) 
 

64 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.22) 
Need for PAN India Licence, Ware Housing fertilizers nutrient based subsidy for city 
compost and inclusion of city compost under NIL category under GST recommended 
4.23 The Committee had recommended as under: 
            Various other aspects related with Wast e to Compost that came up before the 
Committee through  ASSOCHAM include need for pan India licence for city compost in 
place of time consuming State specific licence currently prevailing, need for 
warehousing facilities  for storing city compost as thousa nds of bags of city compost is 
lying unsold in various WTC plants, introduction of nutrient based subsidy for city 
compost in the name of Phosphate Rich Organic Manure (PROM),   which is not 
available currently, and need for inclusion of city compost under Nil category under 
GST.   In this context, on the inclusion of city compost under NIL category under GST, 
the Committee find that the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have left the issue to 
Ministry of Finance to comment upon.   The Committee recommend  that MOH&UA 
should take up the aforesaid issues with appropriate Ministries for making the procedure 
for WTC simple, conducive and workable for WTC composting facilities in the country to 
flourish which would be in the interest of environment.    On the GS T issue, the 
Committee would like the Ministry of Finance to take a positive view in the matter. 
4.24 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
The GST rates are decided on the recommendations of the GST Council and the 
Council has granted exemption from GST to Municipal Solid Waste, sewage sludge and 
clinical waste vide S.No. 110 of notification No. 2/2017 -Central Tax (Rate) dated 
28.06.2017. Compost has also been granted an exemption from GST if not packed in a 
unit container and n ot bearing a brand name vide S.No. 108 of notification No. 2/2017 -
Central Tax (Rate) dated 28.06.2017. Compost packed in unit container and bearing a 
brand name attracts GST rate of 5%. 
  
SBM-I, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs O.M No.H-11013/2/2019-SBM-I Dated 05 
July, 2019. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 1.18 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.23) 
PROJECT, PLANNING AND IMPLEMENTATION OF WASTE TO ENERGY (WTC) 
PLANT CRITICIZED AND GOVERNMENT ASKED TO OPEN WTC PLANTS IN ALL 
STATES IN THE COUNTRY IN A BIG WAY 
4.25 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee are constrained to note that there are only few functional Waste to 
Compost (WTC) Plants in the country and these too are running much below their 
annual installed capacity.  For instance, out of a  

65 
 
total of 145 WTC Plants in the country with per annum installed capacity of 62.32 lakh 
tonnes,  the per annum  compost production is as low as 13.11 lakh tonnes. From the 
State-wise details, the Committee  are also constrained to note that WTC plants are 
largely concentrated in a few States viz. Karnataka and Maharashtra with  19 plants 
each, Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu  with 14 plants each, besides 
Gujarat with 12 such plants.The Committee ar e glad to note that twin States of 
Karnataka and Kerala are moving towards cent percent decentralized composting.The 
Committee however find that in the remaining States, the number is in single digits.In 
this Connection, the MOH&UA have candidly admitted b efore the Committee that more 
number of plants are needed  to process the waste effectively.  As regards  projects 
under construction,  the Committee find that 150 WTC Plants with capacity of 33.48 
MTPA are under construction and / or tendering,  and major ity of these WTC already 
have been planned in States where such Plants are already working namely 29 Plants 
in Andhra Pradesh, 20 Plants in Gujarat, 19 Plants in Tamil Nadu, 14 Plants in 
Maharashtra  and 16 Plants in Rajasthan.   
On the issue of making Was te to Compost Plants a pan India presence, the 
Committee have been informed by MOH&UA that a drive for segregation of waste has 
already been on in all 4041 cities/towns to produce good quality of compost and many 
States like Assam, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, J harkhand, Odisha, Arunachal Pradesh, 
WTC Plants are already set up or in the process of being set up.  The Committee, 
however, find from the State -wise data placed before the Committee that number of 
WTC Plants in  
aforesaid States are quite few.  The Committee would like an explanation from 
MOH&UA in this regard.  In this connection, the Committee have been informed by NITI 
Aayog that vast opportunities might  emerge for expansion of Solid Waste Management 
in the country. Member-Secretary, Central Pollution Control Board has also outlined the 
need for preparing a roadmap of total waste generated vis-à-vis city compost likely to be 
generated in coming five years from now in the country and the Committee feel that in 
all the States project, planning and i mplementation of WTC Plants be uniformly chalked 
out in the country expeditiously." 
4.26 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"The Solid Waste Management (SWM) Rules 2016 have clearly laid down the 
end-to-end roadmap for the scienti fic management of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) 
keeping in view the threat to human health and environmental degradation. 
The roadmap given in the SWM Rules needs to be implemented in letter and in spirit by 
the States/UTs and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) who a re constitutionally responsible for 
the subject and for carrying out the functions. 
Further, the funding required for such MSWM has to be arranged by the States/UTs and 
ULBs whereas the Central Government may provide certain Additional Central 
Assistance ( ACA) under various centrally sponsored schemes run from time to time 
such as Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM)- Urban, as per guidelines. 
The processing of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) as on date has increased to 54% from 
19% in 2014 due to the focus brought by S wachh Bharat Mission (Urban) upon door -to-

66 
 
door collection of segregated waste which is about 90% as on date, integration of 
informal waste pickers, collection of user fee, anti -littering directions, setting up of 
material recovery facilities, in house proc essing of wet waste by bulk waste generators, 
processing of biodegradable waste into compost and bio -methanation, non -
biodegradable (dry) waste into energy and Refused Derived Fuel (RDF), setting up of 
scientific and land fill for residual waste etc. 
Ministry is advising the States/UTs & ULBs to take up decentralised processing of wet 
waste as a corollary to door to door collection of segregated wet waste." 
SBM-I, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs O.M No.H -11013/2/2019-SBM-I Dated 05 
July, 2019. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 1.18 of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 25) 
GOVERNMENT ASKED TO UTILIZE AVAILABLE TECHNOLOGICAL OPTIONS FOR 
SWM WITH DESIRED LEVEL OF INVESTMENT FROM AFFLUENT SECTION OF 
SOCIETY IN A COMPREHENSIVE MANNER 
4.27 The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee's examination of Waste to Energy (WTE) aspect linked with 
Solid Waste Management  has revealed various issues.  These inter alia include use of 
appropriate Waste to Energy technologies for proper waste processing,  need for dis -
incentivising landfills, promoting  scientific landfills and their conversion into parks, need 
for capacity creation of Waste to Energy Plants, augmenting R&D and capacity building 
in Solid Waste Management, use of plastics for road construction and various 'C' and 'D' 
Waste related issues.  On the issue of appropriate technologies for WTE the Committee 
find that NITI Aayog has outlined four technologies for WTE processing of (i) 
Hydrothermal (conversion of wet to green coal), (ii) Catalytic  Thermo Chemical process 
(shell technology),  converting Bio -mass and Bio -degradable MSW to liquid fuel (iii) 
Plasma Gasification (WC Technology) which gasify all kinds of waste to energy at 3000 
degree centigrade and (iv) The Thermal De -polymerisation  which can generate 
methane and oil from unsegregated MSW etc.  In this context, MOH&UA has observed 
before the Committee that there are no separate suitable methods for metropolitan 
cities and smaller cities and all processing methods are suitable for entire quality of 
waste with suitab le quantity however segregation of waste in different streams is key  
for efficient and economical processing.  The MOH&UA has also submitted before the 
Committee that considering typical composition of waste, composting is highly relevant 
in India, howeve r, in certain categories of bulk generators like hotels and restaurants 
etc. bio-methanisation process proves to be better and an economic option.  Further, 
segregation and recycling of various streams is best method for dry waste in large cities 
or cluster basis involving many smaller cities are better suited for methods of processing 
dry waste like  

67 
 
plastic waste.  In this context, NITI Aayog has observed that there is a positive co -
relation of Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) generation with economic developm ent and 
accompanying affluence.  In this context, NITI Aayog has quoted that as per study by 
Columbia University, New York, a higher standard of living results in more waste and 
also a greater ability to invest in waste management system.  The Committee th us finds 
that technologies options are already available and there is an apparent need for higher 
investment in such technologies from affluent section of society.   The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the MOH&UA to go for use of available technologies for  SWM,  
with equivalent investment from affluent sections of society in the area of SWM,  in the 
country in a comprehensive manner. The Committee also recommended that all out 
efforts should be made to make use of biogas from organic waste." 
4.28 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"The States/UTs & ULBs are constitutionally mandated to carry out the functions of 
municipal solid waste management on whole town basis including decentralised 
processing, and for such activities, Ministr y is advising to collect affordable, differential 
and sustainable user charges depending upon the different economic status / conditions 
prevalent in the society." 
 
SBM-I, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs O.M No.H -11013/2/2019-SBM-I Dated 05 
July, 2019. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 1.18 of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 26) 
DISINCENTIVISING LANDFILLS AND THEIR CONVERSION INTO PARKS 
RECOMMENDED  
4.29  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee are dismayed to note that as per NITI Aayog the country is 
going to lose as large as 1240 hectares of additional land every year for 
accommodating processed/unprocessed MSW seriously threatening the environment 
through ground water and air po llution.  In this connection, Center for Science & 
Environment has informed the Committee that land as a resource is too valuable to be 
wasted for landfills and have advocated for dis -incentivising it by charging high amount 
of tipping fee for bringing was te to landfills as has been done globally.  In this context, 
the Committee have been informed by ASSOCHAM that the collection efficiency is as 
low as 50 -60% in India, and where only 10% of plastic waste gets treated, unlike 
European and North American coun tries where no landfills are visible as whatever 
waste is available gets converted into products for further use.   

68 
 
 In this connection, the Committee also find that public resistance for allotment of 
landfills due to Not In My Backyard (NIMBY) syndrome ha s been the reason behind 
delay in identification of land in Delhi for landfills also Finding a way out ASSOCHAM 
has pleaded for scientific landfills by way of converting the landfills into parks on the 
pattern of Mumbai.  The Committee also find that on AS SOCHAM's suggestion of 
allotment of barren land for dump site the MOH&UA has observed that landfills site 
should be selected by ULBs/District Administration keeping in view siting conditions of 
landfills specified in SWM Rules and MOE&F have also observed on similar lines.  In 
view of above, the Committee feel that landfills should be dis -incentivised  by very high 
rate of tipping fee from waste deposition in landfills and the landfills be scientifically 
managed by way of converting these into parks on the lines of the one done in Mumbai,  
by impressing upon ULBs/Panchayats etc to take necessary steps in this regard." 
4.30 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"The SWM Rules 2016, have laid down the management of landfills/dumpsites including 
their proper closure. States/UTs and ULBs need to implement the same. However, 
Ministry is encouraging them by the inclusion of the landfill/dumpsite assessment in the 
Swachh Survekshans and the protocol for Garbage Free Star Rating of Cities." 
 
SBM-I, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs O.M No.H -11013/2/2019-SBM-I Dated 05 
July, 2019. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 1.24 of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 30) 
EXTENSIVE USE OF PLASTIC FOR ROAD CONSTRUCTION RECOMMENDED 
 
4.31 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee are constrained to note that virtually no headway has been 
achieved in use of plastic for road construction between country's prominent road 
construction agency of NHAI and South Delhi Municipal Corpor ation (SDMC) even after 
an MOU was signed between the two and even after an affidavit was filed by the then  
Municipal Corporation of Delhi way back in 2012 before Hon'ble Supreme Court stating 
that Ghazipur dump site has reached its saturation point and n o dumping can be done 
there.  The Committee are constrained to note that status quo is still prevailing  on the 
issue as a representative of MOH&UA during his deposition before the Committee has 
promised the Committee to take up the issue with the level of  Hon'ble Minister for 
Housing and Urban Affairs.  The Committee feel that in the case of Delhi, there is a 
need for resolving  the deadlock on the issue between NHAI and SDMC so that the eye 
sore of Ghazipur dump site is cleaned and plastic dumped therein is used for road 

69 
 
construction purposes.  The Committee also strongly recommend that issue of plastic 
for road construction purposes be promoted in a big way across States/UTs.” 
4.32 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"Ministry is encouraging the States/UTs and ULBs in plastic waste management 
including the use of waste plastic in road construction as brought out in the Ministry’s 
Advisory on Plastic Waste Management containing the issues, solutions and case 
studies, as far as waste plastic is concerned." 
 
SBM-I, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs O.M No.H -11013/2/2019-SBM-I Dated 05 
July, 2019. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 1.24 of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 32) 
LOWER UTILIZATION OF FUNDS UNDER SOLID WASTE COMPONENTS UNDER 
SWACHH BHARAT MISSION (URBAN) CRITICIZED AND GOVERNMENT ASKED 
TO IMPRESS UPON STATES/UTS  FOR UTILIZING THE AVAILABLE FUNDS 
COMPLYING WITH DIFFERENT CONDITIONS LAID DOWN BY MINISTRY OF 
HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
4.33  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee are constrained to note that there have been huge gap between 
Mission Allocations vis -à-vis Releases and Utilization Certificates (UCs) due vis -à-vis 
UCs received as on 30.09.2018 in Solid Wa ste component under Swachh Bharat 
Mission (Urban) period (2014 -19) so far.  For instance, as against the Mission 
allocations of Rs.7,365.82 crore, the releases were as low as Rs.3,284.79 crore.  
Similarly, as against Rs.1490.65 crore of UCs due, the total UCs received were as low 
as Rs.1,116.83 crore.  The Committee's examination has revealed that in major 
beneficiary States of Solid Waste Management funds, the scenario of allocation vis -à-
vis releases is grim. In Maharashtra, out of allocations Rs.1081.84 crore, the releases 
were as low as Rs.290.34 crore.  Similar was the position in other States of Uttar 
Pradesh (Rs.940 crore/Rs.427.73 crore), Tamil Nadu (Rs.690.00 crore/Rs.205 crore), 
Gujarat (Rs.536 crore/Rs.268.11 crore), Karnataka (Rs.512.52 crore/         Rs. 99.18 
crore) and West Bengal (Rs.487.79 crore/Rs.199.80 crore).  The Committee have also 
noticed that a few States have faired well as well.  These are Andhra Pradesh 
(Rs.308.54/Rs.308.54), Rajasthan (Rs.363.46 crore/Rs.344.26 crore), Madhya Prad esh 
(Rs.434.01/Rs.301.75 crore), Chhattisgarh (Rs.131.53 crore/Rs.93.99 crore), Jharkhand 
(Rs.122.68 crore/Rs.92.38 crore), Goa (Rs.9.29 crore/Rs.5.93 crore), Himachal 
Pradesh (Rs.15.22 crore/Rs.9.10 crore).  The Committee also find that majority of North 
Eastern States have also faired well.  On the issue of gap between Utilisation 
Certificates (UCs) vis -à-vis UCs received, the Committee are constrained to note the 
prominent States from where the due UCs have not been received are Andhra Pradesh, 
Bihar, Gu jarat, Jharkhand and Rajasthan.  Various reasons like failure on the part of 

70 
 
States/UTs in not furnishing timely UCs as well as not furnishing physical and financial 
progress of funds released under Ist installment have been attributed as reasons for  
lower releases by Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs.  Besides, various procedural 
issues like compliance of conditions like preparation of bankable DPRs  by  ULBs   for  
SWM   in   consultation  with  State  Governments  duly approved by State High 
Powered Committees (HPCs) within the norms of MOH&UA etc have also been outlined 
for lower release of funds by MOH&UA.  In view of the foregoing, the Committee feel 
that lessons may be learnt by the slow moving States including Delhi from good 
performing States o f  Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, 
Jharkhand, Goa and Himachal Pradesh in Solid Waste Management so that  actual 
workdone is visible at ground level.  The Committee therefore recommend the 
MOH&UA that necessary interactive exercise  be opened between good performing 
States and slow moving States expeditiously for getting the desired results.  The 
Committee also recommend that concerned States from whom required UCs are 
pending be asked to submit the same expeditiously." 
4.34 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"Under Swachh Bharat Scheme, Solid Waste Management projects are capital intensive 
with a completion time range of 1-3 years. Further the utilisation certificates are required 
to be submitted within  12 months of the closure of the financial year in which the grant 
has been released. Till date Rs. 9008.17 Crores have been released to the States/UTs 
and against the due amount of Rs. 6338.21 Crores for utilisation certificates (UCs), 
actual UCs for an amoun t of Rs. 5,401Crores were received in the Ministry. This figure 
also includes some UCs which was due in next financial year i.e. 2020-21." 
SBM-I, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs O.M No.H -11013/2/2019-SBM-I Dated 05 
July, 2019. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 1.15 of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 33) 
INITIATING REMEDIAL STEPS FOR STRENGTHENING THE FINANCES OF ULBS 
LIKE REVIEWING THE FUNDING PATTERN, GENERATING RESOURCES 
THROUGH INTEREST FREE BONDS BY ULBS RECOMMENDED 
4.35  The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee's examination has revealed that inability of ULBs to arrange their two 
third share in SWM projects with one third available from Centre by reason of their poor 
financial position has been shown promin ently before the Committee, with barely 5% 
funds available with ULBs for SWM purposes with as high as 60 -70% funds deployed 
for street cleaning and remaining 20 -30% funds deployed on transportation.  In this 
connection, it has been apprehended before the Committee by Municipal Commissioner 
of South Delhi Municipal Corporation (SDMC) that financially poor Corporations might  
fail Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) in the country. At the same time, the Committee 

71 
 
have also been informed by the MOH&UA that SWM proje cts are either completely or 
partially funded by Government of India and also by external agencies like JICA, ADB 
etc., or by private participation, user charges, Swawchh Bharat Kosh and also through 
tax free Municipal bonds etc.  The Ministry has also sug gested that funds for SWM can 
also be generated through pooled financing. The Committee feel that although these 
avenues/options are still open and available with ULBs, yet the ULBs still lack requisite 
finances to run SWM projects on their own.  The Commi ttee, therefore, recommend that 
the issue of reviewing the funding pattern be examined with ULBs in the light of 
options/avenues available for resource generation  and also in the light of experience of 
good performing States enabling them to make SBM(U) a success in the country." 
4.36 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"As SWM is a State subject and function of the ULBs it is their responsibility to fund the 
sector. Ministry is only providing ACAs generic to all States and UTs as decided by the 
Cabinet. Hence, the recommendation is not agreeable.” 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 1.24 of the Report) 
 
SBM-I, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs O.M No.H -11013/2/2019-SBM-I Dated 05 
July, 2019. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 34) 
INADEQUATE MECHANISM AVAILABLE FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF E -WASTE 
(MANAGEMENT) RULES, 2016 CRITICISED AND GOVERNMENT ASKED TO 
ENHANCE THE AVAILABLE MECHANISM AND SPEED UP IMPLEMENTATION 
4.37  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee are constrained to note that as per Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology, e-Waste creates global crisis due to environmental degradation 
and may affect human health, soil and even may contaminate ground water.E -Waste 
means wastes from electrical and electronic equipment whole or part or rejects in the 
form of  Lead, Mercury, Cadmium, Chromium etc. from their manufacturing process that 
are intended to be discarded.  In this connection, the Committee also notice that as per 
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), the level of e -Waste generation of 1.45  lakh 
tonnes in 2005 may go as high as 8.00 lakh tonnes by 2020, whereas as per NITI 
Aayog, India happens to be one of the largest producer generating 18.5 lakh tonnes of 
hazardous waste and importing items yielding e -waste of 13.5 lakh tonnes annually 
which ends up in landfills/incinerators  releasing cancer causing toxins.  The Committee 
are dismayed to notice the media report,  quoting UN Report,  that out of 44.7 million 
tonnes o f electronic waste in 2016 equivalent to some 45 Eifel  Towers, India's  
contribution is as high as 2 million tonnes and despite e -waste (Management) Rules, 
2016 as high as 80% of e-Wastes like  old lap tops, cell phones,  TV etc.  continue to be 
broken at huge health and environmental cost by informal sector.  The Committee note 
that the country is currently undergoing an exciting and unprecedented phase of 

72 
 
development and economic transformation with heavy dependence on import of 
electronic goods to meet its domestic demand.  
 The Committee also find that since recycling of e-waste is difficult and complex in 
nature, the e-waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2011 were notified which inter -
alia provide for prohibiting  and separating e -waste from enterin g into the Municipal 
Solid Waste stream, depositing domestic e -waste such as tube light, CFL lamps, 
computer hardware at nearest Material Recovery Facility (MRF), providing for  
Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) etc. and so on.  The Committee also fin d that 
unsatisfied with implementation of 2011 Rules the e -waste (Management) Rules, 2016 
were notified which inter -alia included elaborate EPR, setting up of Producers 
Responsibility Organisations and e -waste exchange assigning specific responsibility  to   
bulk  consumers  of  electronic  products  for safe disposal, making mandatory for every 
producer to apply before CPCB for EPR authorization, making the  producers 
responsible for providing contact details to consumers and  bulk consumers  through 
their websites, spreading of awareness etc.  The Committee also find that Ministry of  
Housing and Urban Affairs while outlining Physical and Chemical process of recycling of 
e-waste in details has also outlined that 178 authorised recyclers and dismantlers are 
currently working in India.  In view of the above, the Committee feel that like Solid 
Waste Management, implementation of e -waste (Management) Rules, 2016 is far from 
satisfactory and whatever good intentions that are behind these rules, all these are only  
on paper, as common man as well as, the producer of e -waste and even the CPCB are 
not honest in implementation of these Rules.  The Committee also feel that 178 
authorised recyclers and dismantlers for the vast country like India are too less and 
need to be suitably enhanced to broaden the scope of recycling and dismantling of e -
waste properly in the country." 
4.38 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) is the nodal agency 
for policy, planning, promoting and coordinating the environmental programmes and has 
notified the E -Waste (Management) Rules, 2016.   The E-Waste Rules, 2016 mandate 
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) to prepare guidelines on implementation of E -
Waste Rules, which includes specific guidelines for extended producer responsibility, 
channelization, collection centres, storage, transportation, environmentally sound 
dismantling and recycling, refurbishment, and random sampling of EEE for testing of 
RoHS parameters. 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY), being the nodal ministry for 
Electronics and IT,  is promoting R&D to develop technological solutions for e -waste 
management in environment friendly manner.   The e - waste has various  components 
like, printed circuit boards (PCBs), plastic, metal etc.   The process for recovery of 
precious metals from PCB under a project jointly implemented by C -MET, Hyderabad 
and E-Parisara, Bengaluru has yielded two exclusive PCB recycling processes,1 000Kg/ 
day capacity and 100Kg/batch, with acceptable environmental norms first time in India. 
  
The e -waste also contains plastics, nearly 25% of its weight. Novel recovery and 
conversion of e -waste plastics to value added product had also been successfull y 
developed. The developed process is capable to convert majority (76%) of the waste 

73 
 
plastics to suitable master batch, which could be used for virgin plastic products. The 
toxicity and environmental tests were carried out on the developed products from th e 
master batch, showed acceptable standard."  
 
SBM-I, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs O.M No.H -11013/2/2019-SBM-I Dated 05 
July, 2019. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 1.21 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 35) 
IN THE LIGHT OF GOOD  WORKDONE IN DEVELOPED AND DEVELOPING 
COUNTRIES ESPECIALLY OF EUROPE, VERY LESS WORKDONE ON E -WASTE 
MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL IN THE COUNTRY CRITICIZED AND 
GOVERNMENT ASKED TO MAKE USE OF AVAILABLE PROVISIONS IN E -WASTE 
(MANAGEMENT) RULES FOR DESIRED LEVEL OF WORK AT GROUND LEVEL 
4.39 The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee are constrained to note that many developed countries like Japan, 
Netherland, some other countries of Europe and some developing countries also  are 
far ahead in the area of  e-waste management in the spheres of Extended Producers 
Responsibility (EPR) through Producers Responsibility   Organisation  (PROs),   setting  
up   mechanism  for  public awareness etc., whereas the workdone in India is almost nil 
and whatever works on R&D for e-waste recycling that has been taken up by Ministry of 
Electronics and IT and Ministry of Environment and Forests and Climate Change is at 
Pilot stage only besides mechanism for public awareness is almost nil.  The Committee 
are also constrained t o note  that in the name of providing necessary training on e -
waste management, the Committee have been informed by the MOE&F&CC that a 
programme is designed to be implemented in 68 cities of the country in first phase in 
association with CPCB within the u mbrella framework of Swachh Bharat Mission.  The 
Committee feel that all these facts reveal that virtually no work is undertaken by different 
Ministries in the field of e -waste management which may cause havoc to environment, 
degrade soil and contaminate ground water also.  
 The Committee also note that e -waste (Management) Rules contains many good 
things like convergence of stakeholders including manufacturers, dealers, e -retailers 
etc. simplification in registration/authorization for dismantling under one  system, 
withdrawing or recall of product from market in case of non -compliance,  making State 
Governments responsible for ensuring safety, health and skill development of workers 
involved in dismantling and recycling operations, assigning the ULBs the dut y to collect 
and channelize the orphan products to authorized dismantlers or receivers etc.  The 
Committee however feel that their implementation is not visible at ground level and is 
only on paper.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the MOE&F&CC and all ied 
Ministries to pull up their socks and make use available provisions under e -waste 
(Management) Rules, 2016 for treatment and disposal of e -waste in an effective and 
comprehensive manner." 

74 
 
4.40 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"The major concern of e -waste management in India is lack of awareness amongst 
various stakeholders about the hazards associated to the end -of-life products.   In this 
direction, MeitY has been implementing an “Awareness Programme on Environmental 
Hazards of Electronic waste” since March 2015 to create awareness among the public 
about the hazards of e -waste recycling by the unorganized sector and to educate them 
about alternate methods of disposing their e -waste.  The programme has created 
training tools, content materials, films, printed materials, videos and jingles etc. for every 
strata of the society which are freely available on the dedicated website 
(www.greene.gov.in).  Further, social media platforms (Twitter handle and Facebook 
page), app has also been created to provide online status of the activities and show -
case the activities/ workshops/ carnivals etc. conducted under the programme." 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 1.21 of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 37) 
IN VIEW OF CHALLENGING SCENARIO OF HAZARDOUS WASTE IN THE 
COUNTRY, STATES/UTS HAVE BEEN ASKED TO FRAME A ROADMAP BY 2020 
FOR PROPER TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL OF HAZARDOUS WASTE IN 
CONSULTATION AND COORDINATION WITH REGISTERED RECYCLERS, 
CEMENT PLANTS INDUSTRIES ETC. 
4.41  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee note that as per Ministry of Environment and Forest and Climate 
Change, hazardous waste means any waste which by reason of characteristics such as 
physical, chemicals, biological, reactive toxic, flammable, explosive or corrosive causes 
danger or is likely to cause danger to health or environment whether alone or in contact 
with other wastes or substances. It basically comprises of waste generated during 
manufacturing proce ss of commercial products such as industries involved in 
petroleum, refining, production of pharmaceuticals paint, electronic products like Lead, 
Acid Batteries, Waste tyres, paper wastes, have been categorized as hazardous 
wastesby MOE&F&CC whereas Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology has 
informed that with development of modern electronic gadgets such as Cell phone iPOD, 
Palm Top, Lap Top computers etc. also result in high use of different hazardous 
substances that are harmful for environmen t and human body.  In this connection, the 
Committee are constrained to note that  MOE&F&CC has also highlighted the issue of 
unscientific disposal of hazardous waste and have underlined the need for systematic 
management of hazardous and other waste in an  environmentally sound manner by 
way of prevention, minimization, re -use, recycling, utilisation including co -processing 
and safe disposal of waste.  In this connection, Committee find that as per CPCB the 
annual hazardous waste generation in 2018 was 7.46  million tonnes from 44,000 
industries and for re-cycling and reuse, there are currently 1080 registered recyclers, 47 
Cement Plants permitted for co -processing and about 108 industries permitted for 
utilization of hazardous waste.  Besides, there are 40 C ommon Hazardous Waste 

75 
 
Treatment, Storage and Disposal Facilities (TSDFs) available in 17 States/UTs.  
Besides, the hazardous waste can be disposed off by setting up captive treatment 
plants.  In this context, while perusing Hazardous and other Waste (Manag ement and 
Transporting Movement) Rules, the Committee find that States/UTs have been given 
the responsibility for environmentally sound management of hazardous and other 
wastes like setting up of industrial space or sheds for recycling, pre -processing of 
hazardous waste, registering workers involved in recycling, pre -processing, undertaking 
skill development activities etc.  In this connection, it came out during the course of 
evidence of the representatives of MOH&UA that some big cities such as Bengaluru has 
made sufficient storage/sorting facilities. The Committee apprehend that hazardous 
waste management may not be working well in different States/UTs. MOH&UA was also 
candid in their admission before the Committee that monitoring hazardous waste 
management is essential and the Ministry is encouraging  States/UTs to adopt this 
approach.  The Committee feel that since the State Governments/UTs Administration 
have been made respsonsible for environmentally sound management of hazardous 
waste and other wastes  like setting up of industrial space or sheds for recycling, 
registering or workers involved in recycling for their skill development, the Committee 
recommend that State Governments/UTs Administration should sit together with 1080 
registered recyclers, 47 Cement Plants permitted for co -processing and 108 industries 
permitted for utilization of hazardous waste and after understanding  their views chart 
out a roadmap by 2020 for treatment and disposal of hazardous waste at States/UTs 
level itself by suitably enhancing the current level of 40 common Hazardous Waste 
Treatment, Storage and Disposal Facilities (TSDFs) available in 17 States/UTs or by 
encouraging captive treatment plants in a big way." 
4.42 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"Hazardous Wastes are handled broadly under two categories (i) Domestic Hazardous 
Waste and (ii) Industrial Hazardous Waste.   Local bodies are required to establish 
various collection centres so that domestic hazardous waste from houses, premises, 
colonies etc. can be deposited into the collection centre and it is channelized for further 
recycling and processing.   For this urban local bodies have to develop a mechanism 
under the State Waste Management Policy framed by State/UT department under the 
overall guidance of Waste management Policy of MOH&UA. 
For Industrial Hazardous Waste, the Industrial Hazardous Waste are covered by 
Hazardous & other waste (Management & Transboundary Movement) Rules, 2016 in 
which authorisation is provided by the State Po llution Control Boards for generation, 
handling, collection, reception, treatment, transport, storage, reuse, recycling, recovery, 
pre-processing, utilisation including co-processing and disposal of hazardous wastes by 
various industrial units.   These permissions are granted keeping in view the adequate 
recycling facilities available in different cities/Urban Areas for which the State and UT 
departments haveto work closely for setting up various recycling units including TSDF." 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 1.21 of the Report) 
 
 

76 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
TIME BOUND SCIENTIFIC COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION OF WASTE 
RECOMMENDED 
5.1 The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “It came out during the course of evidence of the representatives of ASSOCHAM 
that there is a need for time bound scientific collection and transportation of waste in the 
country by way of use of efficien t collection and segregation techniques for getting best 
out of wastes since there is a  lack of clear guidelines for collection, storage,  etc and for 
stringent action against offenders in case of non -compliance.  In this connection, 
Committee also find t hat MOH&UA has also 'agreed' with ASSOCHAM about need for 
scientific collection and transportation in the country.  The Committee feel that there is a 
need for its implementation throughout the country.  Further, the representatives of 
Swachh Pune has also  underlined the need for promoting portable sorting sheds for 
waste collection as people do not want these in front of their houses.  In this context, the 
Committee have also been informed that many such portable sheds are already working 
in Pune city.  Th e Committee feel that the issue be expeditiously examined by 
MOH&UA and action taken thereon be conveyed to the Committee for enabling them to 
arrive a logical conclusion." 
 
5.2 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"Ministry is advising States/UTs and ULBs for scientific collection and 
transportation of waste such as door to door collection along with source segregated 
waste, segregated transportation, targeted transportation of segregated wasted to 
specific sorting and processin g facilities etc. The secondary segregation of the dry 
waste faction has to be carried out by the ULBs by setting up material recovery facilities 
(MRF) mandated in the SWM Rules 2016. The ULBs may adapt different models for 
sorting in addition to portable sheds used in Pune suiting to their own requirements and 
community acceptance. Cities like Indore and Vellore have achieved very high rating to 
secondary sorting/segregation without using portable sorting sheds. Hence, the matter 
needs to be left to the States/ULBs for achieving results.” 
 
SBM-I, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs O.M No.H -11013/2/2019-SBM-I Dated 05 
July, 2019. 
 
 

77 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 16) 
DIFFERENT MODELS OF DECENTRALISED SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT 
WELCOMED AND DECENTRALIZED MODEL WHEREVER POSSIBLE 
RECOMMENDED 
5.3  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee are glad to find that models of decentralized Solid Waste 
Management are being run successfully in various part of the country like Ambikapu r in 
Chhattisgarh, Pune in Maharashtra, Bengaluru in Karnataka and significant work on 
Solid Waste Management has been done in Amritsar in Punjab and UT of Chandigarh.  
In respect of Ambikapur, from the document submitted before the Committee,  as also 
oral deposition by witness, the Committee have been enlightened as to how with the 
help of SHGs, RWAs, commercial residential bulk generators and through GIS based 
Route Plan work, door to door collection, segregation and recycling has been made 
possible in a s high as 3896 ULBs out of 4000 odd ULBs with population of less than 3 
lakh  Ambikapur Model of Decentralised SWM is being replicated. Similarly, the 
Committee have come across Pune Model of Decentralised Solid Waste Management 
being run as a cooperative of ragpickers with support of KagadKach Patra Kashtakari 
Panchayat (KKPKP) and Pune Municipal Cooperation by charging user charges from 
households for waste collected and where  rag-pickers are running the compost pits and 
ensuring that organic waste is getting composted and in return  they get composting fee 
also. Similarly, about Bengaluru Model of Decentralised Solid Waste Management, the 
Committee have been informed that with population of 1.25 crore with area of 800 sq. 
kms. and with the city generatin g 4800 tonnes of Solid Waste collected everyday from 
house to house and then segregated and sent to plants for compost, with Agriculture 
Department of Karnataka and Swachh giving subsidy and under BBMP Budget also.  
The Committee have also been informed th at Bengaluru has also started mechanical 
sweeps which is cost effective and for more environment friendly as against manual 
sweeping. As regards, Varanasi, the Committee have been informed that through use of 
IT, cleaning and collection of waste is being done.  
  Similarly, the Committee have also been informed that number of 
Decentralised Waste Processing Units (DPUs) are working in Tamil Nadu and based on 
their experience, MOH&UA has issued an Advisory 'Onset and Decentralised 
Composting of Municipal Organic Waste' for compliance by States/UTs.  About Goa, the 
Committee recall that they had been to Waste Treatment Plant at North Goa and were 
very impressed with the Goa model of waste management.  In this connection, the 
Committee have been informed that due to higher cost factor, it is not feasible for ULBs.  
Similarly, the Committee have come across best practices of decentralized Solid Waste 
Management in Venguala town of Sindhudurg district of Maharashtra and Allapuza town 
in Kerala also.  In this context, the M ember-Secretary, Central Pollution Control Board 
while appreciating the ground work -done by informal sector has opined before the 
Committee that wherever possible decentralized Solid Waste Management is most 

78 
 
welcome.  In view of the foregoing, the Committe e recommend that decentralized Solid 
Waste Management wherever possible be resorted to in a big way across all States in a 
time bound manner." 
5.4 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"As sanitation is a state subject and function of the ULBs, it is upto ULBs for adopting 
processing of waste through centralize or decentralized or a mix of both. Ministry is 
encouraging and pursuing the States/UTs and ULBs to take up decentralised 
processing of waste also and has issued specific advis ory titled “Advisory on On -site 
decentralised composting of Municipal and Organic Waste”." 
 
SBM-I, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs O.M No.H -11013/2/2019-SBM-I Dated 05 
July, 2019. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;   
         Jagdambika Pal  
    16 March,2021                Chairperson,           
25 Phalguna, 1942 (Saka)                                                             Standing Committee  
on Urban Development 
 
  

79 
 
ANNEXURE –I 
                                            [Vide Para 3 of the Introduction] 
 
Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs 


80 
 
1. Shri Durga Shanker Mishra   Secretary 
2. Ms. D. Thara      Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Vinay Pratap Singh    Director 
 
Delhi Development Authority 
4. Shri Anurag Jain     Vice Chairman, DDA 
National Capital Region Planning Board 
5. Smt. Archana Agarwal    Member Secretary 
Town and Country Planning Organisation 
6. Shri R. Srinivas     Town & Country Planner 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for taking evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Housing & 
Urban Affairs on the subject "Need for formulating Master Plans for every city in the 
country for holistic development". 
 *  *  *  *  *  * 
6. The Committee then took up for consideration Draft Reports (i) on A ction 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 24th 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Rainwater harvesting in Metropolitan Cities' ; and (ii) 
25th Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 'Solid Waste management Including Hazardous 
Waste, Medical Waste and E-waste and adopted the same without any modification. 
7. A verbatim record of proceedings has been kept. 
 The Committee then adjourned 
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
* Matter not related to the Report.  
  

81 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
[Vide para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY FIFTH 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON URBAN  DEVELOPLMENT 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
I.  Total number of recommendations                         37 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted  
by the Government:                                                                              14      
Recommendation Nos. 3, 6, 7, 15, 18, 19, 20, 21, 24, 27, 28, 29, 31 and 36. 
Percentage to total recommendations                                           (37.83%)                                     
          
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:                             0 
Percentage to total recommendations                                                (0%)                
            
  
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of             
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:          21 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 17, 22, 23, 25, 26, 30, 
32, 33, 34, 35 and 37 
Percentage to total recommendations                                          (56.75%) 
 
 
V.         Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final     
replies of the Government are still awaited:                                       2 
Recommendation No.  14 and 16    
Percentage to total recommendations                                             (5.40%) 