    STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOUSING  
          AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
                                (2024-25) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
Regional Rapid Transit System and Role of NCRTC 
 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
April, 2025/Chaitra, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
  
5 

 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOUSING 
AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
(2024-25) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
 
Regional Rapid Transit System and Role of NCRTC 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.07.2025 
 Presented to Speaker on 29.05.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 04.04.2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
April, 2025/Chaitra, 1947 (Saka) 
 


 
 
 
 
 C.U.D. No.: 146 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©2025 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Publish under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
 
 
 

 
 
(i) 
 
  Pg.No. 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE............................... (iii) 
 INTRODUCTION....................................................................... (iv) 
REPORT 
PART-I 
I. Introductory   1 
 (i) RRTS vis-à-vis alternative modes of regional transport 3 
 (ii) Need for Regional Rapid Transit System (RRTS) 5 
 (iii) Cost-Benefit analysis of RRTS vis-à-vis other alternatives 7 
II Genesis of RRTS In India 7 
 (i) Organisation of NCRPB 7 
 (ii) Creation of National Capital Region (NCR) 8 
 (iii) Regional Plan 2021 for NCR 8 
 (iv) Functional Plan for Transport-2032 8 
III 
National Capital Region Transport Corporation (NCRTC) and its 
functions 9 
 (i) Setting up of NCRTC 9 
 (ii) Functions of NCRTC 11 
IV Legislative, Policy Framework and Funding of RRTS 13 
 (i) Legislative framework 13 
 (ii) Policy Framework 13 
 (iii) Funding of RRTS Projects 14 
V Status of progress and issues with various corridors of RRTS 14 
 (i) Delhi-Ghaziabad-Meerut Corridor 15 
 (ii) Delhi-Gurugram-SNB Corridor 16 
 (iii) Delhi-Panipat Corridor 16 
 (iv) Projected Operational Performance of 3 priority Corridors 17 
VI Delhi-Ghaziabad-Meerut Corridor 18 
 (i) Salient features 18 
 (ii) Financing of Delhi- Meerut Corridors of RRTS 19 
 (iii) Viability and Ridership of the Delhi-Meerut Corridor 20 
 (iv) Fare Fixation Mechanism and Revenue/Ticketing 22 
  (A)Fare Box Revenue 22 
  (B) Non fare Box revenue 23 
  (C)Ticketing 24 
 (v) Transit Oriented Development (TOD) 25 

  (A)TOD Development on the corridor in Delhi  25 
  (B)TOD development on the Corridor in Uttar Pradesh 25 
 (vi) Last Mile Connectivity and Multi Modal Integration 26 
 (vii) Safety Measures, Medical facilities and accessibility 28 
  (A)Safety and Security 28 
  (B)Medical Facility 29 
  (C)Accessibility 30 
 (viii) Grievance Redressal Mechanism 31 
 (ix) Environmental Benefits 31 
 (x) Promotion of Make in India in RRTS 32 
 (xi) Benchmarking 33 
 (xii) Data and Details of Accident 33 
VII  Expansion of RRTS network 34 
VIII  Engagement of Private Sector for future RRTS projects 35 
PART-II 
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 36 
 APPENDICES  
Annexure I 
Decadal growth of population provided by Mumbai Metro Line-3, 
Chennai Metro, Hyderabad Metro and Bangalore Kolkata Metro and 
NCRTC 48 
Annexure II 
Estimated current population and future projection provided by Mumbai 
Metro Line-3, Chennai Metro, Hyderabad Metro, Bangalore Metro and 
NCRTC 50 
Annexure III MDB loans terms and conditions 52 
Annexure IV Delhi-Meerut RRTS: Loan repayment schedule 53 
Appendix I Minutes of the Eighteenth Sitting of the Committee held on 07.09.2022  55 
Appendix II Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Committee held on 31.10.2023 58 
Appendix III Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Committee held on 13.11.2024 60 
Appendix IV Minutes of the Eleventh Sitting of the Committee held on 03.04.2025 63 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
(iii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS (2024-25) 
 
Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy -        Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
  
2. Smt. Lovely Anand 
3. Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
4. Smt. Misha Bharti 
5. Shri Satpal Brahamchari 
6. Shri Hibi Eden 
7. Smt. Hema Malini 
8. Shri Selvam G. 
9. Ms. Sayani Ghosh 
10. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
11. Smt. Mahima Kumari Mewar 
12. Shri Naresh Ganpat Mhaske 
13. Shri Rambhual Nishad 
14. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
15. Dr. Gumma Thanuja Rani 
16. Shri Chamala Kiran Kumar Reddy 
17. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
18. Shri Alok Sharma 
19. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar 
20. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
21. Shri Ravindra Dattaram Waikar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
  
22. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
23. Shri Raghav Chadha 
24. Shri G. C. Chandrashekhar 
25. Shri Mission Ranjan Das 
26. Shri Ram Chander Jangra 
27. Dr. Medha Vishram Kulkarni 
28. Smt. Maya Naroliya 
29. Shri Debashish Samantaray 
30. Shri R. Girirajan 
31. Shri A. A. Rahim 
. 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal  - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania  - Director 
3. Ms. Swati Parwal   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Abhishek Kumar  - Under Secretary 
 

 
(iv) 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs 
(2024-25), having been authorized by the Committee on their behalf, present this Fifth 
Report (18th Lok Sabha) on the subject, ‘Regional Rapid Transit System and Role of 
NCRTC’ of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs. 
2. The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs has introduced Regional Rapid Transit 
System (RRTS) to meet the need of fast, safe, reliable, comfortable and modern 
transportation system providing regional connectivity to rapidly growing urban 
population in National Capital Region. National Capital Region Transport Corporation 
(NCRTC) has been mandated with the designing, developing, financing, operating and 
maintaining RRTS network. Out of the three prioritized corridors of RRTS, part of Delhi-
Ghaziabad-Meerut Namo Bharat Corridor has since been made operational. Against 
this background, the Committee felt the need to examine the subject ‘Regional Rapid 
Transit System and Role of NCRTC’. 
3. The Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs (2022-23) selected the subject 
‘Regional Rapid Transit System and Role of NCRTC’ for in depth examination and 
report to the House. The Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs (2023-24) and 
(2024-25) continued with the examination of the subject.  
4. The Committee were briefed on the subject by the representatives of Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs on 07 September 2022 and 13 November 2024. The 
Committee also took oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs along with representatives of NCRTC on 31 October 2023. The 
Committee express gratitude to the previous Committees for their valuable inputs during 
the briefing sessions and oral evidence held under their tenure. 
5.  The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officials of the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs and other witnesses for appearing before them and 
furnishing the information that they desired in connection with the examination of the 
subject. 
6.  The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of 
appreciation for the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the Officials of Lok 
Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
7.  The Committee considered and adopted Draft Report at their Sitting held on  
03 April, 2025. 
8.  For facility of reference, the observations/recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold letters in the body of the Report. 
 
 
              Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
New Delhi;                                                                                                    Chairperson                                                                                                    
03 April, 2025                       Standing Committee on Housing                    
13 Chaitra, 1947 (Saka)                                                              and Urban Affairs 
 

1 
 
PART-I 
I. INTRODUCTORY 
1.1 According to Census 2011, decadal growth of urban population was higher than the rural 
population, with 31.2 percent of the population living in urban areas. There has been a dramatic 
increase in the number of large cities. As many as 53 cities in India had a million plus 
population.    
1.2 The study of the trends of Urbanization in India also reveal that the concentration of 
Urban Population in million plus cities have increased significantly from about one fourth in the 
1970s to 1980s to more than two fifths in the 2000s. Among the Metropolitan cities, six cities 
that have a population of more than five million, namely Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Delhi, 
Hyderabad and Bangalore constitute around one fifth of the total urban population. These Urban 
Centers due to better infrastructure in terms of Education, Health, Transportation, Entertainment 
etc. act as magnets attracting people, capital and technology towards itself and have become 
engines of economic growth in the country providing opportunities of trade, employment, 
research, innovation etc.  
1.3 As the density of population in metropolitan cities have increased significantly over the 
years, it has spilled over to adjoining areas as a natural consequence. It is worthwhile to mention 
that the peripheral areas adjoining the main city are comparatively growing faster than many 
million plus cities. In this respect, the examples of cities like Gurugram, Faridabad, Meerut, 
Noida around Delhi and Navi Mumbai, Thane, Kalyan, Mira Bhayander around Mumbai is 
noteworthy. Thus, the nature of migration in big metropolitan cities seems to have changed 
which need to be assessed in conjunction with the surrounding areas. 
1.4 With limited availability of land and rapid influx of population, these cities have swollen 
with people leading to dense and compact settlements leading to heavy traffic congestion, 
environmental pollution, increasing Green House Gas emissions from the transport sector, 
increasing road accidents, an exploding growth in the number of private vehicles, lack of space, 
parking space problems, crowding, housing shortage, slums etc. 
1.5 Although, the peripheral areas around the big cities are growing at fast pace in terms of 
population, the centres providing opportunities for trade, employment, education, research & 
innovation, healthcare, transportation, etc. have remained largely within the city. Hence, people 
are required to travel to these megacities daily from various sub-urban and regional centers 

2 
 
surrounding them. Most of these commuters use local trains, short distance train and buses which 
are cost effective but often remain overcrowded, uncomfortable in extreme weather condition 
and are unreliable, or private vehicles which lead to traffic congestion, long commuting time, air 
pollution etc. putting strain on their physical and mental health.  
1.6 On the other hand, efficient, fast, safe and comfortable Urban Transportation makes 
significant contributions towards the mental, emotional and physical well being to improve the 
efficiency and productivity of a city and its environs. The extent to which the Indian cities can 
maximize economic performance and reduce poverty will be closely linked to how efficiently 
their transport system moves people and goods upon which their socio-economic activities 
depend. 
1.7 The economic survey 2025 points that given India’s vast size and limited land 
availability, public transportation is a more efficient alternative for viable energy transition. 
Further, as India aspires to become a developed nation by 2047, it is crucial to create efficient 
mass transportation system providing speed, safety, reliability and comfort for maximizing 
economic performance, physical and mental well being of its citizen and promoting efficient 
energy uses not only within the city but also in and around the adjoining suburban and regional 
urban agglomeration. 
1.8 It is in this backdrop the idea of developing regional rapid transit system connecting the 
National capital with the adjoining areas came up in the ‘Functional Plan on Transport for 
National Capital Region-2032’ prepared by the NCR Planning Board (NCRPB). Accordingly, in 
August, 2013, the Government of India formed a Joint Venture with four State Governments 
namely Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Rajasthan and established National Capital Region 
Transport Corporation (NCRTC) for implementation of RRTS network. Under the proposed 
RRTS network for connecting regional centres in NCR, 8 corridors have been identified. Out of 
which 3 were prioritised. 
1.9 With part of Delhi-Meerut corridor operational and remaining under implementation, the 
Committee took up the RRTS project for detailed examination and report. In this Report, the 
Committee have examined the role of NCRTC, characteristics of Regional Rapid Transit System, 
the progress of the project and other related issues. In the process, the Committee obtained 
background materials and post evidence written replies from the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs besides taking their oral evidence. Based on the written replies and oral depositions of the 

3 
 
Ministry, the Committee have analysed various issues pertaining to the subject matter as 
enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs followed by the Committee’ 
Observations/Recommendations. 
(i) RRTS vis-à-vis alternative modes of regional transport 
1.10 As regards the query of various alternatives for boosting regional connectivity, the 
Ministry informed that as per the Metro Rail Policy, 2017, other than Metro Rail and Regional 
Rail, following are the alternative mass transit systems in cities/urban agglomeration: 
(a) Bus ways & Bus Rapid Transit System (BRTS): Bus ways are physically 
demarcated bus lanes along the main carriageway with a segregated corridor for 
movement of buses only. At the intersections, the buses may be given priority 
over other modes through a signalling system. BRTS, is an enhanced form of a 
busway which incorporates features such as facilities for pedestrians, Non-
Motorised Vehicles (NMV) and many other associated infrastructures including 
operations and control mechanism. 
(b) Suburban Rail Services: The Suburban Rail Services can be a cost effective 
option depending upon the line capacity of Indian Railways. However, it needs to 
be improved in terms of speed, comfort, punctuality & availability.  
1.11 Further, pointing out the limitation of Suburban Rail Services, Secretary, MoHUA in the 
meeting dated 07.09.2022 deposed before the Committee as given:- 
“अब िजतनी नई इंटर िसटी चल रही हœ, वे बाकी टŌेɌ  क े  िलए बाधक हो रही हœ। जैसे 
िदʟ ी से कानपुर, इलाहबाद, वाराणसी वाला टŌैक है, उस पर तो डेिडक े िटड ůे ट 
कॉįरडोर क े  आ जाने से टŌैिफक अभी थोड़ा कम Šआ है, आगे और कम हो जाएगा। परंतु 
बाकी िजतने मेजर कॉįरडोसŊ हœ और खासतौर पर जो बड़े शहरों क े  पास क े  कॉįरडोसŊ हœ, 
वे चो̋डहœ। वे लगभग 300 पसŒट Ǜ ादा क ै पेिसटी पर चल रहे हœ।उस पर और कोई टŌेन 
चला पाना अब संभव नहीं है, अनलैस आप कोई और टŌैक डालŐ।आपने देखा होगा िक 
जयपुर से जब िदʟ ी आते हœ तो गुŜŤाम तक तो बड़ी तेज़ी से टŌेन आती है, पालम तक 
िफर भी आती है, लेिकन पालम से नई िदʟ ी जाने मŐ आपको आधा-पौना घंटा लग जाता 
है, ÈयɉǑक ये टŌैƛ  चो̋ड हœ।” 
1.12 Comparing the Metro rail with RRTS, the Ministry informed the Committee that Metro 
Rail is a fully segregated rail based mass transit system, which could be at grade, elevated or 
underground and due to its physical segregation and system technology, metro rail can have a 
very high capacity of 40,000–80,000 passengers per hour per direction (PPHPD). Metro systems 
also include monorails, which, however, has lower capacities and higher maintenance cost. 

4 
 
Metro Rail are generally useful for transportation within a large city and have halts at shorter 
distance of 1-1.5 km. As a result, the speed of Metro trains are relatively slower. Whereas, 
Regional Rail caters to passenger services within a larger urban agglomerate or metropolitan area 
connecting the outskirts to the center of the city. The services have greater number of halts at 
smaller distances compared to long distance railways but fewer halts and higher speeds 
compared to metro rail. Regional rail are common in large metropolitan cities and held in 
decongesting the city center by providing safe and speedy access to the city center for 
commuters residing in less congested suburbs. 
1.13 As regards the query as to how the RRTS is unique from other modes of transportation, 
the Ministry explained the Committee that while, every mode has its own advantages, the 
following features of the RRTS trains distinguishes it from traditional MRTS: 
 
(a) Higher Speed: The RRTS trains have a design speed of 180 Kmph, with maximum 
operating speed of 160 Kmph, resulting in average speed of about 100 Kmph.  
 
(b) Advanced Technologies: RRTS incorporates state-of-the-art technologies across its 
various subsystems, making it a first of its kind implementation in India. For 
instance, it utilizes Austrian pre-cast track technology for low maintenance ballast 
less tracks, a rigid overhead catenary system for the design speed of 180 Kmph and 
the European Train Control System (ETCS) level 2 signaling. 
 
(c) Unique Service Offerings: RRTS introduces innovative services such as the 
capability to carry patients on stretchers/wheelchairs during medical emergencies. 
This feature enhances the safety and accessibility of the system, potentially saving 
lives in critical situations.  
 
(d) Comfort: The RRTS trains offer features like comfortable &cushioned 2x2 transverse 
seats, overhead luggage racks, USB/electric charging points, onboard WiFi and a 
premium class coach with facilities like reclining seats, sun blinds, footrests, laptop 
charging sockets etc. These amenities enhance passenger comfort and convenience 
during travel. 
 
(e) Operational Complexity: RRTS introduces operational complexity by sharing its 
infrastructure with other services, such as the operation of metro services in Meerut 
on the same infrastructure. This demonstrates the adaptability and flexibility of the 
RRTS system to accommodate diverse transportation needs within the region. 
 

5 
 
(f) Interoperability and System Integration: Unlike metro where each corridor is 
standalone with the no movement of rolling stock from one line to other, RRTS 
corridors are being designed to be inter operable. The deployment of ETCS level 2 
signaling allows interoperability among different RRTS corridors facilitating 
seamless operations across a network of networks.  
 
(g) Additionally, the use of modern system-operated, Made-in-India rolling stock with 
high acceleration/deceleration further distinguishes it from other mode of 
transportation. 
 
 
1.14 The above points demonstrate that RRTS has a clear edge over other modes of regional 
transport including MRTS. In subsequent paragraphs specific advantages expected to be gained 
from RRTS which makes it a desirable option for regional transport are listed out.  
(ii) Need for Regional Rapid Transit System (RRTS)  
1.15 The Ministry presented before the Committee that Regional Rapid Transit System 
(RRTS) is a state-of-the-art, high-speed rail-based commuter network designed to enhance 
regional connectivity in urban and peri-urban areas. Operated at speeds of up to 180 km/h and 
with availability of trains every 5-10 minutes serving traffic nodes every 5-10 kms, the RRTS is 
envisioned as a game-changer for urban mobility, featuring modern infrastructure, advanced 
signalling systems, and passenger-centric amenities. The Committee were also informed that 
across the world also, such connectivity is deployed. The best examples are Regional Express 
Rail (RER) in Paris, S. Bahn in Berlin, GTX in Seoul, Tsukuba in Tokyo, Regional Rail in 
Queensland and Cross Rail in London. 
1.16 The following points, furnished by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs outline the 
need for RRTS in India: 
(a) Addressing Congestion 
India’s cities are among the most congested in the world, with vehicular traffic increasing 
exponentially. The over-reliance on road-based transport leads to long travel times, fuel 
wastage, and reduced productivity. RRTS offers a high-speed, efficient alternative to ease 
congestion, especially on heavily used corridors like Delhi-Meerut or Delhi-Panipat. 

6 
 
(b) Meeting the Demands of Urbanization 
As urban populations grow, the demand for housing, jobs, and services extends to 
suburban and peri-urban areas. Efficient regional transit systems like RRTS ensure that 
these areas remain connected to urban hubs, supporting balanced urban development and 
reducing pressure on city centers. 
(c) Promoting Sustainable Transportation 
India is grappling with rising air pollution and carbon emissions, much of which stem 
from the transportation sector. The RRTS, with its reliance on electricity and energy-
efficient technologies, provides a low-carbon mobility solution that contributes to India’s 
climate goals under international agreements. The safer rail based transit also has the 
potential to reduce road accidents. 
(d) Reducing Travel Time and enhanced labour productivity 
Commuters traveling between cities and suburbs often face long, unpredictable travel 
times. RRTS, with operational speeds of up to 180 km/h, drastically reduces travel time. 
For example, the Delhi-Meerut RRTS corridor will allow commuters to travel the 
distance in less than an hour compared to over two hours by road. The reduced travel 
time and reliability reduces the travel time buffer leading to increased productivity. 
(e) Polycentric economic development 
By encouraging commuters to live in suburban and regional areas while maintaining easy 
access to urban hubs, RRTS helps to decongest metropolitan areas. This reduces the 
strain on urban infrastructure, including housing, roads, and utilities and encourages 
polycentric economic development and more livelihood opportunities. 
(f) Boosting Regional Economies and inclusive growth 
Efficient connectivity is crucial for economic growth in regional areas. RRTS fosters 
regional development by linking businesses, educational institutions, healthcare facilities, 
entertainment hubs and industrial hubs, ensuring access to opportunities across a wider 
geographical area, thereby promoting inclusive growth. 
(g) Integrated Transport Solution 
The lack of integration between different modes of transport in India often leads to 
inefficiencies. RRTS is designed to seamlessly integrate with existing transport systems, 
such as metro rail, bus networks, and airports, creating a unified and user-friendly 
transportation ecosystem. 
(h) Improving Quality of Life 
A reliable and fast transit system reduces commuting stress and allows for better work-
life balance. RRTS also ensures a safer and more comfortable commuting experience, 

7 
 
with features such as air-conditioned coaches, automated ticketing, and modern safety 
measures. 
(i) Supporting Government Initiatives and providing employment 
The RRTS aligns with the Indian government’s initiatives, such as Smart Cities Mission, 
Make in India and Atmanirbhar Bharat by promoting urban mobility solutions that are 
technologically advanced, sustainable and locally developed leading to direct as well as 
induced job creation. 
 (iii) Cost-Benefit analysis of RRTS vis-à-vis other alternatives 
 
1.17 Since, RRTS is a capital-intensive project, the Ministry was asked as to whether any 
cost benefit analysis of various option of Mass Rapid Transit System has been conducted, the 
Ministry informed as under: 
“A cost-benefit analysis conducted by NITI Aayog in Dec 2018 for the Delhi-
Meerut RRTS project highlighted the critical need for enhanced regional 
connectivity in the Delhi-NCR. The study reviewed various transportation 
challenges faced by National Capital Territory of Delhi & NCR, emphasizing the 
importance of implementing high-speed public transport systems like RRTS to 
decongest Delhi and facilitate the growth of Tier-2 & Tier-3 cities in NCR. 
Several alternatives were evaluated, including commuter rail services on existing 
Indian Railways alignment and high-capacity bus systems or BRTS along the 
Delhi-Meerut expressway alignment. However, these alternatives were deemed 
infeasible or unsuitable due to various factors such as saturated capacity, high 
number of level crossings, and high first and last mile travel distances for 
commuters. 
The study conducted a two-level analysis of alternatives, comparing options like 
extension of Metro services, elevated BRTS connectivity, and the proposed Delhi-
Ghaziabad-Meerut RRTS corridor. This analysis considered parameters such as 
mobility, costing and financials, conceptual engineering effects, economic, social, 
and environmental factors. The RRTS emerged as the most suitable alternative 
with an overall score of 4.57 out of 5, surpassing the alternatives significantly like 
elevated BRTS stands at 2.49 and that of Metro Extension alternative stands at 
3.14 out of score of 5.” 
 
II. GENESIS OF RRTS IN INDIA 
 
1.18 The genesis of RRTS can be traced to planning of NCR in regional context which led to 
organization of NCR Planning Board (NCRPB) and creation of NCR. 

8 
 
(i)        Organisation of NCRPB 
1.19   Like the other metropolitan cities of India, Delhi has also been experiencing phenomenal 
growth of population which led to increasing congestion and shortages of civic amenities. It has 
been felt that as Delhi grows, its problems of land, housing, transportation and management of 
essential infrastructure like water supply and sewerage would become more acute. The 
Committee have learnt that it was with this concern that the need for planning Delhi in the 
regional context was felt.  The Interim General Plan 1956 suggested that serious consideration 
should be given for a planned decentralization to outer areas & even outside the Delhi region. 
For the purpose, a High Powered Board was set up under Union Minister for Home Affairs in 
1961. The Master Plan for Delhi 1962 also emphasized Planning of Delhi in regional context. 
The High Powered Board was reconstituted under Union Minister for Works & Housing in 
1973. Subsequently, National Capital Region Planning Board was constituted in 1985 through 
enactment of the Act by the Union Parliament, with the concurrence of the participating States 
of Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh.  
(ii)       Creation of National Capital Region (NCR) 
1.20    Regarding the creation of NCR, the Committee have been apprised that the constitution 
of NCRPB paved the way for creation of NCR which is a unique example of inter-state regional 
planning and development, covering the entire National Capital Territory of Delhi, fourteen 
districts of State of Haryana, eight districts of State of Uttar Pradesh and two districts of State of 
Rajasthan. With the Nation Capital as its core, the key rationale of creation of NCR is to 
promote balanced and harmonized development of the Region through preparation of Regional 
and Functional Plan for NCR region.   
 (iii)      Regional Plan 2021 for NCR 
1.21    The Committee were learnt that the regional plan for NCR with the perspective year 
2021 was notified by NCRPB in 2005. One of the objectives of the Regional Plan-2021 was to 
provide efficient and economic rail and road-based transportation system (including mass 
transport systems) well integrated with the land-use patterns for balanced regional sustainable 
development. Subsequent to notification of Regional Plan 2021, the functional plan on various 
aspects related to Transport, Ground Water Recharge, Economic Development, Drainage and 
Micro & Household Enterprises were  prepared by NCRPB to elaborate on various aspects of 

9 
 
Regional Plan and for proper guidance of participating States. 
(iv)      Functional Plan for Transport-2032 
1.22 The functional plan for Transport was prepared by NCRPB with the perspective year 
2032. As regards the salient features and achievements made in Functional Plan on Transport for 
NCR, 2032, MoHUA in their written reply informed as under:-  
 
“The Functional Plan on Transport recommends projects related to Regional Rapid 
Transit System (RRTS), New Rail Lines, Regional Mass Rapid Transit System 
(MRTS), Up-gradation of Roads, Expressways, Interchange, Bypasses, Bus 
Transport-System, Bus Terminals, Logistic hubs, Integrated Freight Complexes, 
Highway Facilities Centres and Airports.  
The current day prominent implemented projects such as the Eastern and 
Western Express ways around Delhi, Yamuna Expressway, Delhi-Meerut 
Expressway and the under implementation RRTS corridors are amongst the key 
contributions of the plan.  
Many of the proposed road stretches/corridors that have been created/improved 
and were proposed for same in the Plan include Greater Noida-Bulandshahar, 
Delhi-Panipat, Delhi-Loni-Baghpat, Delhi-Ghaziabad-Meerut, Ghaziabad-Hapur, 
Ghaziabad-Bulandshahar-Khurja,Delhi-Faridabad-Ballabgarh-Palwal expressway, 
Delhi-Gurgaon-Manesar-Dharuhera, Delhi-Bahadurgarh-Rohtak, Panipat-Rohtak-
Rewari, Rewari-Palwal-Khurja, Khurja-Hapur-Meerut and Gurgaon-Faridabad 
highways have been implemented. 
Plan also proposed that the MRTS and RRTS are to be planned with appropriate 
integrated feeder rail/road services. The plans recommended that Mass Rapid 
Transit System (MRTS) extension to NCR towns and its integration with upgraded 
ring railway in Delhi and proposed Regional Rapid Transit System (RRTS).” 
1.23 As regards the query as to whether NCRPB has prepared regional plan beyond 2021, the 
Ministry informed as under:- 
“As per the Minutes of the 41st Board Meeting of NCRPB held on 12.10.2021 
under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of Housing and Urban Affairs and 
Chairman, NCRPB, the decision (v) (Agenda Item No. 41/4) – “The current RP 
2021 shall be valid till the publication of finally approved Regional Plan-2041”. 
Currently, the Draft RP-2041 is prepared but yet to be approved.” 
1.24 With regard to preparation of fresh functional plans including transport plan, the Ministry 
informed that advance preliminary work for preparation of various Functional plan including 
transport will be finalized once the Regional Plan-2041 is approved. 

10 
 
III National Capital Region Transport Corporation (NCRTC) and its functions 
(i) Setting up of NCRTC  
1.25 The Committee have been briefed that although the idea of an integrated commuter 
railway network providing connectivity using fast commuter trains within National Capital 
Region and Delhi was mooted way back in 1998-99 in an Indian Railways commissioned study, 
the idea was subsequently taken up and owned by NCPRB while developing the ‘Functional Plan 
on Transport for NCR-2032’ and the proposal was re-examined in 2006 in the light of extension 
of the Delhi Metro to some of the NCR Towns. The NCRPB identified and recommended eight 
RRTS corridors to connect the towns in NCR with high-speed rail-based commuter transit 
services.  
1.26 The erstwhile Planning Commission subsequently formed a Task Force (2006) under the 
Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD) on RRTS for NCR. The 
Task Force in 2009 proposed to set up a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) with an initial corpus of 
Rs. 100 crore for implementing a wide-ranging integrated multi-modal transport system for 
suburban commuters that would lead to a balanced and sustainable growth across the region. 
1.27 To develop an appropriate ecosystem for development and growth of RRTS, NCRPB had 
initiated and prepared the Cabinet Note in year 2010 on the subject of “Formation of National 
Capital Region Transport Corporation (NCRTC)”, as a wholly government owned company 
under Companies Act 1956 under MoHUA (erstwhile Ministry of Urban Development).  
1.28 As was proposed in Cabinet Note, a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed 
amongst MoHUA, NCRPB, State Governments of NCT of Delhi, Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar 
Pradesh for implementation of commuter transit projects in NCR, on 29th June 2011. The MoU 
stated that “An organization to be called as “NCR Transport Corporation” (NCRTC) will be 
formed for creation of comprehensive integrated multi-modal suburban commuter transportation 
system for National Capital Region (NCR). Accordingly, for planning and implementation of 
Regional Rapid Transit System (RRTS) projects, National Capital Region Transport Corporation 
(NCRTC) was established in 2013 which is a joint venture of Government of India and States of 
Rajasthan, UP, Haryana and Delhi.  
 
 

11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.29 The capital Structure of NCRTC is as under:-  
 
 
(ii) Functions of NCRTC 
1.30 As per Memorandum of Understanding, NCRTC was formed for creation of 
comprehensive integrated multi-modal suburban commuter transportation system for NCR. 
According to the official website of NCRTC, the mandate of NCRTC includes overall 
development of commuter Rail, related Roads, bus service, etc. to improve connectivity in NCR, 
integration of feeder bus service and commercial exploitation of air space above non-operational 
buildings/areas. The MOU further provides that NCRTC would look after the commercial 
aspects i.e. fare structure, fare collection, inter-modal integration of feeder bus services, 


12 
 
commercial exploitation of air space above non-operational buildings/areas etc. The MOU also 
provides that NCRTC will subsequently undertake other transportation projects.   
1.31 The Ministry was requested to inform about the other activities NCRTC is 
undertaking/propose to undertake in future for optimally utilizing their capacity/resources and to 
fulfill their mandate in true earnest besides undertaking implementation of RRTS. In response, 
the Ministry informed as under:- 
“NCRTC is currently spearheading the successful implementation of the 82km 
Delhi-Meerut Namo Bharat RRTS corridor, with 55 km operational and the 
remaining section on track for timely completion. Key steps taken towards 
building an integrated transport system include: 
(i) NCRTC will be providing Meerut Metro services on the Namo Bharat 
infrastructure in Meerut. This integration will lead to ease of travelling for 
commuters and saving of around Rs. 6,300 Cr to public exchequer. 
(ii) On the request of UP Govt, NCRTC is undertaking the relocation of Bhaisali 
interstate bus terminal and depot to outskirts of Meerut by creating two multi 
modal transit hubs near Meerut South and Modipuram Namo Bharat stations. 
This is expected to significantly decongest the city and promote seamless 
connectivity. 
(iii) Undertook extensive integration with other modes such as mainline Railways, 
Delhi Metro, inter state and local buses, para transit organisations to ensure 
smooth public transit transfers. 
(iv) Developed expertise in planning and execution of complex infrastructure 
projects, transport modelling, efficient project management etc and also 
supported other organisations in the sector. 
(v) NCRTC is also involved in preparing Influence Zone Plan (IZP) of Transit 
Oriented Development (TOD) nodes of Jangpura, Kakardooma and Anand 
Vihar Multimodal Transit hub. NCRTC is also a member of the committee for 
preparation of UP TOD policy and Zonal Development Plan(ZDPs) for 
Meerut TOD Zone. 
 
With its diverse human resources and accumulated experience, NCRTC is 
well-equipped to take on additional assignments in the transportation sector, as 
mandated in future.” 
1.32 The data regarding decadal growth of population in Mumbai Metropolitan Region, 
Hyderabad Metropolitan Area, Chennai Metropolitan Area, Bangalore Metropolitan Area and 
Kolkata as provided by the Ministry is enclosed at Annexure-I. Further, the date regarding the 
estimated current population and future projection of population provided by them in these cities 
(except Kolkata) is enclosed at Annexure-II. 

13 
 
1.33 The Ministry was requested to inform whether any need has been felt by the Ministry for 
planning the aforesaid cities in regional context as has been done in case of NCR. The Ministry 
informed as under:- 
“Urban Planning is a State subject. Therefore, the respective State Governments 
are responsible for planning, initiating and developing urban transport 
infrastructure. The Central Government considers financial assistance for Metro 
Rail proposals in cities or urban agglomerates based on the feasibility of the 
proposal and availability of resources, as and when posed by the concerned State 
Government.” 
 
IV. LEGISLATIVE, POLICY FRAMEWORK AND FUNDING OF RRTS 
 
(i) Legislative framework 
1.34 Regarding the Legislative framework under which Regional Rapid Train System would 
operated, the Ministry briefed the Committee as under: 
“Legal cover for the RRTS projects to be taken up by NCRTC is under the Metro 
Railways (Construction of Works) Act 1978, the Railways Act 1989 and the Delhi 
Metro Railways (Operation and Maintenance) Act 2002 as amended through Metro 
Railways (Amendment) Act 2009. This legal framework was sanctioned by the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs for the formation of NCRTC in July 2013. 
Further, Ministry of Railways is the Central Government agency in relation to 
technical planning and safety of Metro Railways including RRTS.” 
 (ii) Policy Framework 
1.35 The Government of India formulated a National Urban Transport Policy in April, 2006. 
The objective of the policy is to ensure accessible, safe, affordable, quick, comfortable, reliable 
and sustainable mobility for all. The policy seeks to promote integrated land use and transport 
planning, greater use of public transport and non-motorized modes of travel and use of cleaner 
technologies. It offers Central Government’s financial support for investments in public 
transport. 
1.36 The Government of India has launched PM Gatishakti- A National Master plan for Multi-
Modal connectivity, essentially a digital platform to bring 16 Ministries including Railways and 
Roadways together for integrated planning and coordinated implementation of infrastructure 
connectivity projects. The Multi-modal connectivity will provide integrated and seamless 
connectivity for people, goods and services from one mode of transport to another. 

14 
 
1.37 The Committee have been informed that the RRTS projects are governed by the Metro 
Rail Policy 2017. The policy provides for setting up of Unified Metropolitan Transport Authority 
(UMTA) for integrated approach in planning and management of urban transport for States. 
UMTA has been assigned to prepare Comprehensive Mobility Plan for the city, organize 
investments in urban transport agencies, manage the Urban Transport Fund (UTF) etc. For all 
metro rail projects taken up with central assistance, it will be mandatory for the State 
Governments to give commitment to set up and operationalize UMTA in city within a year.  
 
1.38 As regards the status of setting up UMTA in Delhi, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and 
Rajasthan, the Ministry informed as under:- 
“The Delhi-Ghaziabad-Meerut RRTS corridor has been sanctioned by 
Government of India which passes through Delhi and Uttar Pradesh. However, 
UMTA has not been set up by the State Governments of National Capital 
Territory of Delhi and Uttar Pradesh. In this regard, Government of NCT of Delhi 
have informed that Draft Cabinet Note for setting up of UMTA has been mooted 
by them.” 
 
 (iii) Funding of RRTS Projects 
 
1.39 As regards the funding of RRTS Projects, the Ministry informed that projects like RRTS 
are highly capital intensive and have longer gestation period. Such projects are difficult to take up 
by private players without necessary support from Central and/or State Government(s). Some of 
the existing modes of funding are: 
 50:50 JV between GoI & State Government(s). 
 100% funding by GoI. 
 100% funding by State Government(s). 
 Public Private Partnership. 
1.40 The Ministry further informed that RRTS projects may cross the boundaries of more than 
one State and, therefore, the concerned States are supposed to contribute to its funding depending 
on the benefits expected to be reaped by the States. Further, Property Development may be one 
of the important sources for funding such projects. Concerned State Governments may consider 
providing land pieces at the stations and/or along the corridors, which can be monetize to partly 
fund the project. 
 

15 
 
V. STATUS OF PROGRESS AND ISSUES WITH VARIOUS CORRIDORS  
OF RRTS 
1.41 The eight identified Regional Rapid Transit System (RRTS) corridors are as under: 
i. Delhi-Ghaziabad-Meerut,  
ii. Delhi-Panipat, 
iii.  Delhi-Alwar,  
iv. Delhi-Faridabad-Ballabgarh-Palwal,  
v. Ghaziabad-Khurja,  
vi. Delhi-Bahadurgarh-Rohtak,  
vii. Ghaziabad-Hapur,  
viii. Delhi-Shahdra-Baraut, 
 
 
 
1.42 As regards the progress of various corridors of RRTS, the Ministry informed that the task 
force prioritized three corridors out of 8 corridors proposed in transport plan-2032, namely 
Delhi-Ghaziabad-Meerut, Delhi-Alwar and Delhi-Panipat. Out of these, Delhi-Meerut RRTS 
corridor has been sanctioned by Government of India. 


16 
 
(i) Delhi-Ghaziabad-Meerut Corridor  
1.43 The Committee have been apprised that the Delhi-Ghaziabad-Meerut corridor project 
received sanction on 7th March, 2019 while the construction commenced soon after on June 2019 
as pre construction activities and enabling works were undertaken in advance. RRTS Services 
commenced on October 20, 2023 when 17 km priority section of the corridor was inaugurated. 
This priority section with 5 stations spanning from Sahibabad to Duhai Depot is under 
commercial operations w.e.f. 21.10.2023. Another 17 km stretch from Duhai to Modinagar North 
was inaugurated on March 6, 2024. 
1.44 As regards the updated status regarding physical and financial progress of the Delhi-
Meerut Corridor, the Ministry has informed in the sitting of the Committee dated 13.11.2024 that 
the physical and financial Progress is around 80% and 75% respectively. The Ministry also 
informed that concerted efforts are being made to pre-pone the commissioning of entire corridor 
within scheduled completion date of June 2025. 
 (ii) Delhi-Gurugram-SNB Corridor 
1.45 Regarding Delhi-SNB Corridor, the Secretary, MoHUA in the sitting of the Committee 
dated 31.10.2023 informed as under:- 
“द ू सरा कॉįरडोर िदʟ ी एस एन बी आर आर टी एस कॉįरडोर है। उसका डीपीआर बन 
चुका है। इसमŐ हįरयाणा और राज˕ ान मŐ अपने योगदान क े  िलए किमटमŐट िकया है। 
अभी िदʟ ी सरकार से इसक े  फाइनœिशयल किमटमŐट का अŮूवल नहीं िमला है। इसकी 
टोटल लŐथ 107 िकलोमीटर है। इसका लगभग  71 ि क ल ो म ी ट र  ए ि ल व े ट े ड  ह ै ।  इ स  क ा  ल ं ब ा  
पोशŊन काफी अंडरŤाउंड है, Ɛ ो ं ि क यह िदʟ ी क े  उन जगहों पर है, जहां एिलवेटेड 
बनाना संभव नहीं है। इसमŐ भी  16 ː ेशंस ह ो ं ग े  औ र 70 िमनट मŐ यह द ू री पूरी होगी। 
इसकी भी फाइनœिशयल ː Ō Ɓįरंग िदʟ ी मेरठ जैसे ही है, िजसमŐ 20 Ůितशत भारत 
सरकार, 20 Ůितशत तीनों राǛ  सरकार और  60  Ůितशत मʐ ी ल े ट र ल  फ ं ि ड ं ग  क े  Ȫारा 
पैसा आएगा।“  
1.46 The Ministry also informed that as per recent judgment dated 24.07.2023, Hon’ble 
Supreme Court of India has directed GNCTD to make budgetary provision for Delhi-SNB 
corridor. Government of India vide letter dated 11.08.2023 had requested GNCTD to 
communicate their commitment for the corridor. Based on Hon’ble Supreme Court’s Judgment, 
GNCTD released an amount of Rs. 100 crore for Sarai Kale Khan (SKK) - SNB RRTS corridor. 
 

17 
 
1.47 However, subsequently, in the sitting of the Committee dated 13.11.2024, NCRTC 
informed that the said corridor has not been sanctioned and some fine tuning of the DPR is being 
done. Thereafter, the proposal will be sent to the Ministry for sanction.  
 
(iii) Delhi-Panipat Corridor 
1.48 Regarding Delhi-Panipat Corridor, the Secretary, MoHUA in the sitting of the Committee 
dated 31.10.2023 informed as under:- 
“तीसरा िदʟ ी-पानीपत आरआरटीएस कॉįरडोर है। इसकी लंबाई लगभग 103 
िकलोमीटर है। इसका डीपीआर बन गया है। हįरयाणा सरकार से उसका अनुमोदन भी 
हो गया है। इसमŐ लगभग 51 िकलोमीटर एिलवेटेड है और  11 िकलोमीटर का 
अंडरŤाउंड सेƕ न है। इसका क ु छ पोशŊन िदʟ ी मŐ और क ु छ पोशŊन पानीपत मŐ है। 
इसमŐ लगभग 17 ː ेशंस हœ। िदʟ ी मŐ छ: ː ेश ं स और हįरयाणा मŐ 11 ː ेशंस हœ। इसे भी 
हįरयाणा सरकार ने अनुमोदन कर िदया है, लेिकन जीएनसीटीडी का अŮूवल अवेटेड है। 
यह िमलेगा, तब सœƕन की ŮिŢया आगे बढ़ेगी।“ 
1.49 Regarding the updated status of the corridor, the Ministry in their reply dated 27.06.2024 
informed as under:- 
“DPR of the Delhi-Panipat RRTS Corridor was approved by NCRTC Board on dt: 
06-04-2020. Govt. of Haryana conveyed approval of DPR vide letter dt: 08-01- 
2021 and has released the amount of Rs. 5 Crores vide letter dt: 26-06-2018.  DPR 
was forwarded to GNCTD for approval on dt: 10-04-2020.” 
 
1.50 The Committee have been further apprised that in compliance to the directions of Hon’ble 
Supreme Court, Government of NCT of Delhi have sanctioned ₹50 crore on 21.12.2023 as per 
the schedule laid before the Hon’ble court. Further, GNCTD has provisioned ₹200 crore in 
Budget Estimate for 2024-25 towards Delhi-SNB and Delhi-Panipat RRTS corridors. However, 
the approval on the DPR and financial commitment towards the Delhi-Panipat RRTS corridor is 
pending from GNCTD. 
1.51 During the evidence sitting of the Committee held on 13.11.2024, NCRTC informed that 
some realignment and extension of the corridor to Karnal is being considered and NCRTC will 
submit the proposal to the Ministry.  
1.52 When asked about the reasons for reviewing DPR at such a late stage when financial 
contributions from States have already been obtained for the project, the Ministry informed as 
given: 

18 
 
“Metro project are cost intensive. Therefore, at appraisal stage an exercise is 
undertaken based on the experience gained in previous projects at appraisal stage 
to optimize the cost.” 
 (iv) Projected Operational Performance of  3 priority Corridors 
 
1.53 The Ministry was asked to furnish the projected operational performance of the three 
priority corridors. In response, the Ministry informed as given:- 
Corridors Delhi – Ghaziabad - 
Meerut 
Delhi – Gurugram- 
SNB 
Delhi - Panipat 
Expected 
capacity in 
terms of 
passenger per 
hour per 
direction 
(PPHPD) 
@ 6p/sqm – 40,000 
 
@ 6p/sqm –40,000 
@ 8p/sqm – 49,000 
@ 6p/sqm – 40,000 
@ 8p/sqm – 49,000 
Peak Hour 
Peak Direction 
Traffic 
(PHPDT)  
2024 – 19,444 
2031 – 22,215 
2041 – 26,462 
2031- 24,589 
2051 – 48,883  
2031- 17,142 
2051 – 26,651 
Expected 
Average Daily 
Ridership 
2024 - 7,95,516 
2031 – 9,19,612 
2041 - 11,35,530 
2031 - 10,95,087 
2051 – 19,37,846 
2031 – 8,00,758 
2051 – 12,50,335 
Daily 
Ridership 
Required for 
Breakeven 
Above ridership 
along with non-fare 
box revenue will be 
able to make it 
breakeven 
Above ridership 
along with non-fare 
box revenue will be 
able to make it 
breakeven 
Above ridership along 
with non-fare box 
revenue will be able to 
make it breakeven 
Expected 
Average Daily 
Earning 
2031 - 11.82 Cr 2031 - 14.189 Cr 2031 - 10.49 Cr 
 
VI. DELHI-GHAZIABAD-MEERUT CORRIDOR 
 
1.54 Considering the fact that the Delhi-Ghaziabad-Meerut corridor is the first prioritized 
corridor under the RRTS project which is partly operational and would act as a ‘light house’ 

19 
 
corridor for other proposed seven corridors, the Committee have in detail examined the various 
aspects and operational issues related with this corridor in subsequent paragraphs.   
(i) Salient features 
1.55 The Salient features of Delhi Meerut Corridor as informed by the Ministry are as under:- 
 
(a) The Delhi-Meerut RRTS corridor is 82.15 kms long corridor with 24 stations, which 
will cover the distance from Sarai Kale Khan in Delhi to Modipuram in Meerut in 
about 60 minutes (Currently, it takes more than 3 hours to commute from Delhi to 
Meerut). 
(b) The corridor will fill the void of regional connectivity serving key nodes with an inter 
station distance of 5-10km through a semi high speed services with 5-10 min 
frequency. 
 
(c) The alignment of this corridor has 68.03 km elevated and 14.12km underground. 
 
(d) System Specifications: 
(i) Design Speed: 180 kmph 
(ii) Operational Speed: 160 kmph 
(iii) Average Speed: 100 kmph 
(iv) Track Gauge: Standard Gauge (1435 mm) 
(v) Traction: 1 x 25 KV AC overhead catenary (OHE) 
(vi) Seating Arrangement: Economy and Business (1 coach per train) 
 
 (ii) Financing of Delhi- Meerut Corridors of RRTS 
 
1.56 As regards the funding of Delhi-Meerut Corridors of RRTS, the Ministry informed that 
the said corridor was sanctioned at a total project cost of Rs. 30,274 crores. The 20% of the 
project cost (excluding state taxes, government land and private sector participation) is being 
funded by Government of India. 20% of the project cost (excluding state taxes, government land 
and private sector participation) is being funded by participating States (namely Government of 
Uttar Pradesh and Government of NCT-Delhi). Remaining project cost (excluding state taxes, 
government land and private sector participation) is being funded from Multilateral Development 
Banks (MDBs) namely Asian Development Bank (USD 1049 million), New Development Bank 
(USD 418 million) and Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (USD 500 million). As regards the 
status of funds received, the Ministry informed that till 27.06.2024, the details of funds received 
are as under:- 

20 
 
 
Stakeholder 
Contribution 
expected,  
₹ Crore 
Funds received, as 
on 29 Feb 2024, ₹ 
Crore 
Government of India 5,872  4,066.65 
Government of NCT-Delhi 1,180  1,260.00 
Government of Uttar Pradesh 6,048  4,742.00 
Loan from ADB, AIIB, NDB (received as 
PTA from GoI) 16,904 11,360.00 
Private sector participation (AFC) 270  - 
Total 30,274 21,428.65 
 
1.57 The details of term and rate of interest of MDB loans signed by Government of India has 
been summarized at Annexure-III. The repayment of loan (ADB, NDB, AIIB) for Delhi-Meerut 
RRTS corridor is based on the principle of semi-annual annuitized repayments and repayment 
schedule is at Annexure-IV. As regards cheaper option of loan, the Ministry submitted as given: 
“Loan interest rate depends on various factors such as exchange rate, currency, 
geo political factors, tenure etc. These factors are very dynamic therefore interest 
rate fluctuates regularly. Loan with low interest rate in current scenario may prove 
to be costlier due to above factors. Therefore, it is not possible to indicate which is 
cheaper due to above factors.” 
 
(iii) Viability and Ridership of the Delhi-Meerut Corridor 
1.58 As regards the viability of the project, NCRTC informed that Financial Rate of Return is 
around 8% and economic rate of return is around 19%. As regards the query as to whether the 
project is service oriented or commercially oriented, the Ministry informed that the project has 
been approved on the basis of Economic rate of return and not on the basis of financial rate of 
return. 
 
1.59 In the DPR, the daily ridership is estimated to be around 8 lakh per day for the Delhi-
Meerut Corridor. The Ministry was requested to justify how RRTS will attain the ridership of 8 
Lakh per day given the fact that the Delhi Meerut expressway runs almost parallel with the 

21 
 
corridor. The corridor also faces competition with sub-urban/local trains which is much cheaper. 
In response, the Ministry submitted as given:- 
 
“एƛŮ ेसवे मŐ जो उसकी कनेİƃिवटी है और आरआरटीएस की जो कनेİƃ िवटी है और 
आरआरटीएस की जो िलंक े ज िवद मेटŌो िसː म,  िदʟ ी मेटŌो क े  साथ मŐ और द ू सरे मेटŌोज़ 
क े  साथ जो िलंक े ज आरआरटीएस का हो रहा है और साथ मŐ बीच-बीच मŐ जो ː ेशंस आ 
रहे हœ, उसक े  कारण जो कार से आने वाले लोग हœ और िजनको कहीं ऐसी जगह जाना है, 
जहाँ मेटŌो की रीचेिबिलटी नहीं है, उनकी बात छोड़ दीिजए। बाकी िदʟ ी मेटŌो िसː म क े  
साथ आरआरटीएस की जो कनेİƃिवटी है, I do not think expressway provides that 
connectivity, but certainly your point is valid that expressway does provide a 
competition to this line.”  
  
1.60 The Ministry during an evidence, further submitted: 
“There is an issue, which you said, that poor people will continue to use railways. 
This project has a high cost. How much should we do ticketing? What should be the 
fare between Delhi and Meerut? This is a very critical issue for us. When we took 
DMRC fare and applied it to RRTS, the fare between Delhi and Meerut came to  
Rs. 310. That is a bit high fare for poor people to pay every day. This is an issue 
which is bothering us also. Right now, it is a small stretch which has been 
inaugurated. Once all the stretches get inaugurated from Meerut to Delhi when they 
get completed, by that time, we have to address this issue of how do we get poor 
people to use it. Ǜ ादातर लोग जो मेरठ से िदʟ ी आते हœ, Ǜ ादातर गरीब लोग िदʟ ी 
आते हœ, िमड ल Ƒ ास भी आता है, लेिकन गरीब लोग Ǜ ादा आते हœ। गरीबों क े  िलए Ɛ ा 
फ े यर अŮोिŮएट होगा? अगर हम Ůोजेƃ  की ऑपरेशनल कॉː  भी įरकवर नहीं कर पाते 
हœ तो इस तरह क े  Ůोजेƃ ्स हमारे िलए आगे बनाना भी मुİʭल होगा।“ 
 
1.61 Regarding viability of the project, the Secretary, MoHUA informed as under:- 
 
“वॉयिबिलटी एक तो ओवर ए पीįरयड ऑफ टाइम होती है। िदʟ ी मेटŌो मŐ भी या द ू सरी मेटŌोज़ मŐ 
भी हमारा एƛ पीįरयंस है िक शुŝ  मŐ क ु छ पीįरयड मŐ, अभी तो यह लाइन शुŝ  नहीं Šई है, शुŝ  
होगी तब हमŐ एƪ ैƃ  राइडरिशप पता चलेगी। सभी मेटŌोज़ मŐ हमारा एƛ पीįरयंस यह रहा है 
िकओवर ए पीिडयड ऑफ टाइम राइडरिशप बढ़ती है। 
 
िदʟ ी मेटŌो मŐ दो इʴ ूज़ रहे हœ। हमने शुŝ  की िजतनी लाइɌ  बनाईं, वहां पर टŌैिफक बŠत Ǜ ादा 
रहा है। अभी भी वह बŠत ही ओवरŢाउडेड है, चाहे आप गुड़गांव की लाइन ले लŐ, चाहे Ȫारका-
नोयडा लाइन लŐ, इवेन शाहदरा वाली लाइन है, इन सब पर टŌैिफक बŠत Ǜ ादा है। जो नई लाइन 
बनी है, įरंगरोड, िपंक लाइनआिद, उसमŐ अभी राइडरिशप थोड़ी कम है। राइडरिशप शायद धीरे-
धीरे बढ़ेगी। क ु छ लाइɌ  मŐ राइडरिशप कम है, क ु छ मŐ बŠत Ǜ ादा है, लेिकन राइडरिशप धीरे-
धीरे बढ़ी है। आरआरटीएस मŐ जो आपका क ं सनŊ है, वह बŠत वैिलड क ं सनŊ है। वही क ं सनŊ हमारे 
िदमाग मŐ भी आता है िक राइडरिशप का Ɛ ा इʴ ू होगा? जैसे मœने जयपुर क े  क े स मŐ कहा िक 

22 
 
अलवर तक भी राइडरिशप िकतनी होगी, यह एक काफी बड़ा इʴ ू है। एƛŮ ेस-वे क े  साथ 
कांपटीशन तो है, आपकी बात सही है। जो इंिडयन रेलवे की रेगुलर पैसŐजर सिवŊस है, उसक े  साथ 
भी कांपटीशन है, Ɛ ोंिक वहां तो शायद पांच सौ Ŝपये मŐ एक महीने का पास बन जाता है।“ 
 
 
1.62 Since, the ridership of RRTS is expected to increase in future, the Ministry was requested 
to inform as to whether platforms have been designed to accommodate additional coaches as per 
requirement. In response, the Ministry informed that Delhi-Meerut Namo Bharat RRTS Corridor 
has been constructed for 9 coach train. Currently, 6 coach trains are being operated as per 
ridership.   
 
(iv) Fare Fixation Mechanism and Revenue/Ticketing 
 
(A) Fare Box Revenue 
 
1.63 A rational fare structure is essential not only to maintain commercial viability of RRTS 
but also to attain greater ridership.  As regards the query regarding the details of the fare fixation 
mechanism of RRTS and whether any study has been conducted before deciding the fare 
structure regarding the willingness/paying capacity of riders to pay extra fare for high frequency, 
comfortable sitting, air conditioning etc., which the RRTS offers., the Ministry informed as 
under:- 
(a) “Indian Institute of Management, Ahmadabad (IIMA) was engaged by NCRTC to 
carry out a detailed study which carried out the study in two phases. The IIM 
Ahmadabad conducted a comprehensive two-phase study for NCRTC to develop 
a fare structure for the Delhi Meerut RRTS and Meerut metro. Phase I involved 
comparing fare structures of metro systems in India and internationally, alongside 
other transport modes in the NCR, and devising strategies for ridership and 
revenue maximization. Phase II focused on developing a fare policy, including 
data collection, fare setting recommendations, and an indexation methodology, 
aiming to balance ridership growth and revenue.  
(b) A willingness to pay survey was conducted on bus stations, railway stations, and 
primary activity centres as part of the fare setting process for RRTS system. The 
SP survey was administered through a semi-structured questionnaire via random 
face-to-face data collection. Passengers travelling via various modes such as two-
wheeler, car, government bus, AC Volvo bus, AC chair car, AC sleeper, reserved 
chair car, reserved sleeper, unreserved sleeper, and EMU were interviewed for 
Delhi Meerut RRTS corridor. The survey design captured various socio-economic 
characteristics and journey details of the passengers. Further, the interviewee’s 
opinions were recorded to understand their preference for RRTS choice based on 

23 
 
six transport scenarios that compared the attributes of the existing travel mode, 
likely travel time, travel cost, and wait time, with that of a new travel mode of 
RRTS. Survey formats also captured willingness to pay for new features of RRTS 
such as AC and comfortable seating, premium class and other added services. The 
data was analysed to estimate the relationship between RRTS fare and 
commuters’ likelihood of choosing RRTS at various time and cost savings. 
Sensitivity analysis has been carried for revenue and ridership estimation at 
various RRTS fare levels which helped in finding the break-even point between 
revenue and ridership to set up the suitable fare for RRTS.” 
1.64 Regarding the comparative cost of travel by alternative modes of transport viz. the 
roadways, railways etc. between Meerut and Delhi, the Ministry informed as under:- 
Node Source-Destination Distance 
(KM) 
Fare 
(INR) 
Per KM 
Fare 
(INR) 
UPSRTC 
Janrath 
AC Bus 
Kausambi Bus Stand (Anand 
Vihar) to Meerut South (On Pro 
Rata Basis) 46.5 105 2.25 
Janshatbdi AC 
Chair car (Train No. 
12055) Ghaziabad to Meerut City 47.0 270 5.74 
Vande Bharat (Train 
No. 22457) Anand Vihar to Meerut City 60.0 399 6.65 
Taxi Normal 
Anand Vihar Namo Bharat 
Station to Meerut South Namo 
Bharat station 57.0 1067 18.72 
Taxi Premium 57.0 1578 27.68 
Car 
Anand Vihar Namo Bharat 
Station to Meerut South Namo 
Bharat station 57.0 658 11.54 
Namo Bharat Fare 
Anand Vihar Namo Bharat 
Station to Meerut South Namo 
Bharat station 44.3 130 2.93 
 
1.65 As regards the details of the expected fare box revenue, the Ministry informed that at the 
time of fare setting of Delhi-Meerut RRTS corridor, the estimated daily ridership of Delhi-
Meerut RRTS for the initial fare target year 2025-26 was considered with a ramp-up factor of 
25% and gradually increasing to 65% in FY 2033-34. This was considered as it would take time 
for India’s first RRTS system to stabilize, development of robust feeder system, TOD 
developments along the corridor, operationalization of RRTS Phase-I corridors in a phased 
manner, first/ last mile network expansion, including others.  
 

24 
 
(B) Non fare box revenue 
1.66 With regard to non fare box revenue, NCRTC have identified the following streams:- 
Station naming Rights Pre-fix or suffix brand name with the RRTS Station Name. 
Media Rights Indoor Advertisement, Outdoor Advertisement, In-train 
advertisement 
Property Development Commercialization of land parcels, Land Value Capture 
Telecom Telecom Tower, IBS (in building solution) 
Station areas Retail spaces, parking, PD floors/spaces, food and 
beverages 
Other Innovative Streams Consultancy works, EV charging stations, virtual stores, 
digital lockers, capacity building 
 
1.67 Regarding the details of the policies formulated and steps taken for increasing the Non-
Fare box Revenue, the Ministry informed as under:- 
(a)  “A Standard Operating Policy has been formulated to ease decision making for Real 
Estate Business, Retail Related Business, and Advertisement and IT Business. 
(b) A dedicated cell has been created for maximizing Alternate Revenue Sources and 
Value Capture Financing. This cell has a cross functional team comprising of 
Financial Managers, Marketing Specialists, Civil Engineers, Architects and Contract 
Specialists who work in close collaboration with rest of the organization to quickly 
identify and close Non-Box Fare Revenue Opportunities. 
(c) The dedicated Cell is supported by a team of external specialists comprising of 
International Property Consultants, Strategy Consultants, Technical and Legal 
Consultants. 
(d) For Real Estate Business, NCRTC has prepared a detailed corridor level strategy 
towards successful commercial development along the transit corridor. The corridor 
level strategy focuses on corridor level value enhancement rather than individual 
property level value maximization. 
(e)  NCRTC has been working closely with all the stakeholders including Urban 
Development Authorities to obtain necessary approvals to create encumbrance free 
opportunities to exploit private sector efficiency.” 
 
1.68 As regards the query as to whether the estimated revenue generated through fare and 
Non-fare box is expected to meet the operational expenditure and service the debt, the Ministry 
replied that in the fare setting exercise, it was estimated that fare box revenues of the system may 
be able to cover its operating costs (i.e. O&M costs excluding interest, depreciation, and grant 
amortization, but including contingencies and GST). However, it is only expected to meet  
28-36% of the total O&M costs in the FY 2025-26. 

25 
 
 (C) Ticketing 
1.69 As regards ticketing, NCRTC has informed that NCMC card will be used for ticketing in 
RRTS. Further, multiple payment channel viz. paper QR code, Digital QR code and EMV 
contactless card will also be used and for the purpose necessary tech infrastructure has been put 
in place in the priority corridor. Certain innovative steps have also been undertaken for 
Automatic Fare Collection for example the UPI-enabled Ticket Vending Machines (TVMs) at 
RRTS stations cater to all commuter ticketing needs, offering various payment options (cash, 
credit/debit cards, UPI, and NCMC wallet) for a smooth travel experience.  
 
1.70 The Committee have also been briefed that for purchasing Mobile QR tickets, NCRTC 
has launched an innovative ‘One Tap’ feature. Commuter (after arriving at a RRTS origin 
station) only need to press once the ‘One Tap’ feature in mobile app and unique QR is generated 
at origin station and at whichever station, commuter exits through AFC gate, the fare would be 
automatically deducted from digital wallet. Further, OD Selection has been introduced wherein 
passengers can book the tickets by selecting the origin and destination stations and making the 
payment. 
 
 (v) Transit Oriented Development (TOD) 
 
(A) TOD Development on the Corridor in Delhi  
1.71 Transit oriented Development aims to promote planned and sustainable urban centers 
with high density, mixed land-use development within an influence zone of 500-800 meters of 
mass transit stations, thereby increasing the ridership of the transit facility and improving the 
economic and financial viability of the system.  As regards, TOD in Delhi on Delhi-Meerut 
Route, the Ministry informed a under: 
“Upon the request of Delhi Development Authority, NCRTC undertook the 
preparation of Influence Zone Plan (IZP) for 3 nodes under the Delhi TOD Policy, 
viz. Jangpura RRTS Station, Sarai Kale Khan-Nizamuddin Multi-modal transit hub 
and Karkardooma & Anand Vihar Multi-modal transit hub (taken together). The 
final IZP for Jangpura has been submitted to DDA and awaits approval. 
Coordination with DDA towards finalization and approval of these IZPs is 
ongoing.” 
(B) TOD development on the Corridor in Uttar Pradesh 

26 
 
1.72 As regards TOD development along RRTS corridor in Uttar Pradesh on Delhi-Meerut 
Route, the Ministry informed as given: 
“The State cabinet of GOUP has approved and notified TOD policy on 24 Aug 
2022. The said policy provides for application of TOD provisions in the ‘TOD 
Zones’ of the Delhi - Ghaziabad - Meerut RRTS corridor and TOD shall be 
applicable in the radial Influence Zones of 1.5 km from the RRTS stations and the 
4 Special Development Areas (SDAs) and have been incorporated in the Master 
plans (2031) of Ghaziabad and Meerut. The Meerut Master plan was notified on 
09.02.2024 and the Ghaziabad Master plan has been finalized by the GDA Board 
and awaits State Government notification. Further, GDA and MDA have 
delegated responsibility of preparation of TOD based Zonal Development Plans 
for the RRTS TOD Zones to NCRTC. Works in respect of the same are ongoing 
in coordination with the Development Authorities.” 
 
1.73 As regards the steps being taken for optimization of land use and commercial exploitation 
of Depots in Duhai and Modipuram on the Delhi Meerut Corridor, the Ministry informed as 
given: 
“NCRTC has planned to develop the depots on principles of Transit Oriented 
Development (TOD). This will allow for optimum land utilization and 
Commercial Exploitation while also helping in attracting increased ridership for 
the Namo Bharat Trains. NCRTC also worked with the Ghaziabad Development 
Authority and Meerut Development Authority to delineate these Depots as TOD 
Zones in the Master plan of Ghaziabad and Meerut. In the Master plan of 
Ghaziabad Development Authority and Meerut Development Authority, the land 
use of the Depots has been changed to Transportation. Land use of Transportation 
under UP TOD Policy allows for a development mix comprising of Residential, 
Commercial, Transportation and Retail. Further, to provide ease of access, both 
these Depots have a functional Passenger Station, which improves the opportunity 
for commercial exploitation. For Duhai Depot NCRTC has carried out extensive 
stakeholder interaction to identify a potential use which would result in optimum 
commercial exploitation.” 
 
(vi) Last Mile Connectivity and Multi Modal Integration 
 
1.74 The Ministry has informed that for improving the last mile connectivity, catchment area 
of RRTS will be connected with various feeder modes. Walking track upto 500 mtr., cycling 
zone upto 1 km, provision for bike taxi/scooter rental, electric rickshaw and shared auto for 
connectivity upto 3 km and Auto Rickshaw, Taxi/Car rental, shuttle bus for long distance travel 
are to be made.  
 

27 
 
1.75 As regards the query regarding details of physical infrastructure which is already in place 
and the timeline by which the remaining portion (if any) will be completed, the Ministry 
informed as under:- 
(a) “For improvement of multimodal integration and walkability around stations, 
NCRTC has already constructed footpaths in the vicinity of the stations.  
(b) Electric buses operated by Ghaziabad City Transport Services Ltd. (GCTSL) 
are integrated at 4 RRTS stations of the operational section of Delhi – Meerut 
RRTS Corridor. These buses operating on 7 routes are providing feeder 
connectivity to RRTS passengers from various areas of Ghaziabad. Bus stops 
of these routes are introduced in RRTS station pockets at each location. 
(c) Regarding Para-transit services, while sufficient number of e-Rickshaws & 
Autos are already registered in both cities, NCRTC is engaging with private 
operators to deploy Bike Taxi, Bicycle sharing, E-Autos, Taxi and shuttle 
Buses. Partnership has been made by issuing Letter of Award/MoUs signing 
with 3 feeder operators namely ETO, Rapido and Speed Trip (P) Ltd to 
provide of Electric Autos, Bike Taxi, & Cabs from Stations between 
Sahibabad – Duhai section of Delhi – Meerut RRTS Corridor. 
(d) Engagement is being done with City Transport Services Ltd. for feeder bus 
routes operation from RRTS stations. On request of NCRTC, State Transport 
Authority (Govt. of Uttar Pradesh) had approved and notified 17 feeder bus 
routes with 114 buses to/from 5 operational stations of priority section 
between (including) Sahibabad RRTS Station and Duhai Depot RRTS 
Stations.  
(e) NCRTC has included station design elements to support infrastructure and 
providing ample parking space, pick & drop for intermediate public transport 
(IPT) at stations to enable first/last mile connectivity.” 
 
1.76 Regarding the Status of Multimodal Integration of Delhi-Meerut RRTS with various 
modes of transport, the Ministry informed the following: 
Modes MMI 
Metro Rail Systems Delhi Metro: Ghaziabad, Anand Vihar, New Ashok Nagar, 
SKK 
Meerut Metro: At Begumpul 
Indian Railways Hazrat Nizamuddin & Anand Vihar 
ISBTs Sarai Kale Khan, Anand Vihar 
Other Bus Terminal/Depot Kaushambi Bus Depot, Sahibabad Bus Adda, Ghaziabad 
New Bus Adda, Muradnagar Bus Stand, Bhaisali Bus Adda 
Roads Ring Road, Eastern Peripheral Expressway, Delhi-Meerut 
Expressway 

28 
 
 
1.77 Further explaining the manner in which Multimodal integration has been achieved, the 
Ministry in the sitting dated 13.11.2024 has informed as under:- 
“मʐ ी मॉडल इंटीŤेशन हमारा एक बŠत बड़ा Ůयास रहा है िक जो िडफरŐट मोड्स ऑफ 
टŌांसपोटőशन है, चाहे वहमेटŌो हो, चाहे बसेस हों, चाहे रेलवे ː ेशɌ  हों या ऑटोįरƕ ाज़ हो, उनको 
हमने एक साथ लाने की कोिशश की है। जैसे सराय काले खां ː ेशन की ओर हम जाते हœ तो वहां 
पर िनजामुȞीन रेलवे ː ेशन भी है, बस ːœड भी है तो हमने उन सबको जोड़ा है। जहां पर द ू री 
Ǜ ादा है,  उनको िŰजेस से या टŌेवलेटसŊ क े  माȯ म से जोड़ने की कोिशश कर रहे हœ। उसी तरह 
से आनंद िवहार मŐ भी ऐसा ही िकया जा रहा है। सभी ː ेशɌ  पर हमारा यही Ůयास है। बस 
ऑपरेटसŊ से भी, जो यूपी एįरयाज़ मŐ चलते हœ, उनसे हमने मीिटंƺ  की है िक आप हमसे पैरेलल मŐ 
न चलकर, कॉİɼ िटशन मŐ न चलते Šए ऐसी जगहों को फीड करŐ, जहां पर बस की सिवŊसेज़ नहीं 
है। वे हमसे सहमत Šए हœ। गवनŊमŐट ऑफ यूपी ने 17 नए बस क े  ŝ ट्स भी नोिटफाई िकए है। 
अगर इस ˠ ाइड मŐ देखŐ तो सराय काले खां आरआरटीए सː ेशन है और राइट मŐ जाकर हजरत 
िनजामुद ्  दीन रेलवे ː ेशन है। मेटŌो ː ेशन भी वहीं पर है और रेलवे ː ेशन भी है। हम लोगों ने 
सबको जोड़ िदया है। उसमŐ चाहे एˋ े लेटर लगाना हो या िलɝ  लगानी हो, चाहे टŌेवलेटर लगाना 
हो, एफयूबी बनाना हो, सब Ůयास िकया है, िजससे एक सीमलैस कनेİƃिवटी हो।“ 
 
 (vii) Safety Measures, Medical facilities and accessibility 
 
(A) Safety and Security 
1.78 Regarding the safety and security measures, particularly for female passengers,  
undertaken or proposed to be undertaken in and around the RRTS network, the Ministry 
informed as under:- 
(a) “Security of the RRTS network has been entrusted to UPSSF under the 
supervision of the Commandant 5th Battalion UPSSF. The Government of UP 
shall bear the expenditure on the deployment of security staff. UPSSF staff has 
been deployed approximately 8 meters before AFC gates. 
(b)  All commuters are checked, frisked, and their baggage subjected to inspection 
through XBIS. At each Security Checkpoint (SCP), a female police constable 
has been deployed for frisking and checking, if necessary, based on indications 
given by DFMD. One Ladies Frisking Booth (LFB) has been placed at each 
SCP to ensure privacy of female commuters. In addition to the staff deployed 
at the security check points. 
(c)  UPSSF has deployed one personnel for CCTV monitoring at each station and 
one-armed guard inside BP Morcha at each SCP al under the supervision of 
Sub Inspector of Police. QRT, consisting of one SI and three subordinates all 
armed, is deployed to handle any contingency and for regular patrolling. 
(d) Namo Bharat trains have a dedicated women’s coach on every train. To ensure 
safe and comfortable regional travel for women the second coach is reserved 

29 
 
for women. Additionally, 10 seats are also reserved for women in other 
coaches of the train. 
(e) CCTV cameras have been installed in vulnerable areas, including lifts and 
around the station premises and in RRTS train sets for 24/7 monitoring, and 
security personnel have been deployed to monitor various movement at the 
OCC as well as the station to enhance safety. 
(f) To make end to end journeys of commuters safe and reliable, well-lit station 
pickup and drop off areas have been created on the stations.” 
1.79 As regards the query as to whether security has been provided inside the trains, the 
Ministry informed as under:- 
“There is a provision. If some passenger has some problem, he will push that 
button. His photo will come to the driver's console and he or she can talk to driver 
and adequate action can be taken. The driver can then convey to the central 
control that if someone is misbehaving with a lady passenger, then she can convey 
the message to the driver.”  
1.80 The Delhi-Meerut Corridor of RRTS passes through dense urban areas at many places 
having residential building, hospital, offices and other public infrastructure. Hence, Ministry was 
asked to provide the information as to whether sound barriers have been installed by RRTS in 
such places, the Ministry informed as under:- 
“The Sound barrier has not been installed by NCRTC in Delhi-Meerut Namo 
Bharat Corridor till date. However, as per the requirement envisaged in the 
proposed Namo Bharat Stabling line alignment traverses through the Sidhartha 
Extension Pocket-C Residential Complex at New Delhi, a stretch of approx. 
length of 125 meters of viaduct has been planned with the installation of noise 
barrier.” 
1.81 Regarding steps taken for safety of passengers on various modes of transportation 
providing last mile connectivity, the Ministry informed as follows:- 
“NCRTC is making provisions of feeder/last mile connectivity either through 
local city transport corporations (Ghaziabad City Transport Services Ltd, DTC 
etc) or through MOU with private operators. All feeder operators have to comply 
with local regulatory requirements related to safety.  However, at Namo Bharat 
stations NCRTC has made several initiatives to enhance safety of passengers such 
as provision of CCTV Cameras, adequate lighting arrangement etc. NCRTC is 
also working on various safe initiatives such as providing pink auto rickshaw for 
women from stations, Emergency button is also provided in the mobile App.” 
 (B) Medical Facility 
1.82 With regard to the Medical facilities, the Ministry informed as under:- 

30 
 
“हरेक ː ेशन पर फːŊ एड की सुिवधा है। इसक े  साथ ही, हर ː ेशन क े  िनयरेː  हॉİ˙टʤ  हœ, 
उनक े  साथ टाई-अप है िक अगर कभी भी ऐसी आवʴ कता हो, तो तुरंत उनसे कांटैƃ  िकया 
जाए और उनकी एɾ ुलŐस क े  Ȫारा हम ʩİƅ  को ले जा सकŐ।“ 
1.83 Regarding the distance between the station and the hospital, the Ministry informed that 
on an average, the distances are less than 10 kilometres. As regards first aid in case someone get 
stroke or heart attacks, the Ministry informed the Committee that their staff are trained in CPR.  
 
1.84 To the query of having para-medical staff and small CPR machine, the Ministry stated 
replied: 
“It is not there today. We can examine this.” 
 (C) Accessibility 
1.85 RRTS is mostly an elevated rail network. Hence, easy and convenient accessibility to 
platform is crucial for wider adoption of the system by cross section of society. In respect of the 
query regarding the steps taken/ proposed to be taken for easy accessibility of old, infirm, 
patients, pregnant women and children, the Ministry informed the following:- 
“NCRTC is committed to providing state-of-the-art infrastructure for its commuters 
and the concept of universal accessibility is adopted in its corridors. Towards this, 
following provisions have been made- 
(a) ramps with handrails, tactile path and warning strips for vision impaired 
persons; bright colour contrast for low vision persons;  
(b) large lettering and information displays and signage;  
(c) lifts with lowered control panel with Braille and raised control buttons and 
auditory signals, wide doors and grip rails on the side walls of the elevator 
car;  
(d) resting areas for senior citizens and disabled persons; well-lit corridors;   
(e) widened ticket gate to accommodate wheelchair users have been planned at 
Stations.  
(f) Inside coaches, reserved seats for old and physically challenged, audio 
announcement with dynamic display and sensory door closing mechanism 
have also been planned.  
(g) Audio and visual indications are provided during the opening and closing 
processes of the Platform Screen Door (PSD). One PSD earmarked for 
physically challenged individuals on each platform, located close to the 
nearest lift and directed by a tactile path, have been provided with higher 
frequency audio and visual chimes. 

31 
 
(h) RRTS trains have been specially designed to carry a stretcher at specified 
location in a coach along with enabling RRTS station infrastructure to cater to 
the medical emergencies. 
(i) Lifts & Escalators have been provided from Ground to Concourse and 
Concourse to Platform for the differently abled and elderly passengers in 
order to provide step free vertical movement at its stations.  
(j) Wheelchairs and stretchers are available at all the stations for the passengers 
in need; also, an earmarked space for wheelchairs and stretcher has been 
provided in each train.  
(k) Dedicated parking areas for the differently abled passengers have been 
provided in the parking lots. 
(l) A tactile path has been provided for easy access of the station to blind 
passengers. Also, ramps with a dedicated tactile path to negotiate all level 
differences have been provided. 
(m) RRTS stations also have provisions for nursing rooms and separate toilets for 
women & differently abled. Further the female rest rooms are also equipped 
with Sanitary Pad Vending Machine and Diaper Change Station.  
(n) Help points have been provided on the Concourse from which the passenger 
may call SCR/OCC in case of any emergency. 
(o) Train attendants are available inside the train in order to guide the passengers 
during normal and emergency scenarios.  
(p) Customer Facilitation Agents (CFAs) are available at the stations for crowd 
management and helping commuters whenever required.”  
 
(viii) Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
 
1.86 An efficient and fast grievance redressal is one of the pre-requisites of the public 
transportation system. In this regard, the Ministry informed that for complaint redressal, Namo 
Bharat has following 3 modes: 
    “Helpline no.08069651515 
    Email Id- customercare@ncrtc.in 
Complaint logbook kept at all stations. 
Further, 05 day timeline is prescribed for redressal of any complaint.” 
 
 (ix) Environmental Benefits  
1.87 RRTS projects have the potential to reduce environmental pollution both directly and 
indirectly. By installing solar panels, better station design to reduce energy consumption, etc. it 
can directly lessen environmental pollution. Indirectly, RRTS projects may reduce vehicles on 
road thereby impacting environment positively.  

32 
 
1.88 As regards the sources of power and energy conservation methods adopted/proposed to 
be adopted on various lines of RRTS, the Ministry informed as given: 
“NCRTC is currently sourcing the power from State Distribution Companies 
(DISCOMs) in Delhi and Uttar Pradesh. The energy conservation measures 
employed/adopted on Delhi-Meerut RRTS corridor include regenerative braking 
features in Rolling Stock and lifts. Further, energy efficient electrical M&Ps, air 
conditioning systems including, lighting fixtures, etc. are being used. Open and 
energy efficient stations with natural ventilation have been planned and constructed 
with the aim of saving energy in respect of lighting and ventilation thereby 
lowering the operating cost. Saving of approximately 30,000 units of electricity per 
annum per elevated RRTS station has been anticipated.” 
1.89 Regarding the steps being taken by RRTS for solar power generation on the rooftop of 
stations, depots and other possible areas, the Ministry informed that NCRTC has planned 
provision of 11 MWp solar capacity on its roof top spaces of RRTS Stations, Depots & electrical 
receiving sub-stations. These projects are being executed under Renewable Energy Service 
Company (RESCO) model wherein NCRTC will only pay the cost of energy generated from 
these solar plants. 
1.90 The Ministry has also informed: 
“An Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) study for Delhi - Ghaziabad - Meerut 
RRTS corridor was carried out as per Asian Development Bank Safeguard Policy 
Statement 2009. The EIA report includes an Environment Management Plan (EMP) 
to mitigate negative impacts during project execution and RRTS project 
advantages. As per the traffic studies carried out, over the 29 year design life of the 
Delhi-Meerut RRTS project from 2025 until 2054, there will be a net reduction of 
about 7.4 million tons of carbon-di-oxide with an average reduction of over 
2,58,000 tons per annum.” 
 
1.91 Regarding the steps taken for registration for carbon credits and rating of stations of 
RRTS by Indian Green Building Council (IGBC), the Ministry informed as under: 
“NCRTC has engaged agency for registration of carbon credit for the project. The 
said agency is in process of registration of carbon credit for the project of Delhi 
Meerut Namo Bharat Corridor.”  
 
1.92 Regarding IGBC rating, the Ministry briefed as given: 
“NCRTC has taken various measures right from energy efficient design till 
operation stage including during construction activities, waste management, water 
conservation measures, use of energy efficient systems etc. Systems and 
subsystems have been implemented in line with highest IGBC certification 
(Platinum rating) for all establishments like Stations, RSS, Depot Building etc.” 

33 
 
 
 (x) Promotion of Make in India in RRTS 
1.93 Regarding promotion of Make in India in RRTS, the Ministry informed that one of the 
endeavors of RRTS is to promote indigenization of various sub systems of RRTS viz. Rolling 
stock, signaling, Tele communication, Civil, Electrical and Mechanicals etc. RRTS rolling stock 
is the first in India certified for providing high speed (design/operating speed of 180/160 kmph). 
100% trainsets for RRTS are being manufactured at Savli, in Gujarat under (Make in India) MiI 
guidelines of DPIIT, Government of India (GOI). The train sets have been designed at the Global 
Engineering and Technology Centre, Hyderabad and the Propulsion System for the trains has 
also been developed in the country. 
1.94 Platform Screen Doors (PSDs) have been designed and developed indigenously for the 
first time in the country by NCRTC in partnership with Bharat Electronics Limited (BEL) and a 
complete set has been installed at one platform of Duhai Depot. This development is aiming to 
minimize the dependence on foreign vendors. 
 
1.95 As regards the query as to whether any separate study has been undertaken to quantify 
the Cost reduction, due to promotion of Make in India, the Ministry answered in negative. 
 (xi) Benchmarking 
1.96 RRTS is one of its kind project in India. However, Benchmarking with similar systems is 
an essential for enhancing the performance and undertaking the best practices. As regards 
Benchmarking exercise of RRTS with other regional transportation system developed across the 
world, the Ministry informed the Committee as given: 
“The global best practices are being implemented in Namo Bharat RRTS corridor. 
However, as of now, only Delhi-Ghaziabad-Meerut RRTS project has been 
sanctioned and is under implementation.  Further, the cost of project depends on 
local factors like technology availability, manpower etc. Hence, when a suitable 
number of RRTS project is approved & operational, then, if need is felt, a 
Benchmarking exercise for RRTS projects can be performed.”   
 
 (xii) Data and Details of Accident 
1.97 Regarding the details of accidents taken place so far during construction and/or operation 
of Delhi-Meerut corridor of RRTS, the Ministry informed that a total of five fatal accidents 
occurred during construction phase of Delhi-Meerut corridor of RRTS. 

34 
 
 
1.98 With regard to the mechanism adopted for grievance redressal of the victim, payment of 
compensation and the time frame for the same, the Ministry answered as under: 
“In case of accidents of employees including contract workers, compensation is 
regulated as per Employees Compensation Act, 1923. In addition, a Labour 
Welfare Fund has also been created to provide financial relief in cases of Death 
and Total/Partial disability. Further compensation is also provided to third party in 
cases of Death/Permanent incapacitation of victims/families of victims on account 
of accident due to negligence and/or unforeseen causes in the course of 
provisioning of Public Services.” 
 
VII EXPANSION OF RRTS NETWORK 
 
1.99 There are many urban centers especially the big metro cities like Mumbai, Kolkata, 
Bangalore, Chennai, Hyderabad etc. in the country who see a large influx of people for 
employment, business, leisure and other activities. With regard to the query as to whether 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) is planning to expand the RRTS network in 
and around such major towns and cities, The Ministry informed as under:-  
 
“हमŐ ː ेट गवनŊमŐट से Ůपोजल आना चािहए। चूंिक इसे मेटŌो एƃ  मŐ करते हœ िजस रीजन ने डेवलप 
करना है there should be Metro and there should be ridership और राǛ  सरकार को उस 
एįरया को मेटŌोपोिलटन एįरया िडƑ ेयर करना पड़ेगा। Then, they should come up with their 
proposal.” 
 
1.100 Further, explaining the point, the Ministry informed that in Delhi, DMRC has got a 
network of around 400 kilometers. Once that kind of strong network is available in the heart of 
the city, then these systems are very efficient. If a person is coming from a satellite town, he 
would like to be connected with some other Metro system to reach his working place. Secretary, 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs clarified that the mandate of the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs is to provide connectivity in the Metropolitan areas of the city while the inter city 
connectivity is the subject of Indian Railways. 
 
1.101 Regarding the query as to whether RRTS can be built outside NCR region or not, 
Secretary, MoHUA in the sitting dated 31.10.2023 informed as under: 
 
“अगला इʴ ू था िक एनसीआर रीजन से बाहर आर आर टी एस जा सकती है या नहीं? मœ बताना 
चाšंगा िक आर आर टी एस िसफŊ एन सी आर रीजन के  िलए ही नहीं बनाई गई है। यह टŌेन कहीं 
भी बनाई जा सकती है। मुंबई रीजन मŐ भी बनाई जा सकती है। जयपुर भी जा सकती है।कोई भी 

35 
 
Ůोजेƃ  करने क े  िलए हमŐ यह देखना होगा िक उसकी राइडरिशप िकतनी एƛ पेƃ ेड है, Ɛ ा 
कॉː  है और Ɛ ा बेिनिफट्स हœ।“  
 
1.102 With regard to the query as to whether NCRTC can function outside NCR region, the 
Secretary in the sitting dated 31.10.2023 informed as under:- 
 
“एक तो टैİƋकल इʴ ू है िक एनसीआरटीसी एनसीआर रीजन के  बाहर जा सकता है या नहीं जा 
सकता है? लेिकन भारत सरकार, on a larger scale, क ु छ भी सœƕन कर सकती है। राǛ  
सरकारŐ और भारत सरकार अगर चाहे तो कानून भी बदल सकते हœ और क ु छ भी, कहीं भी 
सœƕन िकया जा सकता है। यिद मुंबई एįरया मŐ यह लगता है िक वहां भी आरआरटीएस बननी 
चािहए या बŐगलुŜ रीजन मŐ, चेɄई रीजन मŐ बननी चािहए, तो बनाई जा सकती है।“ 
 
1.103 Jewar airport is going to become operational soon. The airport is built mainly to provide 
another alternative airport to people residing in NCR. The Committee noted that expanding the 
RRTS network from Ghaziabad to Jewar will go a long way in not only providing smooth 
connectivity to Jewar for the people living in NCR but also improve the passenger foot print and 
sustainability of RRTS. To a query as to whether NCRTC is considering connectivity of Delhi 
Meerut Corridor of RRTS with Jewar Airport, the Ministry informed as under:- 
“we have received one proposal from NCRTC, which is connecting Ghaziabad 
with Jewar airport. That proposal we have recently received. We are appraising 
that project and we are examining how much it will be beneficial for the public 
and how much the best kind of connectivity can be provided with Delhi, 
Ghaziabad, and future connectivity that it should match with our future plans.” 
 
VIII ENGAGEMENT OF PRIVATE SECTOR FOR FUTURE RRTS PROJECTS 
 
1.104    The Memorandum of understanding (MoU) of NCRTC states that the plan of RRTS 
projects needs to be implemented in phases keeping in view the scarcity of resources. MOU 
further provides for inducting Private entrepreneurs at a subsequent stage, if considered desirable. 
NCRTC was requested to clarify whether they are planning to engage Private entrepreneurs in 
future RRTS projects. The reply furnished is as under: 
“NCRTC has engaged private parties in Delhi-Ghaziabad-Meerut Namo Bharat 
Corridor for comprehensive Operation & Maintenance activities for a period of 12 
years, maintenance activities of Rolling Stock for a period of 15 years. Further, 
maintenance of Automatic Fare Collection (AFC) system has also been taken up 
under PPP Hybrid Annuity Model (HAM) for a period of 10 years. Similarly, 
NCRTC is inclined to engage private sector in future Namo Bharat Corridor 
projects also.” 
 

36 
 
1.105 Regarding the approach adopted by NCRTC with regard to participation of private sector, 
the Ministry informed as under:- 
“At Sarai Kale Khan station, we have constructed foundation for two buildings fit 
for six storey. So, we have constructed only the foundation but then in PPP mode, 
whosoever wants to come based on open bidding, then he can come and construct 
six storey two buildings. In that way, we will also earn and that guy will also 
recover his money. So, this kind of approach, we are trying to follow 
everywhere.” 
******* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

37 
 
PART II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
Recommendation No.1 
Need  to plan big Metro cities in regional context and expansion of RRTS  
The Committee note that considerable rise in population of Delhi and its 
adjoining areas resulted in problems of land, housing, transportation, pollution etc. 
and necessitated planning of Delhi in regional context which led to development of 
regional and functional plan including the Transport plan 2032. The Committee 
also note that the transport plan 2032 contributed significantly towards 
development and improvement of many expressways, highways, roads and forms 
the basis for RRTS in India. 
Looking at the estimated current and projected population data of metro 
cities namely Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Hyderabad, Bangalore etc. and the 
problem of insufficient infrastructure, congestion and pollution grappling them, the 
Committee are of the opinion that there is a need to plan these cities in the regional 
context to promote balanced and harmonized development and make them 
sustainable. The Committee are also of the view that fulfillment of the ambitious 
goal of Viksit Bharat by 2047 will be closely linked with the efficiency of the 
transport system moving people and goods for various socio-economic activities. 
Thus, modern transportation solution like the RRTS is the need of the hour so as to 
enable people to live in sub-urban areas adjoining these big cities while remaining 
connected to modern healthcare, educational, research, entertainment facilities and 
opportunities of trade and employment thus increasing their productivity and 
ensure their social and mental well being.   
Regarding the need to plan these cities in regional context, the Committee 
were apprised by the Ministry that urban planning is a State subject and therefore 
respective State Governments are responsible for planning, initiating and 
developing urban transport infrastructure. The Central Government considers 
financial assistance for Metro Rail proposals in cities and urban agglomerates based 

38 
 
on the feasibility of the proposals and availability of resources, as and when posed 
by the concerned State Government. 
In this regard, the Committee feel that the role of Central Government 
cannot be confined only to providing financial assistance to State Governments. 
Policy decision on regional planning ought to be taken at the Centre level who have 
an important mandate of urban transport planning and therefore impetus from the 
Ministry for such initiative is needed.   
With regard to expansion of RRTS network in various cities, the Committee 
were informed that interventions like RRTS are suitable in cities having strong 
metro network providing connectivity to various places in the heart of the city.     
    In this connection, the Committee are of the view that RRTS projects are 
of long gestation period. Further, cities like Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Hyderabad, 
Bangalore have expanding metro network. Thus, by the time, RRTS projects are 
finalized, there will be strong metro networks in these cities to supplement future 
RRTS projects. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend:- 
(i) Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) to exhort and 
persuade the respective State Governments to plan big metro cities 
like Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Bangalore and Hyderabad in 
regional context and prepare detailed regional and functional plans 
including transport plan for future regional development to meet the 
transportation needs of these cities. 
 
(ii) Subject to preparation of such detailed transport plan by the 
concerned State Government, MoHUA may consider RRTS projects 
based on the proposal received from the State Government, financial 
commitment, feasibility study and other relevant facts. A proper 
roadmap is required to be prepared in this direction. 
 
 

39 
 
 
Recommendation No.2 
Timely preparation of Regional and Functional Plan for NCR region 
 
The Committee note that National Capital Region Planning Board (NCRPB) 
prepared a Regional Plan with the perspective year 2021 for the National Capital 
Region (NCR) that was notified on 17.09.2005. The plan provides a model for 
sustainable and balanced development of urban and rural settlements to improve 
quality of life as well as a rational regional land use pattern in NCR. Thereafter, as 
envisaged in Regional Plan 2021, various functional and sub-regional plans 
including transport plan with the perspective year 2032 were prepared which led to 
development of transportation infrastructure in and around NCR including RRTS.  
The Committee further note that the period of the said regional plan has 
completed in the year 2021. However, the draft Regional Plan 2041 is yet to be 
approved and till the final approval of Regional Plan 2041, the current Regional 
plan will remain valid. Further, advance preliminary work for the preparation of 
various Functional plans including transport will be finalized once the Regional 
Plan-2041 is approved. 
The Committee are of the view that meticulous and advance planning is 
required for timely and appropriate intervention by the Urban developmental 
agencies in addressing the issues arising out of rapid urbanization and bridge the 
infrastructural gaps important for making the urban sprawl sustainable and 
economically viable especially for mega cities that are growth engines of our 
country. The Committee also feel that advance transportation plan is all the more 
important because of its multiplier effect on the economy. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs (MoHUA) to finalize and notify draft Regional Plan 2041 for Delhi-NCR at 
the earliest and direct NCRPB to expeditiously prepare and finalize the various 
functional plans including the transport plan. 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
Recommendation No.3 
Extending the mandate of NCRTC to undertake transport projects outside NCR 
The Committee note that the mandate of National Capital Region Transport 
Corporation (NCRTC) is to undertake overall development of commuter Rail, 
related Roads, bus services etc. to improve connectivity in NCR region only. The 
Committee appreciate the fact that in addition to spearheading the implementation 
of Delhi-Meerut RRTS corridor, NCRTC have also undertaken various other 
projects viz. providing Meerut Metro services on RRTS infrastructure, relocation of 
bus terminal and depot, extensive multi-modal integration, preparation of Transit 
oriented development (TOD) plans, etc. have developed expertise in planning and 
execution of complex infrastructure projects, transport modelling and efficient 
project management.  
 The Committee feel that there is a need to leverage the capacity and 
expertise of NRCTC in other parts of the country for catering to the regional 
transportation requirement in particular and other appropriate transport solution 
in general.  
The Committee, therefore recommend that through appropriate legislative 
instrument, the mandate of NCRTC be extended in regions other than NCR for 
creation of comprehensive integrated multi-modal suburban commuter 
transportation system. 
Recommendation No.4 
Setting up of Unified Metropolitan Transport Authority (UMTA) 
 
The Committee observe that RRTS projects are being implemented under 
the Metro Rail Policy 2017. The policy provides for setting up of Unified 
Metropolitan Transport Authority (UMTA) to facilitate coordinated planning, 
implementation of Urban Transport programs & projects and integrated 
management of the Urban Transport System. For all metro rail projects taken up 
with central assistance, it will be mandatory for State Government to set up and 
operationalize UMTA within a year. The Committee have been apprised that 

41 
 
UMTA has not been set up by the State Governments of National Capital territory 
of Delhi and Uttar Pradesh where RRTS projects are under implementation along 
with the Metro projects although Draft Cabinet Note for setting up of UMTA has 
been mooted by Govt. of NCT of Delhi. 
The Committee feel that coordinated and integrated planning and execution of 
various urban transportation projects creates a symbiotic relationship resulting in 
cost reduction and optimization of resources on one hand and complementing the 
transport needs of the commuters on the other. 
The Committee, hence, recommend Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
(MoHUA) to take up the matter with the respective State Governments and 
persuade them to operationalize UMTA at the earliest. 
 
Recommendation No.5 
Finalization of DPR and commence work on remaining two priority corridors of 
RRTS 
 
The Committee observe that out of 08 corridors identified for RRTS projects 
in the Transportation plan 2032, the Task Force on RRTS proposed for setting up 
National Capital Region Transport Corporation (NCRTC) in 2009 and prioritized 
three corridors namely the Delhi Meerut Corridor, Delhi-Gurugram-SNB Corridor 
and Delhi Panipat Corridor. The Committee further note that although the DPR of 
all the three corridors were finalized, the project has taken off only in respect of 
Delhi-Meerut Corridor. On the remaining two priority corridors, very little 
progress could be made. As a matter of fact, the DPR of these corridors are now 
being revisited. 
 The Committee acknowledge that projects like RRTS are time consuming 
due to Financial, Structural and Technical complexities involving multilevel 
deliberation and meticulous planning. However, the very purpose of prioritizing a 
corridor gets defeated due to such inordinate delays particularly for a 
transformational project like RRTS which is touted as a game changer in urban 
mobility and sustainable urbanization showcasing the technical prowess and 
aspirations of the country to become a developed nation by 2047. The Committee 
are also of the view that rapid progress have been made in terms of development of 

42 
 
highways and metro network in NCR areas which needs to be factored in while 
reviewing the DPRs of the remaining two priority corridors so that all these 
transport mode should complement each other rather than posing competition to 
each other.       
 The Committee, therefore, recommend Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs (MoHUA) to ensure that all the necessary formalities like approval of DPR, 
obtaining necessary approvals from respective State Governments be completed in a 
time bound manner and commence the work on the proposed Delhi- SNB and Delhi-
Panipat corridor at the earliest. The Committee further recommend that while 
reviewing the DPRs of the remaining two priority corridors, the Ministry should 
ensure that alignment of these corridors be done in such a way that metro, road and 
rail network should complement the RRTS and benefits may reach to maximum 
number of people. The feedback of commuters/general public may also be obtained 
before finalization of the DPRs.    
 
 
Recommendation No.6 
Integration of RRTS corridors with India Gandhi International Airport and Jewar 
Airport 
 
The Committee appreciate the concerted efforts made by NCRTC for 
Multimodal integration of RRTS with various other modes of transportation such as 
Metro Rail, Indian Railways, Inter State Bus Terminals (ISBTs), other Bus 
terminals/depots and important roads/expressways. However, two important nodes 
of transportation viz. the Indira Gandhi International Airport and Jewar Airport 
are yet to be integrated with the RRTS.  
As regards connecting Indira Gandhi International Airport (IGIA) with the 
RRTS, the Committee were earlier apprised that such integration will be 
undertaken in the Delhi-SNB corridor. However, now, the DPR of the said corridor 
is being revisited by NCRTC.  
The Committee are of the view that being an established transport node in 
Delhi-NCR, it is important to bring Indira Gandhi International Airport on the map 
of RRTS.  

43 
 
With regard to connecting Jewar airport with Delhi Meerut corridor of 
RRTS, the Committee were informed that they have received one proposal for 
connecting Ghaziabad to Jewar Airport through RRTS and the proposal is under 
appraisal. 
The Committee are of the opinion that, in future, Jewar Airport is going to 
become an important transport hub for people living in Ghaziabad, Gautam Budh 
Nagar and adjoining areas.  Further, the growth of dense residential areas, 
employment opportunities, entertainment zones, educational and healthcare 
facilities around Ghaziabad-Noida-Greater Noida corridor makes it all the more 
important to connect these areas through a safe, fast, comfortable and reliable 
transport mode like RRTS which will feed and increase the ridership and financial 
viability of Delhi -Meerut Corridor and provide much needed connectivity to Jewar 
airport. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that both the important transport 
nodes of Delhi -NCR i.e. Indira Gandhi International Airport and Jewar Airport be 
connected with Regional Rapid Transit System. 
 
 
Recommendation No.7 
Expediting Transit oriented development (TOD) on Delhi-Meerut Corridor and 
planning TOD in advance on remaining two priority corridors 
 
The Committee note that although the Delhi Meerut Corridor of Regional 
Rapid Transit System is nearing its completion and NCRTC is planning to 
operationalize the entire corridor in 2025, the Transit oriented development (TOD) 
for three nodes in Delhi, 04 special development areas in Uttar Pradesh and around 
the radial influence zone of RRTS Stations is only at a planning stage. As such, 
significant opportunity of increasing non fare box revenue through TOD remains 
unutilized.  
 The Committee feel that for a highly capital intensive project like RRTS, 
concurrent development of Residential, Commercial, Retail, educational, healthcare 
and leisure infrastructure as envisaged under TOD along with the construction of 

44 
 
the RRTS corridor is crucial for increasing its ridership and to improve the 
economic and financial viability of the system from the outset. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend NCRTC to expedite finalization of 
TOD plans in Delhi and Uttar Pradesh in consultation with respective development 
authority and start developing physical infrastructure swiftly on the Delhi-Meerut 
Corridor. The Committee further recommend that TOD plans be finalized in 
coordination with the developmental authority of the concerned states for the 
remaining two priority corridors also so that work can commence concurrently in 
respect of TOD along with construction of the these corridors.  
 
Recommendation No.8 
Model of Multimodal Integration required to be followed  
 
The Committee note that for seamless connectivity of RRTS with different 
mode of transportation, NCRTC have built bridges, foot over bridges (FOB) and 
used travellators & escalators at various railway stations, bus stands etc. 
Regarding the Model to be followed for Multi-Modal connectivity of RRTS 
with other transportation systems, the Committee are of the view that integration 
should take place in such a seamless manner that the commuter may be able to 
board or de-board the RRTS trains from within the premises of the airport, railway 
station etc. Such facilities provide convenience to the commuters travelling with 
luggage and save lot of time during interchange of different mode of transportation.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that at the time of finalization of 
DPR, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) should coordinate with all 
the stakeholders viz. Ministry of Civil Aviation, Ministry of Railways and respective 
State Government so that multimodal integration within the premises of railways 
stations, airports, Inter State Bus Terminals could be planned and developed at 
various interchange points of RRTS network in future and facility of luggage check-
in etc. be provided at the entry point of RRTS network to the commuters.  
 
 
 
 

45 
 
Recommendation No.9 
Ensure availability and frequency of feeder bus service for last mile connectivity  
 
The Committee note that NCRTC is engaging with various city transport services of 
the government and private service providers for feeder bus operations, shuttle bus 
services, bike taxi, E-Autos, taxi etc. The Committee also appreciate that RRTS 
stations have been designed to provide ample parking space, pick & drop facility for 
intermediate public transport and have introduced bus stops in RRTS station 
pockets. 
 
 The Committee are of the view that commuters judge the efficiency of a mass 
transport system like RRTS, metro etc. not only by the time taken in reaching from 
one station to another but by the overall time taken in travelling from their 
originating point to the final point of destination. Thus, the availability and 
frequency of shuttle bus services providing last mile connectivity is important to 
reduce the waiting time of the commuters at their de-boarding point especially those 
who cannot afford taxi or auto services. The Committee also feel that small buses 
with fixed time interval matching more or less with the time interval of                      
Namo Bharat trains is required for meeting such requirement. 
 
 The Committee, therefore, recommend NCRTC to consider adopting shuttle 
buses with smaller capacity and with fixed frequency matching largely with the 
frequency of Namo Bharat trains while engaging with service providers providing 
feeder bus service for last mile connectivity. 
 
 
 
Recommendation No.10 
Installation of sound barriers 
 
The Committee note that Delhi-Meerut Corridor is passing through dense 
urban areas of Delhi-NCR having residential buildings, offices, hospitals 
educational institution etc. The Committee, therefore feel that installation of sound 

46 
 
barriers are very important to ensure that the residents and public in general and 
patients, elderly citizens and children in particular using various facilities around 
the corridor are not put to any inconvenience due to operation of Namo Bharat 
trains.  
 
In this regard, the Committee has been apprised that sound barriers have 
not been installed by NCRTC in Delhi-Meerut Corridor of RRTS.  Only a stretch of 
approximately 125 meters of viaduct has been planned with the installation of noise 
barrier. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that a detailed study be conducted to 
ascertain the effect of vibrations on close by buildings and the need to install sound 
barrier taking the feedback and opinion of the people living and using various 
infrastructural facilities in close proximity of Delhi-Meerut RRTS corridor. The 
Committee further recommend that appropriate remedial measures like installation 
of sound barriers etc.  be taken expeditiously as per the outcome of the said study. 
 
Recommendation No.11 
Deployment of Para-Medical Staff and CPR Machines 
 
With regard to medical facilities, the Committee has been apprised that 
provision of first aid has been made. NCRTC have also tied up with various 
hospitals within 10 kilometer vicinity of Delhi-Meerut Corridors in case of medical 
emergencies. The personnel of RRTS have also been trained in giving CPR in case 
of stroke or heart attack. 
The Committee while appreciating the efforts made by NCRTC, feel that in 
cases of health emergencies like heart attack, stroke etc., the response time is very 
limited. Hence, administering appropriate and fast response becomes crucial in 
saving the lives of commuters. Availability of para-medical staff and installation of 
small CPR machines on various stations of RRTS can improve the capability of such 
response a great deal. The Committee feel that for a system like RRTS which prides 
itself in providing better passenger facilities and amenities and aspires to compete 
with best transportation systems in the world, making provision for such medical 
facilities will improve the trust and perception of the people. 

47 
 
The Committee, therefore recommender NCRTC to consider engaging               
para-medical staff and installation of CPR machines at various stations of RRTS 
system for fast and better response in case of medical emergencies. 
 
Recommendation No.12 
Exploring the possibility of funding the RRTS project through PPP mode  
 
The Committee are aware that RRTS projects are highly capital intensive 
with long gestation period and such projects are difficult to be taken up by private 
players without necessary support from Central and/or State Governments. The 
Committee note that though, one of modes of funding the project is Public Private 
partnership, the funding of existing RRTS project is being done with the financial 
support of Central Government, respective State Governments and through loan 
obtained from multilateral foreign banks. The Memorandum of Understanding 
(MOU) of NCRTC also recognizes the role of private entrepreneurs at different 
stages. So far, the engagement of private players has been confined to operation and 
maintenance of various sub-systems of RRTS. 
The Committee, however, feel that with the right planning, strategy and 
structuring of RRTS projects and with the availability of encumbrance free 
opportunities for commercial exploitation in and around the RRTS corridors, there 
are sufficient scope to induce private sector for participation and funding of RRTS 
projects. 
The Committee, therefore recommend NCRTC to employ best global 
consultants in transport sector for planning and structuring of future RRTS project 
so as to enable participation and funding of RRTS projects through PPP mode. 
Recommendation No.13 
Development of an app for grievance redressal 
The Committee note that there are 3 modes for grievance redressal in RRTS 
viz. the helpline number, E mail and complaint logbook kept at all stations. Further, 
a timeline of 05 days has been prescribed for redressal of any complaint. 

48 
 
The Committee are of the view that an opaque grievance redressal system 
creates anxiety and suspicion in the mind of the complainants. Thus, real time 
information regarding the status of complaints is important to make the grievance 
redressal system transparent and accountable. 
While lauding the effort of NCRTC to develop various apps and deploy 
technologically advance solutions to facilitate and improve the travelling experience 
of its consumers, the Committee feel that in addition to the methods of grievance 
redressal already in place, the tracking of grievances should also be done through 
an app. 
The Committee, therefore recommend NCRTC to develop an app for 
grievance redressal wherein the customer can lodge and track the real time status of 
their complaint. The app should also display the name and contact number of 
concerned official with whom the complaint is pending. 
 
 
 
Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy  
 New Delhi;                                                                                                                  Chairperson                                                                                                    
03rd April, 2025                                Standing Committee on Housing                         
13 Chaitra, 1947 (Saka)                                                                      and Urban Affairs 
 
********* 
 
 
 
 
 

49 
 
Annexure-I 
 
(i) The decadal growth of population provided by Mumbai Metro Line-3, Chennai Metro, 
Hyderabad Metro and Bangalore Kolkata Metro and NCRTC is as under:  
 
Mumbai Metropolitan Region 
Year Population (in Millions) Decadal growth (%) 
1971 7.76 - 
1981 11.08 42.78 
1991 14.55 31.32 
2001 19.37 33.13 
2011 22.80 17.71 
 
Hyderabad Metropolitan Area 
Year Population (in Lakh) Decadal growth (%) 
1971 17.96 - 
1981 39.33 119 
1991 58.18 48 
2001 76.30 31 
2011 95.80 26 
 
Chennai Metropolitan Area 
Year Population (in absolute no.) Decadal growth (%) 
1971 35,04,000 - 
1981 46,01,000 2.76 
1991 58,18,000 2.37 
2001 70,81,869 1.99 
2011 88,76,029 2.28 
 
 
 

50 
 
Bangalore Metropolitan Area 
Year Population(in absolute no.) Decadal growth (%) 
1970 1,615,000 - 
1980 2,812,000 74.1 
1990 4,043,000 43.8 
2000 5,581,000 38.0 
2010 8,296,000 48.7 
2017 11,990,000 44.6 
 
Kolkata 
Year Population(in absolute no.) Decadal growth (%) 
1971 37,27,020 - 
1981 41,26,846 10.7 
1991 43,99,819 6.6 
2001 45,72,876 3.9 
2011 44,96,694 -1.7 
 
Delhi 
Year  Population (in absolute no.) Decadal growth (%) 
1971       40,65,698  -           
1981       62,20,406  +53.0           
1991       94,20,644  +51.45           
2001   1,38,50,507  +47.02           
2011   1,67,87,941  +21.21           
 
  
 
 
 
 
 

51 
 
Annexure-II 
 
(ii) The estimated current population and future projection provided by Mumbai Metro 
Line-3, Chennai Metro, Hyderabad Metro, Bangalore Metro and NCRTC are as under: 
 
Mumbai Metropolitan Region 
Year Population (in Million) 
2021 26.16 
2031 28.78 
2041 29.89 
 
Bangalore Metropolitan Area 
Year Population (in Millions) 
2025 14.395 
2031 16.480 
 
Hyderabad Metropolitan Area 
Year Population (in Lakh) 
2024 154.9 
2030 186 
2040 241 
2050 300 
 
Chennai Metropolitan Area 
Year Population (in absolute no.) 
2022 1,08,50,000 
2046 1,51,56,000 
2051 1,60,53,000 
 
Delhi 
Year Population(in absolute no.) 
2021 2,06,00,000 

52 
 
2031 2,48,00,000 
2041 2,92,00,000 
 
Kolkata Metro has not provided the estimated current and future projection of the population. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

53 
 
Annexure - III  
MDB loans terms and conditions 
Parameter ADB T1 
(USD Mn) NDB (USD Mn) ADB T2 (AIIB) 
(USD Mn) ADB T3 (Yen Bn) 
Amount of loan 500 418 (revised)  500 Yen 37.7375 Bn (USD 
250 Mn) 
Front-End fee (one-time) 0.00% 0.25%  0.25% 0.00% 
Commitment Charges (on 
undrawn portion of loan) 0.15% 0.25%  0.25% 0.15% 
Reference interest rate 
(variable) SOFR SOFR  SOFR TONA 
+ Contractual Spread 0.50% 0.50%  0.50% 0.50% 
+ Maturity Premium 0.20% 0.35%  0.50% 0.20% 
+ Other Charges -- 0.50%  -- -- 
+ Borrowing cost margin 
(surcharge/ rebate) 0.22% 0.43%  0.34% (-) 0.33% 
Total charges SOFR + 
0.92% 
SOFR + 
1.78% 
SOFR + 
1.34% TONA + 0.37% 
Net applicable rates on 
foreign currency 6.17% 7.03% 6.59% 0.37% 
SOFR(6M): 5.25% p.a. (as on 13.03.2024) | TONA (6M): (-) 0.01% p.a. (as on 13.03.2024), 
 
Loan period: 25-year term, including a grace period of 8 years, 
Repayment schedule: Annuity based repayment method with 10% discount rate, 
Foreign exchange fluctuation risk not accounted for (applicable at interest payment & principal 
repayment) 
 
 
 
 

54 
 
Annexure – IV 
Delhi-Meerut RRTS: Loan repayment schedule 
Financial 
year 
ADB Tranche 1  
(₹ Crore) 
NDB  
(₹ crore) 
ADB Tranche 2 
(AIIB loan)  
(₹ crore) 
ADB Tranche 3  
(₹ crore) 
Total  
(₹ crore) 
2029                         
49  
                     
41  - - 89 
2030                        
105  
                     
88  
                         
49  - 241 
2031                        
116  
                     
97  
                       
105  - 317 
2032                        
127  
                   
106  
                       
116  
                        
24  374 
2033                        
140  
                   
117  
                       
128  
                        
52  438 
2034                        
155  
                   
129  
                       
141  
                        
58  483 
2035                        
171  
                   
143  
                       
155  
                        
64  532 
2036                        
188  
                   
157  
                       
171  
                        
70  587 
2037                        
207  
                   
173  
                       
189  
                        
77  648 
2038                        
229  
                   
191  
                       
208  
                        
85  714 
2039                        
252  
                   
211  
                       
230  
                        
94  787 
2040                        
278  
                   
232  
                       
253  
                      
104  867 
2041                        
307  
                   
256  
                       
279  
                      
114  956 
2042                        
338  
                   
283  
                       
308  
                      
126  
                  
1,055  
2043                        
373  
                   
312  
                       
340  
                      
139  
                  
1,163  
2044                        
411  
                   
343  
                       
374  
                      
153  
                  
1,282  

55 
 
2045                        
453  
                   
379  
                       
412  
                      
169  
                  
1,413  
2046                        
244  
                   
204  
                       
455  
                      
186  
                  
1,089  
2047 - -                        
227  
                      
205  432 
2048 - - -                       
226  226 
2049 - - -                       
122  122 
Total                     
4,141  
                
3,462  
                    
4,142  
                   
2,071  
                
13,816  
 
*1 USD equals INR 82.83, as on 14 March 2024; foreign exchange fluctuations will be in 
addition to the above amounts and have to be borne by the NCRTC. This does not include ADB 
Tranche 4 loan of USD 299 million/ ₹ 2,477 Crore which is yet to be signed by Government of 
India. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

56 
 
Appendix – I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
Minutes of the Eighteenth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Housing and Urban 
Affairs (2021-22) held on Wednesday, 07 September, 2022 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hours to 1230 hours in Main Committee Room, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 Shri Jagdambika Pal        -        Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri Ramcharan Bohra 
3. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
4. Shri M V V Satyanarayana 
5. Shri S. Ramalingam 
6. Smt Aparajita Sarangi 
7. Shri Sunil Kumar Soni 
8. Shri Sudhakar Tukaram Shrangre 
 
Rajya Sabha 
9. Shri Ram Chander Jangra 
10. Shri Sanjay Singh 
    
Secretariat 
1. Shri Vinod Kumar Tripathi  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania   Director 
 
Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs 
 
1. Shri Manoj Joshi                      Secretary 
2. Shri Jaideep     OSD (UT) & EO JS 
3. Shri Vikas Kumar     Managing Director, DMRC 
 
NCRTC 
 
1. Shri Vinay Kumar Singh                    Managing Director 
2. Shri Anil Kumar Shrangariya       Director         
3. Ms. Namita Mehrotra          Director 
4. Shri Mahender Kumar         Director 

57 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened for briefing by the representatives of Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
(MoHUA) and NCRTC on the subject, ‘Improving the Living Standard and Quality of Living in 
Urban Cities - Status of Regional Rapid Transit System (RRTS) Projects’. 
(Thereafter the witnesses were called in) 
3. The Chairperson welcomed the witnesses and noted that to promote sustainable and 
balanced growth in National Capital Region (NCR), the NCR Planning Board (NCRPB) 
prepared a ‘Functional Plan on Transport for National Capital Region-2032’, which 
recommended development of multimodal transport system for NCR with special emphasis on 
dedicated rail based high-speed, high frequency RRTS for connecting regional centres in NCR. 
Accordingly 8-corridors were identified, out of which 3 RRTS corridors were prioritized viz. 
Delhi-Meerut, Delhi-Panipat and Delhi-Alwar for implementation in the first phase. Among 
them only Delhi-Meerut corridor had been sanctioned in 2019 at a total cost of Rs. 30,274 crore. 
The Committee wanted to be informed why other two priority corridors could not be sanctioned 
so far and by when were they likely to be sanctioned and completed. The Committee also wanted 
to know about the progress of Delhi-Meerut corridor & its likely date of completion, funding 
source, the body which would operate this project. Likely Average Daily Ridership vis-à-vis. 
Actual Average Dally Ridership required for Breakeven, whether automated fare collection 
system through single card across PRTS & Delhi Metro were being installed, First and Last Mile 
Connectivity, etc. 
4. Thereafter, the representatives of NCRTC made a PowerPoint presentation in which they 
briefed the Committee about conception of RRTS, 3 priority corridors in RRTS Phase 1, RRTS 
being a Rail based high speed, high capacity, comfortable and safe commuter service connecting 
regional nodes which will travel at 3 times faster pace than the average speed of metro, socio-
economic benefits of RRTS, multimodal integration at various levels, provision for various 
Feeder modes- Last Mile connectivity, National Common Mobility Card & other multiple 
Payment modes, Value Capture Financing (VCF) & Transit Oriented Development in UP & 
Delhi, Implementation status of Delhi-Meerut RRTS corridor, etc.  

58 
 
5. Subsequently, the Members raised various queries viz. whether this inordinate delay in 
Implementation of RRTS was not defeating its purpose, why other two priority corridors have 
not been taken up yet, was it possible to connect Delhi-Jaipur, Indore-Ujjain through RRTS, 
funding aspect of RRTS, etc. The representatives of MoHUA and NCRTC replied to various 
queries raised by the Members and for the queries which could not be answered it was promised 
to furnish written replies to the Committee in due course.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
(Verbatim proceeding of this Sitting of the Committee has been kept for record.) 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

59 
 
Appendix – II 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs 
held on Tuesday, 31 October, 2023 
 
The Committee sat from 1530 hours to 1700 hours in Committee Room 'D', Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh        -        Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha  
2. Shri Benny Behanan 
3. Shri Ramcharan Bohra 
4.  Shri Hibi Eden  
5. Shri Syed Imtiaz Jaleel  
6. Shri Hasnain Masoodi 
7. Shri S. Ramalingam 
8. Shri MVV Satyanarayana   
 
Rajya Sabha 
9. Shri R. Girirajan  
10. Smt Jebi Mather Hisham  
11. Shri Ram Chander Jangra 
12. Shri Kumar Ketkar 
13. Dr. K. Laxman 
14. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
15. Dr. Kalpana Saini 
   
Secretariat 
1. Smt. Archna Pathania  Director  
2. Ms. Swati Parwal  Deputy Secretary 
 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs 
1. Shri Manoj Joshi   Secretary  
2. Shri Jaideep    JS & OSD (UT), MoHUA 
3. Shri Vinay Kumar Singh  MD, NCRTC 

60 
 
 
 
2. *  *  *  *  *                   *                    
 *  *  *  *  *                   *                  
*  *  *  *  *                   *                  
3. The Chairperson then welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs, National Capital Region Transport Corporation (NCRTC) and Dr. Satya Pal 
Singh, MP, Lok Sabha from Baghpat who was present as an attendee during the sitting with the 
Chair's approval, to the sitting of the Committee called to take oral evidence of the 
representative(s) of Ministry on the subject "Regional Rapid Transport System and role of 
NCRTC." 
4. The representatives of the Ministry made a brief power-point presentation before the 
Committee inter-alia explaining the Regional Rapid Transport System, funding pattern, detail 
status of Phase 1 RRTS Corridors, namely Delhi-Meerut RRTS, Delhi-Panipat RRTS and Delhi-
SNB RRTS, etc. Thereafter, various issues, such as, criteria adopted for selection of various 
RRTS corridors, cost of RRTS network vis-à-vis Metro and Sub-urban trains system, challenges 
from expressways and suburban trains to RRTS in terms of ridership, plan for bringing important 
centres on RRTS grid, steps taken for simultaneous development of multi-modal integration and 
last-mile connectivity, fare rationalisation, cooperation by participating States in terms of 
approving DPR/ signing of MoU/contributing their share, commencement of work on Delhi-SNB 
and Delhi-Panipat corridors, etc., were discussed by the Committee with the witnesses, 
5. The representatives of the Ministry were requested to furnish the replies in writing to 
various issues/question raised by the Members for which replies are not readily available during 
the course of the discussion.  
* matter not related with the report 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
 
 

61 
 
Appendix – III 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs 
held on Wednesday, 13 November, 2024 
 
The Committee held their third sitting on 13th November, 2024 in Committee Room C, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi from 1100 to 1300 hours, during which 
representatives from the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs and National Capital Region 
Transport Corporation (NCRTC) briefed the Committee on the ‘Regional Rapid Transit 
System and Role of NCRTC’.  
 
PRESENT 
 Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy        -        Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha  
2.  Smt Lovely Anand 
3. Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
4. Shri Satpal Brahamchari 
5. Shri Hibi Eden 
6. Ms. Sayani Ghosh 
7. Shri Rambhual Nishad 
8. Dr. Gumma Thanuja Rani 
9. Shri Chamala Kiran Kumar Reddy 
10. Shri Alok Sharma 
11. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
 
  
Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
13. Shri Ram Chander Jangra 
14. Shri Debashish Samantaray 
15. Shri G.C. Chandrashekar 
16. Shri A. A. Rahim 

62 
 
   
Secretariat 
1. Shri Y.M. Kandpal  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania       Director 
 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs  
 
1. Shri Jaideep   JS & OSD (UT) 
2. Shri Yogesh Antil  Director 
 
National Capital Region Transport Corporation 
 
1. Shri Shalabha Goel  MD, NCRTC 
2. Shri Anil Shrangarya  Director Project, NCRTC 
3. Shri Navneet Kaushik  Director Systems, NCRTC 
4. Shri Mahendra Kumar Director, NCRTC 
5. Smt Namita Mehrotra  Director, NCRTC 
 
2. *  *  *  *  *  * 
*  *  *  *  *  * 
*  *  *  *  *  * 
3. The Chairperson then welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs and National Capital Region Transport Corporation (NCRTC) to the sitting of the 
Committee. 
4. The representatives from the Ministry and NCRTC gave a brief PowerPoint presentation 
to the Committee, covering topics such as funding structure and the detailed status of Phase 1 
RRTS corridors, including the Delhi-Meerut, Delhi-Panipat and Delhi-SNB corridors. Following 
the presentation, the Committee inquired about several issues and raised questions on various 
matters including criteria for selecting RRTS corridors,  plans to set up RRTS network in other 
metro cities in the country, cost comparison between the RRTS network and metro or suburban 

63 
 
train systems, potential ridership challenges posed by expressways and suburban trains, plans to 
incorporate Jewar Airport into the Delhi Meerut corridor of RRTS network, steps for multi-
modal integration and last-mile connectivity, fare rationalization, cooperation from participating 
states regarding DPR approval, MoU signing and contribution of shares, as well as the 
commencement of work on the Delhi-SNB and Delhi-Panipat corridors etc. which were 
responded to by the representatives of the Ministry and NCRTC. 
5. The representatives of the Ministry/NCRTC were requested to furnish the replies in 
writing to various issues/questions raised by the Members for which replies were not readily 
available during the course of the discussion. 
* matter not related with the report 
   The Committee then adjourned.  
(Verbatim proceeding of this Sitting of the Committee has been kept for record.) 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

64 
 
Appendix – IV 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
Minutes of the Eleventh Sitting of the Standing Committee on Housing and Urban 
Affairs (2024-25) held on Thursday, 03 April, 2025 
 
The Committee sat from 1515 hours to 1645 hours in Committee Room 2, Parliament 
House Annexe Extension, Block ‘A’, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy        -        Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha  
2.  Smt Lovely Anand 
3. Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
4. Shri Satpal Brahamchari 
5. Ms. Sayani Ghosh 
6. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
7. Smt. Mahima Kumari Mewar 
8. Shri Naresh Ganpat Mhaske 
9. Shri Rambhual Nishad 
10. Shri Chamala Kiran Kumar Reddy 
11. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
12. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar 
13. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
14. Shri Ravindra Dattaram Waikar 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
15. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
16. Shri Raghav Chadha  
17. Shri Mission Ranjan Das  
18. Dr. Medha Vishram Kulkarni 
19. Smt. Maya Naroliya  
20. Shri Debashish Samantaray 

65 
 
   
Secretariat 
1. Shri Y.M. Kandpal                  Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania       Director 
3. Ms. Swati Parwal       Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Standing 
Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs to the sitting of the Committee. 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the Draft Report on ‘Regional 
Rapid Transit System and Role of NCRTC’ and adopted the same without any 
modifications. 
4. *  *  *  *  *  *          * 
*  *  *  *  *  *          * 
 
* Matter not related with the Report 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
 
 