    STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOUSING  
          AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
                                (2025-26) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
(DEPARTMENT OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT) 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Housing and Urban Affairs (2025-26) on the subject, ‘Review of Atal 
Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) with 
special emphasis on Urban Drinking Water’] 
 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 
  
11 

ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOUSING 
AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
(2025-26) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
(DEPARTMENT OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Housing and Urban Affairs (2025-26) on the subject, ‘Review of Atal 
Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) with 
special emphasis on Urban Drinking Water’] 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.08.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.08.2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 


 
 
 
 
 C.U.D. No.: 157 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©2026 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
 
 
 

 
(i) 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
Composition of the Committee  (ii) 
 
Introduction  (iii) 
 
CHAPTER I  Report  1 – 20 
 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
 21 – 43  
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the  Government's replies 
 
 44 – 44 
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration 
 
 45 – 53 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
     54 – 54 
ANNEXURES 
 
I.   Minutes of the 23rd Sitting of the Committee held on 
04.08.2026 
  
      55-56 
II.   Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Seventh Report  
(18th Lok Sabha) 
         57 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(ii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS (2025-26) 
 
Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy -        Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
  
2. Smt. Lovely Anand 
3. Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
4. Smt. Misha Bharti 
5. Shri Satpal Brahamchari 
6. Shri Hibi Eden 
7. Smt. Hema Malini 
8. Shri Selvam G. 
9. Ms. Sayani Ghosh 
10. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
11. Smt. Mahima Kumari Mewar 
12. Shri Naresh Ganpat Mhaske 
13. Shri Rambhual Nishad 
14. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
15. Dr. Gumma Thanuja Rani 
16. Shri Chamala Kiran Kumar Reddy 
17. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
18. Shri Alok Sharma 
19. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar 
20. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
21. Shri Ravindra Dattaram Waikar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
  
22. Smt. Jaya Amitabh Bachchan 
23. Shri G. C. Chandrashekhar 
24. Shri R. Girirajan 
25. Dr. Medha Vishram Kulkarni 
26. Smt. Maya Naroliya 
27. Shri Sandeep Kumar Pathak 
28. Shri A. A. Rahim  
29. Shri Jogen Mohan 
30. Shri Ramrao Sakharam Wadkute 
31. Shri Debashish Samantaray. 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Lalkithang   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania  - Director 
3. Ms. Swati Parwal  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Anunay Kumar  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 

(iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs 
(2025-26) having been authorized by the Committee, to present this Eleventh Report  
(18th Lok Sabha) on action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Seventh Report (18th Lok Sabha) of 
the Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs (2025-26) on the subject, 
‘Review of Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) with 
special emphasis on Urban Drinking Water’. 
2. The Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 12.12.2025 and laid on the 
table of Rajya Sabha on the same date. The Action Taken Replies of the Government to 
all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 20 April, 2026. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on  
04th August, 2026. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Seventh Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at 
Annexure-II. 
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee are highlighted in bold letters in Chapter I of the Report. 
 
 
       Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
New Delhi;                                                                                                    Chairperson                                                                                                    
04 August, 2026                                           Standing Committee on Housing                                  
13 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)                                                                     and Urban Affairs 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs (2025-26) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Seventh 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject, ‘Review of Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and 
Urban Transformation (AMRUT) with special emphasis on Urban Drinking Water’ of the 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs which was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha 
on 12 December, 2025. 
1.2 The Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect 
of all the fifteen Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report on 20 April, 
2026. These have been categorized as follows: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government: 
 Recommendation Serial Nos.  1, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15  
(Total -11) 
(Chapter-II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations, which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of Government's replies: 
Recommendation Serial No.  Nil  
(Chapter-III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which replies of Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
     Recommendation Serial Nos.  2, 3, 4, 7  
    
(Total -4) 
(Chapter-IV) 
                       
(iv) Recommendations /Observations, in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited: 
   Recommendation Serial No.  Nil                                               
   (Chapter-V) 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that specific replies to the Comments contained in  
Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished at the earliest and in any case, not later than 
three months from the presentation of this Report. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their 
recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.  

2 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
Need for adequate Funding for Urban Water Infrastructure under AMRUT 2.0  
1.5  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
“The Committee evaluated the adequacy of financial investments under AMRUT 1.0 
and AMRUT 2.0 in comparison with the projections made by the High-Powered 
Expert Committee (HPEC), 2011 set up for estimating the investment requirements 
for Urban Infrastructure Services, which estimated ₹3.2 lakh crore for urban water 
supply infrastructure and ₹5.5 lakh crore for Operations and Maintenance (O&M) 
over a 20- year period (2012-2031).  
 
The Ministry informed that under AMRUT 1.0, ₹43,392 crore worth of water supply 
projects have been grounded with ₹38,554 crore already spent. Under AMRUT 2.0, 
water supply projects worth ₹1,18,422 crore have been approved, with grounding 
completed for ₹69,341 crore. Combined, ₹1,61,814 crore has been sanctioned for 
water supply across both Missions, addressing about 51% of the HPEC-projected 
investment of ₹3.2 lakh crore. The Committee observe that while AMRUT has led to 
a notable scaling-up of investments in urban water supply infrastructure, the total 
sanctioned amount still meets only about half of the requirement projected by HPEC 
for the 20-year period 2012–2031, which is set to conclude in the next five to six years.  
 
On the O&M front, the Committee note that projects worth ₹21,023 crore have been 
planned under AMRUT 2.0 against the total sanctioned project cost of ₹1,73,149 
crore. The Ministry informed that O&M expenses are to be met by ULBs through user 
charges or other cost-recovery measures. The Committee observe that although States 
and ULBs are required to incorporate five years of O&M in project planning, the 
Government of India does not provide financial support for these expenses under 
either AMRUT or AMRUT 2.0. This has led to significant operational difficulties at 
the ULB level, where limited financial resources often impede the proper operation 
and maintenance of water treatment plants, sewerage networks and other assets 
created under the Mission. The Committee note that inadequate O&M financing not 
only limits the effectiveness of capital investments but also affects the long-term 
sustainability of the infrastructure. Furthermore, as O&M responsibilities rest with 
ULBs, the limited financial and institutional capacity of many urban local bodies 
further constrains their ability to ensure reliable and sustained service delivery.  
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the MoHUA take immediate steps to 
bridge the financing gap in urban water infrastructure. This should include:- 
  
i. conducting a comprehensive assessment of State-level water sector 
investments to gauge cumulative progress towards the HPEC-estimated 
requirement;  

3 
 
ii. pursuing enhanced central and multilateral funding support to close the 
remaining deficit, especially in underserved regions;  
iii. establishing a dedicated financial mechanism or incentive-based support 
framework for O&M funding to supplement ULB efforts, particularly in 
smaller municipalities with limited revenue-generating capacity; and  
iv. assessing the additional financial requirements and investment needs of the 
urban water sector with a long-term perspective up to the year 2047.” 
 
1.6 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"AMRUT 2.0 is encouraging States and cities to adopt a long-term planning 
perspective aligned with the vision of Viksit Bharat @2047. Under AMRUT 
2.0, States have been requested to assess current infrastructure gaps and assess 
the investments required for future projections based on future demand 
projections, taking into account factors such as population growth, urban 
expansion and service level benchmarks. These saturation assessments are 
required to be done in accordance with the technical norms and planning 
parameters prescribed in CPHEEEO manuals, which provide standard 
methodologies for estimating present and future water demand and designing 
infrastructure accordingly. Through this approach, States and Urban Local 
Bodies (ULBs) are expected to undertake systematic demand assessments and 
plan infrastructure investments that are aligned with long-term urban growth 
and service delivery needs.  
 
The Ministry, through handholding support and advisory from CPHEEO 
and other technical institutions, support States and ULBs in preparing 
scientifically designed infrastructure plans based on projected demand 
scenarios. These planning frameworks will help assess future investment 
requirements and guide sustainable development of urban water infrastructure 
over the long term.  
 
An utility has been developed on the AMRUT 2.0 platform for assessing 
the gaps as in 2025, in urban piped water supply and the required investment to 
build the infrastructure. States/ UTs have been requested to update the data on 
the portal. 
 
The Government of India has been promoting a multi-pronged financing 
framework to augment investments in urban water infrastructure through 
Central assistance, institutional financing, and innovative financing 
mechanisms.  
 
Under AMRUT 2.0, States and cities are encouraged to leverage Public–
Private Partnerships (PPP) for project implementation, with a view to 
mobilising private sector investment, enhancing operational efficiency and 
reducing the burden on public finances.  

4 
 
The Government is also encouraging market-based financing by Urban 
Local Bodies through municipal bonds. The Union Budget 2026–27 has further 
strengthened this approach by announcing an incentive of ₹100 crore for 
municipal corporations issuing a single municipal bond of more than ₹1,000 
crore, in addition to the existing AMRUT-based performance incentives that 
support smaller bond issuances up to ₹200 crore. This measure aims to 
encourage large cities to tap capital markets for urban infrastructure financing 
and deepen the municipal bond market in the country 
 
Further, the Government is facilitating additional investments in urban 
infrastructure through dedicated financing initiatives such as the Urban 
Challenge Fund (UCF) and the Urban Infrastructure Development Fund 
(UIDF). UCF with committed central assistance of ₹ one lakh crore government 
provides up to 25% funding for bankable projects, with at least 50% financing 
through bonds, bank loans, or PPPs, to support urban infrastructure under three 
verticals including Water & Sanitation.  
 
To facilitate market access for smaller ULBs, including Tier-2 and Tier-
3 cities, a Credit Repayment Guarantee Scheme with a corpus of ₹5,000 crore 
has been approved for ULBs in North-Eastern and Hilly States/UTs and smaller 
ULBs (<1 lakh population) in other States/UTs. The scheme provides Central 
guarantee for loans up to ₹7 crore or 70% of the loan (whichever is lower) for 
first-time loans, and ₹7 crore or 50% for subsequent loans, in addition to Central 
Assistance under UCF. 
 
States and cities are also encouraged to mobilise resources through 
institutional finance, externally aided projects, and innovative financing 
models, along with their own budgetary allocations, to supplement investments 
under Central Missions and accelerate the creation of urban water infrastructure, 
particularly in smaller and underserved cities. 
 
Maintenance and replacement of ageing pipelines is the responsibility 
of Urban Local Bodies (ULBs)/parastatals. The Government of India 
supplements the efforts of States through schematic interventions, financial 
assistance and technical advisories, including under the Atal Mission for 
Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) and AMRUT 2.0. Under 
these Missions, capital investments for infrastructure creation are supported 
through Central assistance, while operation and maintenance (O&M) of water 
supply and sewerage systems remains the responsibility of ULBs, in line with 
their constitutional mandate. To ensure sustainability of assets, the AMRUT 
guidelines advocates taking up projects with Operation and Maintenance (O & 
M) cost for at least five years, funded by way of levy of user charges or other 
revenue streams. The Mission framework also emphasizes reforms such as levy 
and collection of user charges, reduction of non-revenue water, reuse and 

5 
 
recycling of treated wastewater and improvement in financial management 
practices to enhance the capacity of ULBs to sustainably operate and maintain 
assets.” 
 
1.7 The Committee appreciate that a mechanism for data collection and 
infrastructure gap assessment has been established under AMRUT 2.0. However, it 
remains unclear whether a comprehensive nationwide assessment of urban water 
infrastructure investment requirements vis-à-vis the projections of the High-Powered 
Expert Committee (HPEC) has been undertaken or is currently in progress. The 
Committee are of the view that an annual nationwide assessment of urban water 
infrastructure initiatives is the need of the hour to evaluate progress, identify gaps and 
guide future investments. While appreciating the Ministry’s efforts to augment urban 
infrastructure financing through initiatives such as the Urban Challenge Fund (UCF) and 
the Urban Infrastructure Development Fund (UIDF) Credit Repayment Guarantee 
Scheme, the Committee observe that these initiatives are not specifically focused on urban 
water infrastructure. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to undertake a time-
bound nationwide assessment of cumulative investments against HPEC projections, 
institute an annual impact assessment of urban water infrastructure initiatives, and 
examine the feasibility of creating a dedicated Central support or incentive mechanism 
for operation and maintenance of urban water infrastructure, particularly for financially 
weaker Urban Local Bodies (ULBs).  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
Strengthening the Quality and Coverage of City Water Planning under AMRUT 2.0 
1.8  The Committee had recommended as under: 
City Water Balance Plans (CWBPs), City Water Action Plans (CWAPs) and State 
Water Action Plans (SWAPs) are at the core of AMRUT 2.0 and has introduced 
structure and consistency in urban water planning. As per AMRUT 2.0 guidelines, 
Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) will submit detailed CWBPs and CWAPs through online 
portal covering proposed projects in the thrust areas. The responsibility of ensuring 
scientific accuracy, reliable data and methodological consistency in these plans lies 
with the respective State Level Technical Committee (SLTC) and State High Powered 
Steering Committee (SHPSC). The Committee were informed that the preparation of 
CWBPs and CWAPs has been made mandatory for all towns and cities. However, out 
of 4,883 cities that filled CWBPs, only 3,367 submitted CWAPs. States like Madhya 
Pradesh, Kerala, Nagaland and West Bengal have shown near- full compliance, while 
others such as Bihar, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand lag significantly. 
The Ministry has, thus acknowledged that though CWBPs and CWAPs has brought 
significant structure and consistency to city-level water planning across States, certain 
challenges such as data gaps, inconsistent consultant support and limited climate 
resilience integration in some plans persist.  

6 
 
 
The Committee observe that while the introduction of CWBPs and CWAPs is a step 
forward in structured urban water planning, a large gap remains between the number 
of cities that have filled CWBPs and those that have submitted CWAPs. The shortfall 
in States like Bihar, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand is concerning, 
indicating possible delays, limited technical support or capacity gaps. Moreover, the 
variability in the scientific rigour and data reliability of the plans poses a risk to the 
effectiveness of implementation. The Committee feel that these issues may undermine 
the achievement of AMRUT 2.0’s goals related to water security and sustainability.  
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry, in coordination with State 
Governments, take time-bound steps to ensure 100% submission of City Water Action 
Plans (CWAPs) by all ULBs, with a focus on lagging States. A standardised quality 
assurance framework for CWAPs/CWBPs should be developed, incorporating 
uniform data standards, methodologies and climate resilience parameters. The 
capacity and accountability of State Level Technical Committees (SLTCs) and State 
High Powered Steering Committees (SHPSCs) must be strengthened for robust data 
validation. Further, targeted technical handholding and centralised consultant support 
should be provided to low-capacity ULBs to improve the quality and timeliness of 
these planning documents. 
 
1.9 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“Under AMRUT 2.0, there is a provision of preparation of City Water Balance 
Plans (CWBPs) and City Water Action Plans (CWAPs) for all towns and cities. 
These plans serve as foundational documents to assess a city's water demand, 
supply, losses, and potential for reuse, and to guide targeted interventions for 
water security and sustainability.  
 
Under AMRUT 2.0, States/Union Territories (UTs) are empowered to 
select, appraise, prioritize and implement projects. State Level Technical 
Committee (SLTC) headed by the Secretary, Urban Development & Housing 
Department provides technical support to the State High Powered Steering 
Committee (SHPSC) headed by the Chief Secretary of the State, to approve, 
monitor and supervise implementation of the scheme at the State/ UT level. On 
recommendation of the SHPSC, Apex Committee of Ministry of Housing & 
Urban Affairs (MoHUA) approves projects within the broad framework of 
Mission.  
 
While the introduction of CWBPs and CWAPs has brought significant 
structure and consistency to city-level water planning across States, certain 
challenges persist. Further, an utility has been developed on the AMRUT 2.0 
platform for assessing the gaps in urban piped water supply and the required 

7 
 
investment to build the infrastructure. States/ UTs have been requested to update 
the data on the portal.  
 
Despite limitations of quality data, qualified manpower support, etc the 
exercise has substantially improved the baseline understanding of urban water 
flows, informed State-level planning, and laid the groundwork for more data-
driven and resilient water infrastructure development. The States/ UTs have 
been advised to update the saturation assessment module in accordance with the 
technical norms and planning parameters prescribed in CPHEEEO manuals, 
which provide standard methodologies for estimating present and future water 
demand and designing infrastructure accordingly.  
 
However, the responsibility for ensuring scientific rigour, data 
reliability, and methodological consistency rests with the respective State Level 
Technical Committee (SLTC) and State High Powered Steering Committee 
(SHPSC), which review and validate the quality and integrity of data and 
planning assumptions in the CWBP/CWAPs submitted by ULBs. A total of 22 
States has established PDMCs / PMUs / SMMUs, indicating substantial 
progress in institutionalizing project management and implementation support 
mechanisms across States." 
 
1.10 The Committee note that the Ministry has acknowledged the importance of City 
Water Balance Plans (CWBPs) and City Water Action Plans (CWAPs) as foundational 
planning documents under AMRUT 2.0 and has outlined the institutional mechanism for 
their preparation, appraisal and approval. The Ministry has also stated that States/UTs 
have been advised to update the relevant data on the AMRUT 2.0 portal and that the 
responsibility for ensuring scientific rigour, data reliability and methodological 
consistency rests with the respective State Level Technical Committees (SLTCs) and 
State High Powered Steering Committees (SHPSCs). However, the Committee find that 
the Ministry has not indicated any time-bound roadmap to achieve 100 per cent 
submission of CWAPs by all Urban Local Bodies, particularly in the lagging States, which 
was one of the key recommendations of the Committee. The reply is also silent on the 
specific measures proposed for States that continue to show poor compliance in 
submission of CWAPs. 
The Committee further observe that the Ministry’s reply did not respond to the 
recommendation for developing a standardized quality assurance framework 
incorporating uniform data standards, scientific methodologies and climate resilience 
parameters. The reply is also silent on measures to strengthen the capacity and 
accountability of SLTCs and SHPSCs for ensuring robust data validation and 
methodological consistency. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation.  
 
 

8 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
 
Strengthening Institutional Convergence for Integrated Urban Water Management 
1.11  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
“Ensuring safe and adequate drinking water to urban households involves multiple 
Ministries and agencies across various stages namely, source conservation and 
restoration, treatment, distribution and wastewater management. In this context, the 
Ministry had briefed the Committee that convergence has been built into AMRUT’s 
design through holistic planning tools like City Water Balance Plans (CWBP) and 
City Water Action Plans (CWAP), and institutional oversight mechanisms such as the 
State High Powered Steering Committee (SHPSC) chaired by State Chief Secretaries 
and State Level Technical Committees (SLTCs). States are also supported by Project 
Development and Management Consultants (PDMCs) to align AMRUT projects with 
other schemes. In addition, the Mission promotes convergence with related initiatives 
like Smart Cities Mission (SCM), Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM), and Jal Shakti 
Abhiyan (JSA) including its “Catch the Rain” campaign.  
 
While structural mechanisms and planning frameworks under AMRUT attempt to 
promote inter-agency coordination, the Committee observe that actual 
implementation remains fragmented. No dedicated institutional mechanism or binding 
inter-agency coordination protocol exists to operationalize the much-required 
convergence effectively. There is minimal, if any, interaction between the agencies 
responsible for planning, financing, execution, and operations & maintenance. Urban 
water governance continues to function in silos, with overlapping mandates and 
insufficient integration among stakeholders at various levels. Despite convergence 
being encouraged through SHPSCs and planning tools, the absence of a centralized 
command structure and binding protocols for cross-sector collaboration has 
significantly impeded progress toward truly integrated urban water management.  
 
In light of the above, the Committee recommend that the Ministry, in coordination 
with the Ministry of Jal Shakti and concerned State departments, take time-bound 
action to institutionalize integrated urban water management. This should include 
setting up a formal inter-ministerial coordination platform with clearly defined roles 
for key ministries and planning bodies; enforcing convergence across central schemes 
like AMRUT, SBM, Atal Bhujal Yojana, and Jal Shakti Abhiyan; establishing 
Integrated Urban Water Management Cells under State High Powered Steering 
Committees (SHPSCs) as nodal coordination units; integrating real-time data systems 
across departments; and mandating the inclusion of sustainability components such as 
wastewater reuse, aquifer recharge, and catchment protection in all AMRUT planning 
and execution processes.” 
 
 

9 
 
1.12 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“AMRUT 2.0 provides a strong framework for convergence with other national 
and State-level initiatives to achieve sustainable and integrated urban water 
management. The Mission is being implemented with the objective of providing 
universal water supply coverage in urban areas and improving sewage and 
septage management in 500 AMRUT cities, while also strengthening water 
security and sustainability.  
 
Under AMRUT 2.0, institutional mechanisms have been established to 
promote coordination among Central Ministries, including the Ministry of Jal 
Shakti, State departments, Urban Local Bodies (ULBs), and other implementing 
agencies. The Mission encourages convergence with related programmes such 
as Swachh Bharat Mission, Atal Bhujal Yojana, Jal Shakti Abhiyan, Jal Sanchay 
Jal Bhagidhari initiative to ensure a comprehensive approach covering water 
supply, wastewater management, and groundwater sustainability.  
 
Projects under the Mission are planned through City Water Balance 
Plans (CWBP) and City Water Action Plans (CWAP), which enable integrated 
planning by considering ongoing or proposed projects across departments, State 
schemes, and externally funded programmes. These plans also incorporate 
sustainability measures such as wastewater reuse, aquifer recharge, and 
protection of water sources and catchment areas. 
  
At the institutional level, implementation and convergence are overseen 
by the State High Powered Steering Committee (SHPSC), chaired by the State 
Chief Secretary, which facilitates coordination among different departments 
and agencies. State- and district-level committees further support integrated 
planning, monitoring, and implementation. In addition, Project Development 
and Management Consultants (PDMCs) assist States and cities in aligning 
AMRUT interventions with other schemes in terms of coverage, financing, and 
outcomes.  
 
Through these mechanisms, the Mission is promoting a coordinated, 
data-driven, and sustainable approach to urban water management in 
collaboration with relevant ministries and State governments.” 
 
 
1.13 The Committee note that AMRUT 2.0 has put in place a framework for 
convergence through mechanisms such as City Water Balance Plans (CWBPs), City 
Water Action Plans (CWAPs), State High Powered Steering Committees (SHPSCs), 
Project Development and Management Consultants (PDMCs), and coordination with 
schemes like SBM, Atal Bhujal Yojana and Jal Shakti Abhiyan while also incorporating 
sustainability measures like wastewater reuse and aquifer recharge. However, the 

10 
 
Committee feel that these existing institutional arrangements and broad coordination 
efforts do not adequately address the structural gaps identified by the Committee, such 
as the absence of a formal inter-ministerial coordination platform, binding coordination 
protocols, dedicated Integrated Urban Water Management Cells and integrated real-time 
data systems. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation for the 
establishment of formal, accountable and well-defined coordination mechanisms, with 
clearly demarcated institutional responsibilities and integrated monitoring systems to 
ensure effective convergence and governance in the urban water sector. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
Establishing adequate Data Systems for Monitoring Outcomes and Financial 
Transparency 
1.14  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
The Committee had sought to know whether the Ministry had evaluated the State/UT-
wise total requirement of household water tap connections, household sewer 
connections, sewer networks and sewage treatment plants (STPs) in urban areas, 
including the estimated cost and whether sanctioned projects under the Mission were 
adequate to meet those requirements. The Committee had further requested data on 
key progress indicators in urban water supply and sanitation across the years 2015 
(preAMRUT), 2021 (end of AMRUT), and 2025 (target under AMRUT 2.0), 
including parameters such as piped water coverage, 24x7 supply, per capita supply 
and demand, non-revenue water (NRW), metering, distribution losses, wastewater 
treatment and reuse along with the extent of funding contributions made by States and 
ULBs.  
 
However, in response to data requests, the Ministry could provide only limited 
information. Apart from a marginal increase in household piped water coverage (from 
49% in 2015 to a projected 75% in 2025), several critical parameters across the three 
reference years remained unreported. Furthermore, the Ministry confirmed that it does 
not maintain records of financial contributions or utilization from sources other than 
central assistance.  
 
The Committee are of the view that the Ministry’s inability to furnish comprehensive 
outcome and impact metrics undermines effective monitoring and evaluation of 
AMRUT and AMRUT 2.0. Key indicators essential to assessing urban water security 
and service delivery such as water-stressed ULBs, 24x7 coverage, demand-supply 
gap, NRW, metering and wastewater treatment—remain absent or patchy, reflecting 
a lack of robust data systems. The Ministry’s dependence solely on State-reported 
figures, without a centralized mechanism to track cumulative financial inputs and 
tangible outcomes, poses serious concerns regarding accountability and policy 
coherence. The lack of data not only affects mid-course corrections but also hinders 
the formulation of evidence-based policy interventions.  

11 
 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should immediately institute 
a centralized and standardised outcome monitoring framework for AMRUT 2.0, 
encompassing physical, financial and impact-related indicators across States/UTs. A 
digital dashboard with time-series data on essential parameters such as 24x7 water 
supply, per capita supply and demand, NRW, metering, wastewater generation and 
reuse must be made publicly accessible. In addition, the Ministry should put in place 
a robust mechanism to track financial contributions and expenditures by States as well 
as Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) to enable more informed, transparent and accountable 
implementation of Mission objectives.” 
 
1.15 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“AMRUT 2.0 has incorporated a comprehensive monitoring and evaluation 
framework to track the progress and outcomes of the Mission across States and 
Union Territories. The Ministry has developed a centralized digital platform 
(AMRUT Universe) to monitor physical and financial progress of projects in 
real time. Key indicators such as water supply coverage, project implementation 
status under AMRUT, released and expenditure on these projects are regularly 
updated by the States/ UTs and reviewed through this system to ensure effective 
oversight and course correction. The projects under AMRUT 2.0 having 24x7 
water supply are also monitored and reviewed through this platform. 
 
The portal has an online dashboard that enables continuous tracking of 
project progress, financial releases, and utilization under the Mission. States and 
Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) regularly update project and financial data on this 
platform, which allows the Ministry to review the status of implementation and 
financial contributions from different stakeholders. The dashboard is accessible 
to all the stakeholders including States and ULBs for review, monitoring and 
updation.  
 
Further, Department of Expenditure has made a new system  
(SNA-SPARSH) for just in time release of funds to the States under Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes. The funds under AMRUT 2.0 are now released to the 
States through Mother Sanctions which are utilised by the States/ UTs on real 
time basis. The matching share of the States/ ULBs are also released on real 
time and the expenditures of both Centre and States are monitored on online 
SPARSH platform. This has contributed towards informed, transparent and 
accountable implementation of Mission objectives.  
 
Besides the above, NITI Ayog also monitor and review the progress of 
the AMRUT 2.0 Mission through Output Outcome Monitoring Framework 
(OOMF). Key outcome indicators under OOMF include coverage of piped 
water supply and sewerage connections, recycled water used (developed in 

12 
 
MLD), number of cities issuing municipal bonds in a year and area of water 
bodies rejuvenated.” 
 
1.16  The Committee acknowledge that digital platforms such as AMRUT Universe and 
SNA-SPARSH have been developed for real-time monitoring of the physical and financial 
progress of projects, and that selected indicators are monitored through NITI Aayog’s 
Output Outcome Monitoring Framework (OOMF). However, the Committee observe 
that the Ministry’s reply primarily relates to project implementation and financial 
tracking, whereas the Committee had specifically recommended the establishment of a 
comprehensive and standardised outcome monitoring framework for AMRUT 2.0 to 
assess whether the intended outcomes of these projects are being achieved. The reply does 
not clearly indicate whether comprehensive data on key outcome indicators such as 24x7 
water supply, demand-supply gap, non-revenue water (NRW), metering coverage, 
wastewater treatment and reuse, and identification of water-stressed ULBs are being 
systematically captured and monitored. Further, if such key outcome data are available 
through AMRUT Universe, SNA-SPARSH or NITI Aayog’s OOMF, the Ministry has 
neither furnished the same to the Committee nor explained the reasons for not doing so. 
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge the Ministry 
to establish a robust outcome monitoring framework, alongside project monitoring, and 
furnish complete and standardised data on all key outcome and financial indicators while 
ensuring transparent public access to such information.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
Need for accelerated implementation of water source sustainability measures under 
AMRUT 2.0   
1.17  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
The Committee, taking note of the alarming depletion of groundwater reserves 
and the growing threat to water security, sought detailed information from the Ministry 
on the interventions under AMRUT and AMRUT 2.0 aimed at ensuring water source 
sustainability, specifically, the measures taken for reducing groundwater dependence, 
rejuvenating water bodies, improving aquifer recharge, along with their measurable 
outcomes and effectiveness. In response, the Ministry stated that a multi-pronged 
approach has been adopted under both phases of AMRUT to tackle groundwater 
depletion. Key measures inter-alia included the implementation of Shallow Aquifer 
Management (SAM) pilots in 9 cities, now being scaled up to 75 cities under SAM 2.0, 
construction of aquifer recharge structures, restoration of defunct wells and 
comprehensive groundwater mapping and planning in partnership with National 
Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) and National Institute of Urban Affairs (NIUA). 
Further, 28,761 urban water bodies covering an area of 7.13 lakh hectares have been 
mapped. 

13 
 
While acknowledging the Ministry’s efforts in designing a broad framework for 
groundwater recharge and water body rejuvenation, the Committee remain concerned 
about the slow implementation. It is noted that only 678 out of 3,032 sanctioned water 
body rejuvenation projects have been completed, amounting to just around 22%, 
reflecting significant delays. Moreover, despite the extensive mapping of water bodies, 
rejuvenation plans have so far been prepared for only about 10.5% of them under 
AMRUT 2.0, highlighting a disconnect between data collection and follow-through 
action. The Committee further observe that SAM initiative although conceptually 
strong, so far remains limited in reach and investment with only ₹4.5 crore invested 
across 9 cities. The Committee have further been briefed that the exact volumes of 
drinking water contributions made through these interventions are not quantified and 
State/UT wise data is not monitored under AMRUT 2.0.  
In view of the above submissions made by the Ministry, the Committee recommend the 
following: 
(i) in light of the fact that the Mission is scheduled to end on 31stMarch, 2026, the 
Ministry must take urgent steps to accelerate the completion of all sanctioned 
water body rejuvenation projects under AMRUT 2.0 and establish annual 
progress targets with public disclosure; 
(ii) expedite the sanctioning and approval of projects for rejuvenation of urban water 
bodies that have been mapped through Urban Water body Information System 
(UWAIS) by the National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC); 
(iii) simultaneously also upscale Shallow Aquifer Management (SAM) 2.0 by 
enhancing funding, expanding its coverage beyond the initial 75 cities and 
integrating it into city-level planning frameworks; and 
(iv) formulate a National Urban Aquifer Recharge Strategy with defined benchmarks, 
monitoring mechanisms and a GIS-enabled tracking system so as to quantify the 
outcomes and sustainability of the various initiates. 
  
1.18 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
“To accelerate completion of approved water body rejuvenation projects under 
AMRUT 2.0, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) maintains 
close coordination with States/UTs throughout the Mission. Progress is 
regularly reviewed in APEX Committee meetings and monitored through video 
conferences, webinars, and workshops at various levels in the Ministry. A 
dedicated digital platform tracks project milestones, requiring States/UTs to 
update data consistently to ensure transparency and accurate monitoring. 
Independent Review & Monitoring Agencies have been appointed for third-
party oversight, while the Mission Directorate provides continuous support to 
resolve issues and eliminate bottlenecks for timely completion. As on 
31.03.2026, 838 water body rejuvenation projects have been completed.  

14 
 
AMRUT 2.0 Mission has been extended till 31.03.2027. The State-wise 
and project-wise status of AMRUT 2.0 projects are available in public domain 
on the website https://amrut.mohua.gov.in/approvedProjects/state.  
 
Groundwater management and aquifer recharge fall within the domain 
of States/UTs. The Government of India supplements the efforts of States 
through technical guidance and schematic support under AMRUT and AMRUT 
2.0. To support scientific planning and monitoring, the Ministry has 
collaborated with institutions such as the National Remote Sensing Centre 
(NRSC) for mapping and geospatial analysis of urban water resources. 
  
Urban Water Body Information System (UWAIS) under AMRUT 2.0 
has been developed by MoHUA in collaboration with National Remote Sensing 
Centre to map the water bodies in urban areas. It envisages to develop a database 
of urban water bodies for all ULBs/ cities in the country with the below 
information:  
1. Inventory of water bodies along with size/ area in each  
Town/ State (>1 ha size)  
2. Water spread area of each water body, fortnightly (2012 – till 
date)  
3. Availability of water in each waterbody in a year  
4. Turbidity & Chlorophyll content  
5. Land use/ Land cover (LULC) changes for 3 shortlisted 
waterbodies  
6. The portal makes available geospatial information support on 
waterbodies, enabling decision makers to plan conservation, 
sustainability & rejuvenation of waterbodies  
 
Under AMRUT 2.0, the States/ UTs are empowered to select, appraise, 
prioritise and implement the projects including water body rejuvenation 
projects. It is upto the States/ UTs to take up water body rejuvenation projects 
for the water bodies mapped under UWAIS.  
 
Under Shallow Aquifer Management (SAM), the initiative has been 
scaled up to 75 cities with a budget of ₹75 crore. SAM is being implemented 
through the National Institute of Urban Affairs (NIUA). 56 cities/ ULBs have 
signed agreement with NIUA and 802 sites have been mapped so far for 
recharge structures. Since AMRUT 2.0 has been extended till 31.03.2027, 
expansion of coverage of SAM 2.0 will be considered in the next phase of the 
Mission.  
 
Under AMRUT 2.0, source sustainability and groundwater recharge 
measures are being promoted as an integral component to achieve water security 
in cities. Cities are required to undertake water balance studies and source 

15 
 
sustainability planning, including protection and rejuvenation of water bodies, 
rejuvenate defunct borewells as recharge structures, rainwater harvesting and 
aquifer recharge measures. Digital platforms and GIS-based tools are also being 
utilised to support planning, monitoring and management of urban water 
resources. Ministry is working with States/UTs to expand these initiatives in a 
phased manner by incorporating learnings from pilot interventions and 
strengthening planning, monitoring and implementation of source sustainability 
measures, with the objective of improving urban water security and reducing 
dependence on groundwater sources.” 
 
1.19 The Committee note that the implementation of water body rejuvenation projects 
under AMRUT 2.0 is being regularly monitored through review meetings, digital 
platforms and third-party monitoring mechanisms. The Committee also note that the 
number of completed water body rejuvenation projects has increased from 678 to 838, 
that the Mission has been extended up to 31 March 2027, and that the SAM initiative has 
been expanded to 75 cities with enhanced funding. The Committee, however, emphasise 
the need for timely completion of the remaining sanctioned water body rejuvenation 
projects, expeditious approval of projects for mapped water bodies under UWAIS, and 
effective implementation of the expanded SAM initiative within the extended Mission 
period ending on 31 March 2027. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.7) 
Need to reduce Non-Revenue Water (NRW) and accelerate Smart Metering across cities 
under AMRUT 2.0 
1.20  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
According to the High-Powered Expert Committee (HPEC) report titled “Indian 
Urban Infrastructure and Services”, 2011, the non-revenue water (NRW) accounts for 
50 percent of water production. Further, Sustainable Development Goal 6.4 aims to 
substantially increase water-use efficiency across all sectors. Consequently, the 
AMRUT 2.0 guidelines proposes reduction of non-revenue water (NRW) to below 
20% in an ULB as a part of the incentive-based reforms on water conservation. In this 
regard, ₹400 crore has been earmarked as incentive for States/ULBs that achieve 
NRW reduction below 20%, subject to fulfilling specific milestones such as 
installation of water meters at all water sources and bulk distribution points, creation 
of District Metered Areas (DMAs) covering at least 50% of ULB population with 
100% household metering within these DMAs and establishment of dedicated NRW 
Cells for leakage mapping and water audits.  
 
However, as per the information furnished by the Ministry, no State or ULB has 
submitted claims for reform incentives under this provision as yet. On the issue of 
smart water metering and corresponding NRW reduction, the Ministry stated that 
water is a State subject and planning and implementation are the responsibility of 

16 
 
respective States/ULBs. It did not furnish any city-wise data on smart meter coverage 
or NRW reduction impact.  
 
The Committee observe that despite NRW reduction being a central reform 
target under AMRUT 2.0 and clear financial incentives having been provisioned, 
progress on this front has been negligible. The fact that no State or ULB has claimed 
the incentive reflects a significant gap between policy design and implementation. 
Moreover, the lack of consolidated data on smart meter deployment and resultant 
NRW reduction hampers transparency, monitoring and accountability. The 
Committee are of the view that unless NRW is brought under control, the 
sustainability and efficiency of urban water supply systems will remain compromised.  
 
Despite the fact that water is State subject, the Committee are of the firm opinion 
that the objective of the AMRUT 2.0 of making the cities ‘water secure’ cannot be 
achieved without increasing water-use efficiency. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry urgently engage with States/ULBs to operationalise the 
incentive mechanism for NRW reduction and institute a structured monitoring and 
reporting framework, including the publication of city-wise NRW levels and smart 
metering status.” 
 
1.21 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“Under AMRUT 2.0, performance-linked incentives have been provisioned to 
encourage States and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) to reduce Non-Revenue 
Water (NRW). An amount of ₹400 crore has been earmarked for States upon 
achieving NRW reduction to below 20% at the ULB level. The eligibility for 
claiming these incentives is based on the following milestones:  
a. Installation of water meters at all water sources and bulk distribution points 
within the ULB.  
b. Establishment of District Metered Areas (DMAs) covering at least 50% of 
the ULB population, with 100% metering within these DMAs (including 
household meters), and reporting of NRW in DMAs.  
c. Creation of a Non-Revenue Water Cell in the ULB for conducting leakage 
mapping and water audits. ULBs already having DMAs covering 50% of the 
population are also eligible under this criterion.  
 
The Ministry encourages the States/ UTs to claim the incentives. 
However, it is for the States/ UTs and ULBs to claim the incentives. Further, 
AMRUT 2.0 is actively promoting the adoption of smart elements in urban 
water infrastructure to improve monitoring and reduce Non-Revenue Water 
(NRW). Under AMRUT, 258 water supply projects have incorporated SCADA 
systems. Under AMRUT 2.0, 1,430 water supply projects include provisions for 
SCADA, while 80 projects have integrated flow meters and 22 projects provide 

17 
 
for bulk meters, enabling better system monitoring, efficiency, and NRW 
reduction. 
  
Under AMRUT 2.0, States/UTs are encouraged to implement at least 
one DfT project in a District Metered Area (DMA) or ward in each AMRUT 
city to demonstrate scalable models of continuous and safe water supply. So far, 
408 projects (₹27,864 crore) have been taken up across 27 States/UTs covering 
348 ULBs, with 1,153 DMAs and 16.72 lakh households under DfT supply. 
These DfT projects on DMA approach improve NRW.” 
 
1.22 The Committee acknowledge the existing incentive provisions and initiatives 
undertaken by the Ministry, including SCADA systems, flow meters, bulk meters and 
District Metered Area (DMA)-based Drink from Tap (DfT) projects being implemented 
in various States/UTs. However, the Committee note that the reasons for non-availing of 
incentives by any State or ULB so far have not been explained, nor has city-wise data on 
Non-Revenue Water (NRW), smart metering coverage or actual reduction in NRW been 
furnished, as sought. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation and urge 
the Ministry to provide city-wise data on NRW levels, coverage of smart metering and 
outcomes achieved, along with a clear roadmap for operationalising the incentive 
mechanism and achieving measurable reduction in NRW across AMRUT cities.  
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
Need for strengthening institutional and financial capacity of ULBs in water supply 
management 
1.23  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
Under the AMRUT guidelines, Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) have to submit detailed 
City Water Balance Plans (CWBPs) and City Water Action Plans (CWAPs). 
However, it is reportedly found that in several States/UTs the planning, financing and 
implementation of water supply projects is executed through parastatal agencies such 
as State Jal Boards rather than ULBs, contradicting the 74th Constitutional 
Amendment and the 12th Schedule wherein water is assigned to ULBs. In this regard, 
the Ministry stated that under AMRUT and AMRUT 2.0, ULBs are designated as the 
primary implementing agencies for planning, tendering, awarding and executing 
projects approved under the State Water Action Plan (SWAP). However, in cases 
where ULBs lack technical capacity, support is provided by specialized parastatal 
agencies and Project Development and Management Consultants (PDMCs). On 
municipal bonds, the Ministry informed the Committee that ₹5,309 crore has been 
mobilized by 17 cities through bond issuance so far, and incentives have been 
provided accordingly.  
 
The Committee note that although the framework places ULBs at the centre of 
implementation, the actual practice remains skewed towards parastatal dominance due 

18 
 
to inadequate technical and institutional capacity at the ULB level. Elected ULB 
members do not have much control over state-level institutions. There is also no 
clarity on the degree of ULB involvement in Service Level Improvement Plans 
(SLIPs) preparation. The Committee also took note of the fact that only 17 out of 500 
AMRUT cities have successfully accessed municipal bonds, highlighting the limited 
financial autonomy and preparedness of the majority of ULBs.  
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs, in coordination with State Governments, should take concrete, time-bound 
steps to empower ULBs as per the spirit of the 74th Constitutional Amendment. This 
includes mandating and closely monitoring their participation in planning exercises 
such as SLIPs, formulating a national roadmap for building their institutional and 
technical capacity and progressively reducing reliance on parastatal agencies. 
Targeted financial and technical support should be extended to enable ULBs to 
independently plan and implement water supply projects” 
 
1.24 In their written reply, the Ministry has stated as follows: 
 
“Water and Sanitation is State subject. Government of India supplements the 
efforts of the States through schematic interventions/ advisories. It provides 
financial and technical support to the States through various Mission/ Schemes 
such as Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) 
and AMRUT 2.0 for improvement/ augmentation of basic infrastructure in 
urban areas in the sectors of water supply, sewerage and septage management, 
etc.  
 
Under AMRUT and AMRUT 2.0, States are empowered to plan, design, 
and approve projects based on their priorities and contextual needs. The 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) approves the State Water 
Action Plans (SWAPs) submitted by States, in alignment with the broad 
contours and reform objectives outlined in the Mission Guidelines.  
 
The Mission guidelines empowers ULBs to prepare City Water Balance 
Plans (CWBPs) and City Water Action Plans (CWAPs). These plans serve as 
foundational documents to assess a city's water demand, supply, losses, and 
potential for reuse, and to guide targeted interventions for water security and 
sustainability.  
 
The Ministry provides financial support to ULBs through various 
projects under AMRUT/ AMRUT 2.0 for augmentation of basic infrastructure 
as per Mission guidelines. Further, ULBs are supported through various reform 
incentives such as Jal hi Amrit, outcome based incentives, incentives for issuing 
municipal bonds, etc.  
 

19 
 
ULBs are also supported through 15th Finance Commission Grants.” 
 
1.25  The Committee acknowledge that the Ministry has empowered Urban Local 
Bodies (ULBs) under the AMRUT 2.0 guidelines to prepare City Water Balance Plans 
(CWBPs) and City Water Action Plans (CWAPs), and has extended financial assistance 
through AMRUT, reform incentives and the 15th Finance Commission Grants to 
strengthen urban water infrastructure. The Committee are of the view that these 
initiatives should now be complemented with a comprehensive roadmap for 
strengthening the institutional role, functional autonomy and decision-making capacity 
of ULBs, in keeping with the spirit of the 74th Constitutional Amendment. The Committee 
further feel that the ongoing support mechanisms should be expanded through structured 
capacity-building programmes in technology, financial management, project planning 
and implementation, enabling ULBs to progressively undertake urban water supply 
projects independently. Simultaneously, sustained efforts may be made to progressively 
reduce reliance on parastatal agencies by empowering ULBs with the requisite 
institutional and technical capabilities.  
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
Need for a National-Level Long-Term Urban Water Demand Projection Framework 
1.26  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
The Committee sought to know whether any comprehensive assessment has been 
undertaken to estimate the urban drinking water demand for the long-term horizon of 
2047 (Viksit Bharat), given the anticipated demographic transition with over half of 
India’s population projected to reside in urban areas by 2050. The Committee also 
inquired how the AMRUT Mission across both phases has been designed or 
recalibrated to account for the projected growth in urban population and 
corresponding water demand, and what strategic interventions are being undertaken 
to ensure water security for future urban India.  
 
The Ministry stated that while no unified national-level projection report has 
been prepared, inputs from institutional mechanisms such as Census projections, NITI 
Aayog, World Bank, and ADB are used to inform long-term planning. Under AMRUT 
2.0, States and ULBs have been encouraged to prepare City Water Balance Plans 
(CWBP) and City Water Action Plans (CWAP) to assess current and future water 
demand. Detailed Project Reports are being developed on a 15–30 year horizon. Other 
interventions under AMRUT 2.0 include universal water supply coverage, reduction 
of Non-Revenue Water (NRW), treated wastewater reuse, water body rejuvenation, 
digital governance tools, capacity building, and reform-linked incentives.  
 
The Committee note that although the Ministry has taken various steps through 
AMRUT 2.0 to guide long-term urban water infrastructure planning in a decentralised 
manner, there is no single consolidated or nationally coordinated projection of urban 

20 
 
water demand for 2047 or 2050. The absence of such a long-term strategic assessment 
weakens the alignment of city-level interventions with the overarching goals of Viksit 
Bharat 2047 and limits the ability to comprehensively address the implications of 
rapid urbanisation on water security. Fragmented approaches, varying in quality and 
coverage across States and ULBs, further exacerbate this gap.  
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry, in coordination with 
various stakeholders, should urgently commission a unified national-level assessment 
and projection of urban drinking water demand for next 25 to 30 years. This exercise 
should account for projected population growth, migration trends, climate resilience, 
resource sustainability and technological interventions. The findings should form the 
basis for a National Urban Water Security Strategy, which would guide reforms, 
infrastructure investments and institutional capacity building across all levels of 
governance to ensure future-ready and water-secure cities.” 
 
1.27 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“States have been requested to assess current infrastructure gaps and prepare 
project proposals based on future demand projections, taking into account 
factors such as population growth, urban expansion and service level 
benchmarks. These saturation plans are required to be prepared in accordance 
with the technical norms and planning parameters prescribed in CPHEEEO 
manuals, which provide standard methodologies for estimating present and 
future water demand and designing infrastructure accordingly. Through this 
approach, States and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) are expected to undertake 
systematic demand assessments and plan infrastructure investments that are 
aligned with long-term urban growth and service delivery needs.  
 
An utility has been developed on the AMRUT 2.0 platform for assessing 
the gaps in urban piped water supply and the required investment to build the 
infrastructure. States/ UTs have been requested to update the data on the portal.” 
 
1.28 The Committee appreciate the Ministry's initiative in developing a utility on the 
AMRUT 2.0 platform for assessing urban piped water supply gaps and the corresponding 
infrastructure investment requirements. The Committee would like the Ministry to 
furnish the consolidated data uploaded by the States/UTs on the portal, together with the 
status of infrastructure gap assessments undertaken so far.  
   
******* 

21 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
Need for adequate Funding for Urban Water Infrastructure under AMRUT 2.0  
2.1  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
The Committee evaluated the adequacy of financial investments under AMRUT 1.0 
and AMRUT 2.0 in comparison with the projections made by the High-Powered 
Expert Committee (HPEC), 2011 set up for estimating the investment requirements 
for Urban Infrastructure Services, which estimated ₹3.2 lakh crore for urban water 
supply infrastructure and ₹5.5 lakh crore for Operations and Maintenance (O&M) 
over a 20- year period (2012-2031).  
 
The Ministry informed that under AMRUT 1.0, ₹43,392 crore worth of water 
supply projects have been grounded with ₹38,554 crore already spent. Under AMRUT 
2.0, water supply projects worth ₹1,18,422 crore have been approved, with grounding 
completed for ₹69,341 crore. Combined, ₹1,61,814 crore has been sanctioned for 
water supply across both Missions, addressing about 51% of the HPEC-projected 
investment of ₹3.2 lakh crore. The Committee observe that while AMRUT has led to 
a notable scaling-up of investments in urban water supply infrastructure, the total 
sanctioned amount still meets only about half of the requirement projected by HPEC 
for the 20-year period 2012–2031, which is set to conclude in the next five to six years.  
 
On the O&M front, the Committee note that projects worth ₹21,023 crore have 
been planned under AMRUT 2.0 against the total sanctioned project cost of ₹1,73,149 
crore. The Ministry informed that O&M expenses are to be met by ULBs through user 
charges or other cost-recovery measures. The Committee observe that although States 
and ULBs are required to incorporate five years of O&M in project planning, the 
Government of India does not provide financial support for these expenses under 
either AMRUT or AMRUT 2.0. This has led to significant operational difficulties at 
the ULB level, where limited financial resources often impede the proper operation 
and maintenance of water treatment plants, sewerage networks and other assets 
created under the Mission. The Committee note that inadequate O&M financing not 
only limits the effectiveness of capital investments but also affects the long-term 
sustainability of the infrastructure. Furthermore, as O&M responsibilities rest with 
ULBs, the limited financial and institutional capacity of many urban local bodies 
further constrains their ability to ensure reliable and sustained service delivery.  
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the MoHUA take immediate steps 
to bridge the financing gap in urban water infrastructure. This should include:- 
  

22 
 
i. conducting a comprehensive assessment of State-level water sector 
investments to gauge cumulative progress towards the HPEC-estimated 
requirement;  
ii. pursuing enhanced central and multilateral funding support to close the 
remaining deficit, especially in underserved regions;  
iii. establishing a dedicated financial mechanism or incentive-based support 
framework for O&M funding to supplement ULB efforts, particularly in 
smaller municipalities with limited revenue-generating capacity; and  
iv. assessing the additional financial requirements and investment needs of the 
urban water sector with a long-term perspective up to the year 2047.” 
 
2.2 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"AMRUT 2.0 is encouraging States and cities to adopt a long-term planning 
perspective aligned with the vision of Viksit Bharat @2047. Under AMRUT 
2.0, States have been requested to assess current infrastructure gaps and assess 
the investments required for future projections based on future demand 
projections, taking into account factors such as population growth, urban 
expansion and service level benchmarks. These saturation assessments are 
required to be done in accordance with the technical norms and planning 
parameters prescribed in CPHEEEO manuals, which provide standard 
methodologies for estimating present and future water demand and designing 
infrastructure accordingly. Through this approach, States and Urban Local 
Bodies (ULBs) are expected to undertake systematic demand assessments and 
plan infrastructure investments that are aligned with long-term urban growth 
and service delivery needs.  
 
The Ministry, through handholding support and advisory from CPHEEO 
and other technical institutions, support States and ULBs in preparing 
scientifically designed infrastructure plans based on projected demand 
scenarios. These planning frameworks will help assess future investment 
requirements and guide sustainable development of urban water infrastructure 
over the long term.  
 
An utility has been developed on the AMRUT 2.0 platform for assessing 
the gaps as in 2025, in urban piped water supply and the required investment to 
build the infrastructure. States/ UTs have been requested to update the data on 
the portal. 
 
The Government of India has been promoting a multi-pronged financing 
framework to augment investments in urban water infrastructure through 
Central assistance, institutional financing, and innovative financing 
mechanisms.  
 

23 
 
Under AMRUT 2.0, States and cities are encouraged to leverage Public–
Private Partnerships (PPP) for project implementation, with a view to 
mobilising private sector investment, enhancing operational efficiency and 
reducing the burden on public finances.  
 
The Government is also encouraging market-based financing by Urban 
Local Bodies through municipal bonds. The Union Budget 2026–27 has further 
strengthened this approach by announcing an incentive of ₹100 crore for 
municipal corporations issuing a single municipal bond of more than ₹1,000 
crore, in addition to the existing AMRUT-based performance incentives that 
support smaller bond issuances up to ₹200 crore. This measure aims to 
encourage large cities to tap capital markets for urban infrastructure financing 
and deepen the municipal bond market in the country 
 
Further, the Government is facilitating additional investments in urban 
infrastructure through dedicated financing initiatives such as the Urban 
Challenge Fund (UCF) and the Urban Infrastructure Development Fund 
(UIDF). UCF with committed central assistance of ₹ one lakh crore government 
provides up to 25% funding for bankable projects, with at least 50% financing 
through bonds, bank loans, or PPPs, to support urban infrastructure under three 
verticals including Water & Sanitation.  
 
To facilitate market access for smaller ULBs, including Tier-2 and Tier-
3 cities, a Credit Repayment Guarantee Scheme with a corpus of ₹5,000 crore 
has been approved for ULBs in North-Eastern and Hilly States/UTs and smaller 
ULBs (<1 lakh population) in other States/UTs. The scheme provides Central 
guarantee for loans up to ₹7 crore or 70% of the loan (whichever is lower) for 
first-time loans, and ₹7 crore or 50% for subsequent loans, in addition to Central 
Assistance under UCF. 
 
States and cities are also encouraged to mobilise resources through 
institutional finance, externally aided projects, and innovative financing 
models, along with their own budgetary allocations, to supplement investments 
under Central Missions and accelerate the creation of urban water infrastructure, 
particularly in smaller and underserved cities. 
 
Maintenance and replacement of ageing pipelines is the responsibility 
of Urban Local Bodies (ULBs)/parastatals. The Government of India 
supplements the efforts of States through schematic interventions, financial 
assistance and technical advisories, including under the Atal Mission for 
Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) and AMRUT 2.0. Under 
these Missions, capital investments for infrastructure creation are supported 
through Central assistance, while operation and maintenance (O&M) of water 
supply and sewerage systems remains the responsibility of ULBs, in line with 

24 
 
their constitutional mandate. To ensure sustainability of assets, the AMRUT 
guidelines advocates taking up projects with Operation and Maintenance (O & 
M) cost for at least five years, funded by way of levy of user charges or other 
revenue streams. The Mission framework also emphasizes reforms such as levy 
and collection of user charges, reduction of non-revenue water, reuse and 
recycling of treated wastewater and improvement in financial management 
practices to enhance the capacity of ULBs to sustainably operate and maintain 
assets.” 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No. O-
16011/04/2025 -AMRUT-IA-MoHUA (E-9192544) dated 20th April, 2026] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.7 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
Need for accelerated implementation of water source sustainability measures under 
AMRUT 2.0   
2.3  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
The Committee, taking note of the alarming depletion of groundwater reserves and the 
growing threat to water security, sought detailed information from the Ministry on the 
interventions under AMRUT and AMRUT 2.0 aimed at ensuring water source sustainability, 
specifically, the measures taken for reducing groundwater dependence, rejuvenating water 
bodies, improving aquifer recharge, along with their measurable outcomes and effectiveness. 
In response, the Ministry stated that a multi-pronged approach has been adopted under both 
phases of AMRUT to tackle groundwater depletion. Key measures inter-alia included the 
implementation of Shallow Aquifer Management (SAM) pilots in 9 cities, now being scaled up 
to 75 cities under SAM 2.0, construction of aquifer recharge structures, restoration of defunct 
wells and comprehensive groundwater mapping and planning in partnership with National 
Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) and National Institute of Urban Affairs (NIUA). Further, 
28,761 urban water bodies covering an area of 7.13 lakh hectares have been mapped. 
While acknowledging the Ministry’s efforts in designing a broad framework for 
groundwater recharge and water body rejuvenation, the Committee remain concerned about the 
slow implementation. It is noted that only 678 out of 3,032 sanctioned water body rejuvenation 
projects have been completed, amounting to just around 22%, reflecting significant delays. 
Moreover, despite the extensive mapping of water bodies, rejuvenation plans have so far been 
prepared for only about 10.5% of them under AMRUT 2.0, highlighting a disconnect between 
data collection and follow-through action. The Committee further observe that SAM initiative 
although conceptually strong, so far remains limited in reach and investment with only ₹4.5 
crore invested across 9 cities. The Committee have further been briefed that the exact volumes 
of drinking water contributions made through these interventions are not quantified and 
State/UT wise data is not monitored under AMRUT 2.0.  

25 
 
In view of the above submissions made by the Ministry, the Committee recommend the 
following: 
(i) in light of the fact that the Mission is scheduled to end on 31stMarch, 2026, the Ministry 
must take urgent steps to accelerate the completion of all sanctioned water body 
rejuvenation projects under AMRUT 2.0 and establish annual progress targets with 
public disclosure; 
(ii) expedite the sanctioning and approval of projects for rejuvenation of urban water bodies 
that have been mapped through Urban Water body Information System (UWAIS) by the 
National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC); 
(iii) simultaneously also upscale Shallow Aquifer Management (SAM) 2.0 by enhancing 
funding, expanding its coverage beyond the initial 75 cities and integrating it into city-
level planning frameworks; and 
(iv) formulate a National Urban Aquifer Recharge Strategy with defined benchmarks, 
monitoring mechanisms and a GIS-enabled tracking system so as to quantify the 
outcomes and sustainability of the various initiates. 
  
2.4 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
“To accelerate completion of approved water body rejuvenation projects under 
AMRUT 2.0, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) maintains 
close coordination with States/UTs throughout the Mission. Progress is 
regularly reviewed in APEX Committee meetings and monitored through video 
conferences, webinars, and workshops at various levels in the Ministry. A 
dedicated digital platform tracks project milestones, requiring States/UTs to 
update data consistently to ensure transparency and accurate monitoring. 
Independent Review & Monitoring Agencies have been appointed for third-
party oversight, while the Mission Directorate provides continuous support to 
resolve issues and eliminate bottlenecks for timely completion. As on 
31.03.2026, 838 water body rejuvenation projects have been completed.  
AMRUT 2.0 Mission has been extended till 31.03.2027. The State-wise 
and project-wise status of AMRUT 2.0 projects are available in public domain 
on the website https://amrut.mohua.gov.in/approvedProjects/state.  
 
Groundwater management and aquifer recharge fall within the domain 
of States/UTs. The Government of India supplements the efforts of States 
through technical guidance and schematic support under AMRUT and AMRUT 
2.0. To support scientific planning and monitoring, the Ministry has 
collaborated with institutions such as the National Remote Sensing Centre 
(NRSC) for mapping and geospatial analysis of urban water resources. 
  
Urban Water Body Information System (UWAIS) under AMRUT 2.0 
has been developed by MoHUA in collaboration with National Remote Sensing 
Centre to map the water bodies in urban areas. It envisages to develop a database 

26 
 
of urban water bodies for all ULBs/ cities in the country with the below 
information:  
7. Inventory of water bodies along with size/ area in each  
Town/ State (>1 ha size)  
8. Water spread area of each water body, fortnightly (2012 – till 
date)  
9. Availability of water in each waterbody in a year  
10. Turbidity & Chlorophyll content  
11. Land use/ Land cover (LULC) changes for 3 shortlisted 
waterbodies  
12. The portal makes available geospatial information support on 
waterbodies, enabling decision makers to plan conservation, 
sustainability & rejuvenation of waterbodies  
 
Under AMRUT 2.0, the States/ UTs are empowered to select, appraise, 
prioritise and implement the projects including water body rejuvenation 
projects. It is upto the States/ UTs to take up water body rejuvenation projects 
for the water bodies mapped under UWAIS.  
 
Under Shallow Aquifer Management (SAM), the initiative has been 
scaled up to 75 cities with a budget of ₹75 crore. SAM is being implemented 
through the National Institute of Urban Affairs (NIUA). 56 cities/ ULBs have 
signed agreement with NIUA and 802 sites have been mapped so far for 
recharge structures. Since AMRUT 2.0 has been extended till 31.03.2027, 
expansion of coverage of SAM 2.0 will be considered in the next phase of the 
Mission.  
 
Under AMRUT 2.0, source sustainability and groundwater recharge 
measures are being promoted as an integral component to achieve water security 
in cities. Cities are required to undertake water balance studies and source 
sustainability planning, including protection and rejuvenation of water bodies, 
rejuvenate defunct borewells as recharge structures, rainwater harvesting and 
aquifer recharge measures. Digital platforms and GIS-based tools are also being 
utilised to support planning, monitoring and management of urban water 
resources. Ministry is working with States/UTs to expand these initiatives in a 
phased manner by incorporating learnings from pilot interventions and 
strengthening planning, monitoring and implementation of source sustainability 
measures, with the objective of improving urban water security and reducing 
dependence on groundwater sources.” 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No. O-
16011/04/2025 -AMRUT-IA-MoHUA (E-9192544) dated 20th April, 2026] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.19 of the Report) 

27 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
Need for Accelerated Completion, Capacity Realisation and Performance Monitoring of 
Water Supply Infrastructure under AMRUT 
2.5  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
The Committee, while reviewing the status of urban water supply infrastructure under 
AMRUT and AMRUT 2.0, examined State/UT-wise data relating to upgradation and 
augmentation of old Water Treatment Plants (WTPs), commissioning of new WTPs, household 
access to piped water supply and expansion and replacement of water distribution networks. 
The Committee observe that although certain components of AMRUT 1.0 have registered 
notable progress, substantial gaps persist across States/UTs in both infrastructure creation and 
service delivery outcomes. 
Under AMRUT 1.0, out of 32 old WTPs targeted, 31 have been upgraded/augmented, 
covering a combined capacity of 307.79 MLD across eight States/UTs, with Karnataka alone 
accounting for nearly 142 MLD of upgraded capacity. However, under AMRUT 2.0, the 
Committee note that out of 133 sanctioned WTP augmentation/rehabilitation projects with a 
total approved capacity of 1,652.49 MLD, only 2 projects (6.03 MLD) have been completed to 
date, representing less than 0.4% of the approved capacity. Major States such as Gujarat, 
Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh, despite having some of the highest sanctioned capacities, 
have reported no completed projects so far. 
As regards new WTPs under AMRUT, out of 149 planned plants, 134 have been 
commissioned, achieving 4,626.06 MLD against a planned capacity of 5,814.65 MLD, leaving 
a capacity gap of 1,188.59 MLD. Several States including Punjab (gap of 405.89 MLD), 
Maharashtra (238 MLD), Tamil Nadu (125 MLD) and Kerala (100 MLD) continue to exhibit 
substantial shortfalls. 
On the aspect of household access to piped water supply, the data furnished reflects 
disparities across States/UTs as of 2021. While States/UTs, such as Andaman & Nicobar 
Islands, Punjab, Telangana and Puducherry report over 90% coverage, several States/UTs, such 
as Ladakh (11.46%), Nagaland (17.07%), Assam (16.28%), Arunachal Pradesh (37.74%), 
Jharkhand (35.7%) and Uttar Pradesh (44.15%) remain significantly below the 50% mark. 
The Committee further note that under AMRUT 1.0, against a target of 70,673.78 km 
of water pipeline network, 73,519.51 km has reportedly been achieved overall. However, this 
aggregate conceals substantial under-performance in States such as Assam, Andhra Pradesh, 
Gujarat, Jharkhand, Kerala, Rajasthan, Telangana and Uttar Pradesh. Under AMRUT 2.0, 
although 22,147 km of distribution network has been identified for replacement, the Ministry 
has not furnished any data on progress achieved so far.  
In light of these observations and especially noting the slow pace of WTP upgradation 
under AMRUT 2.0, persistent treatment capacity gaps and wide disparities in household 
coverage, the Committee recommend that the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs undertake 
the following measures: 
(i) Establish strict, State-wise quarterly targets for the completion of ongoing WTP 
upgradation, augmentation and rehabilitation projects under AMRUT 1.0 and 

28 
 
AMRUT 2.0, as well as pipeline network works in lagging States. These targets 
should be monitored on a real-time basis to prevent further slippage. 
(ii)  Bridge Capacity Gaps: Prioritise States with significant treatment capacity deficits 
such as Punjab, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and Kerala and those with less than 50% 
household coverage, such as Ladakh, Nagaland, Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Jharkhand, and Uttar Pradesh by providing targeted funding, technical support and 
capacity-building measures. 
(iii) Improve Data Transparency: Mandate comprehensive annual performance 
reporting for all AMRUT cities/ULBs, including household coverage, treatment 
capacity utilisation and progress on network projects to ensure informed policy and 
operational decisions. 
(iv) Link Funding to Outcomes: Introduce conditional funding mechanisms under 
AMRUT 2.0, linking future fund releases not only to demonstrated progress in 
infrastructure creation but also to operational performance indicators such as 
treatment capacity utilisation, proportion of population receiving 24x7 water supply 
and household coverage with piped connections etc. so as to enhance accountability 
and ensure timely achievement of Mission objectives. 
 
2.6 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
“Under AMRUT and AMRUT 2.0, a multi-tier monitoring framework has been 
put in place to ensure timely implementation of projects including Water 
Treatment Plants (WTPs), distribution networks, and household connections.  
 
At the State level, a State High Powered Steering Committee (SHPSC) 
headed by the Chief Secretary monitors and supervises implementation of the 
Mission. The State Level Technical Committee (SLTC), chaired by the 
Secretary, Urban Development & Housing Department, provides technical 
appraisal and support to the SHPSC in overseeing project progress. At the 
national level, an Apex Committee constituted under the Mission guidelines 
periodically reviews and monitors implementation of the Mission. In addition, 
Independent Review and Monitoring Agencies (IRMAs) have been engaged for 
third-party assessment and monitoring of works undertaken in States/UTs.  
 
To further accelerate project completion, States/UTs have been asked to 
provide quarterly project expenditure and progress targets, which are being 
regularly tracked. States have also been requested to identify project-wise 
bottlenecks, particularly relating to land availability and statutory approvals, so 
that these issues can be taken up in joint review meetings with concerned 
authorities and resolved in a time-bound manner. Further, project 
implementation is closely monitored through regular video conferences and site 
visits by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) with States/UTs 
and Urban Local Bodies. A dedicated AMRUT 2.0 online portal and MIS 

29 
 
platform also enables real-time tracking of project progress, facilitating timely 
identification and resolution of implementation issues.  
 
The Ministry has taken note of the recommendation regarding bridging 
treatment capacity gaps and improving household coverage in States with lower 
service levels. Under AMRUT 2.0, the States/ UTs are empowered to select, 
appraise, prioritise and implement the projects. States/ UTs prioritise projects 
within the overall allocated central contribution for the entire Mission period. 
 
 However, under AMRUT/AMRUT 2.0, significant investments have 
been made in augmenting water treatment capacity, strengthening distribution 
networks and expanding household tap connections. As a result of these efforts, 
urban tap water coverage has increased from about 49% in 2011 to around 
78.2% (based on 2021 population). Under the Mission, about 2.46 crore tap 
connections have been provided, and another 1.62 crore connections have been 
approved under AMRUT 2.0. Further, 5,517 MLD of additional water treatment 
capacity has been created, while another 12,019 MLD capacity is under 
implementation to address treatment gaps and improve reliability of supply.  
 
To support States/UTs with lower service levels, the Ministry is also 
facilitating technical guidance and capacity building of urban utilities, including 
training of engineers, operators and municipal officials for improved planning, 
project implementation and operation of water supply systems. Around 1.05 
lakh contractors, plant operators, plumbers, officials, women and youth have 
been trained so far.  
 
Under AMRUT 2.0, project progress and outcomes are tracked through 
the AMRUT 2.0 collaboration platforms, where States/UTs regularly update 
physical and financial progress. A ranking framework has been developed on 
the AMRUT Universe Platform, under which ULBs with approved projects are 
ranked within their respective States/UTs based on parameters such as projects 
awarded, expenditure incurred, outcomes achieved and timely project data 
updation.  
 
Under AMRUT 2.0, the Mission guidelines links project fund releases 
with the achievement of outcomes. The third instalment, amounting to 40% of 
the admissible Central Assistance (CA) to the State/UT, is released on achieving 
functional outcomes from AMRUT 2.0 projects. This mechanism ensures that 
States/UTs focus not only on infrastructure creation but also on operational 
performance and delivery of intended service outcomes, thereby strengthening 
accountability and supporting timely achievement of Mission objectives.” 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No. O-
16011/04/2025 -AMRUT-IA-MoHUA (E-9192544) dated 20th April, 2026] 

30 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
Urgent need to augment Wastewater Treatment capacity and to strengthen Wastewater 
Reuse through Policy, Regulation and Incentives  
2.7  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
The AMRUT 2.0 guidelines states that State High Powered Steering Committee 
(SHPSC), while approving the State Water Action Plan will also ensure that used water 
(wastewater) is treated and put to reuse to meet 20% of cities water demand and 40% of Industry 
water demand in aggregate at the state level. In this context, the state-wise data on sewage 
generation and treatment as furnished by the Ministry, based on the information provided by 
the Chief Secretaries of 31 States/UTs to National Green Tribunal (NGT) dated February, 2021 
reveals that total sewage generation in urban India stands at approximately 48,004 MLD and 
the installed treatment capacity is about 30,001 MLD spread across 1,261 Sewage Treatment 
Plants (STPs). However, the actual utilization of the existing treatment capacity is only 55.9%, 
that is, 16,770 MLD. Certain States either have no treatment capacity or underutilized 
infrastructure. Thus, against the 2021 data on national sewage generation, as on date 31,234 
MLD sewage goes untreated across states. 
On reuse, the Ministry stated that AMRUT 2.0 promotes the reuse of treated 
wastewater for building a circular urban water economy. The Committee have been apprised 
that so far 1,437 MLD of additional reuse capacity has been created under AMRUT, taking the 
total to 5,614 MLD, with another 1,943 MLD under implementation. States are further 
encouraged to scale this up to 10,000 MLD by 2030. The Ministry highlighted that 11 States 
have notified reuse policies under AMRUT 2.0 and reforms such as Jal Hi AMRIT incentivise 
performance-based recycling. AMRUT also mandates ULBs to pass resolutions on wastewater 
reuse, supported by financial and technical assistance under the Technology Sub-Mission. 
The Committee take note of the significant gap of over 31,234 MLD between 
wastewater generation and treatment, indicating serious capacity and operational shortcomings. 
Although AMRUT 2.0 emphasises wastewater reuse, its adoption remains limited and 
inconsistent, with only 11 States having formal reuse policies. These policies appear to focus 
primarily on augmenting water supply, with insufficient emphasis on wastewater recycling and 
reclamation. The lack of centralised data on potable water uses for non-potable needs and weak 
enforcement mechanisms further hinder progress. While initiatives like Jal Hi AMRIT are 
commendable, the Committee are of the view that voluntary efforts without strong regulatory 
backing are unlikely to drive large-scale change at the national level. 
In light of the above, the Committee recommend that: 
(i) the Ministry must take all necessary measures for optimal utilisation of the sewage treatment 
capacity of the existing Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs) and promote installation of sufficient 
STPs across States/UTs as to achieve 100% wastewater treatment; 
(ii) the Ministry should collect and upload the latest data from all the States on total sewage 
generation in urban India and the installed treatment capacity, and accordingly plan further 
strategies and reforms; 
(iii) All the States should be urged to adopt and notify specific reform provisions and policies 
on reuse of treated water; and 

31 
 
(iv) the Ministry in coordination with States, formulate a National Urban Wastewater Reuse 
Policy with enforceable benchmarks on priority basis, mandating time-bound adoption of State-
level reuse policies and establish robust systems for tracking actual reuse and resultant 
reduction in potable water diversion; 
2.8 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
“Sanitation is a State subject, and the primary responsibility for wastewater 
management, including treatment and reuse, rests with States/UTs and Urban 
Local Bodies (ULBs).  
 
Under AMRUT and AMRUT 2.0, States/UTs and Urban Local Bodies 
(ULBs) are being supported to augment sewage treatment capacity and ensure 
optimal utilisation of existing Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs). So far under 
AMRUT & AMRUT 2.0, around 5,455 MLD sewage treatment capacity has 
been created & another 7494 MLD is in progress/ planned in approved projects. 
To ensure efficient utilisation of treatment infrastructure, States/UTs have been 
advised to connect STPs with the associated sewerage network and provide 
household sewer connections. Under AMRUT/AMRUT 2.0, about 26,995 km 
of sewer network has been laid and another 33,368 km planned/in progress 
under approved projects to strengthen sewerage coverage.  
 
To ensure effective monitoring and operation of treatment facilities, 
technology-based monitoring systems such as SCADA and Online Continuous 
Effluent Monitoring Systems (OCEMS) are being deployed for real-time 
tracking of STP performance.  
 
AMRUT 2.0 also promotes a circular urban water economy, 
encouraging States/UTs to reuse and recycle treated wastewater. Under 
AMRUT, 1,437 MLD of additional reuse capacity has been created, taking the 
total reuse capacity to around 6,000 MLD, with another 1,931 MLD under 
implementation under AMRUT 2.0 for uses such as irrigation in nearby 
farmlands, horticulture, and industrial applications.  
 
Further, performance-based initiatives such as “Jal Hi Amrit” 
incentivise efficient sewage treatment and recycling of treated wastewater. 
Under the Jal Hi Amrit (JHA) initiative, 25 States/UTs have established Water 
Resource Recovery Cells (WRRCs) to strengthen governance of wastewater 
recycling, and over 7,000 certifications have been issued to plant operators, 
plant managers, and technical personnel to improve professional management 
of treatment facilities.  
 
Under AMRUT 2.0, reuse of treated wastewater is promoted as a key 
component of circular urban water management. States/UTs are encouraged to 
formulate and notify their own policies on reuse of treated wastewater, and 

32 
 
Urban Local Bodies are required to pass resolutions on wastewater reuse as part 
of project planning under the Mission.  
 
To support this objective, the Ministry provides technical guidance 
through CPHEEO manuals and advisories, and financial assistance under the 
Technology Sub-Mission of AMRUT 2.0.  
 
As a result of these efforts, 11 States have already notified policies on 
wastewater reuse, and several others are in the process of developing such 
frameworks. The Ministry continues to work closely with States/UTs to 
promote adoption of reuse policies, strengthen monitoring systems and scale up 
reuse of treated wastewater, thereby reducing dependence on freshwater sources 
and promoting sustainable urban water management.  
 
An utility has been developed on the AMRUT 2.0 platform for assessing 
the gaps in sewerage and the required investment to build the infrastructure. 
States/ UTs have been requested to update the data on the portal. 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No.  
O-16011/04/2025 -AMRUT-IA-MoHUA (E-9192544) dated 20th April, 2026] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
Need for strengthening institutional and financial capacity of ULBs in water supply 
management  
2.9  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
Under the AMRUT guidelines, Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) have to submit detailed City Water 
Balance Plans (CWBPs) and City Water Action Plans (CWAPs). However, it is reportedly 
found that in several States/UTs the planning, financing and implementation of water supply 
projects is executed through parastatal agencies such as State Jal Boards rather than ULBs, 
contradicting the 74th Constitutional Amendment and the 12th Schedule wherein water is 
assigned to ULBs. In this regard, the Ministry stated that under AMRUT and AMRUT 2.0, 
ULBs are designated as the primary implementing agencies for planning, tendering, awarding 
and executing projects approved under the State Water Action Plan (SWAP). However, in cases 
where ULBs lack technical capacity, support is provided by specialized parastatal agencies and 
Project Development and Management Consultants (PDMCs). On municipal bonds, the 
Ministry informed the Committee that ₹5,309 crore has been mobilized by 17 cities through 
bond issuance so far, and incentives have been provided accordingly. 
The Committee note that although the framework places ULBs at the centre of 
implementation, the actual practice remains skewed towards parastatal dominance due to 
inadequate technical and institutional capacity at the ULB level. Elected ULB members do not 
have much control over state-level institutions. There is also no clarity on the degree of ULB 
involvement in Service Level Improvement Plans (SLIPs) preparation. The Committee also 
took note of the fact that only 17 out of 500 AMRUT cities have successfully accessed 

33 
 
municipal bonds, highlighting the limited financial autonomy and preparedness of the majority 
of ULBs.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, 
in coordination with State Governments, should take concrete, time-bound steps to empower 
ULBs as per the spirit of the 74th Constitutional Amendment. This includes mandating and 
closely monitoring their participation in planning exercises such as SLIPs, formulating a 
national roadmap for building their institutional and technical capacity and progressively 
reducing reliance on parastatal agencies. Targeted financial and technical support should be 
extended to enable ULBs to independently plan and implement water supply projects. 
2.10 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
“Water and Sanitation is State subject. Government of India supplements the 
efforts of the States through schematic interventions/ advisories. It provides 
financial and technical support to the States through various Mission/ Schemes 
such as Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) 
and AMRUT 2.0 for improvement/ augmentation of basic infrastructure in 
urban areas in the sectors of water supply, sewerage and septage management, 
etc.  
 
Under AMRUT and AMRUT 2.0, States are empowered to plan, design, 
and approve projects based on their priorities and contextual needs. The 
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) approves the State Water 
Action Plans (SWAPs) submitted by States, in alignment with the broad 
contours and reform objectives outlined in the Mission Guidelines.  
 
The Mission guidelines empowers ULBs to prepare City Water Balance 
Plans (CWBPs) and City Water Action Plans (CWAPs). These plans serve as 
foundational documents to assess a city's water demand, supply, losses, and 
potential for reuse, and to guide targeted interventions for water security and 
sustainability.  
 
The Ministry provides financial support to ULBs through various 
projects under AMRUT/ AMRUT 2.0 for augmentation of basic infrastructure 
as per Mission guidelines. Further, ULBs are supported through various reform 
incentives such as Jal hi Amrit, outcome based incentives, incentives for issuing 
municipal bonds, etc.  
 
ULBs are also supported through 15th Finance Commission Grants.” 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No.  
O-16011/04/2025 -AMRUT-IA-MoHUA (E-9192544) dated 20th April, 2026] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.25 of the Report) 

34 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
Institutionalising community participation under AMRUT  
2.11  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
AMRUT 2.0 aims to make cities ‘water secure’ through circular economy of water by 
involving community at large. Regarding the initiatives taken under the Mission to 
foster a people-centric, participatory governance model beyond the scope of 
infrastructure creation, the Ministry informed the Committee that citizen engagement 
is promoted through various initiatives such as AMRUT Mitras, engagement of Self-
Help Groups (SHGs), Information, Education and Communication (IEC) campaigns 
and workshops with States, Cantonment Boards and parastatal bodies. It elaborated that 
SHGs are being trained for household-level water quality testing using field kits under 
the AMRUT Mitra initiative, which aims to empower communities, especially women, 
in decentralized water quality monitoring.  
While acknowledging the Ministry’s initiatives to involve SHGs and promote 
citizen engagement, the Committee note that these efforts lack structured 
institutionalized platforms for regular community involvement, particularly at ground 
level.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry institutionalize 
community participation in AMRUT projects through mechanisms such as ward-level 
water user committees, formal citizen feedback and grievance redressal digital 
platforms and inclusion of civil society organisations in monitoring activities. 
2.12 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
“MoHUA has already taken steps to strengthen community participation in 
AMRUT 2.0 through the AMRUT Mitra initiative, which actively engages 
women-led Self-Help Groups (SHGs) in urban water management and service 
delivery. Under this initiative, women members of SHGs are involved in 
activities such as household-level water quality testing, support in billing and 
collection of water user charges, assistance in operation and maintenance of 
urban assets, and awareness generation on water conservation and responsible 
usage. They also assist Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) in improving the last-mile 
delivery of water connections, thereby strengthening citizen engagement and 
community ownership of urban water infrastructure.  
 
The initiative is implemented in convergence with the National Urban 
Livelihoods Mission (NULM), which enables SHGs to undertake water and 
sanitation-related works, while also generating livelihood opportunities for 
women. SHGs are allowed to take up projects of up to ₹10 lakh per project and 
up to ₹30 lakh annually, and are provided with capacity building and technical 
training to effectively perform these roles. So far, 6,067 projects worth ₹376.95 
crore have been approved, involving more than 45,000 women SHG members 

35 
 
in these projects across the country. Through this approach, the Ministry has 
institutionalized community participation in AMRUT projects while 
simultaneously promoting participatory governance, improved service delivery 
and women’s economic empowerment.” 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No.  
O-16011/04/2025 -AMRUT-IA-MoHUA (E-9192544) dated 20th April, 2026] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
 
Ensuring Timely Execution of projects under AMRUT and AMRUT 2.0 
2.13  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
While examining the physical and financial progress of urban drinking water projects 
under AMRUT and AMRUT 2.0, the Committee sought detailed information on the 
physical and financial progress of projects under AMRUT and AMRUT 2.0, including 
the number and value of grounded, ongoing and completed projects; release and 
utilisation of Central Assistance; and the contribution and utilisation of funds from State 
Governments and other sources. The Committee also inquired about the status of 
projects subsumed under AMRUT 2.0 and whether delays in execution or fund flow 
are impeding the timely completion of the scheme. 
The Ministry informed that under AMRUT 1.0, 6,010 projects worth ₹83,550 
crore have been grounded, exceeding the approved SAAP allocation of ₹77,640 crore 
with 95% of physical works executed and 87% of funds utilised. However, works worth 
₹4,073 crore remain under execution, a figure that has remained almost unchanged even 
after their subsumption into AMRUT 2.0, indicating persistent delays in closing legacy 
projects. 
Under AMRUT 2.0, although 8,791 projects worth about ₹1.90 lakh crore have 
been approved, the Committee note that there continues to be significant variation as 
projects move from approval to actual execution. DPRs have been prepared for ₹1.54 
lakh crore, NITs issued for ₹1.47 lakh crore and contracts awarded for ₹1.18 lakh crore, 
but physical completion stands at only about ₹48,050 crore, with expenditure at merely 
₹35,520 crore. This wide variation demonstrates procedural bottlenecks and slowing 
momentum on the ground. Further, only ₹12,724 crore, roughly 19% of the central 
share for projects, has been released so far, which constrains fund flow and may 
discourage timely matching contributions from States and ULBs. The Committee also 
note that the Ministry does not maintain consolidated records of financial contributions 
by States and ULBs, undermining holistic monitoring of the Mission’s financing. State-
wise utilisation of central assistance shows significant disparities, with several States 
utilising their allocations fully while others lag considerably. 

36 
 
The Committee therefore observe that in addition to pending projects under 
AMRUT 1.0, the large approvals given under AMRUT 2.0 are not translating into 
commensurate progress on the ground. With the Mission set to conclude in FY 2025–
26 and much of the work still in nascent stages, the Committee flag a risk of time 
overruns unless immediate and coordinated remedial steps are undertaken. 
To address delays under AMRUT and AMRUT 2.0, the Committee recommend 
that the Ministry ensure timely completion of remaining AMRUT 1.0 projects with 
strict accountability. It should streamline and standardise the project workflow, from 
approval to execution and enhance technical assistance to States. The Committee also 
stress the need to accelerate the release of central funds. Taking note of the Ministry’s 
inability to track fund release and utilisation beyond central assistance, the Committee 
urge the establishment of a mechanism at national level to monitor multi-source funding 
including State share, ULB contribution and other financing streams to improve 
transparency and fiscal oversight. In addition, the Committee recommend that targeted 
support and performance-linked incentives should be extended to low-performing 
States/UTs and a comprehensive mid-term review of AMRUT 2.0 should be undertaken 
in FY 2025-26 to recalibrate targets and timelines for effective and timely completion 
of the Mission. 
2.14 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
“The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) coordinate with 
States/UTs for completion of grounded projects under AMRUT, with progress 
reviewed in APEX Committee meetings also and monitored through video 
conferences and review meetings by the Ministry officials.  
 
The AMRUT 2.0 portal has an online dashboard that enables continuous 
tracking of project progress, financial releases, and utilization under the 
Mission. States and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) regularly update project and 
financial data on this platform, which allows the Ministry to review the status 
of implementation and expenditure status. The dashboard is accessible to all the 
stakeholders including States and ULBs for review, monitoring and updation.  
 
Further, Department of Expenditure has made a new system (SNA-
SPARSH) for just in time release of funds to the States under Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes. The funds under AMRUT 2.0 are now released to the 
States through Mother Sanctions which are utilised by the States/ UTs on real 
time basis. The matching share of the States/ ULBs are also released on real 
time and the expenditures of both Centre and States are monitored on online 
SPARSH platform. The new system for release of funds to States have been 
fully operational from the year 2025-26. This has improved transparency and 
fiscal oversight.  
 
The Ministry supports the ULBs and States through various capacity 
building programmes under AMRUT 2.0. The performance linked incentives 

37 
 
under AMRUT 2.0 are open to all the ULBs and States. During the year 2025-
26, an amount of around 775 crore has been released to the States/ULBs for 
various reform incentives under AMRUT 2.0. Overall an amount of ₹ 2110.97 
cr has been released as incentive under AMRUT 2.0. AMRUT 2.0 has been 
extended upto 31.03.2027.” 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No.  
O-16011/04/2025 -AMRUT-IA-MoHUA (E-9192544) dated 20th April, 2026] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
Promotion of Innovative and Alternative Financing Mechanisms  
2.15  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
AMRUT 2.0. guidelines stipulate that Public Private Partnership (PPP) projects are 
mandatory in million plus cities and at least a minimum of 10% of total fund allocation 
at the city level shall be committed to PPP projects. In pursuance to the stated 
stipulation, the Committee were apprised that under AMRUT 2.0, 43 PPP projects 
worth ₹7,384 crore (including 19 projects worth ₹6,472 crore in million-plus cities) 
have been approved and 17 cities have raised ₹5,309 crore via municipal bonds. 
The Committee appreciate Ministry’s efforts to promote alternative financing 
mechanisms, particularly PPPs and municipal bonds. However, considering the total 
capital expenditure under the Mission, the Committee observe that the share of PPP 
investments and municipal bond mobilisation remains limited and concentrated in a 
few cities.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry intensify efforts to 
scale up innovative financing mechanisms under AMRUT 2.0 and extend technical 
support in areas such as credit rating, accounting reforms and regulatory compliance. 
2.16 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
So far, under AMRUT 2.0 projects worth ₹1,72,633 cr (capex) have been 
approved, of which central assistance allocated is ₹66,025 cr. The remaining 
balance is borne by the States/ UTs and their ULBs from their own funds/ 
innovative financing. States have been encouraged to adopt innovative 
financing mechanisms such as through PPPs, municipal bonds etc.  
 
For accessing commercial financing including bank loans, credit rating 
is often a precondition. For providing guidance to cities on the process of getting 
a credit rating, MoHUA has issued ‘Credit Rating Toolkit for Urban Loal 
Bodies’. 
 

38 
 
So far 19 cities have raised ₹5,584 crore through issue of municipal 
bonds and an incentive of ₹382 crore has been released as incentive to the ULBs. 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No.  
O-16011/04/2025 -AMRUT-IA-MoHUA (E-9192544) dated 20th April, 2026] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
Need for a National-Level Long-Term Urban Water Demand Projection Framework 
2.17  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
The Committee sought to know whether any comprehensive assessment has been 
undertaken to estimate the urban drinking water demand for the long-term horizon of 
2047 (Viksit Bharat), given the anticipated demographic transition with over half of 
India’s population projected to reside in urban areas by 2050. The Committee also 
inquired how the AMRUT Mission across both phases has been designed or 
recalibrated to account for the projected growth in urban population and corresponding 
water demand, and what strategic interventions are being undertaken to ensure water 
security for future urban India. 
The Ministry stated that while no unified national-level projection report has 
been prepared, inputs from institutional mechanisms such as Census projections, NITI 
Aayog, World Bank, and ADB are used to inform long-term planning. Under AMRUT 
2.0, States and ULBs have been encouraged to prepare City Water Balance Plans 
(CWBP) and City Water Action Plans (CWAP) to assess current and future water 
demand. Detailed Project Reports are being developed on a 15–30 year horizon. Other 
interventions under AMRUT 2.0 include universal water supply coverage, reduction of 
Non-Revenue Water (NRW), treated wastewater reuse, water body rejuvenation, digital 
governance tools, capacity building, and reform-linked incentives. 
The Committee note that although the Ministry has taken various steps through 
AMRUT 2.0 to guide long-term urban water infrastructure planning in a decentralised 
manner, there is no single consolidated or nationally coordinated projection of urban 
water demand for 2047 or 2050. The absence of such a long-term strategic assessment 
weakens the alignment of city-level interventions with the overarching goals of Viksit 
Bharat 2047 and limits the ability to comprehensively address the implications of rapid 
urbanisation on water security. Fragmented approaches, varying in quality and 
coverage across States and ULBs, further exacerbate this gap. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry, in coordination with 
various stakeholders, should urgently commission a unified national-level assessment 
and projection of urban drinking water demand for next 25 to 30 years. This exercise 
should account for projected population growth, migration trends, climate resilience, 
resource sustainability and technological interventions. The findings should form the 
basis for a National Urban Water Security Strategy, which would guide reforms, 

39 
 
infrastructure investments and institutional capacity building across all levels of 
governance to ensure future-ready and water-secure cities. 
 
2.18 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
States have been requested to assess current infrastructure gaps and prepare 
project proposals based on future demand projections, taking into account 
factors such as population growth, urban expansion and service level 
benchmarks. These saturation plans are required to be prepared in accordance 
with the technical norms and planning parameters prescribed in CPHEEEO 
manuals, which provide standard methodologies for estimating present and 
future water demand and designing infrastructure accordingly. Through this 
approach, States and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) are expected to undertake 
systematic demand assessments and plan infrastructure investments that are 
aligned with long-term urban growth and service delivery needs.  
 
An utility has been developed on the AMRUT 2.0 platform for assessing 
the gaps in urban piped water supply and the required investment to build the 
infrastructure. States/ UTs have been requested to update the data on the portal. 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No. O-
16011/04/2025 -AMRUT-IA-MoHUA (E-9192544) dated 20th April, 2026] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.28 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
Need for Uniform Standards and Formal Contractor Training Mechanisms 
2.19  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
In light of the observation regarding absence of uniform construction standards and the 
inconsistent quality of execution by contractors engaged in AMRUT works on account 
of the lack of structured training for contractors, inadequate technical oversight and the 
absence of any dedicated agency responsible for ensuring adherence to standardised 
protocols across projects, the Committee, sought clarification from the Ministry on 
whether any centralised authority has been mandated to frame, enforce and monitor 
project-level standards to ensure uniformity and quality in execution across all States 
and ULBs. In response, the Ministry acknowledged that a major challenge lies in the 
lack of trained contractor staff, emphasising that while officers and engineers are being 
trained, the contractors who are ultimately responsible for on-ground implementation 
also require systematic skilling. 

40 
 
The Committee observe that despite the measures initiated, contractor training 
remains fragmented and non-mandatory, and no single agency has been entrusted with 
enforcing uniform construction standards. In the absence of a structured and 
compulsory capacity-building framework, the quality of execution continues to depend 
heavily on individual contractors’ practices, resulting in inconsistent outcomes and 
frequent infrastructure failures. The Committee are of the view that without a formal 
institutional mechanism to ensure compliance with Central Public Health and 
Environmental Engineering Organisation (CPHEEO) norms and technical benchmarks, 
the assets created under AMRUT will continue to face challenges relating to quality, 
durability and long-term sustainability. 
In light of the above, the Committee recommend the Ministry 
(i) to put in place an institutional mechanism to ensure compliance with uniform 
project-level construction protocols across all States and ULBs; 
(ii) to formulate a mandatory contractor training and certification programme, with 
standard curriculum and construction protocols aligned with CPHEEO standards, as a 
prerequisite for undertaking AMRUT works; 
(iii) to engage State-level accredited training centres for the training and periodic 
recertification of contractors and field supervisors. 
(iv) to create and maintain a national database of certified contractors, integrated with 
the AMRUT portal, enabling ULBs to verify credentials before awarding works; and  
(v) to introduce independent third-party quality audits for all major water supply and 
sewerage projects, with audit findings linked to contractors’ future eligibility to 
undertake Mission-related works. 
 
2.20 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
The Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs (MoHUA) has provided Standardized 
construction protocols and technical guidelines based on CPHEEEO manuals 
and advisories integrated into project planning, DPR preparation, tender 
documents and contract conditions for all projects undertaken under the 
Mission. At the State level, the State High Powered Steering Committees 
(SHPSC) and State Mission Directorates are responsible for ensuring adherence 
to these protocols through technical appraisal of DPRs, periodic project reviews 
and field inspections. At the city level, Urban Local Bodies and Project 
Implementation Units, PDMCs monitor compliance during construction 
through regular site supervision and quality checks. In addition, third-party 
quality assurance mechanisms through Independent Review and Monitoring 
Agencies and digital monitoring systems, including geo-tagged progress 
reporting and online dashboards, track compliance, identify deviations and 
ensure uniform implementation of construction standards across States and 
ULBs.  

41 
 
 
CPHEEEO has empanelled more than 40 institutes for training and 
periodic recertification of contractors, engineers, field supervisors etc. These 
institutes have created standard course curriculum and construction protocols 
aligned with CPHEEEO manuals and standard, and provide post graduate 
courses, refresher courses and short-term courses through which more than 
36,800 engineers and personnel have been trained so far.  
 
CPHEEO has also tied up with the industry partners for capacity 
building of Municipal Engineers (EE, AE, JE, & Site Engineers/Supervisors), 
PDMCs and ground staff of Private Contractors who are working for water 
supply and sewerage projects under AMRUT 2.0.  
 
The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) has already 
established and maintains a national database of certified contractors who are 
engaged in the implementation of projects under AMRUT 2.0 on the AMRUT 
Universe platform. This database captures key details of contractors involved in 
water supply and sewerage infrastructure works and serves as a centralized 
repository to facilitate monitoring and transparency in project implementation. 
The information is uploaded by the Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) as a pre-
requisite for award of projects. By maintaining this digital database, MoHUA is 
able to track contractor participation across States and cities, support better 
oversight of project execution, and promote accountability and standardization 
in the implementation of AMRUT projects.  
 
Under AMRUT 2.0 Mission, MoHUA has put in place Independent 
Review and Monitoring Agencies (IRMAs) to undertake third-party monitoring 
and evaluation of project implementation. These agencies conduct regular field 
visits to project sites, verify the physical and financial progress of works, assess 
the quality of infrastructure being created, and submit independent reports to 
both the concerned States/UTs and the Ministry. The findings of IRMAs help 
identify implementation gaps, suggest corrective measures and strengthen 
accountability in project execution. Further, audit observations and quality 
assessment reports generated by IRMAs are also considered while reviewing 
the performance of contractors, and persistent deficiencies are informed to 
States for the contractors’ future eligibility to undertake Mission related works, 
thereby promoting greater adherence to prescribed standards and ensuring 
improved quality of infrastructure delivery. 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No.  
O-16011/04/2025 -AMRUT-IA-MoHUA (E-9192544) dated 20th April, 2026] 
 
 
 

42 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
Ensuring Uniform Water Quality Monitoring and Compliance under AMRUT 2.0 
2.21  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
The Committee, taking note of the centrality of water quality to safe and reliable urban drinking 
water supply, examined the mechanisms adopted under AMRUT and AMRUT 2.0 to ensure 
compliance with prescribed drinking-water standards. The Committee express concern over the 
wide variation in water-quality data placed before them, where samples were shown to meet 
99% compliance at the WTP level and 98.82% at the household level in one instance, while 
another dataset reflected only 66% household-level compliance with BIS norms. 
In response, the Ministry stated that AMRUT does not issue separate water-quality 
guidelines and that States/ULBs are to follow IS 10500:2012 and CPCB standards. It further 
referred to initiatives such as SCADA and IoT-based monitoring, setting up laboratories at 
WTPs and STPs and community engagement through women SHGs under AMRUT Mitra. The 
Committee, while acknowledging these efforts, noted the absence of a uniform, centrally 
governed water-quality surveillance framework. The Committee also observe that community 
participation and SHG involvement, though valuable for awareness generation and citizen 
engagement, cannot substitute formal quality-control mechanisms, which must rely on 
accredited laboratories and trained professionals. 
In view of the above, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should establish a 
unified, transparent National Urban Water Quality Monitoring Framework for all AMRUT 
cities, prescribing standardised sampling protocols, testing parameters and reporting formats 
aligned with IS 10500:2012 and ensure mandatory and scientifically robust testing at both WTP 
and household levels at accredited water quality laboratories by qualified technical 
professionals, with real-time results published through a publicly accessible dashboard linked 
to SCADA/IoT systems. 
2.22 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
Water quality surveillance in urban water supply systems is governed through 
the national drinking water standards prescribed under BIS IS 10500:2012, 
which provide a uniform framework for water quality monitoring across the 
country. States/UTs and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) undertake regular 
sampling and testing at source, treatment plants and distribution points through 
accredited laboratories, in accordance with these standards and technical 
guidance issued by CPHEEO.  
Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering Organisation at 
the national level issues advisories, guidelines, and manuals to support States 
and ULBs on water supply standards and water quality management.  

43 
 
 
The Ministry of Housing Affairs (MoHUA) has published Manual on 
Water Supply and Treatment Systems (Drink from Tap) in March 2024 for 
reference by the States/ ULBs for designing, implementation, drinking water 
quality and monitoring of the water supply projects. 
(https://mohua.gov.in/publication/manual-on-water-supplyandtreatment -
systems---drinkfrom-tap---march-2024.php). MoHUA has also issued an 
advisory "Strengthening Water Quality Monitoring in Cities through 
Community Participation" under AMRUT 2.0 in November, 2024 to all the 
States to formulate a Water Quality Monitoring strategy at the State or City level 
and to strengthen the institutional capacity for citywide monitoring of drinking 
water quality in urban areas along with Digital Display Boards for water quality 
parameters for public information & awareness.  
 
Under AMRUT and AMRUT 2.0, several measures have been taken to 
strengthen water quality assurance. To address treatment gaps, about 5,517 
MLD of water treatment capacity has been created and another 12,019 MLD is 
under implementation. Technology-based monitoring is also being promoted, 
with SCADA systems proposed in 1,681 water supply projects, of which 404 
are already operational for improved monitoring of treatment and distribution 
systems. Under the Drink from Tap (DfT) initiative, 407 projects worth ₹27,858 
crore have been sanctioned, including 1,153 District Metered Areas (DMAs) 
benefiting about 16.72 lakh households with 24×7 potable water supply, which 
helps maintain quality across distribution networks.  
 
Community participation initiatives such as AMRUT Mitra, support 
awareness generation and assist utilities in activities such as water quality 
testing and system upkeep. However, these initiatives are intended to 
supplement formal monitoring systems by promoting citizen awareness and 
supporting routine field-level activities, and are not a substitute for laboratory-
based quality control mechanisms. Formal testing and compliance verification 
continue to be carried out through accredited laboratories and trained 
professionals, as prescribed under national standards. Further, Capacity 
building of plant operators, contractors and technical personnel is also 
undertaken to improve professional management of water utilities. 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No. O-
16011/04/2025 -AMRUT-IA-MoHUA (E-9192544) dated 20th April, 2026] 
 
*** 
 
 

44 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
“Nil” 
 
 
   
*** 

45 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
Strengthening the Quality and Coverage of City Water Planning under AMRUT 2.0 
4.1  The Committee had recommended as under: 
"City Water Balance Plans (CWBPs), City Water Action Plans (CWAPs) and State 
Water Action Plans (SWAPs) are at the core of AMRUT 2.0 and has introduced 
structure and consistency in urban water planning. As per AMRUT 2.0 guidelines, 
Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) will submit detailed CWBPs and CWAPs through online 
portal covering proposed projects in the thrust areas. The responsibility of ensuring 
scientific accuracy, reliable data and methodological consistency in these plans lies 
with the respective State Level Technical Committee (SLTC) and State High Powered 
Steering Committee (SHPSC). The Committee were informed that the preparation of 
CWBPs and CWAPs has been made mandatory for all towns and cities. However, out 
of 4,883 cities that filled CWBPs, only 3,367 submitted CWAPs. States like Madhya 
Pradesh, Kerala, Nagaland and West Bengal have shown near- full compliance, while 
others such as Bihar, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand lag significantly. 
The Ministry has, thus acknowledged that though CWBPs and CWAPs has brought 
significant structure and consistency to city-level water planning across States, certain 
challenges such as data gaps, inconsistent consultant support and limited climate 
resilience integration in some plans persist.  
 
The Committee observe that while the introduction of CWBPs and CWAPs is a 
step forward in structured urban water planning, a large gap remains between the 
number of cities that have filled CWBPs and those that have submitted CWAPs. The 
shortfall in States like Bihar, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand is 
concerning, indicating possible delays, limited technical support or capacity gaps. 
Moreover, the variability in the scientific rigour and data reliability of the plans poses 
a risk to the effectiveness of implementation. The Committee feel that these issues 
may undermine the achievement of AMRUT 2.0’s goals related to water security and 
sustainability.  
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry, in coordination with 
State Governments, take time-bound steps to ensure 100% submission of City Water 
Action Plans (CWAPs) by all ULBs, with a focus on lagging States. A standardised 
quality assurance framework for CWAPs/CWBPs should be developed, incorporating 
uniform data standards, methodologies and climate resilience parameters. The 
capacity and accountability of State Level Technical Committees (SLTCs) and State 
High Powered Steering Committees (SHPSCs) must be strengthened for robust data 

46 
 
validation. Further, targeted technical handholding and centralised consultant support 
should be provided to low-capacity ULBs to improve the quality and timeliness of 
these planning documents.” 
 
4.2 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“Under AMRUT 2.0, there is a provision of preparation of City Water Balance 
Plans (CWBPs) and City Water Action Plans (CWAPs) for all towns and cities. 
These plans serve as foundational documents to assess a city's water demand, 
supply, losses, and potential for reuse, and to guide targeted interventions for 
water security and sustainability.  
 
Under AMRUT 2.0, States/ Union Territories (UTs) are empowered to 
select, appraise, prioritize and implement projects. State Level Technical 
Committee (SLTC) headed by the Secretary, Urban Development & Housing 
Department provides technical support to the State High Powered Steering 
Committee (SHPSC) headed by the Chief Secretary of the State, to approve, 
monitor and supervise implementation of the scheme at the State/ UT level. On 
recommendation of the SHPSC, Apex Committee of Ministry of Housing & 
Urban Affairs (MoHUA) approves projects within the broad framework of 
Mission.  
 
While the introduction of CWBPs and CWAPs has brought significant 
structure and consistency to city-level water planning across States, certain 
challenges persist. Further, an utility has been developed on the AMRUT 2.0 
platform for assessing the gaps in urban piped water supply and the required 
investment to build the infrastructure. States/ UTs have been requested to update 
the data on the portal.  
 
Despite limitations of quality data, qualified manpower support, etc the 
exercise has substantially improved the baseline understanding of urban water 
flows, informed State-level planning, and laid the groundwork for more data-
driven and resilient water infrastructure development. The States/ UTs have 
been advised to update the saturation assessment module in accordance with the 
technical norms and planning parameters prescribed in CPHEEEO manuals, 
which provide standard methodologies for estimating present and future water 
demand and designing infrastructure accordingly.  
 
However, the responsibility for ensuring scientific rigour, data 
reliability, and methodological consistency rests with the respective State Level 
Technical Committee (SLTC) and State High Powered Steering Committee 
(SHPSC), which review and validate the quality and integrity of data and 
planning assumptions in the CWBP/CWAPs submitted by ULBs. A total of 22 
States has established PDMCs / PMUs / SMMUs, indicating substantial 

47 
 
progress in institutionalizing project management and implementation support 
mechanisms across States." 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No.  
O-16011/04/2025 -AMRUT-IA-MoHUA (E-9192544) dated 20th April, 2026] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.10 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
 
Strengthening Institutional Convergence for Integrated Urban Water Management 
4.3  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
Ensuring safe and adequate drinking water to urban households involves multiple 
Ministries and agencies across various stages namely, source conservation and 
restoration, treatment, distribution and wastewater management. In this context, the 
Ministry had briefed the Committee that convergence has been built into AMRUT’s 
design through holistic planning tools like City Water Balance Plans (CWBP) and 
City Water Action Plans (CWAP), and institutional oversight mechanisms such as the 
State High Powered Steering Committee (SHPSC) chaired by State Chief Secretaries 
and State Level Technical Committees (SLTCs). States are also supported by Project 
Development and Management Consultants (PDMCs) to align AMRUT projects with 
other schemes. In addition, the Mission promotes convergence with related initiatives 
like Smart Cities Mission (SCM), Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM), and Jal Shakti 
Abhiyan (JSA) including its “Catch the Rain” campaign.  
 
While structural mechanisms and planning frameworks under AMRUT attempt 
to promote inter-agency coordination, the Committee observe that actual 
implementation remains fragmented. No dedicated institutional mechanism or binding 
inter-agency coordination protocol exists to operationalize the much-required 
convergence effectively. There is minimal, if any, interaction between the agencies 
responsible for planning, financing, execution, and operations & maintenance. Urban 
water governance continues to function in silos, with overlapping mandates and 
insufficient integration among stakeholders at various levels. Despite convergence 
being encouraged through SHPSCs and planning tools, the absence of a centralized 
command structure and binding protocols for cross-sector collaboration has 
significantly impeded progress toward truly integrated urban water management.  
 
In light of the above, the Committee recommend that the Ministry, in 
coordination with the Ministry of Jal Shakti and concerned State departments, take 
time-bound action to institutionalize integrated urban water management. This should 

48 
 
include setting up a formal inter-ministerial coordination platform with clearly defined 
roles for key ministries and planning bodies; enforcing convergence across central 
schemes like AMRUT, SBM, Atal Bhujal Yojana, and Jal Shakti Abhiyan; 
establishing Integrated Urban Water Management Cells under State High Powered 
Steering Committees (SHPSCs) as nodal coordination units; integrating real-time data 
systems across departments; and mandating the inclusion of sustainability 
components such as wastewater reuse, aquifer recharge, and catchment protection in 
all AMRUT planning and execution processes..” 
 
4.4 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“AMRUT 2.0 provides a strong framework for convergence with other national 
and State-level initiatives to achieve sustainable and integrated urban water 
management. The Mission is being implemented with the objective of providing 
universal water supply coverage in urban areas and improving sewage and 
septage management in 500 AMRUT cities, while also strengthening water 
security and sustainability.  
 
Under AMRUT 2.0, institutional mechanisms have been established to 
promote coordination among Central Ministries, including the Ministry of Jal 
Shakti, State departments, Urban Local Bodies (ULBs), and other implementing 
agencies. The Mission encourages convergence with related programmes such 
as Swachh Bharat Mission, Atal Bhujal Yojana, Jal Shakti Abhiyan, Jal Sanchay 
Jal Bhagidhari inititiative to ensure a comprehensive approach covering water 
supply, wastewater management, and groundwater sustainability.  
 
Projects under the Mission are planned through City Water Balance 
Plans (CWBP) and City Water Action Plans (CWAP), which enable integrated 
planning by considering ongoing or proposed projects across departments, State 
schemes, and externally funded programmes. These plans also incorporate 
sustainability measures such as wastewater reuse, aquifer recharge, and 
protection of water sources and catchment areas.  
 
 
At the institutional level, implementation and convergence are overseen 
by the State High Powered Steering Committee (SHPSC), chaired by the State 
Chief Secretary, which facilitates coordination among different departments 
and agencies. State- and district-level committees further support integrated 
planning, monitoring, and implementation. In addition, Project Development 
and Management Consultants (PDMCs) assist States and cities in aligning 
AMRUT interventions with other schemes in terms of coverage, financing, and 
outcomes. 
 

49 
 
 Through these mechanisms, the Mission is promoting a coordinated, 
data-driven, and sustainable approach to urban water management in 
collaboration with relevant ministries and State governments.” 
 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No. O-
16011/04/2025 -AMRUT-IA-MoHUA (E-9192544) dated 20th April, 2026] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.13 of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
Establishing adequate Data Systems for Monitoring Outcomes and Financial 
Transparency 
4.5  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
The Committee had sought to know whether the Ministry had evaluated the State/UT-
wise total requirement of household water tap connections, household sewer 
connections, sewer networks and sewage treatment plants (STPs) in urban areas, 
including the estimated cost and whether sanctioned projects under the Mission were 
adequate to meet those requirements. The Committee had further requested data on 
key progress indicators in urban water supply and sanitation across the years 2015 
(preAMRUT), 2021 (end of AMRUT), and 2025 (target under AMRUT 2.0), 
including parameters such as piped water coverage, 24x7 supply, per capita supply 
and demand, non-revenue water (NRW), metering, distribution losses, wastewater 
treatment and reuse along with the extent of funding contributions made by States and 
ULBs.  
 
However, in response to data requests, the Ministry could provide only limited 
information. Apart from a marginal increase in household piped water coverage (from 
49% in 2015 to a projected 75% in 2025), several critical parameters across the three 
reference years remained unreported. Furthermore, the Ministry confirmed that it does 
not maintain records of financial contributions or utilization from sources other than 
central assistance.  
 
The Committee are of the view that the Ministry’s inability to furnish 
comprehensive outcome and impact metrics undermines effective monitoring and 
evaluation of AMRUT and AMRUT 2.0. Key indicators essential to assessing urban 
water security and service delivery such as water-stressed ULBs, 24x7 coverage, 
demand-supply gap, NRW, metering and wastewater treatment—remain absent or 
patchy, reflecting a lack of robust data systems. The Ministry’s dependence solely on 

50 
 
State-reported figures, without a centralized mechanism to track cumulative financial 
inputs and tangible outcomes, poses serious concerns regarding accountability and 
policy coherence. The lack of data not only affects mid-course corrections but also 
hinders the formulation of evidence-based policy interventions.  
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should immediately 
institute a centralized and standardised outcome monitoring framework for AMRUT 
2.0, encompassing physical, financial and impact-related indicators across States/UTs. 
A digital dashboard with time-series data on essential parameters such as 24x7 water 
supply, per capita supply and demand, NRW, metering, wastewater generation and 
reuse must be made publicly accessible. In addition, the Ministry should put in place 
a robust mechanism to track financial contributions and expenditures by States as well 
as Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) to enable more informed, transparent and accountable 
implementation of Mission objectives.” 
 
4.6 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“AMRUT 2.0 has incorporated a comprehensive monitoring and evaluation 
framework to track the progress and outcomes of the Mission across States and 
Union Territories. The Ministry has developed a centralized digital platform 
(AMRUT Universe) to monitor physical and financial progress of projects in 
real time. Key indicators such as water supply coverage, project implementation 
status under AMRUT, released and expenditure on these projects are regularly 
updated by the States/ UTs and reviewed through this system to ensure effective 
oversight and course correction. The projects under AMRUT 2.0 having 24x7 
water supply are also monitored and reviewed through this platform. 
 
The portal has an online dashboard that enables continuous tracking of 
project progress, financial releases, and utilization under the Mission. States and 
Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) regularly update project and financial data on this 
platform, which allows the Ministry to review the status of implementation and 
financial contributions from different stakeholders. The dashboard is accessible 
to all the stakeholders including States and ULBs for review, monitoring and 
updation.  
 
Further, Department of Expenditure has made a new system (SNA-
SPARSH) for just in time release of funds to the States under Centrally 
Sponsored Schemes. The funds under AMRUT 2.0 are now released to the 
States through Mother Sanctions which are utilised by the States/ UTs on real 
time basis. The matching share of the States/ ULBs are also released on real 
time and the expenditures of both Centre and States are monitored on online 
SPARSH platform. This has contributed towards informed, transparent and 
accountable implementation of Mission objectives.  
 

51 
 
Besides the above, NITI Ayog also monitor and review the progress of 
the AMRUT 2.0 Mission through Output Outcome Monitoring Framework 
(OOMF). Key outcome indicators under OOMF include coverage of piped 
water supply and sewerage connections, recycled water used (developed in 
MLD), number of cities issuing municipal bonds in a year and area of water 
bodies rejuvenated.” 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No.  
O-16011/04/2025 -AMRUT-IA-MoHUA (E-9192544) dated 20th April, 2026] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.16 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No.7) 
Need to reduce Non-Revenue Water (NRW) and accelerate Smart Metering across cities 
under AMRUT 2.0 
4.7  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
“According to the High-Powered Expert Committee (HPEC) report titled “Indian 
Urban Infrastructure and Services”, 2011, the non-revenue water (NRW) accounts for 
50 percent of water production. Further, Sustainable Development Goal 6.4 aims to 
substantially increase water-use efficiency across all sectors. Consequently, the 
AMRUT 2.0 guidelines proposes reduction of non-revenue water (NRW) to below 
20% in an ULB as a part of the incentive-based reforms on water conservation. In this 
regard, ₹400 crore has been earmarked as incentive for States/ULBs that achieve 
NRW reduction below 20%, subject to fulfilling specific milestones such as 
installation of water meters at all water sources and bulk distribution points, creation 
of District Metered Areas (DMAs) covering at least 50% of ULB population with 
100% household metering within these DMAs and establishment of dedicated NRW 
Cells for leakage mapping and water audits.  
 
However, as per the information furnished by the Ministry, no State or ULB has 
submitted claims for reform incentives under this provision as yet. On the issue of 
smart water metering and corresponding NRW reduction, the Ministry stated that 
water is a State subject and planning and implementation are the responsibility of 
respective States/ULBs. It did not furnish any city-wise data on smart meter coverage 
or NRW reduction impact.  
 
The Committee observe that despite NRW reduction being a central reform 
target under AMRUT 2.0 and clear financial incentives having been provisioned, 
progress on this front has been negligible. The fact that no State or ULB has claimed 
the incentive reflects a significant gap between policy design and implementation. 

52 
 
Moreover, the lack of consolidated data on smart meter deployment and resultant 
NRW reduction hampers transparency, monitoring and accountability. The 
Committee are of the view that unless NRW is brought under control, the 
sustainability and efficiency of urban water supply systems will remain compromised.  
 
Despite the fact that water is State subject, the Committee are of the firm opinion 
that the objective of the AMRUT 2.0 of making the cities ‘water secure’ cannot be 
achieved without increasing water-use efficiency. Therefore, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry urgently engage with States/ULBs to operationalise the 
incentive mechanism for NRW reduction and institute a structured monitoring and 
reporting framework, including the publication of city-wise NRW levels and smart 
metering status.” 
 
4.8 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“Under AMRUT 2.0, performance-linked incentives have been provisioned to 
encourage States and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) to reduce Non-Revenue 
Water (NRW). An amount of ₹400 crore has been earmarked for States upon 
achieving NRW reduction to below 20% at the ULB level. The eligibility for 
claiming these incentives is based on the following milestones: 
 a. Installation of water meters at all water sources and bulk distribution points 
within the ULB.  
b. Establishment of District Metered Areas (DMAs) covering at least 50% of 
the ULB population, with 100% metering within these DMAs (including 
household meters), and reporting of NRW in DMAs.  
c. Creation of a Non-Revenue Water Cell in the ULB for conducting leakage 
mapping and water audits. ULBs already having DMAs covering 50% of 
the population are also eligible under this criterion.  
 
The Ministry encourages the States/ UTs to claim the incentives. 
However, it is for the States/ UTs and ULBs to claim the incentives. Further, 
AMRUT 2.0 is actively promoting the adoption of smart elements in urban 
water infrastructure to improve monitoring and reduce Non-Revenue Water 
(NRW). Under AMRUT, 258 water supply projects have incorporated SCADA 
systems. Under AMRUT 2.0, 1,430 water supply projects include provisions for 
SCADA, while 80 projects have integrated flow meters and 22 projects provide 
for bulk meters, enabling better system monitoring, efficiency, and NRW 
reduction.  
 
Under AMRUT 2.0, States/UTs are encouraged to implement at least 
one DfT project in a District Metered Area (DMA) or ward in each AMRUT 
city to demonstrate scalable models of continuous and safe water supply. So far, 
408 projects (₹27,864 crore) have been taken up across 27 States/UTs covering 

53 
 
348 ULBs, with 1,153 DMAs and 16.72 lakh households under DfT supply. 
These DfT projects on DMA approach improve NRW.” 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No. O-
16011/04/2025 -AMRUT-IA-MoHUA (E-9192544) dated 20th April, 2026] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.22 of the Report) 
 
*** 

54 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
“Nil” 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy  
New Delhi;                                                                                                             Chairperson                                                                                                    
04 August, 2026                                                Standing Committee on Housing                         
13 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)                                                                         and Urban Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

55 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
Minutes of the Twenty-Third Sitting of the Standing Committee on Housing and 
Urban Affairs (2025-26) held on Tuesday, 04 August, 2026 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1700 hours in Main Committee Room 
(MCR), Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy        -        Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha  
2. Smt. Lovely Anand 
3. Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
4. Smt. Misha Bharti 
5. Shri Satpal Brahamchari 
6. Shri Selvam G. 
7. Ms. Sayani Ghosh 
8. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
9. Smt. Mahima Kumari Mewar 
10. Shri Naresh Ganpat Mhaske 
11. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
12. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
13. Shri Alok Sharma 
14. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar 
15. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
16. Shri Ravindra Dattaram Waikar 
 Rajya Sabha 
17. Smt. Jaya Amitabh Bachchan 
18. Shri G. C. Chandrashekhar 
19. Dr. Medha Vishram Kulkarni 
20. Smt. Maya Naroliya 
21. Shri Sandeep Kumar Pathak 
22. Shri A. A. Rahim  
23. Shri Jogen Mohan 
24. Shri Ramrao Sakharam Wadkute 

56 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri Lalkithang  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania Director 
3. Ms. Swati Parwal  Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Standing 
Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs to the sitting of the Committee. 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration the Draft Report on ‘Action Taken 
by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Seventh Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs 
(2025-26) on the subject, ‘Review of Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban 
Transformation (AMRUT) with special emphasis on Urban Drinking Water’ and 
adopted the same without any modifications. 
 
*     *      *      *      *     *      *    *      *      *      *     * 
* Matter not related with the Report 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

57 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
[Vide para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTH REPORT 
OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
I.  Total number of recommendations                     15 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government:       11 
     
Recommendation Nos. 1, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 
Percentage to total recommendations                                      (73.33%)                                     
          
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:                            Nil  
 
Recommendation No.  
Percentage to total recommendations                                               (0%)                
           
   
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of            
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:          4 
 
Recommendation Nos. 2, 3, 4, 7 
Percentage to total recommendations                                        (26.67%) 
 
V.         Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final     
replies of the Government are still awaited:           Nil 
 
Recommendation No.  
Percentage to total recommendations                   (0%) 
 