    STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOUSING  
          AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
                                (2025-26) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Ninth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Housing and Urban Affairs (2025-26) on, ‘Demands for Grants (2026-
2027)’ of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs] 
 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 
 
  
12 

TWELFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOUSING 
AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
(2025-26) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Ninth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on 
Housing and Urban Affairs (2025-26) on, ‘Demands for Grants (2026-
2027)’ of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs] 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 11.08.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 11.08.2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2026/Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 


 
 
 
 
 C.U.D. No.: 158 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©2026 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
 
 
 

 
(i) 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
Composition of the Committee  (ii) 
 
Introduction  (iii) 
 
CHAPTER I  Report  1 – 31 
 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
 32 – 58  
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the  Government's replies 
 
 59 – 61 
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration 
 
 62 – 73 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
     74 - 74 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
III.   Minutes of the 23rd Sitting of the Committee held on 
04.08.2026 
  
 75-76 
IV.   Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Ninth Report  
(18th Lok Sabha) 
      77 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(ii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS (2025-26) 
 
Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy -        Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
  
2. Smt. Lovely Anand 
3. Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
4. Smt. Misha Bharti 
5. Shri Satpal Brahamchari 
6. Shri Hibi Eden 
7. Smt. Hema Malini 
8. Shri Selvam G. 
9. Ms. Sayani Ghosh 
10. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
11. Smt. Mahima Kumari Mewar 
12. Shri Naresh Ganpat Mhaske 
13. Shri Rambhual Nishad 
14. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
15. Dr. Gumma Thanuja Rani 
16. Shri Chamala Kiran Kumar Reddy 
17. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
18. Shri Alok Sharma 
19. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar 
20. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
21. Shri Ravindra Dattaram Waikar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Smt. Jaya Amitabh Bachchan 
23. Shri G. C. Chandrashekhar 
24. Shri R. Girirajan 
25. Dr. Medha Vishram Kulkarni 
26. Smt. Maya Naroliya 
27. Shri Sandeep Kumar Pathak 
28. Shri A. A. Rahim  
29. Shri Jogen Mohan 
30. Shri Ramrao Sakharam Wadkute 
31. Shri Debashish Samantaray. 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Lalkithang   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania  - Director 
3. Ms. Swati Parwal   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Anunay Kumar  - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 

(iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs 
(2025-26) having been authorized by the Committee, to present this Twelfth Report  
(18th Lok Sabha) on action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report (18th Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee on, ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs. 
2. The Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 12.03.2026 and laid on the 
table of Rajya Sabha on the same date. The Action Taken Replies of the Government to 
all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on  
10 June, 2026. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on  
04th August, 2026. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Ninth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given at 
Annexure-II. 
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in 
the body of the Report. 
 
 
       Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
New Delhi;                                                                                                    Chairperson                                                                                                    
04 August, 2026                                 Standing Committee on Housing                                  
13 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)                                                              and Urban Affairs 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs  
(2025-26) deals with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Ninth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject, ‘Demand for 
Grants (2026-27)’ of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs which was presented 
to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 12 March, 2026. 
1.2 Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of 
all the 15 Recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized 
as follows: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 Recommendation Serial Nos.  1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14 
(Total -10) 
(Chapter-II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations, which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of Government's replies: 
Recommendation Serial No.  10 
(Total -01) 
(Chapter-III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 Recommendation Serial Nos.  3, 6, 8, 15 
  
(Total -4) 
(Chapter-IV) 
 
(iv) Recommendations /Observations, in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
   Recommendation Serial No. Nil       
   (Chapter-V) 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that specific replies to the Comments contained in 
Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished at the earliest and in any case, not later than 
three months from the presentation of this Report. 
 

2 
 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on 
some of their recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.   
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
Need for Proper and Realistic Budgetary Planning 
1.5  The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended as under: 
The Committee note that while the Total Central Government Outlay has 
increased steadily from ₹39,44,909 crore in 2022-23 to ₹53,47,315 crore in 
2026-27, the share of the Ministry has not grown proportionately. The Ministry’s 
share, which stood at 1.94% in 2022-23 and 1.91% in 2025-26, has declined to 
1.60% in 2026-27 which is the lowest in the five-year period. Further, against 
the projected outlay of ₹97,644.51 crore for 2026-27, the approved Budget 
Estimate is ₹85,522.39 crore, reflecting a reduction of ₹12,122.12 crore 
(12.41%). The Committee also note that such reductions between projected 
outlay and approved Budget Estimates have been persistent over the years i.e. 
22.82% in 2022-23, 11.52% in 2023-24 and 17.25% in 2024-25, with the only 
exception being the year 2025-26.  
The Committee also note that despite increasing urbanisation and rising 
demand for housing, water supply, sanitation and urban transport, the Ministry’s 
relative share in the Central Budget has declined and its projections are 
routinely curtailed at the approval stage except in FY 2025-26. The Committee 
feel that such persistent gaps between projected outlay and Budgetary 
allocation are linked to the actual utilisation trends, highlighting a systemic 
mismatch between projection and implementation capacity. With the need to 
address the issues of such stark gaps between the Ministry’s budgetary 
projections and actual utilisation, the Committee recommend the Ministry: 
(i) to adopt a more realistic and evidence-based forecasting mechanism 
aligned with actual implementation capacity at the State level;  
(ii) to formulate and present a clear and time-bound roadmap for 
progressively enhancing Ministry’s share in the Total Central Outlay, 
commensurate with the expanding urban infrastructure needs and 

3 
 
services, delivery obligations aligned with the vision of ‘Viksit Bharat’ in 
2047; and 
(iii) to institute robust expenditure monitoring and mid-year review 
mechanisms to ensure timely utilization of allocated funds under key 
schemes and other urban infrastructure programmes, enabling 
corrective action within the same FY to prevent persistent 
underutilization.  
 
1.6 In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have 
stated as follows: 
 
“The Ministry has noted the observations of the Committee and is committed to 
ensuring more realistic and evidence-based budgetary planning under various 
schemes/projects so that savings at the end of financial year are minimal. 
Ministry would, however, like to submit that requirement of funds for 
schemes/ projects/ programmes in the given financial year (FY) is initially 
assessed at the time of submitting proposal to Ministry of Finance in the month 
of September/ October. The BE under Centrally Sponsored Schemes is 
determined on the basis of the total Central Share outlay approved for the 
Missions by the Cabinet for each financial year, as well as the projected fund 
absorption capacity of the States/UTs. On the basis of instructions outlined in 
the Budget Circular for preparation of budget, projection of funds is made much 
before the commencement of the next financial year and constraints that may 
affect implementation of schemes/ programmes during that particular year are 
sometimes beyond anticipation.     
Revised Estimates for the ongoing FY are arrived at after mid-year 
assessment of progress of schemes/ projects, trends of expenditure, approval 
of the scheme/ projects by the competent authority and committed expenditure 
for the remaining period of the year.  These proposals are discussed in the pre-
Budget Meetings with Secretary (Expenditure) to finalise Revised Estimates/ 
Budget Estimates and reduction of allocation by Ministry of Finance at RE stage 
after re-assessment of requirement of funds results in savings. 
The pattern of variation between BE, RE and Actuals observed in recent 
years has been primarily on account of the transition to the SNA-SPARSH 
(Single Nodal Account – System for Payment Reconciliation and Allocation of 

4 
 
Scheme Heads) model mandated by the Department of Expenditure, Ministry 
of Finance, effective from 1st August 2024. Under this model, funds are 
released in a Just-in-Time manner based on actual bill submissions by the 
Implementing Agencies through the integrated PFMS-IFMIS-e-Kuber platform 
of the Reserve Bank of India, as opposed to the earlier practice of bulk releases 
into State SNA accounts. This transition, while ensuring improved financial 
discipline, caused transitory delays in bill submission in the initial months as 
States/UTs were to be on-boarded on the revised system. This system has now 
almost stablised and it is expected that pace of expenditure will now pick-up 
from the current financial year. 
While there has been slightly reduced expenditure on the releases to 
State(s) due to the various reasons given earlier, MoHUA has been showing 
steady growth in terms of capital expenditure except for FY 2022-23. The 
CAPEX data for the previous five financial years is presented in the following 
table. 
                   (₹ in crore) 
Break-up of Capital Expenditure (Gross Budgetary Support) 
Sr. 
No. Year BE 
(Capital) 
RE 
(Capital) 
Actual 
Expenditure 
% Expenditure 
w.r.t RE 
1 2021-22  25,759 25,957 25,946 99.96% 
2 2022-23  27,341 23,681 23,675 99.98% 
3 2023-24  25,997 26,533 26,441 99.65% 
4 2024-25  28,628 31,662 31,623 99.88% 
5 2025-26  37,623 32,978 32,929 99.85% 
 
The CAPEX as part of the complete budgetary allocation of the ministry 
is increasing steadily over the last few years except during FY 2022-23, along 
with near 100% utilization of the allocation. The ministry is, therefore, making a 
significant contribution towards sound fiscal management to national economy.  
Ministry is taking all necessary steps to accurately assess the 
requirement of funds while preparing Budgetary Estimates (BE) and Revised 
Estimates (RE) of the Ministry. Taking into account that most of the schemes 
of the Ministry are demand driven, all the States Governments/UTs have been   

5 
 
advised at the level of Hon’ble Minister (HUA) that system must be put in place 
so that effective and timely utilization of funds is ensured. It was also highlighted 
that focussed expenditure monitoring is one of the critical inputs for meeting 
service delivery and urbanisation goals.  Copies of letters all dated 18.02.2026 
issued at the level of Minister, Housing and Urban Affairs to the Chief Ministers 
of State Governments/Administrators of UTs in the matter are attached. 
The Ministry has been monitoring the implementation of scheme and 
utilisation of funds under various schemes through periodic review meetings, 
video conferences and regular follow-up with States/UTs for expeditious 
utilization of funds and completion of sanctioned projects within the stipulated 
time frame.” 
 
1.7 The Committee note the Ministry's efforts to make budgetary planning 
more realistic and evidence-based. The Committee also take note of the reasons 
furnished for the variations between Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates and 
Actual Expenditure, particularly the temporary impact of the transition to the 
SNA-SPARSH system. The Ministry has also informed the Committee that the 
SNA-SPARSH system has now largely stabilised and that the pace of 
expenditure is expected to improve from the current financial year. The 
Committee, however, emphasize the need for a clear and time-bound roadmap 
for progressively enhancing the Ministry's share in the Total Central Outlay, 
keeping in view the growing requirements of urban infrastructure and service 
delivery in line with the vision of ‘Viksit Bharat’ in 2047. Such a roadmap should 
be supported by realistic projections, measurable milestones and periodic 
monitoring to ensure that the Ministry is adequately equipped to meet the 
country’s evolving urban development needs.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
Need for Timely Utilisation of Funds  
1.8  The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended as under: 
The Committee note that the gap between Budget Estimates (BE), 
Revised Estimates (RE) and Actual Expenditure (AE) of the Ministry has 
widened significantly in recent years. While utilisation remained close to RE in 

6 
 
2022-23 and 2023-24, the position deteriorated in 2024-25 and 2025-26. In 
2025-26, the BE of ₹96,777 crore was sharply reduced at RE stage to 
₹57,203.78 crore (a reduction of nearly 40%).The actual expenditure as on 
20.02.2026 stands at ₹40,967.62 crore, which is only 71.62% of RE implying 
that nearly 28.38% of the revised allocation is to be spent in the last 39 days of 
the financial year. Scheme-wise analysis shows uneven performance. While 
AMRUT and PMAY (Urban) show utilisation above 79–80% of RE, schemes 
such as PM-eBus Sewa (17.87%), CITIIS 2.0 (0.37%), PM SVANidhi (60.99%), 
DJAY (45.60%) and PHE (40.29%) show slow progress. Further, unspent 
balances under various schemes amount to ₹5,806.27 crore, with substantial 
balances under Smart Cities Mission (₹2,012.64 crore), SBM (₹1,238.90 crore) 
and AMRUT (₹1,213.01 crore). The amount surrendered has also risen sharply 
from ₹1,157.31 crore in 2022-23 to ₹32,291.34 crore in 2024-25 indicating 
serious issues in expenditure planning and utilisation. 
The Committee take note of the Ministry’s submission that expenditure 
depends substantially on the spending capacity of States under the SNA-
SPARSH mechanism, which requires States to incur expenditure before the 
Central share is released. The Ministry has also cited delays in approval of 
major schemes such as the National Urban Digital Mission (NUDM), Urban 
Challenge Fund and the Scheme for Industrial Housing, involving an outlay of 
₹13,750 crore, as factors affecting utilisation. While these constraints are 
acknowledged, the Committee are of the considered view that repeated large-
scale reductions at the RE stage, uneven scheme performance and growing 
unspent balances point to deeper issues in budgeting realism, inter-
governmental coordination and monitoring. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry: 
(i) to undertake a thorough review of Budgeting exercise so as to better 
align Budgetary Estimate, Revised Estimate and Actual Expenditure;  
(ii) to address procedural bottlenecks under fund flow mechanisms such as 
SNA-SPARSH;  
(iii) to fix scheme-wise spending targets at regular intervals, ideally every 
quarter, and review them closely to ensure timely use of funds; 

7 
 
(iv) to strengthen institutional capacity of States and Urban Local Bodies 
(ULBs) for improved fund absorption; and  
(v) to ensure that expenditure is evenly paced throughout the year avoiding 
year-end concentration, so as to uphold both fiscal prudence and 
implementation quality. 
 
1.9 In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have 
stated as follows: 
 
“I. Ministry will like to inform the Hon’ble Committee that Ministry could 
utilize 99.78% of the allocated funds   amounting to ₹57,075.19 crore against  
allocated funds in Revised Estimates (RE) 2025-26 of ₹ 57,203.78 crore,.  This 
is line with the trend during previous few years excepting FY 2024-25 when it 
remained low. Ministry is taking all necessary steps to accurately assess the 
requirement of funds while preparing Budgetary Estimates (BE) and Revised 
Estimates (RE) of the Ministry.  Scheme-wise expenditure vis-à-vis Revised 
Estimates 2025-26 is as under: - 
Sl. 
No. Name of Schemes B.E. 
2025-26 
R.E. 2025-
26(Final) 
 
Actual 
2025-26 
% Actual 
w.r.t. RE 
2025-26  
1 MRTS & Metro Projects 34807.00 29451.00 29451.00 100% 
2 
Pradhan Mantri Awas 
Yojna -PMAY-Urban & 
PMAY-Urban 2.0 
23294.00 8963.37 8948.82 99.84% 
3 Scheme for Industrial 
Housing 2500.00 0 0  0  
4 
Atal Mission for 
Rejuvenation and Urban - 
AMRUT  
     
10,000.00  7814.86 7789.52 99.68% 
5 
City Investment to 
Innovate, Integrate and 
Sustain 2.0  
250.00 2.07 1.70 85% 
6 National Urban Digital 
Mission (NUDM) 1250.00 0.00 0  0  

8 
 
7 Swachh Bharat Mission-
Urban 5000.00 2000.00 1945.47 97.27% 
8 CPWD (Scheme) 3957.00 4022.55 4002.14 99.48% 
9 PM SVANidhi 373.00 571.98 571.98 100% 
10 PHE Sector Development  2.00 2.00 2.00 100% 
11 PM-eBus Sewa Scheme 1310.00 173.70 171.20 98.39% 
12 
Deendayal – Jan 
Aajeevika Yojana 
(Shahari)  
0.00 95.00 95.00 100% 
13 Urban Challenge Fund 10000.00 0.00 0  0  
 A Total (Schemes)  92743.00 53096.53 52978.83 99.78% 
 B Non-scheme 4034.00 4107.25 4096.36 99.73% 
   GRANT TOTAL (A+B) 96777.00 57203.78 57075.19 99.78% 
 
Ministry would also like to inform the Hon’ble Committee that budgetary 
allocation for schemes/projects depends upon receipt of the proposals from 
State Governments/UTs and approval thereof by the Ministry after detailed 
examination. Adequate budgetary allocations are made based on realistic 
assessment of expenditure in consultation with the beneficiary 
States/UTs/Implementing Agencies. It is also submitted that final allocations at 
the stage of BE/RE are made by Ministry of Finance keeping in view the fiscal 
space available for allocation to various Ministries/Departments. 
II. The Ministry acknowledges the procedural challenges in fund flow 
mechanisms such as SNA-SPARSH, particularly with regard to technical 
familiarization, first-time adoption by nodal agencies, and variations in State-
specific systems mainly under Centrally Sponsored Schemes. To address 
these issues, continuous technical support, capacity-building sessions, and 
coordination with States/UTs are being undertaken to streamline processes and 
enhance ease of fund flow. 
III. The Ministry has institutionalized periodic review mechanisms wherein 
scheme-wise financial and physical progress is assessed at regular 
intervalsthrough regular video conferences/ webinars/ workshops/ site-visits etc. 
States/UTs are encouraged to adhere to expenditure targets, and progress is 

9 
 
closely monitored through review meetings to ensure timely and efficient 
utilisation of funds. States/UTs having unspent balances have been advised to 
expedite utilisation and submit Utilization Certificates (UCs) and other requisite 
documents in a timely manner.   
IV. To enhance fund absorption capacity, the Ministry regularly conducts 
capacity-building workshops and training programmes at the central level. 
Additionally, continuous project-level handholding support is extended to 
States/ULBs, including technical guidance, advisory support, and field-level 
coordination to improve implementation efficiency. Taking into account that 
most of the schemes of the Ministry are demand driven, all the States 
Governments/UTs have been   advised at the level of Hon’ble Minister (HUA) 
that system must be put in place so that effective and timely utilization of funds 
is ensured. It was also highlighted that focused expenditure monitoring is one 
of the critical inputs for meeting service delivery and urbanisation goals.  Copies 
of letters all dated 18.02.2026 issued at the level of Minister, Housing and Urban 
Affairs to the Chief Ministers of State Governments/Administrators of UTs in the 
matter are attached. 
V. The Ministry emphasises phased and evenly distributed expenditure 
throughout the financial year. Through judicious financial planning, regular 
monitoring, and advisory to States/UTs, efforts are being made to avoid year-
end concentration of spending, thereby ensuring fiscal prudence and 
maintaining the quality of implementation. States/UTs-wise tentative allocations 
under various schemes have been made and communicated for expeditious 
utilization of funds and timely implementation of scheme.” 
 
1.10 The Committee note that the Ministry has achieved utilisation of 99.78 per 
cent of the Revised Estimates for 2025-26 and has outlined various measures to 
improve budget estimation, strengthen expenditure monitoring, address 
procedural issues under the SNA-SPARSH mechanism and enhance the 
implementation capacity of States and Urban Local Bodies. The Committee also 
note the Ministry's efforts to ensure phased utilisation of funds throughout the 
financial year to avoid year-end concentration of expenditure. The Committee, 
however, observe that the substantial reduction at the Revised Estimates 
continues to be a matter of concern, particularly in the context of the increasing 

10 
 
pace of urbanisation and the growing demand for urban infrastructure and 
services. The Committee also note that despite Budget Estimates having been 
provided for the Scheme for Industrial Housing, the National Urban Digital 
Mission (NUDM) and the Urban Challenge Fund (UCF), no expenditure could be 
incurred under these schemes during 2025-26. While taking note of the reasons 
furnished by the Ministry, the Committee expect the Ministry to make budget 
estimation more realistic and ensure timely operationalisation of approved 
schemes so that budgetary allocations are translated into effective 
implementation.  
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
Strengthening Implementation and Financial Discipline under PMAY (Urban) 
1.11  The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended as under: 
The Committee note that while Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana–Urban 
(PMAY-U) has achieved significant scale in terms of sanctions (122.22 lakh 
houses) and grounding (114.59 lakh houses), actual completion stands at 96.65 
lakh houses, indicating that a sizeable number of houses are still pending 
completion. The Committee further observe that Budget Estimates for 2025–26 
was drastically reduced at the Revised Estimate stage from ₹23,294 crore to 
₹7,800 crore, and actual expenditure as on 05.01.2026 is only ₹3,874.84 crore, 
reflecting slow fund utilisation. Although the Ministry has attributed this to 
lowutilisation of “Mother Sanctions” by States and the initial phase of PMAY-U 
2.0, the Committee are of the view that such sharp reductions and modest 
actual spending point towards underlying weaknesses in expenditure planning 
and implementation pace. 
The State-wise data also reveal uneven physical and financial progress. 
Large States such as Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Tamil Nadu and Madhya Pradesh account for a major share of completions; 
however, noticeable gaps between sanctioned and completed houses persist 
in Telangana, Bihar, Jharkhand, Rajasthan and Haryana. In the North Eastern 
region, Manipur, Meghalaya and Arunachal Pradesh show comparatively low 
 

11 
 
 
completion levels. On the financial side, while around 85–86% of sanctioned 
central assistance has been released nationally, gaps remain in States such as 
Telangana, Bihar, Odisha and Punjab. In States like Maharashtra, Karnataka, 
Telangana, Rajasthan and West Bengal, substantial central assistance has 
already been released but completion of houses is yet to fully catch up, 
indicating delays in converting financial support into completed dwelling units. 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry that: 
 
(i) Budget Estimates under the scheme be projected more realistically so 
as to avoid sharp reductions at the Revised Estimate stage and low 
actual expenditure at the end of the financial year; 
(ii) a strengthened review and coordination mechanism be put in place with 
periodic progress assessment to ensure that central assistance is 
translated into completed dwelling units within the stipulated timeframe; 
and 
(iii) the adequacy of existing central financial assistance per dwelling unit 
be reviewed and suitably enhanced, wherever necessary, keeping in 
view rising construction costs, so that beneficiaries are not burdened 
and projects are completed in a timely and sustainable manner. 
 
1.12 In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have 
stated as follows: 
 
 
“Budget allocation for a financial year under PMAY-U/PMAY-U 2.0 is made 
based on the anticipated requirement, keeping in view the approved targets and 
likely pace of implementation during the year. The allocated funds are released 
and utilized in accordance with the claims submitted by States/UTs, subject to 
fulfillment of prescribed conditions and compliances in respect of sanctioned 
projects. Central Assistance is released in installments linked to stages of 
construction and adherence to scheme guidelines, including submission of 
utilization certificates, progress reports and other requisite documentation. 

12 
 
At the commencement of each financial year, the total budgetary 
provision is tentatively distributed among States/UTs based on past trends of 
fund utilization, physical and financial progress, and expected demand during 
the year. However, actual release of funds depends upon the pace at which 
States/UTs achieve/submit compliances and submit claims. 
 
It is pertinent to note that completion of houses/projects under the 
scheme is affected by various implementation-related factors such as timely 
availability of beneficiary contribution, availability of construction materials, 
labour availability, delays in tendering and procurement processes, statutory 
approvals as well as region-specific challenges including climatic conditions. 
These factors may, at times, impact the progress of projects, leading to delays 
in submission of claims and consequently less utilization of the earmarked 
tentative allocations. 
 
The Ministry conducts periodic reviews with States/UTs on the 
implementation of PMAY-U/PMAY-U 2.0 to ensure expeditious grounding and 
completion of sanctioned projects within the timelines specified in the 
respective Detailed Project Reports (DPRs). These reviews also focus on 
identifying bottlenecks, providing necessary handholding support and 
monitoring the pace of fund utilization by States/UTs, so as to achieve the 
objective of Housing for All within the stipulated timeframe. 
 
The scheme period of PMAY-U has been extended up to 30th September 
2026 for completion of under-construction houses with existing funding pattern. 
Further, the scheme guidelines of PMAY-U 2.0 have been designed on the 
basis of learnings of PMAY-U scheme, global best practices/benchmarks and 
outcomes of series of consultations with multiple stakeholders including 
States/UTs, Banks, Housing Finance Companies, Private Sector etc. So far, 34 
States/UTs have signed the MoA with the Ministry for implementation of PMAY-
U 2.0 and based on the proposals received, a total of 13.84 lakh houses have 
already been sanctioned. However, during implementation of the scheme, 
assessment of achievement/performance will be done with the participating 
States/UTs and necessary changes, if required, would be done accordingly to 

13 
 
achieve the scheme’s objective of providing affordable housing to the intended 
beneficiaries/families.” 
 
1.13 The Committee note the Ministry's explanation regarding the basis of 
budget estimation, fund releases under PMAY-U/PMAY-U 2.0 and the measures 
being taken to strengthen monitoring, coordination and handholding support to 
States/UTs for timely completion of houses. The Committee also take note of 
the extension of PMAY-U for completion of under-construction houses and the 
Ministry's submission that PMAY-U 2.0 has been designed by incorporating the 
learnings from the earlier scheme, with necessary changes to be made during 
implementation, if required. 
The Committee, however, find that the Ministry's reply only partially addresses 
their recommendation. While the Ministry has outlined the measures being 
taken for the implementation of PMAY-U 2.0, it has not specifically addressed 
the Committee's longstanding concern regarding the adequacy of Central 
financial assistance extended to beneficiaries under the Scheme. The 
Committee have consistently emphasised the need to review and suitably 
enhance the quantum of Central assistance in view of the rising cost of 
construction, so as to reduce the financial burden on beneficiaries and facilitate 
the timely completion of housing projects. The Committee, therefore, reiterate 
their earlier recommendation and urge the Ministry to undertake an appropriate 
review of the existing financial assistance and suitably enhance the Central 
assistance under the Scheme, keeping in view prevailing construction costs and 
the objective of ensuring affordable housing for all. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
Ensuring Wider and Balanced Implementation of ARHC across States  
1.14  The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended as under: 
Affordable Rental Housing Complex (ARHC) scheme was introduced as 
a sub-scheme of PMAY (U) in July, 2020 and since September, 2024 is being 
implemented as a vertical under PMAY(U) 2.0 through two models i.e. Model-
I, which envisages conversion of existing government-funded vacant houses 
into rental housing through PPP or public agencies for 25 years; and Model-II, 

14 
 
which provides for construction, operation and maintenance of new rental 
housing units by public or private entities on their own land for 25 years. 
However, progress under both the models has been uneven. Under Model-I, 
against 83,534 vacant houses identified, only 5,783 units have been converted 
into ARHCs, while 7,413 units are under process, leaving a very large stock of 
vacant houses unutilised. States/UTs such as Delhi and Maharashtra, despite 
having 29,112 and 32,345 vacant houses respectively, have reported no 
conversion under the scheme. The Committee further note that out of 5,783 
houses converted under Model-I in eight cities, 4,605 units have been occupied 
by beneficiaries so far, while 1,178 units remain vacant.Under Model-II, 
although 83,298 units have been approved nationwide, only 36,450 units have 
been completed and occupied so far, with the overwhelming share 
concentrated at Sriperumbudur, Hosur and Chennai in Tamil Nadu. Many 
approved projects in other States remain at early stages of completion. This 
indicates slow progress, limited geographical spread and inadequate reporting 
on actual utilisation of assets created. 
The Committee are of the view that the objectives of ARHC, which aims 
to provide dignified, affordable rental housing to urban migrants, poor and other 
vulnerable groups close to their workplaces, cannot be fully realised unless 
vacant houses are swiftly converted and newly approved units are completed 
and occupied in a time-bound manner. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
to the Ministry: 
(i) to prepare a time-bound State/UT-wise action plan for conversion of 
vacant houses under Model-I, particularly in States/UTs with large 
inventories such as Delhi and Maharashtra and actively resolve 
administrative or coordination issues hindering implementation; 
(ii) to establish a system to oversee and ensure that the houses lying vacant 
in various States/UTs which are being considered under Model-I of 
AHRC are first appropriately retrofitted, repaired and upgraded, 
wherever necessary, to make them habitable; 
(iii) to set strict timelines for completion and operationalisation of approved 
units under Model-II, with periodic review of construction and occupancy 
status; 

15 
 
(iv) to strengthen monitoring and coordination with States/UTs and private 
partners so that both conversion of existing vacant houses and 
construction of new rental units translate into functional, fully occupied 
housing complexes serving the intended beneficiaries; and 
(v) to undertake a comprehensive national assessment of demand for 
affordable rental housing for urban migrants and to fix clear State/UT-
wise targets for the number of ARHC dwelling units.  
 
 
1.15 In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have 
stated as follows: 
 
“The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) has been implementing 
Affordable Rental Housing Complexes (ARHCs) as a sub-scheme of Pradhan 
Mantri Awas Yojana - Urban (PMAY-U) to provide dignified living to urban 
migrants/poor near their workplace through two models:  
I. Model-I: Utilizing existing Government funded vacant houses 
constructed under Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission 
(JNNURM) and Rajiv Awas Yojana (RAY) to convert into ARHCs 
through Public Private Partnership (PPP) or by Public Agencies, 
II. Model-II: Construction, Operation & Maintenance of ARHCs by 
Public/Private Entities on their own available vacant land. 
Under Model 1 of ARHCs, around 83,534 houses constructed under 
erstwhile schemes of BSUP & IHSDP of JnNURM and RAY were found to be 
vacant in different States/UTs. These identified houses were targeted for 
converted into ARHCs under Model -I by States/UTs. Out of this, a significant 
number of these vacant houses located in Maharashtra (32,345 houses) and 
Delhi (29,112 houses) were found not feasible for conversion into ARHCs due 
to various reasons.  Also, so far, under Model-1, 5,783 (about 44%) units 
(Chandigarh (2,195), Surat (528), Ahmedabad (1,376), Rajkot (698), 
Chittorgarh (480), Jammu (336), Lalkuan (100), & Dehradun (70) have been 
converted into ARHCs.  
Under Model -II, based on the proposals submitted by States/UTs, 
MoHUA has approved proposals for construction of 83,298 new ARHC units in 
several States including Tamil Nadu, with Technology Innovation Grant (TIG) 

16 
 
of ₹175.95 crore. Out of this, 40,630 ARHC units have been completed. Further, 
as per the Operational Guidelines of ARHCs, the projects using innovative and 
alternate technologies are to be completed within 18 months after getting all 
statutory approvals. The MoHUA has been closely monitoring the progress of 
already sanctioned ARHCs projects through periodic reviews with States and 
implementing Entity to ensure timely completion and occupancy of units.  
Further, based on the learnings of ARHCs, a dedicated vertical of 
Affordable Rental Housing (ARH) has been provisioned under PMAY-U 2.0 to 
promote construction of affordable rental housing for eligible beneficiaries 
including urban migrants/ industrial workers/ working women/ students/ urban 
poor etc. across the country. The ARH vertical is implemented through two 
models:  
i. Model-I: Converting existing Government funded vacant houses into 
ARH through PPP mode or by Public Agencies, 
ii. Model-II: Construct, Operate and Maintain rental housing by 
Private/Public Entities for urban poor, working women, employees of 
Industries, Industrial Estates, Institutions and other eligible EWS/LIG 
families. 
Under model -I of ARH vertical, States/UTs may rent out the houses 
constructed under various Central/ State/UT Government Schemes which are 
still lying vacant and unutilized, by making them liveable for eligible 
beneficiaries through repair/retrofitting along with necessary civic infrastructure 
facilities by themselves or through a Concessionaire. 
As PMAY-U and PMAY-U 2.0 are demand driven schemes and there are 
no fixed State/UT wise targets. Selection of beneficiaries under various verticals 
preferred by the beneficiaries, formulation & execution of projects are done by 
States/Union Territories (UTs) and public/private entities. Further, to encourage 
public/private entities to submit the proposals under ARH vertical, an 
Expression of Interest (EoI) has been issued by the Ministry for submission of 
project proposals for construction of new ARH units. The last date of 
submission of proposal is 30.06.2026.” 
 

17 
 
1.16 The Committee note the measures taken by the Ministry to strengthen the 
implementation of Affordable Rental Housing under PMAY-U 2.0, including 
provision for repair and retrofitting of vacant houses under Model-I, timelines 
for completion of projects under Model-II, periodic monitoring of sanctioned 
projects, etc. The Committee also take note of the Ministry's submission 
regarding the limited feasibility of converting a large number of vacant houses 
in certain States. The Committee, however, observe that the absence of a 
comprehensive assessment of rental housing demand and State/UT-wise 
targets may affect balanced implementation of the scheme across the country 
and expect the Ministry to keep the demand for affordable rental housing under 
continuous assessment so that implementation remains responsive to the 
needs of urban migrants and other intended beneficiaries.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
Need for affordable Rent Fixation and Operationalisation of Incentives under 
ARHC  
1.17  The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended as under: 
The Committee note that under the Affordable Rental Housing 
Complexes (ARHC) scheme, Dwelling Units may consist of Single/Double 
Bedroom units (30/60 sqm) and Dormitory beds (10 sqm), with basic facilities 
such as kitchen, toilet and bathroom as prescribed in the operational guidelines. 
Further, as per the guidelines, rent under Model–I which permits conversion of 
existing government-funded vacant houses, is to be fixed by the local authority 
based on a local survey conducted prior to issuance of the Request for Proposal 
(RFP). Under Model–II which allows construction, operation and maintenance 
by public/private entities, the initial affordable rent is to be fixed by the 
concerned entity based on a local survey. Rent is permitted to be enhanced 
biennially by 8%, subject to a maximum cumulative increase of 20% over five 
years. 
The guidelines further provide for various fiscal and non-fiscal incentives 
to improve project viability and ensure affordability. These include concessional 
project finance, Income Tax and GST exemptions, Technology Innovation 
Grant (TIG), additional FAR/FSI up to 50% free of cost, land-use relaxations, 

18 
 
single-window approvals, levy of municipal charges at par with residential 
properties and provision of trunk infrastructure up to the project site by 
States/UTs without additional cost. 
The Committee observe that rent fixation is entirely decentralised and 
the Ministry does not prescribe uniform rent rates nor maintain centralized data 
regarding rent levels across cities. Similarly, implementation of incentives such 
as additional FAR/FSI, land-use permissions, municipal charge parity and trunk 
infrastructure provision varies across States/UTs depending upon local 
regulations and policy notifications. With regard to fiscal incentives, including 
Income Tax and GST exemptions, the Committee are apprised that the Ministry 
does not directly administer these benefits project-wise and has indicated that 
the matter is being taken up with the concerned authorities. 
The Committee are of the view that while flexibility to States/UTs is 
necessary given that land and housing are State subjects, the core intent of the 
Scheme to provide “affordable” rental housing to the urban migrants must not 
get sidelined. The Committee are also of the view that the absence of a broad 
guiding framework and centralized monitoring of rents may lead to variations 
that affect affordability for migrant workers. The Committee further observe that 
uneven implementation of incentives such as additional FAR/FSI, trunk 
infrastructure, tax exemptions and municipal charge parity may adversely 
impact project viability and could ultimately result in higher rents. 
In view of the above, the Committee recommend the Ministry: 
(i) to assess feasibility of issuing indicative rent benchmarks to ensure 
‘affordability’ for urban migrants while retaining flexibility for local 
conditions and to develop a centralized system to capture State-wise 
data on rent fixation, revisions, occupancy levels and incentives availed 
under both models of ARHC; 
(ii) to ensure that ARHC projects are prioritised in locations near major 
employment hubs and industrial areas to ensure higher occupancy and 
reduced commuting burden on beneficiaries; 
(iii) to direct States/UTs to strictly implement provisions relating to free 
additional FAR/FSI, land-use relaxations, residential-rate municipal 

19 
 
charges and timely provision of trunk infrastructure as mandated in the 
operational guidelines; and 
(iv) to actively pursue operationalisation of Income Tax and GST exemptions 
and ensure that such fiscal benefits translate into affordable rents for 
tenants. 
 
1.18 In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have 
stated as follows: 
 
“Land and colonisation are State subjects. Accordingly, fixation of rents under 
both Models of the Affordable Rental Housing Complexes (ARHCs) is 
undertaken by the respective State Governments/UT Governments/Entities, 
based on local surveys. This Ministry may not prescribe uniform rent rates 
under the scheme and does not maintain centralized data regarding rent 
fixation. The responsibility for determining, notifying, and revising rent levels 
rests with the concerned State/UT authorities in accordance with the scheme 
guidelines and local policy framework. 
As per the Operational Guidelines, ARHCs/ARH is being implemented 
in all Statutory Towns as per Census 2011 and Towns notified subsequently, 
Notified Planning Areas and areas of Development/ Special Area Development/ 
Industrial Development Authorities. States/UTs may also consider any project 
in any other areas after due notification. Further, MoHUA advised State/UTs to 
propose projects near major employment hubs and industrial areas to ensure 
higher occupancy, improved accessibility, and reduced commuting burden for 
beneficiaries. 
Land use regulation, building permissions and fixation of FAR/FSI fall 
within the jurisdiction of the respective State Governments/UT administrations 
and Urban Local Bodies. States/UTs have been advised to facilitate necessary 
policy measures, including suitable land-use changes, provision of additional 
FAR/FSI (up to 50 per cent free of cost) and other local incentives such as fee 
exemptions to enhance project viability. Implementation of these measures 
varies across States/UTs depending upon their respective urban development 
regulations, local planning frameworks and policy notifications. The Ministry 
may not centrally enforce or uniformly operationalise such relaxations, as these 
are governed by State/UT-specific statutes and building byelaws. There are 
variation across States in adoption of such policy measures. States/UTs are 

20 
 
being regularly advised to implement provisions related to additional FAR/FSI, 
land-use relaxations, levy of municipal charges at par with residential 
properties, and timely provision of trunk infrastructure, as per the operational 
guidelines of the scheme. 
Further, as per the operational guidelines, the incentives of exemption 
of Income Tax on any profits and gains derived from operation of ARHCs/ARH 
on similar lines as that of ‘Affordable Housing’ under section 80-IBA of Income 
Tax Act, 1961 and exemption of GST on any profits and gains derived from 
operation of ARHCs/ARH, at par with rental services of residential premises, 
vide Notification number 12 of 2017- Central Tax (Rate) dated 28th   June 2017 
are to be provided to Entities. Further, MoHUA is making continuous efforts to 
ensure that such fiscal incentives are effectively passed on to entities so that 
rental housing remains affordable for urban migrants.” 
 
1.19 The Committee note the Ministry's submission that fixation of rents under 
the Affordable Rental Housing Complexes (ARHC) scheme falls within the 
jurisdiction of the respective State Governments/UT Administrations, and that 
the Ministry may neither prescribe uniform rent rates nor maintain centralised 
data regarding rent fixation. The Committee, however, observe that their 
recommendation was not intended to prescribe uniform rent rates but rather to 
examine the feasibility of evolving indicative rent benchmarks that could serve 
as broad guidance to ensure affordability for urban migrants while retaining 
flexibility for local conditions. The recommendation also envisaged the 
establishment of a centralised mechanism to capture State-wise information on 
rent fixation, rent revisions, occupancy levels and incentives availed under both 
models of ARHC, thereby, facilitating effective monitoring and evaluation of the 
Scheme. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation and desire 
the Ministry to re-examine the feasibility of evolving indicative rent benchmarks 
and establishing a suitable centralised monitoring mechanism, without 
impinging upon the powers of the States/UTs to fix rents, so as to strengthen 
monitoring and ensure that the objective of providing affordable rental housing 
is effectively achieved.  
 
 

21 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
Strengthening Financial Planning, Monitoring and Timely Completion under 
AMRUT 2.0  
1.20  The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended as under: 
The Committee note that although the Budget Estimates for AMRUT 2.0 
were kept at ₹8,000 crore in 2023-24 and 2024-25 and enhanced to ₹10,000 
crore in 2025–26, the Revised Estimates were scaled down in successive years 
due to slow pace of expenditure. In 2025–26, only ₹5,569.21 crore or 74.25% 
of RE had been utilised as of January 2026. The Ministry has primarily 
attributed this to delays in onboarding States onto the SNA SPARSH platform. 
The Committee are of the view that recurring reductions at the RE stage reflect 
overestimation at the BE stage and weaknesses in expenditure planning and 
absorption capacity. 
The Committee further note that against the total approved Central share 
of ₹76,760 crore, only ₹18,757.16 crore has been released so far, which is 
significantly lower than the total approved outlay, and out of this, ₹15,161.94 
crore has been utilised, reflecting an overall financial progress of 80.83% 
against the funds released. While the overall physical grounding of projects 
stands at 78.65%, the inter-State variations remain significant. Several States 
have demonstrated commendable performance in both physical and financial 
progress. However, a number of States are lagging in physical achievement, 
while few show low financial utilisation.  
The Committee are of the considered view that with AMRUT 2.0 entering 
its final phase, delays in grounding projects and uneven utilisation of funds 
could hinder timely completion and the fulfilment of its key objectives, especially 
universal water supply and sewerage coverage. The Committee accordingly 
stress that timely completion of ongoing projects, efficient utilisation of allocated 
funds and reduction of inter-State disparities are essential to ensuring durable 
and sustainable urban infrastructure outcomes under the Mission.  
The Committee therefore recommend that to achieve the physical and 
financial target set under the Mission, the Ministry must focus on handholding 
of lagging States so as to accelerate physical grounding and completion of 

22 
 
remaining projects and ensure that mission objectives are met within stipulated 
timelines. 
 
1.21 In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have 
stated as follows: 
 
“Under AMRUT 2.0, State Water Action Plans (SWAPs) of the States/ UTs 
comprising of 8736 projects worth ₹1,95,422.52 crore have been approved as 
on 05.05.2026. States/ UTs have awarded contracts for 7402 projects worth 
₹1,45,666.71 crore.  
Necessary support and hand holding is provided to the States/UTs as 
and when required. The progress of AMRUT 2.0 is being monitored regularly 
at the Central level for early grounding of the approved projects. In order to fast 
track the implementation of AMRUT 2.0 projects, the progress is periodically 
reviewed and monitored through regular video conferences/ webinars/ 
workshops/ site-visits etc. by MoHUA with the States/UTs and their ULBs.  The 
Apex Committee also periodically reviews the implementation of AMRUT 2.0 
with the States/ UTs.” 
 
1.22 The Committee note that necessary handholding and technical support 
are being provided to the States/UTs and that the implementation of AMRUT 2.0 
is being regularly monitored through periodic review meetings, video 
conferences, workshops and site visits. The Committee also note that the Apex 
Committee periodically reviews the implementation of the Mission with the 
States/UTs. The Committee, however, observe that that as on 05.05.2026, 
against 8,736 approved projects under the State Water Action Plans (SWAPs) 
with a total approved cost of ₹1,95,422.52 crore, contracts have been awarded 
for only 7,402 projects worth ₹1,45,666.71 crore indicating that a number of 
approved projects are yet to enter the execution stage. The Committee, 
therefore, emphasise the need for the Ministry to continue providing focused 
handholding and technical support to the lagging States/UTs so as to accelerate 
the grounding and timely completion of the remaining projects and ensure that 
the objectives of AMRUT 2.0 are achieved within the stipulated Mission period 
scheduled to end in March 2027.  

23 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
Need for Adequate Financial Allocation and Expedited Remediation of Legacy 
Dumpsites under Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) 2.0  
1.23  The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended as under: 
The Committee note that under the Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) 2.0, 
notable progress has been reported in door-to-door collection (96.54% wards), 
source segregation (88.08% wards) and waste processing (81.65% of total 
waste generated). Further, 1,193 cities have been certified as Garbage Free 
Cities (GFC) with varying star ratings. However, the Committee observe certain 
critical concerns regarding financial management and remediation of legacy 
dumpsites. 
On the financial front, there is a consistent gap between the Ministry’s 
projected requirements, Budget Estimates (BE), Revised Estimates (RE) and 
actual expenditure. In the last four years, allocations at the BE stage were lower 
than projections and were further reduced at the RE stage. While expenditure 
remained close to RE in earlier years, in 2025–26 only ₹1,321.15 crore has 
been spent as on 17.02.2026 against an RE of ₹2,000 crore which is about 
66%. Further, for 2026-27, against a projected requirement of ₹5,000 crore, the 
BE has been fixed at ₹2,500 crore, which is 50% of the projected need. 
Although, the Ministry has clarified that the BE was reduced by the Department 
of Expenditure based on actual expenditure trends from 2021-22 to 2025-26, 
and additional requirements, if any, will be projected at the Revised 
Estimates/Supplementary Demands stage, the Committee feel that such 
reduced allocations in the final phase of the Mission may constrain 
implementation and delay completion of pending works. 
At the same time, in respect of legacy dumpsites, out of 2,510.78 lakh 
metric tonnes (LMT) of identified waste, only 1,568.01 LMT or about 62.5% has 
been remediated and 8,587.67 acres reclaimed, leaving 942.77 LMT yet to be 
treated and 6,671.03 acres of land to be reclaimed. While some States/UTs 
have achieved full remediation, large quantities of waste remain pending in 
States such as Maharashtra, Karnataka, West Bengal, Rajasthan, Delhi and 
Tamil Nadu. The pace of remediation is uneven and substantial work remains 
to be completed within a limited timeframe. The Committee note that the 

24 
 
Ministry has launched the Dumpsite Remediation Accelerator Programme 
(DRAP) on 8th November, 2025, with the aim of completing remediation of all 
dumpsites by 31st March, 2027. 
As the Mission is in its final phase with the goal of making all cities 
“Garbage Free” by 2026, the Committee emphasise that adequate financial 
support and faster remediation of legacy dumpsites are essential for achieving 
this objective. Any delay in addressing funding gaps and pending waste 
treatment may hinder timely completion of the Mission. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend to the Ministry that : 
(i) Adequate and realistic assessment of funds should be made at the 
Budget Estimate stage itself in line with projected requirements and 
physical targets and any drastic reductions at the Revised Estimate 
stage should be avoided; 
(ii) A clear, State/UT-wise time-bound action plan with quarterly targets 
should be prepared to clear the remaining legacy waste under the DRAP 
and special monitoring and support should be provided to States where 
large quantities of waste are still pending;  
(iii) it should be ensured that within two years every ULB has ‘waste 
treatment plants’ (WTPs) with a capacity proportionate to the amount of 
waste generated currently while also envisaging future needs, to avoid 
growth of new dumpsites and landfills; and 
(iv) greater emphasis should be put on sustainable and scientific methods 
such as waste-to-energy, bio-mining, composting and material recovery, 
so that legacy waste is properly processed rather than merely shifted. 
States with large pending quantities should be encouraged to adopt 
value-recovery models to generate energy, reduce landfill burden and 
ensure productive use of reclaimed land. 
 
1.24 In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have 
stated as follows: 
 
“Remediation of all legacy dumpsites is one of the primary objectives of SBM-
Urban 2.0. As per available records, there are approximately 2,476 legacy 
dumpsites in urban areas across the country, containing approximately 26.38 

25 
 
crore Metric Tonnes (MT) of accumulated waste. The status of remediation as 
on date is as under: 
(i)        Approximately 1,703 lakh MT (about 65%) of legacy waste has 
been completely remediated, with 9,169 acres of land reclaimed. 
(ii)      Remediation work is ongoing in 940 dumpsites, covering 84.2 
Crore MT of legacy waste. 
(iii)    Under SBM-U 2.0, action plans for remediation of 22.57 Crore MT 
of waste across 3,046 ULBs have been approved at a total project 
cost of ₹12038.19 crore, with Central Financial Assistance (CFA) 
of ₹4,689.73 crores. 
To fast-track the remaining remediation work and meet the 'Lakshya 
Zero Dumpsites' target, the Dumpsite Remediation Accelerator Programme 
(DRAP) was launched on 8th November 2025 and proposal worth ₹795.09 
crores having central share of ₹292 crores have been approved so far under 
DRAP.” 
 
1.25 The Committee note the progress made in the remediation of legacy 
dumpsites, the launch of the Dumpsite Remediation Accelerator Programme 
(DRAP) and the approval of projects for remediation of legacy waste under SBM-
U 2.0. The Committee, however, observe that the Ministry has not addressed the 
Committee's recommendation regarding the need for a realistic assessment of 
fund requirements at the Budget Estimate stage and avoidance of substantial 
reductions at the Revised Estimate stage. Further, the Ministry has not indicated 
whether a State/UT-wise time-bound action plan with quarterly targets and a 
focused monitoring mechanism for States/UTs having large quantities of 
pending legacy waste has been prepared under DRAP. The Ministry has also not 
furnished its response to the Committee's recommendation on ensuring 
adequate waste treatment capacity in every ULB to prevent the creation of new 
dumpsites, as well as on promoting sustainable and scientific waste processing 
methods and value-recovery models. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
earlier recommendations and urge the Ministry to accord priority to realistic 
budgetary planning, preparation and implementation of time bound action plans 
with robust monitoring mechanisms, creation of adequate waste treatment 
infrastructure and adoption of sustainable waste management practices to 

26 
 
ensure the effective remediation of legacy waste and prevent the emergence of 
new dumpsites.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
Focus of smaller Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) under the Urban Challenge Fund  
1.26  The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended as under: 
In the Budget 2025-2026, the Union Government proposed to set up an 
Urban Challenge Fund of ₹1 lakh crore to implement the proposals under three 
verticals, namely, (i) ‘Cities as Growth Hubs’, (ii) ‘Creative Redevelopment of 
Cities’ and (iii) 'Water and Sanitation'. According to the Ministry, this fund will 
finance up to 25 per cent of the cost of bankable projects with a stipulation that 
at least 50 per cent of the cost is funded from the market sources such as 
bonds, bank loans, and Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) and the remaining 
25 percent are financed by States, ULBs or through other sources. 
The Committee understand that urban infrastructure requires substantial 
funding, which so far have been supported primarily by budgetary grants. The 
Committee appreciate that against this backdrop, an innovative shift has been 
proposed, aiming to generate₹4 lakh crore for urban development over the next 
five years through a challenge based, market-linked, reform driven and 
outcome-oriented scheme by encouraging States and ULBs to raise funds from 
the market for financing urban infrastructure projects. The Committee have also 
noted that these changes will be accompanied by reforms in accounting system 
followed by States/Cities/ULBs. Further, to enable participation of fiscally 
weaker Urban Local Bodies, a Credit Repayment Guarantee Sub-Scheme has 
been approved under the Urban Challenge Fund. A corpus of ₹5,000 crore has 
been created under this Sub-Scheme to provide credit repayment guarantee 
support. The Sub-Scheme will cover all ULBs in Northeastern and Hilly 
States/UTs and smaller ULBs (with population below 1,00,000) in other 
States/UTs, enabling them to raise resources from the market and participate 
in the Urban Challenge Fund.  
The Committee observe that the Ministry were not able to raise desired 
funds through Public Private Partnership (PPP) under earlier Schemes, such 
as the Smart Cities Mission. Further, the success of any Scheme depends on 

27 
 
the delivery capability and absorption capacity of the ULBs. The bigger ULBs 
will naturally be in a better position to avail themselves of the benefits of the 
UCF compared to the smaller ones. The Committee, thus recommend the 
Ministry : 
(i) to specifically focus on smaller cities and those cities which were not 
covered under the Smart Cities Mission so that the intended benefits 
generated from the Scheme are evenly distributed; and 
(ii) for early finalisation of guidelines and operational modalities of the 
Scheme. 
 
1.27 In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have 
stated as follows: 
 
“The Ministry accords due importance to strengthening the capacity and 
financial sustainability of smaller Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) under the Urban 
Challenge Fund (UCF). 
In order to improve the creditworthiness of smaller ULBs and to facilitate 
access to market finance, a Credit Repayment Guarantee Sub-Scheme 
(CRGSS) with a corpus of 5,000 crore has been approved for all ULBs of North-
Eastern & Hilly States/UTs and smaller ULBS (<1,00,000 population) in other 
States/UTs under UCF. 
Under this scheme, in addition to the Central Assistance for the UCF 
projects, Central Government will provide the credit repayment guarantee of up 
to 7 crore or 70 per cent of the loan amount (whichever is lower) for first-time 
loans and 7 crore or 50 per cent of the loan amount (whichever is lower) for 
second- time loans availed by the ULBS. 
Further, it has been informed that Cabinet approved the Urban 
Challenge Fund (UCF) on 13.02.2026. Subsequently, the Guidelines for Urban 
Challenge Fund (UCF) was formally launched on 15.04.2026. ” 
 
1.28 The Committee note that the Urban Challenge Fund (UCF) has been 
approved by the Cabinet and that the operational guidelines for its 
implementation have been issued. The Committee further note that a Credit 

28 
 
Repayment Guarantee Sub-Scheme, with a corpus of ₹5,000 crore, has been 
introduced under the UCF to improve the creditworthiness of smaller Urban 
Local Bodies (ULBs) and facilitate their access to market-based funding for 
urban infrastructure projects. While welcoming this initiative, the Committee, 
emphasise the need for the Ministry to continue providing sustained 
handholding, financial assistance and technical support to smaller ULBs, 
particularly those with limited institutional and fiscal capacity. Such support is 
essential to enable these ULBs to effectively access market finance, strengthen 
their project implementation capabilities and fully leverage the benefit of the 
Urban Challenge Fund.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
Need for Long-Term Urban Infrastructure Planning and Investment Strategy  
1.29  The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended as under: 
The Committee sought to ascertain whether the Ministry has prepared 
or proposes to prepare a unified long-term urban strategy aligned with the vision 
of Viksit Bharat 2047, integrating infrastructure creation, governance reforms, 
climate resilience, economic growth and social inclusion across metropolitan, 
Tier-II and Tier-III cities. The Committee have been apprised that the High 
Powered Expert Committee (HPEC), in its 2011 report, had estimated urban 
infrastructure investment requirements up to 2031 and projected urban 
population share to increase to 75% by 2030. Since then, no similar Committee 
has been constituted. The Ministry further referred to the 2022 report “Cities as 
Engines of Growth” by NITI Aayog and Asian Development Bank (ADB), which 
highlights the strong correlation between urbanisation and GDP growth. The 
Ministry submitted that various ongoing missions such as AMRUT 2.0, SBM-U 
2.0, PMAY-U 2.0, Metro Rail Projects and PM e-Bus Seva are contributing 
towards improving quality of life and supporting the vision of Viksit Bharat 2047. 
  The Committee note that while several flagship schemes are being 
implemented and financing support mechanisms have been introduced, these 
interventions are largely scheme-driven and sector-specific. The last 
comprehensive and consolidated assessment of urban infrastructure 
requirements was undertaken by the HPEC in 2011, with projections only up to 

29 
 
2031. No updated national-level assessment has been undertaken to estimate 
infrastructure demand, financing gaps and institutional requirements beyond 
2030 in a holistic manner. Given the rapid pace of urbanisation, the growing 
economic centrality of cities, emerging climate risks and the stated national goal 
of achieving ‘Viksit Bharat 2047’, the absence of an integrated long-term urban 
investment and strategy framework may lead to fragmented planning, sub-
optimal allocation of resources and financing stress in the future. 
In view of the above, the Committee recommend the Ministry to 
constitute a new High-Level Expert Committee to comprehensively assess 
India’s urban infrastructure requirements, financing needs, governance reforms 
and capacity-building imperatives up to 2047 aligned with the vision of ‘Viksit 
Bharat 2047’. A forward-looking and evidence-based roadmap would enable 
coordinated planning, better fiscal preparedness and balanced urban 
development across metropolitan, Tier-II and Tier-III cities. 
 
1.30 In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have 
stated as follows: 
 
“Ministry while appreciating the concern raised by the Hon’ble Committee take 
note of the observations regarding the need for a comprehensive, long-term 
urban infrastructure planning and investment strategy aligned with the vision of 
Viksit Bharat 2047. 
Ministry will like to submit that ‘Urban Development’ is a State subject 
and Government of India plays a catalytic role through Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes (CSSs), sectoral missions, policy framework and financial support. 
Ministry has been implementing several flagship programmes, including 
AMRUT 2.0, Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) 2.0, and PMAY-U 2.0, Metro Rail 
projects, PM e-Bus Sewa, which collectively address infrastructure creation, 
service delivery, climate resilience, and improved urban governance. 
Ministry recognizes that India's long-term urban transition requires 
substantial investment and strategic planning. In this context, the World Bank 
has estimated that India will need to invest about USD 840 billion in urban 
infrastructure over the 15 years up to 2036, or an average of USD 55 billion per 
annum, to meet the needs of its growing urban population. This underscores 
the importance of strengthening financing frameworks, project preparation 

30 
 
capacities and integrated planning approaches across metropolitan, Tier-Il and 
Tier-III cities. 
Further, the Government of India has announced the setting up of an 
Urban Challenge Fund (UCF) of 1 lakh crore in the Union Budget 2025-26 to 
support the implementation of proposals relating to 'Cities as Growth Hubs', 
'Creative Redevelopment of Cities' and 'Water and Sanitation'. 
The Fund is designed to finance up to 25 per cent of the cost of bankable 
projects, subject to the condition that at least 50 per cent of the project cost is 
mobilised through bonds, bank loans and Public Private Partnerships (PPPs), 
with an enhance urban resilience and economic productivity through integrated 
urban planning, land-use efficiency and sustainable financing. 
In addition, policy guidance and analytical inputs have been drawn from 
reports such as "Cities as Engines of Growth" (NITI Aayog-ADB, 2022), which 
emphasise the role of urbanisation in economic development.  Ministry also 
continuously engages with States/UTs for integrated planning through City 
Action Plans, State Annual Action Plans, and convergence frameworks under 
various schemes to support integrated planning and implementation. 
In view of the above, the Ministry will continue to strengthen evidence-
based urban planning, investment prioritisation and reform-linked support 
mechanisms under ongoing and emerging initiatives, so as to advance 
coordinated, resilient and inclusive urban development aligned with the vision 
of Viksit Bharat 2047.” 
 
1.31 The Committee note the Ministry's submission regarding the 
implementation of various flagship urban development programmes, the 
establishment of the Urban Challenge Fund and the efforts being made towards 
evidence-based urban planning and investment prioritisation. The Committee 
also note the Ministry's reference to the World Bank's estimate of urban 
infrastructure investment requirements up to 2036 and the use of various 
planning frameworks under ongoing schemes. The Committee, however, 
observe that these initiatives are largely scheme-specific and do not constitute 
a comprehensive national assessment of urban infrastructure requirements, 
financing needs, governance reforms and capacity-building imperatives up to 
2047. In the absence of such an integrated long-term assessment, coordinated 

31 
 
planning and resource mobilisation in line with the vision of Viksit Bharat 2047 
may remain fragmented. The Committee, therefore reiterate their 
recommendation that the Ministry examine the feasibility of constituting a High-
Level Expert Committee to undertake a comprehensive assessment of India's 
urban infrastructure requirements up to 2047 and prepare a long-term roadmap 
to support balanced and sustainable urban development.  
******* 
  

32 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
Need for Proper and Realistic Budgetary Planning 
2.1  The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended as under: 
The Committee note that while the Total Central Government Outlay has 
increased steadily from ₹39,44,909 crore in 2022-23 to ₹53,47,315 crore in 
2026-27, the share of the Ministry has not grown proportionately. The Ministry’s 
share, which stood at 1.94% in 2022-23 and 1.91% in 2025-26, has declined to 
1.60% in 2026-27 which is the lowest in the five-year period. Further, against 
the projected outlay of ₹97,644.51 crore for 2026-27, the approved Budget 
Estimate is ₹85,522.39 crore, reflecting a reduction of ₹12,122.12 crore 
(12.41%). The Committee also note that such reductions between projected 
outlay and approved Budget Estimates have been persistent over the years i.e. 
22.82% in 2022-23, 11.52% in 2023-24 and 17.25% in 2024-25, with the only 
exception being the year 2025-26.  
The Committee also note that despite increasing urbanisation and rising 
demand for housing, water supply, sanitation and urban transport, the Ministry’s 
relative share in the Central Budget has declined and its projections are 
routinely curtailed at the approval stage except in FY 2025-26. The Committee 
feel that such persistent gaps between projected outlay and Budgetary 
allocation are linked to the actual utilisation trends, highlighting a systemic 
mismatch between projection and implementation capacity. With the need to 
address the issues of such stark gaps between the Ministry’s budgetary 
projections and actual utilisation, the Committee recommend the Ministry: 
(i) to adopt a more realistic and evidence-based forecasting mechanism 
aligned with actual implementation capacity at the State level;  
(ii) to formulate and present a clear and time-bound roadmap for 
progressively enhancing Ministry’s share in the Total Central Outlay, 
commensurate with the expanding urban infrastructure needs and 

33 
 
services, delivery obligations aligned with the vision of ‘Viksit Bharat’ in 
2047; and 
(iii) to institute robust expenditure monitoring and mid-year review 
mechanisms to ensure timely utilization of allocated funds under key 
schemes and other urban infrastructure programmes, enabling 
corrective action within the same FY to prevent persistent 
underutilization.  
 
2.2 In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have 
stated as follows: 
 
“The Ministry has noted the observations of the Committee and is committed to 
ensuring more realistic and evidence-based budgetary planning under various 
schemes/projects so that savings at the end of financial year are minimal. 
Ministry would, however, like to submit that requirement of funds for 
schemes/ projects/ programmes in the given financial year (FY) is initially 
assessed at the time of submitting proposal to Ministry of Finance in the month 
of September/October. The BE under Centrally Sponsored Schemes is 
determined on the basis of the total Central Share outlay approved for the 
Missions by the Cabinet for each financial year, as well as the projected fund 
absorption capacity of the States/UTs. On the basis of instructions outlined in 
the Budget Circular for preparation of budget, projection of funds is made much 
before the commencement of the next financial year and constraints that may 
affect implementation of schemes/ programmes during that particular year are 
sometimes beyond anticipation.     
Revised Estimates for the ongoing FY are arrived at after mid-year 
assessment of progress of schemes/ projects, trends of expenditure, approval 
of the scheme/ projects by the competent authority and committed expenditure 
for the remaining period of the year.  These proposals are discussed in the pre-
Budget Meetings with Secretary (Expenditure) to finalise Revised Estimates/ 
Budget Estimates and reduction of allocation by Ministry of Finance at RE stage 
after re-assessment of requirement of funds results in savings. 
The pattern of variation between BE, RE and Actuals observed in recent 
years has been primarily on account of the transition to the SNA-SPARSH 
(Single Nodal Account – System for Payment Reconciliation and Allocation of 

34 
 
Scheme Heads) model mandated by the Department of Expenditure, Ministry 
of Finance, effective from 1st August 2024. Under this model, funds are 
released in a Just-in-Time manner based on actual bill submissions by the 
Implementing Agencies through the integrated PFMS-IFMIS-e-Kuber platform 
of the Reserve Bank of India, as opposed to the earlier practice of bulk releases 
into State SNA accounts. This transition, while ensuring improved financial 
discipline, caused transitory delays in bill submission in the initial months as 
States/UTs were to be on-boarded on the revised system. This system has now 
almost stablised and it is expected that pace of expenditure will now pick-up 
from the current financial year. 
While there has been slightly reduced expenditure on the releases to 
State(s) due to the various reasons given earlier, MoHUA has been showing 
steady growth in terms of capital expenditure except for FY 2022-23. The 
CAPEX data for the previous five financial years is presented in the following 
table. 
                   (₹ in crore) 
Break-up of Capital Expenditure (Gross Budgetary Support) 
Sr. 
No. Year BE 
(Capital) 
RE 
(Capital) 
Actual 
Expenditure 
% Expenditure 
w.r.t RE 
1 2021-22  25,759 25,957 25,946 99.96% 
2 2022-23  27,341 23,681 23,675 99.98% 
3 2023-24  25,997 26,533 26,441 99.65% 
4 2024-25  28,628 31,662 31,623 99.88% 
5 2025-26  37,623 32,978 32,929 99.85% 
 
The CAPEX as part of the complete budgetary allocation of the ministry 
is increasing steadily over the last few years except during FY 2022-23, along 
with near 100% utilization of the allocation. The ministry is, therefore, making a 
significant contribution towards sound fiscal management to national economy.  
Ministry is taking all necessary steps to accurately assess the 
requirement of funds while preparing Budgetary Estimates (BE) and Revised 
Estimates (RE) of the Ministry. Taking into account that most of the schemes 
of the Ministry are demand driven, all the States Governments/UTs have been   

35 
 
advised at the level of Hon’ble Minister (HUA) that system must be put in place 
so that effective and timely utilization of funds is ensured. It was also highlighted 
that focussed expenditure monitoring is one of the critical inputs for meeting 
service delivery and urbanisation goals.  Copies of letters all dated 18.02.2026 
issued at the level of Minister, Housing and Urban Affairs to the Chief Ministers 
of State Governments/Administrators of UTs in the matter are attached. 
The Ministry has been monitoring the implementation of scheme and 
utilisation of funds under various schemes through periodic review meetings, 
video conferences and regular follow-up with States/UTs for expeditious 
utilization of funds and completion of sanctioned projects within the stipulated 
time frame.” 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No.  
G-20022/2/2026-BUDGET SECTION-MoHUA dated 10th June, 2026] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.7 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
Need for Timely Utilisation of Funds  
2.3  The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended as under: 
The Committee note that the gap between Budget Estimates (BE), 
Revised Estimates (RE) and Actual Expenditure (AE) of the Ministry has 
widened significantly in recent years. While utilisation remained close to RE in 
2022-23 and 2023-24, the position deteriorated in 2024-25 and 2025-26. In 
2025-26, the BE of ₹96,777 crore was sharply reduced at RE stage to 
₹57,203.78 crore (a reduction of nearly 40%). The actual expenditure as on 
20.02.2026 stands at ₹40,967.62 crore, which is only 71.62% of RE implying 
that nearly 28.38% of the revised allocation is to be spent in the last 39 days of 
the financial year. Scheme-wise analysis shows uneven performance. While 
AMRUT and PMAY (Urban) show utilisation above 79–80% of RE, schemes 
such as PM-eBus Sewa (17.87%), CITIIS 2.0 (0.37%), PM SVANidhi (60.99%), 

36 
 
DJAY (45.60%) and PHE (40.29%) show slow progress. Further, unspent 
balances under various schemes amount to ₹5,806.27 crore, with substantial 
balances under Smart Cities Mission (₹2,012.64 crore), SBM (₹1,238.90 crore) 
and AMRUT (₹1,213.01 crore). The amount surrendered has also risen sharply 
from ₹1,157.31 crore in 2022-23 to ₹32,291.34 crore in 2024-25 indicating 
serious issues in expenditure planning and utilisation. 
The Committee take note of the Ministry’s submission that expenditure 
depends substantially on the spending capacity of States under the SNA-
SPARSH mechanism, which requires States to incur expenditure before the 
Central share is released. The Ministry has also cited delays in approval of 
major schemes such as the National Urban Digital Mission (NUDM), Urban 
Challenge Fund and the Scheme for Industrial Housing, involving an outlay of 
₹13,750 crore, as factors affecting utilisation. While these constraints are 
acknowledged, the Committee are of the considered view that repeated large-
scale reductions at the RE stage, uneven scheme performance and growing 
unspent balances point to deeper issues in budgeting realism, inter-
governmental coordination and monitoring. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry: 
(i) to undertake a thorough review of Budgeting exercise so as to better 
align Budgetary Estimate, Revised Estimate and Actual Expenditure;  
(ii) to address procedural bottlenecks under fund flow mechanisms such as 
SNA-SPARSH;  
(iii) to fix scheme-wise spending targets at regular intervals, ideally every 
quarter, and review them closely to ensure timely use of funds; 
(iv) to strengthen institutional capacity of States and Urban Local Bodies 
(ULBs) for improved fund absorption; and  
(v) to ensure that expenditure is evenly paced throughout the year avoiding 
year-end concentration, so as to uphold both fiscal prudence and 
implementation quality. 
 
2.4 In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have 
stated as follows: 
 

37 
 
“I. Ministry will like to inform the Hon’ble Committee that Ministry could 
utilize 99.78% of the allocated funds   amounting to ₹57,075.19 crore against  
allocated funds in Revised Estimates (RE) 2025-26 of ₹ 57,203.78 crore,.  This 
is line with the trend during previous few years excepting FY 2024-25 when it 
remained low. Ministry is taking all necessary steps to accurately assess the 
requirement of funds while preparing Budgetary Estimates (BE) and Revised 
Estimates (RE) of the Ministry.  Scheme-wise expenditure vis-à-vis Revised 
Estimates 2025-26 is as under: - 
Sl. 
No. Name of Schemes B.E. 
2025-26 
R.E. 2025-
26(Final) 
 
Actual 
2025-26 
% Actual 
w.r.t. RE 
2025-26  
1 MRTS & Metro Projects 34807.00 29451.00 29451.00 100% 
2 
Pradhan Mantri Awas 
Yojna -PMAY-Urban & 
PMAY-Urban 2.0 
23294.00 8963.37 8948.82 99.84% 
3 Scheme for Industrial 
Housing 2500.00 0 0  0  
4 
Atal Mission for 
Rejuvenation and Urban - 
AMRUT  
     
10,000.00  7814.86 7789.52 99.68% 
5 
City Investment to 
Innovate, Integrate and 
Sustain 2.0  
250.00 2.07 1.70 85% 
6 National Urban Digital 
Mission (NUDM) 1250.00 0.00 0  0  
7 Swachh Bharat Mission-
Urban 5000.00 2000.00 1945.47 97.27% 
8 CPWD (Scheme) 3957.00 4022.55 4002.14 99.48% 
9 PM SVANidhi 373.00 571.98 571.98 100% 
10 PHE Sector Development  2.00 2.00 2.00 100% 
11 PM-eBus Sewa Scheme 1310.00 173.70 171.20 98.39% 
12 
Deendayal – Jan 
Aajeevika Yojana 
(Shahari)  
0.00 95.00 95.00 100% 

38 
 
13 Urban Challenge Fund 10000.00 0.00 0  0  
 A Total (Schemes)  92743.00 53096.53 52978.83 99.78% 
 B Non-scheme 4034.00 4107.25 4096.36 99.73% 
   GRANT TOTAL (A+B) 96777.00 57203.78 57075.19 99.78% 
 
Ministry would also like to inform the Hon’ble Committee that budgetary 
allocation for schemes/projects depends upon receipt of the proposals from 
State Governments/UTs and approval thereof by the Ministry after detailed 
examination. Adequate budgetary allocations are made based on realistic 
assessment of expenditure in consultation with the beneficiary 
States/UTs/Implementing Agencies. It is also submitted that final allocations at 
the stage of BE/RE  are made by Ministry of Finance keeping in view the fiscal 
space available for allocation to various Ministries/Departments. 
II. The Ministry acknowledges the procedural challenges in fund flow 
mechanisms such as SNA-SPARSH, particularly with regard to technical 
familiarization, first-time adoption by nodal agencies, and variations in State-
specific systems mainly under Centrally Sponsored Schemes. To address 
these issues, continuous technical support, capacity-building sessions, and 
coordination with States/UTs are being undertaken to streamline processes and 
enhance ease of fund flow. 
III. The Ministry has institutionalized periodic review mechanisms wherein 
scheme-wise financial and physical progress is assessed at regular 
intervalsthrough regular video conferences/ webinars/ workshops/ site-visits etc. 
States/UTs are encouraged to adhere to expenditure targets, and progress is 
closely monitored through review meetings to ensure timely and efficient 
utilisation of funds. States/UTs having unspent balances have been advised to 
expedite utilisation and submit Utilization Certificates (UCs) and other requisite 
documents in a timely manner.   
IV. To enhance fund absorption capacity, the Ministry regularly conducts 
capacity-building workshops and training programmes at the central level. 
Additionally, continuous project-level handholding support is extended to 
States/ULBs, including technical guidance, advisory support, and field-level 
coordination to improve implementation efficiency. Taking into account that 

39 
 
most of the schemes of the Ministry are demand driven, all the States 
Governments/UTs have been   advised at the level of Hon’ble Minister (HUA) 
that system must be put in place so that effective and timely utilization of funds 
is ensured. It was also highlighted that focused expenditure monitoring is one 
of the critical inputs for meeting service delivery and urbanisation goals.  Copies 
of letters all dated 18.02.2026 issued at the level of Minister, Housing and Urban 
Affairs to the Chief Ministers of State Governments/Administrators of UTs in the 
matter are attached. 
V. The Ministry emphasises phased and evenly distributed expenditure 
throughout the financial year. Through judicious financial planning, regular 
monitoring, and advisory to States/UTs, efforts are being made to avoid year-
end concentration of spending, thereby ensuring fiscal prudence and 
maintaining the quality of implementation. States/UTs-wise tentative allocations 
under various schemes have  been made and communicated for expeditious 
utilization of funds and timely implementation of scheme.” 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No. G-
20022/2/2026-BUDGET SECTION-MoHUA dated 10th June, 2026] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.10 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
 
 
Slow progress of Light House Projects (LHP) under PMAY(U) 
  
2.5  The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended as under: 
 
The Committee note that under PMAY-U 1.0 six Light House Projects 
(LHPs), each comprising over 1,000 houses with allied infrastructure facilities 
are being constructed at Indore (Madhya Pradesh), Rajkot (Gujarat), Chennai 

40 
 
(Tamil Nadu), Ranchi (Jharkhand), Agartala (Tripura) and Lucknow (Uttar 
Pradesh). The foundation stones for six LHPs were laid by Hon’ble Prime 
Minister on January 1, 2021. The Committee also note that these houses have 
been constructed using six different innovative technologies identified through 
the Global Housing Technological Challenge-India (GHTC-India). It has also 
been submitted by the Ministry that these LHPs will serve as live laboratories 
for all stakeholders facilitating dissemination of knowledge about these 
technologies in terms of cost and time effectiveness, resilience, environmental 
friendliness, faster construction etc. and promoting their adoption in house 
construction activities. Further, the Hon’ble Prime Minister has inaugurated 
LHP Chennai on 26th May 2022, LHP Rajkot on 19th October 2022, LHP Indore 
on 5th October 2023 and LHP Lucknow & LHP Ranchi on 10th March 2024. The 
LHP Agartala is in advanced stage of construction. 
 
The Committee in their Seventeenth Report (2022-23) on “Evaluation of 
Implementation of Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (Urban)” had recommended 
for speedy completion of LHPs and for additional central assistance for LHP 
projects, Agartala, Tripura. The Committee are pleased to learn through the 
Action Taken replies furnished by the Government on Committee’s 
recommendation that a conscious decision has been taken by the Ministry to 
enhance the Technology Innovation Grants (TIG) share so that the burden on 
EWS beneficiaries can be substantially reduced and LHP projects are 
implemented successfully. The TIG has been revised from ₹2.00 lakh per 
Dwelling Unit (DU) or 20% of the estimated cost per DU, whichever is less to 
₹4.00 lakh per DU or, 40% of the tendered cost per DU, whichever is less in 
case of LHP Chennai (Tamil Nadu), Ranchi (Jharkhand), Indore (Madhya 
Pradesh), Rajkot (Gujarat) and Lucknow (Uttar Pradesh). For LHP Agartala 
(Tripura), TIG has been increased to ₹5.00 lakh per DU or, 40% of the tendered 
cost per DU, whichever is less, which is already higher as compared to other 
LHP States. The TIG is in addition to the existing funding of ₹1.5 lakh per DU 
under Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana - Urban (PMAY-U). The Committee are of 
the view that the additional central assistance was provided to LHP Agartala for 
timely completion of the project and any further delay in completion of the 
Agartala Light House Project would defeat the very purpose and objective of 

41 
 
the initiative. The Committee therefore, recommend that the Ministry review the 
project’s progress on regular basis, provide necessary handholding to the State 
of Tripura for speedy completion of the Dwelling Units and furnish a status 
report to the Committee at the earliest.  
 
2.6 In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have 
stated as follows: 
 
 
“The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee has been noted. The Light 
House Project (LHP) at Agartala, Tripura is at advanced stage of construction. 
In line with the Committee’s recommendation, the MoHUA has strengthened 
the monitoring mechanism and undertaking weekly reviews through periodic 
meetings and continuous follow-up with the State Government of Tripura and 
Construction Agency. The officers of MoHUA& BMTPC are also monitoring the 
progress through regular field visits to the LHP Agartala site.   
 
Further, to reduce the financial burden of beneficiaries, the enhanced 
Technology Innovation Grant (TIG) of Rs. 5 lakh per Dwelling Units has already 
been provided to LHP Agartala and MoHUA and BMTPC (Technology partner 
of GHTC-India) has been providing continuously necessary handholding 
support, including technical guidance to the Construction Agency to ensure 
expeditious completion of LHP Agartala.  
 
The MoHUA remains committed to ensuring early completion of the LHP 
Agartala and timely allotment of houses to identified beneficiaries, so that the 
objectives of promoting and showcasing innovative construction technologies 
are fully achieved. A detailed status report on the progress of LHP Agartala will 
be furnished to the Hon’ble Committee at the earliest.”  
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No.  
G-20022/2/2026-BUDGET SECTION-MoHUA dated 10th June, 2026] 
 
 
 

42 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
Ensuring Wider and Balanced Implementation of ARHC across States  
2.7  The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended as under: 
Affordable Rental Housing Complex (ARHC) scheme was introduced as 
a sub-scheme of PMAY (U) in July, 2020 and since September, 2024 is being 
implemented as a vertical under PMAY(U) 2.0 through two models i.e. Model-
I, which envisages conversion of existing government-funded vacant houses 
into rental housing through PPP or public agencies for 25 years; and Model-II, 
which provides for construction, operation and maintenance of new rental 
housing units by public or private entities on their own land for 25 years. 
However, progress under both the models has been uneven. Under Model-I, 
against 83,534 vacant houses identified, only 5,783 units have been converted 
into ARHCs, while 7,413 units are under process, leaving a very large stock of 
vacant houses unutilised. States/UTs such as Delhi and Maharashtra, despite 
having 29,112 and 32,345 vacant houses respectively, have reported no 
conversion under the scheme. The Committee further note that out of 5,783 
houses converted under Model-I in eight cities, 4,605 units have been occupied 
by beneficiaries so far, while 1,178 units remain vacant. Under Model-II, 
although 83,298 units have been approved nationwide, only 36,450 units have 
been completed and occupied so far, with the overwhelming share 
concentrated at Sriperumbudur, Hosur and Chennai in Tamil Nadu. Many 
approved projects in other States remain at early stages of completion. This 
indicates slow progress, limited geographical spread and inadequate reporting 
on actual utilisation of assets created. 
The Committee are of the view that the objectives of ARHC, which aims 
to provide dignified, affordable rental housing to urban migrants, poor and other 
vulnerable groups close to their workplaces, cannot be fully realised unless 
vacant houses are swiftly converted and newly approved units are completed 
and occupied in a time-bound manner. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
to the Ministry: 
(i) to prepare a time-bound State/UT-wise action plan for conversion of 
vacant houses under Model-I, particularly in States/UTs with large 

43 
 
inventories such as Delhi and Maharashtra and actively resolve 
administrative or coordination issues hindering implementation; 
(ii) to establish a system to oversee and ensure that the houses lying vacant 
in various States/UTs which are being considered under Model-I of 
AHRC are first appropriately retrofitted, repaired and upgraded, 
wherever necessary, to make them habitable; 
(iii) to set strict timelines for completion and operationalisation of approved 
units under Model-II, with periodic review of construction and occupancy 
status; 
(iv) to strengthen monitoring and coordination with States/UTs and private 
partners so that both conversion of existing vacant houses and 
construction of new rental units translate into functional, fully occupied 
housing complexes serving the intended beneficiaries; and 
(v) to undertake a comprehensive national assessment of demand for 
affordable rental housing for urban migrants and to fix clear State/UT-
wise targets for the number of ARHC dwelling units.  
 
 
2.8 In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have 
stated as follows: 
 
“The Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) has been implementing 
Affordable Rental Housing Complexes (ARHCs) as a sub-scheme of Pradhan 
Mantri Awas Yojana - Urban (PMAY-U) to provide dignified living to urban 
migrants/poor near their workplace through two models:  
III. Model-I: Utilizing existing Government funded vacant houses 
constructed under Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission 
(JNNURM) and Rajiv Awas Yojana (RAY) to convert into ARHCs 
through Public Private Partnership (PPP) or by Public Agencies, 
IV. Model-II: Construction, Operation & Maintenance of ARHCs by 
Public/Private Entities on their own available vacant land. 
Under Model 1 of ARHCs, around 83,534 houses constructed under 
erstwhile schemes of BSUP & IHSDP of JnNURM and RAY were found to be 
vacant in different States/UTs. These identified houses were targeted for 

44 
 
converted into ARHCs under Model -I by States/UTs. Out of this, a significant 
number of these vacant houses located in Maharashtra (32,345 houses) and 
Delhi (29,112 houses) were found not feasible for conversion into ARHCs due 
to various reasons.  Also, so far, under Model-1, 5,783 (about 44%) units 
(Chandigarh (2,195), Surat (528), Ahmedabad (1,376), Rajkot (698), 
Chittorgarh (480), Jammu (336), Lalkuan (100), & Dehradun (70) have been 
converted into ARHCs.  
Under Model -II, based on the proposals submitted by States/UTs, 
MoHUA has approved proposals for construction of 83,298 new ARHC units in 
several States including Tamil Nadu, with Technology Innovation Grant (TIG) 
of ₹175.95 crore. Out of this, 40,630 ARHC units have been completed. Further, 
as per the Operational Guidelines of ARHCs, the projects using innovative and 
alternate technologies are to be completed within 18 months after getting all 
statutory approvals. The MoHUA has been closely monitoring the progress of 
already sanctioned ARHCs projects through periodic reviews with States and 
implementing Entity to ensure timely completion and occupancy of units.  
Further, based on the learnings of ARHCs, a dedicated vertical of 
Affordable Rental Housing (ARH) has been provisioned under PMAY-U 2.0 to 
promote construction of affordable rental housing for eligible beneficiaries 
including urban migrants/ industrial workers/ working women/ students/ urban 
poor etc. across the country. The ARH vertical is implemented through two 
models:  
iii. Model-I: Converting existing Government funded vacant houses into 
ARH through PPP mode or by Public Agencies, 
iv. Model-II: Construct, Operate and Maintain rental housing by 
Private/Public Entities for urban poor, working women, employees of 
Industries, Industrial Estates, Institutions and other eligible EWS/LIG 
families. 
Under model -I of ARH vertical, States/UTs may rent out the houses 
constructed under various Central/ State/UT Government Schemes which are 
still lying vacant and unutilized, by making them liveable for eligible 
beneficiaries through repair/retrofitting along with necessary civic infrastructure 
facilities by themselves or through a Concessionaire. 

45 
 
As PMAY-U and PMAY-U 2.0 are demand driven schemes and there are 
no fixed State/UT wise targets. Selection of beneficiaries under various verticals 
preferred by the beneficiaries, formulation & execution of projects are done by 
States/Union Territories (UTs) and public/private entities. Further, to encourage 
public/private entities to submit the proposals under ARH vertical, an 
Expression of Interest (EoI) has been issued by the Ministry for submission of 
project proposals for construction of new ARH units. The last date of 
submission of proposal is 30.06.2026.” 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No. G-
20022/2/2026-BUDGET SECTION-MoHUA dated 10th June, 2026] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.16 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
Strengthening Financial Planning, Monitoring and Timely Completion under 
AMRUT 2.0  
2.9  The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended as under: 
The Committee note that although the Budget Estimates for AMRUT 2.0 
were kept at ₹8,000 crore in 2023-24 and 2024-25 and enhanced to ₹10,000 
crore in 2025–26, the Revised Estimates were scaled down in successive years 
due to slow pace of expenditure. In 2025–26, only ₹5,569.21 crore or 74.25% 
of RE had been utilised as of January 2026. The Ministry has primarily 
attributed this to delays in onboarding States onto the SNA SPARSH platform. 
The Committee are of the view that recurring reductions at the RE stage reflect 
overestimation at the BE stage and weaknesses in expenditure planning and 
absorption capacity. 
The Committee further note that against the total approved Central share 
of ₹76,760 crore, only ₹18,757.16 crore has been released so far, which is 
significantly lower than the total approved outlay, and out of this, ₹15,161.94 
crore has been utilised, reflecting an overall financial progress of 80.83% 
against the funds released. While the overall physical grounding of projects 
stands at 78.65%, the inter-State variations remain significant. Several States 

46 
 
have demonstrated commendable performance in both physical and financial 
progress. However, a number of States are lagging in physical achievement, 
while few show low financial utilisation.  
The Committee are of the considered view that with AMRUT 2.0 entering 
its final phase, delays in grounding projects and uneven utilisation of funds 
could hinder timely completion and the fulfilment of its key objectives, especially 
universal water supply and sewerage coverage. The Committee accordingly 
stress that timely completion of ongoing projects, efficient utilisation of allocated 
funds and reduction of inter-State disparities are essential to ensuring durable 
and sustainable urban infrastructure outcomes under the Mission.  
The Committee therefore recommend that to achieve the physical and 
financial target set under the Mission, the Ministry must focus on handholding 
of lagging States so as to accelerate physical grounding and completion of 
remaining projects and ensure that mission objectives are met within stipulated 
timelines. 
 
2.10 In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have 
stated as follows: 
 
“Under AMRUT 2.0, State Water Action Plans (SWAPs) of the States/ UTs 
comprising of 8736 projects worth ₹1,95,422.52 crore have been approved as 
on 05.05.2026. States/ UTs have awarded contracts for 7402 projects worth 
₹1,45,666.71 crore.  
Necessary support and hand holding is provided to the States/UTs as 
and when required. The progress of AMRUT 2.0 is being monitored regularly 
at the Central level for early grounding of the approved projects. In order to fast 
track the implementation of AMRUT 2.0 projects, the progress is periodically 
reviewed and monitored through regular video conferences/ webinars/ 
workshops/ site-visits etc. by MoHUA with the States/UTs and their ULBs.  The 
Apex Committee also periodically reviews the implementation of AMRUT 2.0 
with the States/ UTs.” 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No.  
G-20022/2/2026-BUDGET SECTION-MoHUA dated 10th June, 2026] 

47 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.22 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
Need for Expedited Implementation and Improved Financial Planning under PM 
e-Bus Sewa Scheme  
2.11  The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended as under: 
The Committee note that the PM e-Bus Sewa Scheme aims to deploy 
10,000 electric buses with Central Assistance of ₹20,000 crore and is valid up 
to March 2037. Against the target of 10,000 buses, 9,642 buses have been 
sanctioned across 110 cities in 18 States and 5 UTs, out of 178 eligible cities. 
However, only 225 buses have been delivered and made operational so far in 
just four cities viz. Guwahati, Bhavnagar, Nagpur and Chandigarh. The 
Committee also observe that guidelines for Green Urban Mobility Initiatives 
(GUMI) under Segment-B are yet to be finalised, thereby delaying 
implementation of Intelligent Traffic Management System (ITMS) and National 
Common Mobility Card (NCMC) -based Automated Fare Collection Systems. 
The Committee further note the repeated gap between Budget 
Estimates, Revised Estimates and actual releases. Against BE of ₹1,300 crore 
in 2024–25, the RE was reduced to ₹500 crore, with actual release of ₹475.44 
crore. Similarly, in 2025–26, against BE of ₹1,310 crore, the RE was reduced 
to ₹300 crore, with ₹237.56 crore released as on 19.02.2026. The Ministry has 
attributed these reductions to delays in submission of proposals, tendering, 
infrastructure readiness and operationalisation at the State/UT level. 
The Committee emphasise that unless implementation and financial 
utilisation are accelerated, the intended benefits of clean, efficient and green 
public transport may not be realised within the planned timeframe. The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry : 
(i) must ensure time-bound completion of depots, charging and power 
infrastructure so that sanctioned buses are made operational without 
further delay;  

48 
 
(ii) Prepare a detailed State/UT-wise implementation roadmap with defined 
milestones to cover the remaining eligible cities, ensuring all the 
sanctioned buses are operational at the earliest;  
(iii) expedite finalisation and rollout of GUMI guidelines promptly to ensure 
timely implementation of integrated urban mobility improvements; and 
(iv) budgetary projections should be prepared on a more realistic 
assessment of States/UT readiness and project execution capacity to 
avoid repeated downward revisions at the RE stage.  
 
 
2.12 In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have 
stated as follows: 
 
“Ministry would like to submit point-wise replies as under:- 
i. Ensuring timely completion of depot, charging and power infrastructure 
is the responsibility of the respective States/UTs. The Scheme envisages 
deployment of electric buses by 31.03.2027.  
Most participating cities are at various stages of implementation, 
including finalisation of Concession Agreements and development of civil depot 
and Behind-the-Meter (BTM) power infrastructure. The Ministry is closely 
monitoring progress and has issued periodic advisories, including the latest 
D.O. communication dated 23.03.2026, to facilitate timely completion of 
infrastructure and operationalisation of buses. 
 ii. The scheme envisages 31st March 2027 as the estimated timeline for 
deployment of electric buses by the participating cities, which is contingent on 
completion of various activities like, State-wise aggregation of demand, 
finalization of bus depot location, project sanctioning by State Level Steering 
Committee and Central Sanctioning Steering Committee, completion of 
associated infrastructure (Behind-The-Meter Power Infrastructure & Civil Bus 
Depot Infrastructure). 
Since, implementation lies with the State, the participating cities are 
already asked to share their roadmap for full deployment of electric buses. 

49 
 
The Ministry prioritise extensive handholding and capacity-building 
support for cities. Technical assistance along with workshops and field visits 
are being provided to facilitate cities in deployment of buses in a timely manner. 
iii. The Ministry has conducted six (6) stakeholder consultation meetings so 
far, for finalization of GUMI guidelines and the broad contours of the GUMI 
guidelines have been formulated and the draft GUMI guidelines have been 
finalised and are expected to be issued soon.  
However, for major components of GUMI such as Intelligent Transit 
Management System (ITMS) along with National common Mobility Card 
(NCMC) based Automatic fare collection system (AFCS), NCRTC has been 
nominated as the Implementing Agency for ITMS work.  NCRTC has already 
made significant progress by floating the tender for selection of System 
Integrator for carrying out the ITMS Work under the PM-eBus Sewa Scheme.  
iv. To improve upon the Budget estimation process, the Ministry issued 
letters on 15.10.2025 and 24.12.2025 to all participating States/UTs to furnish 
detailed budget requirement projections and likely expenditure on quarterly 
basis. The physical progress of the Scheme such as depot readiness and 
financial progress is being periodically monitored through meetings to align with 
the budgetary estimates.”  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
Need for Expedited Operationalisation and Effective Utilisation of Funds under 
CITIIS 2.0  
2.13  The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended as under: 
The Committee note that CITIIS 2.0 was approved in May 2023 with the 
objective of promoting circular economy–based integrated waste management 
at the city level, climate-oriented reforms at the State level and institutional 
strengthening at the national level. However, despite the programme being 
operational for nearly two years, financial progress remains significantly slow. 
Against a proposed outlay of ₹1,139.8 crore for 2026–27, only ₹300 
crore has been allocated. Further, actual expenditure has been minimal, i.e., 
₹9.25 crore in 2024–25 and ₹0.17 crore in 2025–26, primarily because the 

50 
 
programme is still in the project preparation and maturation phase. The 
Committee also observe that although 18 cities have been selected under 
Component 1, project components and costs are yet to be finalised and 
implementation activities have not commenced. Similarly, under Component 2, 
while Tripartite Agreements have been signed with 21 States/UTs, fund 
disbursement is linked to Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) and 
expenditure remains limited. 
The Committee further note that the programme is supported through 
substantial external funding from Agence Française de Développement 
(French Development Agency) (AFD), Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau ("Credit 
Institute for Reconstruction")(KfW) and the European Union. Although no 
commitment charges or financial burden have arisen so far, continued delays 
in grounding projects may risk inefficient fund utilisation and affect the intended 
outcomes within the stipulated timeframe. 
In view of the above, the Committee recommend that the Ministry: 
(i) should expedite finalisation of project components and cost estimates 
for the 18 selected cities and ensure commencement of on-ground 
implementation with a clearly defined, time-bound framework for both 
city-level and State-level components; 
(ii) should  strengthen coordination with participating States/UTs to fast-
track approvals, procurement and execution, while ensuring that budget 
projections are realistic and aligned with actual implementation capacity 
to avoid persistent under-utilisation and wide gaps between outlay and 
expenditure; and 
(iii) Closely monitor phased drawdown of external loans and strictly link it to 
physical and financial progress so as to ensure timely utilisation and 
prevent any potential financial implications, thereby safeguarding the 
intended objectives of CITIIS 2.0.  
 
 
2.14 In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have 
stated as follows: 
 
“The recommendations of the Hon’ble Standing Committee have been noted.  

51 
 
Under CITIIS 2.0, the programme is currently in the project preparation 
(maturation phase), which is essential to ensure robust project design, technical 
soundness, and readiness for implementation. The Ministry, in coordination 
with the 18 cities is actively finalizing the project components. Significant 
progress has been made in this regard. As of 21st May 2026, six cities have 
finalised their project components, completed their Environmental & Social 
prescreening and received approval from MoHUA to initiate the Maturation 
Phase deliverables. The remaining cities are also in the advance stage of their 
project finalization.  
Furthermore, regular review meetings with States and cities are being 
held to expedite the completion of maturation phase deliverables of the 18 cities 
and the disbursement linked indicators of the 21 States. A national capacity 
building workshop and various regional workshops were conducted to support 
the cities and States in expediting the operationalisation of the programme. 
Moreover, technical assistance is being provided to the 18 cities to enhance 
project readiness and preparedness, thereby, improving utilisation and 
reducing delays.  
CITIIS 2.0 is supported through external assistance from programme 
partners, including the French Development Agency (AFD), German 
Development Bank (KfW), and the European Union. The programme 
incorporates phased drawdown mechanisms, wherein fund utilisation is strictly 
linked to achievement of Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs), physical 
progress, and financial milestones.”  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
Focus of smaller Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) under the Urban Challenge Fund  
2.15  The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended as under: 
In the Budget 2025-2026, the Union Government proposed to set up an 
Urban Challenge Fund of ₹1 lakh crore to implement the proposals under three 
verticals, namely, (i) ‘Cities as Growth Hubs’, (ii) ‘Creative Redevelopment of 
Cities’ and (iii) 'Water and Sanitation'. According to the Ministry, this fund will 
finance up to 25 per cent of the cost of bankable projects with a stipulation that 
at least 50 per cent of the cost is funded from the market sources such as 

52 
 
bonds, bank loans, and Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) and the remaining 
25 percent are financed by States, ULBs or through other sources. 
The Committee understand that urban infrastructure requires substantial 
funding, which so far have been supported primarily by budgetary grants. The 
Committee appreciate that against this backdrop, an innovative shift has been 
proposed, aiming to generate ₹4 lakh crore for urban development over the 
next five years through a challenge based, market-linked, reform driven and 
outcome-oriented scheme by encouraging States and ULBs to raise funds from 
the market for financing urban infrastructure projects. The Committee have also 
noted that these changes will be accompanied by reforms in accounting system 
followed by States/Cities/ULBs. Further, to enable participation of fiscally 
weaker Urban Local Bodies, a Credit Repayment Guarantee Sub-Scheme has 
been approved under the Urban Challenge Fund. A corpus of ₹5,000 crore has 
been created under this Sub-Scheme to provide credit repayment guarantee 
support. The Sub-Scheme will cover all ULBs in Northeastern and Hilly 
States/UTs and smaller ULBs (with population below 1,00,000) in other 
States/UTs, enabling them to raise resources from the market and participate 
in the Urban Challenge Fund.  
The Committee observe that the Ministry were not able to raise desired 
funds through Public Private Partnership (PPP) under earlier Schemes, such 
as the Smart Cities Mission. Further, the success of any Scheme depends on 
the delivery capability and absorption capacity of the ULBs. The bigger ULBs 
will naturally be in a better position to avail themselves of the benefits of the 
UCF compared to the smaller ones. The Committee, thus recommend the 
Ministry : 
(i) to specifically focus on smaller cities and those cities which were not 
covered under the Smart Cities Mission so that the intended benefits 
generated from the Scheme are evenly distributed; and 
(ii) for early finalisation of guidelines and operational modalities of the 
Scheme. 
 
2.16 In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have 
stated as follows: 

53 
 
 
“The Ministry accords due importance to strengthening the capacity and 
financial sustainability of smaller Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) under the Urban 
Challenge Fund (UCF). 
In order to improve the creditworthiness of smaller ULBs and to facilitate 
access to market finance, a Credit Repayment Guarantee Sub-Scheme 
(CRGSS) with a corpus of 5,000 crore has been approved for all ULBs of North-
Eastern & Hilly States/UTs and smaller ULBS (<1,00,000 population) in other 
States/UTs under UCF. 
Under this scheme, in addition to the Central Assistance for the UCF 
projects, Central Government will provide the credit repayment guarantee of up 
to 7 crore or 70 per cent of the loan amount (whichever is lower) for first-time 
loans and 7 crore or 50 per cent of the loan amount (whichever is lower) for 
second- time loans availed by the ULBS. 
Further, it has been informed that Cabinet approved the Urban 
Challenge Fund (UCF) on 13.02.2026. Subsequently, the Guidelines for Urban 
Challenge Fund (UCF) was formally launched on 15.04.2026. ” 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No. G-
20022/2/2026-BUDGET SECTION-MoHUA dated 10th June, 2026] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.28 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
Need for Ensuring Prior Approval and Policy Clarity in Rollout of New Urban 
Schemes  
2.17  The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended as under: 
The Committee observe that several major initiatives of the Ministry such 
as the National Urban Digital Mission (NUDM), the Scheme for Industrial 
Housing, the Site Adjacent Factory Employee (SAFE) Accommodation under 
Pradhan Mantri - National Industrial Workers Accommodation Scheme (PM-

54 
 
NIWAS), Deendayal Jan Aajeevika (Shehari) (DJAY-S) and the proposed 
Municipal Bonds scheme, are yet to receive final approval of the Cabinet. At 
the same time, substantial budgetary allocations have been made in successive 
years, even though the contours, guidelines, funding patterns and 
implementation frameworks of these schemes are still under formulation. 
In the case of NUDM, the Cabinet Note has been returned for revision 
and the Mission framework is under reconsideration, yet allocations were 
provided in 2024-25 and 2025-26 with sharp reductions thereafter at RE stage. 
Similarly, DJAY-S has concluded its pilot phase and awaits Cabinet approval 
for full-scale rollout, while fresh allocations have been made in BE 2026–27. 
The Industrial Housing/PM–NIWAS initiative was announced with ₹2,500 crore 
in 2025–26 and ₹400 crore in 2026-27, despite the scheme remaining at the 
conceptual stage. The Municipal Bonds scheme has been introduced with a 
token allocation of ₹100 crore even though its guidelines are under preparation 
and requisite approvals of the Cabinet and Expenditure Finance Committee are 
pending. 
The Committee feel that announcing schemes, making budgetary 
allocations and even operating pilot projects for indefinite periods without final 
statutory approval and clearly notified guidelines lead to uncertainty in 
implementation, under-utilisation of funds, frequent revisions in budget 
estimates and lack of accountability in outcomes. Such an approach also 
creates confusion among States/UTs and ULBs regarding eligibility, funding 
support and long-term sustainability. Moreover, it may give rise to a perception 
that policy initiatives are characterised more by announcements and 
preliminary allocations than by timely execution on the ground. The Committee 
emphasise that all announced initiatives should be implemented promptly so 
that they translate into tangible outcomes and benefits for citizens. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend that : 
(i) proper due diligence must be undertaken by the Ministry before making 
full-scale budgetary allocations for any new scheme. Allocations should 
be provided only after the scheme’s contours, funding pattern and 
implementation guidelines have been finalised and approved by the 

55 
 
competent authority. Any token provision, if considered necessary, 
should be clearly justified and accompanied by a defined timeline;  
(ii) Proposals such as NUDM, DJAY-S, Industrial Housing/PM–NIWAS and 
Municipal Bonds, which are currently under consideration for approval, 
should be placed before the Cabinet/EFC at the earliest, with a clearly 
defined timeline for their operational rollout; 
(iii) Pilot initiatives should have clearly defined objectives, evaluation 
frameworks and clauses, and their learnings should be formally 
incorporated into the final scheme design before scaling up.  
 
2.18 In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have 
stated as follows: 
 
“The observations and recommendations of the Hon’ble Parliamentary 
Standing Committee have been noted. The Ministry is currently conceptualising 
a scheme to provide dormitory-type rental accommodation near industrial 
zones, aimed at ensuring workers have access to safe, hygienic, and well-
equipped living spaces. The scheme is under preparation, and consultations 
with multiple stakeholders including industry representatives, public agencies, 
financial institutions and other concerned entities are ongoing to finalise its 
design and implementation framework. After finalisation of the scheme contours 
and financial aspects, the proposal will be placed before the EFC and the 
Cabinet for approval. 
Deendayal Jan Aajeevika Yojana-Shehari initiative was operated on pilot 
basis during Financial Years 2024-25 and 2025-26 which has ended on 
31.12.2025. 
The suggestions and inputs received from the Hon’ble Parliamentary 
Standing Committee have already been duly considered and incorporated in 
the revised Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) Note on NUDM, which has 
been refined through stakeholder consultations with a renewed focus on 
strengthening scalable, interoperable, and citizen-centric e-governance 
frameworks across the country. The revised EFC Note has been circulated 
among the Ministries/Departments concerned for inter-ministerial 

56 
 
consultations, following which the proposal shall be placed before the Cabinet 
for final approval. 
Ministry will take all necessary measures for placing the proposals before 
the competent authority including the Cabinet for their consideration and 
requisite approval for expeditious rollout of the schemes.”  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
 
Promoting effective coordination and integration among urban sector schemes 
to prevent duplication and overlapping  
 
2.19  The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended as under: 
The Committee observe that multiple schemes of the Ministry operate 
within closely related thematic areas affordable housing for workers under 
Affordable Rental Housing Complexes (ARHCs) under PMAY (U) and the 
Scheme for Industrial Housing/SAFE Accommodation under PM–NIWAS; 
sewage and wastewater management under AMRUT and Swachh Bharat 
Mission (SBM-Urban); solid waste management and circular economy 
initiatives under SBM-U and City Investments to Innovate, Integrate and 
Sustain (CITIIS-2.0) and Urban Challenge Fund (UCF); and urban livelihoods 
and employment through PM SVANidhi and DJAY-S. While each scheme has 
distinct objectives, their operational domains often intersect at the level of 
States/UTs and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs). 
The Committee feel that, in the absence of a clearly articulated 
convergence framework, such overlap may lead to duplication of funding, 
fragmented implementation, inefficient utilisation of resources and confusion 
among implementing agencies and beneficiaries. There is also a risk of multiple 
schemes financing similar infrastructure components or targeting overlapping 
beneficiary groups without proper integration of objectives and outcomes. 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to prepare and notify 
a comprehensive convergence framework clearly delineating the scope, target 
beneficiaries, admissible components and funding patterns of each urban 
sector scheme so as to prevent overlap, promote complementarities and 
ensure optimal utilisation of public resources;  

57 
 
2.20 In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have 
stated as follows: 
 
“Various flagship schemes operate in well-defined and distinct domains, and 
there is no structural overlap in the works funded under each scheme as 
explained below:- 
Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana–Urban (PMAY-U)/PMAY-U 2.0 Scheme 
has a well-defined objective of addressing the housing needs of eligible urban 
households through provision of pucca houses with basic civic facilities. The 
Ministry has already issued detailed scheme guidelines under PMAY-U/PMAY-
U 2.0 clearly defining the target beneficiaries, admissible components, 
implementation modalities and funding patterns to avoid duplication and 
ensuring focused implementation. Under PMAY-U 2.0, convergence with other 
Central/State schemes has also been encouraged for provision of trunk 
infrastructure, sanitation, water supply, sewerage, livelihood support and social 
amenities so as to ensure integrated urban development. Further, the Ministry 
ensures that Central Assistance under PMAY-U/PMAY-U 2.0 is released 
against approved projects based on unique beneficiary identification, project-
level appraisal and monitoring through MIS-based systems, geo-tagging and 
Aadhaar-based validation, thereby minimizing the possibility of duplication of 
beneficiaries. 
Similarly, Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) 2.0 covers sustainable 
sanitation (Individual Household Latrines, Community/Public Toilets, Faecal 
Sludge Management, and Solid Waste Management (including source 
segregation, scientific processing, and legacy dumpsite remediation), and 
associated IEC and capacity building activities. To deal with sewerage and 
septage management in cities having less than 1 lakh population a new 
component Used Water Management (UWM) has been introduced under SBM-
U 2.0. Another scheme of the Ministry, namely Atal Mission for Rejuvenation 
and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) deal with sewerage and septage 
management as well as making cities/statutory towns ‘self-reliant’ and ‘water 
secure’, in ULBs with more than 1 lakh population. Hence, SBM-U and AMRUT 
operate in distinct domains. 

58 
 
Under AMRUT 2.0, institutional mechanisms have been established to 
ensure effective coordination among Central Ministries, State departments, 
ULBs, parastatal agencies, and other stakeholders. Convergence with related 
missions such as Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM), Smart Cities Mission (SCM), 
and National Urban Livelihoods Mission (NULM) is actively promoted, as these 
share common components with AMRUT, including sanitation, smart water 
systems, and urban employment. Under AMRUT 2.0, the States/ UTs take up 
sewerage and septage management projects in 500 AMRUT cities. For the 
cities/ towns having population upto 1 lakh, sewerage and septage 
management projects are taken up by the States/ UTs under SBM (U). The 
Mission guidelines provides for State level Project development and 
Management Consultant (PDMC), which examine convergence with other 
similar schemes in terms of coverage, fund flow, impact and outcomes.     
To avoid duplication and ensure synergy in waste management, the 
CITIIS 2.0 programme is being implemented in close alignment with Swachh 
Bharat Mission (SBM-Urban), given shared objectives in solid waste 
management and circular economy, including adherence to the new Solid 
Waste Management Rules 2026 and related policy frameworks. Under 
Component 1, project proposals of the 18 cities were appraised to ensure 
complementarity with existing schemes such as Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM-
Urban) and to avoid overlap in the project components. Further, coordination 
mechanisms have been instituted through interdivisional discussions and 
consultations with SBM-Urban during the identification and finalization of 
project components and its approval stages. This was done to strengthen 
coherence across programmes and ensured optimal resource utilisation. 
Evaluation of projects and overall monitoring of implementation under 
recently approved Urban Challenge Fund Scheme will be done by the National 
Apex Committee at National Level. It will be ensured that projects are in 
strategic alignment & planning integration viz a viz convergence with ongoing 
Central/State schemes and urban growth strategies.”  
 
 
***** 
  

59 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE 
IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
Assessment of ULB’s vendor carrying capacity for PM SVANidhi  
3.1  The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended as under: 
The Committee note that the Pradhan Mantri Street Vendors 
Atmanirbhar Nidhi (PM SVANidhi) was launched as a positive intervention by 
the Central Government for members of the lowest strata of urban society, 
namely, the street vendors who were hit hard by the Covid Pandemic. One of 
the tacit achievements of the Scheme was the implementation of the Street 
Vendors Act, 2014 across States/UTs by intertwining the requirements of the 
Scheme with the provisions of the Act. Continuing the momentum created by 
PM SVANidhi in terms of bringing street vendors into the fold of formal financial 
system and also promoting digital transactions, in August 2025, the scheme 
has been extended in a restructured manner till 2030 with a budgetary 
allocation of Rs.900 crore in BE 2026-27and Department of Financial Services 
(DFS) has also been taken on board.  
However, the Committee observe that out of 73.33 lakh loans disbursed 
in the first tranche, 28.03 lakh of total disbursed loans are still outstanding which 
is 38.23 percent of the total disbursed loans indicating that 28.03 lakh street 
vendors are yet to repay their first tranche of loans and are not eligible for the 
second tranche of loan. Further, the Committee have also been informed that 
beneficiary target under the restructured scheme is 1.15 crore including 50 lakh 
new beneficiaries.  
The Committee understand that the scheme is demand driven, intending 
to cover all eligible street vendors willing to avail loans, and since the vendor 
population is dynamic (with new vendors entering &exiting regularly), the 
Ministry does not have data on precise number of street vendors in the country. 
Nonetheless, it is important that the scheme should not lead to an unintentional 
surge in the number of street vendors in urban areas, thereby further 

60 
 
congesting the limited public space or vending zones and footpaths. The 
Committee, thus recommend that  
(i) the Ministry should direct all the States/UTs, through Urban Local Bodies 
(ULBs), to assess the carrying capacity of designated vending zones and 
ULBs managed spaces to determine the number of street vendors that 
can be accommodated at a time and formulate a policy in this regard; 
(ii) Further, the ULBs through States/UTs must be strictly directed to issue 
Letter of Recommendation (LoR)/Certificate of Vending (CoV) to new 
vendors for the purpose of availing loan under PM SVANidhi only after 
conducting the stated ‘ULBs vendor carrying capacity assessment’ 
survey/exercise; 
(iii) It should be ensured that vending zones are strategically located in high 
footfall and commercially viable areas, in accordance with the Street 
Vendors Act, and PM SVANidhi guidelines to ensure sustainable 
business opportunities for vendors.  
3.2 In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have 
stated as follows: 
 
“Ministry would like to submit point-wise replies as under: - 
(i)  The Street Vendors (Protection of Livelihood and Regulation of Street 
Vending) Act, 2014 has been enacted to protect the rights of urban street 
vendors and to regulate street vending activities. The responsibility for 
implementation of the provisions of the Act rests with the respective States/UTs, 
which, inter alia, includes ensuring that Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) constitute 
and operationalize Town Vending Committees (TVCs), undertake periodic 
surveys of street vendors, issue Certificates of Vending, and formulate and 
notify street vending plans, etc. The Act also provides for determination of the 
holding capacity of vending zones by the local authority on the 
recommendations of the Town Vending Committee (TVC). 
States/UTs have been advised to ensure effective implementation of the 
provisions of the Street Vendors (Protection of Livelihood and Regulation of 
Street Vending) Act, 2014, so as to facilitate orderly and planned street vending 
while protecting the livelihoods and rights of street vendors. 

61 
 
(ii)  The Letters of Recommendation (LoRs) and Certificates of Vending 
(CoVs) are issued in accordance with the PM SVANidhi Guidelines and the 
provisions of the Street Vendors (Protection of Livelihood and Regulation of 
Street Vending) Act, 2014, respectively. 
(iii)  The Street Vendors (Protection of Livelihood and Regulation of Street 
Vending) Act, 2014 provides that every local authority shall, in consultation with 
the planning authority and on the recommendations of the Town Vending 
Committee (TVC), prepare a plan for street vending once every five years. The 
plan, inter alia, includes earmarking of spaces for vending zones and 
determination of restriction-free vending zones, restricted vending zones, and 
no-vending zones.”  
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No.  
G-20022/2/2026-BUDGET SECTION-MoHUA dated 10th June, 2026] 
*** 

62 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
Strengthening Implementation and Financial Discipline under PMAY (Urban) 
4.1  The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended as under: 
The Committee note that while Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana–Urban 
(PMAY-U) has achieved significant scale in terms of sanctions (122.22 lakh 
houses) and grounding (114.59 lakh houses), actual completion stands at 96.65 
lakh houses, indicating that a sizeable number of houses are still pending 
completion. The Committee further observe that Budget Estimates for 2025–26 
was drastically reduced at the Revised Estimate stage from ₹23,294 crore to 
₹7,800 crore, and actual expenditure as on 05.01.2026 is only ₹3,874.84 crore, 
reflecting slow fund utilisation. Although the Ministry has attributed this to low 
utilisation of “Mother Sanctions” by States and the initial phase of PMAY-U 2.0, 
the Committee are of the view that such sharp reductions and modest actual 
spending point towards underlying weaknesses in expenditure planning and 
implementation pace. 
The State-wise data also reveal uneven physical and financial progress. 
Large States such as Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Tamil Nadu and Madhya Pradesh account for a major share of completions; 
however, noticeable gaps between sanctioned and completed houses persist 
in Telangana, Bihar, Jharkhand, Rajasthan and Haryana. In the North Eastern 
region, Manipur, Meghalaya and Arunachal Pradesh show comparatively low 
completion levels. On the financial side, while around 85–86% of sanctioned 
central assistance has been released nationally, gaps remain in States such as 
Telangana, Bihar, Odisha and Punjab. In States like Maharashtra, Karnataka, 
Telangana, Rajasthan and West Bengal, substantial central assistance has 
already been released but completion of houses is yet to fully catch up, 
indicating delays in converting financial support into completed dwelling units. 

63 
 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry that: 
 
(i) Budget Estimates under the scheme be projected more realistically so 
as to avoid sharp reductions at the Revised Estimate stage and low 
actual expenditure at the end of the financial year; 
(ii) a strengthened review and coordination mechanism be put in place with 
periodic progress assessment to ensure that central assistance is 
translated into completed dwelling units within the stipulated timeframe; 
and 
(iii) the adequacy of existing central financial assistance per dwelling unit 
be reviewed and suitably enhanced, wherever necessary, keeping in 
view rising construction costs, so that beneficiaries are not burdened 
and projects are completed in a timely and sustainable manner. 
 
4.2 In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have 
stated as follows: 
 
 
“Budget allocation for a financial year under PMAY-U/PMAY-U 2.0 is made 
based on the anticipated requirement, keeping in view the approved targets and 
likely pace of implementation during the year. The allocated funds are released 
and utilized in accordance with the claims submitted by States/UTs, subject to 
fulfillment of prescribed conditions and compliances in respect of sanctioned 
projects. Central Assistance is released in installments linked to stages of 
construction and adherence to scheme guidelines, including submission of 
utilization certificates, progress reports and other requisite documentation. 
At the commencement of each financial year, the total budgetary 
provision is tentatively distributed among States/UTs based on past trends of 
fund utilization, physical and financial progress, and expected demand during 
the year. However, actual release of funds depends upon the pace at which 
States/UTs achieve/submit compliances and submit claims. 
 
It is pertinent to note that completion of houses/projects under the 
scheme is affected by various implementation-related factors such as timely 
availability of beneficiary contribution, availability of construction materials, 

64 
 
labour availability, delays in tendering and procurement processes, statutory 
approvals as well as region-specific challenges including climatic conditions. 
These factors may, at times, impact the progress of projects, leading to delays 
in submission of claims and consequently less utilization of the earmarked 
tentative allocations. 
 
The Ministry conducts periodic reviews with States/UTs on the 
implementation of PMAY-U/PMAY-U 2.0 to ensure expeditious grounding and 
completion of sanctioned projects within the timelines specified in the 
respective Detailed Project Reports (DPRs). These reviews also focus on 
identifying bottlenecks, providing necessary handholding support and 
monitoring the pace of fund utilization by States/UTs, so as to achieve the 
objective of Housing for All within the stipulated timeframe. 
 
The scheme period of PMAY-U has been extended up to 30th September 
2026 for completion of under-construction houses with existing funding pattern. 
Further, the scheme guidelines of PMAY-U 2.0 have been designed on the 
basis of learnings of PMAY-U scheme, global best practices/benchmarks and 
outcomes of series of consultations with multiple stakeholders including 
States/UTs, Banks, Housing Finance Companies, Private Sector etc. So far, 34 
States/UTs have signed the MoA with the Ministry for implementation of PMAY-
U 2.0 and based on the proposals received, a total of 13.84 lakh houses have 
already been sanctioned. However, during implementation of the scheme, 
assessment of achievement/performance will be done with the participating 
States/UTs and necessary changes, if required, would be done accordingly to 
achieve the scheme’s objective of providing affordable housing to the intended 
beneficiaries/families.” 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No.  
G-20022/2/2026-BUDGET SECTION-MoHUA dated 10th June, 2026] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.13 of the Report) 
 

65 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
Need for affordable Rent Fixation and Operationalisation of Incentives under 
ARHC  
4.3  The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended as under: 
The Committee note that under the Affordable Rental Housing 
Complexes (ARHC) scheme, Dwelling Units may consist of Single/Double 
Bedroom units (30/60 sqm) and Dormitory beds (10 sqm), with basic facilities 
such as kitchen, toilet and bathroom as prescribed in the operational guidelines. 
Further, as per the guidelines, rent under Model–I which permits conversion of 
existing government-funded vacant houses, is to be fixed by the local authority 
based on a local survey conducted prior to issuance of the Request for Proposal 
(RFP). Under Model–II which allows construction, operation and maintenance 
by public/private entities, the initial affordable rent is to be fixed by the 
concerned entity based on a local survey. Rent is permitted to be enhanced 
biennially by 8%, subject to a maximum cumulative increase of 20% over five 
years. 
The guidelines further provide for various fiscal and non-fiscal incentives 
to improve project viability and ensure affordability. These include concessional 
project finance, Income Tax and GST exemptions, Technology Innovation 
Grant (TIG), additional FAR/FSI up to 50% free of cost, land-use relaxations, 
single-window approvals, levy of municipal charges at par with residential 
properties and provision of trunk infrastructure up to the project site by 
States/UTs without additional cost. 
The Committee observe that rent fixation is entirely decentralised and 
the Ministry does not prescribe uniform rent rates nor maintain centralized data 
regarding rent levels across cities. Similarly, implementation of incentives such 
as additional FAR/FSI, land-use permissions, municipal charge parity and trunk 
infrastructure provision varies across States/UTs depending upon local 
regulations and policy notifications. With regard to fiscal incentives, including 
Income Tax and GST exemptions, the Committee are apprised that the Ministry 
does not directly administer these benefits project-wise and has indicated that 
the matter is being taken up with the concerned authorities. 

66 
 
The Committee are of the view that while flexibility to States/UTs is 
necessary given that land and housing are State subjects, the core intent of the 
Scheme to provide “affordable” rental housing to the urban migrants must not 
get sidelined. The Committee are also of the view that the absence of a broad 
guiding framework and centralized monitoring of rents may lead to variations 
that affect affordability for migrant workers. The Committee further observe that 
uneven implementation of incentives such as additional FAR/FSI, trunk 
infrastructure, tax exemptions and municipal charge parity may adversely 
impact project viability and could ultimately result in higher rents. 
In view of the above, the Committee recommend the Ministry: 
(i) to assess feasibility of issuing indicative rent benchmarks to ensure 
‘affordability’ for urban migrants while retaining flexibility for local 
conditions and to develop a centralized system to capture State-wise 
data on rent fixation, revisions, occupancy levels and incentives availed 
under both models of ARHC; 
(ii) to ensure that ARHC projects are prioritised in locations near major 
employment hubs and industrial areas to ensure higher occupancy and 
reduced commuting burden on beneficiaries; 
(iii) to direct States/UTs to strictly implement provisions relating to free 
additional FAR/FSI, land-use relaxations, residential-rate municipal 
charges and timely provision of trunk infrastructure as mandated in the 
operational guidelines; and 
(iv) to actively pursue operationalisation of Income Tax and GST exemptions 
and ensure that such fiscal benefits translate into affordable rents for 
tenants. 
 
4.4 In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have 
stated as follows: 
 
“Land and colonisation are State subjects. Accordingly, fixation of rents under 
both Models of the Affordable Rental Housing Complexes (ARHCs) is 
undertaken by the respective State Governments/UT Governments/Entities, 
based on local surveys. This Ministry may not prescribe uniform rent rates 
under the scheme and does not maintain centralized data regarding rent 
fixation. The responsibility for determining, notifying, and revising rent levels 

67 
 
rests with the concerned State/UT authorities in accordance with the scheme 
guidelines and local policy framework. 
As per the Operational Guidelines, ARHCs/ARH is being implemented 
in all Statutory Towns as per Census 2011 and Towns notified subsequently, 
Notified Planning Areas and areas of Development/ Special Area Development/ 
Industrial Development Authorities. States/UTs may also consider any project 
in any other areas after due notification. Further, MoHUA advised State/UTs to 
propose projects near major employment hubs and industrial areas to ensure 
higher occupancy, improved accessibility, and reduced commuting burden for 
beneficiaries. 
Land use regulation, building permissions and fixation of FAR/FSI fall 
within the jurisdiction of the respective State Governments/UT administrations 
and Urban Local Bodies. States/UTs have been advised to facilitate necessary 
policy measures, including suitable land-use changes, provision of additional 
FAR/FSI (up to 50 per cent free of cost) and other local incentives such as fee 
exemptions to enhance project viability. Implementation of these measures 
varies across States/UTs depending upon their respective urban development 
regulations, local planning frameworks and policy notifications. The Ministry 
may not centrally enforce or uniformly operationalise such relaxations, as these 
are governed by State/UT-specific statutes and building byelaws. There are 
variation across States in adoption of such policy measures. States/UTs are 
being regularly advised to implement provisions related to additional FAR/FSI, 
land-use relaxations, levy of municipal charges at par with residential 
properties, and timely provision of trunk infrastructure, as per the operational 
guidelines of the scheme. 
Further, as per the operational guidelines, the incentives of exemption 
of Income Tax on any profits and gains derived from operation of ARHCs/ARH 
on similar lines as that of ‘Affordable Housing’ under section 80-IBA of Income 
Tax Act, 1961 and exemption of GST on any profits and gains derived from 
operation of ARHCs/ARH, at par with rental services of residential premises, 
vide Notification number 12 of 2017- Central Tax (Rate) dated 28th June 2017 
are to be provided to Entities. Further, MoHUA is making continuous efforts to 
ensure that such fiscal incentives are effectively passed on to entities so that 
rental housing remains affordable for urban migrants.” 

68 
 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No.  
G-20022/2/2026-BUDGET SECTION-MoHUA dated 10th June, 2026] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.19 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
Need for Adequate Financial Allocation and Expedited Remediation of Legacy 
Dumpsites under Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) 2.0  
4.5  The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended as under: 
The Committee note that under the Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) 2.0, 
notable progress has been reported in door-to-door collection (96.54% wards), 
source segregation (88.08% wards) and waste processing (81.65% of total 
waste generated). Further, 1,193 cities have been certified as Garbage Free 
Cities (GFC) with varying star ratings. However, the Committee observe certain 
critical concerns regarding financial management and remediation of legacy 
dumpsites. 
On the financial front, there is a consistent gap between the Ministry’s 
projected requirements, Budget Estimates (BE), Revised Estimates (RE) and 
actual expenditure. In the last four years, allocations at the BE stage were lower 
than projections and were further reduced at the RE stage. While expenditure 
remained close to RE in earlier years, in 2025–26 only ₹1,321.15 crore has 
been spent as on 17.02.2026 against an RE of ₹2,000 crore which is about 
66%. Further, for 2026-27, against a projected requirement of ₹5,000 crore, the 
BE has been fixed at ₹2,500 crore, which is 50% of the projected need. 
Although, the Ministry has clarified that the BE was reduced by the Department 
of Expenditure based on actual expenditure trends from 2021-22 to 2025-26, 
and additional requirements, if any, will be projected at the Revised 
Estimates/Supplementary Demands stage, the Committee feel that such 
reduced allocations in the final phase of the Mission may constrain 
implementation and delay completion of pending works. 

69 
 
At the same time, in respect of legacy dumpsites, out of 2,510.78 lakh 
metric tonnes (LMT) of identified waste, only 1,568.01 LMT or about 62.5% has 
been remediated and 8,587.67 acres reclaimed, leaving 942.77 LMT yet to be 
treated and 6,671.03 acres of land to be reclaimed. While some States/UTs 
have achieved full remediation, large quantities of waste remain pending in 
States such as Maharashtra, Karnataka, West Bengal, Rajasthan, Delhi and 
Tamil Nadu. The pace of remediation is uneven and substantial work remains 
to be completed within a limited timeframe. The Committee note that the 
Ministry has launched the Dumpsite Remediation Accelerator Programme 
(DRAP) on 8th November, 2025, with the aim of completing remediation of all 
dumpsites by 31st March, 2027. 
As the Mission is in its final phase with the goal of making all cities 
“Garbage Free” by 2026, the Committee emphasise that adequate financial 
support and faster remediation of legacy dumpsites are essential for achieving 
this objective. Any delay in addressing funding gaps and pending waste 
treatment may hinder timely completion of the Mission. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend to the Ministry that : 
(i) Adequate and realistic assessment of funds should be made at the 
Budget Estimate stage itself in line with projected requirements and 
physical targets and any drastic reductions at the Revised Estimate 
stage should be avoided; 
(ii) A clear, State/UT-wise time-bound action plan with quarterly targets 
should be prepared to clear the remaining legacy waste under the DRAP 
and special monitoring and support should be provided to States where 
large quantities of waste are still pending;  
(iii) it should be ensured that within two years every ULB has ‘waste 
treatment plants’ (WTPs) with a capacity proportionate to the amount of 
waste generated currently while also envisaging future needs, to avoid 
growth of new dumpsites and landfills; and 
(iv) greater emphasis should be put on sustainable and scientific methods 
such as waste-to-energy, bio-mining, composting and material recovery, 
so that legacy waste is properly processed rather than merely shifted. 
States with large pending quantities should be encouraged to adopt 

70 
 
value-recovery models to generate energy, reduce landfill burden and 
ensure productive use of reclaimed land. 
 
4.6 In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have 
stated as follows: 
 
“Remediation of all legacy dumpsites is one of the primary objectives of SBM-
Urban 2.0. As per available records, there are approximately 2,476 legacy 
dumpsites in urban areas across the country, containing approximately 26.38 
crore Metric Tonnes (MT) of accumulated waste. The status of remediation as 
on date is as under: 
(i)        Approximately 1,703 lakh MT (about 65%) of legacy waste has 
been completely remediated, with 9,169 acres of land reclaimed. 
(ii)      Remediation work is ongoing in 940 dumpsites, covering 84.2 
Crore MT of legacy waste. 
(iii)    Under SBM-U 2.0, action plans for remediation of 22.57 Crore MT 
of waste across 3,046 ULBs have been approved at a total project 
cost of ₹12038.19 crore, with Central Financial Assistance (CFA) 
of ₹4,689.73 crores. 
To fast-track the remaining remediation work and meet the 'Lakshya 
Zero Dumpsites' target, the Dumpsite Remediation Accelerator Programme 
(DRAP) was launched on 8th November 2025 and proposal worth ₹795.09 
crores having central share of ₹292 crores have been approved so far under 
DRAP.” 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No.  
G-20022/2/2026-BUDGET SECTION-MoHUA dated 10th June, 2026] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.25 of the Report) 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 15) 
Need for Long-Term Urban Infrastructure Planning and Investment Strategy  

71 
 
4.7  The Committee, in their Ninth Report, had recommended as under: 
The Committee sought to ascertain whether the Ministry has prepared 
or proposes to prepare a unified long-term urban strategy aligned with the vision 
of Viksit Bharat 2047, integrating infrastructure creation, governance reforms, 
climate resilience, economic growth and social inclusion across metropolitan, 
Tier-II and Tier-III cities. The Committee have been apprised that the High 
Powered Expert Committee (HPEC), in its 2011 report, had estimated urban 
infrastructure investment requirements up to 2031 and projected urban 
population share to increase to 75% by 2030. Since then, no similar Committee 
has been constituted. The Ministry further referred to the 2022 report “Cities as 
Engines of Growth” by NITI Aayog and Asian Development Bank (ADB), which 
highlights the strong correlation between urbanisation and GDP growth. The 
Ministry submitted that various ongoing missions such as AMRUT 2.0, SBM-U 
2.0, PMAY-U 2.0, Metro Rail Projects and PM e-Bus Seva are contributing 
towards improving quality of life and supporting the vision of Viksit Bharat 2047. 
  The Committee note that while several flagship schemes are being 
implemented and financing support mechanisms have been introduced, these 
interventions are largely scheme-driven and sector-specific. The last 
comprehensive and consolidated assessment of urban infrastructure 
requirements was undertaken by the HPEC in 2011, with projections only up to 
2031. No updated national-level assessment has been undertaken to estimate 
infrastructure demand, financing gaps and institutional requirements beyond 
2030 in a holistic manner. Given the rapid pace of urbanisation, the growing 
economic centrality of cities, emerging climate risks and the stated national goal 
of achieving ‘Viksit Bharat 2047’, the absence of an integrated long-term urban 
investment and strategy framework may lead to fragmented planning, sub-
optimal allocation of resources and financing stress in the future. 
In view of the above, the Committee recommend the Ministry to 
constitute a new High-Level Expert Committee to comprehensively assess 
India’s urban infrastructure requirements, financing needs, governance reforms 
and capacity-building imperatives up to 2047 aligned with the vision of ‘Viksit 
Bharat 2047’. A forward-looking and evidence-based roadmap would enable 

72 
 
coordinated planning, better fiscal preparedness and balanced urban 
development across metropolitan, Tier-II and Tier-III cities. 
 
4.8 In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs have 
stated as follows: 
 
“Ministry while appreciating the concern raised by the Hon’ble Committee take 
note of the observations regarding the need for a comprehensive, long-term 
urban infrastructure planning and investment strategy aligned with the vision of 
Viksit Bharat 2047. 
Ministry will like to submit that ‘Urban Development’ is a State subject 
and Government of India plays a catalytic role through Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes (CSSs), sectoral missions, policy framework and financial support. 
Ministry has been implementing several flagship programmes, including 
AMRUT 2.0, Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban) 2.0, and PMAY-U 2.0, Metro Rail 
projects, PM e-Bus Sewa, which collectively address infrastructure creation, 
service delivery, climate resilience, and improved urban governance. 
Ministry recognizes that India's long-term urban transition requires 
substantial investment and strategic planning. In this context, the World Bank 
has estimated that India will need to invest about USD 840 billion in urban 
infrastructure over the 15 years up to 2036, or an average of USD 55 billion per 
annum, to meet the needs of its growing urban population. This underscores 
the importance of strengthening financing frameworks, project preparation 
capacities and integrated planning approaches across metropolitan, Tier-Il and 
Tier-III cities. 
Further, the Government of India has announced the setting up of an 
Urban Challenge Fund (UCF) of 1 lakh crore in the Union Budget 2025-26 to 
support the implementation of proposals relating to 'Cities as Growth Hubs', 
'Creative Redevelopment of Cities' and 'Water and Sanitation'. 
The Fund is designed to finance up to 25 per cent of the cost of bankable 
projects, subject to the condition that at least 50 per cent of the project cost is 
mobilised through bonds, bank loans and Public Private Partnerships (PPPs), 
with an enhance urban resilience and economic productivity through integrated 
urban planning, land-use efficiency and sustainable financing. 

73 
 
In addition, policy guidance and analytical inputs have been drawn from 
reports such as "Cities as Engines of Growth" (NITI Aayog-ADB, 2022), which 
emphasise the role of urbanisation in economic development.  Ministry also 
continuously engages with States/UTs for integrated planning through City 
Action Plans, State Annual Action Plans, and convergence frameworks under 
various schemes to support integrated planning and implementation. 
In view of the above, the Ministry will continue to strengthen evidence-
based urban planning, investment prioritisation and reform-linked support 
mechanisms under ongoing and emerging initiatives, so as to advance 
coordinated, resilient and inclusive urban development aligned with the vision 
of Viksit Bharat 2047.” 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No.  
G-20022/2/2026-BUDGET SECTION-MoHUA dated 10th June, 2026] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.31 of the Report) 
 
*** 

74 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
“Nil” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy  
New Delhi;                                                                                               Chairperson                                                                                                    
04 August, 2026                                                Standing Committee on Housing             
13 Sravana, 1948 (Saka)                                                       and Urban Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

75 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
Minutes of the Twenty-Third Sitting of the Standing Committee on Housing and 
Urban Affairs (2025-26) held on Tuesday, 04 August, 2026 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1700 hours in Main Committee Room 
(MCR), Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
 
PRESENT 
 Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy        -        Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha  
2. Smt. Lovely Anand 
3. Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
4. Smt. Misha Bharti 
5. Shri Satpal Brahamchari 
6. Shri Selvam G. 
7. Ms. Sayani Ghosh 
8. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
9. Smt. Mahima Kumari Mewar 
10. Shri Naresh Ganpat Mhaske 
11. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
12. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
13. Shri Alok Sharma 
14. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar 
15. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
16. Shri Ravindra Dattaram Waikar 
 Rajya Sabha 
17. Smt. Jaya Amitabh Bachchan 
18. Shri G. C. Chandrashekhar 
19. Dr. Medha Vishram Kulkarni 
20. Smt. Maya Naroliya 
21. Shri Sandeep Kumar Pathak 
22. Shri A. A. Rahim  
23. Shri Jogen Mohan 
24. Shri Ramrao Sakharam Wadkute 

76 
 
Secretariat 
1. Shri Lalkithang  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania Director 
3. Ms. Swati Parwal  Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Standing 
Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs to the sitting of the Committee. 
3. *      *       *       *       *      *       *     *       *       *       *      * 
*      *       *       *       *      *       *     *       *       *       *      * * 
*      *       *       *       *      *       *     *       *       *       *      * * 
*      *       *       *       *      *       *     *       *       *       *      * * 
4. The Committee, thereafter took up for consideration the Draft Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Ninth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs 
(2025-26) on, ‘Demands for Grants (2026-2027)’ of the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs and adopted the same without any modifications. 
 
*     *      *      *      *     *      *    *      *      *      *     * 
* Matter not related with the Report 
The Committee then adjourned. 
***** 
 
  

77 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
[Vide para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE NINTH REPORT OF 
THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
I.  Total number of recommendations                     15 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted 
by the Government:       10 
     
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14 
Percentage to total recommendations                                      (66.67%)                                     
          
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:                            1 
Recommendation No. 10 
Percentage to total recommendations                                               (6.66%)                
           
   
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of           
  
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:          4 
Recommendation Nos. 3, 6, 8, 15 
Percentage to total recommendations                                        (26.67%) 
 
V.         Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final     
replies of the Government are still awaited:           Nil 
Recommendation Nos.  
Percentage to total recommendations                   (0%) 