    STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOUSING  
          AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
                                (2024-25) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Twenty First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs (2023-24) on the subject, ‘Smart 
Cities Mission: An Evaluation’] 
 
SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2024/Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
 
 
  
2 


SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOUSING 
AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
(2024-25) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in 
the Twenty First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs (2023-24) on the subject,  
‘Smart Cities Mission: An Evaluation’] 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.12.2024 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.12.2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2024/Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 C.U.D. No.: 143 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price : Rs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 2024 By Lok Sabha Secretariat  
 
Publish under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by………… 
 
 
 

(i) 
 
CONTENTS 
 
  PAGE 
Composition of the Committee  (iv) 
 
Introduction  (v) 
 
CHAPTER I  Report  1 – 12 
 
CHAPTER II  Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
 13 – 27  
CHAPTER III  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the  Government's replies 
 
 28 – 32 
CHAPTER IV  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration 
 
 33 – 34 
CHAPTER V  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
 35-37 
ANNEXURES 
 
I.   Minutes of the 5th Sitting of the Committee held on 
05.12.2024 
  
 38-39 
II.   Analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report 
(17th Lok Sabha) 
 40 
 
 
 
 

(ii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS (2024-25) 
 
Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy -        Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
  
2. Smt. Lovely Anand 
3. Shri Manickam Tagore B. 
4. Smt. Misha Bharti 
5. Shri Satpal Brahamchari 
6. Shri Hibi Eden 
7. Smt. Hema Malini 
8. Shri Selvam G. 
9. Ms. Sayani Ghosh 
10. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
11. Smt. Mahima Kumari Mewar 
12. Shri Naresh Ganpat Mhaske 
13. Shri Rambhual Nishad 
14. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
15. Dr. Gumma Thanuja Rani 
16. Shri Chamala Kiran Kumar Reddy 
17. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
18. Shri Alok Sharma 
19. Shri Kanwar Singh Tanwar 
20. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
21. Shri Ravindra Dattaram Waikar 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
  
22. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
23. Shri Raghav Chadha 
24. Shri G. C. Chandrashekhar 
25. Shri Mission Ranjan Das 
26. Shri Ram Chander Jangra 
27. Dr. Medha Vishram Kulkarni 
28. Smt. Maya Naroliya 
29. Shri Debashish Samantaray 
30. Shri R. Girirajan 
31. Shri A. A. Rahim 
. 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt Archna Pathania  - Director 
3. Shri Anunay Kumar  - Committee Officer 
 
 
 

(iii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairperson of the Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs 
(2024-25) having been authorized by the Committee, present this Second Report  
(18th Lok Sabha) on action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report (17th Lok Sabha) 
of the Committee on the subject, ‘Smart Cities Mission: An Evaluation’ of the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs’. 
2. The Twenty First Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 08.02.2024 and laid on 
the table of Rajya Sabha on the same date. The Action Taken Replies of the 
Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on  
19 July 2024. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at their sitting held on  
05th December, 2024. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the recommendations 
contained in the Twenty First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is 
given at Annexure-II. 
5. For the facility of reference and convenience, the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in 
the body of the Report. 
 
 
       Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy 
New Delhi;                                                                                                    Chairperson                                                                                                    
05th December, 2024             Standing Committee on Housing             
14 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)                                                   and Urban Affairs 
 

1 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs (2024-25) deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in their Twenty 
First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the subject, ‘Smart Cities Mission: An Evaluation’ of 
the Ministry of  Housing and Urban Affairs which was presented to Lok Sabha on 8th February, 
2024. 
1.2 Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government in respect of all the 14 
Recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows: 
(i) Recommendations/Observations, which have been accepted by the Government: 
 Recommendation Serial Nos. 1, 2, 3, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 
(Total -10) 
(Chapter-II) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations, which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
Government's replies: 
Recommendation Serial No.  6, 8 
                                                                                                                                (Total -2) 
(Chapter-III) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations, in respect of which replies of Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
      Recommendation Serial Nos.  5     
(Total -1) 
(Chapter-IV) 
                       
(iv) Recommendations / Observations, in respect of which final replies of the Government are 
still awaited: 
   Recommendation Serial No.   4  (Part reply)                            (Total - 1) 
   (Chapter-V) 
 
 

2 
 
1.3 The Committee desire that specific replies to the Comments of the Committee as 
contained in Chapter-I of this Report may be furnished to them at the earliest and in any case, not 
later than three months from the presentation of this Report. 
1.4 The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their 
recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.    
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
Need to launch next phase of Smart Cities Mission covering larger number of cities and 
areas and utilizing experience and expertise of Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) for the 
purpose. 
1.5  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
“The Committee have been apprised that many SPVs such as Surat, Indore, 
Visakhapatnam etc. are generating revenue from the projects developed by them, which 
may complement their financial sustenance. Post completion of the Mission, the 
respective State Governments may decide on the utilization of the experience and 
expertise of the SPVs in Urban development initiatives in the respective States/UTs. It 
has also been informed that MoHUA is in the process of evaluating these SPVs and 
framing guidelines in this regard. The Committee feel that majority of Indian cities are 
at a low level of development where city planning and governance need to be 
strengthened. The Committee note that 500 cities are covered under AMRUT Scheme 
and 4041 ULBs under DAY-NULM and, therefore, the Smart Cities Mission like 
structure, after completion of SCM, may be useful for them, too. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should get the third-party assessment of the 
various projects undertaken in the Smart Cities Mission and thereafter, consider to 
launch next phase of the Mission. 
  
Further, the Committee are of the opinion that the experience and expertise gained by 
the SPVs in Urban development initiatives must be leveraged and possibility should be 
explored for utilizing their expertise in other projects, such as AMRUT, DAY-NULM 
etc. undertaken for the growth and development of cities and sub-urban areas/satellite 
towns/growth centres around the city or elsewhere. 
  
The Committee also intends to emphasize that in the next phase of the Smart Cities 
Mission, thrust should be on tier 2 cities, located between 50 to 100 kilometers from 
capital cities and tourist cities, if not already covered. This will not only de-congest the 
capital cities but also act as a fillip factor for tier 3 cities for their growth.” 
 

3 
 
1.6 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"The Hon’ble Standing Committee has rightly noted the need to strengthen the planning 
and governance in majority of the Indian cities. As a matter of fact, 66 of the 100 
selected cities in Smart Cities Mission have population less than 10 lakhs. Further 46 
cities have population less than 5 lakhs. These smaller cities have lesser planning and 
implementation capacities. The Smart Cities Mission guidelines which adopted the 
Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) model of implementation have helped these cities in 
particular to implement multi-sectoral projects within a limited time frame. We have 
noticed that the projects undertaken by the smaller cities are equally diverse and 
challenging. Further, the project completion in smaller cities is almost equal to the 
bigger cities. This allows us to infer that the SPV structure has improved planning and 
implementation in the Smart Cities and can act as a model for other cities.   
 
Established under the Company’s Act 2013, SPVs were set up in each of the 100 smart 
cities to plan, appraise, approve, release funds, implement, manage, operate, and 
monitor smart city projects. –These SPVs have the funds, autonomy, and talent to 
deliver complex urban development projects. All 100 smart cities (including big and 
small cities) are extensively using emerging technologies in urban management. This is 
revolutionizing urban development and management, and smart cities have proved to be 
the vanguards of this change. Over the course of the Smart Cities Mission, many SPVs 
have catalyzed urban data, technology, and innovation ecosystems that will further 
mature over time.  
 
We agree with the suggestion of the Hon’ble Standing Committee that these Smart City 
SPVs must be leveraged for their expertise gained in project planning & implementation 
to other Missions of the MoHUA like AMRUT, DAY-NULM etc. in their respective 
cities. MoHUA is in the process to finalize a guideline for these SPVs with 
“Recommendations on Future of Smart City SPVs”. 
 
The emphasis of the Hon’ble Standing Committee for inclusion of more tier 2 cities 
(located between 50 to 100 km from the capital and tourist cities) has been duly noted 
for future programs." 
 
1.7 The Committee acknowledge the Ministry's acceptance of their recommendation 
regarding leveraging the expertise gained by Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) in project 
planning and implementation for other Missions, such as AMRUT and DAY-NULM. The 
Committee take note of the Ministry's efforts to finalize guidelines for SPVs, particularly 
the "Recommendations on the Future of Smart City SPVs." The Committee desire the 
Ministry to provide a copy of these guidelines once they are finalized. 

4 
 
The Committee, however find that the reply furnished by the Ministry is silent on 
their recommendation regarding third party assessment of various projects undertaken in 
Smart Cities Mission to fill the gaps before taking up the next phase of Mission. The 
Committee therefore reiterates their earlier recommendation for conducting a third-party 
assessment of the projects implemented under the Smart Cities Mission and the findings 
thereof may be shared with them. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
Need for deeper engagement of public representatives in execution of Smart Cities Mission  
1.8  The Committee had recommended as under: 
"Smart Cities Mission Guidelines provide for a structured mechanism for consultation 
with the public representatives through Smart City Advisory Forum (SCAF) which 
includes MP, MLA, Mayor, District Collector, CEO of SPV and others. However, the 
Committee are constrained to note that meetings of SCAF were not conducted in many 
smart cities regularly. The meetings took place in the range of 01 to 08 in these five 
years and extended tenure upto September 2023. Further, in Amravati and Imphal, no 
meeting took place. Thus, the majority of the Smart Cities failed to leverage the 
expertise and grass root connection of Members of Parliament and other 
representatives/experts by not convening the meetings of Smart City Advisory Forum 
(SCAF) regularly. The Committee further note that Members of Parliament have not 
been placed in State level Advisory body. These have resulted in delay in completion 
and changing/dropping of many projects across various Smart Cities. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Members of Parliament, being public representatives and 
having grass-root level expertise must be the member of advisory committee, not only at 
city level but at State level too. Prior consultation with the Members of Parliament be 
made in identification, selection and implementation of projects for augmenting the 
viability of the projects and eliminating unnecessary hurdles. Further, the SCAF 
meetings should be held regularly, either quarterly/bi-annually. This will give MPs 
sufficient time to review the proposals, gather inputs from their constituents and prepare 
for meaningful discussions during the meetings.” 
 
1.9 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“According to SCM Guidelines Clause No. 13.3 under ‘Mission Monitoring’ section at 
city level a Smart City Advisory Forum (SCAF) has been established in all 100 smart 
cities to advise and enable collaboration among various stakeholders. The SCAF 
includes the District Collector, MP, MLA, Mayor, CEO of SPV, local youth, technical 
experts, and at least one member from the area who is either a,  

5 
 
i. President / secretary representing registered Residents Welfare Association,  
ii. Member of registered Taxpayers Association / Rate Payers Association,  
iii. President / Secretary of slum level federation, and  
iv. Members of a Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) or Mahila Mandali / 
Chamber of Commerce / Youth Associations.  
The CEO of the SPV is the convener of the SCAF. Hon’ble Standing Committee 
recommendation to leverage the expertise and grass root level connection of Members 
of Parliament (MPs) and other public representatives is crucial in the larger spirit of the 
Mission and has been duly incorporated. MoHUA would ensure that regular meetings of 
SCAF are convened as per guidelines, and all representatives are duly invited for the 
same in advance." 
  
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No. H-15012/10/2024-SC.I 
dated 3rd July, 2024] 
1.10 In addition to ensuring that regular and periodic meetings of SCAF are held as per 
the guidelines, the Committee had recommended that the Members of Parliament, being 
public representatives must be the member of advisory committee at State level also so as 
to leverage their expertise and grass root level connection. The Ministry has stated that 
provisions for leveraging the expertise and grass root level connection of MPs have been 
incorporated. However, it appears that these efforts are not reaching the ground level or 
being implemented effectively, as many MPs have reported during meetings that they are 
not being invited to participate in such discussions. The Committee therefore, reiterate 
their recommendation and strongly urge that the Members of Parliament be included in 
state-level advisory bodies in Missions. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
matter.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
 
Sustenance and optimal use of Integrated Command and Control Centres (ICCCs) in 
public delivery 
1.11  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
“Under the Smart Cities Mission, Integrated Command and Control Centers (ICCCs) 
have been operationalized in all the 100 Smart Cities, which are acting as the brain and 
nerve center of the cities by enabling a decision support system for enhancing municipal 
service delivery, urban management and improving quality of life for the citizens. The 
Committee appreciate setting up of Integrated Command and Control Centres (ICCCs) 

6 
 
with smart features for monitoring and managing cities. The operationalization of 
ICCCs as crisis management rooms during Covid-19 pandemic has been noticeable and 
worth mentioning. 
  
In order to broaden the scope of ICCCs and fully utilize their potential, the Committee 
recommend that the role of ICCCs in cities should be expanded by enabling them to 
provide a variety of services in the field of health, internal security, waste management, 
traffic management, disaster management and e-governance etc. Regular flow of funds 
may also be ensured for the purpose. Integration of these services should be made 
possible with regular and continuous smarter technological integrations in these centers. 
Further, assessment should be done about the number of ICCC platform required in 
various cities of a State and thereafter steps should be taken to create a state level ICCC 
for connecting and putting together all the ICCCs in the State to create a common e-
governance platform.”  
  
1.12 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“ICCCs in smart cities act as decision support systems, emergency response 
mechanisms and bring together the complex web of city agencies on one platform to 
forge inter-agency coordination. Today, a large number of these ICCCs are delivering 
high quality services in the fields of health, internal security, waste management, traffic 
management, disaster management, e-governance etc. Some of these services are: 
  
a. Municipal services for citizens and businesses: ICCCs have especially improved 
citizen grievance redressal, monitoring of service delivery, and brought in mobile 
governance for online services across the smart cities.  
b. Disaster Management: Rapid response and early warning systems for disasters 
leverage ICCC data integration, ensuring timely mitigation and response strategies. 
c. WASH (Water, Sanitation and Hygiene): ICCC facilitates efficient waste 
management and water supply monitoring through GPS-enabled vehicles and IoT 
devices, reducing non-Revenue Water with SCADA systems. 
d. Health: ICCC platform streamlines pandemic management and health services, 
coordinating emergency response and telemedicine initiatives for citizens. 
e. Environment: Centralized environmental monitoring through ICCC aids in early 
warning and response to pollution, water levels, and natural disasters using IoT 
sensors. 
f. Urban Mobility: ICCC-driven traffic monitoring enhances public transportation and 
pedestrian access, ensuring safer and more efficient urban mobility with real-time 
data insights. 

7 
 
g. Safety and Security: ICCC integrates surveillance systems and emergency response 
technologies, enhancing city safety through smart streetlights, CCTV monitoring, 
and emergency call systems. 
Smart cities have created Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and Business/Value 
Proposition plans for their ICCCs in order to ensure effective functioning and long-term 
sustenance of digital infrastructure after the completion of the Mission. Multiple 
technical workshops and handholding sessions have been organized for Smart City 
SPVs as part of capacity building efforts to help them on various aspects such as 
security and privacy, use case effectiveness, maintenance of digital assets as well as 
financial sustainability of these projects. Additionally, MoHUA has released a 
document called ICCC Maturity Assessment Framework (IMAF) in 2021 which acted 
as a guiding toolkit for cities to self-assess the maturity of ICCCs, identify the gaps 
under functional, technological, operational and engagement aspects and make any mid-
course corrections for enhanced effectiveness. 
  
As ICCCs have matured, it was important to revisit the existing framework and modify 
the same to assess cities on upcoming priorities such as compliance on cyber security, 
creation of a business plan for the sustenance of ICCC beyond the Mission period, 
adoption of innovation to address complex urban challenges, etc. IMAF 2.0 assessment 
framework was introduced in 2023 which takes a systematic and comprehensive 
approach to assess maturity and effectiveness of ICCCs in Smart Cities. It is designed to 
assess ICCCs on 10 key pillars which can help cities constantly improve their ICCCs in 
providing better services to the citizens. 
  
Furthermore, the Ministry is planning to enable preparation of State level urban digital 
plan for States to assess the possibility of creation of State level ICCC for connecting 
and putting together all data emerging from different cities in the State to create a 
centralized platform that leverages data analytics and computational modelling to tackle 
complex urban issues. These centers can be instrumental in sustainable urban 
development, employing advanced techniques like machine learning, Artificial 
intelligence, and network modelling to derive insights from urban data, which are 
crucial for informed decision-making and policy creation.” 
 
 
1.13 While recognizing the establishment of Integrated Command and Control Centres 
(ICCCs) with smart features for city monitoring and management, the Committee had 
recommended expanding the role of ICCCs to offer a broader range of services and to 
assess the number of ICCC platforms required in various cities within a State and 
proposed setting up a state-level ICCC to integrate and connect all ICCCs in the State, 
creating a unified e-governance platform. In response, the Ministry has stated that ICCCs 
are currently delivering high-quality services in various fields and they have introduced 

8 
 
ICCC Maturity Assessment Framework (IMAF) 2.0 assessment framework in 2023 to 
evaluate the maturity and effectiveness of ICCCs in Smart Cities across 10 key pillars. The 
Ministry has also submitted that they are planning to facilitate the development of a State-
level urban digital plan for States, which will explore the feasibility of creating a State-level 
ICCC to integrate and consolidate data from various cities within the State.  
The Committee feel that for the State-level ICCC to be truly effective, all cities must have 
their own ICCCs that comprehensively cover the entire city in both length and width. 
Therefore, the Committee had recommended assessing the number of ICCC platforms 
needed in various cities across the State. The Committee reiterate their recommendation 
and desire that in the first place the requirement of ICCCs platforms in the existing Smart 
Cities may be assessed so to ensure that ICCCs cover the entire city, not just few 
municipalities within a city. It is only after a smart city is fully covered under the ICCCs 
then a move can be made towards State-level ICCC.  
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
Reasons for slow progress of the Mission in certain Smart Cities to be identified 
 
1.14  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
“The Committee notice that larger cities having efficient organizational and financial 
structure like Surat, Agra, Ahmedabad, Bhopal, Varanasi, Madurai, Pune, Indore, 
Jaipur, etc. have performed well. However, progress of the Mission is slow in many 
small cities including those in North-Eastern States where city administration lacks 
robust organizational and financial structure for sustenance. The Ministry also admitted 
that many Smart Cities didn’t have capacity to plan and spend thousand crore projects 
under the Mission. It is with this view that the Centre-State share ratio for 13 Himalayan 
States and North-eastern States was revised from 50:50 to 90:10. However, even after 
the altered funding pattern, out of the 15 cities at the bottom of the ranking, 8 cities are 
from North-eastern States. Further, as of December 2023, in comparison to an average 
6% incomplete projects in the rank-wise 20 best performing cities, almost 47% projects 
are at work order stage in the 20 cities at the bottom of the ranking. The Committee 
desire that the reasons for slow progress should be identified and analyzed. The 
Committee further desire that a plan should be chalked out to strengthen the capabilities 
of the ULBs in small cities for those not reaping the benefit of the Mission so that 
projects under the SCM get completed.” 
 
1.15 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“Urbanization in India is not uniform and is at varied levels. As a matter of fact, 66 of 
the 100 selected cities in Smart Cities Mission have population less than 10 lakhs. 

9 
 
Further 46 cities have population less than 5 lakhs. These smaller cities have lesser 
planning and implementation capacities. They also find difficulty in attracting human 
resources to prepare the project report and monitor them, as well as good vendors to 
execute these projects. Some of the cities had to tender multiple times to get the right 
vendors for their projects. While the physical progress in these smaller cities may have 
been slow, they have undertaken multi-sectoral projects which they have never 
implemented before. The smaller cities under the Mission were slow to start but most of 
them, have accelerated the project implementation and matching the project completion 
with the bigger cities. 
   
SCM, MoHUA has also undertaken an initiative of assessing the impact of its projects 
in 100 smart cities through 50 theme-based impact assessment research studies 
undertaken by 29 institutes of national repute that includes salient IITs, IIMs and others. 
As per the recommendations of the Hon’ble Standing Committee, Ministry will identify 
more city specific challenges and reasons of slow progress in various size class cities. 
The study is also expected to suggest on how these smaller cities can further enhance 
their capabilities. The study is currently under way towards the finalization stage. 
In spite of various reasons of slow progress beyond control of the mission and midway 
disruptions due to pandemic, SCM was able to register substantial progress.As on 15 
June 2024, all 8,010 projects undertaken in the Mission, worth around ₹ 1,64,064 crore 
have been work ordered; of which 7,151 projects (90% of total projects) worth ₹ 
1,43,601 crore (88% by value) have been completed. The balance ongoing projects too 
are in advanced stage of implementation. As on 12th June 2024, under SCM, ₹ 86,281 
crore has been released; of which ₹ 78,752 crore (91%) has been utilized.”   
 
1.16  The Committee had found progress of the Mission slow in many smaller cities 
including those in North-Eastern States and therefore, desired that the reasons for slow 
progress should be identified and analyzed, and a plan be developed to strengthen the 
capabilities of the ULBs in these smaller cities to ensure timely completion of SCM 
projects. The Ministry, in reply, has listed a few reasons for the delays and stated that they 
have initiated an effort to assess the impact of SCM projects in 100 smart cities through 50 
theme-based impact assessment research studies, conducted by 29 nationally recognized 
institutes, including prominent IITs, IIMs, and others. These studies, currently nearing 
completion, are also expected to provide suggestions on how these smaller cities can further 
enhance their capabilities.  
The Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised of the details and the outcome 
of the 50 theme-based impact assessment research studies undertaken by 29 institutes of 
national repute along with the actions taken or being taken by the Ministry on the 
suggestions made by them. 
 

10 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
Robust mechanism for coordination amongst government schemes for smooth and 
harmonized monitoring of smart cities projects  
 
1.17  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
“Convergence is one of the most important principles of the Smart Cities Mission under 
which funds of several other national schemes are being converged for Smart City 
projects so as to optimize costs, create integrated solutions, improve sustainability and 
bring about maximization of citizen benefit. However, delay has been witnessed in 
Convergence projects owing to involvement of executing agency other than Smart City 
or non-defined role of SPVs in implementation of Convergence projects. The 
Committee are of the view that the Ministry, in all its Schemes where convergence of 
various schemes is proposed, should put in place a robust mechanism to ensure 
coordination with other Government schemes for smooth and harmonized monitoring, 
preferably at District Collector level. This will bring about positive convergence and 
ward off duplication and wastage of resources.” 
 
1.18 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“Smart city SPVs were created as part of the Mission to enable quick decision making 
and fast implementation of projects.  Benefits of the SPV can be gauged from the fact 
that even smaller cities, which hitherto used to lag the bigger cities in project 
implementation, have performed at par as far as the implementation of smart city 
projects are concerned. The SPVs have not limited their planning role to projects 
undertaken from Mission funds, but have successfully leveraged other sources of funds, 
both public and private, to create holistic, integrated solutions for the city. While doing 
so, they have had to create working relationships with other State agencies. In some 
cases, few works have been assigned to State agencies to leverage their experience and 
strengths to complete such projects expeditiously. However, in few cases, as pointed out 
by the Hon’ble Committee, coordination has been a challenge in some such works.  
MoHUA, realizing the importance of cross-agency coordination for smart city 
development is working to suggest changes in governance of SPVs to States i.e. Board 
of Directors, AoA, Rules of Business so that they can forge better inter-departmental 
coordination. This will help avoid ward level duplication and wastage of resources. The 
proposed Rules of Business for SPV would also have defined roles of SPVs in 
implementation of project under convergence as recommended by Hon’ble Standing 
Committee.  
 
In order to further investigate the relevance of convergence projects in city 
development, SCM under SAAR-Sameeksha Series of impact assessment studies by 
institutes of national repute has taken up research topic no. 26, i.e., “Whether 

11 
 
convergence of projects in SCM resulted in appropriate outcomes?”  The Report is 
under finalization. The study is expected to be useful for the forthcoming urban 
Missions. Recommendations of the Hon’ble Standing Committee has been noted for 
required compliances in forthcoming missions.”   
 
1.19  The Committee had recommended putting in place a robust mechanism to ensure 
effective coordination with other related government schemes, facilitating smooth and 
harmonized monitoring of smart cities projects undertaken through Convergence. In 
response, the Ministry acknowledged that coordination has posed challenges in some areas 
and is therefore working to suggest changes in the governance of Special Purpose Vehicles 
(SPVs) to the States, including adjustments to the Board of Directors, Articles of 
Association (AoA), and Rules of Business, to improve inter-departmental coordination. 
Additionally, the Ministry has conducted impact assessment studies on the outcomes of 
convergence projects. The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific changes 
made in the governance of SPVs and the results of the assessment studies on convergence 
projects, with follow-up actions taken thereon. 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
Need for change in the outlook of the Ministry 
 
1.20  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
“The Committee have been apprised that 400 projects worth Rs.22,814 crore may take 
longer time for completion beyond December, 2023. The Mission has been extended 
upto June, 2024 for completion of these projects. The Ministry has stated before the 
Committee that in case of non-completion of these projects within the extended time 
frame, the concerned State governments will be responsible, and they will have to 
complete those incomplete projects at their own cost. In this connection, the Committee 
are of the strong opinion that the Ministry’s role should not be confined to transfer of 
their share regarding Mission/scheme/project, but they have to remain watchful for the 
execution and successful completion of the projects. Thus, in respect of States which are 
continuously lagging behind, the Ministry needs to intervene timely to handhold them 
and facilitates with required inputs and expertise. The Committee would like to know 
the steps taken in the matter and the progress made regarding completion of 400 
pending projects.” 
 
1.21 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“Smart Cities Mission is currently extended till June 2024. A few projects are expected 
to overshoot the deadline of June 2024.  
  

12 
 
SCM Directorate, MoHUA under the Joint Secretary & Mission Director is keeping a 
close watch on physical & financial progress and monitoring progress of projects on a 
daily/ weekly basis. These weekly meetings are scheduled with CEO/ Municipal 
Commissioners of the respective cities. Hon’ble Minister of Housing & Urban Affairs, 
Government of India and Secretary, MoHUA have also intervened and reviewed 
progress from time to time.  
 
Despite numerous challenges substantive progress has been registered. Currently As on 
15 June 2024, all 8,010 projects undertaken in the Mission, worth around ₹ 1,64,064 
crore have been work ordered; of which 7,151 projects (90% of total projects) worth ₹ 
1,43,601 crore (88% by value) have been completed. The balance ongoing projects too 
are in advanced stage of implementation. As on 12th June 2024, under SCM, ₹ 86,281 
crore has been released; of which ₹ 78,752 crore (91%) has been utilized. 
Recommendations of the Hon’ble Standing Committee have been noted for required 
compliances in future programs.” 
 
1.22 During the course of examination, the Ministry reported that they had identified 
400 delayed projects valued at Rs. 22,814 crores, which would require more time for 
completion beyond December 2023. As a result, the Smart Cities Mission (SCM) was 
extended to June 2024, by which time the Smart Cities were expected to complete their 
projects. The Committee are concerned to observe that several of these projects have 
missed even the extended June 2024 deadline, despite MoHUA’s periodic interventions and 
progress reviews which shows that some more intensive efforts were required by the 
concerned stakeholders. The Committee would like to know the detailed information on the 
incomplete and delayed projects and the specific interventions made to expedite their 
completion. 
***** 

13 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GORERNMENT 
Recommendation (Serial No. 1) 
Frequent change or shelving of projects at implementation/ execution stage 
 
2.1  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
 “The Committee note that the selection process of Smart Cities was based on 
cooperative and competitive federalism and followed a challenge process to select cities 
in two stages. However, during the course of examination of city-wise progress and 
performance, the Committee noted frequent changes, dropping or shelving of projects. 
In this regard, the Ministry explained that at the time of implementation of the smart 
city projects, on-ground implementation challenges in the form of land availability, 
litigations, regulatory challenges, financial difficulties, technology selection issues were 
encountered in few projects. The Ministry has further stated that the Covid pandemic 
led to reprioritization in most cities forcing them to include components of health, 
education, active living, walking and cycling to name a few areas in their plan. The 
Ministry has further issued an Advisory 13, dated 21 January 2019, titled “Policy for 
Managing Variation in the projects in the Smart City Proposal” wherein the flexibility 
was provided to Smart Cities to undertake changes in the SCP, without disturbing the 
spirit of the Challenge process to ensure that the core value of the Mission and hurdles 
encountered in few projects were overcome by either modifying or replacing them with 
alternate ones meeting desired objectives.  
  
The Committee, while appreciating the fact that the Smart Cities have been given 
flexibility to undertake changes in the Smart City Projects in order to ensure the 
completion of projects, desire that the selected and planned projects must be completed 
in time." 
 
2.2 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"Many of the 8,000 projects undertaken by the 100 smart cities as part of the Mission 
are innovative& multi-sectoral, some of them being undertaken for the very first time in 
the country. During and post the Covid pandemic, a need for reprioritization emerged 
wherein sectors like health and environment; active living elements like walkability, 
cycling infrastructure, public transport; IT for various facets of city management gained 
prominence.  A core principle of SCM is that cities have to be responsive to emergent 
needs of their communities. It is therefore that SCM through its Advisory No.13 titled, 
“Policy for Managing Variation in the projects in the Smart City Proposal”(Copy 

14 
 
enclosed), provided the requisite flexibility to smart cities to alter/ amend/ modify their 
projects in light of emergent community needs. Moreover, post formulation of the 
original SCP, unforeseen issues like non-availability of land, litigations; technological 
& financial infeasibility stalled some projects listed therein. The Mission advisory 
allowed replacement of such projects with due approval of the SPV’s Board, on the 
condition that the overall spirit of the Mission will not be affected.  
 Modifications in the projects were allowed subject to the conditions laid down in the 
SCP guidelines and any other subsequent directions/ guidelines issued by the MoHUA 
from time to time. Full responsibility for ensuring that the individual projects added/ 
selected/ executed in/ follow the above guidelines rested with the SPV. This flexibility 
has helped the cities substitute their infeasible projects with feasible ones and has 
ensured that all 100 cities complete their targets.   
 MoHUA closely monitors all 8000 projects at the level of Secretary, HUA and Joint 
Secretary and Mission Director, SCM. It keeps a close watch on physical & financial 
progress and has been monitoring cities progress on daily/ weekly basis relying on real-
time data obtained from the Geographical Management Information System 
(GMIS).The physical verification is conducted on-ground by officials of MoHUA and 
State Mission Directorate. Weekly meetings were scheduled online with CEO/ 
Municipal Commissioners of the respective cities, especially those who had slow 
progress. SCM has made all possible efforts to overcome hurdles and complete all its 
ongoing projects in 100 smart cities within stipulated time frame i.e. till June 2024.  
As on 15 June 2024, all 8,010projects undertaken in the Mission, worth around ₹ 
1,64,064 crore have been work ordered; of which 7,151 projects (90% of total projects) 
worth ₹ 1,43,601 crore (88% by value) have been completed. The balance ongoing 
projects too are in advanced stage of implementation. As on 12th June 2024, under 
SCM, ₹ 86,281 crore has been released; of which ₹ 78,752 crore (91%) has been 
utilized." 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No. H-15012/10/2024-SC.I  
dated 3rd July, 2024] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 2) 
 
Master Plan for Greenfield Development 
 
2.3  The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The strategic components of Area-based development (ABD) in the Smart Cities 
Mission are city improvement (retrofitting) in an area consisting of more than 500 acres 
identified by the city in consultation with citizens, city renewal (redevelopment) 

15 
 
consisting of an area of more than 50 acres identified by Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) in 
consultation with citizens and city extension (green field development) aimed at 
introducing Smart Solutions in a previously vacant area of more than 250 acres using 
innovative planning, plan financing and plan implementation tools (e.g. land 
pooling/land reconstitution) with provision for affordable housing, especially for the 
poor. 
  
It is stated that Greenfield development are required around cities in order to address the 
needs of the expanding population. Unlike retrofitting and redevelopment, green field 
developments could be located either within the limits of the ULB or within the limits 
of the local Urban Development Authority (UDA). The Committee desire that under the 
Greenfield development model, area within the radius of 10 km around the city should 
be developed in a structured manner in different pockets so as to meet the future need of 
urbanization with well-conceived/ drafted Master Plans. The task of preparation of the 
Master Plans for the proposed Greenfield area may not be left with the Urban Local 
Bodies alone as many of them lack the desirable expertise for the job. Rather the 
Ministry should spearhead the planning and provide expertise for preparing the same. 
Even though the focus is on city-specific needs, a minimum basic infrastructure 
development model incorporating sustainable green technologies should be prepared 
and with States/ULBs." 
 
2.4 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"As has rightly been observed by the Hon’ble Standing Committee, green field 
development is an important method to address the requirement of increasing 
urbanisation. SCM has acknowledged this fact since inception of the Mission and 
suitable provisions have been incorporated in its Guidelines to ensure the same. Under 
strategic components of ‘Area based development’ one of the prescribed models is 
‘Greenfield development”. 5 out of 100 cities viz., Amravati, Rajkot, Ranchi, Atal 
Nagar & New Town Kolkata have opted for green field development and balance 95 
have chosen a mix of retrofit and redevelopment models. The 5 smart cities, who 
undertook green field development have brought learnings and successful models for 
other cities in the country.  
It may be noted that the task of preparation of master plans for proposed green field 
development in the radius of approx. 10 km of the urban fringes along municipal 
boundaries is normally undertaken by city Development Authorities (DAs) in close 
consultation with the ULB officials, and they are expected to have all the required 
expertise. In a typical green field development model, land pooling/ acquisition/ 
reconstitution is normally undertaken by DA or officials of the concerned District 
Magistrate, within the given regulatory and legal framework. It also involves 
development of a financially bankable model to ensure its sustainability. Paying due 

16 
 
respect to the regional autonomy and following principles of cooperative federalism, 
MoHUA provides supporting expertise, as per the State’s request.  
In case of Smart Cities Mission, the Project Management Consultants hired by SPV 
prepared the draft master plans for these green field cities as per MoHUA approved 
Urban & Regional Department Plans formulation & Implementation (URDPFI) 
Guidelines 2014. These are eventually approved by the State Government prior to 
implementation. The recommendations of the Hon’ble Standing Committee to promote 
minimum basic infrastructure development model incorporating sustainable green 
technologies in various sectors is already being pursued by MoHUA through its various 
flagship missions like SCM, SBM, HFA, etc. However, the recommendations of the 
Hon’ble Standing Committee has been noted for required compliance in future 
programs.  
For example, Ranchi is one of 100 smart capital cities in India being developed using a 
green field model. The 656.30 acre green field development is be located within the 
municipal core of the Ranchi Municipal Corporation and will accommodate a 
population of approximately 1.5 lakh persons. The green field development at Ranchi, 
gave it the opportunity to focus on urban design, and sustainable area-based 
development (ABD), practices. The city has developed the core infrastructure towards 
its goal to become a knowledge city which is supported with a lively, walking-friendly 
environment and world-class basic infrastructure.” 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No. H-15012/10/2024-SC.I  
dated 3rd July, 2024] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 3) 
Fixed tenure of CEOs for Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) 
2.5  The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Smart Cities Mission at the City level is executed by SPVs created to plan, 
implement, operate, and monitor the development projects. The SPVs are entities 
registered under the Companies Act, 2013, with 50:50 ownership of Urban Local 
Bodies and respective States. The Board of Directors of SPV has representatives of 
Central Government, State Government, ULB and Independent Directors, in addition to 
the Chief Executive Officers (CEO) and Functional Directors. The Ministry has also 
issued an advisory for 'Engagement of key managerial posts and human resources in 
SPVs. The Committee have been given to understand that one of the main challenges 
faced in execution of Smart Cities Mission is frequent transfer of CEOs and lack of 
clear guidelines and directions for dedicated CEOs with fixed tenure. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend for appointment of dedicated CEOs with a minimum fixed tenure 

17 
 
along with a clear and strong governance structure for the SPVs that also includes 
representation from the city administration, local self-government, experts in urban 
development and concerned stakeholders which will ensure clear accountability, 
decision-making and transparency in working of SPVs.” 
 
2.6 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"As per SCM Guidelines Clause No. 10.1, implementation of the Mission at the city 
level is undertaken by an exclusive Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) created for the 
purpose. These SPVs are jointly held in 50:50 ratio by the respective State 
Government/UT and ULB. The Central Government has one nominee Director on their 
Board. (Annexure-5) Point No.3.3 of the guidelines details out the structure and 
functions of the SPV. It mandates that appointment of CEO in any SPV should be with 
the approval of the then MoUD (MoHUA). However, in practice, since most of the 
CEOs are officers of the State Government, their postings/ transfers are handled by 
them as per their administrative requirements/ exigencies. The Committee’s 
recommendation for appointment of dedicated CEOs with a minimum fixed tenure 
along with a clear and strong governance structure for the SPVs that also includes 
representation from the city administration, local self-government, experts in urban 
development and concerned stakeholders is taken note of and will be prioritized. 
  
However, despite the stated challenges, As on 15 June 2024, all 8,010 projects 
undertaken in the Mission, worth around ₹ 1,64,064 crore have been work ordered; of 
which 7,151 projects (90% of total projects) worth ₹ 1,43,601 crore (88% by value) 
have been completed. The balance ongoing projects too are in advanced stage of 
implementation. As on 12th June 2024, under SCM, ₹ 86,281 crore has been released; 
of which ₹ 78,752 crore (91%) has been utilized." 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No. H-15012/10/2024-SC.I  
dated 3rd July, 2024] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 7) 
Sustenance and optimal use of Integrated Command and Control Centres (ICCCs) in 
public delivery 
2.7  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
“Under the Smart Cities Mission, Integrated Command and Control Centers (ICCCs) 
have been operationalized in all the 100 Smart Cities, which are acting as the brain and 
nerve center of the cities by enabling a decision support system for enhancing municipal 
service delivery, urban management and improving quality of life for the citizens. The 

18 
 
Committee appreciate setting up of Integrated Command and Control Centres (ICCCs) 
with smart features for monitoring and managing cities. The operationalization of 
ICCCs as crisis management rooms during Covid-19 pandemic has been noticeable and 
worth mentioning. 
  
In order to broaden the scope of ICCCs and fully utilize their potential, the Committee 
recommend that the role of ICCCs in cities should be expanded by enabling them to 
provide a variety of services in the field of health, internal security, waste management, 
traffic management, disaster management and e-governance etc. Regular flow of funds 
may also be ensured for the purpose. Integration of these services should be made 
possible with regular and continuous smarter technological integrations in these centers. 
Further, assessment should be done about the number of ICCC platform required in 
various cities of a State and thereafter steps should be taken to create a state level ICCC 
for connecting and putting together all the ICCCs in the State to create a common e-
governance platform.”   
 
2.8 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“ICCCs in smart cities act as decision support systems, emergency response 
mechanisms and bring together the complex web of city agencies on one platform to 
forge inter-agency coordination. Today, a large number of these ICCCs are delivering 
high quality services in the fields of health, internal security, waste management, traffic 
management, disaster management, e-governance etc. Some of these services are: 
  
a. Municipal services for citizens and businesses: ICCCs have especially improved 
citizen grievance redressal, monitoring of service delivery, and brought in mobile 
governance for online services across the smart cities.  
b. Disaster Management: Rapid response and early warning systems for disasters 
leverage ICCC data integration, ensuring timely mitigation and response strategies. 
c. WASH (Water, Sanitation and Hygiene): ICCC facilitates efficient waste 
management and water supply monitoring through GPS-enabled vehicles and IoT 
devices, reducing non-Revenue Water with SCADA systems. 
d. Health: ICCC platform streamlines pandemic management and health services, 
coordinating emergency response and telemedicine initiatives for citizens. 
e. Environment: Centralized environmental monitoring through ICCC aids in early 
warning and response to pollution, water levels, and natural disasters using IoT 
sensors. 

19 
 
f. Urban Mobility: ICCC-driven traffic monitoring enhances public transportation and 
pedestrian access, ensuring safer and more efficient urban mobility with real-time 
data insights. 
g. Safety and Security: ICCC integrates surveillance systems and emergency response 
technologies, enhancing city safety through smart streetlights, CCTV monitoring, 
and emergency call systems. 
Smart cities have created Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and Business/Value 
Proposition plans for their ICCCs in order to ensure effective functioning and long-term 
sustenance of digital infrastructure after the completion of the Mission. Multiple 
technical workshops and handholding sessions have been organized for Smart City 
SPVs as part of capacity building efforts to help them on various aspects such as 
security and privacy, use case effectiveness, maintenance of digital assets as well as 
financial sustainability of these projects. Additionally, MoHUA has released a 
document called ICCC Maturity Assessment Framework (IMAF) in 2021 which acted 
as a guiding toolkit for cities to self-assess the maturity of ICCCs, identify the gaps 
under functional, technological, operational and engagement aspects and make any mid-
course corrections for enhanced effectiveness. 
  
As ICCCs have matured, it was important to revisit the existing framework and modify 
the same to assess cities on upcoming priorities such as compliance on cyber security, 
creation of a business plan for the sustenance of ICCC beyond the Mission period, 
adoption of innovation to address complex urban challenges, etc. IMAF 2.0 assessment 
framework was introduced in 2023 which takes a systematic and comprehensive 
approach to assess maturity and effectiveness of ICCCs in Smart Cities. It is designed to 
assess ICCCs on 10 key pillars which can help cities constantly improve their ICCCs in 
providing better services to the citizens. 
  
Furthermore, the Ministry is planning to enable preparation of State level urban digital 
plan for States to assess the possibility of creation of State level ICCC for connecting 
and putting together all data emerging from different cities in the State to create a 
centralized platform that leverages data analytics and computational modelling to tackle 
complex urban issues. These centers can be instrumental in sustainable urban 
development, employing advanced techniques like machine learning, Artificial 
intelligence, and network modelling to derive insights from urban data, which are 
crucial for informed decision-making and policy creation.” 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.13 of the Report) 
 

20 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 9) 
Government asked to draw a plan for maintenance of infrastructure and digital assets 
created under the Smart Cities Mission and their timely upgradation 
 
2.9  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
“A large number of infrastructure and digital assets/infrastructure are created under the 
Smart Cities Mission. The Committee have been informed that to control, monitor and 
maintain physical and digital assets/ infrastructure created under the Mission, different 
mechanisms suitable to their context are being worked out in different States and cities. 
  
The Committee are of the view that the assets-physical as well as digital, are the very 
basis of Smart Cities Mission and feel that greater efforts are indeed required for 
maintenance of infrastructure assets created under the Mission. Considering that these 
infrastructures, particularly digital infrastructure require regular and timely calibration 
and servicing, the Committee recommend that comprehensive framework and Operation 
& Maintenance (O&M) strategies should be worked out to ensure increased lifetime 
utility, value of infrastructure/assets and their timely upgradation.” 
2.10 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"Various initiatives have been implemented to ensure the upkeep of assets developed 
under SCM. These include integrating a five-year Operation and Maintenance (O&M) 
component into project costs and establishing a Model Request for Proposal (RFP) 
along with Contract is periodically updated, enabling cities to conduct necessary 
upgrades in alignment with project requirements. In majority of the projects undertaken 
in the mission, the project cost includes the CAPEX and around 5 years O&M cost. 
All of the 100 Smart City SPVs have been advised to make provision for “Deferred 
O&M Expenses”. It was for  projects having O&M component built into the contracts 
and having their O&M period extending beyond the Mission end date. Subsequently, 
post the Mission closure, Smart City SPVs/ Smart Cities must make their own 
arrangements for its O&M from their own source revenue. The Ministry has also 
encouraged the Smart Cities SPVs to create a financial sustenance plan, which will help 
them in O&M and upgradation of the assets created.   
  
Furthermore, the mission has introduced ICCC Maturity Assessment Framework 
(IMAF) in 2021 which acted as a guiding toolkit for cities to self-assess the maturity of 
ICCCs, identify the gaps under functional, technological, operational and engagement 
aspects and make any mid-course corrections for enhanced effectiveness. With ICCCs 
now matured, it was important to revisit the existing framework and modify the same to 
assess cities on upcoming priorities such as compliance on cyber security, creation of a 
business plan for the sustenance of ICCC beyond the mission period, adoption of 

21 
 
innovation to address complex urban challenges, etc. IMAF 2.0 assessment framework 
was introduced in 2023 which takes a systematic and comprehensive approach to assess 
maturity and effectiveness of ICCCs in Smart Cities. It is designed to assess ICCCs on 
10 key pillars which can help cities constantly improve their ICCCs in providing better 
services to the citizens. IMAF aims to provide insights into developing, sustaining, and 
enhancing the benefits derived from ICCCs to maximize their utility over their 
operational lifespan and their timely upgradation. 
Additionally, the mission has collaborated with all 100 Smart Cities to develop Standard 
Operating Procedures (SOPs) and Business/Value Proposition plans for their ICCCs in 
particular, ensuring effective operations and long-term sustainability of digital 
infrastructure post-Mission completion. To support capacity building efforts, multiple 
technical workshops and guidance sessions have been conducted for Smart City Special 
Purpose Vehicles (SPVs), focusing on aspects like digital asset maintenance and 
financial sustainability of projects. Continued capacity building of cities aims to 
facilitate the smooth transition and sustained operation of digital infrastructure beyond 
the Mission period." 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No. H-15012/10/2024-SC.I  
dated 3rd July, 2024] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 10) 
Reasons for slow progress of the Mission in certain Smart Cities to be identified 
 
2.11  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
“The Committee notice that larger cities having efficient organizational and financial 
structure like Surat, Agra, Ahmedabad, Bhopal, Varanasi, Madurai, Pune, Indore, 
Jaipur, etc. have performed well. However, progress of the Mission is slow in many 
small cities including those in North-Eastern States where city administration lacks 
robust organizational and financial structure for sustenance. The Ministry also admitted 
that many Smart Cities didn’t have capacity to plan and spend thousand crore projects 
under the Mission. It is with this view that the Centre-State share ratio for 13 Himalayan 
States and North-eastern States was revised from 50:50 to 90:10. However, even after 
the altered funding pattern, out of the 15 cities at the bottom of the ranking, 8 cities are 
from North-eastern States. Further, as of December 2023, in comparison to an average 
6% incomplete projects in the rank-wise 20 best performing cities, almost 47% projects 
are at work order stage in the 20 cities at the bottom of the ranking. The Committee 
desire that the reasons for slow progress should be identified and analyzed. The 
Committee further desire that a plan should be chalked out to strengthen the capabilities 
of the ULBs in small cities for those not reaping the benefit of the Mission so that 
projects under the SCM get completed.” 

22 
 
 
2.12 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"Urbanization in India is not uniform and is at varied levels. As a matter of fact, 66 of 
the 100 selected cities in Smart Cities Mission have population less than 10 lakhs. 
Further 46 cities have population less than 5 lakhs. These smaller cities have lesser 
planning and implementation capacities. They also find difficulty is attracting human 
resources to prepare the project report and monitor them, as well as good vendors to 
execute these projects. Some of the cities had to tender multiple times to get the right 
vendors for their projects. While the physical progress in these smaller cities may have 
been slow, they have undertaken multi-sectoral projects which they have never 
implemented before. The smaller cities under the Mission were slow to start but most of 
them, have accelerated the project implementation and matching the project completion 
with the bigger cities.  
  
SCM, MoHUA has also undertaken an initiative of assessing the impact of its projects 
in 100 smart cities through 50 theme-based impact assessment research studies 
undertaken by 29 institutes of national repute that includes salient IITs, IIMs and others. 
As per the recommendations of the Hon’ble Standing Committee, Ministry will identify 
more city specific challenges and reasons of slow progress in various size class cities. 
The study is also expected to suggest on how these smaller cities can further enhance 
their capabilities. The study is currently under way towards the finalization stage. 
 
In spite of various reasons of slow progress beyond control of the mission and midway 
disruptions due to pandemic, SCM was able to register substantial progress.As on 15 
June 2024, all 8,010 projects undertaken in the Mission, worth around ₹ 1,64,064 crore 
have been work ordered; of which 7,151 projects (90% of total projects) worth ₹ 
1,43,601 crore (88% by value) have been completed. The balance ongoing projects too 
are in advanced stage of implementation. As on 12th June 2024, under SCM, ₹ 86,281 
crore has been released; of which ₹ 78,752 crore (91%) has been utilized." 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No. H-15012/10/2024-SC.I  
dated 3rd July, 2024] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.16 of the Report) 
 
 

23 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 11) 
Need for Central Government to assist State Governments and Cities so as to strengthen 
their organizational and financial structures to make them capable of tapping economic 
potential of cities  
2.13  The Committee had recommended as under: 
“The Committee feel that most of the large and relatively developed Smart Cities have 
performed better in attracting and utilizing the funds under the Mission including 
through Convergence, PPP and Loans. However, smaller Smart Cities, particularly, 
from north-eastern States and the UTs have found it difficult to attract and utilize funds 
other than those received from the Central and State Government. 
  
The Committee are of the view that all the cities, large or small, possess huge untapped 
economic potential which should be leveraged to create wealth and economic 
opportunities for all. Greater efforts therefore are required, particularly, from State 
governments and Cities to mobilize funds. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Central Government must assist State Governments and Cities which are in dire need of 
organisational restructuring, training and capacity building of their personnel on 
strategic governance and financing systems so that they can tap economic potential of a 
city through innovative finance mechanisms such as municipal bonds with credit rating 
of ULBs, Pooled Finance Mechanism, Tax Increment Financing (TIF), etc.” 
 
2.14 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"Government of India launched Smart Cities Mission on 25thJune 2015 with an 
objective to promote cities that provide core infrastructure, clean and sustainable 
environment and give a decent quality of life to their citizens through the application of 
‘smart solutions’.  
  
Government had committed financial support to SCM to the extent of Rs.48000 Crore 
over the Mission period i.e. on an average of Rs.500 crore per city over the Mission 
period. Almost equal amount of matching share is being provided by State Government/ 
ULB except NE States, where the formula for contribution is 90:10. Smart Cities ULBs/ 
SPV/ State Government were encouraged to generate additional funds from other 
internal/ external sources. Smart Cities have also accessed funds from other sources like 
convergence, PPP, municipal bonds, loans, external multi-lateral aids etc. Nine Smart 
Cities have also raised revenue more than Rs.2000 Cr through municipal bonds.  
  
These 100 cities are implementing approximately 8,000 multi-sectoral projects worth 
approx. ₹ 1.67 lakh crore, of which 203 projects worth more than ₹ 10,400 crore are 

24 
 
being developed in Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode. In the financial year 2023-
24, 20 PPP projects worth ₹ 1,002 crore were completed. These projects belong to 
diverse urban sector such as Affordable Housing, Public Bicycle Sharing, Energy 
efficient LED street lighting, Park development, smart parking tower, etc.  
  
Recommendations of the Hon’ble Standing Committee has been noted for required 
compliances in forthcoming Missions. Despite numerous challenges, As on 15th June 
2024, all 8,010 projects undertaken in the Mission, worth around ₹ 1,64,064 crore have 
been work ordered; of which 7,151 projects (90% of total projects) worth ₹ 1,43,601 
crore (88% by value) have been completed. The balance ongoing projects too are in 
advanced stage of implementation. As on 12th June 2024, under SCM, ₹ 86,281 crore 
has been released; of which ₹ 78,752 crore (91%) has been utilized." 
 
 [Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No. H-15012/10/2024-SC.I  
dated 3rd July, 2024] 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 12) 
Central Government asked to put in place a robust mechanism to ensure coordination with 
other related government schemes for smooth and harmonized monitoring of smart cities 
projects undertaken through Convergence 
2.15  The Committee had recommended as under: 
"Convergence is one of the most important principles of the Smart Cities Mission under 
which funds of several other national schemes are being converged for Smart City 
projects so as to optimize costs, create integrated solutions, improve sustainability and 
bring about maximization of citizen benefit. However, delay has been witnessed in 
Convergence projects owing to involvement of executing agency other than Smart City 
or non-defined role of SPVs in implementation of Convergence projects. The 
Committee are of the view that the Ministry, in all its Schemes where convergence of 
various schemes is proposed, should put in place a robust mechanism to ensure 
coordination with other Government schemes for smooth and harmonized monitoring, 
preferably at District Collector level. This will bring about positive convergence and 
ward off duplication and wastage of resources." 
 
2.16 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
"Smart city SPVs were created as part of the Mission to enable quick decision making 
and fast implementation of projects.  Benefits of the SPV can be gauged from the fact 
that even smaller cities, which hitherto used to lag the bigger cities in project 

25 
 
implementation, have performed at par as far as the implementation of smart city 
projects are concerned. The SPVs have not limited their planning role to projects 
undertaken from Mission funds, but have successfully leveraged other sources of funds, 
both public and private, to create holistic, integrated solutions for the city. While doing 
so, they have had to create working relationships with other State agencies. In some 
cases, few works have been assigned to State agencies to leverage their experience and 
strengths to complete such projects expeditiously. However, in few cases, as pointed out 
by the Hon’ble Committee, coordination has been a challenge in some such works.  
MoHUA, realizing the importance of cross-agency coordination for smart city 
development is working to suggest changes in governance of SPVs to States i.e. Board 
of Directors, AoA, Rules of Business so that they can forge better inter-departmental 
coordination. This will help avoid ward level duplication and wastage of resources. The 
proposed Rules of Business for SPV would also have defined roles of SPVs in 
implementation of project under convergence as recommended by Hon’ble Standing 
Committee.  
In order to further investigate the relevance of convergence projects in city 
development, SCM under SAAR-Sameeksha Series of impact assessment studies by 
institutes of national repute has taken up research topic no. 26, i.e., “Whether 
convergence of projects in SCM resulted in appropriate outcomes?”  The Report is 
under finalization. The study is expected to be useful for the forthcoming urban 
Missions. Recommendations of the Hon’ble Standing Committee has been noted for 
required compliances in forthcoming missions.” 
 
 [Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No. H-15012/10/2024-SC.I 
dated 3rd dated July, 2024] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.19 of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 13) 
Expected funds could not be generated through Public Private Partnership (PPP) 
2.17  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
“Investments worth Rs.2,05,018 crore have been proposed in 100 Smart Cities as a part 
of their smart city plans. Out of the total proposed investment of Rs. 41,022 crore, i.e., 
21% funds were envisaged from Public-Private Partnership (PPP). 
  
However, half of the Smart Cities could not undertake any project under PPP model. 
Out of 7970 projects worth of Rs.170,400 crore, cities have taken up 207 projects worth 
Rs.10,794 crore only which is 6% of their total cost under PPP. The Committee are of 

26 
 
the view that public sector alone cannot act as the driving engine for infrastructural 
growth of cities. It is essential for government at every level to attract and involve 
private player/sector as private sector not only infuses funds but also provides the state 
of the art technology. Further, the Government should analyze the reasons of not 
harvesting the benefit of PPP by remaining cities and required remedial measures 
should be introduced.” 
 
2.18 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“The 100 smart cities are implementing approximately 8,000 multi-sectoral projects 
worth approx. ₹ 1.67 lakh crore, of which 203 projects worth more than ₹ 10,400 crore 
are being developed in Public Private Partnership (PPP) mode. These PPP projects 
being developed in the Mission are significant, for two reasons. Firstly, these PPP 
projects are across a wide geography of more than 50 cities. These include both big and 
small cities. Secondly, these PPP projects are multi-sectoral urban projects and many of 
these projects are with non-land based concessions. These projects are a good stepping 
point, showing private investments in different type of projects which will be a 
reference for other cities.  In the financial year 2023-24, 20 PPP projects worth ₹ 1,002 
crore were completed. These projects belong to diverse sectors such as Affordable 
Housing, Public Bicycle Sharing, energy efficient LED street lighting, park 
development, smart parking, etc.  
 
While many of the cities in their approved Smart City Proposals had proposed and taken 
up much more projects under PPP, their revenue models and revenue estimates could 
not be firmly grounded due to onset of unprecedented Covid pandemic and subsequent 
lockdowns in Jan 2020 onwards. Besides, capacity issues have also played their part in 
the smaller cities. 
 
MoHUA has however taken note of the Hon’ble Standing Committee recommendation 
and would strive to leverage the potential of private players in terms of both financing 
& infusion of state of art technologies through its various Missions like HFA, SBM, 
AMRUT including SCM." 
 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No. H-15012/10/2024-SC.I 
dated 3rd July, 2024] 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 14) 
 
Need for change in the outlook of the Ministry 
 

27 
 
2.19  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
“The Committee have been apprised that 400 projects worth Rs.22,814 crore may take 
longer time for completion beyond December, 2023. The Mission has been extended 
upto June, 2024 for completion of these projects. The Ministry has stated before the 
Committee that in case of non-completion of these projects within the extended time 
frame, the concerned State governments will be responsible, and they will have to 
complete those incomplete projects at their own cost. In this connection, the Committee 
are of the strong opinion that the Ministry’s role should not be confined to transfer of 
their share regarding Mission/scheme/project, but they have to remain watchful for the 
execution and successful completion of the projects. Thus, in respect of States which are 
continuously lagging behind, the Ministry needs to intervene timely to handhold them 
and facilitates with required inputs and expertise. The Committee would like to know 
the steps taken in the matter and the progress made regarding completion of 400 
pending projects.” 
 
2.20 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“Smart Cities Mission is currently extended till June 2024. A few projects are expected 
to overshoot the deadline of June 2024.  
 
 SCM Directorate, MoHUA under the Joint Secretary & Mission Director is keeping a 
close watch on physical & financial progress and monitoring progress of projects on a 
daily/ weekly basis. These weekly meetings are scheduled with CEO/ Municipal 
Commissioners of the respective cities. Hon’ble Minister of Housing & Urban Affairs, 
Government of India and Secretary, MoHUA have also intervened and reviewed 
progress from time to time.  
 
Despite numerous challenges substantive progress has been registered. Currently As on 
15 June 2024, all 8,010 projects undertaken in the Mission, worth around ₹ 1,64,064 
crore have been work ordered; of which 7,151 projects (90% of total projects) worth ₹ 
1,43,601 crore (88% by value) have been completed. The balance ongoing projects too 
are in advanced stage of implementation. As on 12th June 2024, under SCM, ₹ 86,281 
crore has been released; of which ₹ 78,752 crore (91%) has been utilized. 
Recommendations of the Hon’ble Standing Committee have been noted for required 
compliances in future programs.” 
 
 
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No. H-15012/10/2024-SC.I 
dated 3rd July, 2024] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.22 of the Report) 
 
*** 

28 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE 
IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 6) 
Greater need for Pan City projects focusing on implementing technology-driven solutions 
across the entire city for ensuring comprehensive and holistic development  
3.1  The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The strategic components of Smart Cities Mission comprise Area-Based Development 
(ABD) projects and Pan-city initiative. Area Based Development (ABD) projects with 
focus on improving specific areas or neighborhoods within a city, typically targeting 
physical infrastructure development, such as transportation, housing, and public spaces 
are important for revitalizing specific areas and addressing local challenges. Pan city 
projects address common challenges faced by all the city residents, such as traffic 
management, waste management, sewerage system, drinking water supply system and 
energy efficiency. 
  
The Committee observe that that as on December 2023, out of 7,970 smart city projects 
worth Rs.1,70,400 crore under implementation, 4,740 projects worth Rs.95,400 crore 
are ABD projects and 3,230 projects worth Rs.75,000 crore are pan city projects. 
Further, pan-city projects do not comprise more than 50 percent of total projects in 76 
out of 100 smart cities. The Committee are of the view that Smart Cities Mission should 
put greater emphasis on Pan City projects focusing on implementing technology-driven 
solutions across the entire city for ensuring comprehensive and holistic development. 
By implementing smart solutions at a citywide level, the cities may optimize resource 
allocation, reduce wastage, and enhance overall efficiency which leads to cost savings, 
environmental sustainability, and improved quality of life for residents. Further, by 
leveraging technology and innovation across the entire city, India can achieve 
sustainable, citizen-centric urban development that serves as a Benchmark for Future 
Cities. The Committee, therefore, desire that adequate emphasis should also be given to 
Pan City Development in order to ensure comprehensive and holistic development of a 
city.” 
 
3.2 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“Smart Cities Mission strategic components includes Area-based development (ABD) 
and Pan city initiative. Under ABD component, three models of area development - city 
improvement (retrofitting), city renewal (redevelopment) and city extension (green field 

29 
 
development) were considered. Over and above ABD, all smart cities have chosen Pan-
city initiatives focused on technology based smart solutions that are applied covering 
larger parts of the city.  
  
The Smart City Proposal (SCP) prepared by each of the shortlisted cities was expected 
to encapsulate either a retrofitting or redevelopment or green field development model, 
or a mix thereof and a Pan-city feature with smart solution(s). It is important to note that 
having at least one pan-city solution is a mandatory feature to be provided for in the 
SCP. Since Smart City is taking a compact area approach, it is necessary that all the city 
residents feel there is something in it for them also. Therefore, the additional 
requirement of some (at least one) city-wide smart solutions has been made mandatory 
to make the Mission more inclusive. 
  
Smart cities are like ‘lighthouses’ that act as models for other cities. Some of the 
landmark technology focused projects like ICCC (that acts as the brain and nervous 
system of the city) has been implemented in all smart cities. As regards Hon’ble 
Standing Committee recommendation on developing benchmark for future cities, SCM 
has developed following key publications, details of the same is given below: 
i. Smart Cities Mission – Localizing Sustainable Development Goals, UN 
Habitat  
Release Date: 27 September 2023  
Description: UN Habitat authored a report on Smart Cities Mission 
showcasing the Mission’s contribution towards the localization of the 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in 100 Indian smart cities. It 
quantified mission contribution towards 15 of the 17 SDGs.  
Link: https://smartcities.gov.in/sites/default/files/2023-
09/SCM_UN_Report%20.pdf   
ii. Smart Cities Mission: Compendium of Best Practices  
Release Date: 27 September 2023  
Description: Authored the compendium presenting case studies of the award-
winning projects of the India Smart Cities Awards Contest (ISAC) 2022. It 
consisted of a comprehensive collection of breakthrough ideas, successful 
initiatives, and transformative projects from the 100 smart cites.  
Link: https://smartcities.gov.in/sites/default/files/2023-
09/Compendium%20of%20Best%20Practices_book_web_version_1.pdf 
  

30 
 
iii. 75+ Case studies of innovative projects implemented under Smart Cities 
Mission (Vol-I, II and III)  
Release Date: 20 March 202  
Description: Published in three volumes, these compendium of innovative 
urban projects documents the projects implemented under the Smart Cities 
Program. Released in the National Youth Conclave at Vigyan Bhawan, I 
helped collate all the 75+ research case studies.   
Link:  
Vol I – Urban Infrastructure: https://smartcities.gov.in/sites/default/files/2023-
06/Part%20A-UM.pdf,  
Vol II – Climate change & management: 
https://smartcities.gov.in/sites/default/files/2023-06/PartB-
Climate%20Change%20and%20RC.pdf,  
Vol III – Urban Management: 
https://smartcities.gov.in/sites/default/files/2023-06/PartC-UI.pdf  
   
iv.      Streets for People: Pathways for Change for India’s Smart Cities  
Release Date: 03 January 2024 
Description: The publication showcases 50 inspiring case studies of street 
transformation projects from various smart cities across the country. They 
represent a holistic approach to urban revitalisation, encompassing 
accessibility, sustainability, and community engagement.  
Link: https://smartcities.gov.in/sites/default/files/2024-
03/Street%20Compendium%202023.pdf  ." 
  
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No. H-15012/10/2024-SC.I 
dated 3rd July, 2024] 
Recommendation (Serial No. 8) 
Ensure protection of the right to privacy and to prevent surveillance and misuse of data  
3.3  The Committee had recommended as under: 
"The Committee appreciate the steps taken under SCM for digital infrastructure such as 
Integrated Command and Control Centers (ICCCs), Adaptive Traffic Control System 
(ATCS), Red Light Violation Detection (RLVD), Automatic Number Plate Recognition 
System (ANPR), Digital Assets for Solid Waste & wastewater Management and water 
distribution Management, Smart Education and Smart Health systems and facilities, 
Mobile applications of various kinds, Optical Fiber networks, CCTV surveillance 

31 
 
systems, Early warning and disaster response systems, etc. However, the same is 
expected to generate and use large volumes of data from these varied digital sources 
which necessitates putting in place a mechanism to protect digital infrastructure and 
smart solutions from cyber-terror/ theft/threat and to maintain sensitivity/privacy of 
data. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a robust system should be put in place 
to protect digital platforms from cyber-attack and to ensure that sensitive public and 
private data is adequately protected and safeguarded. 
  
The Committee have been informed that MoHUA has taken several steps to protect 
digital infrastructure and smart solutions under SCM from cyber-terror theft, etc., 
which, inter alia, includes ‘Model Framework for cyber security’ in 2016, ‘Model RFP 
2.0’ in 2021, pilot Cyber security assessment in 5 cities by STQC (Standard Testing and 
Quality Control) directorate, ICCC Maturity Assessment Framework etc. Similarly, it 
has been apprised that in order to instill capacities in the Smart Cities to better leverage, 
manage, use and share data from varied sources and put in place ‘systems’ to maintain 
sensitivity of privacy of data, MoHUA has launched the Data Smart Cities (DSC) 
Initiative across 100 Smart Cities using a three-pronged approach – People, Process, 
Platform and institutionalizing Data Ecosystem in cities through appointment of 100 
City Data Officers and Data teams (People) along with Data Policy frameworks and 
guidelines (Processes). The Committee desire to be apprised of the status of 
appointment of City Data Officers and Data teams and the city-wise implementation 
status of Data Policy frameworks and guidelines (Processes).” 
 
3.4 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“To harness the wealth of data generated within cities by intelligent devices and 
systems, the Smart Cities Mission under MoHUA introduced the Data Smart Cities 
(DSC) Initiative in 100 Smart Cities. The DSC employs a comprehensive approach 
focusing on People, Process, and Platform to cultivate a culture of data awareness and 
utilization in urban operations. The program formalizes a Data Ecosystem within cities 
by appointing 100 City Data Officers and establishing dedicated Data Teams (People), 
supported by robust Data Policy frameworks and guidelines (Processes). These City 
Data Offices undergo regular capacity-building exercises on urban data management 
practices. Additionally, the Smart Cities Mission has developed a reference guide to 
assist cities in crafting their own City Data Policies, emphasizing Data Categorization 
and Classification to safeguard sensitive public and private data effectively. The Smart 
Cities have appointed City Data Officers and they along with respective data teams are 
working to develop, enhance, and implement the city data policies post approval from 
competent city level authorities. 
  
Furthermore, the Mission conducts annual assessments of Data Maturity in cities across 
key components including Policy, People, Process, Technology, and Outcomes. These 

32 
 
initiatives have enhanced the capabilities of Smart Cities to leverage, manage, utilize, 
and share data from diverse sources while maintaining the privacy sensitivity of data.  
  
Furthermore, several steps have been taken to ensure protection and misuse of data 
within the Smart Cities Mission (SCM) from various cyber threats like theft and 
terrorism. In addition to releasing a ‘Model Framework for cyber security’ followed by 
‘Model RFP 1.0’ in 2016 and ‘Model RFP 2.0’ in 2021 to provide cities with direction 
on the precise elements on integrating cyber security measures and conducting a pilot 
Cyber security assessment conducted in five cities by the STQC Directorate, the 
following steps have been taken: 
1. Cyber security assessment for all 100 cities by STQC (Standard Testing and 
Quality Control) directorate, Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology 
(MeitY) is underway. The assessment shall be carried out in two iterations based on 
which certain gaps that are identified shall be addressed across the smart cities. The 
assessment encompasses the following 4 pillars: 
a. End Point Security 
b. Trusted Electronics Value Chain Certification Scheme (TEVCCS) 
c. Vulnerability Assessment/ Penetration Testing (VA/PT) 
d. Process Audit (PA) 
2. The learnings from the cyber security audit have been circulated in form of an 
advisory to all 100 Smart Cities. Capacity building of cities through multiple 
meetings and two online conferences were conducted in the month of Feb’24 and 
May’24 have been carried out. The Mission is also working with cities to take 
necessary corrective actions in this regard and has asked all cities to submit their 
compliance report on cyber security based on the output of the first iteration of the 
audit. 
3. Additionally, the Mission has engaged with industry experts to create a Cyber 
security E-learning module to equip the cities with an updated knowledge toolkit. 
  
In addition to above, MoHUA constantly engages with cities and shares the best 
practices through workshops, online meetings, webinars, conferences etc. with an 
objective to make the digital infrastructure highly secure in the cities to protect the 
right to privacy and prevent misuse of data." 
  
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No. H-15012/10/2024-SC.I 
dated 3rd July, 2024] 
 
*** 

33 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation (Serial No. 5) 
Need for deeper engagement of public representatives in execution of Smart Cities Mission  
4.1  The Committee had recommended as under: 
"Smart Cities Mission Guidelines provide for a structured mechanism for consultation 
with the public representatives through Smart City Advisory Forum (SCAF) which 
includes MP, MLA, Mayor, District Collector, CEO of SPV and others. However, the 
Committee are constrained to note that meetings of SCAF were not conducted in many 
smart cities regularly. The meetings took place in the range of 01 to 08 in these five 
years and extended tenure upto September 2023. Further, in Amravati and Imphal, no 
meeting took place. Thus, the majority of the Smart Cities failed to leverage the 
expertise and grass root connection of Members of Parliament and other 
representatives/experts by not convening the meetings of Smart City Advisory Forum 
(SCAF) regularly. The Committee further note that Members of Parliament have not 
been placed in State level Advisory body. These have resulted in delay in completion 
and changing/dropping of many projects across various Smart Cities. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Members of Parliament, being public representatives and 
having grass-root level expertise must be the member of advisory committee, not only at 
city level but at State level too. Prior consultation with the Members of Parliament be 
made in identification, selection and implementation of projects for augmenting the 
viability of the projects and eliminating unnecessary hurdles. Further, the SCAF 
meetings should be held regularly, either quarterly/bi-annually. This will give MPs 
sufficient time to review the proposals, gather inputs from their constituents and prepare 
for meaningful discussions during the meetings.” 
 
4.2 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
 
“According to SCM Guidelines Clause No. 13.3 under ‘Mission Monitoring’ section at 
city level a Smart City Advisory Forum (SCAF) has been established in all 100 smart 
cities to advise and enable collaboration among various stakeholders. The SCAF 
includes the District Collector, MP, MLA, Mayor, CEO of SPV, local youth, technical 
experts, and at least one member from the area who is either a,  
i. President / secretary representing registered Residents Welfare Association,  

34 
 
ii. Member of registered Taxpayers Association / Rate Payers Association,  
iii. President / Secretary of slum level federation, and  
iv. Members of a Non-Governmental Organization (NGO) or Mahila Mandali / 
Chamber of Commerce / Youth Associations.  
The CEO of the SPV is the convener of the SCAF. Hon’ble Standing Committee 
recommendation to leverage the expertise and grass root level connection of Members 
of Parliament (MPs) and other public representatives is crucial in the larger spirit of the 
Mission and has been duly incorporated. MoHUA would ensure that regular meetings of 
SCAF are convened as per guidelines, and all representatives are duly invited for the 
same in advance." 
  
[Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, Government of India, O.M. No. H-15012/10/2024-SC.I 
dated 3rd July, 2024] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.10 of the Report) 
 
 
*** 

35 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation (Serial No. 4) 
Need to launch next phase of Smart Cities Mission covering larger number of cities and 
areas and utilizing experience and expertise of Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) for the 
purpose. 
5.1  The Committee had recommended in their original Report as under: 
“The Committee have been apprised that many SPVs such as Surat, Indore, 
Visakhapatnam etc. are generating revenue from the projects developed by them, which 
may complement their financial sustenance. Post completion of the Mission, the 
respective State Governments may decide on the utilization of the experience and 
expertise of the SPVs in Urban development initiatives in the respective States/UTs. It 
has also been informed that MoHUA is in the process of evaluating these SPVs and 
framing guidelines in this regard. The Committee feel that majority of Indian cities are 
at a low level of development where city planning and governance need to be 
strengthened. The Committee note that 500 cities are covered under AMRUT Scheme 
and 4041 ULBs under DAY-NULM and, therefore, the Smart Cities Mission like 
structure, after completion of SCM, may be useful for them, too. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should get the third-party assessment of the 
various projects undertaken in the Smart Cities Mission and thereafter, consider to 
launch next phase of the Mission. 
  
Further, the Committee are of the opinion that the experience and expertise gained by 
the SPVs in Urban development initiatives must be leveraged and possibility should be 
explored for utilizing their expertise in other projects, such as AMRUT, DAY-NULM 
etc. undertaken for the growth and development of cities and sub-urban areas/satellite 
towns/growth centres around the city or elsewhere. 
  
The Committee also intends to emphasize that in the next phase of the Smart Cities 
Mission, thrust should be on tier 2 cities, located between 50 to 100 kilometers from 
capital cities and tourist cities, if not already covered. This will not only de-congest the 
capital cities but also act as a fillip factor for tier 3 cities for their growth.” 
 
 
 

36 
 
5.2 In their written reply, the Ministry have stated as follows: 
"The Hon’ble Standing Committee has rightly noted the need to strengthen the planning 
and governance in majority of the Indian cities. As a matter of fact, 66 of the 100 
selected cities in Smart Cities Mission have population less than 10 lakhs. Further 46 
cities have population less than 5 lakhs. These smaller cities have lesser planning and 
implementation capacities. The Smart Cities Mission guidelines which adopted the 
Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) model of implementation have helped these cities in 
particular to implement multi-sectoral projects within a limited time frame. We have 
noticed that the projects undertaken by the smaller cities are equally diverse and 
challenging. Further, the project completion in smaller cities is almost equal to the 
bigger cities. This allows us to infer that the SPV structure has improved planning and 
implementation in the Smart Cities and can act as a model for other cities.   
 
Established under the Company’s Act 2013, SPVs were set up in each of the 100 smart 
cities to plan, appraise, approve, release funds, implement, manage, operate, and 
monitor smart city projects. –These SPVs have the funds, autonomy, and talent to 
deliver complex urban development projects. All 100 smart cities (including big and 
small cities) are extensively using emerging technologies in urban management. This is 
revolutionizing urban development and management, and smart cities have proved to be 
the vanguards of this change. Over the course of the Smart Cities Mission, many SPVs 
have catalyzed urban data, technology, and innovation ecosystems that will further 
mature over time.  
 
We agree with the suggestion of the Hon’ble Standing Committee that these Smart City 
SPVs must be leveraged for their expertise gained in project planning & implementation 
to other Missions of the MoHUA like AMRUT, DAY-NULM etc. in their respective 
cities. MoHUA is in the process to finalize a guideline for these SPVs with 
“Recommendations on Future of Smart City SPVs”. 
 

37 
 
The emphasis of the Hon’ble Standing Committee for inclusion of more tier 2 cities 
(located between 50 to 100 km from the capital and tourist cities) has been duly noted 
for future programs." 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 1.7 of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy  
              New Delhi;                                                                                                   Chairperson                                                                                         
              05th December, 2024        Standing Committee on Housing                                             
14 Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)                                              and Urban Affairs 
 
  

38 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
 
 
Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs 
held on Thursday, 05 December, 2024 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1600 hours in Committee Room C, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi on 05 December, 2024. 
 
PRESENT 
 Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy        -        Chairperson 
Members 
Lok Sabha  
2.  Smt Lovely Anand 
3. Shri Satpal Brahamchari 
4. Shri Hibi Eden 
5. Shri Selvam G. 
6. Ms. Sayani Ghosh 
7. Shri Shankar Lalwani 
8. Smt. Mahima Kumari Mewar 
9. Shri Rambhual Nishad 
10. Shri Sanjay Dina Patil 
11. Dr. Gumma Thanuja Rani 
12. Shri Chamala Kiran Kumar Reddy 
13. Smt. Mala Rajya Laxmi Shah 
14. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
15. Shri Ravindra Dattaram Waikar 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
16. Shri R. Girirajan  
17. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla  
18. Smt. Maya Naroliya 
19. Shri Debashish Samantaray 
20. Shri A. A. Rahim 

39 
 
   
Secretariat 
1. Shri Y.M. Kandpal                  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Archna Pathania       Director 
3. Smt. Swati Parwal Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Standing 
Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs to the sitting of the Committee. 
3. * * * * * * * * * * * * 
 * * * * * * * * * * * * 
* * * * * * * * * * * * 
4. The Committee, thereafter took up for consideration the Draft Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Twenty First Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs 
(2023-24) on the subject ‘Smart Cities Mission: An Evaluation’ and adopted the same 
without any modifications. 
* matter not related with the report 
   The Committee then adjourned.  
***** 
  

40 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
[Vide para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF THE ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY FIRST 
REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOUSING AND URBAN AFFAIRS 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
I.  Total number of recommendations                         14 
 
II. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted  
by the Government:                                                                              10   
   
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 
Percentage to total recommendations                                               (71.42 %)                                     
          
 
III. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not  
desire to pursue in view of Government’s replies:                             02 
Recommendation Nos. 6, 8 
Percentage to total recommendations                                                (14. 28 %)                 
             
IV. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of             
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee:            01 
Recommendation Nos. 5   
Percentage to total recommendations                                                (07.14%) 
 
V.         Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final     
replies of the Government are still awaited:                                       01 
Recommendation No.  4    
Percentage to total recommendations                                             (07.14%) 
 