 
11 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURES 
(2008-2009) 
                 
         
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
 
 
INTER LINKING OF RIVERS 
         
         
         
ELEVENTH REPORT 
  
 
         
            
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
OCTOBER, 2008/ASVINA, 1930 (Saka) 
         

   
 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2008-2009) 
          
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
                 
         
INTER LINKING OF RIVERS  
  
         
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.10.2008 
     
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.10.2008 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
         
OCTOBER, 2008/ASVINA, 1930 (Saka) 

   
 
 
WRC No.  15 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
         
        © 2008 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha  (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   
 
 
  Page No.(s) 
 
 CONTENTS   
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2008-2009)  
 
 ABBREVIATIONS 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
(v) 
 
(vii) 
 
PART – I 
 
REPORT 
   
Chapter –I Introductory 
 
1 
Chapter – II Role of National Water Development Agency 
 
6 
 - Work done by NWDA     
- Efforts for consensus on link proposals   
- Intra State Links     
- International Dimensions   
 
7 
9 
12 
14 
Chapter – III  Task Force on ILR 
 
16 
Chapter – IV Economics of ILR 
 
24 
 - Cost and Funding of Project  
- Study by NCAER on ILR 
- Rationalisation of Water Use/Water Use Charges 
 
24 
25 
27 
Chapter – V Constitutional Set up and ILR  
 
28 
Chapter – VI    Committee of Environmentalists, Social Scientists and 
other experts on ILR 
 
32 
Chapter – VII Suggestions / opinions of  experts / individuals / 
organizations 
 
35 
 - Integrated authority for ILR/National Water Grid 
- Problem of deforestation, displacement and  
   rehabilitation 
- Global Climate Change and Inter Linking of Rivers 
- Flood Control  
- Maintenance Issues 
- Alternate proposals from individuals 
- Views of State Governments on Inter Linking of Rivers 
 
36 
37 
 
38 
40 
40 
41 
42 

   
 
PART – II 
 
 
     OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS                                                         47  
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
Appendix – I 
 
Proposed Inter-Basin Water Transfer Links under the  
Peninsular Component. 
   
61 
Appendix – II 
 
 
Proposed Inter-Basin Water Transfer Links under the  
Himalayan Component. 
   
62 
Appendix – III 
 
 
Details of the links having International Dimensions 
 
63 
Appendix – IV 
 
 
Composition of Working/Study Groups of Task Force 64 
Appendix-V 
 
 
 
Composition of Committee of Environmentalists, Social  
Scientists and other Experts and terms of reference. 
67 
Appendix-VI 
 
 
 
List of individuals/experts/NGOs invited by Committee  
to give their views. 
69 
Appendix-VII 
 
 
 
Brief of some proposals / suggestions by individuals/NGOs  
on ILR along with observations of Ministry of Water Resources 
 
71 
Appendix– VIII 
 
Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on “Inter Linking of 
Rivers”.  
 
79 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON WATER RESOURCES (2008-2009) 
 
 
  Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao  -  Chairman 
 
          MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.        Shri Bhanwar Singh Dangawas 
3.        Shri Bikram Keshari Deo 
4.        Shri Rajen Gohain 
         5. Shri Prakash B. Jadhav 
6.  Smt. Preneet Kaur 
7. Shri Raghuveer Singh Kaushal  
             8. Shri Shankhlal Majhi 
9.       Shri Abu Ayes Mondal 
       10.        Shri Lonappan Nambadan 
11.        Shri Harilal Madhavji Bhai Patel 
             12.        Shri Vishnu Deo Sai 
13.        Dr. Arun Kumar Sarma 
14.        Smt. Minati Sen 
15.        Shri Harihar Swain 
            *16.     Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
          **21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22.        Chowdhary Mohammad Aslam   
             23. Shri Ajay Singh Chautala    
24. Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
   25.        Shri K.E. Ismail 
           26. Prof. P.J. Kurien   
27. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
28. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
29. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley 
30. Shri Sharad Yadav 
31. Vacant 
 
 
* Nominated w.e.f. 26.08.2008 
** Smt. Manorama Madhavraj, MP, Lok Sabha resigned w.e.f. 20.10.2008 
 

   
 
SECRETARIAT 
   
1. Shri N.K. Sapra  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P.K. Grover  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri C.S.Joon  - Director 
4. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Deputy Secretary  
    5. Shri A.K. Yadav  - Committee Officer 
   
 
 
 

   
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
AIBP   -  Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme 
CWC   -  Central Water Commission 
DPR   -  Detailed Project Report 
EIA   -  Environment Impact Assessment 
FR   -  Feasibility Report 
IIM   -  Indian Institute of Management 
ILR   -  Inter Linking of Rivers 
IWRFC  -  Irrigation and Water Resource Finance Corporation 
MoEF   -  Ministry of Environment & Forests 
NAILR  -  National Authority for Inter-Linking of Rivers 
NBWL   -  National Board for Wild Life 
NCAER  -  National Council of Applied Economic Research 
NCMP   -  National Common Minimum Programme 
NPP   -  National Perspective Plan 
NRWDC  -  National River Water Development Council 
NWDA  -  National water Development Agency 
PFR   -  Pre Feasibility Report 
TAC   -  Technical Advisory Committee 
TF   -  Task Force 
ToR   -  Terms of Reference 

   
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committ ee on Water Resources (2008-2009) having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this 
Eleventh Report on “Inter-Linking of Rivers.” 
2. The Committee (2004-2005) took up the subj ect “Inter-Linking of Rivers” for a 
detailed and indepth study.  The Committee wa s briefed by the representatives of the 
Ministry  of  Water  Resources  on various aspects of the subject at their sitting held on 
25 January 2005.  The Committee came across, before and after the selection of the 
subject, divergent views being expressed in different fora by eminent persons and groups 
on varied considerations both in the print a nd other media as well as during the informal 
interactions the Committee had with the representatives of State Governments of 
Maharashtra, Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh.  The Committee while keeping in 
view the above, decided to i nvite comments/Memoranda from 
individuals/associations/NGOs/experts interested in the subject by issue of a Press 
Communiqué and by giving wide publicity on All India Radio/Doordarshan in June, 
2005.   
3. In response to these efforts, 969 Memo randa/letters containing views/suggestions 
etc. were received.  Of these 81 Memoranda (52 in favour and 29 against) were found to 
be worth consideration by the Committee.  The Committee short listed 32 
individuals/NGOs/experts to appear as non-official witnesses before the Committee.  The 
Committee took evidence of these Individuals /Experts and the representatives of NGOs 
etc. in 12 sittings spread over from January 2006 to September 2007.  The list of 
individuals / experts who appeared before  the Committee and offered their views/ 
suggestions on the subject is given at Appendix-VI of this Report.   

   
 
 The Committee took oral evidence of the repr esentatives of the Ministry of Water 
Resources, Central Water Commission and National Water Development Agency at their 
sitting held on 12 April 2008. 
4. The Committee at their sitting held on 20 October 2008 considered and adopted 
the Report.   
5. The Committee were also benefited from the views/suggestions of 
individuals/NGOs etc. and express their thanks  to all of them who furnished Memoranda 
and tendered evidence before the Committee as referred to in para 3. 
6. The Committee wish to express their tha nks to the officers of the Ministry of 
Water Resources, Central Water Commission and National Water Development Agency 
who appeared before the Committee and placed their considered views. They also wish to 
thank the Ministry for furnishing the requisite material on the points raised by the 
Committee in connection with the examination of the subject. 
7. The Committee would like to place on record their sense of deep appreciation for 
the invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat 
attached to the Committee. 
 
 
NEW DELHI               R. SAMBASIVA RAO, 
20 October, 2008                                Chairman, 
28 Asvina, 1930(Saka)                  Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   
 
PART-I 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER-I  
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
 
 Water is the basic human need and a prime natural resource.  While the 
endowment of Water Resources in the country may apparently appear abundant, there are 
wide variations in the availability of fresh water over space and time.  While nearly 60% 
of the potential is available in the Ganga-B rahmaputra-Meghna system in the North and 
about 11% in the high rainfall region of the Western Ghats, hardly about 29% of the 
potential is available in all the other rive rs, including Mahanadi, Godavari, Krishna & 
Cauvery of the Peninsular region.  Due to th is, some parts of the country suffer from 
floods and at the same time other areas face severe drought.  The Project of Inter Linking 
of Rivers was thought of as an idea in equitable distribution and optimum utilisation of 
water from surplus river basin areas to defic it river basin areas in the country.  Also, the 
country’s food grain requirement is likely to be doubled by the year 2050 to meet the 
food requirement of our teeming populati on.  The abundance of water during flood 
season at some places and severe water scarcity in the form of recurring droughts at some 
other places necessitated the consideration of  a long distance inter-basin water transfer 
project by linking the rivers which is one of the attractive and meaningful option to ease 
out national imbalances in availability of wate r in water scarcity areas as also increase 
irrigated area thereby mitigating the ill effects of floods and droughts. 
1.2 The long distance inter basin transfer of water, however, is not a new concept and 
has been in practice in India for over fi ve centuries.  The Periyar Project, the 
Parambikulam Aliyar Project, Kurnool - Cudappah Canal & The Telugu Ganga Project 

   
 
are some of the good examples of inter basin water transfers executed in south India in 
the 19th & 20 th centuries.  Similarly, in the North India, inter sub-basin transfers in the 
Indus basin and Indira Gandhi Nahar Priyoj ana are some of the projects successfully 
executed.  Another important inter basin wa ter transfer scheme in the country under 
execution is the Sardar Sarovar Project.  A note on the National Water Grid was earlier 
prepared by the then Central Water & Power Commission (around 1972) and three 
possible alignments for the Ganga-Cauvery link along with other links were brought out.   
1.3 The concept of Inter Basin Water Transfer (IBWT) was earlier mooted by Dr. 
K.L. Rao in 1972 as ‘National Water Grid’ and by Captain Dastur in 1977 as ‘Garland 
Canal’ which attracted considerable attention.  Dr. K.L. Rao advocated one of the 
alignments for the Ganga-Cauvery link along with a few other links including the 
Brahmaputra and Ganga Link.  The 2,640 km . long Ganga-Cauvery link essentially 
envisaged the withdrawal of 1,680 cumec (60,000 cusecs) of the flood flows of the Ganga 
near Patna for about 150 days in a year and pumping about 1,400 cumec (50,000 cusec) 
of this water over a head of 549 metres (1,800 feet) for transfer to the Peninsular region 
and utilizing the remaining 280 cumec (10,000 cu sec) in the Ganga basin itself.  The 
proposal envisaged utilization of 2.59 million h ectare metres of Ganga water to bring 
under irrigation an additional area of 4 m.  Ha.  Dr. Rao had also proposed a few 
additional links like (a) Brahmaputra-Ganga link to transfer 1,800 to 3,000 cumec with a 
lift of 12 to 15 m.; (b) Link  transferring  300  cumec  of  Mahanadi  water southwards; 
(c) Canal from Narmada to Gujarat and West ern Rajasthan with a lift of 275 m; and (d) 
links from rivers of the western ghats to wards east.  This proposal had components 
similar to the proposals later made under the National Perspective Plan. 

   
 
1.4 Apart from Dr. K.L. Rao, Captain Dastur, earlier put forward his proposal for 
Garland Canal which mainly consisted of two canals, viz. (i) A 4,200 km. long, 300 m. 
vide Himalayan Canal at a constant bed level between 335 m. and 457 m. about mean sea 
level aligned along the southern slopes of th e Himalayas running from the Ravi in the 
west to the Brahmaputra in the east and be yond.  This was to be fed by the Himalayan 
river waters stored in 50 integrated lakes to be created by cutting the hill slopes of the 
Himalayas to the same level as the be d of the canal and another 40 lakes beyond 
Brahmaputra.  The proposal envisaged (i) a storage capacity of 24.7 M.Ha.m to control 
and distribute 61.7 M.Ha.m of water and ( ii) a 9,300 km. long 300 metre vide Central 
Southern Garland Canal at a constant el evation of between 244 metre and 305 metre 
about the mean sea level.  This Garland Ca nal was proposed to have about 200 integrated 
lakes having a storage capacity of 49.7 M.Ha.m  to control and distribute 86.4 M.Ha.m of 
water.  The Himalayan and the Garland Canal were proposed to be inter-connected at 2 
points (Delhi and Patna) by 5 number of 3.7 m.  dia pipelines for transfer of water.  
Captain Dastur estimated that all the surplu s water in the country will be utilized to 
irrigate 219 M.Ha.   About 16.8 million volunteers were expected to complete the work in 
3 to 4 years.  The cost estimated by Captain Dastur (around 1977) was Rs. 24,095 crores. 
1.5 While Dr. K.L. Rao’s proposal envisaged the transfer of Ganga’s flood water to 
Cauvery through Ganga-Cauvery link partially  by lift and partially by gravity, Captain 
Dastur’s concept was to store waters at all th e tributaries / rivulets in canal at a constant 
elevation and utilize through Himalayan and Central / Southern Garland canals which 
were proposed to be inter-connected at two poi nts (Delhi and Patna).  In other words, 
Captain Dastur’s proposal is to store water and transfer in both the directions. 

   
 
1.6 Both these schemes were examined by a group of experts comprising experts 
from Central Water Commission, State Gove rnments and Professors from IIT and 
University of Roorkee and were found to  be technically unsound and economically 
prohibitive.  The Central Water Commission in 1979 indicated that the cost of the Dastur 
proposal was about Rs.12 million crore.  Theref ore, the Scheme was given up.  However, 
the continued interest shown by many people ga ve impetus to again study the inter basin 
water transfer proposals.   
1.7 Thereafter, the Ministry of Water Res ources (then Ministry of Irrigation) in 
August 1980 had formulated the ‘National Perspective Plan for Water Resources 
Development’ in the country which envisaged transfer of water from surplus basins to 
deficit basins.   The National Perspective Plan (NPP) comprises two components, viz. (i) 
Peninsular Rivers Development, and (ii)  Himalayan River Development. The NPP 
envisages additional benefits of 25 m.ha. of  irrigation from surface water, 10 m.ha by 
increased use of ground water, raising the u ltimate irrigation potential from the existing 
level of 140 m. ha. to 175 m.ha. and generation of 34,000 MW of power apart from the 
benefits of flood control, navigation, wate r supply, fisheries, salinity and pollution 
control etc.  The National Water Development Agency (NWDA) was entrusted the task 
of further carrying out pre-feasibility/feas ibility studies in respect of the above 
components of National Perspective Plan. 
1.8 The Committee’s examination of the subject ‘Inter-Linking of Rivers’ which inter 
alia included the review of work done and role  of NWDA, the efforts made by the Task 
Force on Inter-Linking of Rivers, the cost and funding aspects of the Inter-Linking of 
Rivers projects, the constitutional set up, th e environmental and other related aspects 
including the views of the experts/NGOs/emine nt individuals along with the views of 

   
 
State Governments obtained during the Committee’ s various field visits and interactions 
with the State Government officials has been dealt with in the succeeding Chapters of this 
Report. 
 

   
 
CHAPTER-II 
ROLE OF NATIONAL WATER DEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
The National Water Development Agen cy was set up on 17 July 1982 by the 
Government of India Resolution under the Ministry of Water Resources as an 
Autonomous Society to study the  feasibility  of the Peninsular Component of National 
Perspective Plan.  The NWDA is fully funded by Government of India.    Subsequently, 
in 1990-91, NWDA Society resolved to take up  the studies of Himalayan Component 
also.  Further, on 28 June 2006, the NWDA Society approved modifications in the 
functions of NWDA to include preparation of  Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) of link 
projects and pre-feasibility/ feasibility reports of intra-basin links as proposed by States. 
Accordingly, MOWR vide Resolution dated 30 November 2006 has modified the 
functions of NWDA Society.   
 
2.2 The functions of the Agency at present are as follows: 
 
(a)   To carry out detailed surveys and investigations of possible      reservoir  sites  
and  inter-connecting links  in  order  to establish  feasibility of the proposal of 
Peninsular  Rivers      Development  and  Himalayan  Rivers  Development  
components forming part of the National Pers pective Plan for Water Resources      
Development prepared by the then Ministry of Irrigation (now      Ministry of 
Water Resources) and Central Water Commission. 
 
(b)   To carry out detailed studies about the quantum of water  in  various Peninsular 
River systems and Himalayan River systems whic h  can  be  transferred  to  other  
basins/States  after meeting  the  reasona ble needs of the  basin/States  in the 
foreseeable future. 
 
(c)   To  prepare feasibility re port of the various components  of   the  scheme  relating 
to Peninsular Rivers  development and Himalayan Rivers development. 
 
(d)   To prepare detailed project re port of river link proposals under National 
Perspective Plan for Water Resources Development after concurrence of the 
concerned States. 
 
(e)   To prepare pre – feasibility / feasibility reports of the intra-state links as may be 
proposed by the States.  

   
 
(f)   To  do  all  such  other things  the  Society  may  consider   necessary,  incidental,  
supplementary or conducive  to  the  attainment of above objectives. 
 
2.3 The National Water Development Agency Society is the apex body of the 
National Water Development Agency and meets at least once in a year to review the 
progress and performance of the Agency toward s the attainment of its objectives and to 
give such policy directions as it deems f it.  The Hon’ble Union Minister of Water 
Resources is the President of the Societ y.  The Governing Body of the NWDA Society 
had constituted a Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) of NWDA under the 
Chairmanship of the Chairman, Central Water Commission, for examination and scrutiny 
of the various technical proposals framed by the Agency. 
2.4 A Group (Consensus Group) has been c onstituted by the Ministry of Water 
Resources in June 2002 under the Chairman, Central Water Commission with Director 
General, NWDA as Member-Secretary in order to discuss and expedite the process of 
arriving at consensus amongst the States regarding sharing of surplus water in river 
basins/sub-basins and quantum of surplus water to be transferred from surplus basins to 
deficit basins/areas as per the proposals of interbasin water transfer of NWDA and to 
assist the States in arriving at an agreement regarding sharing of costs and benefits by the 
beneficiary States and other related issues for taking up implementation of the link 
schemes and also to discuss the issue of preparation of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) 
of various links for which Feasibility Reports have already been completed by NWDA. 
Work done by NWDA 
2.5 The NWDA after various studies identif ied 30 links under National Perspective 
Plan for preparation of Feasibility Reports (FRs) – 16 links under the Peninsular 
Component of the plan and 14 links under th e Himalayan Component.  The list of these 

   
 
identified links is given at Appendix-I and II.  So far, NWDA has completed the 
feasibility reports in respect of 14 links under the Peninsular Component and 2 links 
(Indian Portion) under the Himalayan Com ponent (Indian Portion).  Surveys and 
investigations for the remaining links (Indian Portion) under both the Peninsular and 
Himalayan Component are under various stages of progress. 
2.6 NWDA has completed water balance studies of basins/sub-basins and at diversion 
points, toposheet studies of reservoirs and link alignments, storage capacity studies of 
reservoirs, pre-feasibility studies and feasibility studies towards the implementation of 
inter-linking of rivers in the country as follows: 
 
S. No. Item Quantity 
1 Water balance  studies  of    basins/sub-basins 137 
2 Water  balance studies  at diversion points 71 
3 Toposheet and  storage  capacity  studies  of reservoirs 74 
4 Toposheet studies of  link  alignments 37 
5 Prefeasibility reports of links  32 
6 Feasibility Reports 16 
  
 NWDA has completed feasibility reports of 14 links under Peninsular Component 
and 2 links under Himalayan component (Indian portion).  
2.7 The balance of FR of two peninsular links, the FR of one link namely Bedti-
Varda is in progress. However, local people were having certain apprehensions about this 
link for which a seminar in association with  the Govt. of Karnataka was organized on 09 
December 2007 at Sirsi, Uttar Kannada Distri ct, Karnataka to inform the local people 
about its benefits and create a conducive atmo sphere for carrying out field surveys and 
investigation  activities  related  with  preparation  of  Feasibility  Report of the link while 
in respect of other  peninsul ar link i.e. Netravati – Hemavati link, Govt. of  Karnataka is 
yet to give their concurrence.  Their main  apprehension is about environmental issues 
involved in this link.  The survey and investigation of this link would be taken up after 

   
 
their concurrence. Field survey and inves tigation of balance 12 links in Himalayan 
component are in progress in Indian portion for preparing their FRs. 
Efforts for consensus on the Link Proposals 
2.8 In order to arrive at a consensus on the link proposals between various State 
Governments, all the reports prepared by NWDA are circulated to concerned State Govts.  
The State Govt. officers are invariably invited in all the important meetings e.g. Annual 
General Meeting of NWDA Society, Govern ing Body, Technical Advisory Committee 
etc.    Efforts are being made from tim e to time by the officers of MOWR / NWDA / 
CWC to convince the officials of  State Govts. about the feasibility of the  proposals.   A 
Group headed by Chairman, Central Water Commission (CWC) and consisting of other 
officers of CWC and Secretaries of Irriga tion / Water Resources Department from 
concerned States has been constituted in June, 2002 to discuss with the States the issues 
for arriving at a consensus regarding sharing of surplus waters and the preparation of 
detailed project reports by NWDA. Five li nks namely Ken-Betwa, Parbati-Kalisindh-
Chambal, Par-Tapi-Narmada, Damanganga-Pinjal and Godavari (Polavaram)-Krishna 
(Vijayawada) have been identified as priority links for bringing consensus amongst the  
concerned States to take up the work of preparation of their DPRs.   The Consensus 
Group has held nine meetings so far, thr ee for Ken – Betwa link, three for Parbati – 
Kalisindh – Chambal link, one for Godavari (Polavaram) – Krishna (Vijayawada) link 
and two for Par – Tapi – Narmada  & Damanga nga – Pinjal links. The last meeting of 
‘Consensus Group’ was held on 28 June 2007 for Parbati – Kalisindh – Chambal link.  
2.9 The National Common Minimum Progra mme (NCMP) of the Government 
envisages that the UPA Government will make a comprehensive assessment of the 
feasibility of linking the rivers of the country starting with the southern rivers in a fully 

   
 
consultative manner.  It will also explore the feasibility of linking sub-basins of rivers in 
States like Bihar. 
2.10 An assessment of interlinking of Rivers (ILR) Programme has been carried out at 
the level of Secretary (WR) through detailed discussions and interaction with various 
Stakeholders, Officers of Ministry of Wate r Resources and other Central Deptts., and 
State Governments.  A Conference of the Chie f Secretaries and Principal Secretaries of 
Water Resources of the States / UTs was held on 2 and 3 August 2004 during which this 
issue was discussed at a dedicated session. 
 2.11   Most of the States are supportive of the concept of the interlinking of rivers 
project; provided the project can some how ensure  a “win – win” situation for all States.  
States were largely of the vi ew that funding may have to be provided by Govt. of India.  
In general, there is in-principle agreement with the ILR proposal as the scheme is to 
derive optimal benefits with regards to specific requirements of the concerned States.   
2.12 Out of 30 links identified by NWDA, all over the country, DPR of one link, viz. 
Ken-Betwa link is likely to be completed by 2008.  When asked as to how long it will 
take to prepare DPRs for other links, the Mi nistry in a post evidence reply submitted as 
under : 
 “The Inter-Linking of Rivers (ILR) programme involves various steps such as 
(i) preparation of feasibility reports of links, (ii) negotiations and consensus 
among the  concerned States, (iii) Agr eement with neighbouring countries if 
link involves area lying in other countries, and then (iv) preparation of Detailed 
Project Reports of links. The  preparation of DPRs is  dependent  on  the  
consensus reached among the  concerned States  and signing of agreements with 
neighbouring countries for the links located  there. Preparation of DPR is likely 
to take three years after consensus is arrived and MoU is signed by the 
concerned States.” 
 
2.13 Asked further about the hurdles whic h slows down the preparatory work on 
DPRs, the Ministry in a note stated : 

   
 
 “ In order to take up the work of Prepar ation of DPR, the reservations of the 
concerned State Govts. are first required to  be addressed.  These reservations may 
be on account of surpluses worked out by NWDA, disturbing  the existing water 
allocations as per Tribunal awards and perception of adverse effects on existing 
irrigation and power facilities. For carrying out surveys & investigations in forest 
and wildlife sanctuaries, necessary clear ances from Ministry of Environment & 
Forest also takes time.  In Himalayan Component, the initial reaches of seven 
water transfer links and storages proposed  in these links i.e. Kosi-Mechi, Kosi-
Ghagra, Gandak-Ganga, Ghagra-Yamuna, Sarda-Yamuna, Manas-Sankosh-Tista-
Ganga & Jogighopa-Tista-Farakka are falling in neighbouring countries.  For 
carrying out  surveys & investigations  for these links in the neighbouring 
countries,  their permission is essential
.”  
 
2.14 As regards the problem of sharing of water in Parbati-Kalisindh-Chambal link the 
Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources duri ng evidence informed that the representative 
of the Government of Madhya Pradesh had stated that both States will settle this issue 
bilaterally and as soon as it is settled, they would come back to the Ministry of Water 
Resources, Government of India.  It is being discussed between Madhya Pradesh and 
Rajasthan. 
2.15 When asked about the status of th e Par-Tapi-Narmada and Damanganga-Pinjal 
links, the Secretary during evidence stated as follows : 
“These two links were taken up together.  One benefits Maharashtra and the other 
benefits Gujarat.  Informally both the Stat es agreed for the two.   But the formal 
concurrence of the two States on the Mo U is awaited.  We have been pursuing 
with them.  Last time I had gone to Maha rashtra it was informally said that the 
Government perhaps has agreed, but we have not received anything from them.” 
2.16 On the question of the problem concerning the Godavari-Krishna Link, the 
representative of NWDA during evidence stated that the right canal of Polavaram Project 
is called as the Godavari-Krishna Link.  The DPR has been appraised by the CWC.    The 
clearance of the Ministry of Environment & Forest was yet to come.  The investment 
clearance is also to come from Pla nning Commission.  Depending upon the clearances 
from all the three agencies, appropriate action would be taken. 

   
 
2.17 When asked as to what are the broad r easons for the States not agreeing to the 
proposals, at the time of signing of MoU for preparation of DPRs the representative of 
the NWDA stated that States have been raising their apprehensions from time to time.  As 
far as all the State Governments were con cerned, right from 1978, in principle, all the 
State Governments were agreeable in any foru m as far as this programme was concerned 
because it was for the benefit of the people.  But when it came to the specifics, the 
problem starts cropping up like water sharing, etc.   Every State does not  want to give the 
water flowing through their State and would like to extract maximum benefit out of it. 
2.18 When asked as to what concrete and improved results have been brought by way 
of steps taken by NWDA and others, the representative of the NWDA stated:  
“Due to the efforts that we have taken, that is, due to the efforts taken by the 
people in the Ministry, one DPR is now under implementation.  Again, I am 
hopeful that two more DPRs are likely to be taken up during this year depending 
upon the response of the State Governments.  In the case of Parbati-Kalisindh-
Chambal, I have met the Chief Secretary of Rajasthan.  We have been meeting the 
officials.  We will expedite these efforts.   We have taken note of the concerns of 
the Hon. Committee.  We will expedite our efforts.  To that extent, nothing would 
be amiss from our side.  But we are de pending on the State Governments.  They 
have to say ‘yes’ for us to proceed.” 
  
2.19 The Ministry of Water Resources vide their communication dated 01 August 2008 
informed that as a result of efforts made  by them both the States of Gujarat and 
Maharashtra have given their concurrence in writing for Par-Tapi-Narmada and 
Damanganga-Pinjal links and further action in this regard is being taken by them. 
Intra State Links 
2.20 As a follow up action of the decision take n during presentation before the Hon’ble 
Prime Minister on 11 October 2004, Ministry of Water Resources in June 2005 conveyed 
the approval to identify intra-State links in  the States like Bihar and to prepare pre-
feasibility/ feasibility reports of these links by NWDA. This work has now been added to 

   
 
the functions of NWDA after the approval in the Special General Meeting of NWDA 
Society held on 28 June 2006. 
2.21 On the status of efforts made by Minist ry of Water Resources for taking up Intra 
State Links and the response of various States thereto, the Ministry in a note stated : 
“NWDA has requested all the States / UTs to inform the details of Intra-State 
links for further studies by NWDA. Re sponse from the States of Bihar, 
Maharashtra, Gujarat, Orissa, Jhar khand, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Kerala, Delhi 
and Union Territories of Puducherry, Andaman & Nicobar Islands and Daman & 
Diu has been received.  Govts. of Nagaland, Meghalaya, Kerala, Delhi and  Union 
Territories of Puducherry, Andaman & Nicobar Islands and Daman & Diu  
indicated that there is no Intra-State link proposal concerning to their States / UTs. 
Govt. of Puducherry has sent a proposal for one Inter-State link namely Pennaiyar 
– Sankarabarani link, instead of Intra-State link proposal, which is under 
examination in NWDA. The proposals recei ved from others States have been 
examined / discussed by NWDA officers with the States in various meetings. 
 
The Engineer-in-Chief, Govt. of Biha r vide his letter dt. 14.02.2007 has informed 
that they have already commenced the work of preparation of DPR of the Intra-
State links of the river basins of the Stat e on priority and would seek assistance of 
NWDA as and when required in future. In the 23
rd Annual General Meeting of 
NWDA Society held on 04.07.2007, the Repr esentative of Govt. of Bihar 
informed that some of the intra-State link schemes have been changed and their 
detailed project reports are being prepar ed. The Principal Secretary (WR), Govt. 
of Maharashtra informed that their Govt. has already intimated NWDA regarding 
prioritization of one or two intra-State links.  
 
Representative of Govt. of Tamil Nadu requested NWDA to study one or two 
intra–State link proposals in Tamil Nadu, for which a meeting  was held with 
them on 23.1.08 in which they have indicated that three intra-State Link proposals 
are being firmed up in Tamil Nadu. 
 
A meeting between the officials of NW DA and Govt. of Jharkhand was held on 
27.07.2007 during which it was decided to prepare Pre-Feasibility reports of three 
intra-State link proposals. The data for these links have been sent by Water 
Resources Department, Govt. of Jharkhand in the first week of January 2008.  
 
In the 51 st Governing Body Meeting of NWDA the representative of Govt. of 
Gujarat requested to take up Damanganga – Sabarmati intra-State link.  As 
Damanganga – Sabarmati link will draw water from Damanganga basin, it would 
be appropriate to prepare the PFR/FR of this link after preparing DPR of 
Damanganga – Pinjal link. Representative of  Govt. of Gujarat informed that link 
is planned for balance water from Damanganga-Pinjal link and, therefore, NWDA 

   
 
should at least prepare water balance studi es for this intra-State link considering 
diversions proposed in FR, which was agreed.” 
 
2.22 When asked about the budgetary resources  for Intra-State Linking Projects, the 
Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources stat ed that these projects can be taken up under 
AIBP.  The cost of the DPRs will be borne by the Central Government, if the States 
request NWDA to prepare the reports. 
International Dimensions 
2.23 In Himalayan Component, the initial reaches of seven water transfer links and 
storages proposed in these links. i.e. Kosi -Mechi, Kosi-Ghagra, Gandak-Ganga, Ghagra-
Yamuna, Sarda-Yamuna, Manas-Sankosh-Tista- Ganga & Jogighopa-Tista-Farakka   are 
falling in neighbouring countries of Nepa l and Bhutan. To carry out surveys & 
investigations in the neighbouring countries their permission is essential. The details of 
the links are given in Appendix – III. 
2.24 The NWDA through Ministry of Water Res ources, Govt. of India has approached 
Ministry of External Affairs for seeki ng permission from neighbouring countries for 
carrying out Survey & Investigation works in their territories.  The response received 
from MEA is as follows : 
“MEA vide their letter dated 13.09.2005 advised in regard to survey in Nepal that 
“In MEA’s assessment of current political situation in Nepal, this is not the 
appropriate time to carry out survey wo rks for linking of rivers in Nepalese 
territories.  Our focus at the moment could be on the linking of peninsular rivers”.  
With regard to survey work in Bhutan the MEA advised that “At this juncture, 
when the mega project is still in a conceptual stage, taking up 
survey/investigations work on a sub – com ponent in the territory of Bhutan could 
lead to avoidable complications and adversely affect the close bilateral relations 
which rest on mutual trust and confid ence unless the proposal is considered 
bilaterally.
  
 
MOWR vide their letter dated 17.01.2007 indi cated to MEA that most of the  
survey & investigation work of  Himala yan Component lying in India have been 
completed and, therefore, it is essential to  have the requisite permission from the 

   
 
Govts. of Nepal and Bhutan for carrying out balance work in Nepal and Bhutan. 
MEA was requested to apprise MoWR of the current situation so that formal 
proposals can be sent to MEA for taki ng up the matter with both the Govts. 
MOWR further reminded on 22.03.2007 & 10.07.2007 to MEA in this regard. 
However, their response is awaited. 
 
In regard to concern raised by Banglad esh on ILR programme of India, in the 
thirty sixth meeting of the Indo Bangladesh Joint River Commission held at 
Dhaka from 19
th to 21st September, 2005, it was emphasized that none of the links 
of Himalayan region would be attempte d until the concerns of the neighbouring 
countries were examined and addressed in an open and transparent manner. It was 
assured that India would not take any unilateral action that would harm the 
interest of Bangladesh.”   
 
2.25 In the Himalayan component, NWDA has completed feasibility studies of Sarda – 
Yamuna link and Ghagra – Yamuna link in Indian portion.  The information pertaining to 
Nepal area is given based on toposheet studies in the absence of details of Dams / link 
alignment in Nepal.   As such, these two FR s  are not yet complete and have not been 
circulated.  Besides above, survey & investigation works for preparing FRs of  (i) 
Yamuna – Rajasthan link (ii) Chunar – Sone barrage link (iii) Subernarekha – Mahanadi 
link (iv)Ganga – Damodar – Subernarekha li nk and (v) Farakka – Sunderbans which lie  
in Indian portion have been completed by NW DA.  Further, action is being taken to 
complete their FRs.  

   
 
CHAPTER – III 
TASK FORCE ON INTER LINKING OF RIVERS  
 While the feasibility studies of Inter Linki ng of Rivers were in progress, an IA 
No. 27 (Application for directions) in the Writ Petition (Civil) No. 724/1994 with the title 
“AND QUIET FLOWS THE MAILY YAMUNA” was filed on 10 September 2002 by 
Shri Ranjit Kumar, Sr. Advocate (AC).  In  the Writ, the petitioner, while quoting the 
speech of Hon’ble President of India of 14 August 2002 mentioning the need of river 
networking prayed to the Hon’ble Court to ‘issue appropriate directions, in the first 
instance, to form a High Powered Committee to look into the suggestion of networking of 
rivers, as has been mooted by H.E. the Presid ent of India, and, after the submission of its 
report, issue further directions in consona nce with the objective to be achieved of 
networking of rivers.’ 
3.2 This IA came up for preliminary hearing before the Supreme Court on 16 
September 2002 when the Court was pleased to pass the order that it will be more 
appropriate to treat it as independent Public Interest Litigation with the cause title – “In 
Re: NETWORKING OF RIVERS.”  The Court directed the Centre and States to respond.  
The Supreme Court of India in the Writ Petition No. 512 of 2002 regarding networking of 
rivers on 30 September 2002 directed the Uni on of India to file an affidavit by 28 
October 2002.  The Union of India in its a ffidavit filed on 25 October 2002 before the 
Court has the following operative part : 
“A presentation was made by the Ministry of Water Resources on Inter Linking of 
Rivers before the Hon’ble Prime Mini ster on October 05, 2002, where in the Dy. 
Prime Minister and other senior Ministers and officers were also present.  It was 
suggested after presentation that a High Level Task Force can be formed which 
will go into the modalities for bringing consensus on Inter Linking of Rivers 
among the States.  A similar presentation has also been made to His Excellency 
the President of India on October 16, 2002.  In view of the above facts, it is 

   
 
respectfully submitted that the prayer of  the Petitioner to form a High Powered 
Committee may not be necessary at this stage.” 
3.3 The Hon’ble Supreme Court on 31 Octobe r 2002 has observed in the said Petition 
“We do expect that the programme when dr awn up would try and ensure that the link 
projects are completed within a reasonable time of not more than ten years.  We say so 
because recently the National Highways Projects have been undertaken and the same is 
nearing completion and the Inter Linking of Rive rs is complementary to the said Project 
and the water ways which are so constructed w ill be of immense benefit to the country as 
a whole.” 
3.4 A Task Force under the Chairmanship of Sh. Suresh P. Prabhu, the then Member 
of Parliament, Lok Sabha as Chairman, Shri  C.C. Patel, Vice Chairman and Dr. C.D. 
Thatte, Member-Secretary respectively was constituted on 13 December 2002.  In 
addition to the above members of the Task Force, part-time members were also 
nominated  in  consultation  with  the  Chairman  of  the Task  Force and with the 
approval of the  Prime  Minister  vide  the  Ministry  of  Water  Resources  Resolutions  
dated 18 February 2003, 24 February 2003, 24 March 2003 and 15 July 2003.  The 
following ten members were inducted in the Task Force: 
1. Shri Deepak Das Gupta, (Retd.) 
Chairman, NHAI 
(Full Time Member) 
2. Shri K.V. Kamath, MD & CEO, ICICI 
Bank, New Delhi 
(Part Time Member) 
3. Shri R.K. Pachauri, Director General, 
TERI, New Delhi 
(Part Time Member) 
4. Shri Piyush Goyal, Chartered Accountant, 
Mumbai 
(Part Time Member) 
5. Shri K. Kasturirangan, Chairman, ISRO, 
New Delhi 
(Part Time Member) 
 
6. Shri G.C. Sahu, Retd. Engineer-in-Chief, 
Government of Orissa 
(Part Time Member) 

   
 
7. Dr. K. Hari Babu, MLA, Visakhapatnam, 
Andhra Pradesh 
(Part Time Member) 
8. Dr. B.R. Chauhan, Legal Expert, New 
Delhi 
(Part Time Member) 
9. Shri B.G. Verghese, Centre for Policy 
Research, New Delhi 
(Part Time Member) 
10. Dr. A. Mohan Krishnan (Part Time Member) 
 
3.5 The terms of reference of the Task Force are as under : 
i) Provide guidance on norms of appraisal of individual projects in respect of 
economic viability, socio-economic impacts, environmental impacts and 
preparation of resettlement plans; 
ii) Devise suitable mechanism for brining about speedy consensus amongst 
the States; 
iii) Prioritize the different project co mponents for preparation of Detailed 
Project Reports and implementation. 
iv) Propose suitable organizational structure for implementing the project; 
v) Consider various modalities for project funding; and 
vi) Consider international dimensions that maybe involved in some project 
components. 
3.6 The milestone/time table for achieving th e goal of Inter Linking of Rivers as 
indicated in the above resolution is as under : 
(i) Preparation of Action Plan-I, givi ng an outline of the time schedules for 
the completion of the feasibility studies, detailed project reports, estimated 

   
 
cost, implementation schedule, concrete benefits and advantages of the 
project, etc. (30 April 2003). 
(ii) Preparation of Action Plan-II, gi ving alternative options for funding and 
execution of the project as also the suggested methods for cost recovery 
(31 July 2003). 
(iii) Meeting with the Chief Ministers to deliberate over the project and to 
elicit their cooperation (May/June 2003). 
(iv) Completion of Feasibility Studies (already in progress). (31 December 
2005). 
(v) Completion of Detailed Project Reports.  (Preparation of DPRs will start 
simultaneously since FSs in respect of eight river links have already been 
completed). (31 December 2006). 
(vi) Implementation of the Project (10 years) (31 December 2016). 
3.7 The Task Force was to provide guidan ce on norms of appraisal of individual 
projects in respect of economic viability, socio-economic impacts, environmental impacts 
and preparation of resettlement plans, de vise suitable mechanism for bringing about 
speedy consensus amongst the States, prior itize the different project components for 
preparation of Detailed Project Reports  and its implementation, propose suitable 
organizational structure for implementing   the project, consider various modalities for 
project funding and consider international aspects that may be involved in some project 
components etc.  The  Task  Force  has  proposed  and submitted the Action Plan – I on 
30 April 2003. 

   
 
3.8 Action Plan-I, giving an outline of the time schedules for the completion of the 
feasibility studies, detailed project reports, estimated costs, implementation schedule, 
concrete benefits and advantages of th e project, etc. was submitted on 30 April 2003.  
Action Plan I of Task Force on ILR indicated a period of 2 years for preparation of DPR 
for Links of an average size.  Action Plan -II, giving alternative options for funding and 
execution of the project as also the suggested methods for cost recovery was submitted on 
16 April 2004. Task Force on Inter-Linking of Rivers, which has submitted Action Plans 
I & II and completed its role, has been wound up by Ministry of Water Resources with 
effect from 31 December 2004.   
3.9 To facilitate the working of the Task Fo rce to meet its functions and objectives 
given in the ToR, the following Working Gr oups were formed.  The expertise of the 
members of the TF belonging to different disc iplines have been utilized as members of 
the Working Groups.  The Services of the Re source Institutes and of the experts in the 
respective subjects from the Resource Institutes and outside have also been utilized in the 
Working Groups. 
1. Working Group on Technical Matters. 
2. Working Group on Finance Matters. 
3. Working Group on Environment, Ecology and related issues. 
4. Working Group on Social issues. 
5. Working Group on Legal (water law) Aspects. 
6. Working Group on International Dimensions. 
7. Working Group on Application of Remote Sensing Technologies. 
8. Working Group on Communication & Coordination with NGO’s. 
9. Working Group on Executive & Implementation. 
10. Working Group on Institutional Mechanism. 
 

   
 
3.10 In addition, the following Study Groups have also been formed for various other 
studies related to speedy implementation of In ter Linking of Rivers and also to remove 
misinformation among public and society and to communicate the advantages of the Inter 
Linking of Rivers to them : 
1. Critical Review Group 
2. Communication Core Group 
3. Independent Group of Experts 
4. Committee of Experts for guiding pr eparation of Terms of Reference 
(ToR) for Detailed Project Report (DPR) 
5. Review Committee for DPR 
6. Study Group for possible mechanization of Construction 
7. Study Group on Agriculture and Aquaculture. 
 
The Composition of these Working Groups / Study Groups are given in 
Annexure–IV. 
3.11 The Highlights of the findings of  Task Force are: 
(i)  Task Force got prepared Terms of  Reference (TOR) for preparation of 
Detailed Project Reports (DPR) thr ough M/s Engineers India Ltd. (EIL) 
for providing guidance on norms of appraisal of individual projects. 
 
(ii)  On the issue of suitable mechan ism for bringing about speedy consensus 
amongst the States, Task Force has sugge sted meeting at the highest level 
to agree after the technical-level discussions with emphasis that 
outstanding issues should be such that they can be addressed in Detailed 
Project Report stage.  
 
(iii)  The Task Force has stated that  the peninsular links are the right 
component to begin with. Top prior ity links identified by Task Force on 
Interlinking of Rivers are as under: 
 
a) Ken-Betwa link          - UP & MP 
b) Parbati-Kalisindh-Chambal link - MP & Rajasthan 
 
(iv) On the basis of report from IIM-Ahmedabad, a two tier 
institutional/organizational setup has been suggested for the 
implementation of the programme on Interlinking of Rivers (ILR) along 
with a Council – “National Ri ver Water Development Council 

   
 
(NRWDC)” to act as the apex body of the proposed setup. The National 
Authority for Interlinking of Rivers (NAILR) has also been proposed as 
the first tier of the proposed two tier organizational structure and the 
regional or branch offices or subsidia ries would act as “Link Instrument” 
and are proposed as the second tier of the organizational setup.   
 
(v)  Task Force on Interlinking of Rivers consulted ICICI for funding options.  
ICICI has proposed that funding shoul d be partly through public, public-
private and private inputs. The exact requirement on realistic basis will be 
available only after the preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR) of all 
the links. 
 
Based on NWDA studies National Council of Applied Economic Research 
(NCAER) has estimated that the co st of ILR project would be Rs. 
4,44,331.20 crore which is 21-22% lower than the rough estimate of Rs. 
5.60 lakh crore. NCAER is of the view  that the programme would take 
nearly 35 – 40 years.  However, w ith use of modern construction and 
Remote Sensing techniques, the progra mme at best could be completed in 
25 years. 
   
(vi)  A Working Group on International dimensions constituted by Task Force 
on ILR has also suggested that at the present juncture, it is too early, to 
pursue the matter further at high political levels with the Nepal 
government.  Regarding Bangladesh, it has been suggested that Dhaka will 
continue to raise the ILR issue in Joint River Commission and possibly in 
other bilateral fora.  India should respond by reiterating the line taken in 
the JRC i.e., ILR is a concept, not a single project. 
 
3.12 The Task Force assigned the work of designing suitable organisational structure 
for implementing the Inter Linking of Rivers projects to IIM Ahmedabad.  When asked if 
the final report of IIMA has been received a nd the action taken thereon, the Ministry of 
Water Resources in a written reply stated: 
“The final report was received in January, 2007. On the basis of report from IIM-
Ahmedabad, a two tier institutional/organi zational setup has been suggested by 
the Task Force for the implementation of the programme on Interlinking of Rivers 
(ILR) along with a Council – ‘National River Water Development Council 
(NRWDC)’ to act as the apex body of the proposed setup. The National Authority 
for Interlinking of Rivers (NAILR) is proposed as the first tier of the proposed 
two tier organizational structure and the regi onal or branch offices or subsidiaries 
would act as “Link Instrument” and ar e proposed as the second tier of the 
organizational setup.  None of the link project under NPP is under implementation 

   
 
stage as of now.  Action would be ta ken on the above suggestions at an 
appropriate time.” 
 
3.13 The Ministry of Water Resources cons tituted a Special Cell on Inter Linking of 
Rivers headed by Joint Secretary, TF-ILR in December 2004, to look after the residual 
routine work of the TF-ILR and for taking follow up action on the ILR programme.  The 
Special Cell shall work within the overall scheme of NWDA and Ministry of Water 
Resources shall provide funds to NWDA to defray additional expenses on account of the 
Special Cell.  Later, in February, 2005 the Ministry of Water Resources has partially 
modified its earlier order and made Commissione r (PR) Ministry of Water Resources as 
head of this Special Cell.  The Special Cell is carrying out the residual works of TF-ILR. 
 

   
 
CHAPTER – IV 
ECONOMICS OF INTER LINKING OF RIVERS  
 
Cost and Funding of Project 
 
 The Task force has consulted ICICI for funding options and NCAER for studying 
the economic impacts on Inter Linking of Rive rs Programme.  ICICI has proposed that 
funding should be through Public, Public-Private and Private inputs.  The NCAER, based 
on NWDA studies has stated that the cost of ILR Programme would be Rs.4,44,331 crore 
which is 21-22% lower than the rough estim ate of Rs.5.60 lakh crore and it would take 
nearly 35 to 40 years.  However, with use of modern construction and Remote Sensing 
Techniques the programme at best could be completed in 25 years. 
4.2 The Ministry in reply to a query of the Committee stated that total cost of the ILR 
Programme will be firmed up after preparation of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) of all 
the proposals.  The cost of preparation of DPRs is to be borne by Government of India. 
4.3 In his Budget Speech (2008-2009) the Finan ce Minister proposed to establish the 
Irrigation and Water Resource Finance Corpor ation (IWRFC) with an initial capital of 
Rs.100 crore contributed by the Central Gove rnment, the State Governments and other 
Financial Institutions would be invited to c ontribute to the equity.  The Corporation is 
proposed to set up to mobilize very large resources required to fund Major & Medium 
Irrigation Projects. 
4.4 As regards funding of the project, the Ministry has stated that at present, DPR of 
only one link namely Ken-Betwa links is in progr ess .  It has been included in the list of 
National Projects for which 90% of the proj ect cost would be  funded by the Central 
Government. 

   
 
4.5 Asked further if inclusion of DPR of Ken-Betwa as National Project would not 
affect the work of on-going projects for which Ce ntral assistance is being given to States,  
the Ministry in a reply submitted as under : 
“Though the estimated cost of the ILR project  is large, the requirements of funds 
will be spread over a long period of time as  the links are not likely to be taken up 
simultaneously.  DPR of one link is in progress and the same has been included in 
the list of National Projects.  Consensus on other links has not reached yet.  So, 
the funding modalities of other link proj ects would be considered at an 
appropriate time after completion of their DPRs.” 
 
Study by NCAER on ILR 
4.6 The National Council of Applied Economic  Research was asked to study the 
economic impact of Inter Linking of Ri vers Programme in March 2004.  NCAER 
completed the study and submitted its report whic h is being examined by the Ministry of 
Water Resources through a Special Cell on ILR.   When asked about the findings of the 
study of NCAER, the Ministry in a written reply stated as follows : 
“The draft report of National Council of  Applied Economic Research (NCAER) 
mentions: 
 
(a) ILR will result in growth of cons truction sector by 3.80 per cent and total 
employment in economy would increase nearly by 4 per cent. 
 
(b) ILR  is capable of increasing f ood grain production growth by additional 2 
percentage point over baseline scenario which will supplement overall 
economic growth by 0.37 percentage point.   
 
(c) NCAER has estimated that the co st of ILR project would be Rs. 
4,44,331.20 crore which is 21-22% lower than the rough estimate of Rs. 
5.60 lakh crore. NCAER is of the view  that the programme would take 
nearly 35 – 40 years.  However, w ith use of modern construction and 
Remote Sensing techniques, the progra mme at best could be completed in 
25 years.”   
 
4.7 On the action taken by Government on the report of NCAER, the Ministry 
informed that the draft report received from  NCAER has been examined by the Ministry 

   
 
of Water Resources. MoWR has offered th e comments to them based upon the inputs 
from Planning Commission, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of 
Power. NCAER has submitted the revised report recently (7 April 2008) which is being 
examined.  A copy of the report will be submitted as soon as finalized. 
4.8 The Ministry in a post-evidence reply to the query of the Committee regarding 
impact of ILR Project on overall development of rural sector, employment generation in 
rural areas etc. stated as follows: 
“National Council for Applied Economic Re search(NCAER)  was approached to 
study the economic impacts of the ILR programme including Benefits of 
Interlinking Programme.   The revised report of NCAER has been received on 
7.4.2008.   
 
As per NCAER assessment; 
 
(a) The ILR programme involves huge cons truction activity, comparable in scale 
to the Golden Quadrilateral (GQ) project .  The construction activities in the ILR 
would include dams, reservoirs and canals. 
 
(b) ILR programme will have both short and long term impact on the economy.  
The short term impact of the link canal is in the form of increased employment 
opportunities and the  growth of the services sector.  Sectors supplying crucial 
inputs to the construction sector, such as cement, clay, iron and steel, will also 
grow.  In the medium to long term, the major impact of link canals is through 
increased and assured irrigation.  Although the major and direct gainers of the 
Interlinking of Rivers (ILR) programme  will be agriculture and agriculture-
dependent households, the entire economy will be benefited due to construction 
activities and increased agriculture production. 
 
(c) The impact of the ILR programme on agriculture will be realized only when 
construction is completed, reservoirs filled and the water reaches the ultimate 
users for  irrigation, drinking, industrial purposes and hydropower generation.  
Until construction is complete, the impact  of the ILR programme will be through 
Government investment.  This will have an impact on the industries supplying 
inputs for construction.  There will also be an increase in employment and thus on 
demand for foods and services.  
 
(d) According to NCAER studies on Economic  impact of ILR programme, the  
programme will have a major impact on the rural area in general and the 
agriculture dependent households in particular. The rural household per capita 
income with ILR is expected to incr ease by 7.49 per cent as compared to the 
baseline growth without ILR scenar io. Per capita household income of 

   
 
agricultural dependent households in rural area is expected to go up by 13.2 
percent. For Non-agriculture dependent  households per capita household income 
is expected to go up by 4.8 per cent in rura l area and 9.8 per cent in urban area  as 
compared to the baseline scenario.” 
 
Rationalisation of Water Use/Water Use Charges 
4.9 The people have a tendency to treat thi ngs casually which are available free of 
cost or at a much lower cost.  If water is made available at a cost without any exception, 
the use of water will be rationalized.  It can  be done only by better management of water 
and to make people aware of the water saving culture.  
4.10 In this background, when asked if th e Government was considering to put 
cess/charges on use of water for all purposes  as also to fund projects under ILR, the 
Ministry submitted that since water is a State subject, cess/charges on use of water for 
irrigation and other purpose are being fixed by th e State Government.  At present there is 
no proposal in Ministry of Water Resources to levy charges on water uses to fund ILR. 
4.11 When asked about the plans of the Government to control the indiscriminate 
exploitation of water in the country, the Ministry in a reply stated : 
“The MoWR encourages conservation of  water including measures such as 
traditional water conservation practices, rainwater harvesting, recharge to ground 
water and adoption of better management practices including use of modern 
technology. 
 
The Central Ground Water Authority has issued guidelines for regulation of 
withdrawal of ground water in over-explo ited, critical and semi-critical areas. 
States have been requested to take steps to implement these guidelines.” 
 
 

   
 
CHAPTER – V 
CONSTITUTIONAL SET-UP AND ILR 
Water falls under State subject in the present day constitutional set-up.  Some of 
the experts / individuals who deposed before the Committee have expressed the opinion 
that Entry 56 of the Union List in the Seventh Schedule of Constitution gives ample 
powers to the Central Government to make  laws to regulate the implementation of 
projects under ILR.  The Indian Constitution lays down the legislative and functional 
jurisdiction of the Union and the States thr ough the lists in the Seventh schedule.  The 
Entry 56 of the Union List in the Seventh Schedule under Article 246 states as under : 
“Regulation and development of inter-State rivers and river valleys to the extent 
to which such regulation and development under the control of the Union is 
declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest.” 
 
5.2 The Entry 17 of the State List in th e Seventh Schedule under Article 246 of the 
Constitution states as under : 
“Water, that is to say, water supplies,  irrigation and canals, drainage and 
embankments, water storage and water power subject to the provisions of entry 56 
of List I.” 
 
5.3 The Article 254 (1) of the Constitution states as under : 
“If any provision of a law made by the Legi slature of a State is repugnant to any 
provision of a law made by Parliament which Parliament is competent to enact, or 
to any provision of an existing law with re spect to one of the matters enumerated 
in Concurrent List, then, subject to the provisions of clause (2), the law made by 
Parliament, whether passed before or af ter the law made by the Legislature of 
such State, or, as the case may be, the existing law, shall prevail and the law made 
by the Legislature of the State shall, to the extent of the repugnancy, be void.”  
 
5.4 On the issue of legislative and executiv e competence of the Union to regulate and 
develop the inter-State basin transfer of waters, Shri A.D. Mohile, former Chairman, 

   
 
CWC and Secretary to Government of India in a Memorandum submitted to the 
Committee opined : 
“As per the Indian Constitution, the regulati on of the water of an interstate basin 
is an area within the legislative and executive competence of the Union, provided 
the Parliament through an enactment, indicates that such regulation is in National 
interest.  If there is no such en actment, which empowers the Union, the 
competence, both legislative and executive, is vested with the States.  The 
Parliament has enacted very few acts empowering the Union to take executive 
action about the regulation of interstate basins.  Notable among the few acts are 
the Brahmaputra Board Act and the Betwa River Board Act.  Another important 
act enacted under this provision is the River Boards Act, 1956.  However, this Act 
has never been used in setting up any River Board.” 
 
5.5 He further expressed his views as under : 
“………… The present thinking that, in India water is a “State subject” is 
incorrect.  The Constitution provides that the Union, in accordance with the law to 
be passed by the Parliament would have powers to regulate the waters of the 
interstate basins.  The powers of the States are subject to the limitations created 
by the law of the Union.  Considering this position, which is superior to the 
inclusion of water in the Concurrent List , it is preferable for the Union to enact 
laws than to propose Constitutional ame ndments.  This would also be more 
pragmatic, since amending Constitution for sensitive water related issues would 
be difficult.” 
 
5.6 While deposing before the Committee on this issue Shri Mohile stated :  
“Unless the Union empowers itself with powers to force solutions, unless that 
exists, the States are unlikely to solve the problems among themselves in a sure 
way.  When you create an environment th at whether you settle, it otherwise, we 
will settle it for you, then th e attitude will change.  So, through this presentation, 
the main plea which I am making is that there are enough provisions in the 
Constitution to enact legislation under en try 56 and if the Union Legislature 
passes one or more Acts and empowers the Union in various things, which 
inter-
alia, include decisions about studying the basins and in a quasi judicial way to 
decide these powers and that may help in  putting water sector back in order and 
that order today is missing.” 
 
5.7 On being asked whether the Governme nt propose to consider declaring the 
implementation of ILR projects by a law passe d by Parliament to be expedient in the 
public interest as most of the links under IL R could be construed to be projects falling 

   
 
within the meaning of the term ‘regulation and development of inter-State rivers and river 
valleys as contained in Entry 56 of List I of Seventh Schedule or to bring the subject 
‘water’ under the Union List in  view of the situation of the States engaging with each 
other in a prolonged manner over water shari ng of different projects, not honouring the 
verdicts of different Inter State Water Dis pute Tribunals etc.the Ministry in a written 
reply stated as follows : 
“As per National Common Minimum Programme  (NCMP) the work of ILR is to 
be persued in fully consultative manner.  Therefore, a consensus group has been 
constituted under the Chairmanship of Chairman, CWC to bring consensus among 
the concerned states in this regard.   
 
Currently, there is no proposal for bri nging the subject ’Water’ under exclusive 
Central jurisdiction.  Also, there is no proposal for declaring the implementation 
of ILR projects under the provisions of Entry 56 of the List I of the Constitution. 
 
Recently the Central Government has constituted a commission on Center-State 
relations.  In its term of reference it is mentioned that while making 
recommendations, it shall have particular regard to the role, responsibility and 
jurisdiction of Center vis-à-vis states in the planning and implementation of the 
major projects like inter-linking of rivers.  
 
The terms of reference of the commission on Centre-State relations also include 
examination and review of the worki ng of existing arrangements between the 
Union and States as per Constitution of I ndia including inter-State river water and  
recommend such changes or other measures as may be appropriate. 
 
 Recommendations of the Commission are awaited.” 
 
5.8 The Secretary, Ministry of Water Res ources while deposing before the Committee 
responded to the issue of the legislative and executive competence of the Union as 
contained in Entry 56 of the Union List by stating as under : 
“Recently the Central Government has constituted a Commission on Centre-State 
Relations.  In its Terms of Referen ce, it is mentioned: “While making 
recommendations, it shall have particular regard to the role, responsibility and 
jurisdiction of the Centre vis-à-vis States in the planning and implementation of 
the major projects like inter-linking of rivers.” 
 

   
 
5.9 The Secretary further elaborated on the question of taking an opinion of the Law 
Ministry on this issue and stated as follows : 
“One is the legality issue.  As per the National Common Minimum Programme of 
the Government, the work of inter-linking of  rivers is to be pursued in a fully 
consultative manner.  That is our mandate and that is the current policy.  So, even 
if it may be legally valid, still there is no proposal as such at the moment unless it 
comes as a recommendation from the Centre-State Relations Commission.” 
The Centre-State Relations Commission was appointed two years back. 

   
 
CHAPTER –VI 
COMMITTEE OF ENVIRONMENTALISTS, SOCIAL SCIENTISTS AND 
OTHER EXPERTS ON ILR 
 
The Ministry of Water Resources cons tituted a Committee of environmentalists, 
social scientists and other experts on inter linking of rivers with a view to make it a 
consultative process under the chairmansh ip of Secretary (WR). The Committee 
comprises Secretaries of Ministries of So cial Justice & Empowerment and Environment 
& Forests, eminent engineers, sociologists and environmentalists.  The composition of 
this Committee and its terms of reference are at Appendix – V.    
6.2 So far, four meetings of the Committee ha ve been held on 18 January 2005,        
28 October 2005, 04 September 2006 and 08 January 2008 respectively. 
6.3 On the question of the major decisions taken by the Committee in their mettings 
held so far, the Ministry in their reply submitted : 
“During the 1 st meeting overall TOR of the Committee and status of ILR was 
discussed. 
 
During the 2 nd meeting held on 28.10.2005, experts gave various suggestions on 
TOR for preparation of DPR & modalities for preparation of DPR of Ken – Betwa 
link.  The experts stressed the environmental issues that need to be addressed 
while preparing the Detailed Project Reports. It was decided to organise field visit 
to the specific areas of ILR project under consideration. 
 
During 3 rd meeting of Committee held on 4 th Sept., 2006, the Committee was 
apprised of the updated status of the va rious statutory clearances required from 
MoEF for carrying out survey & investig ation works for preparation of DPR of 
Ken-Betwa link.  The Members of the E xpert Committee gave their views on the 
ToR for comprehensive environmental impact assessment of Ken – Betwa link 
which have been considered while finalising ‘request for proposal document’ for 
carrying out comprehensive environment impact assessment. 
 
The major decisions taken by the Committee in its 4 th meeting held on 8.1.2008 
are as follows:  
 
(i) A seminar/symposium may be organi zed at appropriate time to consider 
the views of various NGOs/institutions/individuals on ILR. 

   
 
(ii) The interim report of EIA studies being carried out by AFC Ltd., 
Hyderabad is to be circulated to the members of the committee for 
discussion in the next meeting. 
(iii) The NCAER report will be put on the website of NWDA after its 
finalization. 
(iv) The website of NWDA is to be m odified to have an online forum for 
discussion of the members of the committee. 
(v)  NWDA would take appropriate acti on for obtaining clearances from the 
Supreme Court regarding submergence area of Panna Tiger Reserve.” 
 
6.4 The role of the Committee with regard to  preparation of DPRs of the identified 
priority links is advisory in nature.  It a dvises the Government on various environmental, 
socio-economic and other technical aspects wh ile preparing DPRs of ILR projects as per 
its term of reference. 
6.5 When asked as to what suggestions we re given by the Group for speedy clearance 
of projects from environmental angle, the Committee was informed : 
“The Members of the Committee stressed the environmental issues that need to be 
addressed while preparing the Detailed Project Reports. The Members of the 
Expert Committee also gave their view s on the ToR for Ken – Betwa link which 
have been considered while finalising ‘request for proposal document’ for 
carrying out comprehensive environment impact assessment.” 
 
6.6 Explaining the actions taken by the Ministry on the above mentioned decisions of 
the Committee of environmentalists and other Experts, the Ministry further submitted as 
under : 
“The status in this regard is given under : 
 
(a)   The issue was also discussed in the Committee of Environmentalist and other 
Experts. The date for organising a Seminar/Symposium to consider the views of 
NGOs/institutions/individuals on ILR will be  decided after the preparation of 
DPRs. 
 
(b)   The interim report of Environmenta l Impact Assessment (EIA) is expected 
from AFC Ltd., Hyderabad shortly.  This report after examination  will be 
circulated to the members of the Committee.  
 
(c)   The NCAER revised   report  ha s been recently received (7.4.2008).  It will 
be put on the website of NWDA after its  finalization. 
 

   
 
 
(d) Ken-Betwa link project is a multipurpos e project. At present, the preparation 
of its DPR has been taken up which invol ves only the survey & investigation and 
not the pre-construction activities.  Accordingly, Standing  Committee of National 
Board for Wild Life (NBWL) in its  meeting held on 14.9.2006 recommended the 
survey & investigation work in the Panna Tiger Reserve, Madhya Pradesh.  
 
After the DPR is completed and speci fic MoUs/Agreements are signed by the 
concerned State Govts, an appropriate institutional mechanism would approach 
the MoE&F for obtaining the clearance for pre-construction activities and 
clearance for the project  from Supreme Court/National Board for Wild Life.”  

   
 
CHAPTER –VII 
SUGGESTION/OPINIONS OF EXPERTS/INDIVIDUALS/ORGANIZATIONS 
The Standing Committee on Water Res ources invited memoranda from 
Experts/Organisations/Individuals on the subject  of ILR Programme/concept.  More than 
900 memoranda were received by the Committee.  Out of these more than 30 
Individuals/Experts/NGOs were invited to give  their views in support or against the ILR 
Programme.  A list of Individua ls/Experts/NGOs invited to give their views before the 
Committee is given at Appendix – VI.  Various views/suggestions were given by them.  
The opinion that had emerged from the di scussions held by the Committee was by and 
large in support of the ILR Programme.  Those who were against the proposal also agreed 
to the ILR Programme.  However, they desi red that before going for the ILR Programme 
other alternatives available should be explored  fully.  Thereafter, if needed, Government 
may decide to move on linking of rivers/basin/inter-transfer of waters.  The foremost 
opinion was to make the public aware of the ILR Programme.   
7.2 On the question of the efforts made by the Government / Ministry of Water 
Resources to generate people’s awareness in respect of the ILR Programme, the Ministry 
in reply submitted as follows : 
“As per National Common Minimum Pr ogramme (NCMP), Govt. has done a 
comprehensive assessment of linking of th e rivers of the country starting from 
southern rivers in a fully cons ultative manner.  A Committee of 
Environmentalists, Social Scientists and other experts on ILR has been constituted 
to advise Govt. on ILR.  The information bulletins of ILR are distributed as a part 
of mass awareness programme at various seminars / conferences, exhibitions 
including India International Trade Fair & important public events.  Chairman of 
erstwhile Task Force on ILR has written about 1.5 lakh letters elaborating the 
benefits of ILR to individuals.  For Ken-Betwa link, pamphlet (technical & for 
general public) in Hindi & English, highligh ting the salient features & benefits of 
the link canal, has been distributed in th e Ken-Betwa project area.  MoWR also 
organises National Water Convention (NWC) bi-annually to deliberate on key 
issues of water including ILR.  Last NWC was organised  at   Puducherry   during  
1-3rd November, 2007. NWDA has placed details  of various FRs and activities on 
ILR on the website www.nwda.gov.in .  The website is bilingual and contact 

   
 
interactive.  Seminars are also organise d to propagate the likely benefits of the 
links among the local people.  NWDA ha d also set up a stall in the last 
international trade fair at Delhi for generating people’s awareness for the ILR 
programme.” 
 
7.3 When asked about the response with regard  to their efforts, the Ministry stated 
that the response of efforts made by Govt. is generally positive.  However some people 
and groups have expressed apprehensions  about the Rehabilitation, Resettlement & 
environmental issues which would be duly addressed at DPR stage. 
7.4 It is further stated that the suggesti ons/modifications/alterations made by various 
people are examined by MoWR / CWC / NWDA and are duly considered in the 
preparation of DPR. 
Integrated authority for ILR/National Water Grid 
7.5 Some experts who deposed before the Co mmittee were of the opinion that in view 
of the gigantic size of the ILR Programme  and involvement of a number of State 
Governments, agencies, departments, a single authority/agency to deal with all the works 
under the ILR Programme needs to be constituted. 
7.6 When asked whether the Government has any such proposal to form a single 
authority to deal with Inter Linking of Rivers Programme, the Ministry submitted as 
follows : 
“The National Water Development Agency was set up in 1982 by Government of 
India under the Ministry of Water Res ources as an Autonomous body to study the 
feasibility of the Peninsular Component of National Perspective Plan.  In 1990-
91, the studies of Himalayan Component we re also assigned to NWDA.  Further, 
in 2006 the works related with preparati on of Detailed Project Reports of link 
proposals under National Perspective Plan for Water Resources Development  for 
which concurrence of the concerned States  has been arrived, was also assigned to 
NWDA.  NWDA also mandated to prepare pre-feasibility / feasibility reports of 
intra-state links as may be proposed by states.  The ILR programme is presently at 
FR / DPR stage, so works are being managed through NWDA. 
   
After preparation of DPRs, appropria te decision regarding implementation 
mechanism  will be taken in consultation with the concerned State Govts”.  

   
 
7.7 It has been suggested by some experts who deposed before the Committee that the 
Government may consider formation of National Water Grid on the line of National 
Power Grid, which will be responsible for equ itable distribution of water to Inter basin 
States.  It may also frame policy / guidelines for allocation of water to Inter basin States. 
7.8 When asked to give their comment on suggestion of formation of National Water 
Grid on the line of ‘National Power Grid’ which will be responsible for equitable 
distribution of water and also frame policy/ guidelines for allocation of water for Inter 
basin States, the Ministry in a written reply stated : 
“Most of the water transfer links propos ed under ILR are based on the concept of 
transfer of surplus water to deficit ar eas as well as on philosophy of substitution / 
exchange. Further, unlike power, water flow  by gravity is unidirectional i.e. from 
high elevation to low elevation. Therefor e, the concept of National Water Grid 
can’t be adopted for ILR project”. 
 
Problem of deforestation, displacement and rehabilitation 
7.9 During examination of the subject, all the experts/individuals who favoured or 
had reservations on the ILR Project were of the views that instead of going for such a 
large and expensive projects, the Government should undertake smaller projects 
particularly which create rainfed area,  recharge ground water through rainwater 
harvesting, check dams etc., the Ministry in reply to a query in this regard stated : 
‘Ministry of Water Resources duly recognizes the importance of measures such as 
rain water harvesting, recharge of ground water, check dam etc.  Ministry of 
Water Resources encourages such measures.  However, in view of high variability 
on the availability of water from one re gion to another, the ILR project are 
considered important and very useful in transferring surplus flood water to water 
deficit regions.” 
 
7.10 When asked as to what extent ILR w ill help in recharge of ground water, the 
Ministry submitted that the pilot project commissioned by NWDA in Andhra Pradesh and 

   
 
Rajasthan have indicated percentage of wa ter available for recharge as 40% and 10% 
respectively.  This percentage thus varies from region to region. 
7.11 The critics of the ILR proposal have appr ehensions regarding utilization of large 
chunk of forest land for the project resulting in destruction of forests.  Further, adverse 
impact of diversion routes of the rivers on environment and on flora and fauna of the 
area.  It is stated that the ground water level will go down in the donor basin.   
7.12 Asked as to what extent these appreh ensions could be acceptable to Government, 
the measure proposed to save the environment which is likely to be affected and if any 
study has been conducted by the Ministry to assess the adverse impact on environment on 
the implementation of the project on ILR, th e Ministry in a detailed reply submitted as 
follows : 
“The Ministry of Environment & Forest (MOEF) has laid down certain guidelines 
which are to be followed while planning wa ter resources projects.  According to 
these guidelines before taking up a water resources project,  it is mandatory to 
obtain the Environmental clearance al ongwith the approval of Terms of 
References(TORs) for Environmental Im pact Assessment(EIA) studies. Based on 
the TORs approved by MOEF, EIA study of  individual link schemes  under ILR 
shall be carried out. In this study  all positive and negative impacts of the project 
on the environment shall be studied in de tail.  Catchment Area Treatment  plan, 
afforestation plan shall also be formulat ed  as a part of EIA  studies.   The 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) shall also be formulated to mitigate the 
negative impacts, if any.  All these studies  shall be undertaken at the DPR stage.  
At present NWDA is preparing DPR of Ken-Betwa link in which these studies are 
being carried out.” 
 
Global Climate Change and Inter Linking of Rivers  
7.13 The Earth’s Waterscape can change dramatically due to unexpected climate shifts 
over relatively shorter periods of time.  Global Warming today is an issue about which 
the entire world is concerned.  According to a Report of the United Nation’s Inter-
Governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) , the glaciers, especially the Himalayan 
and other glaciers all over the world, the Ar ctic and the Antarctic are melting down and 

   
 
likely to melt at faster rate due to Global Warming and release of Green House gases in 
the atmosphere.  There will be devastating fl oods in the rivers to begin with, and then 
they might dry up, causing enormous food shortages and other adverse effects.  They may 
also cause rise in sea levels and displacemen t of people in the coastal regions which may 
also accentuate the demand for water and likel y squabbles over water in the years to 
come. 
7.14 On the question of adequacy of the data  of surplus and deficient river basins 
presently available with the Government in the changed scenario of Global Warming and 
its effects and the steps that need to be take n to obviate adverse fallout of the project, the 
Ministry in their reply stated : 
“The present assessment of the water av ailability is based upon data observed by 
various agencies including CWC, NWDA and State Govts.  from adequate 
number of stations. The MoWR has already taken up study in respect of effect of 
climate change on water resources. Appropr iate adaptation measures are to be 
taken up based on the study regarding effect of climate change on water 
resources.” 
 
7.15 Asked further if in view of the like lihood of chain of devastating floods and 
droughts due to glacial meltdown as a result of the situation arising out of Global 
Warming, how does the Ministry view the sustainability of Inter-Linking of Rivers 
Projects getting affected, the Ministry stated : 
“The effect of Global Warming on Water Resources of our country is not yet 
clearly established with reference to locati on and time.  It is an accepted fact that 
even in the post climate change s cenario, systems of Water Resources 
Management that are more controlled will fare better than systems that are less 
controlled. Controlled structure would enab le the water managers to store and 
transfer water with greater certainty, thus reducing the impact of uncertainty”. 
 
 
 
 

   
 
Flood Control 
7.16 According to Government, ILR Scheme will provide additional irrigated area and 
help in controlling the floods and provide wate r to water deficit areas.  However, critics 
say that only 20% of the population will bene fit from the scheme and only 2-3% flood 
can be controlled by the ILR Scheme.  Asked as to what extent the ILR Scheme will help 
in controlling the floods when the Scheme is fully implemented, the Ministry in reply 
stated : 
“The main objective of Interlinking of Ri vers proposals are to increase irrigation, 
domestic & industrial water supply benefits and it involves creation/integration of 
a number of reservoirs. The benefit of flood control is incidental”. 
 
7.17 When asked if any study has been conducted in  this regard, it is stated that since it 
is an incidental benefit as such no assessmen t studies have been made at FR stage.  
However detailed assessment will be made at DPR stage. 
7.18 In response to a query about percentage of population that will be benefited from 
this Scheme, the Ministry informed that the  assessment of benefit is done in terms of 
added Irrigation, Hydropower generation, D&I water supply, navigation etc. However 
detailed assessment in this regard will be done  at DPR stage.  The implementation of the 
schemes of Interlinking of Rivers of the country depends on the consensus and 
cooperation of the concerned States and agreement with neighbouring countries as such 
time frame can not be given. 
Maintenance Issues 
7.19 For implementation of the Schemes and creation of infrastructure, it has been 
suggested by some Experts that each project should be given on BOT basis to private or 
public-private agencies for 10-20 years.  Du ring the operation of project, agencies may 

   
 
collect user charges from users to recover th e cost of project and maintenance thereof.  
Thereafter, the project may be transferred to the State Governments. 
7.20 When asked about the opinion of Government in this regard, the Ministry in reply 
stated that no ILR project is at implementati on stage at present.  This suggestion will be 
considered at the implementation stage in consultation with the concerned State Govts. 
7.21 The Committee asked whether Government  has decided any line of action for 
implementation of the ILR Scheme, the Ministry in reply stated as follows : 
 
“A view on implementation mechanism is to  be taken in consultation with the 
respective States.   However, Ken-Betwa link has been included in the list of 
National Projects.”  
 
Alternate proposals from Individuals /NGOs 
7.22 The Committee received several alternat e proposals to Inter Linking of Rivers 
from Experts/Individuals.  When asked, the Ministry informed that no State Government 
has given any proposal alternate to ILR.  However, some individuals/NGOs have given 
some proposal which have been examined  by various organizations including CWC, 
NWDA and other experts in the erstwhile Task  Force on ILR.  Some of these proposals 
were only at conceptual stage and are not root ed in the basic tenets of the temporal and 
spatial hydrology of the river basin and as such were technically unsound, incomplete and 
hence cannot be considered alternatives to the ILR.   
7.23 The gist of brief of some of the im portant proposals forwarded by individuals 
/NGOs on ILR alongwith observations of Minist ry of Water Resources thereon are at 
Appendix - VII. 
7.24 When questioned as to why the othe r proposals were found technically unsound 
and incomplete whereas ILR was found sound pr oposal which is also at the conceptual 
stage, the Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated : 

   
 
 “The planning and implementation for water resources development takes into 
consideration the topographical, geologi cal, geographical, agro-climatic, hydro-
geological, meteorological and techno-economic factors. 
  
The 30 links identified by NWDA for preparation of Feasibility Reports are 
based on several scientific & technical studies and Surveys & Investigations.  
Further,  thorough scrutiny  was carried out  at various stages viz, water balance 
study, toposheet study, pre-feasibility studies and feasibility studies for 
establishing the techno-economic viability of the identified links.  All these 
reports of NWDA  are examined/scrutinized and accepted by Technical 
Advisory Committee (TAC) of NWDA wh ich is chaired by Chairman, CWC  
and participated by States/Central Govt . Departments and technical experts  
before going for next stage.  Hence, th e concept of ILR based upon scientific & 
engineering studies/surveys  is sound and likely to meet the required  techno-
economic criteria of Govt. of India”. 
 
7.25 Asked if these proposals were also disc ussed with the person who had given the 
proposal, the Ministry in a note submitted as under : 
“In 2003 Task Force on Inter Linking of Rivers constituted an Independent Group 
of Experts to assess the alternate proposals for linking of Rivers received from 
various individuals/groups. The alternative proposals suggested were discussed by 
the Independent Group of Experts cons tituted by the Task Force with the 
concerned persons who gave the proposals.  These persons were also given 
opportunity to present their studies.   This group assessed the proposals and 
concluded that all the proposals are w ithout detailed analysis, technically 
unsound, incomplete and hence cannot be pursued within their present form.”   
 
Views of State Government on Inter-Linking of Rivers 
 
7.26 The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Water Resources visited a number of 
States to have on-the-spot assessment of th e progress made by the State Governments in 
implementation of various irrigation projects.   While doing so, the Committee also held 
discussions with the officials of the State Governments and sought their views on the 
Scheme ‘Inter-Linking of Rivers’.  By and large, the States were in favour of the Scheme.  
However, a majority of them were in favour of giving preference to small projects and 
Intra-State River Links, keeping in view th e problems faced  in coming to agreement by 
State Governments where sharing of water with other States is concerned. 

   
 
7.27 The Government of Bihar stated that  Inter-Linking of River Scheme of NWDA 
related to Bihar falls under the Himalayan component and has international ramifications, 
due to which their priorities have been lowered by the NWDA and MoWR.  Therefore, 
Government of Bihar identified a number of In tra-State river links with the objective of 
irrigation, flood control and drainage.  They have engaged the services of consultancy 
firms for preparation of DPRs for some of  the links.  For providing funds to these 
projects the State have plan to take assist ance of Central Grants as well as World Bank 
and Asian Development Bank.   
7.28 The Gujarat Government has offered the following suggestions/views : 
(i) Priority for Inter-Linking / connec ting of ponds and construction of check-
dam be given. 
 
(ii) The Inter-Linking of existing major,  medium and minor irrigation scheme 
with the rivers, rivulets and drains coming in the command area should be 
given priority by providing escape and series of check dams e.g. Mahi 
Command in Central Gujarat. 
 
(iii) The priority for inter-linking should start from rivers, reservoirs of each 
basin, nearer basin and thereafter State basin without inter-state 
boundaries and last one should be inter linking of inter-State basins. 
 
(iv) Inter-state/inter-linking should only be considered on per capita water 
availability. 
 
(v) The reverse canal concept should be implemented and permission to lift 
from canal, dam should be allowed where surplus water is available. 
 
(vi) In inter-linking, per capita co st, people’s participation, time for 
completion, efficiency, equity and sustainability should be criteria.   
 
7.29 The Orissa Government is of view th at no legal framework has been formed on 
inter-linking of rivers at Central level.  Hence, after fulfilling the demands of the people 
of the State living in the deficit basin th rough intra-basin transfer, the inter-linking 
proposal will be thought off.  

   
 
7.30 The Government of Maharashtra stated th at out of 30 River Links, Maharashtra is 
going to be benefitted marginally from Damonganga-Pinjal Link due to its typical 
topography.  Therefore, the State is of opinion that : 
 
(i) Intra-State River Links proposed by Maharashtra be considered. 
 
(ii) Water from other valleys bei ng diverted to Krishna valley under 
Peninsular River Link project should be compensated to Maharashtra as 
per clause No. XIV of KWDT. 
 
(iii) Mega recharge scheme in Tapi Va lley from Maharashtra be considered by 
NWDA as considered in case of Rajasthan. 
 
(iv) Projects under Inter Linking of Ri vers should be included under AIBP 
(75% of project cost).  The main tenance of project under ILR will be 
managed through State resources also scheme like ERM will be of 
assistance. 
 
 
7.31 The Andhra Pradesh Government is of the view that only peninsular river 
development by itself would not be attractive unless linked with Himalayan river 
development, where the rivers are perennial unlike the peninsular.   
 
7.32 The Uttar Pradesh Government stated that ILR will help in solving the flood 
problems of eastern U.P. by Inter-Linking of rivers coming from Nepal.  The project 
concerned with storage dams on these rivers will feed the drought prone area through 
ILR.  The monsoon water can be stored by cons tructing different reservoirs in tarai area 
of Uttar Pradesh and Nepal.  This water can be utilized for irrigation and drinking by 
drought affected area of Baghe lkhand and Bundelkhand of U.P. by inter linking different 
rivers.   The State would get additional i rrigation potential of 18.76 lac hec. and power 
generation of 20874 MW which will contribut e to State revenue.  On that basis 
NABARD and other funding agencies can provide funds for the projects. 

   
 
7.33 The Rajasthan Government have stated  that looking to the water availability 
scenario in Rajasthan, the only solution to mitig ate crisis is to divert water from water 
surplus basins in the country by Inter Linki ng of Rivers.  Rajasthan is going to be 
benefited by following River links : 
1. Parbati-Kalisindh-Chambal Link 
2. Yamuna-Rajasthan Link 
3. Rajasthan-Sabarmati Link 
7.34 During the course of the Study Visits of the Committee, a suggestion was made 
by several State Governments to consider cer tain projects as ‘National Projects’ fully 
funded by Central Government.  The Committee was also informed that a request was 
received from the Government of West Bengal and the concept of ‘National Projects’ 
was under consideration of the Mini stry.  The Committee in their 7 th Report on Demands 
for Grants (2007-08) desire the Ministry to formulate a policy for declaring Major 
Irrigation Projects as ‘National Projects’.  Th e Ministry in their further reply on the 
Action Taken Report (8 th Report) have stated that the c oncept of ‘National Projects’ was 
incorporated in the Cabinet Note dated 28 September 2007 which was considered by the 
Union Cabinet in its Meeting on 25 October 2007 and it was decided to refer the Cabinet 
Note to a Group of Ministers (GoM).  The Go M in its first Meeting while discussing the 
proposal directed that a separate note for ‘N ational Projects’ should be formulated and 
brought up before the next Meeting of the Go M.  The GoM also finalized criteria for 
selection of ‘National Projects’.  The GoM approved the revised note with some 
amendments.  The decision of the GoM are now  to be placed before the Union Cabinet 
for its approval.  Further, the Finance Minist er in his Budget Speech has stated that the 
Government has declared 14 projects as ‘Na tional Projects’ of which 3 projects would 

   
 
require Rs.7,000 crore during the 11 th Plan.  The criteria / concept for selection of a 
project as ‘National Project’ as approved by the Union Cabinet stipulates: 
(i) International Projects where usage of  water in India is required by a treaty 
or where planning or earlier completion of the project is necessary in the 
country’s interest; 
 
(ii) Inter-State Projects pending due to  non-resolution of Inter-State issues 
relating to sharing of cost rehabilita tion aspects of power production etc. 
including river Inter-Linking Projects; 
 
(iii) Intra-State Projects with additional potential of more than 2 lakh hectares 
having no dispute regarding sharing of water. 
 
The ‘National Projects’ would be eligible for 90% grant of the project cost. 
 
7.35 Asked if Government would consider the priority links identified in respect of 
whom the Feasibility Report prepared by NW DA are available and the links which are 
Intra-State or where the respective State Governments have entered into MoU for 
preparation of DPRs as ‘National Projects’ falling within the criteria (ii) and (iii) as 
above, the Ministry responded by stating that at present DPR of only one link i.e. Ken-
Betwa link is in progress. This link has been included in the list of National Projects. Any 
new project proposed by one or more States which fulfils the criteria approved by the 
Govt. will be eligible to be considered for inclusion in the list of National Projects. 

   
 
PART-II 
 
Observations and Recommendations 
 
 
1. The Committee while recognizing the fact that water is a basic human 
necessity have embarked upon an indepth examination of the concept / scheme of 
Inter-Linking of Rivers in the backdrop of the topical interest generated in the 
subject at various public platforms and oth er fora.  This led to the resurrection of 
the project earlier mooted by some experts in the water resources sector.  The 
Committee note that the long distance transf er of water by way of Inter-Linking of 
River basins was not a new idea and has been a topic debated actively in the country 
for quite sometime.  They further note that a note on National Water Grid was 
earlier prepared by the then Central Water and Power Commission in 1972.  
Further, apart from the CWC this concept of inter-basin water transfer was also 
proposed by Dr. K.L. Rao in 1972 titled, ‘National Water Grid’ and later in 1977 as 
‘Garland Canal’ by Captain Dastur which a ttracted considerable attention.   While 
Dr. Rao’s proposal envisaged transfer of  Ganga water to Cauveri through Ganga-
Cauveri Link partially by lift and partia lly by gravity, the proposal of Captain 
Dastur sought to store water of all tribut aries / rivulets in canals at a constant 
elevation and their utilization through Himalayan and Central / Southern Garland 
Canals involving transfer of water in both the directions.  According to the Ministry 
these schemes were examined by a Group of Experts and were not found feasible 
either technically or economically.  The proposal of Dr. Rao, however, had 
components similar to the proposals later made under the National Perspective Plan 
(NPP).  The National Perspective Plan  was formulated in August 1980 which 
envisaged transfer of water from surplus a reas to deficit areas.  The NPP comprises 

   
 
two components, viz. (i) Peninsular River Development; (ii) Himalayan River 
Development.  The NPP envisaged additi onal benefit of 25 million hectare of 
irrigation from surface water, 10 million h ectare by increased use of ground water 
which would raise the ultimate irrigation potential from the existing level of 140 
million hectare to 175 million hectare and generate 34,000 MW of power apart from 
the benefits of flood control, navigation,  water supply, fisheries, salinity, pollution 
control etc.  While noting the possible be nefits that might accrue as projected under 
the NPP on one hand and the slow pace of implementation of various projects and 
the availability of water in various reservoirs  / rivers due to the effects of global 
warming, etc. on the other, the Committee desire the Ministry to undertake a study, 
which would assure the availability of water as indicated in NPP in about two to 
three decades from now. 
2. The Committee observe that National Water Development Agency (NWDA) 
was set up in 1982 as an autonomous Society under the Ministry of Water Resources 
to study the feasibility of the Peninsular  Component of NPP.  Further, in 1990-1991 
the NWDA resolved to take up the studies  of Himalayan Component also and in 
June 2006, the NWDA approved modifications in the functions of NWDA to include 
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) of link projects and pre-feasibility / feasibility 
report of intra-basin links as proposed by States.  The Governing Body of the 
NWDA Society under the chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources 
controls the affairs and funds of the Society.  The Governing Body had constituted a 
Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) of NWDA under the chairmanship of 
Chairman, Central Water Commission for e xamination and scrutiny of various 
technical proposals framed by the Agency.  A Consensus Group was constituted in 

   
 
2002 under the Chairmanship of Chairm an, Central Water Commission with 
Director General, NWDA as Member Secretary in order to discuss and expedite the 
process of arriving at a consensus among the States regarding sharing of water in 
surplus river basin / sub-basin with deficit ba sins and to assist the States in arriving 
at an agreement regarding sharing of wat ers, cost and benefit to the beneficiary 
States and other related issues.  The Committee further note that NWDA after 
various studies identified 30 links under NPP of which Feasibility Reports in respect 
of 14 links under the Peninsular componen t and 2 links (Indian Portion) under 
Himalayan component have been completed.   Surveys and investigations for the 
other links are under various stages.  FR of  two peninsular links, viz. Bedti-Varda 
and Netravati-Hemavati link are yet to be completed and are pending for want of 
concurrence of the Government of Karnataka. 
3. The Committee further observe that a ll the reports prepared by NWDA are 
circulated to the concerned State Government s.  The State Government officials are 
also invited to all the meetings of  AGM of NWDA Society, Governing Body, 
Technical Advisory Committee etc.  Effort s are also made through the Consensus 
Group to convince the State Governments ab out the feasibility of the proposals and 
for arriving at consensus regarding shar ing of surplus water and preparation of 
DPRs.  The NCMP of the UPA Governme nt of 2004 envisaged a comprehensive 
assessment of feasibility of the links starti ng with the Southern rivers in a fully 
consultative manner.  Thereupon, five lin ks namely Ken-Betwa, Parbati-Kalisindh-
Chambal, Par-Tapi-Narmada, Daman ganga-Pinjal and Godavari (Polavoram)-
Krishna (Vijayawada) were identified as priority links for bringing consensus 
amongst the concerned States to take up the work of preparation of DPRs.  

   
 
However, only one Memorandum of Und erstanding (MoU) for Ken-Betwa link was 
signed and DPR of this link is likely to  be completed by the end of 2008.  The 
Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources, stated during evidence that Gujarat and 
Maharashtra Governments have informa lly agreed to give concurrence for Par-
Tapi-Narmada Link and Damanganga-Pi njal link for which MoU between the 
concerned States is likely to be signed  soon.  The concurrence of Madhya Pradesh 
and Rajasthan Government has not yet been received for the Parbati-Kalisindh-
Chambal link.  It is dishea rtening to further note that though all the States had 
agreed to the ILR Programme in principle at various fora, problems crop up when 
it comes to the specifics of the issue of water sharing and other related benefits.  The 
Committee are unhappy with the current stat us/progress of such a huge Scheme 
which would benefit the nation and the peop le in many respects.  They are of the 
considered view that if the pace of arriving at consensus, preparation of DPRs etc. is 
not accelerated the actual implementati on of projects under ILR would take 
another 30-40 years or more for completion of all the identified 30 links.  It is 
needless to highlight the cascading effect of  all this on the project cost and other 
related issues.  The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to take urgent and 
concerted measures to bring all the concerned States on one platform to arrive at 
the consensus in respect of all links at the earliest so that work of preparation of 
DPRs of various links could be initiated. 
4. The Committee are given to understa nd that the Ministry, in June 2005, 
conveyed to all the States of approval to id entify intra-State links for preparation of 
pre-feasibility /feasibility reports of those links by NWDA.  They are happy to note 
that many States have come forward in this regard.  The States of Bihar, 

   
 
Maharashtra, Jharkhand and Tamil Nadu have  also submitted their proposals for 
study by NWDA.  The Bihar Government  has already undertaken the work of 
preparation of DPRs of some of the intra-State links through consultancy service 
providers.  The Committee desire the Minist ry to render full assistance and support 
in all respects to concerned State Govern ments in preparation of DPRs of Intra-
State links as these links in their opin ion could be implemented by the State 
Governments without any interference/objectio ns from other States.  Further, their 
completion would take lesser time comparat ively and the benefits will also accrue to 
people at the earliest as the cost of p reparation of DPRs is to be borne by the 
Central Government and the projects co uld be taken up for completion under 
AIBP. 
5. From the perusal of various links und er the ILR programme, it is observed 
that out of the 30 identified links, 14 links fall under Himalayan component.  Of 
these, the Committee observe th at initial reaches of seven water transfer links and 
their storages lie in the neighbouring countries of Nepal and Bhutan.  Further, to 
carry out surveys and investigations in these countries their permission is essential.  
The Committee understand that MEA in Se ptember 2005 indicated that owing to 
the prevailing political situation in Nepal,  it was advisable for us to take up the 
Peninsular component to start with.  Al though NWDA has completed FRs of Indian 
portions of some links, they are still incomplete in the absence of FRs of portions of 
links under the jurisdiction of neighbourin g countries.  The Survey & Investigation 
works for preparation of FRs of five links  which lie in Indian portions has been 
completed by NWDA and further action is  being taken on them.  Though the 
Committee are aware of the limitations / problems encountered by NWDA at this 

   
 
juncture, they desire the Government of India to discuss the issue threadbare with 
Nepal at the highest political and executive level so that they can appreciate the 
benefits accruing from these links to them  as well.  The Committee hope this would 
go a long way in not only improving our bilateral ties and place them on a more 
firm footing but also help us avert the ca lamitous situations in future of the kind 
that we are now facing in North Bihar as a result of breach in embankment of river 
Kosi in Nepal. 
6. The Committee note that a Task Force under the Chairmanship of            
Shri Suresh P. Prabhu, then MP, Lok Sabha  was constituted by Government of 
India in December 2002.  As per the term s of reference, the TF on ILR was to 
provide guidance on norms of appraisal of individual projects with regard to 
economic viability, socio-economic and envi ronmental impacts, preparation of re-
settlement plans, prioritize different proj ect components for preparation of DPRs 
and their implementation, etc.  Furtherm ore, to facilitate its working, the Task 
Force formed 10 different Working Groups on technical, financial, legal and other 
such aspects.  Besides, 7 Study Groups were also formed for various other studies as 
also to allay apprehensions of public at larg e on matters relating to ILR.  The Task 
Force submitted two Action Plans before it  was wound up by Government of India 
in December 2004.  The Action Plan I submi tted in April 2003 gave an outline of the 
time schedule for completion of FRs, DPRs, estimated costs, implementation 
schedule, concrete benefits of the project etc.  The Action Plan–II which suggested 
alternative options for funding and executi on of the project and methods for cost 
recovery etc. was submitted in April 2004.  Further, the Task Force assigned the 
work of designing suitable organizationa l structure for implementation of Inter 

   
 
Linking of Rivers Programme to IIM, Ah medabad which submitted its report in 
January 2007.  The IIMA suggested two tier institutional/organizational set-up for 
Inter Linking of Rivers al ongwith a Council – National River Water Development 
Council to act as an apex body of the prop osed set-up.  The National Authority for 
Inter Linking of Rivers has been proposed as the first tier and the regional or 
branch offices or subsidiary offices as ‘Lin k Instrument’ are to be the second tier of 
this organizational set-up.  The Committee,  however, regret to observe that the 
Ministry has not been able to impl ement any of the recommendations of IIMA 
regarding setting up either of NAILR or NRDW C on the ground that as none of the 
links of NPP is under implementation stage , the Government of India would act on 
this suggestion at an appropriate time.  For the present, however, the Commissioner 
(PR), in the Ministry of Water Resources as  head of the Special Cell is carrying out 
the residual works of TF-ILR.  The Co mmittee desire the Ministry to set up 
institutional / organizational set up suggest ed by IIMA at the earliest as the DPR 
work of the Ken-Betwa Link is scheduled to be completed by December 2008 so that 
all requisite institutional framework to implement the link are in place well in 
advance to enable timely completion of the project. 
7. The Committee observe that the Nati onal Council of Applied Economic 
Research (NCAER) was consulted by the Task Force on ILR to assess the economic 
impact of the ILR programme.  NCAER ha d, on the basis of the NWDA study, 
estimated that ILR programme would cost around Rs. 4.44 lakh crore i.e. 21 to 22% 
lesser than the rough estimate of Rs. 5.60 lakh crore projected earlier.  The 
completion time for the programme has b een assessed to be 35 to 40 years.  NCAER 
was, however, of the view that use of modern and remote sensing techniques could 

   
 
help in completion of the programme in 25 years.  The Ministry, in this regard 
opined that the exact cost of projects and completion time would be available only 
after DPRs of various links are ready.  Fu rther, the NCAER in their revised Report 
submitted to the Ministry in April 2008 observed that the ILR programme would 
result in 7.49% increase in per capita income of rural households and 13.2% 
increase of agricultural dependent househol ds in rural areas.  As regards, non-
agricultural dependent households, the per ca pita income is expected to go up by 
4.8% in rural areas and 9.8% in urban areas as compared to the base line. 
 The Committee also observe that ICICI was consulted by the Task Force for 
suggesting funding options for the ILR pr ogramme.  ICICI proposed that funding 
be partly through public, public-private and private inputs.  For the present, DPR 
of only one line, i.e. Ken-Betwa Link is in progress and has been included in the list 
of National Projects for which 90% funds would be provided by the Government of 
India and the remaining 10% would be borne by the Governments of Uttar Pradesh 
and Madhya Pradesh jointly.  The Ministry at  this stage indicated that there are no 
plans to put any cess / user charges for funding the ILR programme.   
8. The Committee further observe that the Government propose to establish the 
Irrigation and Water Resource Finance Corporation with an initial capital of        
Rs. 100 crores contributed by the Central Government with the State Governments 
and other financial institutions being in vited to participate in the equity as 
announced by the Finance Minister in  his Budget Speech of 2008-2009.  This 
Corporation is mandated to mobilize very  large resources required to fund major 
and medium irrigation projects.  The Commi ttee desire the Ministry to include not 
only the projects / links under ILR as Nati onal Projects but also ask the IWRFC to 

   
 
raise funds by way of issue of bonds or other suitable instruments to fund projects 
under ILR.  To begin with the IWRFC co uld raise funds for the Ken-Betwa Link 
for which the DPR is likely to be available by end of December 2008.  The 
Committee are of the opinion that the bene fits / growth indicators assessed by 
NCAER would fructify only when the ILR pr ogramme is fully implemented.  They 
are of the firm opinion that the above me asures when taken would encourage all the 
State Governments to come forward to earn estly take up implementation of various 
link projects under the ILR programme. 
9. The Committee note that according to th e present day Constitutional division 
of subjects between the Union and the States, the subject ‘Water’ falls both under 
the Union and the State Lists.  It may be  pointed out that while Entry 56 of the 
Union List in the Seventh Schedule in accordance with Article 246 empowers the 
Central Government to make laws to reg ulate and develop inter-State rivers and 
river valleys to the extent to which such regulation and development under the 
control of the Union is declared by the Pa rliament by law to be expedient in the 
public interest, Entry 17 of the State List of Seventh Schedule empowers the States 
to make laws to regulate and develop wa ter for irrigation etc. subject to the 
provisions of Entry 56 of the Union List .  Apart from the above, Article 254(1) 
provides that inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and laws made by the 
legislatures of States either in respect of  subject on which Parliament is competent 
to enact laws or to any provision of ex isting law on matters enumerated in the 
Concurrent List, then the law made by Par liament shall prevail on the law made by 
Legislature of the State to that extent  of repugnancy be void.  The Committee, 
however, are constrained to observe that  the Central Government has not so far 

   
 
made any laws under provisions of Entry 56 of Union List under Seventh Schedule 
though there have been several instances of disputes among the States on the issue of 
water, disregarding the verdicts of tribuna ls resulting in avoidable delays etc. in 
execution of projects.  Given this backdrop  of the things as existing, the Committee 
invited Memoranda from experts / individuals on the subject of  Inter Linking of 
Rivers wherein, the Committee observe that a majority of the individuals and 
experts have opined that the subject ‘ Water’ either needs to be brought under the 
Concurrent List or the Union need to enact laws under the provisions of Entry 56 of 
the Union List under the Seventh Schedule.   
10. It may be pertinent to note here that one of the experts while deposing before 
the Committee had expressed ‘unless the Un ion empowers itself with powers to 
force solutions,….. the States are unlikely to  solve the problems among themselves 
in a sure way…. That there are enough provisions in the Constitution to enact 
legislation under Entry 56 and if Union Le gislature passes one or more acts and 
empowers the Union in various things, which inter alia  include decisions about 
studying the basins and in a quasi judicial way to decide these powers that may help 
in putting the water sector back in order and that order today is missing.’  The 
Committee, however, regret to observe that despite several cases of dispute among 
the States, the Government has preferred to pursue the ILR programme only in a 
consultative manner through the ‘Consensus  Group’ formed for the purpose.  The 
Consensus Group further failed to bring about any radical shift in the thought 
process of the States.   
The Committee are also unhappy to take note of the submission made by the 
Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources during evidence that though making laws 

   
 
under Entry 56 would be legally valid, the Government for the moment does not 
have any proposal to that effect or to declare implementation of ILR programme to 
be expedient in the public interest thereund er.  They are further disheartened to 
note of the Secretary’s submission that unless it comes as a recommendation from 
the Centre-State Relations Commission such a proposal cannot be considered.  Since 
the Centre-State Relations Commission may take some more time in giving its 
recommendations, the Committee would sugge st that instead of waiting for a 
recommendation by the Commission to that effect, Government should obtain the 
opinion /advice of the Ministry of Law as to the interpretation of the provisions of 
Entry 56 in the Union List vis-a-vis Entry 17 of the State List.  The Committee are 
of the considered opinion that with the creation of a National Authority for Inter 
Linking of Rivers as recommended by the Ta sk Force on ILR, the setting up of the 
IWRFC as also inclusion of the Ken-Betw a Link under the concept of ‘National 
Projects’ the enactment of laws under Entry 56 of the Union List would be a logical 
sequence and would go a long way in accel erating the pace of implementation of 
projects under ILR programme.  They would lik e to be apprised of the opinion of 
the Law Ministry obtained by Government in this regard at the earliest. 
11. Considering the importance of Inter Linking of Rivers and the interest 
shown by various quarters in the subject , the Committee invited Memoranda from 
individuals / experts / NGOs, etc. some of whom were also invited to depose before 
the Committee and give their views/opinions.  After hearing the views/opinions of 
the experts on the subject, the Committee have come to the conclusion that a 
majority of them are in favour of the ILR programme.  Some of them, however, 
have opined that before implementing projects under the ILR programme, the 

   
 
people should be made aware of the fa cts and the benefits accruing from the 
programme.  The Committee note that the Government have through the electronic 
and print media disseminated information on the website of NWDA about the ILR 
programme and according to Government  the response of the public has been 
positive so far, though there are some people and groups who have apprehensions 
about the rehabilitation of the displaced people, the resettlement and the 
environmental issues.  To address thes e issues, the Government constituted a 
Committee of environmentalists, social scie ntists and other experts on ILR with a 
view to make it a consultative process.   The Committee chaired by Secretary, Water 
Resources had the Secretaries of Ministries  of Social Justice and Empowerment, 
Environment and Forests, eminent engineers, sociologists and environmentalists as 
Members of the Committee.  The Committ ee advise the Government on various 
environmental, socio-economic and other tec hnical aspects at the stage of preparing 
of DPRs of each link of ILR project.  For the present, the Committee hope that all 
the apprehensions would be addressed to at  the time of preparation of DPR of the 
Ken-Betwa Link which according to them sh ould serve as model for preparation of 
DPRs of all other links. 
12. The Committee note that from amon g the individuals/experts/NGOs called 
for submission of Memoranda, some of them have given proposals/schemes as 
alternatives to the links under ILR programme claiming those to be more                     
cost-effective and addressing the environm ental and other issues more effectively 
than the projects under ILR programme.  Th e Ministry have informed that these 
proposals were discussed by an Independent  Group of Experts constituted by the 
Task Force with the persons who gave the proposals.  Those persons were also given 

   
 
an opportunity to present their studies.  The Independent Group of Experts which 
included CWC, NWDA and other organizat ions assessed these proposals and 
concluded that all the proposals were without detailed analysis, technically unsound, 
incomplete and hence could not be pursued in their present form.  Therefore, these 
alternative proposals could not be consid ered alternatives to the links under ILR 
programme.  While not disagreeing with the conclusion of the Independent Group 
of Experts comprising technical experts wh o found these proposals to be unsound,   
the Committee are of the view that those who have given these proposals are 
considered experts in the field of water man agement, etc. and if not all, some of the 
points / ideas / views contained in these pr oposals could definitely be of value and 
use while formulating the DPRs of the links under the ILR programme.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that while finalizing DPRs of various links the 
concerned authorities may have a re-look at  some of the suggestions with an open 
mind.  These are likely to give some better ideas for improvement in the ILR 
programme. 
13. The Committee on Water Resources visi ted a number of States and held 
informal discussions with the officials of  the State Governments on the subject of 
ILR programme and sought their views thereon.  The views of the State 
Governments so obtained can be summarized into two categories, one where most of 
the States give preference to smaller and intra-State Links and the second category, 
where the States are not satisfied with the benefit that would accrue from the links 
under ILR programme.  The Committee are happy  to note that almost all States 
agree to the ILR programme in principle and the only apprehension related to 
inequitable distribution of water / benefi ts out of the programme.  The Committee 

   
 
appreciate the stand taken by the Governme nt of Bihar in identifying a number of 
intra-State river links and the engagement of  the services of consultancy firms for 
preparation of DPRs of some of the intra-State Links.  The Committee note the view 
of the Orissa Government regarding absence of legal framework on Inter Linking of 
Rivers at the Central level.  The Committ ee, therefore, desire the Ministry to take 
all necessary and appropriate steps to add ress the apprehensions of the States as 
well as make efforts to implement the sugge stions of the State Governments both at 
the stage of preparation of DPR as well as its implementation thereafter. 
14. All said and done, the Committee are of  the considered opinion that delaying 
the ILR programme on one or the other p retext any further would only result in 
delay in accrual of benefits of the programme viz. growth of agricultural 
production, employment generation and res ultant slowing down of the economy.  
The Committee are highly optimistic of the success of the ILR programme provided 
all concerned including CWC, NWDA, th e State Governments and all concerned 
Ministries of Government of  India work in tandem in a spirited, homogenous and 
harmonious way with the ultimate aim of enhancing national good as the end object.  
The Committee, therefore, urge one and a ll to work in unison to achieve the 
successful implementation of the identi fied links under ILR programme in the 
shortest possible time in a cost effectiv e way.  They hope Government would give 
due consideration to the recommendations of the Committee on various issues 
expressed in this Report and implement the ILR programme in an earnest manner. 
 
NEW DELHI                         R.SAMBASIVA RAO, 
20 October, 2008                                            Chairman, 
28 Asvina, 1930(Saka)                            Standing Committee on Water Resources 

   
 
APPENDIX – I 
(Para 2.5) 
 
 
 
 
 

   
 
 
APPENDIX – II 
(Para 2.5) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   
 
  
APPENDIX – III 
(Para 2.23) 
 
DETAILS OF THE LINKS HAVING INTERNATIONAL DIMENSIONS 
 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
Link 
Name of River Total 
Link 
length 
(km) 
Link length 
in 
neighbouring 
countries 
(km) 
Name of Dam Country 
1. Kosi – 
Mechi 
Kosi 113 113 Sapta Kosi 
High Dam 
Nepal 
2. Kosi – 
Ghaghra 
Kosi 429 278 Sapta Kosi 
High Dam 
Nepal 
3. Gandak – 
Ganga 
Kali Gandaki 533 130 Kali Gandaki-I 
Dam 
 
Nepal 
  Burhi Gandaki   Burhi Gandaki 
Dam 
Nepal 
  Seti   Seti Storage 
Dam 
Nepal 
  Marshyandi   Marshyandi 
Dam 
Nepal 
  Narayani  
(Gandak) 
  Gandak 
regulating dam 
Nepal 
4. Ghaghra – 
Yamuna 
Karnali 
(Ghagra) 
431 113 Chisapani 
Dam 
Chisapani 
regulating dam 
Nepal 
 
Nepal 
5. Sarda – 
Yamuna 
Mahakali 
(Sarda) 
370 – Pancheswar 
Dam 
Nepal 
  Mahakali 
(Sarda)  
  Poornagiri 
Dam 
Nepal 
6. Manas – 
Sankosh – 
Tista – 
Ganga (M – 
S – T –  G) 
Manas 
 
Sankosh 
457 13 Manas Dam 
 
Sankosh Dam 
Bhutan 
 
Bhutan 
7. Jogighopa – 
Tista – 
Farakka (J – 
T – F) 
Alternative 
to M – S – T 
–  G 
Sankosh 441 6 Sankosh Dam Bhutan 
 
 
 

   
 
 
APPENDIX – IV 
(Para 3.10) 
 
COMPOSITION OF WORKING GROUPS/STUDY GROUPS OF TASK FORCE 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Specialised 
Discipline or 
Aspects to be 
addressed 
 
Member(s) of the Task 
Force who will look into the 
discipline 
Resource 
Person(s) / 
Adviser, 
Resource 
Institutions 
1. Technical Review of 
Link Plan, technical 
negotiations with the 
States & 
Prioritisation of 
Links 
 
Dr. C.C. Patel, V.C. 
Dr. C.D. Thatte, M.S. 
Dr. A. Mohanakrishnan  
Shri G.C. Sahu 
R.S. Prasad, Coordinator (TF) 
NWDA Chief 
Engineers of the 
concerned link or 
link(s) 
NWDA1, 
CWC2, 
CGWB3, 
ISRO4, 
IIT5s & IISc6 
NIH7 
2. Finance Funding 
aspects 
 
 
Cost Recovery 
Aspects  
Economic Impact 
Aspects 
Shri K.V. Kamath 
Shri Piyush Goel 
Shri Deepak Dasgupta 
 
-  do- 
 
-  do- 
 ICICI8, 
NIPF&P9 
 
 
NCAER10, 
NIPF&P 
3. Environment 
Ecology & related 
issues 
Dr. R.K. Pachauri, 
Shri Deepak Dasgupta 
Dr. B.R. Chauhan 
Member-Secretary 
 
Shri D.K. 
Biswas, 
Shri Samar Singh 
NEERI11 
TERI12 
FRI13 & Wild life 
Institute 
 
4. Social Issues Vice Chairman, 
Dr. Hari Babu, 
Prof. B.G. Verghese 
Shri Deepak Dasgupta 
 
 XIRR14 
CDSA15 
5. Legal (Water Law) 
Aspects 
Vice Chairman,  
Member-Secretary 
Prof. B.G. Verghese 
Dr. B.R. Chauhan 
 
Shri V.S. 
Chauhan 
 
1 National Water Development Agency 
2. Central Water Commission 
3 Central Ground Water Board 
4 Indian Space Research Organisation 
5 Indian Institute of Technology 
6 Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 
7 National Institute of Hydrology 
8 ICICI Bank Ltd. 
9 National Institute of Public Funding and Policy, New Delhi 
10 National Council of Applied Economic Research, New Delhi 
11 National Environmental Engineering Research Institute, Nagpur 
12 The Energy Research Institute, New Delhi 
13 Forest Research Institute, Dehradun 
14 Xavier Institute for Social Studies, Ranchi 

   
 
15 Centre for Development St udies and Activities, Pune 
 
6. International 
Dimensions 
Vice Chairman, M.S. 
Prof. B.G. Verghese 
Prof. Dr. B.R. Chauhan 
Shri 
Chandrasekhar 
Chauhan 
 
 
7. Application of 
Remote Sensing 
Technologies for 
speedy ILR 
implementation 
Dr. Kasturi Rangan 
Dr. C.C. Patel 
Dr. C.D. Thatte 
Dr. A. Mohanakrishnan  
Shri G.C. Sahu 
 
Dr. Rame Gowda ISRO 
NWDA 
Survey of India 
8. Communication & 
coordination with 
NGOs 
Shri Suresh Prabhu 
Dr. B.G. Verghese 
Shri Seshadri 
Chari 
Communication 
Core Group 
 
 
9. Execution & 
Implementation 
Dr. C.C. Patel, V.C. 
Member-Secretary 
Shri G.C. Sahu 
 CWC, NWDA, 
Industry 
nominees 
 
10. Institutional 
Mechanism for ILR 
implementation 
Vice Chairman, 
Member-Secretary Shri G.C. 
Sahu 
Dr. B.R. chauhan 
Shri Deepak Dasgupta 
 
Dr. Rame Gowda IIMA16 , 
NWDA 
Other Groups : 
 
1. Critical Review 
Group 
Dr. C.C. Patel, V.C. 
Member-Secretary 
Chairman (CWC) 
Commissioner (PR) 
CE (N/S), NWDA 
Coordinator 
 
CE (HQ.),  
NWDA 
 
2. Review Committee 
for TOR for DPR 
Vice Chairman, 
Shri Deepak Dasgupta 
Shri G.C. Sahu 
Coordinator 
 
CE (HQ.),  
NWDA 
 
3. Communication Core 
Group 
Shri V.B. Patel 
Shri Vinay P. 
Sahasrabudhe, 
Co-Chairman 
Dr. B.G. Verghese 
Shri Sahab Singh 
Shri A.K.K.Meena 
Dr. N. Bhaskara Rao 
Shri Ashok K. Maitra 
Shri Vivek Bharti 
Smt. M. Roy 
Shri Arabinda Ghose 
Shri Seshadri 
Chari 
 
 
 

   
 
 
16 Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad 
  Shri M.K. Singh 
Shri Jyoti Prakash 
Shri V. Palanichamy 
Dr. A.K. Sharda- MS 
 
  
4. Committee of 
Experts (COE) for 
the preparation of 
TOR for DPR 
Shri S.K. Das, Member, 
CWC 
Shri N.B. Desai, Retd. Secy, 
GO Gujarat 
Shri M.L. Gupta, CMD, 
TEHRI 
Prof. A.C. Kamraj 
Shri R.S. Prasad, 
Coordinator, TF-ILR 
 
  
5. Independent Group 
of Experts 
 
Prof. Subhash Chander 
Prof. PBS Sarma 
 
  
6. Agriculture & 
Aquaculture 
Dr. C.C. Patel, VC 
Dr. J.S. Samra 
Dr. S. Ayappan 
Dr. S. Bhowmik 
Shri Sudeep Banarjee 
Shri MKR Nair 
Shri Anoop Bhadwa 
Coordinator, TF-MS 
  
 
 
 

   
 
APPENDIX – V 
(Para 6.1) 
COMPOSITION OF  COMMITTEE OF ENVIRONMENTALISTS, SOCIAL 
SCIENTISTA AND OTHER EXPERTS ON “INTER-LINKING OF RIVERS” AND 
TERMS OF REFERENCE 
(i) COMPOSITION 
1. Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources,  
Govt. of India, New Delhi 
 
Chairman 
2. Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice  & Empowerment, 
Government of India, New Delhi  
   
Member 
3. Secretary, Ministry of Environment & Forests,  
Govt. of India, New Delhi     
 
Member 
4. Chairman, Central Water Commission, Govt. of India, New Delhi 
 
Member 
5. Director General, National Water Development Agency, 
New Delhi. 
 
Member 
6. Shri Z.Hasan, Former Secretary (WR), GOI, Noida. 
 
Member 
7. Shri A.C. Kamraj  
Chairman, NAWAD Council, Madurai, Tamil Nadu. 
 
Member 
8. Shri P. Sen, Rtd. Member, CWC, Kolkata, West Bengal. 
 
Member 
9. Shri Rajinder Singh, Noted Sociologist, Alwar, Rajasthan 
 
Member 
10. Dr. Ms Mala Kapoor (Sociologist), Director, 
Development and Research Foundation, New Delhi 
 
Member 
11. Dr. Ashok Khosla  
President, Development Alternatives, New Delhi.  
 
Member 
12. Prof. M.N. Madhyastha, Environmentalist, 
Centre for Ecological & Environment Studies, 
Mangalore University, Karnataka. 
 
Member 
13. Secretary, TFILR/Joint Secretary (Special Cell on ILR)    
MOWR  New Delhi      
 
Member 
Secretary 
14. Dr. Vijay Paranjpe, 
President and Founder of Gomukh and Gangotree Trusts, Pune 
 
Member 
15. Shri Himanshu Thakkar, Coordinator of Centre for Water Policy 
& Editor of Journal title ‘Dams, River & People’, New Delhi 
Member 
     

   
 
(ii) TERMS OF REFERENCE 
 
The Committee will advise the Government on the following aspects of the 
proposed project : 
 
1 Environmental and socio-economic issues covered in the Terms of Reference 
(TOR) for preparation of Detailed Project  Reports (DPRs) finalised by the Task 
Force. 
 
2. Rehabilitation & Resettlement package for the persons affected by ILR 
programme keeping in view the national R&R policy and structure of the agency 
for its implementation. 
 
3 Additional studies needed to be carried out, to address any other concerns in the 
ILR Programme. 
 
4 Impacts of proposed inter basin transfer of water links on settlements, occupations 
and other socio-economic activities, while preparing the DPRs. 
 
5 Adoption of appropriate measures for optimum utilisation of transferred water 
especially in the water short basins while preparing the various DPRs. 
6. All capital and revenue expenditure required to be incurred by the Committee 
shall be borne by Central Government through the grants in aid to National Water 
Development Agency (NWDA); and NWDA will account for expenditure of the 
Committee as a part of its establishment expenditure.   Audit of Controller 
General of Accounts and Comptroller and Auditor General of India would be 
incident on such expenditure in the same manner as it would be on NWDA other 
usual expenditure. The Secretarial assistance to this committee will be provided 
by NWDA.  Commissioner (PR), MOWR, will attend all the meetings of this 
committee as a special invitee. 
7. Terms and conditions of the non-official Members will be issued separately.   
 
8. This issues as per decision taken by the Prime Minister and with the approval of 
Minister of Water Resources. 
 

   
 
APPENDIX - VI 
(Para 7.1) 
 
LIST OF NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE COMMITTEE 
 
Sl. No. 
 
Name 
1. Shri B.G. Verghese, Eminent Journalist - Individual 
 
2. Indian National Hydro Power Association 
Shri Yogendra Prasad 
Shri B.K. Mittal 
Shri S.R. Narsimhan 
 
3. Institution of Engineers (India) Ltd. 
Shri B.J. Vasoya, Chairman, CLIR & Past President, IEI 
Dr. C.C. Patel, Patron, Committee for ILR 
Shri M. Gopalakrishnan, Vice Chairman, ILR 
 
4. International Commission on Irrigation & Drainage 
Shri M. Gopalakrishnan, Secretary General 
 
5. Water & Food Equitable Distribution Organisation 
Shri K.V. Rupchand 
Shri N.Seshadri Kumar 
 
6. SAHAYOGA 
Shri B.S. Bhavani Shankar 
 
7. Dr. P. Shivu - Individual 
 
8. National Civil Society Committee on Inter-Linking of Rivers 
 Dr. Ashok Khosla 
Prof. Yoginder K. Alagh 
Prof. Kanchan Chopra 
Shri Anil. D. Mohlie 
Ms. Medha Patkar 
Shri Ramaswamy R. Iyer 
Ms. Srabani Das 
 
9. Prof. A.K. Rastogi,  IIT, Mumbai - Individual 
 
10. Dr. C.D. Thatte, Former Chairman, CWC - Individual 
 
11. Shri C.C. Patel, Former Secretary, MoWR – Individual 
 
12. Shri P.R. Janbandhu, Ex. Engineer, Wardha - Individual 
 
13. Prof. S.K. Mazumder - Individual 
Former AICTE Emeritus Professor & Prof. of Civil Engg. DCE 
 

   
 
 
14. 
 
Dr. Kirit S. Parikh, Member, Planning Commission - Individual 
15. 
 
Shri A.D. Mohile, Consultant,    -  Individual 
Water Resources and former Chairman, CWC 
16. Dr. K. Malaisamy, Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha – Individual 
 
17. 
 
Shri V. Jayaraman, - Individual 
Retd. Section Engineer, Southern Railway  
 
18. Shri Martin D. Alumkara, Advocate, High Court - Individual 
 
19. SUJALAM 
Shri S.D. Budhisagar 
Shri Arvind Kulkarni 
Shri R. Chandrashekhar 
Shri Vaikunth Rajwadkar 
 
20. Shri Y. Prabhakara Rao  –  Individual 
Retd. CO, Zilal Parishad, Guntur 
 
21. Indigo Water Recycling Pvt. Ltd. 
Shri Ramakrishna Koduri 
 
22. Sustainable Approach for Development of All 
Sh. Ramesh Kumar Mumukshu 
 
23. Dr. Kaushal Kumar Sharma    -  Individual 
Reader, Kirorimal College, Delhi 
 
24. Shri M.S. Menon, Former Chief Engineer, CWC - Individual 
 
25. Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage 
Shri Manu Bhatnagar, Advisor (NHD) 
 
26. Centre for Equity Studies 
Shri Shekhar Singh Honorary Director 
 
27. 
 
Institute for Resource Management & Economic Development 
Prof. Kamta Prasad, Chairman 
 
28. 
 
NAWAD Council 
Shri A.C. Kamraj, Chairman 
Shri V. Kasi 
 
29. Research Foundation for Science Technology and Ecology 
Dr. Vandana Siva, Founder Director 
 
30. Shri Ramaswamy R. Iyer, Former Secretary - Individual 
Ministry of Water Resources. 
 

   
 
31. Prof. R.R. Singh, Social Scientist  -  Individual 
 
32. Shri R.C. Tripathy, Retd. Engineer-in-Chief  - Individual 
Water Resources, Government of Orissa 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX -VII 
(Para 7.23) 
 
Brief of  proposals by Individuals/NGO on ILR along with observations 
of MoWR   
 
“Ganga – Kumari National Waterways Project” proposal by          
Shri A. C. Kamaraj 
Gist of the Proposal 
 
This proposal envisages construction of three waterways.  (i) The Himalayan 
Waterway - This will be about 4500 km long. The Waterway will be at 500 m 
contour (MSL) connecting all the tribut aries of Ganga and Brahmaputra, (ii) The 
Central Waterway - This Waterway will be a bout 5750 km long and at 300 m 
contour (MSL) connecting tributaries of Ganga (on south), Mahanadi, Narmada, Tapi 
etc., (iii) The Southern Waterway:  This Waterway will be about 4650 km long and 
at 300 m contour (MSL) connecting Godavari, Krishna, Cauvery, West flowing rivers 
in Kerala.  
 
The waterways is indicated to have tr iple function of impounding, transmitting and 
distributing flood water among various ba sins, and is having an annual impounding 
capacity about 15, 000 TMC of flood water. It is mentioned that with the natural 
ground formation of our country it may be possible to maintain one particular 
elevation which would permit water to travel at an even height; so that no pumping is 
required in the entire stretch and the flow of water can be made purely by differential 
water head. There will also be a balancing waterway on the upper side of the 
Waterways which will act as one long reservoir and check dam.  
 
The benefits claimed to be accrued from this project are: i) A new cheap and 
sustained transport system (National Waterways) through out the year ii) 600 millions 
of people will get drinking water, iii) Fl oods and droughts will be well controlled, iv) 
Oil import will be reduced by 65, 000 Cr ore / year, v) 60,000 MW hydropower will 
be generated, vi) 150 million acres of additional land will get irrigation etc. 
 
Observations of MoWR 
 
This NWP proposal is only a variant of Capt ain Dastur’s Garland Canal Scheme and at 
conceptual stage. No detailed study has been carried out to establish the concept of Two – 
Way water diversion theory. There is no consideration of vast and varying geographical 
conditions of country. The project is c onceptualized on contour theory without 

   
 
visualising heavy cutting or filling and ignor ing actual terrain & slopes in the country, 
and outside the country.  No detailed hydrological studies have been carried out to tap 
flood waters in the proposal and its dependa bility.  The NWP proposal from geological 
point of view entails grave risk and possibility of land slides due to the numerous number 
of cross drainage works along the slopes of hills in the Himalayan region. The proposed 
interconnections between the Himalayan waterway and the Central waterway are 
technically infeasible and will not enable transfer of the indicated quantum of water in the 
time frame envisaged in the proposal. Further,  NWP project is conceptualized as a multi 
purpose project including Navigation, fisherie s cultivation, tourism, irrigation, drinking 
water supply etc. Each of the purpose has its own water requirements and their demand 
pattern varies affecting the power generation. 1/3
rd of the Himalayan Waterway (500 m 
contour) i.e. about 1500 Km passes through Nepal and Bhutan territory which will 
invariably involve international ramifications.  
 
 
Proposal of Dr. P. Shivu 
 
 
Gist of the Proposal 
 
Dr. P. Shivu in his proposal na med as Reticular Canal System  (RCS) suggested to link 
the rivers of the country for utilization of Water Resources of the country. Dr. P. Shivu in 
his proposal suggested that the river itself as the main channel and proposed to create 
multiple ‘primary channels’ from the river itself with controlling gates.  Primary channels 
shall be connected with secondary or the ter tiary channels etc. The primary channels are 
to be selected at multiple sites from the ri ver and / or from the valley’s and they will 
interconnect the entire Nation. The interconnec tion in such a fashion has been named 
Reticular Canal System. It is proposed to li nk various rivers from North to South of 
country and is cost effective & less harmful manner. He has claimed not to dig the entire 
canal system and to create channels for one or two kilometers at some points. 
   
Dr. P.Shivu has also illustrated increase in per capita income of villagers to Rs. 53000/- 
from Rs. 14,800/-.  He has worked out cost of this project to the t une of about Rs. Fifty 
Thousand Crores and annual income of Rs. 6287 crores but without much detail.  Total 
cost and benefits are workout merely on assumption only.  
 
Dr P. Shivu has proposed a new water s upply system for the entire Nation for the 
irrigation, industrialization, and for drinki ng purpose.  He has claimed that with 
implementation of his scheme, proposed land value of all irrigated lands shall become 
equal.  
 
Observations of MoWR 
 
In his assumption / knowledge, the rivers in Himalayan range are having abundant 
flow through out the year and carries enough water to be diverted in Secondary, tertiary  
channels.  The transfer of water from low leve ls to higher rivers / channels level has not 
been properly explained.  The alignment of th e various channels in the proposal has been 
thought without giving weightage to natural sl opes and bed level of river. The study is 
not based on any hydrological an alysis. Any water diversion channel has to have water 

   
 
storage structures and not gates to store wa ter. Considering the fact that rainfall is 
confined to a few monsoon months only, con tinuous water supply throughout the year in 
primary channel/river is only possible with storages and proper regulators.  The proposal 
also does not consider the fact that large parts of the country such as Rajasthan, 
Saurashtra region of Gujarat, etc. are drought prone.  Therefore, the principle of Reticular 
Canal System will not have any relevance to these areas.  Details of quantum of water 
available, water to be diverted from one rive r basin to another and area to be irrigated etc 
are not furnished. It is incomprehensible how canals can be directly taken out from these 
rivers. Further, total storage envisaged in river bed is prime-facie impractical. The author 
has not considered the vast variation of  topographical and geological conditions of 
country, faults, folds, dikes etc. in the rive r. In brief the Reticular Canal System as 
proposed by Dr. Shivu is not rooted in the basic tenets of the temporal and spatial 
hydrology of the river basins and thus not technically feasible. 
 
 
Proposal  of Shri K. V. Rupchand 
 
Gist of the Proposal 
 
The Indian River Grid (IRG) proposal, moot ed by Water and food Equitable Distribution 
Organization - WEDO, envisages water flows in TWO – WAY direction i.e. in clockwise 
as well as anticlockwise direction through 3 level canals viz. Northern Waterway (4400 
km long, at a level of 470 – 530 m connecting the Northern rivers), Vindhyan Waterway 
(7300 km long at a level of 270 – 330 m c onnecting the rivers around Vindhyas) and 
Deccan Waterway (4800 km long at level of 270 – 330 m connecting the Southern 
rivers). The width of Waterways will be 100 m or more depending on the site conditions 
and depth of waterways will be 10 m to a llow navigation of medium sized ships and 
barges. Besides the volume of the water to be  stored in waterways, the storage of the 
system will be augmented by the upstream  reservoirs, existing, under construction, 
planned and future. The system can be formed  in stages until the ultimate utilization of 
500 km
3 (17500 TMC) is realised. These 3 waterways are long, serpentine reservoirs 
allowing TWO – WAY transfer of waters de pending on the point of drawal and will be 
suitably connected to allow continuity of na vigation. The benefits as claimed in this 
proposal are that water to be drawn at any desired location, straight forward uses in the 
required places, does not involve any pumping, can generate up to 65,000 MW of hydro 
power, more command area is available, provides year round availability of water & 
navigation through the year, impact on Envir onment & Ecology is least, Cost of the 
proposal is about Rs. 3.90 lakh crores, implementation can be done in 5 – 8 years etc.  
 
Observations of MoWR 
 
This IRG proposal (which happens to be ve ry similar to National Waterways Project 
(NWP) proposal of Shri A. C. Kamaraj) is only a variant of Captain Dastur’s Garland 
Canal Scheme and at conceptual stage i.e. can be termed as rough Desk Top Study.  Capt. 
Dastur’s “Garland Canal Scheme” was exam ined by expert groups comprising senior 
engineers of the CWC, Professors from the IIT, Delhi and Roorkee University and 
Scientists of the GSI and the IMD and found im practical.  Further, the logic put forward 
in this proposal lacks the basic principles of hydrology & hydraulics. No detailed study 

   
 
has been carried out to establish the concep t of Two – Way water diversion theory. There 
is no consideration of vast and varying ge ographical conditions of country. The concept 
of flow in both the directions appears to be technically infeasible as the huge quantity of 
water cannot suddenly flow in opposite directi on as and when required. It will also be 
difficult to design an acceptable control mech anism for these waterways and hence there 
are chances of many disputes between the States  for withdrawal of water. It is also felt 
that IRG while framing the project has not done  any risk analysis for the construction of 
Waterways in hilly slopes. The irrigation be nefits are without any proper planning and 
highly exaggerated in the IRG proposal. IRG assessment of hydropower generation 
without having detailed information i.e. ava ilable discharge, head, and storage etc. 
appears to be on very higher side. The cl aim of IRG for the flood moderation, meeting 
drinking water needs of entire country as  well as drought mitigation seems to be 
exaggerated. Similarly cost of the proposal seems to be underestimated to advocate the 
proposal as the best proposal. A significant portion of the Northern Waterway involves 
international ramifications.  
 
 
Proposal of Shri P. R. Janabandhu 
 
 
Gist of the Proposal 
 
As an alternative to NWDA proposal, he has given a proposal named as “Water resources 
and irrigation development project of India”. In the proposal the water is proposed to be 
collected above 550 m MSL in Himalayas by constructing medium dams (55Nos) across 
river Ganga, Brahmaputra and their tributaries.   The proposed dams are to be constructed 
at 600 to 700m MSL. Water from Himalayan da ms is proposed to be diverted to main 
collecting channel (MCC) proposed to be laid  parallel to Himalayan foothills at an 
approximate elevation of 225 m MSL through pen stock. Syphon i.e. transporting channel 
pipe are proposed to be laid down from M CC to transfer water from Himalayans to 
Peninsular India.  Wherever, these siphons i.e. transporting channel (pipe) meets at 450 to 
500 m MSL i.e. Ground level in Peninsular India, on land canals are proposed to be 
constructed for further distribution through di stribution channels. Hydroelectricity is 
proposed to be generated wherever falls occur in Himalayan and Peninsular systems. 
During monsoon, large amount of hydro-power can be generated.  
 
Observations of MoWR 
 
Major portion of proposal of Shri Janabandhu contains the information collected from 
various sources regarding droughts in India,  floods in India, Water Resources data, 
various inter basin water transfer proposals as mooted from time to time, for example 
National Water Grid by Dr. K. L. Rao, Garland Canal by Capt. Dastur, National 
Perspective Plan of Ministry of Water Res ources as being pursued by NWDA etc. It may 
be mentioned here that his critical review regarding NWDA studies is based on his 
personal views not supported by any detailed scien tific or engineering logic. Further, the 
proposal prima-facie is unworkable as it is  not based on sound engineering basis. The 
water from MCC (main collecting channel) at MSL 225 m which happens to be an open 
channel cannot be transported to Penins ular region at MSL 450 to 500 m above MSL 

   
 
through syphon under differential head as proposed by Sh. Janabandhu.  It is also felt that 
while framing the project, the proposer has not done any risk analysis for the construction 
of such huge canals in hilly slopes.  Thus this proposal appears geo – physically 
impracticable and techno – economically unviable. The information on water availability, 
upstream uses downstream demands and proposed diversion has not been furnished in the 
proposal. No consideration has been given to the vast and varied geology and topography 
of the area, considering the uniform diameter of pipe (50 m) for main collecting channel 
perhaps it may not be possible to collect vast flows.  Likely water head loss through such 
siphon system having a length of 2145 km and distribution links (open channel length 
6990 km) in Southern canals has also not been computed. Idea of laying of 50 meter dia 
main collecting channel (pipe) at an elevati on of 225 meter does not seem to be feasible. 
As, it will be receiving water through the penstocks from the dams located at an elevation 
of 550m MSL, hence the pressure head in the main collecting channel will be 
approximately 300 meter or more. The claim of providing irrigation to additional 133 M 
ha is beyond realistic assessment. The proposal seems to be only schematic and no 
engineering/ geological/technical and hydrological  details have been given to critically 
examine the project.  
 
 
Memorandum submitted by Shri A. D. Mohile on Interlinking of Rivers 
 
Gist of the Memorandum: 
 
Shri Mohile while submitting his memorandum to the Standing Committee on Water 
Resources supported the concept of Inter Basin Transfer of Water. He expressed that the 
main socio – economic objectives of the proposals like providing livelihood & increasing 
incomes in rural areas, National economic de velopment and providing infrastructure for 
food self sufficiency can be effectively fulfilled. At the same time he mentioned that 
there are critiques of these proposals and sugge sted some corrective measures of these 
critiques. He also suggested that the proposal s of Interlinking of Rivers (ILR) may be 
classified as Long Distance Water Transfer s (LDWT) or Inter Basin Water Transfers 
(IBWT) or water transfers to non – co – basin states etc. He advocated for enforcement of 
policies and laws related to transfer of wa ter from one area to another and Parliament 
enacts and empowers the Union in this regard. In the author’s view, there is no need to 
amend Constitution for sensitive water related issu es as it is preferable for the Union to 
enact laws to regulate the waters of the interstate basins. Shri Mohile has also raised the 
issues of Rehabilitation & Resettlement of  project affected people, ecological 
consequences etc. He also raised some specific questions on the Feasibility Report of ken 
– Betwa link. 
 
Thus, the Memorandum  submitted by Sh. Mohile is basically in form of suggestions on 
the interlinking of rivers programme being persued by Government of India under NPP.  
The comments on these suggestion are given below: 
 
Observations of MoWR 
 
Various suggestions made by Shri Mohile in his memorandum regarding Rehabilitation 
& Resettlement of project affected people, ecological consequences etc. have already 

   
 
been covered in the ‘Terms of References  for preparation of Detailed Project Report 
(DPR) of Ken – Betwa link’ based on whic h the DPR is being under preparation by 
NWDA. The suggestions given by Shri Mohile about improvement in preparation of 
reports are already being kept in view wh ile preparing Detailed Project Report for the 
links. 
 
His suggestion regarding putting in public domain the information about the proposals 
and decision making process has al ready been implemented by NWDA 
(
www.nwda.gov.in). 
 
The Interlinking of Rivers (ILR) is only a programme or broad concept comprising of 
various independent or interdependent links transferring water from one river to other 
including enroute use by Inter Basin Water Transfer (IBWT) link proposals. As the 
length of various links proposed by NWDA vary from 11.0 Km to 828 Km, naming the 
project as Long Distance Water Transfers (LDTW) will not convey proper meaning for 
this project.  
 
As envisaged in the National Common Mi nimum Programme (NCMP) of the UPA 
Government, after completion of comprehensive assessment, the Govt. decided to pursue 
ILR with focus on Peninsular Component in the consultative manner.MOWR/NWDA is 
trying to arrive consensus among the States w ithin the existing legal provisions which is 
the most appropriate & time tested method . 
 
“Note on the Inter-linking of Rivers” submitted by Prof. R.R. Singh 
Gist of the Note 
Prof. R.R. Singh has not furnished any proposal but expressed his reservations 
about Interlinking of Rivers for various reasons ranging from environmental, social, 
economic, legal and technical issues.  Prof. Singh has mentioned various concerns he 
thinks about the Interlinking of Rivers Projects. He has also made few suggestions / steps 
which need to be taken up before taking a decision about implementation of interlinking 
of rivers project.  

   
 
 
Observations of MoWR 
 
The points raised by Prof. R.R. Singh to justify his reservations about Inter linking of 
Rivers are of very general nature appli cable to any major Water Resources Project, 
mostly based on news paper reports rather than in depth study of Feasibility Reports of 
various links & Terms of Reference (TOR) for preparation of Detailed Project Report 
DPR) kept on the Website of NWDA for public information. The issues highlighted by 
him are taken care of at various stages of  planning, design, construction and maintenance 
of Water Resources Project. It appears that he has considered the Interlinking of River 
Project as of a unique nature and  first time in the country.  The issues raised by him can 
be broadly grouped as environmental & ecological, social, legal and technical. 
 
National Water Development Agency (NWDA)  after carrying out various technical 
studies such as water balance studies of basins/sub basins, water balance studies at 
diversion points, Toposheet and storage capacity studies of reservoir, toposheet studies of 
link alignment, Pre-feasibility reports of links, has identified 30 links i.e. 16 links under 
Peninsular and 14 under Himalayan river development components for preparation of 
feasibility reports. The quantum of water proposed  to be diverted from the surplus river 
basin to the deficit basin has been worked after meeting water requirement of surplus 
basin for ultimate stage of development. 
 
NWDA has prepared the Terms of Reference (TOR) for preparation of DPR of ILR 
proposals links.  The TORs are placed on the Website of NWDA www.nwda.gov.in.  
NWDA has also taken up the work of prep aration of DPR of Ken - Betwa link. The 
rehabilitation and resettlement plan will be wo rked in respect of individual link at the 
time of preparation of Detailed Project  Report (DPR).  The rehabilitation and 
resettlement packages will be provided as per R&R policy of Govt. of India.  Therefore 
the reservations of Prof. R. R. Singh on Interlinking of Rivers are baseless.     
 
It is proposed that ILR proposals will be executed only with consensus of concerned 
states along with full transparency by keeping various studies on the Website. 
 
A committee of Environmentalists, Social Scie ntists and other Experts on Interlinking of 
Rivers has been constituted by MoWR in  December 2004. The Committee is constituted 
with a view to make the pro cess of proceedings on Interlinking of Rivers (ILR) in a fully 
consultative manner.   
 
The Committee will advise the Government on various aspects of the proposed project. 
The Committee has held four meetings so far. It  is expected that the issues raised by Mr 
R.R.Singh would be duly taken care of by this committee. 

   
 
Memorandum submitted by Shri Ramaswamy R. Iyer. 
 
Gist of the Memorandum: 
 
Shri Ramaswamy R. Iyer has addressed his letter in response to his hearing before 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on 26 th September, 2006. Shri Iyer in his letter, has 
broadly attempted to stress his views e xpressed during above hearing about his 
credentials in water resources field, his view s on floods, Rajasthan canal, social tensions, 
gigantism, link or concept of ILR, Kera la’s views on Pamba-Achankovil-Vaippar link, 
Polavaram project etc.. Further, Shri Iyer on the aspect of Interlinking of Rivers has 
asked Parliamentary Standing committee to refe r: (i) His paper ‘River Linking Project – 
A Critique’, presented in XIth National Water Convention, and (ii) River Linking Project: 
Many questions’, included in the book ‘River linking: A Millennium Folly?’ edited by 
Ms Medha Patkar. 
 
His paper “River Linking Project – A Critiqu e” broadly covers his apprehensions about 
ILR being mega project, stand of Govt. and Supreme Court monitoring, concept of 
project, its analogy with national water grid, concept of surplus and deficit basins, non 
availability of FRs, appli cability of ILR on flood control, power generation, drought, 
water for irrigation, gigantism,  impacts & consequences of ILR, international 
dimensions, diversion from Ganga and need for examination of individual links etc.  
 
Observations of MoWR 
  
In response to various issues raised by him, it may be stated that the planning for water 
resources development takes into consideration the topographical, geological, 
geographical, agro-climatic, hydro-geological, meteorological and techno-economic 
factors before deciding the type of stru cture i.e. surface/groundwater, micro, mini, 
medium or major. Inter Basin Water Tran sfer (IBWT) proposals as based on National 
Perspective Plan (NPP) are envisaged an important strategy in the overall development of 
water resources scenario in the country and to address national food self-sufficiency. The 
storages proposed envisaged efficient utiliza tion of the water resources for irrigation, 
hydro-power, drinking water supply & navigation besides mitigating the ravages of 
floods & miseries caused by droughts, by diverting water from water rich to water short 
areas. The project planning of IBWT links, and implementation shall be done to minimise 
the adverse impacts and enhance the positive im pacts.  With reference to Shri Iyer’s 
assertion regarding recent Floods & the ILR pr oject, it may be stated that objective of 
IBWT is not only flood mitigation but also to  provide irrigation, Industrial and domestic 
water needs, Hydropower and other benefits. As far as climate change is concerned, it 

   
 
may be mentioned that the experts have yet to arrive at a conclusive regional scenario 
because of its impacts. These likely impacts particularly on river flows as well as crop 
production make it imperative to go in for all the possible options for our food security. 
 
“Inter – linking of rivers in India”  proposed by  
Shri S.D. Buddhisagar of “Sujalam” 
 
 
Gist of the Proposal 
 
The concept of this proposal is to tap the ri ver flows before they enter the plains and 
transfer the water to the needy areas to f acilitate countrywide irrigation and transport. 
The proposal comprises a 2400 km long, 50 m deep, 500 m wide canal, named 
Himalayan canal, connecting natural valleys  and forming 19 dams totaling 80 km in 
length to collect water from Himalayan rivers. The Himalayan canal will collect about 
39,000 TMC (1080 BCM) of water annually. The 19 dams will have a holding capacity 
of about 2100 TMC (60 BCM) of water. Another canal, called “main canal” comprising 
the Aravali canal of 820 km length, a twin Valley canal of 170 km long, the Sahyadri 
high canal and Sahyadri low canal with le ngths of 1290 km and 370 km respectively. 
The main canal is proposed to be connected to the Himalayan canal through a link canal 
of 310 km long and it has a holding capacity of  275  TMC (8 BCM). It is proposed to 
maintain the bed elevations of these canal s with construction of huge embankments of 
heights ranging from 250 m to 600 m and the tail end of the last reach of the Sahyadri 
low canal will be at the mean sea level. 
 
  Benefits of irrigation, drinking water, navigation and hydropower generation are 
envisaged through this proposal. Some suggestions are also given for raising the capital 
for investment in the project. 
 
Observations of MoWR 
 
This proposal was also examined by Inde pendent Group of Experts (IGE) comprising 
Prof. Subhash Chander, formerly Prof. & Emeritus Fellow IIT, Delhi and Prof. B.S. 
Sharma, Professor Emeritus (AICTE) set up by the erstwhile Task Force on ILR.  IGE, 
after its examination concluded in its Report that the proposal is technically unsound, 
incomplete and hence cannot be pursued within its present form.  
 
“Sujalam” project is at a very elementary stage and lacks in basic tenets of Hydrology. 
The claimed storages and diversions are w ithout any proper analysis and may be over 
assessed. Further the link canals proposed in the project are conceptualized without 
considering the vast and fragile geological and geophysical characteristics of Himalayan, 
Aravali and western ghats and other va st land of the country. The very high 
embankments proposed to carry water at cl aimed high heads may not be geologically / 
geo – technically stable and may lead to major socio – economical and environmental 
hazards. The claimed benefits from project are also highly exaggerated and the project 
cost seems to be too high. In view of the above, it may not be possible to pursue further 
the project proposal in its present shape.  

   
 
APPENDIX – VIII 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SITTINGS OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON   “INTER 
LINKING OF RIVERS” 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON WATER RESOURCES (2004-2005) HELD ON TUESDAY, 25 JANUARY 2005 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hours to 1300 hours in Committee Room ‘B’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri R. Sambasiva Rao – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Bhanwar Singh Dangawas 
3. Shri Rajen Gohain 
4. Shri Raghuveer Singh Kaushal 
5. Smt. Manorama Madhavraj 
6. Shri Munshiram 
7. Shri Lonappan Nambadan 
8. Shri  Prabodh Panda  
9. Shri Harilal M. Patel 
10. Shri Laxmanrao Patil 
11. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri Indramoni Bora 
13. Shri Manoj Bhattacharya 
14.       Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania      
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri John Joseph    - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri A.S. Chera   - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy   - Under Secretary 
  
 
 

   
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
1. Shri V.K. Duggal, Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources 
2. Shri R. Jeyaseelan, Chairman, Central Water Commission 
3. Smt. Sushma Singh, Additional Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources 
4. Shri C.B. Vashist, Member (WP&P), Central Water Commission 
5. Shri Niranjan Pant, JS&FA, Ministry of Water Resources 
6. Shri R.K. Sharma, Director-General, National Water Development Agency 
(NWDA)  
 
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welc omed the Members to the sitting of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources.   
 
2. ***     ***     *** 
[The representatives of the Ministry were then called in.] 
 
3. After introduction, the representatives of the Ministry of Water Resources gave a 
detailed briefing on the different aspects of the subject ‘Inter-Linking of Rivers’ through 
a power-point presentation.   
 
4. Thereafter, the Members of the Committee sought certain clarifications in brief on 
various aspects of the subject.  The Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources replied to the 
queries raised by the Members. 
 
 
[The representatives of the Ministry then withdrew.] 
 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Sitting of the Committee has been 
kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned to meet again on Tuesday, 22 February, 2005. 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 
*** Minutes in respect of other matters kept separately. 
 

   
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
WATER RESOURCES (2005-2006) HELD ON TUESDAY, 17 JANUARY, 2006 
 
The Committee sat on 17 January, 2006 from 1530 hours to 1815 hours in 
Committee Room ‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri R. Sambasiva Rao – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Bhanwar Singh Dangawas 
3. Shri Rajen Gohain 
4. Shri Raghuveer Singh Kaushal 
5. Smt. Manorama Madhavraj 
6. Shri Munshiram                                                           
7. Shri Lonappan Nambadan 
8. Shri  Harilal. Madhavaji Bhai Patel 
9. Shri Laxmanrao Patil 
10. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat 
11. Smt. Minati Sen 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri Manoj Bhattacharya  
13. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N.K. Sapra    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.S. Chera    - Director 
3. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy    - Under Secretary 
 
List of Non-Official witnesses 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Time 
(Hours) 
1. Shri B.G. Verghese 1540 to 1630 
2. Shri Yogendra Prasad 
(i)  Shri B.K. Mittal 
(ii) Shri S.R. Narsimhan 
1700 to 1745 
3. Sh. Ramesh Kumar Mumukshu 1745 to 1815 
 

   
 
 
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman  wished a very Happy New Year and 
welcomed the Members to the sitting of th e Standing Committee on Water Resources.  
The Hon’ble Chairman then informed that  the Committee would undertake on-the-spot 
Study Tour to Ahmedabad, Goa, Mysore a nd Bangalore from 8-13 February 2006.  He 
drew attention of the Members to the Revise d Guidelines issued by the Hon’ble Speaker, 
Lok Sabha in connection with the Study Tours by the Parliamentary Committees and 
requested them to strictly adhere to the said Guidelines during the Study Tour of the 
Committee. 
 
2. Thereafter, the Hon’ble Chairman welcom ed each of the Non-Official witnesses 
invited to offer their views before the Committee on the subject ‘Inter-Linking of Rivers’.  
He drew their attention to the provision of  Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha and requested them to introduce themselves to the Committee.   
 
3. After the introduction, the Committee took oral evidence of the Non-Official 
witnesses on the subject ‘Inter-Linking of Rivers’.  Thereafter, the Hon’ble Chairman and 
the members sought certain clarifications in brief on various aspects of the subject and 
the witnesses responded thereto. 
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the Committee has been 
kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 

   
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON WATER RESOURCES (2005-2006) HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 18 JANUARY, 
2006 
 
The Committee sat on 18 January, 2006 from 1100 hours to 1340 hours and 1440 
hours to 1800 hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri R. Sambasiva Rao – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Bhanwar Singh Dangawas 
3. Shri Raghuveer Singh Kaushal 
4. Smt. Manorama Madhavraj 
5. Shri Munshiram                                                           
6. Shri Lonappan Nambadan 
7. Shri  Harilal. Madhavaji Bhai Patel 
8. Shri Laxmanrao Patil 
9. Shri Pannian Ravindran 
10. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat 
11. Smt. Minati Sen 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N.K. Sapra    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.S. Chera    - Director 
3. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy    - Under Secretary 
 
List of Non-Official witnesses 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Time 
(Hours) 
1. Shri A.C. Kamaraj 
(i) Shri V. Kasi 
1100 to 1220 
2. Dr. Kaushal Kumar Sharma 1220 to 1250 
3. Shri K.V. Rupchand 
(i) Shri N.S. Kumar 
1250 to 1340 
4. Shri M.S. Menon 1440 to 1510 
5. Shri B.S. Bhavani Shankar 1510 to 1540 
6. Shri Manu Bhatnagar 1540 to 1600 

   
 
7. Dr. P. Shivu 1600 to 1645 
8. Shri M. Gopalkrishnan 1645 to 1725 
9. Shri Shekhar Singh  1725 to 1800 
 
 
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welc omed the Members to the sitting of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources.   
 
2. The Hon’ble Chairman then welcomed Shri Pannian Ravindran, M.P., Lok Sabha 
who attended the sitting of the Committee for the first time after his nomination to serve 
as a Member of the Committee.    
 
3. Thereafter, the Hon’ble Chairman welcom ed each of the Non-Official witnesses 
invited to offer their views before the Committee on the subject ‘Inter-Linking of Rivers’.  
He drew their attention to the provision of  Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha and requested them to introduce themselves to the Committee.   
 
4. After the introduction, the Committee took oral evidence of the Non-Official 
witnesses on the subject ‘Inter-Linking of Rivers ’.  Some of the Non-official witnesses 
also gave a brief power point presentation to  the Committee on the subject.   Thereafter, 
the Hon’ble Chairman and the members sought certain clarifications in brief on various 
aspects of the subject and the witnesses responded thereto. 
 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the Committee has been 
kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 

   
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
WATER RESOURCES (2005-2006) HELD ON TUESDAY, 20 JUNE, 2006 
 
The Committee sat on 20 June, 2006 from 1500 hours to 1800 hours in 
Committee Room ‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri R. Sambasiva Rao – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Bhanwar Singh Dangawas 
3. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo 
4. Dr. M.Jagannath 
5. Shri Raghuveer Singh Kaushal 
6. Smt. Manorama Madhavraj 
7. Shri  Harilal Madhavaji Bhai Patel 
8. Shri Pannian Ravindran 
9. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat 
10. Smt. Minati Sen 
11. Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri Indramoni Bora  
13. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N.K. Sapra    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.S. Chera    - Director 
3. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy    - Under Secretary 
 
List of Non-Official witnesses/Organisations 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Time 
(Hours) 
1. National Civil Society 
Committee on Inter-Linking of 
Rivers 
 
 (i)  Dr. Ashok Khosla, 
(ii)  Prof. Yoginder K. Alagh 
(iii) Prof. Kanchan Chopra 
(iv) Shri Anil. D. Mohlie 
(v)  Ms. Medha Patkar 
 
1500 to 1645 

   
 
(vi) Shri Ramaswamy R. Iyer 
(vii) Ms. Srabani Das 
 
2. Prof. A.K. Rastogi 
IIT, Mumbai 
1700 to 1800 
 
 
 
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welc omed the Members to the sitting of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources.   
 
2. Thereafter, the Hon’ble Chairman welcom ed each of the Non-Official witnesses 
invited to offer their views before the Committee on the subject ‘Inter-Linking of Rivers’.  
He drew their attention to the provision of  Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha and requested them to introduce themselves to the Committee.   
 
3. After the introduction, the Committee took oral evidence of the Non-Official 
witnesses on the subject ‘Inter-Linking of Rivers ’.  Some of the Non-official witnesses 
also gave a brief power point presentation to the Committee on the subject.  Thereafter, 
the Hon’ble Chairman and the members sought certain clarifications in brief on various 
aspects of the subject and the witnesses responded thereto. 
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the Committee has been 
kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

   
 
  
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON WATER RESOURCES (2005-2006) HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 21 JUNE, 2006 
 
The Committee sat on 21 June, 2006 from 1100 hours to 1400 hours in 
Committee Room ‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri R. Sambasiva Rao – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Bhanwar Singh Dangawas 
3. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo 
4. Shri Rajen Gohain 
5. Dr. M.Jagannath 
6. Shri Raghuveer Singh Kaushal 
7. Shri Munshiram 
8. Shri  Harilal Madhavaji Bhai Patel 
9. Shri Pannian Ravindran 
10. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat 
11. Smt. Minati Sen 
12. Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh  
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Indramoni Bora  
14. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.S. Chera   - Director 
3. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy   - Under Secretary 
 
List of Non-Official witnesses 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Time 
(Hours) 
1. Prof. Kamta Prasad  
 
1100 to 1230 
 
2. Shri C.C. Patel  
(i)  Dr. C.D. Thatte  
 
1240 to 1400 

   
 
 
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welc omed the Members to the sitting of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources.   
 
2. Thereafter, the Hon’ble Chairman welcom ed each of the Non-Official witnesses 
invited to offer their views before the Committee on the subject ‘Inter-Linking of Rivers’.  
He drew their attention to the provision of  Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha and requested them to introduce themselves to the Committee.   
 
3. After the introduction, the Committee took oral evidence of the Non-Official 
witnesses on the subject ‘Inter-Linking of Rivers ’.  Some of the Non-official witnesses 
also gave a brief power point presentation to  the Committee on the subject.   Thereafter, 
the Hon’ble Chairman and the members sought certain clarifications in brief on various 
aspects of the subject and the witnesses responded thereto. 
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the Committee has been 
kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

   
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON WATER RESOURCES (2005-2006) HELD ON FRIDAY, 07 JULY, 2006 
 
The Committee sat from 1430 hours to 1745 hours in Committee Room ‘C’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.   
 
PRESENT 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
  Dr. M. Jagannath   - In the Chair 
 
2. Shri Bhanwar Singh Dangawas 
3 Shri Bikram Keshari Deo 
4 Shri Rajen Gohain 
5. Shri Raghuveer Singh Kaushal 
6. Shri Munshiram 
7. Shri Lonappan Nambadan 
8. Shri Laxmanrao Patil 
9. Shri Pannian Ravindran 
10. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat 
11. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri Indramoni Bora  
13. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N.K. Sapra    - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.S. Chera    - Director 
3. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy    - Under Secretary 
 
List of Non-Official witnesses/Organisations 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Time 
(Hours) 
1. Shri P.R. Janbandhu 
      
(i) Shri Shirish Rajurkar 
 
1430 to 1530 
2. Prof. S.K. Mazumder 
 
1530 to 1630 
3. Dr. Vandana Siva  
 
1645 to 1745 

   
 
 
 
In the absence of Hon’ble Chairma n, Standing Committee on Water Resources, 
the Committee chose Dr. M. Jagannath to act  as Chairman for the Sitting under Rule 258 
(3) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.  The Chairman then 
welcomed the members to the sitting of the Committee.  
 
2. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed each of the Non-Official witnesses invited to 
offer their views before the Committee on th e subject, ‘Inter-Linking of Rivers’.  He 
drew their attention to the provisions of Dir ection 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker, 
Lok Sabha and requested them to introduce themselves to the Committee.   
 
3. After the introduction, the Committee took oral evidence of the Non-Official 
witnesses on the subject ‘Inter-Linking of Rivers’.  Some Non-official witnesses also 
gave brief power point presentations to th e Committee on the subject.  Thereafter, the 
members sought certain clarifications in brie f on various aspects of the subject and the 
witnesses responded thereto. 
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the Committee has been 
kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

   
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
WATER RESOURCES (2006-2007) HELD ON TUESDAY, 26 SEPTEMBER 2006 
 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1615 hours in Committee Room ‘E’, 
Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri R. Sambasiva Rao – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Bhanwar Singh Dangawas 
3.    Shri Bikram Keshari Deo 
4.       Shri Raghuveer Singh Kaushal 
5.       Smt. Manorama Madhavraj 
6.       Smt. Kiran Maheshwari 
7.         Shri Shankhlal Majhi 
8.       Shri Mukeem Mohammad 
9.       Shri Subodh Mohite 
10.       Shri Lonappan Nambadan 
11.       Shri  Harilal Madhavaji Bhai Patel  
12.       Smt. Minati Sen 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13.       Shri Indramoni Bora 
14.       Shri K.E. Ismail 
15. Shri K.P.K. Kumaran 
16. Prof. P.J. Kurien 
17. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy   - Under Secretary 
  
Non-Official Witness 
 
     1.  Shri Ramaswamy R. Iyer, Former Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources. 
 
 

   
 
 At the outset, the Chairman welcom ed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee.  He particularly welcomed the new Members who attended the sitting of the 
Committee for the first time after being nominated as its Member. 
 
2. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the N on-Official witness invited to offer his 
views before the Committee on the subject ‘In ter-Linking of Rivers’.  He drew his 
attention to the provisions of Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha 
and requested him to introduce himself to the Committee. 
 
3. After the introduction, the Committee took oral evidence of the Non-Official 
witness on the subject ‘Inter-Linking of Rivers ’.  Thereafter, the members sought certain 
clarifications in brief on various aspects of the subject and the witness responded thereto. 
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the Committee has been 
kept separately 
. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

   
 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
WATER RESOURCES (2006-2007) HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 16 MAY, 2007 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1700 hours in Committee Room ‘B’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri R. Sambasiva Rao – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Bhanwar Singh Dangawas 
3. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo 
4. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
5. Shri Raghuveer Singh Kaushal 
6. Shri Sankhlal Majhi 
7. Shri Abu Ayes Mondal 
8. Shri  Harilal. Madhavaji Bhai Patel 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9 Shri Ajay Singh Chautala 
10. Shri K.E. Ismail 
11. Shri K.P.K. Kumaran 
12. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
13. Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.S. Chera    - Director 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy    - Deputy Secretary 
 
List of Non-Official witnesses 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Time 
(Hours) 
1. Dr. Kirit S. Parikh, Member, 
Planning Commission 
1500 to 1545 
2. Shri A.D. Mohile 1545 to 1630 
3. Dr. K. Malaisamy, MP (RS) 
 
1630 to 1700 
 
 
 
 

   
 
 
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welc omed the Members to the sitting of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources.   
 
2. Thereafter, the Hon’ble Chairman welcom ed each of the Non-Official witnesses 
invited to offer their views before the Committee on the subject ‘Inter-Linking of Rivers’.  
He drew their attention to the provision of  Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha and requested them to introduce themselves to the Committee.   
 
3. After the introduction, the Committee took oral evidence of the Non-Official 
witnesses on the subject ‘Inter-Linking of Rivers’.  Thereafter, the Hon’ble Chairman and 
the members sought certain clarifications in brief on various aspects of the subject and 
the witnesses responded thereto. 
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the Committee has been 
kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

   
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON WATER RESOURCES (2006-2007) HELD ON MONDAY, 11 JUNE 2007 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hours to 1300 hours in Committee Room ‘E’, 
Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri R. Sambasiva Rao – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Bhanwar Singh Dangawas 
3. Shri Rajen Gohain 
4. Shri Prakesh B. Jadhav 
5. Shri Raghuveer Singh Kaushal 
6. Smt. Manorama Madhavraj 
7. Shri Mukeem Mohammad 
8. Shri Abu Ayes Mondal 
9. Shri Lonappan Nambadan 
10. Shri Harilal M. Patel 
11. Dr. Arun Kumar Sarma 
12. Smt. Minati Sen 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri Indramoni Bora 
14. Shri K.E. Ismail 
15. Prof. P.J. Kurien 
16. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
17. Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.S. Chera   - Director 
3.         Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy   - Deputy Secretary 
  
 
List of Non-Official witnesses 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Time 
(Hours) 
1. Prof. R.R. Singh  1100 to 1140 
2. Shri V. Jayaraman 1140 to 1220 
3. Shri R.C. Tripathy 1220 to 1300 

   
 
 
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welc omed the Members to the sitting of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources.   
 
2. Thereafter, the Hon’ble Chairman welcom ed each of the Non-Official witnesses 
invited to offer their views before the Committee on the subject ‘Inter-Linking of Rivers’.  
He drew their attention to the provision of  Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha and requested them to introduce themselves to the Committee.   
 
3. After the introduction, the Committee took oral evidence of the Non-Official 
witnesses on the subject, ‘Inter-Linking of Rivers’.  Thereafter, the Hon’ble Chairman 
and the members sought certain clarifications in brief on various aspects of the subject 
and the witnesses responded thereto. 
 
4. ***     ***     *** 
 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the Committee has been 
kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 
**** Minutes in respect of other matters kept separately. 
 
 

   
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES (2006-2007) HELD ON FRIDAY, 22 
JUNE 2007 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1700 hours in Committee Room ‘B’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri R. Sambasiva Rao – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Bhanwar Singh Dangawas 
3. Shri Bikram Kesari Deo 
4. Shri Rajen Gohain 
5. Shri Prakesh B. Jadhav 
6. Shri Raghuveer Singh Kaushal 
7. Smt. Manorama Madhavraj 
8. Smt. Kiran Maheshwari   
9. Shri Shankhlal Majhi 
10. Shri Abu Ayes Mondal 
11. Shri Lonappan Nambadan 
12. Shri Harilal M. Patel 
13. Dr. Arun Kumar Sarma 
14. Smt. Minati Sen 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
15. Shri K.P.K. Kumaran 
16. Prof. P.J. Kurien 
17. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.S. Chera   - Director 
  
List of Non-Official witnesses 
Sl. No. Name Time (Hours) 
 
1. Shri Martin D. Alumkara 1500 to 1545 
2. Shri S.D. Budhisagar 1545 to 1630 
3. Shri Y. Prabhakara Rao 1630 to 1700 

   
 
 
 
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welc omed the Members to the sitting of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources.   
 
2. Thereafter, the Hon’ble Chairman welcom ed each of the Non-Official witnesses 
invited to offer their views before the Committee on the subject ‘Inter-Linking of Rivers’.  
He drew their attention to the provision of  Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha and requested them to introduce themselves to the Committee.   
 
3. After the introduction, the Committee took oral evidence of the Non-Official 
witnesses on the subject ‘Inter-Linking of Rivers’.  Thereafter, the Hon’ble Chairman and 
the members sought certain clarifications in brief on various aspects of the subject and 
the witnesses responded thereto. 
 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the Committee has been 
kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 

   
 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES (2006-2007) COMMITTEE HELD ON 
WEDNESDAY, 18 JULY 2007 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1630 hours in Committee Room ‘G074’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri R. Sambasiva Rao – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Bhanwar Singh Dangawas 
3. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo 
4. Shri Rajen Gohain 
5. Smt. Preneet Kaur  
6. Smt. Manorama Madhavraj 
7. Smt. Kiran Maheshwari   
8. Shri Shankhlal Majhi 
9. Shri Abu Ayes Mondal 
10. Shri Lonappan Nambadan 
11. Shri Harilal M. Patel 
12. Dr. Arun Kumar Sarma 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Shri K.E. Ismail 
14. Shri K.P.K. Kumaran 
15. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri A.S. Chera   - Director 
2.         Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy   - Deputy Secretary 
  
 
List of Non-Official witnesses 
 
1. Shri S.D. Budhisagar 
2. Shri Arvind Kulkarni 
3. Shri R. Chandrashekhar 
4. Shri Vaikunth Rajwadkar 
 
 

   
 
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welc omed the Members to the sitting of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources.   
 
2. Thereafter, the Hon’ble Chairman welcom ed each of the Non-Official witnesses 
invited to offer their views before th e Committee on the subject, ‘Inter-Linking of 
Rivers’.  He drew their attention to the provi sions of Direction 55(1) of the Directions by 
the Speaker, Lok Sabha and requested them to introduce themselves to the Committee.   
 
3. After the introduction, the Committee took oral evidence of the Non-Official 
witnesses on the subject ‘Inter-Linking of Ri vers’.  The Hon’ble Chairman and the 
members then sought certain clarifications in  brief on various aspects of the subject and 
the witnesses responded thereto. Thereafte r, the Committee decided to obtain the 
observations/comments of the Ministry of  Water Resources/CWC/NWDA on the salient 
features of the proposal/memorandum furnished by the witnesses. 
 
4. ***     ***     *** 
 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the Committee has been 
kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 
*** Minutes in respect of other matters kept separately. 
 
 
 

   
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
WATER RESOURCES  (2007-2008) HELD ON THURSDAY, 13 SEPTEMBER 
2007 
 
The Committee sat from 1400 hours to 1715 hours in Committee Room ‘B’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri R. Sambasiva Rao – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Bhanwar Singh Dangawas 
3. Shri Raghuveer Singh Kaushal 
4. Shri Shankhlal Majhi 
5. Shri Abu Ayes Mondal 
6. Shri Vishnu Deo Sai 
7. Dr. Arun Kumar Sarma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Prof. P.J. Kurien 
9. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
10. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
11. Shri Nandi Yellaiah 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri S.K. Sharma   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Deputy Secretary 
  
List of Non-Official witnesses 
 
Sl. No. Name Time (Hours)
 
1. Representatives of Institution of Engineers 
(India) 
 
(i)  Dr. C.C. Patel, Patron, Committee for ILR 
(ii) Shri B.J. Vasoya, Chairman,CILR & Past  
     President, IEI 
(iii) Shri M Gopalakrishnan, Vice Chairman, 
CILR 
 
1400 to 1600 
2. Shri Ramakrishna Koduri 1615 to 1715 

   
 
 
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting and 
particularly also welcomed Shri Vishnu Deo Sai, MP, Lok Sabha who was nominated for 
the first time to the Committee.   
 
2. Thereafter, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Institution 
of Engineers (India) invited to offer thei r views before the Committee on the subject 
‘Inter-Linking of Rivers’.  He drew their atte ntion to the provision of  Direction 55(1) of 
the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha and requested them to introduce themselves to 
the Committee.   
 
3. After the introduction, the Committee took oral evidence of the Non-Official 
witnesses on the subject ‘Inter-Linking of Rivers’.  Thereafter, the Hon’ble Chairman and 
the members sought certain clarifications in brief on various aspects of the subject, and 
the witnesses responded thereto. 
 
(Tea Break from 1600 Hrs. to 1615 Hrs.) 
 
4. After the tea break, the Chairman welcomed Shri Ramakrishna Koduri invited to 
offer his views before the Committee on the s ubject, ‘Inter-Linking of Rivers’.  He drew 
Shri Koduri’s attention to the provision of Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha and requested him to  introduce himself to the Committee.  
Thereafter the Committee took oral evidence on the subject and members sought certain 
clarifications on various aspects of the subject to which the witness responded in brief. 
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the Committee has been 
kept separately. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

   
 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
WATER RESOURCES (2007-2008) HELD ON SATURDAY, 12 APRIL 2008 
 
The Committee sat from 1130 hours to 1330 hours in Committee Room ‘D’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri R. Sambasiva Rao – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Bhanwar Singh Dangawas 
3. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo 
4. Shri Raghuveer Singh Kaushal 
5. Shri Shankhlal Majhi 
6. Shri Abu Ayes Mondal 
7. Dr. Arun Kumar Sarma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Kumar Deepak Das 
9. Shri K.E. Ismail 
10. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri C.S. Joon    - Director 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy   - Deputy Secretary 
  
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
1. Shri U.N. Panjiar, Secretary, WR 
2. Shri S. Manoharan, Addl. Secretary, WR 
3. Shri A.D. Bhardwaj, Director General, NWDA 
4. Shri K. Vohra, Sr. Joint Commissioner (BM), WR 
 
 
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welc omed the Members to the sitting of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources.   
 
 
 

   
 
2. The Hon’ble Chairman then welcomed Shri Kumar Deepak Das, M.P., Rajya 
Sabha who attended the sitting of the Committee for the first time after his nomination to 
the Committee to serve as a member of the Committee.  Thereafter, the Hon’ble 
Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources as well as his colleagues 
to the sitting of the Committee and requested  them to introduce themselves to the 
Committee.   
 
3. After introduction, the representatives of the Ministry of Water Resources gave a 
detailed briefing on the different aspects of the subject ‘Inter-Linking of Rivers’ through 
a power-point presentation.   
 
4. Thereafter, the Members of the Committee sought certain clarifications in brief on 
various aspects of the subject.  The Secretar y, Ministry of Water Resources and others 
replied to the queries raised by the Members. 
 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Sitting of the Committee has been 
kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 

   
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2008-2009) HELD ON MONDAY, 20  OCTOBER 2008 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1545 hour s in Committee Room ‘C’, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri R. Sambasiva Rao – Chairman 
MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Bhanwar Singh Dangawas 
3. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo 
4. Shri Rajen Gohain 
5. Shri Shankhlal Majhi 
6. Shri Abu Ayes Mondal 
7.       Shri Lonappan Nambadan 
8.       Shri Harilal Madhavbhai Patel 
 
                    RAJYA SABHA 
 
9.      Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
10.      Smt. Vasanthi Stanley 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P.K. Grover   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy   - Deputy Secretary 
 
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welc omed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee and briefed the Members on some important aspect of examination of the subject “Inter 
Linking of Rivers”.   
 
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following : 
(i) ***   ***   ***   ***  
 (ii) Draft Report on the subject “Inter Linking of Rivers”.   
 
___________________________________________________________________________________ 
**** Minutes in respect of other matters kept separately. 
 

   
 
 
After some discussion, the Committee adopted both the Reports without any 
amendment/modification. 
 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to have the above draft Reports finalized on 
the basis of factual verification from the Ministry of Water Resources and to present the same 
to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 