STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES
(2005-06)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006)
{Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Third Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Water Resources}
FOURTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
November, 2005/Kartika, 1927 (Saka)
 4

FOURTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES
(2005-06)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2005-2006)
(Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
 contained in the Third Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Water Resources
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.12.2005
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.12.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2005/Kartika, 1927 (Saka)

WRC NO. 4
Price:
2005 By Lok Sabha Secretariat

CONTENTS
           P A G E
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2005-06)…………………  (iii)
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………… (v)
CHAPTER I   Report ………………………………………… 1
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government ………………….. 22
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the
Government’s replies …………………………. 49
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ……………………. 55
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited … 72
APPENDICES
I. Recommendations of the Expert Group and
Recommendation of the Task Force……………………… 75
II. Copy of D.O. Letter NO. 5/14/2002-ER/1586, dated 12
April, 2005 from Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources
to Secretary, Planning Commission ……………………… 78
III. Minutes of the Fourth sitting of the Committee held on
21 October, 2005…………………………………………. 80
IV. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations contained in the Third
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee ……... 82

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER
RESOURCES
(2005-2006)
  Shri R. Sambasiva Rao  -  Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Bhanwar Singh Dangawas
3. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo
4. Shri Rajen Gohain
5. Dr. M.Jagannath
6. Smt.Preneet Kaur
7. Shri Raghuveer Singh Kaushal
8. Smt. Manorama Madhavraj
9. Smt. Kiran Maheshwari
10. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi
11. Shri Munshiram
12.       Shri Lonappan Nambadan
13.       Shri  Harilal. Madhavaji Bhai Patel
14.       Shri Laxmanrao Patil
15. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat
16. Smt. Minati Sen
17. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi
18. Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh
19.       Shri Sita Ram Yadav
          #20.      Vacant
21. Vacant
RAJYA SABHA
22. Shri Indramoni Bora
23.       Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
            24. Shri Ajay Singh Chautala
25. Smt. Sushree Devi
26. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania
27.      Shri Sharad Yadav
          *28. Vacant
      29. Vacant
      30.       Vacant
31. Vacant
* Shri Jaswant Singh, MP,  Rajya Sabha has resigned w.e.f. 11.08.2005
# Nomination of Shri Prabodh Panda, MP change by the Speaker, Lok Sabha w.e.f. 23.08.2005

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri John Joseph   - Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Joint Secretary
 3. Shri A.S. Chera   - Director
 4. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Under Secretary
5. Shri Ramesh Lal   - Committee Officer
6. Shri Santanu Mukherjee  - Committee Assistant

INTRODUCTION
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Water Resources (2005-06) having
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the
Fourth Report on the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations
contained in the Third Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on
Water Resources (2005-06) on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Ministry of Water
Resources.
2. The Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 20 April 2005.  The replies of
the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 26
August 2005.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and
adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 21 October 2005.
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Third Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of
the Committee is given in Appendix-IV.
NEW DELHI; R. SAMBASIVA RAO,
11 November, 2005 Chairman,
20  Kartika, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Water Resources

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources deals
with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations/
observations contained in their Third Report on Demands for Grants
(2005-2006) of the Ministry of Water Resources which was presented
to Lok Sabha on 20 April 2005.
2. Action taken notes were received from the Government in respect
of all the 27 recommendations/observations of the Committee which
have been categorised as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Para Nos. 1.23, 2.13, 2.20, 3.9, 3.20, 3.21, 3.28, 4.14, 5.15,
5.26, 5.43, 5.57, 6.17 and 6.23
(Total-14)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Para Nos. 2.11, 2.12 and 2.28
(Total-3)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Para Nos. 1.21, 1.22, 1.30, 2.14, 2.15, 4.13, 5.34 and 5.50
(Total-8)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 3.19 and 6.29
(Total-2)

2
3. The Committee desire that final replies in respect of the
recommendations/observations for which only interim replies have
been given by the Government should be furnished to the Committee
within three months of the presentation of the Report.
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the recommendations/observations in the
succeeding paragraphs.
A. Reduction in plan allocation and utilization of Irrigation Potential
created
Recommendation (Para Nos. 1.21 and 1.22)
5. The Committee observed that though the Ministry had proposed
Rs. 946.21 crore as Plan allocation for the year 2005-2006, the Planning
Commission allocated Rs. 921 crore—Rs. 621 crore for the Central Sector
and Rs. 300 crore for the State Sector—which was Rs. 25.21 crore less
than the proposed allocation by the Ministry. The Committee also
observed that it was difficult to understand the rationale behind the
reduction in allocations, which was at variance with the commitment
of Government to give top priority to equitable and effective water
management in the country. The Committee were of the firm view
that the Union Government could not abdicate its responsibility on
the State Sector Schemes as these Schemes interalia entailed creation of
more irrigation potential, recharge of ground water and checking floods
and erosion across the country and desired the Ministry to further
strengthen the monitoring mechanism in respect of these Schemes.
The Committee had observed that though policy thrust of the Ministry
was on drawing up time schedule for completion of on-going Major
Irrigation Projects, they desired that there was a need to lay more
emphasis on the utilization of irrigation potential already created.
6. The Ministry has, in its action taken reply, stated that the outlay
approved by the Planning Commission is Rs. 25.21 crore less than the
outlay proposed by the Ministry . This reduction is marginal and will
not adversely affect the pace of implementation of ongoing projects
and their timely completion. The allocation for the scheme for
CAD&WM during the year 2004-05 has also been reduced to some
extent because the State Governments have not come forward with
sufficient proposals despite every effort was made in this direction.
The three schemes viz. (a) Flood Control in Brahmaputra Valley, (b)
Repair, Renovation and Restoration of water bodies and (c) Artificial
recharge of Ground Water, etc. Have been approved as State Sector

3
schemes. However, the implementation of the schemes continues to be
monitored by the Ministry of Water Resources. Certain gap in the
potential created and the potential utilized is inevitable as command
takes time to develop. The main objective of monitoring is to ensure
the achievement of physical and financial targets for timely completion
of projects, identification of the inputs required, analysis of the reasons
for any shortfalls/bottlenecks and suggest remedial measures, etc. with
a view to complete them in a time-bound manner and to achieve the
targets of creation of irrigation potential.
7. The Committee note that while the reply is more than
forthcoming in delving into the reasons for reduction of outlays in
the RE and CAD&WM during the years 2003-2004 and 2004-2005,
respectively, the Ministry has ostensibly failed in addressing the
reasons for increase in non-Plan allocation for the year 2005-2006.
Further, the reply maintains a stoic silence on the reduced allocation
by the Planning Commission in components like Major and Medium
Irrigation, Minor Irrigation and Flood Control, while maintaining
that the reduced allocation is marginal and would not adversely
affect the pace of implementation of on-going projects and their
timely completion. All these bear ample testimony to the
Government’s commitment to give top priority to equitable and
effective water management in the country which has, in reality,
failed to gain currency. The Committee observe that the reply is an
obvious attempt to understate the existing multiplicities in
implementation process, i.e. Schemes to be planned and executed by
the State Governments and monitored by the Centre, for the three
Major Centrally-Sponsored Schemes, viz. , Flood Control in
Brahmaputra Valley, Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water
Bodies and Artificial Recharge of Ground Water, etc. The Committee
are confident that the pace of implementation of various Schemes to
be executed by the State Governments would be a casualty, given
the notoriety of few States as worst offenders with regard to timely
completion of projects. Furthermore, the reply is also silent on steps
taken/proposed to be taken for utilization of irrigation potential
already created. The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to
evolve a realistic and effective time schedule for utilization of grants,
submission of Utilization Certificates by States while earmarking
allocations at BE stage itself so that reduction at the RE stage for
State Sector Projects does not become a regular feature. The
Committee also desire the Ministry to give due emphasis in priority
areas in order to ensure apportioning of scarce resources in a best
possible manner to realize the objective of equitable and proper
management of water resources. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the steps taken in this regard.

4
B. Need for a single Administrative Ministry for “Water”
Recommendation (Para N. 1.30)
8. The Committee observed that the National Development Council
at its 50th meeting held in December 2002 had considered the need
for a Single Administrative Ministry for dealing with all issues
concerning ‘Water’. Further, the Planning Commission too was of the
view that the subject of ‘Water’ and all its related issues be dealt with
at the Union level in one Ministry, viz. the Ministry of Water Resources
to pave the way for integrated planning, development and management
of water resources in the country for their optimal utilization. This
had also been emphasized in the National Water Policy—The
Committee strongly believed that the ‘Single Administrative Ministry
for Water’ was long overdue as a policy initiative by the Government.
The Committee felt that it would be in the fitness of the things to
designate the Ministry of Water Resources as the nodal agency for
dealing with all aspects of Water at the Central Government level at
the earliest.
9. The Ministry has, in its action taken reply, stated that the relevant
paras from the Tenth Five Year Plan (2002-07) Volume-II are as under:
“8.1.63 Presently water is a subject that is being dealt with in
different ministries. 8.1.64 While at the policy formulation level,
the National Water Resources Council representing all the concerned
ministries was set up in 1983 under the Prime Minister, the
Planning Commission is of the view that the subject of water and
all its uses should be dealt with at the Centre by only one
ministry—the Ministry of Water Resources.
8.1.65 To begin with, it is desirable that a National Water Resources
Programme Coordination Committee under the chairmanship of
Member (Agriculture and Water Resources), Planning Commission
is set up to ensure that everyone’s interests and concerns are taken
into account when framing and implementing all programmes
having abearing on the use, development, conservation,
augmentation, productivity and protection of water resources.
Secretaries of the concerned ministries as well as the Chairman of
CWC, CGWB and Chairman and Managing Director of the National
Hydroelectric Power Corporation (NHPC) would be members and
the Secretary, Water Resources, would be the Member Secretary.
The role of each Ministry in the use and management of water
should be clearly identified by the Committee.”

5
The Ministry submitted that the proposed National Water Resources
Programme Coordination Committee has not yet been constituted.
10. The Committee are least satisfied with the reply furnished
by the Ministry. They are of the firm view that the idea of ‘Single
Administrative Ministry for Water’ is highly desirable and a long
overdue step to need an earnest need for integrated planning,
development and management of water resources of the country.
The sentiment expressed by the Committee further gains credence
in view of its endorsement in the Tenth Plan document and the
National Water Policy. The National Development Council (NDC) is
the apex body in the country for policy formulation and its
observation speaks volumes about the need to bring various water-
related subjects under the control of the Ministry, i.e. the Ministry
of Water Resources. The Committee, however, observe that yet
another Committee, i.e. a National Water Resources Programme
Coordination Committee under the Chairmanship of Member
(Agri&WR), Planning Commission is proposed to be set up to ensure
that interests of all concerned are taken into account while framing
and implementing programmes having a bearing on development,
conservation, augmentation, productivity and protection of water
resources. Further, the Committee are constrained to observe that
though the Tenth Plan has run half of its course, the Government is
yet to constitute the National Water Resources Project Coordination
Committee which according to the Tenth Plan document was a
desirable proposition. In view of the alarming situation of ever-
depleting levels of ground water, lack of adequate conservation
measures, poor financial position of many of the State Governments,
inter-State ramifications of the water sector schemes, lack of
convergence of schemes and multiplicity of agencies involved in
development and management of water resources, the Committee
apprehend that the idea of ‘Single Administrative Ministry for Water’
as decided by the NDC would get stuck in unconscionable delays
and a maze of procedural and bureaucratic hurdles. The Committee,
therefore, again desire that any further procrastination be shunned
and reiterate their earlier recommendation that a Single
Administrative Ministry for Water should see the light of the day at
the earliest and they be apprised of the action taken in this matter
at the earliest.
C. Working Group Recommendation on Major and Medium Irrigation
Recommendation (Para No. 2.14 and 2.15)
11. The Committee observed that pursuant to their earlier
recommendation to identify all completed projects not declared as

6
completed by State Governments, CWC had identified 16 Major and
25 Medium Projects in 10 States which attained 90% or more of targeted
irrigation potential. It was further observed that though the main aim
was creation of additional irrigation potential, the Government found
it difficult to ignore the creation of the balance 10% potential. The
CWC carried out a further analysis of the above projects and found
that 10 Major and 12 Medium Irrigation Projects were receiving CLA
under AIBP and only 2 Major and one Medium Projects were treated
as completed. The States had reportedly given undertakings that 8
Major and 11 Medium Projects would be completed in 2004-05 or
2005-06 and that out of the identified projects, 3 Major and 4 Medium
Projects were in the unapproved category, though they attained the
targeted irrigation potential. The Committee had, therefore, reiterated
their earlier recommendation contained in their Second Action Taken
Report on the subject to stop further flow of funds to projects now
identified as in their considered opinion the created irrigation potential
be put to optimum use rather than creating additional potential and
not putting it to good use which in itself was wastage of public funds.
They had, therefore, desired the Government to accept/implement the
recommendation of the Working Group on Major and Medium
Irrigation in full.
12. The Ministry has, in its action taken reply, stated that there are
41 projects (16 major and 25 medium) as on 1 April, 2004 where 90%
and above potential with respect to targeted irrigation potential has
already been created. These 41 major/medium projects include 3 major
and 4 medium unapproved projects which have attained 90% or more
targeted potential. Considering the attainment of irrigation potential
by these unapproved project, Central Water Commission has been
requested to take up the matter of 3 major and 4 medium unapproved
projects with the State Governments for getting these projects declared
as completed. In view of large number of projects spilling over from
plan to plan, the Working Group for Tenth Plan recommended that
such projects are to be declared completed for practical purposes
leaving the balance potential (which is less than 10%) to be created in
due course by respective State Governments. The policy for declaring
these projects as completed will be finalized in consultation with the
Planning Commission and taken up with the State Governments for
follow up action. The Ministry have further stated that the
recommendation of the Working Group in respect of completion of
on-going projects of previous plans and to derive benefit from already
locked in investment has been brought to the notice of the State
Governments and that the Ministry fully agrees with the views of the
Standing Committee regarding putting to optimum use the created

7
irrigation potential than creating additional irrigation potential in the
projects having balance potential of 5-10%. However, the States may
have to examine each case separately, as in some projects, it may be
the creation of distributaries and minors preventing full achievement
of the envisaged potential. Whenever the concerned States are desirous
of attaining the balance irrigation potential through a fast track mode
or otherwise under the Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme
(AIBP), the Ministry proposed to consider such cases favourably to
achieve the balance irrigation potential.
13. The Committee are distressed to note that though the State
Governments have identified 41 such projects (16 Major and
25 Medium) as on 1 April, 2004, no concrete steps seem to have
been taken by the Ministry to declare these projects as completed
by State Governments. The Ministry has now informed that the 90%
achievement of these projects has been observed to be static in the
past few years and it is not making any headway due to certain
constraints like non-availability of land from the farmers. The
Ministry has further informed the Committee that the policy for
declaring these projects as completed will be finalized in consultation
with the Planning Commission and taken up with the State
Governments for follow up action. The Committee, while expressing
their anguish over the delay in implementation of their
recommendation would like to recommend to the Ministry to make
an all out effort to remove the constraints expeditiously as noticed
by them. They would also like to reiterate their earlier
recommendation to declare these projects as completed as per the
recommendation of Working Group of Tenth Plan so that the further
flow of funds to these projects identified as completed can also be
stopped. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action
taken in this regard.
D. Artificial Recharge of Ground Water
Recommendation (Para No. 3.19)
14. The Committee found that the Ground Water level was
declining very rapidly in almost every part of the country. The Artificial
Recharge of Ground Water Scheme was one of the most effective
Schemes to arrest the further decline of Ground Water level. The
Committee were happy to note that the Planning Commission had
cleared the Scheme “Artificial Recharge of Ground Water”. The
Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources during the evidence informed
the Committee that the note for CCEA was under preparation and the
Scheme would be taken up in the first quarter of current financial

8
year 2005-2006. The Committee hoped that the Government would
endeavour to clear the Scheme from CCEA at the earliest and
implement the Scheme without further loss of time.
15. The Ministry has, in its action taken reply, stated that the
Planning Commission’s ‘in principle’ approval has been received.
Thereafter, a draft Note for Cabinet Committee of Economic Affairs
(CCEA), duly approved by Hon’ble Minister (WR) was circulated to
concerned Ministries/Departments on 20 April 2005 seeking their
comments before finalizing the draft Note. Comments of some of the
concerned Ministries/Departments are still awaited. The matter is being
persued with them and as soon as their comments become available,
the Note for CCEA will be finalized and sent to CCEA for approval.
16. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry
in that the “Artificial Recharge of Ground Water” which is one of
the very important Schemes to arrest the further decline of ground
water and to increase the ground water level has still not been cleared
from the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA). The
Scheme has already been cleared ‘in principle’ by the Planning
Commission. Although the Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources
informed during the evidence that the Note for CCEA is under
preparation and the Scheme will be taken up in the first quarter of
current financial year 2005-06, the Ministry in its action taken reply
has now informed after five months that a draft Note for CCEA
duly approved by Minister (WR), has been circulated to concerned
Ministries/Departments on 20 April 2005 seeking their comments
before finalizing the draft Note. More than four months have passed
since the presentation of the Third Report, but, unfortunately the
Ministry has not been able to obtain the comments from the
concerned Ministries/Departments so far. Meanwhile, the Ministry
has also informed that as soon as their comments become available,
the Note for CCEA will be finalized and sent to CCEA for approval.
The Committee are unhappy to observe that the progress in the
matter is very slow and it appears that the recommendations of the
Committee are not taken seriously by the Government. While
expressing their unhappiness over the lackadaisical approach of the
Ministry in getting clearance for the Scheme from CCEA, the
Committee would like to reiterate strongly to get the Scheme cleared
expeditiously for early implementation.
E. Conservation and augmentation of ground water
Recommendation (Para No. 3.20)
17. The Committee had desired the Government to take steps to
create the awareness among the people to conserve as well as put to

9
good use the available limited ground water resource in the country.
The Committee were of the opinion that alternative methods be devised
to put to use the sewerage and other waste waters after suitable
treatment for irrigation and encourage the use of recycled waste water
which in the long run would help conserve the ground water resources
in the country.
18. The Ministry has, in its action taken reply, stated that as regards
Committee’s suggestion for taking steps to encourage recycling of waste
water, it is mentioned that as ‘Water’ is a State subject, it is for the
State Governments to take steps in this regard. However, the Ministry
of Water Resources has also written to them that in major cities having
population more than 20 lakh, action to recycle the waste water may
be initiated.
19. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the
Government to their suggestion that alternative methods be devised
to put the sewerage and other waste water to use after suitable
treatment for irrigation besides encouraging the use of recycled waste
water. That the Ministry’s approach in implementing the
recommendation of the Committee is very casual and the matter is
not being given due weightage is clear from their statement that
‘Water’ is a State subject and it is for the State Governments to take
steps in this regard. Besides, they have also stated that they have
written to State Governments to take action to recycle the waste
water in the major cities having population more than 20 lakh. The
Committee are of the firm view that the specious plea of Government
that ‘Water’ is a State subject is untenable since it is expected of
from the Ministry of Water Resources, being the nodal Ministry for
national policies on all aspects of water, to take initiative in a more
substantive manner and not confine itself to mere writing letters to
State Governments which would not yield the desired results,
especially in view of the grave situation on the ground water front.
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and
impress upon the Ministry to take initiative in a more substantive
manner in this regard.
F. Command Area Development and Water Management Scheme
Recommendation (Para No. 4.13)
20. The Committee noted that the Command Area Development
Programme had been restructured and renamed as Command Area
Development and Water Management Scheme for implementation
during 2004-2007. Under the restructured Scheme, the State

10
Governments had been advised to submit fresh Detailed Project Reports
of all the projects by the end of August 2004. It was very disturbing
to observe that despite repeated recommendations of the Committee,
the Government failed to obtain the fresh DPRs of all the projects
expeditiously from the State Governments. The Ministry so far could
obtain DPRs from only 8 State Governments. The Committee failed to
understand the manner in which the Ministry had proposed to achieve
the targets under the Scheme with such slow pace of submission of
DPRs by State Governments. The Committee had, therefore, desired
the Ministry of pursue the matter vigorously with all the concerned
State Governments to submit the fresh DPRs of all the projects at the
earliest possible so that the implementation of Scheme might not be
hampered.
21. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated that till May
2005, 11 State Government have submitted the DPRs and the remaining
State Governments are being followed up for expediting the submission
of DPRs. In pursuance of CCEA directive, fresh DPRs were sought
from the State Governments with the objective of assessing the quantum
of work completed by 31 March 2004, the targets for the remaining
period of Tenth Plan indicating inter alia  the time frame budget and
action plan for the same. Since the project activities are being continued,
efforts will be made to achieve the targets.
22. The Committee are unhappy to note that despite repeated
recommendations of the Committee to obtain fresh Detailed Project
Reports (DPRs) of all the projects expeditiously from the State
Governments under the restructured “Command Area Development
and Water Management” Scheme and almost a year has passed by
since August 2004 the due date for submission of fresh Detailed
Project Reports (DPRs) of all the projects by State Governments, the
Ministry could obtain Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) from only
11 State Governments till May 2005. The Committee in their Second
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) had recommended to the Government
to set a definite time frame for submission of fresh Detailed Project
Reports (DRPs) of all the projects by State Governments and in any
case not later than end of March 2005. However, no action has been
taken in this regard so far. The Committee are of the view that the
Ministry has not been able to comprehend their recommendation in
the right perspective and as a result, the Ministry has failed to obtain
the Detailed Project Reports of all the projects from all State
Governments till date. The Committee, therefore, strongly reiterate
their earlier recommendation to pursue the matter vigorously with
all the State Governments to submit the fresh Detailed Project

11
Reports (DPRs) of all the projects at the earliest possible so that the
objective of assessing the quantum of works completed by 31 March,
2004 is attained and the implementation of Scheme may not be
adversely affected.
G. Extension of Embankments on Lalbakeya, Kamla, Bagmati and
Khando rivers
Recommendation (Para No. 5.34)
23. The Committee were disconcerted to note that the Ministry’s
less than impressive performance in regard to under-utilization of funds
at the actual stage for 2003-2004 stemmed from the fact that the
concerned State Governments had failed to revise/finalize the DPRs
for the project in time. They felt that this was a long standing problem
with the State Governments for not only this project but also in other
projects. They had desired the Ministry to pursue the State
Governments to avoid procrastination in this regard to ensure timely
completion of the project. The Committee wanted to know the rationale
for earmarking only Rs. 14.00 crore in BE 2005-06—that too only for
DPRs for Kamla and Bagmati Schemes on Indian side for the project
only. The Committee desired the allocation for 2005-2006 be increased
at the RE stage to accommodate all necessary expenditure for effective
and timely completion of the project. The Committee had also desired
that the above preliminary studies be completed expeditiously so that
the menace of recurring floods and erosion in North Bihar could be
minimized. The Committee also desired that the requisite funds might
soon be released to JPO-SKSKI to complete this project in time to
avoid cost over runs.
24. The Ministry has, in its action taken reply, stated that the
Secretary (WR) took a meeting at Patna on 22 April 2005 wherein
officials from the State Governments and GFCC attended. It was
decided in the meeting that an amount of Rs. 14 crore earmarked as
BE during 2005-06 will be utilised for works related to Kamla and
Bagmati rivers in conformity with the provision contained in the
approved SFC. Meanwhile, an amount of Rs. 3.5 crore has been released
to the Government of Bihar for execution of works on Kamla river as
included in the approved SFC. The Government of Bihar submitted
DPR to GFCC for Bagmati Flood Control Scheme. It is stated the
pending finalisation of DPRs submitted by Government of Bihar, works
included in the approved SFC are being taken up. As regards increase
at the RE stage, it was intimated that it depended upon the expenditure
incurred by the State Government by the time RE is discussed.

12
In the 2nd meeting of JCWR headed by respective Secretaries,
Ministry of Water Resources of India and Nepal, it was agreed that
the feasibility study of the Kamla and preliminary study of Bagmati
Multipurpose Projects would also be carried out by the Joint Project
Office of Sapta Kosi-Sun Kosi Projects to ascertain the likely constraints
in implementation of these projects so that these could be appropriately
addressed. JPO-SKSKI has already initiated action in respect of Kamla
and Bagmati rivers as well. In pursuance of the decision of Kamla
and Bagmati rivers taken in the 2nd JCWR meeting, the Joint Team of
Experts in its 6th meeting (12-13 June 2005) at Biratnagar authorized
Joint Project Office, Sapta Kosi High Dam Multipurpose Project and
Sun Kosi-Storage-Cum Diversion Scheme to take up additional works
in respect of Kamla and Bagmati projects.
An amount of Rs. 7.00 crore has been kept as BE during 2005-06
for the Sapta Kosi Project which may be modified/enhanced at RE
stage depending on the requirement submitted by Central Water
Commission.
25. The Committee are not satisfied with the incomplete reply
as it is merely, a reiteration of earlier submissions made by the
Ministry on the Scheme in general and JPO-SKSKI in particular.
The reply is also silent on the amount released out of Rs. 7.00 crore
earmarked in B.E. 2005-06 for Sapta-Kosi Project. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the manner in which Rs. 7.00 crore
could be allocated for the Sapta-Kosi Project, when the entire
allocated amount in the BE had already been earmarked for DPRs
for Kamla and Bagmati Schemes. The Committee desire that the
design parameters of the DPR submitted by the Government of Bihar/
GFCC to the Central Water Commission is expeditiously finalized.
The Committee further desire that the allocation for the project be
appropriately increased to accommodate all necessary expenditure in
order to avoid project spillover from plan to plan and cost and time
overruns. The Committee would like to be informed of the action
taken in the matter at the earliest.
H. Pagladia Dam Project
Recommendation (Para No. 5.50)
26. The Committee were constrained to observe that the
implementation and the cost of Pagladia Dam Project had been hostage
to the physical problems, viz. ecological, environmental and R&R issues.
These unsolved issues had cast their spell on the utilization of funds

13
for the project, as was evident from the reduced allocation in the
actuals for 2003-2004 and at the RE stage 2004-2005. It was incumbent
upon the Ministry of Water Resources to impress upon the State
Governments to take up these issues in right earnest with project-
affected people in the area and evolve a strategic road map to sort out
the existing problems urgently. The Committee in their First Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) had
recommended for early clearance by PIB and CCEA. However,
clearances were still awaited. The Ministry informed that the Zirat
Survey by the State Government was yet to be taken up. The
Committee had, therefore, desired the Government to take urgent steps
to clear the project at the earliest for implementation, otherwise a
stage might come when the project itself may become unviable.
27. The Ministry has, in its action taken reply, stated that the
Brahmaputra Board as well as Ministry of Water Resources are
persistently pursuing the matter with the Government of Assam for
completion of the Zirat Survey which is essential before the
implementation of the Pagladia Dam Project. The issue of early
implementation of the Pagladia Project came up during the discussion
of the Union Minister of Water Resources with the Chief Minister of
Assam when he visited Guwahati in September 2004. The Additional
Secretary (WR) had a meeting with Chief Secretary , Government of
Assam on 21 September 2005 wherein the expeditious completion of
the Zirat Survey was emphasized in order to take up the
implementation of the project.
A Review Meeting on the progress of implementation of Pagladia
Dam Project was held on 02 February 2005 where the Commissioner
and Secretary to the Government of Assam, Revenue Department and
Principal Secretary, Bodoland Territorial Area Districts (BTAD), officials
from Central Water Commission and Brahmaputra Board were present.
The Union Minister of Water Resources had vide D.O. Letter dated 28
February 2005, requested the Chief Minister of Assam to sort out the
matter at his level and to communicate the firm resolve of the
Government of Assam in consultation with the Bodoland Territorial
Area District, so that the work can be taken up further by Brahmaputra
Board.
The Chief Minister of Assam has constituted a Cabinet Committee
on implementation of the Pagladia Dam Project vide notification dated
23 March, 2005 to examine and resolve all outstanding issues leading
to non-completion of Zirat Survey in the areas under Bodoland
Territorial Area Districts (BTAD).

14
The first meeting of the Committee was held on 22 April 2005
wherein it was decided that the matter would be pursued by
Government of Assam with the representatives of the BTAD after the
Bodo Territorial Council (BTC) election of 13 May 2005.
28. The Committee are disconcerted to learn that nothing has
moved so far as the project is concerned. The problem areas for the
project like the inability to carry out Zirat Survey, failure to address
ecological and R&R issues and absence of any strategic road map
for the early completion of the project have persisted without even
a semblance of redemption visible in the near future. The Committee
are constrained to note that the reply to the recommendation is
incomplete as it does not indicate the progress, if any, made after
the Bodo Territorial Council election held on 13 May 2005. Although
the Committee appreciate the effort made by the Ministry to engage
the State Government and Bodo Territorial Area Districts (BTAD)
Authorities for early completion of the project and the constitution
of a Cabinet Committee by the State Government on implementation
of Pagladia Dam Project, they cannot but add in the same breath
that they would like to emphasise the need to limit the procedures
of resolving all outstanding issues pertaining to the project within
a stipulated time frame. The Committee are further unhappy to note
that the reply appears to have purposefully evaded from addressing
the issue of pending clearances from PIB and CCEA for the project.
The Committee had, in their earlier recommendations impressed upon
the Government on the need for early clearance of the matter but it
has been unheeded so far. The Committee, therefore, desire the
Government to take urgent steps to clear the project expeditiously
otherwise a stage might come when Government is forced to abandon
the project. The Committee, therefore, desire that they be apprised
of the steps taken in this regard.
I. Performance Review of AIBP by C&AG
Recommendation (Para No. 6.29)
29. The Committee were dismayed to note that in the Report of
C&AG, instances of diversion/mis-utilisation of fund released as Central
Loan Assistance (CLA) under AIBP had been noticed. The Ministry
also informed that the States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh,
Gujarat, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and
West Bengal had diverted/mis-utilised the CLA under AIBP . The
Committee were of the considered opinion that it was certainly a matter

15
of a grave concern as it showed the Ministry in poor light and its
poor monitoring of the Scheme. The Committee had, therefore, desired
the Ministry to enquire into the matter and apprise the outcome of
the same to the Committee within three months from the presentation
of this Report to the Houses of Parliament. The Committee also desired
the Ministry to take urgent steps to prevent further diversion/mis-
utilisation of CLA under AIBP so that the completion of incomplete
projects might not be hampered due to diversion/mis-utilisation of
CLA.
30. The Ministry has, in its action taken reply, stated that regarding
instances of diversion/mis-utilization of AIBP funds by the State
Governments as pointed out by the C&AG, it is to be mentioned that
the States have been supplied with the copies of C&AG Report with
the request that the replies pertaining to execution of projects, diversion,
parking and mis-utilization of funds may be prepared by submitted to
the Ministry of Water Resources/Central Water Commission urgently.
Even though the reminders have been sent, no State Governments
(except Karnataka State where the Public Accounts Committee paid a
visit in November 2004) has so far submitted the requisite replies. The
matter is being constantly pursued with the State Government for
getting the needful done on priority. Secretary (WR) is proposing a
meeting shortly with the State Irrigation Secretaries when this matter
would also be discussed.
31. The Committee in their Third Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
had recommended the Government to enquire into the matter
regarding instances of diversion/mis-utilization of AIBP funds
released as Central Loan Assistance (CLA) by the State Governments
as pointed out by the C&AG and apprise the outcome of the same
to the Committee within three months from the presentation of the
Report in the House. However, the Ministry in their action taken
reply have merely informed the Committee that the State
Governments have been supplied the copies of C&AG Report with
the request that the replies pertaining to execution of projects,
diversion, parking and mis-utilization of funds may be prepared
and submitted to Ministry of Water Resources/Central Water
Commission urgently. The Committee are distressed to note that the
Government have failed to enquire into the matter as desire by
them and though more than four months have passed, the Ministry
could obtain the requisite reply only from Karnataka and that too
because the Public Accounts Committee had paid a visit to Karnataka
in Novemebr 2004. The Committee feel that merely circulating the
copy of C&AG Report and requesting the State Governments would

16
not be sufficient in this matter. Further, the reply is also silent on
the steps the Government have taken or proposed to take to prevent
further misutilization/diversion of AIBP funds as desired by them
in their Third Report. The Committee, therefore, desire that the
Ministry should set a definite time-frame for submission of the
requisite replies in order to prevent the further diversion/mis-
utilization of AIBP funds and also infrom them the steps taken to
prevent possible diversion/misutilization of AIBP funds. The action
taken in this regard may be intimated to the Committee at the
earliest.

17
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Plan allocation for North Eastern States—need for expeditious
clearance of projects
Recommendation (Para No. 1.23)
The Committee observe that 10 of total allocation of the Ministry
amounting to Rs. 146.72 crore (15.89%) for 2005-06 has been earmarked
for Schemes specifically planned for North Eastern States. The
Committee are however distressed to find that there is shortfall in
utilization of allocated funds in respect of Pagladia Dam Project etc.
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to impress upon
the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance on the need to step
up the Plan allocation for the Ministry in consonance with the policy
of the Government to give priority to water management. The
Committee would also like to emphasize on the need for earmarking
additional allocations at the RE stage on the above-mentioned three
sectors so that all on going schemes/projects are completed within the
scheduled time-frame to maintain optimum cost-time-benefit ratio. The
Committee also desire that allocations in respect of North Eastern States
be better utilized and stepped up, if needed. Therefore, the Committee
strongly believe that it is incumbent upon the Ministry to initiate
necessary steps to address and overcome the predicament of non-
approvals of schemes by strengthening the field offices of CWC,
evolving single-window clearances for all aspects of project approvals,
lessening procedural delays and improve submission of utilization
certificates by the States. The Committee, therefore, desire that they be
apprised of the steps taken in this direction.
Reply of the Government
The allocations for the schemes specially planned for the North
Eastern region are as under:
(Rs. in crore)
Description Allocation for all Allocation for Percentage
schemes schemes for
N.E. Region
Central Sector Schemes 621.00 66.72 10.74%
State Sector Schemes 300.00 80.00 26.67%
Total 921.00 146.72 15.89%

18
Apart from the above mentioned allocation of Rs. 146.72 crore
(15.89% of total allocation) for specific schemes for the NE Region,
some other schemes also include activities on NE Region. Thus, the
overall share of funds available for North Eastern States out of the
total allocation during the year 2005-06 will be more than 15.87%. The
funds allocation is made as per the specific requirements of the NE
Region. As regards shortfall in utilization of funds in respect of Pagladia
Dam Project, it is submitted that the Project is duly cleared by TAC.
However, the expenditure could not be incurred due to delay in land
acquisition process, non-completion of Zirut Survey etc. by the State
Government affecting the R&R work and revision of the cost due to
change in design of structure etc. Similarly the allocatioin for the
scheme Command Area Development and Water Management
Programme has also been reduced to some extent because the State
Government has not come forward with sufficient proposals despite
every effort in this direction. The scheme for Flood Control in
Brahmaputra Valley (Provision of Rs. 20 crore in BE 2004-05) and
Artificial Recharge of Ground Water (Provision of Rs. 40 crores in BE
2004-05) could not be approved in time. As regards the schemes for
flood control in Brahmaputra Valley, the North Eastern States including
Sikkim and West Bengal (for the areas of North Bengal falling within
Brahmaputra basin) were requested to send the list of prioritized
schemes to the Brahmaputra Board for formulation of the Centrally
Sponsored Schemes for taking up critical flood control/anti-erosion
schemes in Brahmaputra and Barak Valley. There was however, delay
in submission of the prioritised schemes by various North-Eastern
States. Later on, the Planning Commission/Finance Ministry advised
Ministry of Water Resources to take up the scheme in State Sector.
Recasting the scheme in ‘State Sector’ also contributed to delay in
approval of the scheme. As regards the scheme of Artificial Recharge
of Ground Water, the delay in approval of the scheme is mainly
attributable to frequent modification in the nature/modalities of the
scheme by the Planning Commission as also in obtaining ‘in principle’
approval of Full Planning Commission/PM after the General Elections.
Therefore, the allocation at RE stage was reduced to avoid unnecessary
surrender. The existing procedure of project appraisal of Irrigation,
Flood Control and Multipurpose Projects for both major and medium
projects, which are having inter-state ramification is as under:
“The concerned State Government, in the initial stage will first
submit preliminary report covering surveys and investigations,
international/inter-state aspects, hydrology , irrigation planning, brief
environmental aspects, intended benefits, etc. which are required
to establish soundness of the project proposal. The project proposal

19
will be examined and if found acceptable, the CWC shall convey
‘In Principle’ consent for preparation of Detailed Project Report.
Thereafter, Detailed Project Report (DPR) will be prepared with
up-to-date cost and simultaneously the Project Authorities will
process and obtain necessary clearances of the Ministry of
Environment and Forests in respect of Environment Impact
Assessment and Forest area being diverted. If Scheduled Tribe
Population is diverted, the clearance of R&R Plans shall be obtained
from the Ministry of Tribal Affairs. The DPR thus prepared will be
examined in CWC. In States where central design and planning
organizations do not exist, the CWC will check the designs also.
The CWC will finalize the cost, B.C. ratio, internal rate of return,
etc. and the State Government will obtain concurrence of the State
Finance Department for this finalized cost. The project proposal
will, thereafter, be put up to the Advisory Committee for clearance,
which would be, by and large, like single window clearance.
Secretary (WR) has reviewed the procedure for techno-
economic appraisal and clearance of irrigation/flood control/
multipurpose projects and has made certain suggestions for
improvement in the procedure. The Ministry is more actively
engaging CWC in a dialogue to improve its role in techno-economic
clearance of irrigation/flood management schemes.”
Major and Medium Irrigation—Creation/utilisation of irrigation
potential
Recommendation (Para No. 2.13)
The Committee note that against a target of 9.9 million hectare for
creation of irrigation potential under Major and Medium Irrigation
only 6.5 million hectare irrigation potential is likely to be created by
the end of the Tenth Plan resulting in a shortfall of 3.5 Million hectare.
The Committee are not happy with the performance in this regard
and desire the Ministry to make all out efforts to motivate the States
to earnestly complete the projects in hand to achieve 9.9 million hectare
target of potential creation. The Committee further expect the
Government to take necessary steps to increase the utilization of the
created potential simultaneously. The Committee be apprised of the
action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
A Potential target of 9.9 M.ha. through Major and Medium
Irrigation has been kept for the X Plan. This is of high order

20
considering the performance during previous Plans. However, to
facilitate speedy completion of last to last mile projects under AIBP
financial assistance in the form of grant and loan is being provided to
State Governments. Further, under Bharat Nirman, an Action Plan has
been proposed to bring additional 10 M.ha. under assured irrigation
by 2009. Out of this, 6 M.ha. potential is to be created through Major
and Medium Irrigation Projects during next four years and
correspondingly, 2.40 M.ha. by the end of X Plan. The States are advised
to pay more attention to non-farm development for improving the
utilization of created irrigation potential.
Central Water Commission
Recommendation (Para No. 2.20)
The Committee note that CWC has taken up 18 plan schemes/
activities with an outlay of Rs. 29.70 crore for 2005-06. The schemes
include Data Collection, training of personnel at NWA, upgradation
and modernization of information system, research, remote sensing,
survey and investigation and consultancy to name a few. The allocation
for four schemes was reduced at RE stage in 2004-05 due to not taking
up works on technical grounds etc. A perusal of physical targets
attained during 2004-2005 reveals that achievements in respect of
training, consultancy (preparation of Design Memo), survey and
investigation have been very low. The Committee, therefore, desire the
Government to take steps to strengthen the monitoring/evaluation of
the progress made by CWC in respect of the deficient areas so as to
utilize the budgetary allocations to the maximum.
Reply of the Government
The outlay for 2004-05 was reduced at RE stage in some of the
schemes of Central Water Commission. The reasons for reduction are
explained below:
(a) Sedimentation, River morphology & other Remote Sensing
Applications: the hydrographic survey for six reservoirs
planned to be taken up at an estimated cost of Rs. 1.2 crore
at B.E. stage could not be taken up due to technical reasons.
(b) Upgradation & Modernization of Information System in
CWC:  The Expert Group constituted for purpose
recommended deferment of ‘Establishment of Wide Area
Network (WAN)’ and ‘WI-FI connectivity’. Also some of
the major purchases proposed to be made during the

21
year 2004-05 were recommended to be made in phases
spreading over to next year i.e. 2005-06.
(c) Setting up of specialized units in HE Design, pumped
Storage & Instrumentation: The training/consultancy
proposed to be entrusted to various institutes of excellence
during 2004-05 did not materialize as many of the institutes
expressed their inability to commence training/consultancy
during this year.
(d) Upgradation of facilities and skills in CWC regarding Dam
Safety & Rehabilitation in India:  The allocation at R.E.
stage was reduced due to slow progress in the work of
preparation of PMP Atlas by the IITM, Pune. Further, the
Consultancy work for development of Digital Terrain Model
(DTM) proposed for Mahanadi Basin during the year was
dropped as similar work is also proposed to be taken up
by NRSA with funding from the Department of Space.
The progress made by Central Water Commission in respect of the
deficient areas is closely monitored by the Ministry of Water Resources.
Minor Irrigation
Recommendation (Para No. 3.9)
The Committee note that the works of Minor Irrigation are taken
up by several Departments of the State Governments though the policy
formulation aspects are vested in the Minor Irrigation Division of the
Ministry. All Surface and Ground Water Schemes having Culturable
Command Area upto 2,000 hectare individually are classified as Minor
Irrigation Schemes. The Committee observe that out of a total
139.89 million hectare Ultimate Irrigation Potential, 81.43 million hectare
Irrigation Potential is to be created under Minor Irrigation. Upto March,
2004, 58.28 million hectare Irrigation Potential has already been created
and 50.15 million hectare Irrigation Potential has been utilized. As per
Census of Minor Irrigation Schemes conducted by the Ministry for the
year 1993-1994, the irrigation capacity created in the Minor Irrigation
Sector covers about two-third of the country’s total irrigation capacity.
The Committee are of the firm opinion that the Minor Irrigation Projects
are cost-effective and yield the desired results in quick time. The
Committee observe that a sum of Rs. 100 crore has been earmarked
for a pilot project for repair, renovation and restoration of water bodies
for 2005-06. The Scheme stands transferred to State Sector and would
be funded and monitored on the lines of AIBP . It aims at creation of

22
20,000 ha. of additional irrigation potential in 700 water bodies in 16
districts of the country. The Committee recommend that at least one
water body in a district of each state be taken up for creation of
additional irrigation potential under the scheme. The Committee are
of the opinion that these small projects would go a long way in
mitigating the needs of the people. The Committee, therefore, desire
that the Minor Irrigation Sector be given top priority to facilitate the
provision of best possible irrigation facilities to the people of the
country at large.
Reply of the Government
Irrigation being a state subject, the irrigation projects are planned,
formulated, executed and funded by the State governments as per
their priorities. Minor irrigation Sector covers about 60% of the total
irrigation capacity of the country. The ultimate minor irrigation potential
is estimated to be 81.43 Mha, out of which about 64.09 Mha is
attributed to groundwater and the rest 17.34 Mha for surface minor
water schemes. The groundwater resources in the country are depleting
rapidly in some areas due to unrestricted withdrawal. Subsidized power
tariff for agriculture also leads to sub-optimal utilization and excess
drawal of groundwater resources. For reviving the Surface Minor
Irrigation Sector and particularly for restoring the tank irrigation
potential in the country, a pilot scheme “National Project Repair,
Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies Directly Linked to
Agriculture” has been approved for a total outlay of Rs. 300 crore for
implementation during the reamaining period of the X Five Year Plan,
under the State Sector. The objectives of the scheme are: (a) to restore
and augment storage capacities of water bodies and (b) to recover and
extend their lost irrigation potential. In the budget speech 2004-05 of
Finance Minister, it was proposed to select at least one district in each
of the five regions of the country. Detailed Project Reports (DPRs)
were invited from all States for one or two districts in each State. In
the first phase, 16 district projects in 9 States were approved for funding
on the basis of DPRs submitted by these States. As other States submit
project proposals, the same will be considered for funding on the
basis of the guidelines for the Scheme.
Conservation and augmentation of ground water
Recommendation (Para No. 3.20)
The Committee observe that Government have taken certain
measures to arrest the decline of Ground Water Level by way of
regulation of Ground Water withdrawal, adopting artificial recharge

23
methods to augment Ground Water in the States of Delhi, Punjab,
Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu to name a few apart from restricting
development of Ground Water, legislation for regulation and
development of Ground Water and mandatory guidelines for roof top
rain water harvesting by amendment of building bye-laws, etc. The
Committee desire the Government to take steps to create the awareness
among the people of conserve as well as put to good use the available
limited ground water resource in the country. The Committee are also
of the opinion that alternative methods be devised to put to use the
sewerage and other waste waters after suitable treatment for irrigation
and encourage the use of recycled waste water which in the long run
would help conserve the ground water resources in the country. The
Committee, therefore, desire to be apprised of the steps taken in this
regard.
Reply of the Government
The steps taken by the Ministry of Water Resources/Central Ground
Water Authority to create awareness among the people on conservation
and augmentation of ground water resources through rain water
harvesting and artificial recharge are as follows:—
• Mass awareness programmes in Rain Water Harvesting and
Artificial Recharge to Ground Water are organised
throughout the country involving Central/State/NGO’s/VO’s,
resident welfare organizations, educational institutions,
industries and individuals. A total of 239 mass awareness
programmes have been organised so far. During the current
year, 51 mass awareness programmes are proposed to be
organised.
•T raining programmes are conducted to generate resources
persons as a measure of capacity building for designing
rainwater harvesting structures to augment ground water
in different terrains and diverse hydrogeolocial conditions.
A total of 157 training programmes have been conducted
so far. During the current year, 51 training programmes are
proposed to be conducted.
• Central Ground Water Board provides technical guidance
and design for rain water harvesting structures to various
Government and non-Government agencies and individuals
in various parts of the country. So far such technical
guidance has been provided in around 1800 cases.

24
•W ater conservation campaign was launched during Fresh
Water Year (2003) for various target groups like youth and
children, women, farmers and villagers, policy and opinion
makers. Publicity through point media telecasting of spots
on the television, broadcasting messages on radio, holding
of seminars, workshops, conferences etc. were undertaken.
Awareness was also created through Meghdoot post cards
in Hindi and English, Slogans on mail vans and letter boxes
through Department of Posts.
• Films have been produced on Rain Water Harvesting in
urban areas, rain water harvesting in rural areas, ground
water pollution etc. which are shown during various mass
awareness and training programmes.
• Display of working models/fixing of stalls in various
exhibitions and important functions is undertaken by the
Central Ground Water Board.
• Observation of Rain Water Harvesting Week throughout the
country.
As regards Committee’s suggestion for taking steps to encourage
recycling of waste water, it is mentioned that as ‘Water’ is a State
subject, it is for the State Governments to take steps in this regard.
However, the Ministry of Water Resources have also written to them
that in major cities having population more than 20 lakh, action to
recycle the waste water may be initiated.
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para No. 19 of Chapter I of the Report)
Poor performance in attainment of targets under various schemes
Recommendation (Para No. 3.21)
The Committee are disappointed with the poor performance under
the various schemes/activities of Central Ground Water Borad against
the laid down physical targets in respect of (a) Exploration Well
Drilling, (b) RGNGW Training & Research Institute, (c) Mass awareness
in ground water management regulation and conservation, and (d)
Training on rain water harvesting. The shortfall in attainment of
physical targets ranges between 62 and 92 per cent. The Committee
desire the Ministry to monitor the physical progress of the Schemes
effectively to realize the set targets in full under all the Schemes of

25
Central Ground Water Board during the current financial year 2005-
2006. The Committee would be like to be apprised of the action taken
in this matter.
Reply of the Government
By the end of March 2005, there was no shortfall under exploration
well drilling and mass awareness programmes. However, the
observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. Steps
are being taken to monitor the physical progress on regular basis. For
this purpose, regular meettings are being taken at different levels
including at the level of Secretary (WR).
Achievements of Water Quality Assessment Authority (WQAA)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.28)
The Committee are concerned to note that along with decline in
the Ground Water level, the Ground Water quality has also deteriorated
considerably in many areas of the country. The Committee, therefore,
desire the Government to conduct studies in all the affected areas and
make an all out effort to improve the quality of Ground Water. The
Committee also note that Government have constituted Water Quality
Assessment Authority (WQAA) to coordinate the activities of different
agencies, prepare action plans, organize public awareness programmes
as well as to overcome the problem of pollution of national water
resources. Based on the decision taken by WQAA, an Expert Group
and State-Level Water Quality Review Committees in 33 States/UTs
were constituted. The Expert Group has submitted its Report and the
recommendations of the Expert Group have been accepted by WQAA.
Under WQAA, a Water Quality Monitoring Committee (WQMC) and
a Task Force were also constituted to recommend measures for
optimum water quality observation network and coordinate data
collection and dissemination system to assist the WQAA. The Task
Force has also submitted its Report. The Committee desire the Ministry
to furnish a copy each of the Reports submitted by the Expert Group
and the Task Force on the subject to them. The Committee also desire
that the recommendations of the Expoert Group and Task Force be
thoroughly examined for early implementation in order to help all the
concerned Water Quality Monitoring Agencies/States and also provide
the good quality water to the people. The Committee further desire
that reports of the three Specific Groups formed to deal with specialized
functions to be submitted very shortly be processed urgently to
tackle the alarming situation arising out of pollution of ground water
sources.

26
Reply of the Government
Central Ground Water Board undertakes studies pertaining to
geogenic contamination in ground water regularly as a part of its
annual Action Plan. Areas affected with problems of geogenic
contamination viz. Fluoride, Arsenic, Iron, Salinity, etc. are identified
through these studies and remedial measures are sugguested. Further
alternative contaiminant free aquifer zones are explored and delineated
which can be developed by concerned State agencies. As regards
ground water pollution through anthropogenic sources occurring in
different States/UTs, studies are carried out by the Central Pollution
Control Board and State Pollution Control Boards.
The WQAA was constituted to direct the agencies (Government,
local bodies/non-Governmental) for identified water quality related
matters e.g., to standardize methods for water quality monitoring,
proper treatment of waste water, to draw action plan for quality
improvment in water bodies and discharge of treated sewage/trade
effluent on land, river and other water bodies, to identify “Hot-spots”
for taking necessary action for improvement of water quality etc., as
listed out in the Notification. As desired by the Committee, a copy
each of the reports of the Expert Group and Task Force constituted by
WQAA, have been sent to the Committee’s Secretariat separately. On
the basis of the report of the Expert Group it was decided that the
National River Conservation Directorate, Ministry of Environment &
Forest (MoEF) should bring out a Gazette Notification of Uniform
Protocol of Water Quality Monitoring. As per information received
from MoEF, the Gazette Notification of Uniform Protocol has been
finalized in consultation with the Ministry of Law and notified on
17.6.2005. The Monitoring Protocol was prepared also on the basis of
the report/recommendations of the Task Force. The report of the Task
Force has been approved by the MoEF in April, 2005 and follow up
action on the recommendations was considered in 4th WQAA meeting
held in July, 2005. The recommendations of the Expert Group and
Task Force and comments on the status of each recommendation are
given in Appendix-I.
The three Standing Groups have been constituted to help WQAA
to initiate action on the various functions of the Authority. These
Groups, being Standing Groups, are to report to WQMC on regular
basis and their works are reviewed by WQMC in its meetings. Out of
14 functions of WQAA, the Standing Group-I is to initiate action on
7 functions while Group-II & III on one function each. The progress
made by these Groups is as follows:

27
Standing Group-I
This Group has already submitted its report to WQAA/WQMC
bringing out details about sewage treatment plant, R&D activities in
Water Quality Monitoring, treatment of sewage and waste water, need
for action plan for water quality improvement, study regarding self-
assimilation capacity, non-point sources of pollution and “Hot-spots”
already identified. Based on the studies carried out by CPCB and
other expert organizations and criticial issues on the subject, the Group
is preparing an approach paper for finalizing the appropriate action
plan.
Standing Group-II
This Group is to initiate action regarding imposition of restriction
in water abstraction and discharge of treated sewage/trade effluents
with a view to mitigate crisis of water quality. Accordingly, this group
is attempting to take up the studies on some of the polluted stretches
already identified by CPCB for which the finalization of the terms of
reference for engagement of the Conslutant is under process.
Standing Group-III
This Group under the Chairmanship of Member (SAM), CGWB is
to initiate action on rain water harvesting. The group has reviewed its
functions where it was decided that the promotion of on rainwater
harvesting is a major and frontal activity of CGWA and since major
initiatives have already taken in this regard by CGWA, any initiative
by WQAA will be mere duplication. WQAA, in its 4th meeting held
in July, 2005 decided that though CGWA is taking action on this activity,
the Group is required to continue to take stock of rain water harvesting
in the country by CGWA and report to WQAA on regular basis.
Comman Area Development and Water Management Scheme—PIM
Recommendation (Para No. 4.14)
The Committee further note that Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Karnataka,
Tamil Nadu, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Orissa and Kerala have
enacted PIM legislation. The Ministry also informed that all the State
Governments have been requested to enact the necessary legislation
on PIM in the forthcoming Sessions of their State Legislatures. The
Committee also desire the Ministry to pursue the matter with the
remaining State Governments for early enactment of necessary
legislatoin on PIM.

28
Furthermore, a national level workshop on PIM is proposed in
early 2005-2006. The Committee observe that the example set forth by
the WUA functioning in the Surya Project command in the Thane
District of Maharashtra needs to be replicated where even the tail end
users are getting the same quantum of water as the first user. The
interaction the Committee had there with the farmers revealed that
they were very satisfied with the functioning of WUA in their area.
The Committee, therefore, desire the Government to educate the users
as well as administrators about this model of functioning of WUA at
their forthcoming National Level Workshop on PIM. The Committee,
therefore, desire to be apprised of the outcome of the deliberations of
the workshop and the action taken thereon.
Reply of the Government
The National Level Workshop on PIM would be conducted during
the month of September/October, 2005. The suggestions made by the
Committee in the matter would be discussed in the Workshop and all
the remaining States would be requested to enact the necessary
legislation on PIM.
The observation made by the Committee about the example set
for by the WUA functioning in the Surya Project Command in the
Thane District of Maharashtra would also be discussed in the
forthcoming Workshop and replication of the Project in other districts
would be insisted.
The outcome would be intimated to the Committee, as desired.
Flood Control
Recommendation (Para No. 5.15)
The allocation for Flood Control during the Tenth Plan period so
far amounts to more than 30 per cent of total Plan allocation of the
Ministry in each year. However, the amount actually spent and the
allocation at the RE Stages fail considerably to match the amount
earmarked in the BEs over the years. The Committee are perturbed to
note that despite huge allocation made for this Sector year after year,
the Ministry have failed to spend the allocated amount. The reasons
for slashing the BE at RE stage is mainly attributed to the little
headway made in the work of the Pagladiya Dam project, etc. The
allocation for flood control has increased by over 25% in 2005-2006
over the BE 2004-2005. The enhancement is in respect of criticial anti-
erosion works in Ganga Basin States and additional amount of Rs. 50

29
crore for Farakka Barrage Project for works in its extended juridiction.
The Committee, therefore, desire that the allocation for the year should
be spent fully to avoid spill over of projects from plan to plan and
cost over runs.
The Flood Proofing programme is proposed to be discontinued
w.e.f. April 2005. The Ministry through GFCC got the performance
evaluation done of 20 schemes from WAPCOS whose proposal is under
finalization. Meanwhile, the Minister of Water Resources reviewed the
matter and the Planning Commission was requested to continue the
Scheme during the remaining period of the Tenth Plan. The Committee
recommend that the ‘Flood Proofing Programme’ be continued during
the remaining period of the Tenth Plan till the evaluation of the efficacy
of the Scheme is known for the benefit of the people facing the scourge
of recurrent floods in flood-prone areas. They are perturbed to know
that despite the fact that flood forecasting activities in India had begun
in 1958, the issue of flood warning in advance has not moved beyond
the range of 12 hours minimum and 48 hours maximum. The
Committee desire that such warnings be issued at least 3-4 days in
advance so that evacuation work could be undertaken timely to reduce
the plight of the affected people in the flood-prone areas. The
Committee also desire that the flood forecasting activities need to be
modernized, value added and extended to other uncovered areas. The
Committee further recommend that the inflow forecasting to reservoirs
also needs to be instituted for the effective regulation of overflows
from reservoirs to minimize loss of life and property during floods.
Reply of the Government
In Centrally Sponsored Scheme namely, “Critical anti erosion works
in Ganga Basin States” the entire funds provided during 2004-05 was
utilized. Under “Improvement of Drainage in the criticla areas of the
country” the budget provision for 2004-05 was Rs. 8 crore which was
released to the State Governments. Subsequent to it enhancement of
budget provision for 2004-05 was sought and thereafter an amount of
Rs. 1.5 crore was released to the Government of Uttar Pradesh. Under
the scheme namely, Maintenance of flood protection works of Kosi
and Gandak Projects, the funds recommended by GFCC was released
to Governments of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh which are based on the
works actually executed. During the current year also i.e. 2005-06, efforts
are on to ensure that funds earmarked during 2005-06 in respect of
aforesaid ongoing schemes are fully utilized.
The Secretary (WR) vide D.O. letter No. 5/14/2000-ER/1586 dated
12/13 April 2005 (Appendix-II) wrote to Secretary, Planning

30
Commission for reviving the Flood Proofing Programme. Planning
Commission had asked for some information/clarifications which haev
been sent to Planning Commission.
As regards flood forecasting activities, the forecasts are normally
issued 12-48 hour in advance. However, depending on exigencies &
specific requirement, this time is extended. The system is being
modernized by installation of automatic sensors with satellite based
transmitters. Such system was installed in Chambal and Mahandi basins
during IX Plan. Krishna, Godavari, Jiadhal & Siang sub-basins of
Brahmaputra, Damodar, Yamuna, Rapti & Ghaghra basins are proposed
to be covered in X Plan. The system is also to be strengthened in
Mahanadi basin. MIKE 11 model is to be used for flood forecasting
activities in such basins. This would increase advance warning time
considerbly. Under USAID Project, it is also proposed to develop a
system to forecast area likely to be inundated in addition to water
levels. Similar value addition is proposed for Brahmaputra & Barak
basins under a joint project proposed to be implemented with
Department of Information Technology under Ministry of
Communication & Information Technology. To cover the hitherto
uncovered areas by flood forecasts network requests from the State
Governments/project authorities, who are the ultimate beneficiaries of
flood forecasting services of CWC are considered and implemented
after detail examination. Out of 70 reservoirs where daily levels and
flows are monitored, the inflow forecasts are issued for 27 reservoirs.
Inflow forecasts are issued to reservoirs regulating authorities under
the State Governments. More reservoirs can be taken by CWC on
request from the State Governments/project authorities. CWC also
advises DVC on reservoir regulation in Damodar basin to optimize
water conservation as well as to achieve maximum flood moderation
to save lives and properties.
Criticial Anti-erosion Works in Ganga Basin States
Recommendation (Para No. 5.26)
The Committee observe that to assist States in Ganga Basin to
take up critical anti-erosion and flood management schemes, a Centrally
Sponsored Scheme with a central share of Rs. 136.17 crore was
approved as a continuing scheme for implementation during 2004-07.
The funding pattern for the scheme is 75:25 and funds are provided
as advance to State Governments. The allocation for the Scheme has
increased to Rs. 100 crore in BE 2005-2006 from Rs. 30 crore in
2004-05. The increased allocation is to implement the recommendation

31
of the Task Force on flood management and erosion control. The Task
Force has since submitted its report on flood management and erosion
control. The Task Force among other things recommended that total
investment for flood management be increased from existing half per
cent to one per cent of total outlay, creation of revolving fund of Rs.
50 crore with the Ministry of Water Resources for emergent flood
management schemes etc. The Committee recommend the Government
to implement the recommendations of the Task Force in right earnest
after receiving the comments of State Governments, concerned
Ministries and the Planning Commission. The Committee would like
to be informed of the status of the action taken on the Task Force
recommendations.
Reply of the Government
1.  The report of the Task Force has been circulated to the various
Ministries/Planning Commission and the concerned State Governments.
2. The Task Force had recommended certain immediate measures
to be taken up by the Ganga Basin States as well as north eastern
States. In this connection, Secretary (WR) had discussed at Patna with
the officials of Government of Bihar and at Shillong with the concerned
Secretaries of the north eastern States. Based on the discussions, 4
schemes amounting to Rs. 15.42 crore have been included in the existing
continuing schemes namely “Critical anti erosion works in Ganga basin
states” and are under process for release of funds.
3. As regards north-eastern region, the Government of Assam and
Arunachal Pradesh have been requested to furnish necessary clearances
in respect of the schemes of immediate nature costing Rs. 3 crore and
above in order to enable the Ministry to take further action for release
of funds. In addition an amount of Rs. 100 crore was also provided
in the task force recommendations for taking up breach closure works.
In this regard, the matter was taken up with the Planning Commission
which informed that the Planning Commission has already sanctioned
Rs. 25 crore under the Assam Reconstruction Plan as one time
additional Central assistance for flood protection works during
2004-05 and similarly, the Working Group on Irrigation and flood
control for the Annual Plan 2005-06 has recommended Rs. 60 crore
under the Reconstruction plan to be made available to the flood control
schemes for which the proposals will be sent by other State
Government and therefore it is left to the State Government to propose
increase in this allocation for flood sector. It has been further informed
by Planning Commission that during Working Group discussions, the

32
Commissioner & Secretary, Flood Control Department, Government of
Assam informed that more than 50% of the breach closure work (at
estimated cost of Rs. 100 crore) had been carried out with the NCCF
and CRF funds as the embankments were also serving as
communication links/roads to various points. As per the latest
information received from Govt. of Assam closure of all breaches are
nearing completion.
4. For the remaining schemes under the immediate and short term
measures, the necessary proposal has been formulated and referred to
Planning Commission for ‘in principle’ approval for funding the same
under the existing continuing schemes of the Ministry.
5. Under the institutional arrangements recommended by the Task
Force, action has already been intiated by the Ministry as under:
(i) As recommended by the Task Force the jurisiction of Farakka
Barrage Project has been extended upto Rajmahal including
Diaras in the upstream (40 Km from Farakka Barrage) and
upto Jalangi in the downstream (80 Km from the Farakka
Barrage) for speedy implementation of anti erosion works;
(ii) Action initiated for setting up of North Eastern Water
Resources Authority (NEWRA). In this regard, inter-
ministerial consultations were held and the modified draft
note has been sent to Government of Arunachal Pradesh
and Ministry of Power who had some reservation earlier
on the proposal;
(iii) For creation of Sikkim and North Bengal River Management
Board, covering areas in North Bengal and Sikkim, a
Concept Note was prepared and sent to Government of
West Bengal and Sikkim who have given their concurrence.
Based on the observations of the State Governments. A
modified Note has been sent to Planning Commission
seeking their ‘in principle’ approval for creation of such a
Board.
Critical Anti-erosion works in Coastal and Other than Ganga Basin
States-National Coastal Protection Project.
Recommendations (Para No. 5.43)
The planning and implementation of anti-erosion works primarily
rests with the concerned State Governments. However, no request for
additional funding and submission of utilization certificates for the
fund expended in the previous year has been received from the State

33
Governments. The Committee believe firmly that it is incumbent upon
the Ministry to impress on the State Governments to utilize the funds
allocated as well as to submit utilization certificates timely for early
completion of the project. The Centrally Sponsored Scheme regarding
critical anti-erosion works in Coastal Areas was approved for a total
cost of Rs. 20.64 crore in respect of sea-erosion works only. This has
been taken up by the Government of India in February 2004 on pilot
basis. The Central Government shall be sharing 75% of the cost of the
Scheme as grant in aid to be implemented by State Governments. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that special steps should be taken
to address drainage and water stagnating problems at the ayacut and
command area in coastal States where water logging has resulted in
loss of crops and increased salinity of land. The Committee observe
that a National Coastal protection project has been prepared based on
approach paper from State Governments. The project envisages
identification of suitable external funding agencies for exploring
possibilities of getting external funding for the sector. The Committee
appreciate that an initiative has been taken for anti-sea erosion works
in coastal States but at the same time caution the Government to take
all the conditionalities into consideration to protect the national interest
before accepting the external funding for the project. The Committee
also desire to be informed of the action taken in the matter.
Reply of the Government
Planning and implementation of anti-erosion works primarily rests
with the State Governments concerned. However, Ministry of Water
Resources had taken up a Centrally Sponsored Scheme “Critical anti-
erosion works in Coastal & other than Ganga basin States” for a total
cost of Rs. 20.64 crore in March 2004. So far a sum of Rs. 4.50 crore
has been released to various State Governments. The next instalment
will be released after receipt of necessary proposal alongwith utilisation
certificates. The matter is being pursued with State Governments.
Regarding National Coastal Protection Project, it is submitted for kind
information that the Planning Commission has since forwarded the
approach paper submitted by the Ministry of Water Resources to the
Department of Economic Affairs for identification of suitable external
funding agencies. Further action can be taken only after seeking the
views and obtaining the concurrence of all concerned. The observations
of the Committee regarding protection of the national interest has been
noted and appropriate action would be taken accordingly.
New Schemes for Majuli Island in Assam, Dihang Project
Recommendation (Para No. 5.57)
The Committee observe that in Phase-I, Rs. 41.28 crore are allocated
for protection of Majuli Island from floods and erosion in the Tenth

34
Plan. In the short term, immediate anti-erosion measures for Majuli
Island were approved and works completed at the cost of Rs. 6.22
crore. Apparently, this phase is independent of the Model Studies
despite it being a long-term measure. The Committee desire the
Ministry to get the Model Studies completed in a time bound manner
as the erosion problems of Majuli Island are distinct from others. The
Committee are of the opinion that without proper base studies it may
not be possible to control flood and erosion. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the funds be released before the onset of monsoon in
Assam so that the project works could be carried out as pre-planned
and not remain hostage to the vagaries of the weather as it had
happened in the past. The Committee desire that they be apprised of
the steps taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Protection of Majuli Island from flood and erosion Phase-I (Long-
term) estimated to cost Rs. 41.28 crore was approved in January,
2005. The Model Studies are a part of the Phase-I works costing
Rs. 41.28 crore, the works are proposed to be completed during
X Plan. The Brahmaputra Board has already taken up implementation
of Phase-I works.
Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme
Recommendation (Para No. 6.17)
The Committee are happy to note that the allocation for Accelerated
Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP) has been enhanced substantially
from Rs. 2,800 crore to Rs. 4,800 crore which is 71.42% more allocation
for the current financial year 2005-06 as compared to last financial
year 2004-05. A sum of Rs. 250 crore has also been enhanced for AIBP
at the Revised Estimates stage 2004-05 against the Budget Estimates of
Rs. 2,800 crore. The reasons cited by the Ministry for higher allocation
are ostensibly to complete the last-to-last mile projects as identified.
The Committee observe that out of 181 Major/Medium Irrigation
Projects which have been included under AIBP , only 32 projects have
been completed so far since the inception of the Scheme in 1996-97.
As per the Guidelines, only those projects are to be included under
the Scheme which are nearing completion and could be completed
within two working seasons or one year. The Committee are dissatisfied
with the slow progress of completion of these projects and recommend
the Ministry to take all the necessary steps to resolve all the causative
factors as attributed for slow progress of completion of AIBP projects.
The Committee are of the firm opinion that with sufficient allocation

35
of funds for the Scheme, it is the responsibility of the Ministry now
to complete all the projects expeditiously in order to achieve the very
objectives specifically mentioned in NCMP .
Reply of the Government
After commencement of AIBP in 1996-97, 39 Major & Medium
Irrigation Projects have now been completed upto 2004-05 as per
reports, so far, received from the State Governments.
The AIBP guidelines stipulate that projects on which more than
50% of the estimated expenditure has been incurred should get higher
priority but other cases will also be considered if funds are available
after meeting the demand of priority projects.
The Ministry of Water Resources have taken necessary steps in the
modified AIBP for accelerating completion of projects. The State
Governments are now required to submit Memorandum of
Understanding for each individual project under the programme
indicating the balance cost, balance potential and year-wise phasing of
expenditure and potential creation with date of completion. This will
help to monitor better the progress of the projects for their timely
completion. Ministry on its part will strive for higher outlays under
AIBP in the coming years so that the projects under this Programme
are completed expeditiously.
Fast Track Programme of AIBP
Recommendation (Para No. 6.23)
The Committee observe that under AIBP a fast track component
was introduced in February, 2002 under relaxed funding and other
criteria. These criterion were further relaxed in January, 2004 wherein
conditions pertaining to loan and grant components were relaxed and
the time-limit for completion for Fast Track Projects was extended to
6-8 working seasons. Further, the criteria for providing CLA under
AIBP was again relaxed in March, 2005 wherein minor surface irrigation
projects with 100 ha potential in non-special category States benefiting
tribal and drought-prone areas were included. The Ministry is in the
process to include 31 pre-Fifth and Fifth Plan Major and Medium
Irrigation Projects under Fast Track Programme for 100% funding by
the Centre to achieve the target. Out of 32 Major/Medium Irrigation
Projects included in the Fast Track Programme, only 8 projects have
been completed since February, 2002. The Ministry stated that the
remaining 24 projects will be completed during 2005-06. The Committee

36
find that as in the case of other projects under AIBP , the pace of
completion of projects under the Fast Track component of the AIBP
leaves much to be desired. The Committee, therefore, desire that the
monitoring of the progress of projects under Fast Track Programme
needs to be strengthened to achieve the set targets.
Reply of the Government
Under Fast Track Programme (FTP) of AIBP upto 2003-04,
32 projects/project components were included. Out of these,
10 projects/project components have, so far, been completed.
The completion of the projects under FTP has been delayed for
various constraints such as land acquisition, contractual problems,
litigations, law & order problems, delay in transfer of AIBP funds by
the State Finance Department etc. However, from the scenario of value
addition in terms of development of irrigation, the achievement of the
programme can be reckoned as satisfactory. The irrigation potential
created during two years’ period (2002-04) has been 279.651 th.ha.
against the cost of Rs. 1340.329 crore incurred for the creation of above
potential. Accordingly, the cost per ha of development of irrigation
works out to Rs. 48,000 which is quite reasonable.
However, the suggestion of the Standing Committee to strengthen
the monitoring mechanism has been noted. The State Governments
have already been advised to take appropriate action by forming State
level monitoring committees having a representative from Central Water
Commission.

37
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE
GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Major and Medium Irrigation Projects—expeditious implementation
of ILR Projects
Recommendation (Para No. 2.11)
The Committee note that the allocation for Major and Medium
Irrigation during 2004-05 was earmarked at Rs. 71.73 crore. However,
it has been reduced by Rs. 17.92 crore to Rs. 63.81 ccrore at the Revised
Estimates stage. the reduction reportedly was necessitated as the work
relating to preparation of Detailed Project Reports in connection with
Ken-Betwa and Parbati-Kalisindh-Chambal Link Projects could not be
taken up due to non-signing of Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)
between the Co-Basin States. The Committee, therefore, recommend
the Government to resolve all the technical issues expeditiously in
connection with the above links and obtain final concurrence from the
concerned State Governments so that the DPRs can be prepared timely
for early implementation of these links.
Reply of the Government
(i) Efforts for consensus on Ken-Betwe links
The Feasibility Report of the Ken-Betwa link was completed in
November, 1996. For preparation of DPR for this link, a General
Agreement on Interlinking of Rivers Project was sent to UP and MP
in November, 2003. The Government of Madhya Pradesh conveyed its
consent for signing of General Agreement on Interlinking of Rivers
Project on December 17, 2003.
Uttar Pradesh Govt., however, has certain apprehensions on signing
MoU for preparation of DPR such as the investment made by UP
Govt. on Rajghat Dam will become waste due to implementation of
this link project; the agreements made between UP and MP States on
1.8.1972 and 13.1.1977 regarding water sharing of Ken river should be
taken care of, and hydropower generation at Rajghat and Matalia Power
Houses would be hampered etc.

38
The Ministry of Water Resources had earlier constituted a Group
under the chairmanship of Chairman, Central Water Commission
(CWC) in June, 2002 to discuss and expedite the process of arriving
at a consensus amongst States regarding the sharing of surplus water
as per the proposal of inter-basin water transfer by NWDA as well as
the issue of preparation of DPRs. The Secretaries of Water Resources/
Irrigation Departments of concerned States are members of this Group.
This Group earlier held its meeting on 10.02.2003, 12.11.2003 and
1.7.2004 to address the apprehensions of Uttar Pradesh. The issues
raised by UP Government have also been discussed with the officers
of UP Government in different meetings of the technical experts from
Task Force on Inter Linking of Rivers, CWC and National Water
Development Agency (NWDA).
An inter-State meeting at the level of Chief Secretary of the
concerned States of Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan
was held by the Secretary (Water Resources) on 11 January, 2005 to
discuss issues related to Ken-Betwa & Parbati-Kalisindh-Chambal links.
The said meeting was attended by Chief Secretary of Madhya Pradesh
and Principal Secretary (Irrigation) of Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. In
the meeting almost all issues related with Ken-Betwa link were resolved
and officials of UP Government agreed to convey the decision of their
Government by 31 January, 2005. Subsequently, Government of UP
sent its consent in March, 2005 subject to certain conditions. Now
modified MoU for preparation of DPR for Ken-Betwa link has been
sent to Government of MP & UP on 19.5.2005 for their concurrence.
(ii) Efforts for consensus of Parbati-Kalisindh-Chambal link (P-K-C)
An MoU on Parbati-Kalisindh-Chambal link was sent to MP and
Rajasthan in January, 2004. The Government of Madhya Pradesh
conveyed its consent for signing of Memorandum of Understanding
(MoU) for interlinking of Parbati-Kalisindh and Chambal link between
Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan on January 19, 2004. Subsequently, a
meeting between officers of Ministry of Water Resources and officers
of Government of Rajasthan was held on 15.1.2004 at Jaipur to address
the concerns of Government of Rajasthan regarding preparation of DPR
of PKC link based on Pre-Feasibility Report (PFR) studies. In this
meeting the representatives of Government of Rajasthan had raised
some reservations. Some additional issues were also raised by the
Hon’ble Chief Minister, Rajasthan in her letter dated 21.6.2004 addressed
to Minister (WR).
The Feasibility Report (FR) of PKC link was completed in March,
2004 and was circulated by NWDA. Discussions on the FR were held

39
in 33rd Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) meeting of NWDA held
on 2.9.2004.
The Ministry of Water Resources had earlier constituted a Group
under the Chairmanship of Chairman, Central Water Commission in
June, 2002 to discuss and expedite the process of arriving at a consensus
amongst States regarding the sharing of surplus water as per the
proposal of inter-basin water transfer by NWDA as well as the issue
of preparation of DPRs. The Secretaries of Water Resources/Irrigation
Departments of concerned States are members of this Group. In view
of the technical nature of the issues raised by the States, the matter
was taken up by the Consensus Group in its meeting held on
2 November, 2004.
An inter-State Meeting at the level of Chief Secretary of the
concerned States of Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan
was held by the Secretary (Water Resources) on 11 January, 2005 to
discuss issues related to Ken-Betwa and Parbati-Kalisindh-Chambal
links. The said meeting was attended by Chief Secretary of Madhya
Pradesh and Principal Secretary (Irrigation) Rajasthan and Uttar
Pradesh. Regarding Parbati-Kalisindh-Chambal link it was decided that
more technical discussions are required and it was agreed to complete
the discussions by middle of March, 2005. In the meeting held in
March, 2005, it was suggested by the representative of Government of
Rajasthan that the decision for the preparation of DPR shall be
conveyed after the meting of the Chamal Board headed by Chief
Ministers of both the States is held.
(iii) Preparation of DPRs of Links
National Water Development Agency is entrusted only with
preparation of Feasibility Report of links under Peninsular and
Himalayan Component of National Perspective Plan prepared by
Government. The work of preparation of DPR of the Ken-Betwa link
was entrusted to Central Water Commission (CWC) in November, 2003.
Actual work on DPR will commence after signing of MoU. In respect
of Parbati-Kalisindh-Chambal link, no agency has been identified so
far for taking up preparation of DPR for want of consensus.
Major and Medium Irrigation—Strengthening of monitoring
mechanism for expeditious completion of old on-going projects
Recommendation (Para No. 2.12)
The Committee observe that there are 388 on-going Major and
Medium Irrigation Projects pending completion which have spilled over

40
from the Ninth Plan to Tenth Plan (169 Major, 219 Medium). The
Committee are highly distressed to find that as many as 28 Major and
5 Medium Irrigation Projects from pre-Fifth Plan and 44 Major and
44 Medium Irrigation projects from Fifth Five Year Plan are pending
for completion. The Committee are dismayed at the very slow pace of
completion of these projects and are of the firm opinion that it does
not justify the huge investment made under the projects. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to strengthen the
monitoring mechanism further so that these projects can be completed
at the earliest possible.
Reply of the Government
As on 1-4-2004, there are 388 on-going irrigation projects out of
which 169 are Major and 219 Medium. In regard to their approval
status by Planning Commission, 103 Major and 118 Medium projects
totalling to 221 are approved projects.
Most of the projects targeted to be completed in X Plan and
remaining in XI Plan. An effective monitoring system of the projects
is already under implementation in CWC. From time to time, the Project
Authorities/State Governments are requested to expedite the completion
of old on-going projects. Considering the slow progress of the pre-
Fifth and Fifth Plan projects, Ministry of Water Resources proposes to
bring those projects not included under AIBP , in the Fast Track
Programme, so that they could be completed during Tenth Five Year
Plan. The States have been advised accordingly. The observations of
the Committee have been noted monitoring mechanism has been
strengthened. The States have been asked to set up State level
monitoring committees to strengthen the monitoring mechanism of
projects. Reports of formation of State level committees are awaited.
National Water Development Agency (NWDA)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.28)
The Committee note that NWDA has been entrusted with the task
of preparation of DPRs in respect of Ken-Betwa and Parbati-Kalisindh-
Chambal links under the Peninsular component of the programme of
ILR. Their present focus of the programme is restricted to the
preparation of DPRs of the above links as the subject is being examined
by them in detail separately. The Committee further note that a
provision of Rs. 14 crore allocated in 2004-05 for the above link projects
could not be utilized as the concerned States, i.e. Uttar Pradesh-Madhya
Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh-Rajasthan have not been able to arrived

41
at a consensus on various aspects of the links and MoUs for the same
could not be signed by them. The Ministry informed the Committee
that the work of DPRs is likely to take 3 years after the consensus is
arrived at. The Committee, therefore, urge the Government to take
urgent steps to persuade the State Governments to arrive at a consensus
and sign MoUs at an early date so that work of DPR preparation
starts and work on these two links of the peninsular component of
ILR gets underway and the objectives are realized. The Committee,
therefore, desire to be informed of the progress made in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The position has been explained in reply to Recommendation
Para No. 2.11.

42
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE COMMITTEE
Reduction in plan allocation for the Ministry of Water Resources for
2005-06
Recommendation (Para No. 1.21)
The scrutiny of Demands for Grants 2005-2006 of the Ministry of
Water Resources reveals that the total outlay of Rs. 899.66 crore for
2005-2006 shows an overall increase of Rs. 45.30 crore over the BE of
the previous year. It also shows an overall hike of Rs. 41.00 crore
(6.92%) in the plan outlay for 2005-2006 of Rs. 633.00 crore in
comparison to Rs. 592.00 crore in 2004-2005. Whereas there is an
increase of Rs. 38.04 crore (6.91%) on the Revenue Section (Plan), the
Capital Section (Plan) shows an increase of Rs. 2.96 crore (7.01%). On
the other hand, the non-plan allocation for both the Revenue and the
Capital sections show an increase of Rs. 4.15 crore (1.7%) and
Rs. 0.15 crore (0.79%) respectively over the same for the year 2004-
2005. Further, the Committee observe that though the Ministry had
proposed Rs. 946.21 crore as plan allocation for the year 2005-2006, the
Planning Commission allocated Rs. 921 crore, Rs. 621 crore for Central
Sector and Rs. 300 crore for State Sector which is Rs. 25.21 crore less
than the proposed allocation by the Ministry. The Committee also
observe that it is difficult to understand the rationale behind the
reduction of allocations, which are at variance with the commitment
of Government to give top priority to equitable and effective water
management in the country. The reduction in allocation by the Planning
Commission is to the extent of Rs. 7.00 crore for Major and Medium
Irrigation, Rs. 14.00 crore for Minor Irrigation, Rs. 23.21 crore for Flood
Control against the proposals of the Ministry for 2005-2006. The
Committee fail to understand the basis for reduction of allocation by
the Planning Commission in respect of the above three vital components
which in their opinion may adversely affect the pace of implementation
of on-going projects and their timely completion. The Committee are
disconcerted to note that allocations for Command Area Development
and Water Management had been reduced at the RE stage for two
consecutive years 2003-2004 and 2004-2005. Apparently, the Ministry’s
lacklustre performance is reflected from the very fact that not enough
proposals under CADWM come forward from the State Governments.

43
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Water Resources proposed a total outlay of Rs. 946.21 crore
for the year 2005-06 to the Planning Commission. Planning Commission,
however, approved a total outlay of Rs. 921.00 crore. The outlay
approved by the Planning Commission is Rs. 25.21 crore less than the
outlay proposed by the Ministry . This reduction is marginal and will
not adversely affect the pace of implementation of ongoing projects
and their timely completion. The funding pattern was changed during
the year and the consequent changes in processing conditions, clearance
procedure etc. necessitated a reduction of outlays in the RE for
2003-04. The allocation for the scheme for CAD&WM during the year
2004-05 has also been reduced to some extent because the State
Governments have not come forward with sufficient proposals despite
every effort in this direction.
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report)
Monitoring of State Sector Schemes—utilisation of irrigation potential
already created.
Recommendation (Para No. 1.22)
The Committee note that three major Centrally Sponsored Schemes
viz Flood Control in Brahmaputra Valley; Repair, Renovation and
Restoration of Water Bodies and Aritificial Recharge of Ground Water
etc. amounting to an outlay of Rs. 300 crore stand transferred to the
State Sector ostensibly in fulfilment of the provision in the NCMP that
all Centrally Sponsored Schemes except in national priority areas be
transferred to the State Sector. The Committee based on their past
experiences and the current pace of implementation of various schemes
executed by the State Governments and administered and monitored
by the Ministry observe that numerous problems are being encountered
in timely implementation of projects. Further, the schemes transferred
to State Sector would continue to be monitored by the Ministry though
the projects under these programmes would be planned and executed
by the State Governments. The Committee are of the firm view that
the Union Government cannot abdicate its responsibility on the State
Sector Schemes as these Schemes inter-alia entail creation of more
irrigation potential, Recharge of Ground Water and checking floods
and erosion across the country and desire the Ministry to further
strengthen the monitoring mechanism in respect of these schemes.
Further, the Committee observe that though policy thrust of the

44
Ministry is on drawing up time schedule for completion of on going
Major Irrigation Projects, they, however, desire that there need to be
more emphasis on the utilization of irrigation potential already created.
Reply of the Government
The three schemes viz. (a) Flood Control in Brahmaputra Valley,
(b) Repair, Renovation and Restoration of water bodies and (c) Artificial
Recharge of Ground Water etc. have been approved as State Sector
schemes. However, the implementation of schemes continues to be
monitored by the Ministry of Water Resources. As regards utilisation
of irrigation potential already created, it is stated that the objective of
scheme on “Command Area Development & Water Management” being
implemented by the Ministry is to bridge the gap between irrigation
potential created & its utilisation and to optimise agricultural
productivity/production through integrated and coordinated approach
for efficient land and water management in the irrigation commands.
However, certain gap in potential created and potential utilized is
inevitable as command takes time to develop. Regarding monitoring
mechanism, it is stated that a three tier system of monitoring at Centre,
State and Project level is being followed. The main objective of
monitoring is to ensure the achievement of physical and financial
targets for timely completion of projects, identification of the inputs
required, analysis of the reasons for any shortfalls/bottlenecks and
suggest remedial measures etc. with a view to complete them in a
time bound manner and to achieve the targets of creation of irrigation
potential. At Centre level this work is entrusted to Central Water
Commission. As per the present arrangement, Inter-State, Externally
Assisted and Centrally Sponsored projects are being monitored by
monitoring unit at CWC Headquarters and the other projects by various
field units of CWC. Monitoring Directorates are located at various
stations under field formations of CWC.
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report)
Need for a single Administrative Ministry for dealing with all issues
concerning “Water”
Recommendation (Para No. 1.30)
The Committee also observe that National Development Council
at its 50th meeting held in December 2002 considered the matter on
the need for a Single Administrative Ministry for dealing with all

45
issues concerning ‘Water’. Further, the Planning Commission too was
of the view that the subject of ‘Water’ and all its related issues be
dealt with at the Union level in one Ministry viz. the Ministry of
Water Resources to pave the way for integrated planning, development
and management of water resources in the country for their optional
utilization. This has also been emphasized in the National Water Policy.
The Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources had rightly admitted during
his deposition before the Committee that having the same Secretary
for both the Water Resources and Drinking Water Departments is
probably a step in the direction of creation of a Single Administrative
Ministry for water and related subjects. The Committee strongly believe
that the ‘Single Administrative Ministry for Water’ is long overdue as
a policy initiative by the Government. The Committee feel that it would
be in the fitness of the things to designate the Ministry of Water
Resources as the nodal agency for dealing with all aspects of Water at
the Central Government level at the earliest. The Committee, therefore,
desire to be apprised of the progress made in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The relevant paras from the Tenth Five Year Plan (2002-07) V olume-
II are as under:
“8.1.63 Presently water is a subject that is being dealt with in
different ministries.
8.1.64 While at the policy formulation level, the National Water
Resources Council representing all the concerned ministries was
set up in 1983 under the Prime Minister the Planning Commission
is of the view that the subject of water and all its uses should be
dealt with at the Centre by only one ministry—the Ministry of
Water Resources.
8.1.65 To begin with, it is desirable that a National Water Resources
Programme Coordination Committee under the chairmanship of
Member (Agriculture and Water Resources), Planning Commission
is set up to ensure that everyone’s interests and concerns are taken
into account when framing and implementing all programmes
having a bearing on the use, development, conservation,
augmentation, productivity and protection of water resources.
Secretaries of the concerned ministries as well as the Chairman of
CWC, CGWB and Chairman and Managing Director of the National
Hydroelectric Power Corporation (NHPC) would be members and
the Secretary, Water Resources, would be the Member Secretary.
The role of each Ministry in the use and management of water
should be clearly identified by the Committee.”

46
In this regards, it is submitted for information that the proposed
National Water Resources Programme Coordination Committee has not
yet been constituted. It is further submitted for information that the
Ministry of Water Resources and Department of Drinking Water Supply
are now having two different Secretaries.
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report)
Major and Medium Irrigation-Identification of completed projects
not declared as completed.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.14)
The Committee also observe that in pursuance of the
recommendation of the Committee to identify all completed projects
not declared as completed by State Governments contained in their
First Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05), an exercise was carried
out by CWC to identify such projects. This has resulted in identification
of 16 Major and 25 Medium Projects in 10 States which attained 90%
or more of targeted irrigation potential. It is further disconcerting to
observe that though the main aim is creation of additional irrigation
potential, the Government finds it difficult to ignore the creation of
the balance 10% potential. The CWC carried out a further analysis of
the above projects and found that 10 Major and 12 Medium Irrigation
Projects were receiving CLA under AIBP and only 2 Major and one
Medium Projects were treated as completed. The States have reportedly
given undertakings that 8 Major and 11 Medium Projects would be
completed in 2004-05 or 2005-06. It is furthermore surprising that out
of the identified projects, 3 Major and 4 Medium Projects are in the
unapproved category though they attained the targeted irrigation
potential.
Reply of the Government
There are 41 projects (16 major and 25 medium) as on 01.04.2004
where 90% and above potential with respect to ultimate irrigation
potential has already been created. These 41 major/medium projects
include 3 major and 4 medium unapproved projects which have
attained 90% or more targeted potential. Considering the attainment
of irrigation potential by these unapproved project, Central Water
Commission has been requested to take up the matter of 3 major and
4 medium unapproved project with the State Governments for getting
these projects declared as completed. In view of large number of

47
projects spilling over from plan to plan, the Working Group for
X Plan recommended that such projects are to be declared completed
for practical purposes leaving the balance potential (which is less than
10%) to be created in due course by respective State Governments.
This could be made applicable to these projects were the figure showing
the 90% achievement has been static for the past few years and the
progress is not making headway due to certain constraints like non-
availability of land from the farmers etc. The policy for declaring these
projects as completed will be finalized in consultation with the Planning
Commission and taken up with the State Governments for follow up
action.
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report)
Major and Medium irrigation-to stop further flow of funds to
projects—identified as completed as per recommendation of Working
Group on Major & Medium Irrigation.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.15)
The Committee are appalled at the above sorry state of affairs
prevailing in the Major and Medium Irrigation Sector which has been
the light of the day owing to their persistent prodding to the
Government to take a serious view of the hitherto prevailing situation.
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation
contained in their Second Action Taken Report on the subject to stop
further flow of funds to projects now identified as it is their considered
opinion that the created irrigation potential be put to optimum use
rather than creating additional potential and not putting it to good
use which in itself is wastage of public funds. The Committee, therefore,
desire the Government to accept/implement the recommendation of
the Working Group on Major and Medium Irrigation in full. The
committee desire to be apprised of the action taken in the matter.
Reply of the Government
Irrigation being a State subject, the formulation, funding and
implementation of the projects are done by the State Governments.
The recommendation of the Working Group in respect of completion
of on-going projects of previous plans and to derive benefit from
already locked in investment has been brought to the notice of the
State Governments. Ministry fully agrees with the views of the Standing
Committee regarding putting to optimum use the created irrigation
potential than creating additional irrigation potential in the projects
having balance potential of 5-10%. However, the States may have to
examine each case separately, as in some projects, it may be the creation
of distributaries and minors preventing full achievement of the

48
envisaged potential. However, Ministry will be conveying the views of
the Committee as given in para 2.14 to the States. But, whenever the
concerned States are desirous of attaining the balance irrigation potential
through a fast track mode or otherwise under the Accelerated Irrigation
Benefits Programme (AIBP), the ministry proposed to consider such
cases favourably to achieve the balance irrigation potential.
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report)
Command Area Development and Water Management Scheme
Recommendation (Para No. 4.13)
The Committee note that the outlay under Command Area
Development Programme during the Tenth Plan was earmarked at
Rs. 1,208.00 crore. However, only Rs.436.54 crore i.e. 36.14% could be
utilized during the years 2002-2003, 2003-2004 and 2004-2005 and
remaining Rs. 771.46 crore, i.e. 63.86% is yet to be utilized in the last
two financial years 2005-2006 and 2006-2007. During 2004-2005, the
allocation for Command Area Development Programme was kept at
Rs. 181.50 crore and an amount of Rs. 41.14 crore remained unspent.
The Ministry have admitted that this reduced utilization would affect
the work on renovation of land and correction of system deficiencies
adversely. The Committee are unhappy to note the low utilization of
Plan allocation under the Scheme and recommend the Ministry to sort
out all the causative factors under the Scheme and ensure that the
allocated funds are fully utilized during the year.
Further, the Committee note that the Command Area Development
Programme has been restructured and renamed as Command Area
Development and Water Management Scheme for implementation
during 2004-2007. Under the restructured Scheme, the State
Governments have been advised to submit fresh Detailed Projects
Reports of all the project by the end of August 2004. It is very
disturbing to observe that despite repeated recommendations of the
Committee, the Government failed to obtain the fresh DPRs of all the
projects expeditiously from the States. The Ministry so far could obtain
DPRs from only 8 States. The Committee fail to understand the manner
in which the Ministry propose to achieve the targets under the Scheme
with such slow pace of submission of DPRs by States. The Committee,
therefore, desire the Ministry to pursue the matter vigorously with all
the concerned State Governments to submit the fresh DPRs of all the
projects at the earliest possible so that the implementation of Scheme
may not be hampered.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry provides Central Assistance to States on 50:50 basis
keeping in view their performance/requirement. The utilization of

49
central outlays, therefore, depends on the matching allocations provided
by the State Governments. Thus the reduced utilization of central
allocation is on account of the overall reduction in allocation of
matching funds by State Governments. The State Governments are
being regularly persuaded to enhance their matching outlay so as to
utilize the allocated central outlays.
Regarding submission of DPR, it is stated that till May 2005,
11 States have submitted the DPR and the remaining States are being
followed up for expediting the submission of DPRs. In pursuance of
CCEA directive, fresh DPRs were sought from the State Governments
with the objective of assessing the quantum of works completed by
31 March 2004, the targets for the remaining period of X Plan indicating
inter-alia the time frame budget and action plan for the same. Since
the project activities are being continued, efforts will be made to achieve
the targets.
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para No. 22 of Chapter I of the Report)
Extension of Embankments on Lalbakeya, Kamla, Bagmati and
Khando rivers
Recommendation (Para No. 5.34)
The project of Raising, Strengthening and Extension of
Embankments on Lalbakeya, Kamla, Bagmati and Khando Rivers was
envisaged in order to prevent spilling of flood water from these rivers
from Nepal side into Bihar. Being an International commitment, this
project needs special attention from the Government. The Committee
is disconcerted to note that the Ministry’s less than impressive
performance in regard to under-utilization of funds at the actual stage
for 2003-2004 stems from the fact that the concerned State Governments
have failed to revise/finalize the DPRs for the project in time. They
feel that this is a long standing problem with the State Governments
for not only this project but also in other projects. The Committee
note that the Central assistance under the project is released in advance
to enable the State Governments to take up the works on urgent basis.
The Ministry should pursue with the State Governments to avoid
procrastination in this regard to ensure timely completion of the project.
The State Governments have proposed the work on Bagmati
embankment from India-Nepal Boarder upto the confluence point of
Bagmati-Kosi rivers. This entails more funds as additional length of
embankments are to be raised to complete the project. The Committee
want to know the rationale for earmarking only Rs. 14.00 crore in BE
2005-06—that too only for DPRs for Kamla and Bagmati Scheme on
Indian side for the project only. The Committee desire the allocation
for 2005-2006 be increased at the RE stage to accommodate all necessary
expenditure for effective and timely completion of the project. The

50
Committee also desire that they be apprised of the steps taken in this
direction.
A Committee known as India-Nepal Sub-Committee on
Embankments Construction was set up in January, 2001 to conduct
scientific studies and to accelerate the process of construction. It held
its last meeting in June 2004. Negotiations are on with Nepal for
construction of multi purpose storage dams on Kamla and Bagmati
rivers. The preliminary studies are to be carried out by JPO-SKSKI
High Dam Project authorities. The Committee desire that the above
preliminary studies be completed expeditiously so that the menace of
recurring floods and erosion in North Bihar could be minimized. The
Committee also desire that the requisite funds may soon be released
to JPO-SKSKI to complete this project in time to avoid cost over runs.
The Committee further desire that they be apprised of the steps taken
in this direction.
Reply of the Government
Secretary (WR) took a meeting at Patna on 22nd April 2005 wherein
officials from the State Govt. and GFCC attended. Besides other issues,
the scheme namely, Raising, strengthening & extension of existing
embankments on Lalbakeya, Kamla, Bagmati & Khando rivers was
also discussed. It was decided in the meeting that an amount of Rs.14
crore earmarked as BE during 2005-06 will be utilised for works related
to Kamla and Bagmati rivers in conformity with provision contained
in the approved SFC. Meanwhile an amount of Rs. 3.5 crore has been
released to Government of Bihar for execution of works on Kamla
river as included in the approved SFC. The Committee has desired to
know the rationale for earmarking of Rs. 14 crore in BE in 2005-06.
Government of Bihar submitted DPR to GFCC for Bagmati Flood
Control Scheme. In this regard design parameters etc. are yet to be
finalised. The matter has been referred to CWC to examine the case
and take a holistic view in this regard. It is stated in this regard that
pending finalisation of DPRs submitted by Govt. of Bihar works
included in the approved SFC are being taken up. As regards increase
at the RE stage, it is intimated that it depends upon the expenditure
incurred by the State Government by the time RE is discussed.
In the 2nd meeting of JCWR headed by respective Secretaries,
Ministry of Water Resources of India and Nepal, it was agreed that
the feasibility study of the Kamla and preliminary study of Bagmati
Multipurpose Projects would also be carried out by the Joint Project
Office of Sapta Kosi-Sun Koshi Projects to ascertain the likely constraints
in implementation of these projects so that these could be appropriately
addressed. JPO-SKSKI has already initiated action in respect of Kamla
and Bagmati rivers as well. In pursuance of the decision on Kamla

51
and Bagmati rivers taken in the 2nd JCWR meeting, the Joint Team of
Experts in its 6th meeting (12-13 June 2005) at Biratnagar authorized
Joint Project Office, Sapta Kosi High Dam Multipurpose Project and
Sun Kosi Storage Cum Diversion Scheme to take up following
additional works in respect of Kamla and Bagmati projects.
a. Feasibility Level Survey and Investigation for preparation
of feasibility report for Kamla Multipurpose Project.
b. A preliminary study comprising reassessment of Bagmati
Dam based on available information in light of present
environmental and socio economic problems of the project
will be carried out. Field verification by JPO-SKSKI officials
and experts will be conducted as required.
An amount of Rs. 7.00 crore has been kept as BE during 2005-06
for the Sapta Kosi Project which may be modified/enhanced at RE
stage depending on requirement submitted by Central Water
Commission.
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para No. 25 of Chapter I of the Report)
Pagladia Dam Project
Recommendation (Para No. 5.50)
The Committee are constrained to observe that the implementation
and the cost of Pagladia Dam Project have been hostage to the physical
problem, viz. ecological, environmental and R&R issues. These unsolved
issues have cast their spell on the utilization of funds for the project,
as is evident from the reduced allocation in the actuals for 2003-2004
and at the RE stage 2004-2005. It is incumbent upon the Ministry of
Water Resources to impress upon the State Governments to take up
these issues in right earnest with project affected people in the area
and evolve a strategic road map to sort out of the existing problems
urgently. The Committee also observe that the project cost had escalated
from Rs. 542.90 crore to Rs. 1,069.40 crore to accommodate, like many
others, a subject change in design/quality due to additional
investigation. The Committee in their First Report on Demands for
Grants (2004-05) recommended for early clearance by PIB and CCEA.
However, clearances are still awaited. The Ministry informed that Zirat
Survey by State Government is yet to be taken up. The Committee
can not but conclude that both these actions are stuck up in the maze
of procedures. The Committee, therefore, desire the Government to
take urgent steps to clear the project at the earliest for implementation
otherwise a stage might come when the project itself becomes unviable.

52
The Committee also desire that they be apprised of the steps taken in
this regard.
Reply of the Government
Brahmaputra Board as well as Ministry of Water Resources are
persistently pursuing the matter with the Government of Assam for
completion of the Zirat Survey which is essential before the
implementation of the Pagladiya Dam Project. The issue of early
implementation of the Pagladiya Project came up during the discussion
of the Hon’ble Union Minister of Water Resources with the Chief
Minister of Assam during his visit to Guwahati in September 2004.
The Additional Secretary (WR) had a meeting with Chief Secretary,
Government of Assam on 21.09.2005 wherein the expeditious completion
of the Zirat Survey was emphasized in order to take up the
implementation of the project. The Chairman, Brahmaputra Board had
a meeting with the Additional Chief Secretary, Government of Assam
on 25.10.2004.
A Review Meeting on the progress of implementation of Pagladiya
Dam Project was held on 02.02.2005 where the Commissioner and
Secretary to the Government of Assam, Revenue Department and
Principal Secretary, Bodoland Territorial Area Districts (BTAD), officials
from Central Water Commission and Brahmaputra Board were present.
The Hon’ble Union Minister of Water Resources had vide D.O. letter
dated 28.02.2005, requested the Hon’ble Chief Minister of Assam to
sort out the matter at his level and to communicate the firm resolve
of the Government of Assam in consultation with the Bodoland
Territorial Area District, so that the work can be taken up further by
the Brahmaputra Board.
The Hon’ble Chief Minister, Government of Assam has constituted
a Cabinet Committee on Implementation of the Pagladiya Dam Project
vide notification dated 23.03.2005 to examine and resolve all outstanding
issues leading to non-completion of Zirat Survey in the areas under
Bodoland Territorial Area Districts (BTAD).
The first meeting of the Committee was on 22.04.2005 where it
was decided that the matter would be pursued by Government of
Assam with the representatives of the BTAD after the Bodo Territorial
Council (BTC) election of 13.05.2005.
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para No. 28 of Chapter I of the Report)

53
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Artificial Recharge of Ground Water
Recommendation (Para No. 3.19)
The Committee find that the Ground Water level is declining very
rapidly in almost every part of the country. The Artificial Recharge of
Ground Water Scheme is one of the most effective Schemes to arrest
the further decline of Ground Water level. While the Committee are
happy to note that the Planning Commission has cleared the Scheme
“Artificial Recharge of Ground Water” which was pending since long
will now be implemented in the State Sector and an allocation of Rs.
92.00 crore is earmarked for the year 2005-2006 to implement the
Scheme during the year 2005-2006 and 2006-2007. the Secretary, Ministry
of Water Resources during the evidence informed the Committee that
the note for CCEA is under preparation and the Scheme will be taken
up in the first quarter of current financial year 2005-2006. The
Committee hope that the Government would endeavour to clear the
Scheme from CCEA at the earliest and implement the Scheme without
further loss of time.
Reply of the Government
The Planning Commission’s in principle’ approval has been
received. Thereafter, a draft Note for Cabinet Committee on Economic
Affairs (CCEA), duly approved by Hon’ble Minister (WR), has been
circulated to concerned Ministries/Departments on 20.04.2005 seeking
their comments before finalizing the draft Note. Comments of some of
the concerned Ministries/Departments are still awaited. The matter is
being persued with them and as soon as their comments become
available, the Note for CCEA will be finalized and sent to CCEA for
approval.
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para No. 16 of Chapter I of the Report)
Performance Review of AIBP by C&AG
Recommendation (Para No. 6.29)
The Committee note that C&AG had made a performance review
of AIBP for the period 1996-97 to 2002-03 and a performance appraisal
Report No. 15 of 2004 was presented to the Houses of Parliament. The

54
Committee are, however, dismayed to note that in the Report of C&AG,
instances of diversion/mis-utilisation of fund released as Central Loan
Assistance (CLA) under AIBP have been noticed. The Ministry also
informed that the States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh,
Gujarat, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and
West Bengal have diverted/mis-utilised the CLA under AIBP . The
Committee are of the considered opinion that it is certainly a matter
of grave concern as it shows the Ministry in poor light and its poor
monitoring of the Scheme. The Ministry had reportedly sent the
observations of C&AG to all State Governments and compliance reports
from them are awaited. Their present focus is limited to the budgetary
allocations, etc. and a cursory view has been taken in respect of other
matters as the Committee has selected AIBP for detailed examination
separately. The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to enquire
into the matter and apprise the outcome of the same to the Committee
within three months from the presentation of this Report to the Houses
of Parliament. The Committee also desire the Ministry to take urgent
steps to prevent further diversion/mis-utilisation of CLA under AIBP
so that the completion of incomplete projects may not be hampered
due to diversion/mis-utilisation of CLA.
Reply of the Government
Regarding instances of diversion/mis-utilization of AIBP funds by
the State Governments as pointed out by the C&AG, it is to be
mentioned that the States have been supplied with the copies of C&AG
Report with the request that the replies pertaining to execution of
projects, diversion, parking and mis-utilization of funds may be
prepared and submitted to Ministry of Water Resources/Central Water
Commission urgently. Even though the reminders have been sent, no
State has so far submitted the requisite replies (except Karnataka State
where the Public Accounts Committee paid a visit in November, 2004).
The matter is being constantly pursued with the States for getting the
needful done on priority. Secretary (WR) is proposing a meeting shortly
with State Irrigation Secretaries during which this matter would also
be discussed.
Comments of the Committee
(Please See Para No. 31 of Chapter I of the Report)
     N
EW D ELHI; R. SAMBASIVA RAO,
11 November, 2005 Chairman,
20 Kartika, 1927 (Saka) Standing Committee on Water Resources.

55
APPENDIX I
(Mentioned in Reply to Recommendation Para No. 3.28)
RECOMMENDATION OF THE EXPERT GROUP
Recommendations Present Status
12
1. A “Protocol for Water Quality
Monitoring “as detailed in Chapter 7
of this report has been recommended
by the Expert Group for
implementation in the Water quality
monitoring agencies, which deals with
the various components of water
quality monitoring as assigned to the
group by the Ministry of Environment
and Forests (MoEF) from network
design to quality assurance and quality
control for reliable data generation. The
Expert Group has also recognized the
software developed under the
Hydrology Project and the CPCB for
data entry, data validation and analysis
for promoting computerized data
processing and storage to facilitate data
user agencies in planning pollution
control programmes.
2. The Expert Group has recommended
(Chapter 8) various types of quality
assurance tests viz. analytical quality
control (AQC) tests viz . within
‘laboratory’ and ‘inter-laboratory’ AQC,
programme, to be performed by the
laboratories for ensuring reliability in
data generation.
In addition to the ‘referral laboratory’
of the CPCB in Delhi, the Group
The report of the Expert
Group on Uniform
Monitoring Protocol was
generally accepted and
approved by WQAA. As
decided in the meeting,
National River Conservation
Directorate (NRCD) of
Ministry of Environment &
Forests on the basis of
recommendations of Expert
Group and Task Force
formulated the Uniform
Protocol on Water Quality
Monitoring. Considering the
suggestions received from
Ministry of Law, the Gazette
Notification on Uniform
Protocol by NRCD has been
made on 17.6.2005
CWC and CGWB already
declared the Referral
Laboratories at Delhi (in
respect of surface water) and
at Lucknow and Hyderabad
(in respect of ground water)
respectively for providing
expert guidance to surface
and ground water
laboratories.

56
suggests paragraph 8.2) that there is
an urgent need for developing two
‘referral laboratories’—one with the
Central Water Commission and the
other with the Central Ground Water
Board—for providing expert
guidance to the surface water and
ground water laboratories
respectively, and for conducting‘inter-
laboratory AQC’ exercise once a year
among the laboratories. The two
Referral Laboratories should be
equipped with state-of-the-art
instruments and adequate qualified
and trained scientists/chemists. The
CPCB shall include these two
laboratories in its ‘Inter-laboratory
AQC’ exercise, which is conducted
for the laboratories recognized under
the provisions of the Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986.
3. It was observed by the Group that
the most vulnerable aspect in water
quality monitoring programme is the
lack of qualified and trained
manpower. To estimate the
manpower requirement, an approach
has been suggested (paragraph 7.5.3)
for surface water and groundwater
laboratories based on the number of
samples and the parameters to be
analysed.
4. There is an imperative need for
establishing a Central Training
Institute for Water quality monitoring
assessment and management
(paragraph 8.3), preferably located in
The matter was discussed in the
4th meeting of WQAA held in
July, 2005. It was decided that
CWC & CGWB will work out
a proposal in this regard in
consultation with CPCB for
further action.
This matter was discussed in
the 4th Meeting of WQAA held
in July, 2005. It was decided
that rather than establishing one
training institute, it would be
12

57
12
the CPCB, Delhi for better
coordination.
5. Incidentally, the scope of the
report is restricted to the study of
the monitoring systems for inland
surface water and ground water only
as envisaged in its terms of reference.
Monitoring systems for coastal water
and lake ecosystem being of equal
concern, the Group recommends that
the same may be studied separately
and at the earliest.
1. It is recommended that the water
quality monitoring strategies
recommended by the Expert Group
Constituted by WQAA may be
implemented with modification as
suggested by CPCB and incorporated
in this report.
2. The State level committees
constituted under aegis of Ministry
of Water Resources may be activated
with defined tasks and time targeted
action plan on Water Quality data
collection, collation and
dissemination.
more useful to identify reputed
institutions like IIT, in each
region for providing training
support. This will also take care
of related issues like optimum
utilization of faculty members
and need for upgradation of
knowledge and skills for taking
up training.
This matter was discussed in
the 4th Meeting of WQAA held
in July, 2005. It was decided
that a separate study on this is
not required. While considering
the monitoring system in these
specific areas, some experts
specialized in this field can be
co-opted in deciding
appropriate monitoring system.
Gazette Notification of Uniform
Monitoring Protocol has been
made by NRCD (MoEF) on
17.6.2005.
This matter also came up in the
National Conference on Water
Quality held on 14-15th October
at Kolkata. It was
recommended that State Level
Water Quality Review
Committees need to be more
effective to coordinate and
RECOMMENDATION OF THE TASK FORCE

58
12
3. As the information on micro-
pollutants is required to be
generated, all the agencies involved
in water quality  monitoring may
take up this task initially at all the
location on surface water bodies and
10% of the groundwater monitoring
locations in high pesticide
consuming.
4. The guidelines developed by
CPCB for quality assurance and
accreditation of the laboratory may
be implemented in order to generate
authentic data.
address water quality problems.
The recommendations of the
Conference were sent to all
State Governments, Central
Agencies and all State Level
Water Quality Review
Committees for taking
necessary action. Subsequently,
a Strategy Workshop for Water
Quality Review Committees
was held on 20-21st July, 2005
at New Delhi in which
Chairmen and Member
Secretaries of State level
WQRCs and members of
WQAA were invited for
effective interaction. This
workshop also recommended
on this aspect stating that State
Level Water Quality Review
Committees need to be made
more effective towards Water
Quality Management (WQM) to
address related issues like need,
infrastructure, manpower
management, funding etc.
Uniform Protocol on Water
Quality Monitoring as notified
by NRCD covers this aspect
also.
Uniform Protocol on Water
Quality Monitoring as notified
by NRCD covers this aspect
also.

59
12
In this regard it was decided
in the 5th meeting of WQMC
that there is already a website
of MoEF. The matter related to
WQAA would be put in the
hyperlink of this website for
which CPCB would take up
action.
5. The task force decided that the
data generated by all the agencies
shall be shared through websites.
For this purpose a data bank at
National level needs to be set-up to
integrate the information on water
quality and its dissemination to user
groups.

60
APPENDIX II
(Mentioned in Reply to Recommendation Para No. 5.15)
J. HARINARAYAN Government of India
Tel. 23/159919 Ministry of Water Resources
Fax. 23/10305 Shram Shakti Bhavan, Rafi Marg,
E mail. ………….. New Delhi-110 001
D.O. No. 5/14/2002-ER/1586 April 12-13, 2005
Dear Shri Shah,
I am writing this in connection with the Plan scheme on “Flood
Proofing Programme in North Bihar”. The scheme has been
discontinued as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) vide Planning
Commission letter dated 5.2.2005 and no budgetary provision for the
same has been kept for the Annual Plan 2005-06. I would like to
inform that the Ministry of Water Resources had proposed for the
transfer of the scheme from Centrally Sponsored Schemes to State
Sector Schemes with effect from the financial year 2005-06.
Realizing the importance of providing facilities such as raised
platform with some minimum facilities in providing immediate relief
to the flood affected people, this scheme was taken up by this Ministry.
In this regard, I would like to inform that in view of the importance
of the scheme, a higher allocation fo Rs. 20 crore was initially made
during the 10th Five Year Plan with a view to expand the scope of the
scheme to cover the States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, Orissa,
Assam and Andhra Pradesh which are frequently affected by floods.
However, the expanded scheme was not prepared in view of the advice
of the Planning Commission to carry out the performance evaluation
of the existing scheme. The Ministry of Water Resources is in the
process of getting the evaluation studies conducted and the work for
the evaluation has already been awarded to WAPCOS and we expect
the outcome of the study soon. In the meantime, the Task Force for
Flood Management/Erosion Control set up by the Ministry of Water
Resources under Chairman, Central Water Commission has strongly
recommended the flood proofing measures in view of this being very
useful for people to take shelter during flood.
In view of the above position, I request you to re-consider the
decision of the Planning Commission for discontinuation of the scheme

61
on “Flood Proofing in North Bihar” and allow the operation of the
scheme for which allocation could be made from within the overall
budgetary provisions of the Ministry.
With regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(J. Hari Narayan)
Shri Rajeeva Ratna Shah
Secretary
Planning Commission
Yojana Bhawan
New Delhi.

62
APPENDIX III
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES (2005-2006)
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
HELD ON FRIDAY, 21 OCTOBER, 2005
The Committee sat from 1100 hours to 1215 hours in Committee
Room ‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri R. Sambasiva Rao— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhanwar Singh Dangawas
3. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo
4. Shri Rajen Gohain
5. Dr. M. Jagannath
6. Smt. Preneet Kaur
7. Shri Raghuveer Singh Kaushal
8. Smt. Manorama Madhavraj
9. Shri Munshiram
10. Shri Lonappan Nambadan
11. Shri Laxmanrao Patil
12. Smt. Minati Sen
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Indramoni Bora
14. Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
15. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri N.K. Sapra — Joint Secretary
2. Shri A.S. Chera — Director
3. Shri P .V .L.N. Murthy — Under Secretary

63
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the members to
the sitting of the Standing Committee on Water Resources.
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration
Memorandum No. 2 and the Draft Report on Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in their
Third Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants
(2005-06) of the Ministry of Water Resources. After some discussion,
the Committee adopted the Report without any amendments/
modifications.
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the
above draft Action Taken Report on the basis of factual verification
from the Ministry of Water Resources and to present the same to both
the Houses of Parliament.
4. *** *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.
***Minutes in respect of other matters are kept separately.

64
APPENDIX IV
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED
IN THE THIRD REPORT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
OF THE COMMITTEE
(i) Total number of Recommendations/Observations 27
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government
Para Nos. 1.23, 2.13, 2.20, 3.9, 3.20, 3.21, 3.28,
4.14, 5.15, 5.26, 5.43, 5.57, 6.17 and 6.23
Total 14
Percentage 51.86%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies
Para Nos. 2.11, 2.12 and 2.28
Total 3
Percentage 11.11%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee
Para Nos. 1.21, 1.22, 1.30, 2.14, 2.15, 4.13,
5.34 and 5.50
Total 8
Percentage 29.63%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect
of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited
Para No. 3.19 and 6.29
Total 2
Percentage 7.40%