6
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON WATER RESOURCES
(2006-2007)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-2007)
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Water Resources]
SIXTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 ( Saka)

SIXTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
WATER RESOURCES
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2006-2007)
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Water Resources]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 15.12.2006
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 15.12.2006
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)


W.R.C. No. 6
Price : Rs. 80.00
© 2006 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE(S)
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2006-07) .......................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government .................................. 11
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies .......................................... 39
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ..................................... 44
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are
still awaited. ................................................................ 48
A
PPENDICES
I. Status of pending Utilization Certificates (UCs)
from Autonomous Bodies & Institutions from
1986-87 to 2002-03 ...................................................... 54
II. The status of funds released, utilized and
physical outputs in respect of the Centrally
Sponsored Scheme namely, “Improvement of
Drainage in the critical areas of the country” ... 56
III. State-wise Status of Ongoing Major and Medium
Irrigation Projects which were anticipated to
have attained 90% or more of Targetted Potential
on 01.04.2004................................................................ 57
IV . Status of Completion of Projects under AIBP .... 59
V. Minutes of the Fourth sitting of the Committee
held on 06 December, 2006 ..................................... 70
VI. Analysis of action taken by the Government on
the Recommendations/Observations contained
in the Fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of
the Committee. ............................................................ 72
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON WATER RESOURCES (2006-07)
Shri R. Sambasiva Rao— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhanwar Singh Dangawas
3. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo
4. Shri Rajen Gohain
5. Smt. Preneet Kaur
6. Shri Raghuveer Singh Kaushal
7. Smt. Manorama Madhavraj
8. Smt. Kiran Maheshwari
9. Shri Shankhlal Majhi
10. Shri Mukeem Mohammad
*11. Shri Subodh Mohite
**12. Shri Abu Ayes Mondal
13. Shri Lonappan Nambadan
14. Shri Harilal Madhavaji Bhai Patel
@15. Dr. Arun Kumar Sarma
16. Smt. Minati Sen
#17. Shri Harihar Swain
$18. Vacant
%19. Vacant
@@20. Vacant
+21. Vacant
(iii)
$ Nomination of Shri Paras Nath Yadav , MP , changed by the Hon’ble Speaker w.e.f.
31.08.2006.
* Nominated w.e.f. 31.08.2006.
# Nominated w.e.f. 08.09.2006.
@ Nominated w.e.f. 25.09.2006.
% Nomination of Smt. Kalpana Ramesh Narhire, MP , changed by the Hon’ble Speaker
w.e.f. 25.09.2006.
@@ Nomination of Shri Sippipari Ravichandran, MP , changed by the Hon’ble Speaker
w.e.f. 25.09.2006.
+ Shri Jay Prakash Narayan Yadav, MP ceased to be Member of the Committee w.e.f.
24.10.2006 on his induction in the Council of Ministers.
** Nominated w.e.f. 28.11.2006.

Rajya Sabha
22. Chowdhary Mohammad Aslam
23. Shri Indramoni Bora
24. Shri Ajay Singh Chautala
25. Smt. Sushree Devi
26. Shri K.E. Ismail
*27. Shri K.P .K. Kumaran
28. Prof. P . J. Kurien
29. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania
30. Shri Sharad Yadav
31. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Sapra — Joint Secretary
3. Shri A.S. Chera — Director
4. Shri P .V .L.N. Murthy — Under Secretary
5. Shri A.K. Yadav — Committee Officer
(iv)
*Nominated w.e.f. 01.09.2006.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Water Resources
(2006-2007) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Sixth Report on the Action Taken
by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in
the Fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Water Resources (2005-2006) on Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of
the Ministry of Water Resources.
2. The Fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 18 May 2006.
The replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained
in the Report were received on 18 September 2006.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
06 December, 2006.
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Fifth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-VI.
    N
EW D ELHI; R. SAMBASIVA RAO,
13 December, 2006 Chairman,
22 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Water Resources.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources deals
with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations/
observations contained in their Fifth Report on Demands for Grants
(2006-2007) of the Ministry of Water Resources which was presented
to Lok Sabha on 18 May 2006.
2. Action taken notes were received from the Government in respect
of all the 26 recommendations/observations of the Committee which
have been categorised as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Para Nos. 1.19, 1.26, 1.30, 2.8, 2.15, 2.19, 3.17, 3.24, 4.8, 4.18,
4.19, 5.34, 5.48, 6.8, 7.16, 7.21 and 7.27
(Total—17)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Para Nos. 1.20, 3.12, 4.10 and 5.39
(Total—4)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Para Nos. 2.12, 5.15 and 5.24
(Total—3)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 3.9 and 7.26
(Total—2)

2
3. The Committee desire that final replies in respect of the
recommendations/observations for which only interim replies have
been given by the Government should be furnished to the Committee
within three months of the presentation of the Report.
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the recommendations/observations in the
succeeding paragraphs.
A. Outcome Budget—Improvement of Drainage in Critical Areas of
the Country
Recommendation (Para No. 2.12)
5. The Committee noted that an important programme included in
the ‘Outcome Budget’ of the Ministry relates to improvement of
Drainage in Critical Areas of the country estimated to cost
Rs. 54.57 crore comprising Central share of Rs. 49.62 crore sanctioned
in February 2004 which intended to take up works with the objective
of improvement of drainage in critical areas affected by floods in the
States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Orissa and Uttar Pradesh. The Plan
outlay for the Scheme had been increased to Rs. 22.11 crore in
2006-2007 as against Rs. 18 crore in 2005-2006. The Committee were
disconcerted to note that the quantifiable durables/physical outputs in
respect of this Scheme had been very vaguely described. The Plan
outlay had also been restricted to Rs. 22.11 crore in spite of the
availability of Rs. 26.87 crore due to poor performance by the States
of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. The Committee desired the Ministry to
impress upon the State Governments to address the problems like
land acquisition in right earnest so that the works of these projects
commence at the earliest and also define the physical outputs in more
realistic terms.
6. The Ministry has, in its action taken reply, stated that it has
requested the concerned State Governments to expedite the execution
of the works under this scheme. Zonal offices of Central Water
Commission monitor the schemes regularly by making field visits and
submit monitoring report. State Governments are constantly reminded
to complete the scheme by the stipulated time, i.e. by the end of
10th Five Year Plan. The status of funds released, utilized and physical
outputs are given at Appendix-II.
7. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry
that State Governments are being constantly reminded to expedite
completion of the works under this Scheme by the stipulated time,

3
i.e. by the end of the Tenth Plan. A perusal of the Statement
(Appendix-II) showing status of funds released, utilized and physical
outputs under the Scheme reveals that the State Governments treat
the reminders of the Ministry as a routine ritual since no penal or
other actions are initiated for non-performance of States by the
Ministry. The Committee note that Uttar Pradesh which was given
Rs. 150 lakh during 2004-2006 has not utilized even a single rupee
under this Scheme. States of Orissa and Andhra Pradesh have also
not been able to utilize the allocated funds completely. Further, no
reasons were given by the State Governments for the under-
utilization/non-utilisation of the funds. This shows the impunity with
which the State Governments treat the reminders of Ministry of
Water Resources. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation and desire the Ministry to impress upon the State
Governments to address the problems of land acquisition in right
earnest so that work on these projects gets completed at the earliest.
The Committee also desire the Ministry to give complete replies to
their recommendations in future. The Committee further desire that
physical output should be defined in more realistic terms keeping
in view the preparedness of the State Governments for utilization
of the funds in order to put a check on the tendency of non-
utilization/under-utilization of funds.
B. Major and Medium Irrigation—Expeditious completion of projects
to create additional irrigation potential and utilization of potential
created
Recommendation (Para No. 3.9)
8. The Committee were dismayed to note that there were 471 (169
major, 219 medium and 83 ERM) ongoing projects in the country,
which had spilled over from Ninth Plan with a balance cost of about
Rs. One Lakh Crore. Out of all these ongoing irrigation projects, only
11 Major and 7 Medium Irrigation projects were reported as completed
during the first four years of the Tenth Plan. The Ministry had
attributed the reasons fro delay in completion of projects to lack of
budgetary provision in the State Government Budgets, frequent changes
in the scope of project, land acquisition problems, resettlement and
rehabilitation of project oustees, legal problems, delay in compliance
by the State Governments to the observations of Central appraising
agencies and inter-State issues. The Committee had also observed that
300 new projects (78 major, 136 medium and 86 ERM) were taken up
for implementation during the Tenth Plan for creation of 6.5 mha
additional irrigation potential to be created during the Tenth Plan.

4
While 8.12 lakh hectare irrigation potential was created during
2002-2003, irrigation potential of 9.20 and 15.51 lakh hectare was
expected to be created during 2003-2004 and 2004-2005, respectively.
On the other hand the utilization of the potential created was about
86%. The Committee opined that though the Government is making
huge investments year after year to complete the pending projects, the
desired results are far from being achieved. The Committee
recommended the Government to take urgent steps to resolve all the
problems as identified by the Ministry for delay in completion of
projects expeditiously and strengthen the monitoring mechanism under
each project in order to complete these projects as per their present
revised stipulated dates of completion. The Committee also desired
the Ministry to take urgent steps to increase the utilization of irrigation
potential already created as well as to achieve the targets set for creation
of additional potential during the Tenth Plan.
9. The Ministry has, in its action taken reply, stated that as on
31.03.2006 total number of projects completed upto 9th Plan were 1270
(244 major, 936 medium and 90 ERM) and projects not yet completed
are 452 (157 major, 212 medium and 83 ERM). The ongoing projects
include both approved as well as unapproved projects. Implementation
of irrigation projects comes under the purview of the State
Governments. However, the Union Government has been providing
Central loan assistance under AIBP to the ongoing approved projects
to facilitate their early completion for early creation of irrigation
potential.
The average potential creation per year was around 4.4 lakh ha. in
8th plan, which increased to 8.24 lakh ha. in 9th plan. The annual
potential creation in the year 2002-03 was 8.12 lakh ha., which has
further increased to 10.04 lakh ha. in 2003-04 against the expected
creation of 9.2 lakh ha. Though, complete details of potential creation
for the year 2004-05 are yet to be received from States, the potential
creation through the projects under AIBP alone is around 5 lakh ha.
in the year 2004-05. Pace of potential creation will be further accelerated
during the Bharat Nirman period. It may, however, be noted that the
increase in creation of irrigation potential is mainly contributed by the
approved projects and not through the projects which are still
unapproved. The State Governments have been advised to get these
projects duly approved by the Planning Commission. The problems
being faced on account of these unapproved projects are being
discussed in the meetings of the Working Group for 11th Plan
constituted by Planning Commission and further action would be taken
as per their recommendations. It is pertinent to note that most of the

5
projects out of 300 new projects included in 10th Plan are also
unapproved and not much help can be provided by the Ministry of
Water Resources for these projects till they are approved by Planning
Commission.
10. The Committee note that Ministry has provided the data in
support of their comments that substantial progress has been made
in potential creation which was 4.4 lakh ha. in 8th Plan and increased
to 8.24 lakh ha. in 9th Plan. The potential created in the year 2002-
2003 was 8.12 lakh ha. and 10.24 lakh ha. in 2003-2004 against the
expected creation of 9.2 lakh ha. The figures of potential created
during 2004-2005 are not available with the Ministry. However, pace
of potential creation will be further accelerated during the Bharat
Nirman period. The Ministry has stated that the creation of potential
is mainly contributed by the approved projects and they are advising
State Gvoernments to get the projects approved by the Planning
Commission. However, the Ministry has not provided any information
with regard to the steps taken by them to resolve all the problems
as identified for delay in compeltion of projects as also the steps
taken to increase the utilization of irrigation potential already created.
The Ministry has also stated that Working Group of 11th Plan
constituted by the Planning Commission is discussing the issue of
problems faced on account of unapproved projects. The Ministry
will take action after the recommendations of the Working Group
are received. The committee hope that the Working Group would
give their recommendations before the 11th Plan commences. The
Committee desire to be informed of the recommendations of the
Working Group alongwith the steps taken for the completion of the
projects within revised stipulated timeframe. They would like to be
apprised of the action taken in this regard within three months
from the date of presentation of this Report to the Houses of
Parliament. The Comittee, would also advise the Ministry to desist
from tendency of providing incomplete replies to their
recommendations lest a serious view should be taken by them in
this regard.
C. Command Area Development and Water Management Scheme—
National Level Workshop on PIM
Recommendation (Para No. 4.19)
11. The Committee noted that according to the Ministry it could
not organise a National Level Workshop on PIM which was proposed
in early 2005-06. The Ministry had further informed the Committee
that before organizing National Level Workshop on PIM there is a

6
need to get feedback from the regional level workshops on PIM. The
Ministry was, however, able to organize only one regional level
workshop on PIM for North Eastern States during January, 2006. One
such regional level Workshop was proposed to be organized shortly
for Northern States. The Committee had, therefore, desired that the
regional level workshop on PIM for Northern States be organized at
the earliest so that a National Level Workshop on PIM can also be
organized timely which will help the remaining State Governments to
enact PIM legislation for implementing the Scheme.
12. The Ministry has in its action taken reply stated that the matter
relating to holding of Regional Workshop on PIM for Northern States
is under consideration and the same will be organized as soon as the
dates are finalized, following which National Level Workshop on PIM
shall be organized for all the States.
13. The Committee are anguished to note that despite passage of
more than nine months from the holding of the regional workshop
for North Eastern States in January 2006, the Ministry has not been
able to decide on the dates for organising Regional Workshop on
Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM) for Northern States. The
Committee are unable to comprehend the reasons for such an
inordinate delay in this regard and wonder as to when the National
Level Workshop on PIM could be organized by the Ministry given
the pace with which such important Workshops are required to be
organised. The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to take
urgent steps for early organization of Regional as well as National
Level Workshops on PIM so that remaining State Governments may
be benefited by it in enacting PIM legislation for implementation of
the Scheme.
D. Flood Control—Critical Anti-Erosion Works in Ganga Basin States
Recommendations (Para Nos. 5.15 and 5.24)
14. The Committee had noted that Plan allocation for flood control
had been earmarked at Rs. 248.22 crore for 2006-2007 with an increase
of Rs. 16.59 crore as against an allocation of Rs. 231.63 for 2005-2006…..
They had noted that out of Rs. 1,403.22 crore plan outlay for flood
control Rs. 557.39 crore remained unallocated…….. The Committee were
of the firm view that more emphasis needed to be laid on utilizing
the funds allocated for expeditious completion of on-going projects
rather than thin spreading of the available scarce funds on too many
projects. The Committee further noted that the modified EFC memo
for Ganga Basin States that included the Schemes recommended by

7
the Task Force had not been cleared by the appraising agencies and
desired the Ministry to take effective and urgent steps to get the EFC
memo cleared at the earliest to facilitate the works on projects under
the Scheme……
The committee had also observed that the total cost of the Schemer
“Critical Anti-erosion and Flood Management” in Ganga Basin States
was revised to Rs. 242.17 crore with Central share of Rs. 195.63 crore.
The Plan allocation for the year 2006-2007 for the Scheme had been
increased to Rs. 111.20 crore, representing an enhancement of
Rs. 11.20 crore over the BE for the year 2005-2006……. EFC memo for
the Scheme recommended by the Task Force was prepared and
circulated to appraising agencies for their comments. The meeting of
Expenditure Finance Committee was yet to take place and the Ministry
of Water Resources had reminded the Ministry of Finance in this regard.
The Committee had recommended the Ministry to get the comments
of the appraising agencies urgently and arrange a meeting with the
Expenditure Finance Committee to get its concurrence for the Scheme
at the earliest. The Committee noted that the number of new Schemes
which were to be taken up during the year 2006-20067 was contingent
on the approval by the EFC/Competent Authority on the expanded
Scheme and the Schemes were to be prioritised by an Empowered
Committee which was proposed to be set up for the purpose. The
Committee, therefore, recommended the Government to get approval
for the expanded Schemes from the EFC/Competent Authority first
before setting up the Empowered Committee to prioritize the Scheme
at the earliest. The Committee had also recommended the Government
to take all appropriate steps to implement the recommendations of the
Expert Committee which submitted its Report on 15 February 2006 in
the current financial year itself to fulfil the objective of setting up
such an Expert Committee.
15. The Ministry has, in its action taken reply, stated that EFC
meeting regarding the revised scheme on Critical anti-erosion works
in Ganga Basin States, was held on 12 May 2006 under Chairmanship
of Secretary, Ministry of Finance. This scheme cleared by EFC is under
process for obtaining approval of Cabinet Committee on Economic
Affairs. The schemes recommended by Task Force under Immediate
and Short Term-I category which are linked with the ongoing works
i.e., works which are required to be executed to ensure full benefit
from the works under implementation/completed or are very critical
in nature, have been considered under the scheme for implementation
during the last year of 10th Plan. Other schemes as recommended by
Task Force under Immediate and Short Term-I will be implemented

8
during 11th Plan after the performance evaluation of works carried
out during 10th Plan. Out of eleven schemes considered by EFC in
May 2006 for 10th Plan, nine schemes have already been cleared by
GFCC and remaining two are under process.
Most of the new works will spill over to 11th Plan, since the
working season was over by 15 June 2006. The next working season
will start after flood of 2006 and the works will be completed before
flood of 2007. Accordingly provisions have been made under the EFC
to the extent the work is possible in each case by 31 March 2007. The
concept of Empowered Committee will be applicable for the schemes
of 11th Plan, as ongoing schemes and other works required to ensure
full benefits in the vicinity of ongoing schemes/very critical works are
only included in 10th Plan proposal.
16. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the
Ministry. The Committee had recommended the Ministry to take
effective and urgent steps to get the EFC memo cleared at the earliest
to facilitate the works on projects under the Scheme ‘Critical Anti-
erosion work on Ganga Basin States” as the same were likely to be
implemented during the current financial year in consonance with
the recommendation of the Task Force. The Committee had also
desired the Ministry to take all appropriate steps to implement the
recommendation of Expert Committee which submitted its Report
on 15 February 2006 in the current financial year itself to fulfil the
objective of setting up such an Expert Committee. However, the
Committee are dismayed to note that by their own admission most
of the new works will spill over to 11th Plan, since the working
season was over by 15 June 2006. The next working season will start
after flood of 2006 and the work will be completed before flood of
2007. Accordingly, provision has been made under the EFC to the
extent the work is possible in each case by 31 March 2007. The
Committee are unable to comprehend the fact that when the works
were likely to spill over to 11th Plan due to culmination of working
season by 15 June 2006, why so many new Schemes were taken up
for implementation in the current year when the working season is
restricted to the period between November 2006 and March 2007. As
observed elsewhere in this Report, the reply to this recommendation
too is incomplete. The reply is silent on the action taken by
Government on the Report/Recommendations of the Expert
Committee which had submitted its Report on 15 February 2006.
The reply is also silent as to when the EFC memo cleared on 12
May 2006 would be put upto the CCEA for final clearance. The
Committee disapprove the manner in which matters are being

9
conducted by the Ministry. They cannot but express their anguish
over the matter and hope that Ministry would take appropriate steps
to implement the recommendations of Expert Committee with
sincerity as also get the final clearance for the EFC Memo from
CCEA at an early date so that progress of works under the Scheme
are not adversely affected in the 11th Plan. The Committee also
desire to the apprised of the action taken in the above matters within
three months of presentation of this Report to the Parliament.
E. Performance review of AIBP by C&AG
Recommendation (Para No. 7.26)
17. The Committee were unhappy to note that 15 States, viz.,
Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Jammu &
Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa,
Punjab, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal were reported to
have diverted/mis-utilized the Central Loan Assistance (CLA) under
AIBP , according to the Report of C&AG. The Committee in their Third
Report on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) had recommended the
Government to enquire into the matter and apprise the outcome of
the same to the Committee within three months from the presentation
of that Report to the Houses of Parliament. However, the Ministry
could not submit the requisite information to the Committee. The
Committee in their Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants (2005-
2006) had again recommended the Ministry to set a definite time frame
to obtain the requisite information from the above States. The Ministry
could obtain the requisite information from only five State, viz.
Karnataka, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and Uttar Pradesh.
The revised Guidelines stipulate mandatory submission of audited
statement of expenditure on projects receiving CLA within a month of
closure of the financial year………… The Committee opined that the
progress of projects under AIBP was not commensurate to the quantum
of CLA being released by the Government. The Committee
recommended the Ministry to speed up the enquiry procedures in
order to obtain the requisite information from the remaining 10 States
without any further delay.
The Committee had also observed that Five of the States which
had sent compliance report on audit paras to the Ministry had not
tendered the details of diversion and mis-utilization of CLA under
AIBP . The Committee had desired the Government to obtain the
detailed replies from these States in this regard at the earliest. Further,
taking strong exception to the state of affairs in this matter, the
Committee recommend that if these defaulter States do not submit the

10
requisite information within three months of the presentation of the
present Report to the Houses, further release of CLA funds under
AIBP to these States should be stopped immediately so that in future
the diversion/mis-utilization of CLA funds under AIBP dose not take
place.
18. The Ministry, in its action taken reply, stated that the issue of
diversion of funds made available by Central Government to the States
under AIBP has been taken up with the State Governments concerned
but most of the State Governments are yet to respond to the
observations raised by the CAG in its report. The issue is being pursued
by the Ministry of Water Resources with the concerned State
Governments. The performance of the AIBP has in fact been very
good keeping in view the figures of expenditure incurred and potential
created under AIBP . No doubt that number of projects completed are
not in accordance with the targets, but the completion of projects may
be delayed due to various reasons. During 1996 to 2005, total
expenditure incurred on AIBP is of Rs. 27,813 crore and the potential
created under AIBP is 32,60,260 ha. The expenditure incurred for a
hectare of creation of irrigation potential works out to Rs. 85,300 which
is quite reasonable. In fact, the CAG itself has stated that cost of
creation of irrigation potential should be in the limit of Rs. 1.00 lakh
per ha. Accordingly, the expenditure incurred per unit of irrigation
potential creation is well within limit. Further, development of irrigation
potential of 32,60,260 ha. in a period of 8 years is a big achievement
under AIBP .
19. The Committee note that while the reply is more than
forthcoming in delving on points which deal with the performance
of AIBP Scheme and release/non-release of instalments of
Government share in different situations under the AIBP guidelines,
the Ministry has ostensibly failed to obtain the reply of the
defaulting State Governments with regard to diversion/mis-utilisation
of CLA under AIBP . The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry
to pursue the State Governments to submit relevant information
within a period of three months from the date of presentation of
this Report to the Houses of Parliament. The Committee also desire
to be apprised of the outcome of the efforts made by the Ministry
in this regard at the earliest.

11
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Shortfall in Utilization of funds allocated to the Ministry
Recommendation (Para No. 1.19)
The scrutiny of Demands for Grants 2006-2007 of Ministry of Water
Resources reveals an outlay of Rs. 987.31 crore which precludes funds
for AIBP and other Water Resources Programmes. The outlay shows
an increase of 9.74% over the Budget Estimates of the previous year.
It also shows an overall hike of Rs. 79.00 crore (12.48%) in the Plan
outlay of Rs. 712.00 crore for 2006-2007 in comparison to Rs. 633.00 crore
in 2005-2006. Whereas there is an increase of Rs. 81.25 crore (13.82%)
on the Revenue Section (Plan), the Capital Section (Plan) shows a
reduction of Rs. 2.25 crore (-4.89%). On the other hand, the Non-Plan
allocation for Revenue Section shows an increase of Rs. 8.65 crore
(3.49%) while the Capital Section shows no change over the year
2005-2006. The Committee further observe that though the Ministry
had proposed Rs. 1168.23 crore as Plan allocation for the year
2006-2007, the Planning Commission allocated Rs. 987.31 crore,
representing a scaling down in Plan allocation to the tune of Rs. 180.92 crore
for the Ministry by the Planning Commission. The Budget Estimates
(Plan) for the years 2002-2003, 2003-2004 and 2004-2005 for the Ministry
of Water Resources were earmarked at Rs. 562.00 crore, Rs. 566.00
crore and Rs. 592.00 crore respectively. However, the Ministry could
utilize only Rs. 393.66 crore, Rs. 400.20 crore and Rs. 410.16 crore
during the period in question. The amounts remaining unutilised at
Rs. 168.34 crore, Rs. 165.80 crore and Rs. 181.84 crore amount to about
30% of the plan allocation over the years. The Committee fail to
understand the specious argument of the Ministry that due to paucity
of funds certain important new projects could not be undertaken and
some on-going projects could not be completed in time, given the fact
that the Ministry could not even fully utilize the funds allocated to it
well within the stipulated time. The Committee are of the firm view
that the continuous under-utilization of allocated funds by the Ministry
forecloses its options to seek more funds from the Planning Commission
and the blame for the same wholly lies on the part of the Ministry.
This sorry state of affairs speaks volumes of the manner in which its

12
case is being put before the Planning Commission. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Ministry should give more emphasis on
putting the allocated funds to good use and demand additional
allocation from the Planning Commission only when it is certain that
the allocated funds would be fully utilized.
The Committee also observe that the Plan allocation for CAD&WM,
Critical Anti-Erosion Works in Ganga Basin States, new schemes for
Majuli Island, Feasibility Study of Inter-basin transfer of Waters, Ground
Water Survey, Explorations and Investigations, Extension of
Embankments on Lalbakeya, Kamla, Bagmati and Khando rivers had
been reduced considerably at the RE stage for the year 2005-2006.
Apparently, the Ministry’s less than impressive performance in
utilization of Plan allocation for the year 2005-2006 stems mainly from
non-awarding of work relating to DPR of Ken-Betwa Line Project under
NWDA and the delay in execution of the New Scheme for Majuli
Island in Assam, Dihang Project, etc. The Committee, therefore, desire
the Ministry to impress upon the State Governments to award the
works related to DPR of Ken-Betwa Link Project and complete the
new scheme for Majuli Island in Assam, Dihang Project without any
further delay. The Committee would like to be apprised of the status
of the action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
It is a fact that Ministry of Water Resources could not fully utilize
the plan funds for the years 2002-03, 2003-04 and 2004-05. The detailed
reasons for the same were submitted to the Committee from time to
time. The major reasons are summarized as under:
(i) During 2002-03, the progress of Plan expenditure in respect
of “Pagladia Dam Project” was slow due to delay in land
acquisition process, non-completion of Zirut Survey etc. by
the Government of Assam affecting the R&R work and
revision of the cost due to change in the design of structure
etc. The scheme for Flood Control in Brahmaputra Valley
could not be approved in time.
(ii) During 2003-04, Ministry of Finance did not agree with
continuation of the scheme “Command Area Development
Programme” as per the old pattern of funding which in
turn implied lesser availability of time for release of funds
to States after obtaining necessary clearance. The Cabinet
approval for re-structured CAD & WM Programme was,
however, received subsequently only during February 2004.

13
(iii) During 2004-05, the progress of Plan expenditure in respect
of “Pagladia Dam Project” was slow due to delay in land
acquisition process, non-completion of Zirut Survey etc. by
the Government of Assam affecting the R&R work and
revision of the cost due to change in the design of structure
etc. The scheme for Flood control in Brahmaputra Valley
(Provision of Rs. 20 crore in BE 2004-05) and Artificial
Recharge of Ground water (Provision of Rs. 40 crores in BE
2004-05) could not be approved in time. Therefore, the
allocation at RE stage was reduced to avoid unnecessary
surrender.
During 2005-06, a Budget Allocation of Rs. 25 crore was made for
NWDA, which includes a provision of Rs. 6 crore for preparation of
DPR of Ken-Betwa link. The MOU for Ken-Betwa link could be signed
only in August 2005. Immediately after this, NWDA stated finalizing
consultancies, mobilizing manpower for doing field surveys, applying
for environmental clearance to Ministry of Environment and Forests
(MoEF) for doing field activities. The clearance from MoEF is still
awaited. Due to this only Rs. 50 lakh could be spent on DPR of Ken-
Betwa link which resulted a saving of Rs. 5.50 crore. Similarly, for
preparation of FRs of 5 Himalayan links which involves international
dimensions permission from other countries was not available and as
such the Budget Estimate was reduced to Rs. 17 crore at the RE stage,
which was spent during the year. The plan allocation was also reduced
at the R.E. stage due to delay in execution of the new schemes for
Majuli island in Assam, Dibang project etc. and non awarding of work
relating to DPR of Ken Betwa Link Canal Project. There were some
savings under the scheme “Critical anti erosion works in Ganga Basin
States” also. The allocation for the scheme “CAD&WM” during 2005-
06 was also reduced at RE stage because of insufficient proposals
received from the State Governments despite every effort in this
direction. However, allocation was again increased at Final Estimate
stage based on the proposals received.
A memorandum of Understanding (MOU) was signed on 25.08.2005
between the States of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh and Union
Government for preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR) of Ken-
Betwa link. The Ministry of Water Resources subsequently decided
that DPR for Ken-Betwa link shall be prepared by NWDA. NWDA
has initiated the works for preparation of its DPR. NWDA has prepared
a detailed Bar Chart of different activities involved in this DPR and as
per this planning, DPR is likely to be completed by June, 2008.

14
The total approved estimated cost under the scheme “New Scheme
for Majuli Island in Assam, Dibang project etc.” is Rs. 76.56 crore. Out
of this the works of Rs. 20.57 crore have already been completed. The
work orders for the works costing Rs. 36.00 crore have been issued.
As per the agreement with contractor, these are to be completed by
March 2007. The work orders for works costing Rs. 15.60 crore are
planned to be tendered and awarded by October 2006. Out of the
balance Rs. 4.40 crore, Rs 1.60 crore is saving of cost mainly from the
construction of hangar and works amounting to Rs. 2.80 crore are not
likely to be taken up as designs etc. are to take more time.
Single Administrative Ministry for Water
Recommendation (Para No. 1.26)
The Committee are distressed to note that no progress has been
made by the Government even after a lapse of one year towards the
constitution of “Single Administrative Ministry for Water” despite their
repeated recommendations for the same in their earlier Reports. The
Ministry now states that the National Water Resource Programme
Coordination Committee (NWRPCC) under the Chairmanship of
Member (Agri & WR), Planning Commission is yet to be set up and
the onus of forming the Committee lies with the Planning Commission.
The Committee is of the opinion that although speedy constitution of
the NWRPCC is the prerogative of the Planning Commission, the
Ministry cannot shirk its responsibility of getting the committee
constituted at the earliest by constantly prodding the Planning
Commission till its constitution. The Committee, therefore, observe that
if constant dithering and endless dilly-dallying continue to rule roost
in regard to the constitution of NWRPCC for the “Single Administrative
Ministry for Water”, the time is not far when the entire idea of taking
a comprehensive and integrated approach for water resource
development through one administrative unit will attain a slow death.
The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry of Water Resources to
urge the Planning Commission to take urgent steps towards
implementing their recommendation in this regard in the right earnest.
Reply of the Government
As desired by the Committee, the recommendation of the
Committee regarding “Single Administrative Ministry for Water” has
been forwarded to the Planning Commission and the Planning
Commission has been requested to take necessary action in this regard.

15
C&AG’s Reports for the years 2004 & 2005
Recommendation (Para No. 1.30)
The Committee observe that the C&AG Reports of the years 2004
and 2005 contain observations in regard to various schemes and
programmes of the Ministry including its subordinate offices,
autonomous bodies and public undertakings. The C&AG Reports
indicate incidence of serious malpractices in release and utilization of
funds on various schemes and programmes of the Ministry, financial
irregularities and blatant misappropriation of funds in respect of some
of the schemes/projects undertaken by the Ministry of Water Resources.
In Para. Nos. 8.27-8.39 of 1/2004, the C&AG reviewed the Grant No.
86 of Ministry of Water Resources and observed that Command Area
Development Programme and Sutlej Yamuna Link Canal Project were
affected by unspent provision. Again, the C&AG remarked that the
Ministry released excess over budget provision and surrendered the
unspent provision on the last day of the respective financial years.
The Ministry of Water Resources also re-appropriated funds
injudiciously and compulsively expended a large portion of funds in
March, 2004 to meet the deadline for the financial year. In Para No.
1.2 of Report No. 4 of 2005, 144 Utilisation Certificates amounting to
Rs. 725.54 lakh are outstanding in respect of grants released unto March
2003 (as on 31.03.2004) have not been received from the State
Governments. The Committee take a serious note of the fact that the
non-receipt of Utilisation Certificates dates back to 1986-1987 since when
not even a single year is left in which the Ministry has received all
the Utilisation Certificates that were due. The Committee are of the
opinion that the observations made in the C&AG Reports are a matter
of grave concern. The Committee are of the view that had the Ministry
monitored the schemes properly , the situation as mentioned in C&AG
Reports would not have come to such a pass. The Committee, therefore,
desire the Ministry to enquire into the matter in right earnest and
apprise the outcome of the same along with the action taken by the
Central Government to the Committee within three months of
presentation of their Report to the Houses of Parliament.
Reply of the Government
As regards unspent provision affecting Command Area
Development Programme (CADP) mentioned in Para No. 8.27-8.39 of
Report No. 1/2004 of C&AG for the Grant No. 86 of Ministry of
Water Resources it is mentioned that central assistance is provided to
states under this programme in the ratio of 50:50 (centre/state) on the
basis of their performance/requirement. After appraising their
performance during the preceding year, state governments work out
their requirement for the current financial year and forward their

16
proposals for central assistance after knowing the quantum of funds
provided by their own states as per the budget passed by the respective
states. In view of this it is difficult to assess the exact requirement of
funds by the individual states and also the total funds required in a
year by states in advance. Due to overall reduction in allocation of
matching funds by state governments at the fag end of the financial
year, there was saving in the earmarked budget allocation for CAD
Programme. Further, it is added that stages execute most of the physical
works only after the kharif season usually in the months of November
to March. CAD works commence only after kharif as farmers are
reluctant to spare land in cropping season. As such the on farm
development works could be taken up only during the last quarters.
Due to downward revision in targets, demand for release of funds
also came down resulting in savings. These factors contributed for
remaining of unspent balance during the years of CAG reports.
In regard to Sutlaj Yamuna Link Canal Project (SYL Project) being
affected by unspent provisions, it is pointed out that the entire allocated
amount remained unutilised due to non-resumption of construction
works on the canal by Punjab Govt. This is still a sub-judice case.
Though, the Hon’ble Supreme Court had directed the Punjab
Government to complete the balance works and make it functional by
14.01.2003, Punjab Government filed a suit praying for dissolving its
liability for undertaking the works. The suit was admitted and finally
dismissed by Hon’ble  Supreme Court. Provisions were accordingly
kept in the budget to meet emergent requirement of funds by Punjab
Government. However, the Punjab Government enacted the Punajb
Termination of Agreements Act, 2004 on 12.7.2004 terminating the 1981
agreement and all other agreements related to Ravi-Beas Waters. The
State Government also informed that any step taken in furtherance of
the 9181 agreement would be against the legislative mandate of the
Act. In view of these developments, a Presidential Reference regarding
the validity of this enactment and its effect on the earlier Court
judgments was made to the Hon’ble Supreme Court in 2004. This is
yet to be disposed of by the Hon’ble Apex Court. Thus, despite of
action taken by the Central Government to initiate work, the works of
the canal could not be undertaken under above circumstances. This
has resulted in entire provision being surrendered at final stage.
As for CAG’s observations on release of excess amount over budget
provision and surrender of unspent budget provision on the last day
of financial years, it is stated that on some occasions funds under
different units of heads/schemes were required to be augmented by
way of re-appropriation due to actual requirements. These re-

17
appropriations were made with the approval of competent authority,
and in consultation with Ministry of Finance, wherever required. After
reviewing the progress of different schemes and assessing fund
requirements, excess funds are surrendered at the fag end of the
financial year. It is also pointed out that the statement detailing reasons
of savings under different schemes in a financial year are got vetted
from Office of DGACR and furnished to Ministry of Finance.
As regards injudicious re-appropriation of funds reported by CAG,
it is mentioned that recourse to re-appropriation is taken in view of
the actual requirement of funds for a particular scheme and also
expected saving in other head. During the period of CAG report all
the re-appropriation orders were issued due to functional requirement
and with the approval of competent authority. As most of the grants-
in-aid releases are made to the state governments under various
schemes, these releases are made on fulfilling of requisite conditions
by them and as per their demand. Delay in receipt of proposals from
State Governments invariably led to increase of releases in last quarter
of the financial year 2003-04.
With a view to obviate the shortcomings mentioned in CAG report
in question, system of monthly review of plan expenditure has been
introduced. State Governments have also been repeatedly requested to
furnish their proposals for releases and utilization certificates of earlier
installment in time so that releases could be made in a phased and
planned manner. One of the major reasons of unspent balance is late
supply of machinery and equipments by firms. In such cases the
concerned firms have been impressed upon to stick to the conditions
of the supply order.
As per para No. 1.2 of CAG Report No. 4 of 2005 and Appendix
VI, 144 utilization certificates amounting to Rs. 725.54 lakh were shown
outstanding against the grants released up to 2002-03 in respect of
Ministry of Water Resources. At present out of above outstanding
utilization certificates, only 30 utilisation certificates amounting to
Rs. 104.952 lakh are outstanding. The year-wise and wing-wise break
up of outstanding utilisation certificates as on date is at Annexure-I.
Outcome Budget—Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.8)
The Committee observed that the Finance Minister through his
Budget speech (2005-2006) put in place a yardstick to measure the
magnitude of development of all major programmes of the Government

18
with the introduction of the concept of ‘Outcome Budget’ which is
expected to reflect the Annual Budget of the Ministry in terms of
intended outcomes over a period of time which will help in realizing
public scrutiny of the schemes/projects for which funds are allocated
out of the public exchequer. AIBP is one such major programme of
the Ministry of Water Resources where huge amounts are allocated to
the State Governments year after year by the Government. A perusal
of the targets as against the financial outlay outlined in the Outcome
Budget reveals that very little has been achieved during the year (2005-
06) under AIBP . The creation of irrigation potential of 1,041.03 thousand
hectares against a target of 0.925 million hectare, to say the least, is
awfully short. Apparently, the quantum of irrigation potential during
2005-2006 was achieved with the completion of 25 of the 29 major/
medium irrigation projects targeted to be completed during the year.
The Committee cannot but conclude from the above that the Ministry’s
decision to shift focus from ‘completion of project‘ to ‘creation of
irrigation potential’ has failed to achieve the desired result. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to take up only
such projects for implementation which are capable of creating the
magnitude of irrigation potential envisaged for the particular year.
The Committee further recommend that this aspect be incorporated in
the MoUs that are provided by the State Governments at the time of
setting up targets for creation of potential as well as completion of
irrigation projects. The Committee would like to be acquainted of the
status of action taken on this recommendation within 3 months of the
presentation of the Report to the Parliament.
Reply of the Government
The pace of creation of irrigation potential has gained momentum
due to AIBP since the start of 9th Plan. In the 9th plan, out of the
total potential of 42.40 lakh ha, 16.50 lakh ha, (nearly 40%) was through
AIBP schemes. In the 10th plan period, during the first three years of
the 10th plan period, the potential created under AIBP is 4.56 lakh ha
in 2002-03, 4.47 lakh ha in 2003-04 and 4.96 lakh ha in 2004-05. For
the year 2005-06, the targeted irrigation potential was 9.25 lakh ha
against which MoUs have been signed under AIBP for creation of
potential of 14.26 lakh ha. The figures of potential creation for
2005-06 are yet to be received from the States. The figures of irrigation
potential during the year are generally available after about a years
time.
The delay in achieving targeted irrigation potential is due to various
reasons which could not be foreseen, prominent among them are land
acquisition problems and contractual problems. However, for achieving

19
the intended objective, efforts will be made to select only those projects
under AIBP which are having least possible bottlenecks in their
completion. Monitoring of the project is also being intensified for timely
intervention to remove bottlenecks in completion of the project.
MoU are being obtained for new projects to be included in AIBP
from State Government inter-alia  indicating balance cost, balance
potential and targeted date of completion. Since 2004-05, only grant
component of Central Assistance is being released by the Government
of India and loan component is to be raised by State from market
borrowing (except in case of fiscally weak states). MoU provides for
conversion of Grant component into loan in case there is unjustifiable
delay in completion of project beyond target date of completion
indicated in MoU. It is expected that these safeguards introduced in
AIBP will result in expeditious creation of irrigation potential and
completion of projects included under AIBP .
Outcome Budget—Command area Development and Water
Management
Recommendation (Para No. 2.15)
A perusal of the statements of outcomes/targets for CAD & WM
for the year 2005-2006 shows targets of quantifiable works in respect
of construction of field channels, correction of system deficiencies and
renovation of minor irrigation tanks. In respect of construction of field
channels 0.279 million hectare was achieved upto December 2005
against the target of 0.23 million hectare. The Committee, however, are
unhappy to note that no progress has been made in respect of
correction of system deficiencies and renovation of MI tanks under the
restructured CAD&WM for the year 2005-2006. The Ministry’s specious
plea that in case of correction of system deficiency, the formation of
WUAs under PIM Act/Amended Irrigation Acts and the signing of
MoUs between the State Governments and WUAs would take some
time and in case of renovation of MI tanks, the extent pattern of
funding (50:50) and the failure to legislate PIM Act/Amended Irrigation
Acts by State Governments, were mainly responsible for delay in taking
up the Scheme is untenable. The Committee, therefore, desire the
Ministry to pursue with respective State Governments to expedite the
process of constitution of WUAs so that the MoUs between them and
the concerned WUAs could be signed without any further delay. The
Committee recommend the Ministry to revisit the existing policy of
funding pattern for determining renovation of MI tanks and impress
upon the State Governments to legislate PIM Act/amend Irrigation
Acts expeditiously. The Committee desire to be informed of the action
taken in the matter at the earliest.

20
Reply of the Government
The matter relating to enactment of participatory Irrigation
Management (PIM) Acts is being regularly pursued with the State
Governments. The matter is also proposed to be discussed in the
Review Meeting with the State Governments to be held during the
current financial year. The enactment of PIM Act will automatically
facilitate the process of formation of Water Users Associations (WUAs)
and signing of the MoUs between State Governments and the WUAs.
As far as the review of the existing policy of funding pattern for
renovation of minor irrigation tanks is concerned, it may be mentioned
that all aspects of CADWM programme including the funding pattern
are under discussion in the Working Group on Water Resources Sector
set up by the Planning Commission for the 11th Plan. Once the
recommendations of the Working Group are received, further follow
up action shall be initiated by the Ministry.
Outcome Budget—Flood Control in Brahmaputra Valley
Recommendation (Para No. 2.19)
The Committee observe that 45,600 hectares of flood prone area
are proposed to be provided protection under the scheme Flood Control
in Brahmaputra Valley with an outlay of Rs. 80 crore for 2005-2006
against an outlay of Rs. 20 crore for 2004-2005. An amount of
Rs. 11.40 crore only could be spent due to late receipt of investment
clearance for the Scheme. The Committee further observe that a revised
EFC Memo incorporating Schemes of medium and short term-I category
recommended by the Task Force for Rs. 966.40 crore was circulated in
September 2005. The modified EFC recommended an amount of
Rs. 225 crore whereupon the outlay for flood control in Brahmpautra
Valley for 2006-2007 stands re-allocated at Rs. 125 crore. The Ministry
has indicated that the targets are subject to timely submission of
schemes by the State Governments, execution as per time schedule
and utilization of funds properly in time. The Committee, therefore,
desire the Ministry to draw a time frame for submission of schemes
by the State Governments, for their clearance by the Ministry so that
their execution as per time schedule is feasible which will also improve
the utilization of funds properly. The Committee also desire the
Government to monitor the physical outputs as also quantify the results
in relation thereto. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
action taken in this regard at the earliest.

21
Reply of the Government
The list of projects State-wise in respect of the approved scheme
has already been drawn up in consultation with State Governments.
The total funds released under the scheme during 10th Plan is Rs. 60
crore till date.
The programme towards release of funds is that submission of
Utilization Certificates in respect of the already released fund by the
State Governments be made by December 2006. Accordingly the balance
amount can be released in March 2007.
The revised scheme of Rs. 225 crore, approved by the Cabinet
Committee on Economic Affairs, includes Rs. 205 crore for schemes to
be executed by States and Rs. 20 crore by Brahmaputra Board. On
approval of the modified scheme, additional projects are to be taken
up following the same procedure. Preparatory action in consultation
with the States to prioritise the projects to be executed by States from
the additional amount allocated as per the revised scheme has been
finalized in a meeting held in August 2006. The first instalment can be
released after necessary coordination with States by Brahmaputra Board
in November 2006. It is also planned that, on similar basis, the second
instalment can be released by March 2007 on receipt of Utilisation
Certificates from the State Governments.
As regards the schemes to be executed by Brahmaputra Board
with the provision of Rs. 20 crore, the schemes to be taken up in
States have already been identified by the Standing Committee in
consultation with the States. The execution of the identified schemes
will be taken up by Brahmaputra Board to complete the targeted works
utilizing the next working season.
To monitor the implementation of the scheme and its physical
outputs, a Monitoring Team has been constituted under the Chief
Engineer, Brahmaputra Board, which visits the sites and inspects the
physical works executed and on the basis of its reports, the Board
recommends further release of funds on satisfactory progress/physical
outputs. The team has so far visited 36 projects and checked physical
and financial progress achieved.
The quantification of the results from individual projects is
proposed to be carried out by Brahmaputra Board through impact
evaluation for some representative projects on completion and
performance evaluation.

22
National Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee
Recommendation (Para No. 3.17)
The Committee note that the Budget allocation (Plan) for National
Institute of Hydrology was earmarked at Rs. 9.27 crore during the
year 2005-2006. However, at the Revised Estimates stage 2005-2006, it
was reduced to Rs. 5.20 crore. According to the Ministry, during the
year 2005-2006, a sum of Rs. 4.41 crore was provided for taking up
activities related to Hydrology Project-II, however, the activities could
not be taken up as the agreement with World Bank was not signed in
time. The Budget allocation for 2006-2008 for National Institute of
Hydrology stands at Rs. 17.48 crore which is Rs. 8.21 crore more than
the previous financial year. The Ministry informed the Committee that
the enhancement in Budget allocation is mainly on account of
Hydrology Project-II. The Committee, therefore, desire that the
agreement with World Bank be signed at an early date. The Committee
hope that Government will take up all the activities under Hydrology
Project-II earnestly and that the task entrusted for development of
Decision Support Systems assigned to National Institute of Hydrology
would be completed as scheduled for creating a comprehensive DSS.
Reply of the Government
It is submitted that the agreement with World Bank in respect of
Hydrology Project-II has already been signed on 19th January , 2006.
Administrative approval and expenditure sanction of Government of
India for Hydrology Project-II have also been issued on 8th May, 2006
and project has become fully operational. The Decision Support system
(DSS) is expected to be developed under Hydrology Project-II by NIH
as per schedule.
Research and Development (R&D Programme)
Recommendation (Para No. 3.24)
The Committee note that though the Budget allocation for Research
and Development Programme during the years 2004-2005 and
2005-2006 were Rs. 6.00 crore and Rs. 8.00 crore respectively. The
Ministry, however, could utilize only Rs. 2.09 crore (34.83%) and
Rs. 4.20 crore (52.5%) respectively. It is further disconcerting to note
that despite huge under utilization of funds, the Budget allocation for
the above Scheme during the year 2006-2007 has been enhanced by
Rs. 5.06 crore which is 63.25% more allocation than the previous
financial year 2005-2006. The reasons for under-utilization of funds as

23
stated by the Ministry are non-submission of sufficient schemes and
non-clearance of all the received schemes from various organizations.
The Committee are much concerned about the under utilization of
funds and are of the considered opinion that the factors stated by the
Ministry are not that complicated which cannot be resolved. The
Committee feel that the Ministry has proposed for higher allocations
without examining the Scheme properly. The Committee observe that
the Government have initiated various important Research and
Development Programmes in Water Resources Sector under various
Organization/Institutions but due to under utilization of funds, all the
ongoing Research and Development Programmes are getting adversely
affected, resulting in non-completion of works under the Schemes. The
Committee strongly recommend that adequate and necessary steps be
taken by the Ministry to ensure justifiable allocations and effective
utilization under the Schemes so that the completion of work under
various ongoing Research and Development Programmes may not be
hampered. The Committee also desire that utilization of allocated funds
be stepped up to obviate adverse remarks by C&AG or other authorities
in this respect.
Reply of the Government
The suggestions of the Parliamentary Standing Committee have
been noted and with a view to increasing the utilisation of funds
proactive approach is being adopted by the Ministry of Water Resources
for submission of new schemes as well as for submission of proposals
for further release of funds. The procedure for processing of research
schemes is being reviewed and simplified.
It is submitted that due care has been taken while keeping higher
allocation for R&D schemes for the year 2006-07. The allocation for
the year 2006-07 has been increased mainly in view of a number of
studies related to water use efficiencies of irrigation system. In addition,
it is also proposed to carry out evaluation studies of the existing plan
schemes under flood control sector.
Command Area Development and Water Management Scheme—
Utilization of X plan allocation and improvement of physical
performance
Recommendation (Para No. 4.8)
The Committee are dismayed to note that out of the Budget
allocation of Rs. 1,208 crore for Tenth Plan for CAD & WM, only 49%
allocation could be utilized in the first four years of the Tenth Plan.

24
An amount of Rs. 204.30 crore has been allocated for the Scheme for
2006-2007, while the allocation of Rs. 199 crore in BE 2005-2006 was
reduced to Rs. 157.50 crore at RE stage. The Committee observe that
at present there are 133 Projects under implementation spread over
27 States. The Committee also note that the physical targets set under
Field Channels, Warabandi and Field Drains during the year
2005-2006 were 0.607 m.ha., 0.117 m.ha., and 0.099 m.ha. respectively,
while, the achievements have been of the order of only 46%, 57% and
72% respectively. The Committee are of the opinion that the continuous
under utilization of funds under Command Area Development & Water
Management Scheme would adversely affect the completion of above
projects. The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to make all out
efforts to sort out all the problems relating to utilization of funds
under Command Area Development & Water Management to ensure
that funds allocated under the Scheme are utilised during the year
2006-2007. The Committee also desire the Ministry to make all possible
efforts to improve the performance on the above components of
Command Area Development & Water Management. The Committee
would like to be informed of the action taken in the matter.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has been regularly emphasizing upon the State
Governments to enhance the allocation of State share for the
Programme, however the State Governments, because of competing
priorities for funds for various sectors, could not provide adequate
matching share for the scheme and hence there has been under-
utilization of Central share during the first three years of the Tenth
Plan. However, during the year 2005-06 the entire allocated Central
share of Rs. 199 crore was utilized as the reduced RE of 157.50 crore
was fully restored by the Government subsequently. As far as physical
achievements are concerned, there was further improvement in the
progress in respect of field channels and warabandi which increased
from 46% to 61% and from 57% to 64% respectively. The observation
of the Committee that the Ministry should make all possible efforts to
utilize the allocated funds under the scheme during 2006-07 has been
noted and accordingly all efforts shall be made for fully utilizing the
allocated amount during 2006-07.
Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM)
Recommendation (Para No. 4.18)
The Committee note that under the restructured Command Area
Development and Water Management Programme, the thrust is on

25
Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM) and the Central assistance
to State Governments has been linked to enactment of PIM legislation.
The Committee in their Third Report on Demands for Grants (2005-
06) had stressed the need for early enactment of necessary legislation
on PIM to all the State Governments. However, only one State, viz.
Maharashtra has enacted the same in addition to the nine States, viz.
Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh,
Rajasthan, Orissa and Kerala, which had taken action in this regard
earlier. The Ministry informed that they have been persuading the
State Governments to enact PIM Act/Amend Irrigation Act from time
to time. The action in this regard is required to be taken by the
respective State Governments. The State Governments are required to
submit detailed proposals for correction of system deficiency and
rehabilitation of tanks to the Ministry for approval along with a copy
of the MoU signed with the WUAs/Distributary Committees in order
to facilitate the simultaneous transfer of the system.  The Committee
further note that the Ministry propose to discuss the revamping of
CAD & WM Programme to allow PIM through WUAs during the
Working Group Meetings of the Ministry of Water Resources for the
Eleventh Plan and duly revamp the CAD&WM w.e.f. the Eleventh
Plan as the response of the State Governments in enacting PIM
Legislation has been very poor. The Committee, therefore, urge the
Ministry to direct the State Governments to submit detailed proposals
for correction of system deficiency and rehabilitation of tanks to the
Ministry for expeditious approval along with other formalities as
required for the same so that all the remaining State Governments
may also enact the necessary legislation on PIM. The Committee also
desire that more Water User Associations (WUAs) with representation
of women in Managing Committee’s be formed so that beneficiaries
are involved in the implementation  of Programme activities. The
Committee further recommend the Government to complete all
discussions and deliberations required for revamping CAD & WM
before the start of the Eleventh Plan so that CAD & WM is revamped
well in time. The Committee also desire that the issue of revamping
of CAD & WM may also be discussed with the State Governments
which have to ultimately implement the revamped CAD & WM from
the Eleventh Plan. The Committee would like to be informed of the
action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
As mentioned under reply to Para No. 2.15, the matter relating to
enactment of Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM) acts is being
periodically followed up with the State Governments. The matter is
also proposed to be discussed in the review meetings with the State
Governments to be held during the current financial year. As far as

26
the revamping of CAD & WM Programme to allow PIM through
WUAs is concerned, the matter is already under discussion in the
Sub-Group II of the Working Group of the Planning Commission for
XI Plan. Once the recommendations of the Working Group are received,
the issue of revamping of CAD & WM Programme shall be discussed
with the State Governments and based on the consultations with the
State Governments further follow up action shall be taken to revamp
the programme.
Command Area Development & Water Management Scheme—
Workshop on PIM
Recommendation (Para No. 4.19)
The Committee also note that the Ministry during the examination
of Demands for Grants (2005-06) informed the Committee that a
National Level Workshop on PIM was proposed in the early 2005-06.
However, the Ministry could not organize the same. The Ministry has
now informed the Committee that before organizing National Level
Workshop on PIM there is a need to get feedback from the regional
level workshops on PIM. The Ministry has so far been able to organize
only one regional level workshop on PIM for North Eastern States.
One such regional level Workshop is proposed to be organized shortly
for Northern States. The Committee, therefore, desire that the regional
level workshop on PIM for Northern States be organized at the earliest
so that a National Level Workshop on PIM can also be organized
timely which will help the remaining State Governments to enact PIM
legislation for implementing the Scheme.
Reply of the Government
The matter relating to holding of Regional Workshop on PIM for
Northern States is under consideration and the same will be organized
as soon as the dates are finalized, following which National Level
Workshop on PIM shall be organized for all the States.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report)
Flood Control—Extension of Embankments on Lalbakeya, Kamla,
Bagmati and Khando Rivers
Recommendation (Para No. 5.34)
The Committee observe that the plan allocation for the project
Raising, Strengthening and Extension of Embankments on Lalbakeya,

27
Bagmati and Khando rivers has been increased to Rs. 32.25 crore in
BE 2006-2007 from Rs. 14.00 crore in BE 2005-2006. The increased
allocation is to implement the works related to raising and
strengthening of embankments on Bagmati river for a length of
17.5 km. from Dheng Railway Bridge during the year 2006-2007. The
Scheme was originally approved during 2000-2001 with an estimated
cost of Rs. 503 lakh for works related to the left embankment on the
river and two new tagging embankments. Work to the tune of
Rs. 1.50 lakh was carried out for the Scheme. The work on the Scheme
was stopped after Water Resources Department, Government of Bihar
had pointed out certain shortcomings in the Scheme. Subsequently, a
Scheme of Rs. 4.53 crore was approved before the floods of 2005 but
only work to the tune of Rs. 90 lakh could be executed. The Scheme
was revised after the flood of 2005 and the new Scheme has been
approved by GFCC for a length of 17.5 km. with an estimated cost of
Rs. 4.33 crore. The Committee are constrained to note that the
implementation of the Scheme has been held hostage to non-submission
of DPR and failure to complete works in critical reaches on the river
before the onset of flood season by the State Government. This has
resulted in inordinate delay in completion of project and cost overrun
to the extent of Rs. 1.73 crore. From the pace of implementation of the
Scheme started during Ninth Five Year Plan, it is apprehended that it
would spill over beyond the Tenth Plan. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Ministry to impress upon the State Government to
avoid further delay in executing the works related to the Scheme and
to take urgent steps to complete the project during the current financial
year. The Committee desire to be apprised of the progress made in
this regard.
Reply of the Government
A scheme of Rs. 5.03 crore was approved during 2000 with the
provision for raising and strengthening of Bagmati left embankment
below Dheng bridge and construction of the two tagging embankments
upstream of Dheng bridge. Work to the tune of Rs. 1.5 crore was
carried out on the scheme. Subsequently, some shortcomings were
detected in the scheme and the implementation of the scheme was
stopped. Following the submission of another scheme covering reach
of 54 km (upto Runnisaidpur) d/s of Dheng Bridge (Estimated Cost
Rs. 279.35 crore) by Government of Bihar, Ministry of Water Resources
referred the Bagmati flood control issue to Central Water Commission
for holistic study in April 2005. In the meanwhile a scheme of
Rs. 4.53 crore for raising and strengthening of Bagmati embankment
in critical reaches as included in the approved EFC for 10th Plan was

28
approved for execution before flood of 2005. However, work only to
the extent of Rs. 0.9 crore could be carried out before flood of 2005.
Subsequently, CWC constituted a team led by Member (RM), CWC to
visit the Bagmati river in India as well as in Nepal and suggest the
measures for flood control of Bagmati river in the light of minutes of
Senior Officers meeting of Ministry of Water Resources held during
September 2005. The team submitted its interim report to Ministry of
Water Resources in January 2006 which was sent to Ganga Flood
Control Commission and Government of Bihar for necessary action.
Water Resources Development, Government of Bihar submitted to
GFCC the revised scheme for raising and strengthening in the critical
reaches up to 17.5 km from Dheng bridge and the anti erosion works
in the upstream of Dheng bridge after flood of 2005 for execution
before flood of 2006 in the light of CWC report of January 2006. The
scheme was cleared by GFCC and the first installment of Central
assistance has been released and work is under progress. The scheme
submitted by Water Resources Department, Govt. of Bihar, as a follow
up of the decision taken in the meeting taken by Secretary (WR) on
13.3.06, for raising and strengthening of entire 17.5 km of Bagmati
embankment from Dheng bridge has been examined in GFCC and
observations on the issues of fixation of formation level of the
embankment by CWC on the basis of model result, details of Belwa
gap and Dheng railway track/bridge have been conveyed to Water
Resources Department, Govt. of Bihar.
In the meantime, Government of Bihar has intimated regarding a
meeting chaired by Hon’ble Chief Minister, Government of Bihar in
February 2006 to discuss flood problem in North Bihar, wherein it
was decided that Bagmati Multipurpose Project (having irrigation,
drainage and flood control components) which was approved by
Planning Commission in 1984-85 be revised in the light of present
ground conditions and morphology of the river regime.
Water Resources Department, Government of Bihar has assigned
the work for updating the DPR of Bagmati Multipurpose Project to
HSCL. Government of Bihar has now submitted feasibility report of
Bagmati Multipurpose Project in June 2006. In the approved EFC of X
Plan only 17.5 km length of Bagmati river is under Central funding
whereas the river has a length of over 250 km in North Bihar. Task
Force 2004 has also recommended a fund provision of Rs. 12 crore for
reasonable degree of flood protection to entire Bagmati basin in XI
Plan. The work is proposed to be carried out simultaneously with the
work of extension of embankment up to high ground in Nepal to
make the flood embankments on Bagmati in North Bihar effective. It
is targeted to complete the works in XI Plan.

29
Farakka Barrage Project has executed the schemes as per the
recommendations of Expert Committee before the flood of 2006 at
Panchandpur.
New schemes for Majuli Island in Assam, Dihang Project
Recommendation (Para No. 5.48)
The Committee note that the total plan outlay for the Scheme,
“New Scheme for Majuli Island in Assam, Dihang Project” for Tenth
Plan has been increased to Rs. 76.56 crore. Out of Rs. 76.56 crore,
Rs. 35.28 crore for the scheme for protection of Majuli Island from
flood and erosion phase-I was earlier approved for the Tenth Plan.
The SFC for the remaining amount of Rs. 41.28 crore was approved
later on for implementation of the Scheme, Protection of Majuli Island
from Flood and Erosion, phase-I, alongwith other Schemes. Further,
additional funds of Rs. 14.45 crore have been proposed to be allocated
for protection of Majuli Island phase-I. The Committee also observe
that the physical performance for the year 2005-2006 in respect of
12 works related to protection of Majuli Island from flood and erosion
is far from satisfactory . Although, ostensibly the works related to the
construction of nose portion of check dam, RCC porcupine works
raising and strengthening of embankment and starting of construction
of hanger for Majuli Model and physical model studies had to be
completed during 2005-2006, barring the works like Porcupine work
along river Brahmaputra (upstream of Aphalamukh towards Sonowal
Kachari), construction of RCC porcupine works along Malual
Malapindha dyke on Luit Suti and Topographic & Hydrographic survey
of Majuli Island all other works have fallen awfully short of the target
date of completion, i.e. March 2006. Again, the works like Operation
and maintenance of Model, Construction of Hanger, RCC Porcupine
works at Major Chapari and RCC Porcupine works at Sonowal Kachari
have even failed to get started. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that all the works under the above scheme must be completed within
the Tenth Plan period as the erosion problems of Majuli Island are
unique and distinct from flood and erosion problems in other parts of
the country. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress
of works under the schemes.
Reply of the Government
Rs. 14.45 crore is the BE 2006-07 against the scheme “New scheme
of Majuli Island in Assam, Dibang Project, etc.”
Some of the works related to protection of Majuli Island have got
delayed due to poor performance by contractor and the non-availability

30
of construction materials (at Majuli) and communication bottlenecks.
The contract related to raising and strengthening of embankment
(Rs. 8.00 crore) has been rescinded and tendered for awarding afresh
so that it can be completed within 2006-07. All other works have also
been expedited and are planned to be completed by March, 2007.
The laying of physical model of the river reach of Brahmaputra
involving Majuli Island is in progress at North Eastern Hydraulic and
Allied Research Institute (NEHARI) at Guwahati which is scheduled
for completion by November 2006 and the study is scheduled to be
completed by December 2006. The RCC porcupine works at Major
Chapori and at Sonowal Kachari are in progress and 52% and 19%
progress has been achieved by June 2006.
All the works under the scheme protection of Majuli Island
Phase-I are targeted to be completed within Tenth Plan period. The
work orders for all major works have already been issued for
Rs. 31 crore. The work orders for works costing Rs. 5 crore are under
process and to be issued by the end of September 2006. The rest of
the works will be taken up after expert visit in September 2006. Overall
52% of the works under Phase-I are already completed.
Farakka Barrage Project (FBP)
Recommendation (Para No. 6.8)
The Committee observe that Farakka Barrage Project started in
1962 at an estimated cost of Rs. 65.59 crore with the objective of
preventing the silting of Calcutta Port by improving the flow and
navigability of Bhagirathi-Hoogly river system. The Tenth Plan
outlay for FBP was kept at Rs. 140.00 crore while EFC memos for
Rs. 145.53 crore and Rs. 3.37 crore have been approved by the Ministry
for completion of residual works of Ninth Plan during the Tenth Plan.
It is disconcerting to observe that while giving details of the residual
works of Ninth Plan that spilled over to Tenth Plan, the Ministry
contends that these are continuing features to be taken on yearly basis
and cannot be avoided. The Committee cannot buy the Ministry’s
specious argument that the spillover of projects from IX Plan to
10th Plan in Farakka Barrage Project is a continuing feature and thus,
cannot be avoided. The Committee believe that in the first place, no
scope for any residual works be left in a plan period for any project
and even if some spillover occurs due to certain emergent and
unforeseen circumstances, the effort of Ministry to gloss it over as
continuing happenstance is indeed an attempt to find an escape route
for itself. Further, the Committee note that the work orders for

31
execution of special repair/rectification of spill way gate, under service/
river sluice gates, etc. were awarded to M/s Jessop & Co. and M/s
NPCC Ltd. in April 1996 on 50:50 basis. The Committee note that
even though the work commenced at the site in the year 1997/1998,
the actual work attained momentum only at the end of 2002. However,
it was later observed that the magnitude of work to be carried out
had varied greatly from the original quantum of work. Further, it was
also found that the site of the work was situated at a difficult and
inaccessible zone and that one work could only be carried out for one
gate, the original time assessed for the repair and completion of the
total work turned out to be quite inadequate. This has resulted in
time and cost overrun. The estimated cost as per the recommendation
of TAX in 2006 now stands at Rs. 8.72 crore, representing an escalation
of 0.96 crore from the original cost of the Scheme at Rs. 7.76 crore.
The Committee cannot but conclude that the companies entrusted with
the work related to special repair/rectification of spillway gates, under
service/river gates, etc. have failed in properly assessing the time and
the funds required for completion of the work. This smacks of the
cavalier manner in which the executing agencies have approached the
works related to the project. It shows the agencies’ lack of
professionalism and also presents the Ministry in poor light for
awarding the work order for the Project to the agencies without
investigating their credentials. The Committee, therefore, recommend
the Government to review and reassess the amount of funds and time
required to complete repair/rectification of spill-way gates under the
project in more realistic terms and if practicable, may also re-consider
the decision of awarding work orders to these agencies vis-à-vis the
efficiency shown by these agencies while executing the works related
to the projects assigned to them so far. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the progress made under the schemes from time to
time.
Reply of the Government
Plan scheme for Rs. 140.00 crore for work and expenditure
accordingly for X Plan has been done as per the target in each year
in X Plan. There is no surplus and surrender of funds during X plan.
The work for repair of 110 Nos. of Gates of FBP at cost + contract
was divided equally i.e. 55 Gates each between M/s NPCC Ltd., and
M/s. Jessops and Co., Kolkata, with the initial cost of repairs for each
agency being estimated at Rs. 3.88 crore. As per the agreement, the
entire work was to be completed by October, 2000. However, there is
time as well as cost overrun in this case. The cost has now increased
to Rs. 4.38 crore from Rs. 3.88 crore and may possibly go up further.

32
In the meantime, M/s. Jessops and Co., Kolkata to whom repair
of 55 Nos. of Gates had been awarded could complete only 39 Gates
and hence GM, FBP had rescinded the contract with M/s. Jessop and
Co., Kolkata to the extent of 8 Gates out of the balance 16 Gates
pending for completion by them and awarded the repair work of
these 8 Gates to M/s. NPCC Ltd., in addition to their own share of
55 Gates in the interest of early completion of the work. In other
words, NPCC is now having repair work of about 63 Gates while
M/s. Jessops & Co., is having 47 Gates at present.
The cost overrun is due to the fact that the estimate for repair
work of the Gates was prepared on the basis of the condition of the
Gates exposed above the water level at the time of conclusion of the
contract and not on the repairs that might be needed for the portion
of the Gates submerged in the water. When the submerged portion of
the Gates to be repaired was brought out above the water level for
repair, it was found that the submerged portions had deteriorated
beyond expectation on account of chemical reaction with water etc.
The cost overrun is also attributed to change in the methodology for
metalising of the Gates as per the decision taken in the 100th meeting
of the TAC in 2003.
Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP)
Recommendation (Para No. 7.16)
The Committee note that for expeditious completion of irrigation
projects under AIBP which are in an advanced stage of completion,
the Government of India launched Accelerated Irrigation Benefit
Programme (AIBP) during 1996-1997 with the objective of accelerating
completion of on-going projects and to realize bulk benefits from
completed irrigation projects. A total of 189 Major/Medium Irrigation
Projects and 4,472 Minor Irrigation Schemes have been included under
AIBP and an amount of Rs. 18,156.98 crore has been released as CLA/
grant under the programme as on 16 January 2006. The projects under
AIBP were to be completed within 2 years under normal funding.
However, the Government modified the guidelines in March 2005
whereby the projects now are to be completed within 4 financial years.
The Committee are, however, dismayed to note that out of these only
50 Major/Medium Projects and 3,179 Minor Irrigation Schemes have
been completed so far. The reasons for delay in completion of AIBP
projects have been attributed to resettlement and rehabilitation
problems, land acquisition problem, contractual and legal issues, delay
in transfer of funds by the State Finance Departments, inadequate

33
outlay by the State Governments and change in the scope of the
programmes. Even the Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources admitted
during the evidence that out of 160 projects under AIBP half of the
projects are progressing according to the schedule and the other half
are delayed. The Committee are of the considered opinion that though
the Government has launched AIBP with the laudable objective of
accelerating the completion of ongoing projects which are in an
advanced stage of completion and achieve the desired results in the
shortest possible time, the implementation of AIBP has not attained its
desired results when viewed in the context of the volume of funds
pumped into the programme vis-à-vis the pace of completion. Further,
the Committee are of the view that the relaxation of time limit for
completion of projects under normal funding from 2 to 4 years has
defeated the very purpose with which the AIBP was launched which
will stretch the completion time of projects beyond one Plan period
given the pace of implementation by the State Governments. The
Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to make an all out efforts to
sort out all the problems and speed up implementation and tone up
the monitoring mechanism under each project in order to complete all
the projects as per their schedule time. The Committee desire to be
apprised of the action taken in the matter.
Reply of the Government
The position is as under:
(1) During the VIII plan period, irrigation potential of 22.20
lakh ha. was created under major and medium irrigation
sector at an annual rate of 4.4 lakh ha.
(2) During IX plan, irrigation potential created in the major &
medium irrigation sector was 42.2 lakh ha. out of which
16.5 lakh ha. (nearly 40%) was through AIBP schemes. Thus,
average annual potential created during the IX plan was of
the order of 8.24 lakh ha. per annum out of which 3.3 lakh
ha. per annum was contributed by AIBP .
(3) During the first three years of X plan, the potential creation
with major and medium sector and AIBP contribution is as
shown below:
Year Potential created Contribution of Percentage contribution
(lakh ha.) AIBP (lakh ha.) of AIBP
2002-03 8.12 4.56 56
2003-04 10.04 4.47 45
2004-05 10.00* 4.96 50
*Tentative

34
For the year 2005-06, irrigation potential of 9.25 ha. was
targeted against which, MoU under AIBP was signed with
the States for 10.41 lakh ha. However, figures of potential
created for the year 2005-06 are yet to be received from
State Governments and are under compilation. The figures
of irrigation potential creation during the year are generally
available after about a year’s time.
(4) As seen from the above, there is enhancement in the annual
rate of irrigation potential creation in the country from VIII
plan to IX plan from an annual rate of 4.4 lakh ha./annum
to 8 lakh ha./annum i.e. nearly increase of 3.6 lakh ha./
annum, mostly contributed by AIBP . In the X plan, the rate
of potential creation has increased nearly to 10 lakh ha./
annum out of which about 50% is contributed by AIBP .
(5) Assistance under AIBP has been provided to 200 projects in
23 States since the inception of the programme. The number
of projects declared as completed so far is 50. There are
11 projects which were deferred or withdrawn by the State
Governments due to various reasons. Hence, 139 major/
medium irrigation projects are under execution.
(6) The contribution of AIBP in completion of projects is quite
significant and it has progressively helped in accelerating
the completion of projects. During IX Plan, out of 96 major/
medium irrigation projects completed in the country, 17 were
those which received AIBP assistance. However, during
X Plan, out of 38 major/medium irrigation projects completed
in the country, 29 were those which received AIBP assistance.
(7) The normal completion period for major projects is about
10-15 years, and for medium projects about 5-7 years and
accordingly the normal completion schedule for the projects
in advanced stage has been kept four years. The relaxation
in AIBP guidelines regarding the time for completion of
projects has been mainly done in view of concerns raised
by some of the State Governments on this issue.
(8) A number of projects were completed on schedule both
under Normal and Fast Track category. The status of delay
of each of AIBP projects is given in Annexure-IV . It appears
that the completion target of projects for the year 2005-06
as reported in MoU submitted by the State Governments is
not likely to be achieved. However, based on the general
monitoring reports, it appears that most of the targeted

35
projects will be completed in the current year or in the
next financial year.
(9) Therefore, the intended objective of increased rate of
potential creation has been, by and large, achieved and
contribution of AIBP in completion of projects has now
significantly increased.
(10) It is further emphasized that while considering new projects,
it is tried to ensure that projects do not suffer from problems
of land acquisition, contract management and R&R problems.
Detailed information in this regard is collected in advance
from the proponent States.
(11) Even for the ongoing projects, the positions on these aspects
are specifically collected for releasing further CLA/grant to
the projects. The monitoring organizations have also been
geared up to gather information related to such bottlenecks
faced and advice the State Governments for timely attention
to sort out the impediments to the project.
Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP)—Fast Track
Programme
Recommendation (Para No. 7.21)
The Committee note that the Government has launched a Fast
Track Programme under AIBP in February 2002 to complete those
projects which are nearing completion and can be completed in one
year (two working seasons). Since inception of the Scheme, the Ministry
has included 38 projects, out of which, only 13 projects have been
completed so far. The Ministry, during the examination of Demands
for Grants (2005-2006), informed the Committee that 8 projects have
already been completed and 24 projects are likely to be completed
during 2005-2006. However, only 5 Major and Medium Projects have
been completed in 2005-2006. The Ministry has now informed the
Committee that during the last year 2006-2007 of Tenth Plan only 6
projects are likely to be completed. Thus, only 19 Major and Medium
Projects are likely to be completed out of 38 Projects included under
Fast Track Programme. The Ministry also informed that as per the
modified Guidelines issued in March 2005, Projects under the Fast
Track Programme under AIBP have to be completed in two years
instead of one year hitherto. The Committee fail to understand the
logic of the Ministry for relaxing the time limit for completion of the
Fast Track Projects from one year to two years. The Committee are of
the firm opinion that this relaxation defeats the very purpose of

36
completing the Projects under Fast Track Programme expeditiously.
The Committee are dissatisfied with the poor performance of the Fast
Track Programme. The Committee desire the Ministry to complete the
Projects in time under Fast Track Programme. The Committee, therefore,
also desire the Ministry to strictly monitor the completion of remaining
19 Projects included under the Fast Track Programme so that these
projects are completed as per their stipulated dates of completion.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry constituted a committee to review the status of Fast
Track Programme under AIBP in January 2005. The Committee
concluded that the cost of irrigation development during two years
period (2002-04) under Fast Track Programme works out to about
Rs. 48,000 per ha. which is quite reasonable. For the balance irrigation
potential yet to be created under Fast Track Programme the cost per
ha. is likely to be still lower.
However, the aim of speedy completion of the projects which was
the intended objective of the Fast Track Programme was seen to be
not achieved. The Committee therefore recommended that the Fast
Track Programme can be continued for present subject to review after
one year but with more stringent conditions such as:
—P rojects to be included under FTP should be ensured to be
free from the constraints of land acquisition, R&R problem,
litigation problem, contractual problem or any other major
bottleneck which could impede the execution of the project
in a time bound manner.
— Balance cost to be indicated should be realistic and updated.
— Balance irrigation potential to be created should be properly
assessed and then indicated.
— Half yearly programme for expenditure to be incurred and
creation of irrigation potential needs to be indicated in the
FTP proposal.
— Release of 2nd instalment of 50% of the balance cost needs
to be linked with the achievement of targeted potential
rather than linking it with the expenditure progress.
In view of the concerns raised by the State Governments and also
as observed by the above Committee that the projects could be
completed with a delay ranging from 10 to 24 months, the completion

37
schedule of the Fast Track Programme was further rationalized to two
financial years w.e.f. 1.4.2005. The Monitoring Units have also been
advised to ensure that any new proposal submitted under Fast Track
is free from constraints of land acquisition, R&R problems, contractual
problems etc.
As per the MoUs received from the State Governments, the present
status of the projects under Fast Track are as under:
•T otal number of projects/project components as on
31.3.2005—30.
•P rojects dropped from Fast Track—3
• Balance—27
•P rojects already completed—16
•P rojects in advance stage of completion but completion
reports are yet to be received—10
•P rojects included in the year 2004-05 and scheduled for
completion in 2006-07—1
In addition to above, 12 more projects have been included under
Fast Track in the year 2005-06, most of which are scheduled for
completion in 2007-08.
Performance review of AIBP by C&AG
Recommendation (Para No. 7.27)
The Committee observe that Para No. 15 of the C&AG Report of
2004 also highlights the poor performance of AIBP indicating the failure
to achieve its intended objectives inspite of spending Rs. 13,823.05
crore (including States’ share). The reasons attributed by the C&AG
regarding the poor performance of AIBP projects are inadequate
planning, lack of coordination with the State Governments, ineffective
execution, insufficient utilization of resources, etc. The Committee are
of considered opinion that the observations made in the C&AG Report
is of serious nature and a matter of grave concern. The Committee
believe that had the Ministry monitored the scheme properly the
objectives of AIBP would have been fully achieved. The Committee,
therefore, desire the Ministry to enquire into the matter in right earnest
and apprise the outcome of the same to the Committee within three
months of presentation of the Report to the Houses of Parliament.

38
Reply of the Government
The execution of works in the projects is within the jurisdiction of
the State Governments. Ministry of Water Resources/Central Water
Commission do not intervene in the process of execution, such as
award of contract, contract management, mode of construction, quality
control etc. However, the central monitoring teams by visiting the
projects suggest some measures to the State Governments, which are
advisory in nature to improve the pace of construction. In addition,
the bottlenecks and suggestions are also communicated in writing to
the various authorities including State Governments for compliance
and taking remedial measures. The bottlenecks and progress of each
project is reviewed in the review meetings taken by Senior officers of
Central Water Commission.
However, as mentioned under para 7.16, the contribution of AIBP
has been quite significant if we look into the overall potential creation
from irrigation projects in the country and the number of projects
completed in the country after AIBP was launched.

39
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Gender Budgeting
Recommendation (Para No. 1.20)
The Committee note that the Ministry has set up a Gender
Budgeting Cell but would like to add in the same breath that the
Ministry has evaded to provide specific information sought by the
Committee regarding creation of gender profile in its budgeting
provisions. The Committee are of the opinion that merely stating that
the Irrigation Schemes benefit all sections of society including women
amply demonstrates the degree of importance  which the Ministry
attaches to the concept of “Gender Budgeting” in real terms. The
Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to avoid giving evasive replies
to them in future and take more concrete steps to make the idea of
Gender Budgeting ‘Project specific’. The Committee, therefore,
recommend to apportion a certain amount in each project to benefit
women wherever practicable. The Committee also desire to be informed
of the action taken in the matter within a stipulated time frame. A
quarterly report may be furnished to the Committee in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The schemes of the Ministry of Water Resources primarily relate
to planning, design, research & development and data collection issues.
In addition, Centrally Sponsored or State Sector Schemes related to
flood control measures, improvement in Command Area Development
etc. are also operated. It is again submitted that the schemes of the
Ministry address all sections of the society including women.
Major and medium irrigation—Projects where 90% or more of
targeted irrigation potential has been achieved
Recommendation (Para No. 3.12)
The Committee observe that pursuant to their recommendation for
identification of completed projects not declared as completed by the

40
State Governments, 41 projects (16 major and 25 medium) in 10 States
were identified by Government which attained 90% or more of targeted
irrigation potential. The Committee are unhappy to observe further
that despite their recommendations in successive Reports on Demands
for Grants 2004-05 and 2005-06 to the effect that the Working Group
recommendation on major and medium irrigation projects of Tenth
Plan to stop further flow of funds to projects which attained 90% or
more of ultimate potential be treated as completed remains to be
implemented completely as yet by the Government. Further, the
specious plea of the Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources during the
evidence that Central assistance is being given to only 6 of the projects
and that the remaining are entirely funded by the State Governments
is untenable as the purport of the Working Group recommendation
and the observations/recommendations of the Committee was to put
an end to wastage of public funds which could be better utilized for
other projects. The Committee, therefore, desire that all the 6 projects
which are still getting Central assistance should be completed and
declared as completed as per the recommendations of the Working
Group of the Tenth Plan during the currency of the Tenth Plan itself.
The Committee also urge the Planning  Commission to stop allocating
funds to those State Governments where the remaining 21 projects
which have attained 90% or more potential as identified by the Ministry
of Water Resources are located. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
In regard to the Committee’s observation on 41 projects (16 major
& 25 medium), the position is brought out as under:
1. Projects which have actually not attained 90% of the : 6 Nos.
targeted potential
2. Projects solely funded by the States : 20 Nos.
3. No. of projects completed so far : 14 Nos.
4. No. of projects for which no demand for CLA has been : 1 No.
received in last 2 years
5. Balance projects for which CLA has been recommended : Nil
State-wise status is given in Appendix-III.
It can therefore be noted from the above that the recommendation
of the Standing Committee on Water Resources regarding projects which
have attained 90% or more of the targeted potential has been duly
implemented for projects receiving CLA under AIBP .

41
In respect of observation of the Committee to declare those
irrigation projects as completed in which 90% or more irrigation
potential has been created, the Planning Commission has been consulted
who are of the view that cost/benefit of the project at appraisal stage
are worked out for full irrigation potential proposed from the project
at the time of appraisal. Hence, every effort is to be made to create
full design potential from the project.
Command Area Development & Water Management Scheme—
submission of fresh DPRs by State Governments
Recommendation (Para No. 4.10)
The Committee are unhappy to note that despite the repeated
recommendations of the Committee for submission of fresh Detailed
Project Reports (DPRs) of all the 133 ongoing Projects by the State
Governments, the Ministry could receive the same for 101 DPRs of
125 Projects. The Ministry informed the Committee that out of
remaining 32 DPRs, the matter relating to submission of the 27 DPRs
from the concerned State  Governments is being pursued. Of the other
5 DPRs, the Programme being new in the States of Jharkhand, Tripura
and Sikkim, these State Governments are taking their own time to
submit the DPRs. The Committee view the non-submission of DPRs of
the remaining 32 projects very seriously . The Committee, therefore,
desire that the matter be pursued with the concerned State
Governments vigorously for early submission of DPRs so that all these
Projects could be completed as per their completion date and its
benefits could reach the people at large. This is all the more an urgent
matter as the fresh DPRs were sought with the objective of assessing
the quantum of work completed CAD & WM as on 31 March 2004 on
the direction of the CCEA as reported by the Ministry at the time of
examination of Demands of Grants for the year 2005-06. The
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to secure the
remaining DPRs from the concerned State Governments and also assess
the quantum of work completed as on 31 March 2004 within six months
of the presentation of this Report. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the steps taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
As a result of further follow up with the State Governments, the
DPRs of 112 projects have now been received. Another 5 projects have
been completed in the mean time. Thus, DPRs of only 16 projects are
awaited. The matter is being followed up with the concerned States
for early submission of remaining DPRs.

42
Brahmaputra Board
Recommendation (Para No. 5.39)
The Committee observe that in order to address the problems of
floods, erosion and drainage congestion in North-Eastern region of the
country as well as for creation of hydropower, navigation and other
benefits for the people of Brahmaputra and Barak Valleys, the
Brahmaputra Board was set up by the Government of India under an
Act of Parliament (Brahmaputra Board Act 1980). The total plan outlay
for the Board is earmarked Rs. 102.00 crore for the Tenth Plan period.
The Plan allocation in BE 2006-07 was increased to Rs. 28.12 crore
over Rs. 21.00 crore earmarked in BE 2005-2006. The increased allocation
is for implementing some new Drainage Development Schemes, viz.
Kailasahar, Joyasagar, East of Barpeta, Singla, Jenrai, Jakaichuk and
some emergent flood management works during the year 2006-2007.
The Committee note that in projects like Lohit, Kulsi, Kynshi, Noa-
Dehing in which the survey, investigation and preparation of DPRs
are being taken up by Brahmaputra Board, the projects design and
EIA&EMP study have not progressed much. Infact, in all the cases the
achievements are less than 40 percent and have already cast doubts
on the timely preparation of DPRs of the projects. The work has been
held up due to non-receipt of forest clearance in Kameng project. The
Committee, therefore, desire that the project design and EIA&EMP
study should be taken up by the Brahmaputra Board, NHPC and
NEC at the earliest so that the DPRs for the respective projects could
be taken up expeditiously. The Committee further recommend that the
clearance from Forest Department be obtained urgently to complete
the held-up works in Kameng Project. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the action taken in the matter.
Reply of the Government
An amount of Rs. 28.12 crore has been kept for the year 2006-07
against Continuing Scheme of Brahmaputra Board. Out of this, an
amount of Rs. 7.65 crore is provided for seven new Drainage
Development Schemes having estimated cost of Rs. 16.64 crore. The
allocated fund amounting to Rs. 7.65 crore is expected to be utilized
during the year 2006-07.
The EIA&EMP study of the projects Lohit and Kynshi Stage-I has
got delayed due to non-finalization of project parameters because the
dam sites had to be changed due to unsuitable geological conditions
observed during investigations which has necessitated additional survey
and investigations. In case of Kulsi and Noa-Dehing some adverse

43
geological features were encountered and additional survey and
investigations had to be taken up to ascertain their extent. The acute
insurgency problem in interior areas has also contributed in delay of
Kulsi Dam investigations.
On Kameng River, the North-Eastern Electric Power Corporation
(NEEPCO) has started the Bishom Hydel Project upstream of the
proposed Kameng Multipurpose Project and the Powerhouse of this
project is in the reservoir area of the proposed Kameng Multipurpose
Project. There is also no positive response from Forest Dept. of
Arunachal Government towards clearance for investigation of the
project. For these reasons, the investigation of Kameng Multipurpose
Project has now been discontinued.
The project design for Lohit, Kynshi and Noa-Dehang Dam Projects
have been taken up by Brahmaputra Board in consultation with Central
Water  Commission. The EIA&EMP study is targeted for completion
by December 2006. The DPRs of all these projects are scheduled for
completion by Brahmaputra Board by March 2007 subject to completion
of design etc.

44
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Outcome Budget—Improvement of drainage in critical areas of the
country
Recommendation (Para No. 2.12)
 The Committee note that another important programme included
in the ‘Outcome Budget’ of the Ministry relates to improvement of
Drainage in Critical Areas of the country estimated to cost
Rs. 54.57 crore comprising Central share of Rs. 49.62 crore sanctioned
in February 2004 which intends to take up works with the objective
of improvement of drainage in critical areas affected by floods in the
States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Orissa and Uttar Pradesh. The Plan
outlay for the Scheme had been increased to Rs. 22.11 crore in
2006-2007 as against Rs. 18 crore in 2005-2006. The Committee, however,
are disconcerted to note that the quantifiable durables/physical outputs
in respect of this Scheme had been very vaguely described. Further,
the Plan outlay has also been restricted to Rs. 22.11 crore inspite of
the availability of Rs. 26.87 crore due to poor performance by the
States of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. The Committee desire the Ministry
to impress upon the State Governments to address the problems like
land acquisition in right earnest so that the works of these projects
commence at the earliest. The Committee also desire that the physical
outputs be defined in a more realistic terms. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Ministry of Water Resources has requested to the concerned State
Governments to expedite the execution of the works under this scheme.
Zonal offices of Central Water Commission monitor the schemes
regularly by making field visits and submit monitoring report.
State Governments are constantly reminded to complete the scheme
by the stipulated time, i.e. by the end of X Five Year Plan. The
status of funds released, utilized and physical outputs are given at
Annexure-II.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report)

45
Flood Control
Recommendation (Para No. 5.15)
The Plan allocation for flood control had been earmarked at
Rs. 248.22 crore for 2006-2007 an increase of Rs. 16.59 crore as against
an allocation of Rs. 231.63 for 2005-2006. It is, however, disturbing to
observe the reduction of allocation by Rs. 50.42 crore at RE stage
2005-2006 which is attributed to non-taking up of some of the intended
works. It is further disconcerting to observe that additional works are
projected at the time of seeking higher allocations even though the
Ministry fails to keep up the tempo of expenditure for a major part
of the year resulting in reduction in allocations at RE stage. It is
appalling to observe that out of Rs. 1,403.22 crore plan outlay for
flood control Rs. 557.39 crore remained unallocated. This speaks
volumes of the existing state of affairs not only with regard to
utilization of the allocated funds but also of the shoddy nature of
projecting outlays and proposing estimates of expenditure by the
Ministry. The Ministry’s contention that if additional funds were made
available, some new Schemes mainly under Critical Anti-erosion works
and flood management Schemes in Ganga Basin States as well as
North-Eastern region would have been taken up does not cut much
ice with the Committee. The Committee are of the firm view that
more emphasis needs to be laid on utilizing the funds allocated for
expeditious completion of on-going projects rather than thin spreading
of the available scarce funds on too many projects. The Committee
further note that the modified EFC memo for Ganga Basin States that
includes the Schemes recommended by the Task Force has not yet
been cleared by the appraising agencies. The Committee desire the
Ministry to take effective and urgent steps to get the EFC memo cleared
at the earliest to facilitate the works on projects under the Scheme,
‘Critical Anti-erosion works in Ganga Basin States’ as the projects are
likely to be taken up for implementation during the current financial
year in consonance with the recommendations of the Task Force. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.
Flood Control—Critical anti-erosion works in Ganga Basin States
Recommendation (Para No. 5.24)
The Committee observe that the total cost of the Scheme, “Critical
Anti-erosion and Flood Management” in Ganga Basin States was revised
to Rs. 242.17 crore with Central share of Rs. 195.63 crore. The Plan
allocation for the year 2006-2007 for the Scheme has been increased to
Rs. 111.20 crore, representing an enhancement of Rs. 11.20 crore over

46
the BE for the year 2005-2006. The enhancement is required to ensure
completion of on-going projects and new projects to be taken up under
the Scheme as well as for works to be taken up in the extended
jurisdiction of Farakka Barrage Project during 2006-2007 based on the
recommendations of the Task Force. EFC memo for the Scheme
recommended by the Task Force has been prepared and was circulated
to appraising agencies for their comments. The meeting of Expenditure
Finance Committee is yet to take place and the Ministry of Water
Resources had reminded the Ministry of Finance in this regard. The
Committee recommend the Ministry to get the comments of the
appraising agencies urgently and arrange a meeting with the
Expenditure Finance Committee to get its concurrence for the Scheme
at the earliest so that the anti-erosion works under the Scheme could
commence. The Committee note that the number of new Schemes to
be taken up during the year 2006-2007 is contingent on the approval
by the EFC/Competent authority on the expanded Scheme and the
Schemes are to be prioritised by an Empowered Committee was
proposed to be set up for the purpose. The Committee, therefore,
recommended the Government to get approval for the expanded
Schemes from the EFC/Competent Authority first before setting up
the Empowered Committee to prioritize the Scheme at the earliest.
The Committee also recommended the Government to take all
appropriate steps to implement the recommendations of the Expert
Committee which submitted its Report on 15 February 2006 in the
current financial year itself to fulfil the objective of setting up such an
Expert Committee. The Committee would like to be informed of the
action taken in the matter.
Reply of the Government (Para Nos. 5.15 & 5.24)
EFC meeting regarding the revised scheme on Critical anti-erosion
works in Ganga Basin States, was held on 12 May 2006 under
Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Finance. This scheme cleared
by ERC is under process for obtaining approval of Cabinet Committee
on Economic Affairs. The schemes recommended by Task Force under
Immediate and Short Term-I category which are linked with the
ongoing works i.e., works which are required to be executed to ensure
full benefit from the works under implementation/completed or are
very critical in nature, have been considered under the scheme for
implementation during the last year of X Plan. Other schemes as
recommended by Task Force under Immediate and Short Term-I will
be implemented during XI Plan after the performance evaluation of
works carried out during X Plan. Out of eleven schemes considered
by EFC in May 2006 for X Plan, nine schemes have already been
cleared by GFCC and remaining two are under process.

47
Most of the new works will spill over to XI Plan, since the working
season was over by 15 June 2006. The next working season will start
after flood of 2006 and the works will be completed before flood of
2007. Accordingly provision have been made under the EFC to the
extent the work is possible in each case by 31 March 2007. The concept
of Empowered Committee will be applicable for the schemes of
XI Plan, as ongoing schemes and other works required to ensure full
benefits in the vicinity of ongoing schemes/very critical works are
only included in X Plan proposal.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter I of the Report)

48
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Major and Medium Irrigation—Expeditions completion of projects
to create additional irrigation potential and utilizations of potential
created.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.9)
The Committee observe that as on 31 March, 2004 a total of
1248 Major, Medium and ERM Projects have been completed since
Independence. The Committee are however, dismayed to note that
there are 471 (169 Major, 219 Medium and 83 ERM) ongoing projects
in the country, which have spilled over from Ninth Plan with a balance
cost of about Rs. One Lakh Crore. Out of all these ongoing irrigation
projects, only 11 Major and 7 Medium Irrigation projects have been
reported as completed during the first four years of the Tenth Plan.
According to the Ministry, the reasons for delay in completion of
projects are attributable to lack of budgetary provision in the State
Government Budgets, frequent changes in the scope of project, land
acquisition problems, resettlement and rehabilitation of project oustees,
legal problems, delay in compliance by the State  Governments to the
observations of Central appraising agencies and inter-State issues.
Furthermore, the Committee are perturbed to note that Kanupur
Medium Irrigation project in Andhra Pradesh and Gurgaon Canal Major
Irrigation project in Rajasthan which were started during the Third
Plan period are still pending and their likely completion as informed
by the Ministry goes beyond the Tenth Plan. The Committee also
observe that 300 new projects (78 major, 136 medium and 86 ERM)
were taken up for implementation during the Tenth Plan for creation
of 6.5 mha additional irrigation potential to be created during the
Tenth Plan. While 8.12 lakh hectare irrigation potential has been created
during 2002-2003, irrigation potential of 9.20 and 15.51 lakh hectare
was expected to be created during 2003-2004 and 2004-2005, respectively.
On the other hand the utilization of the potential created is about
86%. The Committee are of the firm opinion that though the
Government is making huge investments year after year to complete
the pending projects, the desired results are far from being achieved.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Government to take

49
urgent steps to resolve all the problems as identified by the Ministry
for delay in completion of projects expeditiously and strengthen the
monitoring mechanism under each project in order to complete these
projects as per their present revised stipulated dates of completion.
The Committee also desire the Ministry to take urgent steps to increase
the utilization of irrigation potential already created as well as to
achieve the targets set for creation of additional potential during the
Tenth Plan.
Reply of the Government
The current status (as on 31.3.06) of projects taken upto IX Plan is
as under:
Total number of projects completed : 1270 (244 Major, 936
Medium and 90 ERM)
Projects not yet completed : 452 (157 Major, 212 Medium
and 83 ERM)
The ongoing projects include both approved as well as unapproved
projects with breakup as under:
Category Approved Projects (Nos.) Unapproved Projects (Nos.)
Major 93 64
Medium 112 100
ERM 19 64
Total 224 228
Implementation of irrigation projects comes under the purview of
the State Governments. However, the Union Government has been
providing central loan assistance under AIBP to the ongoing approved
projects to facilitate their early completion for early creation of irrigation
potential. For AIBP funded projects, a monitoring mechanism is in
place through field formation of Central Water Commission and a
substantial progress has been achieved as could be noted through the
reported potential creation for the year 2002-03 and 2003-04.
The average potential creation per year was around 4.4 lakh ha. in
VIII plan, which increased to 8.24 lakh ha. in IX plan. The annual
potential creation in the year 2002-03 was 8.12 lakh ha., which has
further increased to 10.04 lakh ha. in 2003-04 against the expected

50
creation of 9.2 lakh ha. Though, complete details of potential creation
for the year 2004-05 are yet to be received from States, the potential
creation through the projects under AIBP alone is around 5 lakh ha.
in the year 2004-05. Pace of potential creation will be further accelerated
during the Bharat Nirman period. It may, however, be noted that the
increase in creation of irrigation potential is mainly contributed by the
approved projects and not through the projects which are still
unapproved. The State Governments have been advised to get these
projects duly approved by the Planning Commission. The problems
being faced on account of these unapproved projects are being
discussed in the meetings of the Working Group for XI Plan constituted
by Planning Commission and further action would be taken as per
their recommendations. It is pertinent to note that most of the projects
out of 300 new projects included in X Plan are also unapproved and
not much help can be provided by the Ministry of Water Resources
for these projects till they are approved by Planning Commission.
As regards Kanupur project of Andhra Pradesh, more than 90% of
its ultimate potential has already been achieved. The AIBP component
with net potential of 561 ha. only (about 7%) is also in advanced stage
of completion. The balance works have been held up due to litigation
with contractor. The case is now sub judice under Supreme Court.
As regards Gurgaon canal reservoir, out of ultimate potential of
28000 ha., about 82% had already been achieved by the end of
IX Plan. The State Govt. has now proposed to declare the project as
completed and formulate a new scheme including balance components
of the Gurgaon canal along with some new components. No further
fund has been released under AIBP for this project.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter 1 of the Report)
Performance review of AIBP by C&AG
Recommendation (Para No. 7.26)
The Committee are unhappy to note that 15 States, viz., Andhra
Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir,
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab,
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal were reported to have
diverted/mis-utilized the Central Loan Assistance (CLA) under AIBP ,
according to the Report of C&AG. The Committee in their Third Report
on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) had recommended the Government

51
to enquire into the matter and apprise the outcome of the same to the
Committee within three months from the presentation of that Report
to the Houses of Parliament. However, the Ministry could not submit
the requisite information to the Committee. The Committee in their
Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) had again
recommended the Ministry to set a definite time frame to obtain the
requisite information from the above States. So far, the Ministry could
obtain the requisite information from only five States, viz. Karnataka,
Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat and Uttar Pradesh. The revised
Guidelines stipulate mandatory submission of audited statement of
expenditure on projects receiving CLA within a month of closure of
the financial year. The Committee are dismayed to note that the
Ministry had not taken the matter very seriously despite the repeated
recommendations of the Committee to obtain the requisite information
from the above States as one year has elapsed since the presentation
of the Third Report to the Houses. The Committee are of the opinion
that the progress of projects under AIBP is not commensurate to the
quantum of CLA being released by the Government. The Committee,
therefore, strongly recommended the Ministry to speed up the enquiry
procedures in order to obtain the requisite information from the
remaining 10 States without any further delay.
The Committee observe that Five of the States which had sent
compliance report on audit paras to the Ministry have not been
tendered the details of diversion and mis-utilization of CLA under
AIBP . The Committee desire the Government to obtain the detailed
replies from these States in this regard at the earliest. Further, taking
strong exception to the state of affairs in this matter, the Committee
recommend that if these defaulter States do not submit the requisite
information within three months of the presentation of the present
Report to the Houses, further release of CLA funds under AIBP to
these States should be stopped immediately so that in future the
diversion/mis-utilization of CLA funds under AIBP does not take place.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this
matter within three months of the presentation of this Report to the
House.
Reply of the Government
The issue of diversion of funds made available by Central
Government to the States under AIBP has been taken up with the
State Governments concerned but most of the States are yet to respond
to observations raised by the CAG in its report. The issue is being

52
pursued by the Ministry of Water Resources with the concerned State
Governments. In this connection, the following points are mentioned:
(i) The Ministry of Water Resources has kept a built in check
in AIBP guidelines for release of subsequent instalment of
CLA according to which, subsequent instalment of CLA
could be released only when utilization certificate of CLA
released earlier along with appropriate State share is
furnished by the State Government. Even if the said funds
have been misutilized in 1st instance by the State
Government, the subsequent releases of CLA to States is
not possible till utilization certificate of earlier instalment of
CLA is furnished by the State Government.
(ii) Since 2004-05, only Grant component of Central Assistance
is being released by the Government of India and Loan
component is to be raised by the State Government
themselves except for in cases of fiscally week States.
(iii) Provision has been made in AIBP guidelines that Grant
component of the Central Assistance along with Loan
component and State share is required to be transferred to
project authorities within 15 days by the State Government.
(iv) As per AIBP guidelines, if the project components included
in AIBP are not completed in time indicated in MOU, the
Grant component could be converted in Loan component
recoverable from State along with interest thereon.
(v) Utilization Certificate is required to be countersigned by
atleast Secretary of concerned Water  Resources Department.
(vi) The AIBP guidelines further stipulate that the States would
be required to submit audited statement of expenditure on
project within 9 months of completion of financial year.
(vii) The Field Units of the CWC are to pay atleast two
monitoring visits to the projects included in AIBP during
the year to monitor physical and financial achievements and
submit the Status Report within a month of visit to the
project.
(viii) As a result of stringent measures being taken from time to
time by the Ministry of Water Resources, States have started
reallocating Central Assistance directly to the project
authorities more or less in time limit prescribed by the
Ministry of water Resources. Particularly to be mentioned

53
here is State of Maharashtra which has passed a Government
resolution to reallocate Central Assistance under AIBP
directly to project authorities within stipulated time and the
Central Assistance is actually being reallocated.
The performance of the AIBP has in fact been very good keeping
in view the figures of expenditure incurred and potential created
under AIBP . No doubt that number of projects completed are not in
accordance with the targets, but the completion of projects may be
delayed due to various reasons. During 1996 to 2005, total expenditure
incurred on AIBP is of Rs. 27,813 crore and the potential created
under AIBP is 3260260 ha. The expenditure incurred for a hectare of
creation of irrigation potential works out to Rs. 85,300/- which is quite
reasonable. In fact, the CAG itself has stated that cost of creation of
irrigation potential should be in the limit of Rs. 1.00 lakh per ha.
Accordingly, the expenditure incurred per unit of irrigation potential
creation is well within limit. Further, development of irrigation
potential of 32,60,260 ha. in a period of 8 years is a big achievement
under AIBP .
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter I of the Report)
    N
EW D ELHI; R. SAMBASIVA RAO,
13 December, 2006 Chairman,
22 Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) Standing Committee on Water Resources.

54
APPENDIX I
(Mentioned in Reply of Recommendation Para No. 1.30)
STATUS OF PENDING UTILIZATION CERTIFICATES (UCs)
FROM AUTONOMOUS BODIES & INSTITUTIONS
FROM 1986-87 TO 2002-03
(Position as on 14.7.2006)
(Rupees in lakh)
Sl.No. Year No. of Subject Sanction No. Amount Total
UCs Matter
Division
12 3 4 5 67
1. 86-87 3 PP-1 24/5/86-Estt. II dt. 31.3.87 4.80
Ganga-2 37/8/81-FC Vol. IV dt. 30.3.87 4.00 12.50
37/8/81-FC Vol. V dt. 5.1.87 3.70
2. 87-88 1 Ganga-1 37/8/81-FC Vol. V dt. 23.3.88 5.29 5.29
3. 88-89 3 Ganga-3 37/8/81-FC Vol. VI dt. 30.3.89 0.10
37/8/81-FC Vol. VI dt. 30.3.89 8.60 8.80
37/8/81-FC Vol. VI dt. 30.3.89 0.10
4. 89-90 2 PP-6 24/27/89 E-II dt. 30.3.90 2.35 2.85
24/27/89 E-II dt. 30.3.90 0.50
5. 90-91 3 Projects-1 37/35/39-BM dt. 19.2.91 0.15
PP-2 17/6/90-FA 2EA dt. 29.10.90 1.87 7.17
17/6/90-FA 2EA dt. 29.10.90 5.15
6. 91-92 4 PP-2 24/13/90/Estt.-II dt. 30.12.91 0.51 8.91
Projects-1 17/6/90-FA II dt. 13.2.92 (3.90+1.75) 5.65
Ganga-1 37/33/91-BM dt. 17.12.91 2.35
37/33/91-ER-495 dt. 17.3.92 0.40
7. 94-95 1 PP-1 CWC/17/1/95/R & D/670 dt. 21.2.95 0.36 0.36
8. 00-01 2 Ganga-1 12/1/2000/ER/3803 dt. 18.12.00 3.34 6.192
PP-1 16/39/2000-R&D/263-275 dt. 28.3.01 2.852

55
 12 3 4 5 6 7
 9. 01-02 4 PP-2 12/03/J-1/99-WM/2819-2020 dt. 27.9.01 4.40
WM-2 R&D/INCH/01/34/343-355 dt. 6.3.02 2.06 46.46
12/63/J-1/99-WM/2819-2820 dt. 29.10.01 20.00
12/63/J-2/99-WM/2828-2836 dt. 29.10.01 20.00
10. 02-03 7 11/12/2002 E-II dt. 4.10.02 1.00
11/12/2002 E-II dt. 4.10.02 1.00
PP-7 11/12/2002 E-II dt. 4.10.02 1.25 6.25
31/71/2002-PP dt. 5.9.02 1.00
R&D/INCID/2002/105/225-37 1.00
dt. 13.3.03 0.95
31/71/2002-PP dt. 5.9.02 0.05
R&D/INCID/02/105/225-37 dt. 13.3.03
30 Total 104.782

56
APPENDIX II
(Mentioned in Reply to Recommendation Para No. 2.12)
THE STATUS OF FUNDS RELEASED, UTILISED AND PHYSICAL
OUTPUTS IN RESPECT OF THE CENTRALLY SPONSORED
SCHEME NAMELY, “IMPROVEMENT OF DRAINAGE IN
THE CRITICAL AREAS OF THE COUNTRY”
(Rs. in lakh)
Sl. State Name of Estimated Cost of Total Funds Funds Total area Area likely
No. the scheme cost land & Cost released utilised likely to be to be
excluding establish- in till benefited benefited
cost of ment 2004-06 3/2006 in in
land & (As Hectare Hectare
establish- State till till
ment share) 3/2006 3/2006
(As
Central
share)
1. Andhra Improvement to the major 545.00 0.00 545.00 450.00 391.91 9032 5000
Pradesh drainage problematic areas in
the State (Krishna Delta
System of Guntur & Prakasham
Districts)
2. Bihar Raising & strengthening of 73 2738.44 78.24 2816.68 1200.00 12.00.00 18000 10000
Zamindar bunds & residual
work of Pynes (Improvement of
drainage in Mokama Group of
Tal)
3. Orissa Improvement of Drainage 1312.74 165.29 1478.03 475.00 400.00 11600 5020
system & improvement of
Orissa Coast Canal (Range-III)
in Bhograi and Jaleswar Blocks
of Balasore District of Orissa
4. Uttar Construction of new drains in 365.31 251.56 616.87 150.00 0.00 3504 Not
Pradesh Ghaghara & Kalyani Basins of reported
Bara Banki District. by the
State
Government
Total 4961.49 495.09 5456.58 2275.00 1991.91 42136 20020
                                             (Say Rs. 49.62 crore)  (Rs. 54.57 crore)

57
APPENDIX III
(Para 3.12)
STATEWISE STATUS OF ONGOING MAJOR AND MEDIUM IRRIGATION PROJECTS WHICH WERE ANTICIPATED
TO
 HAVE ATTAINED 90% OR MORE OF TARGETTED POTENTIAL ON 1.4.2004
States Major Medium
Completed Project Non-AIBP Total Completed Project Non-AIBP Total
Deferred Deferred
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9Andhra Pradesh 1. Nagarjuna Sagar — 1. Bamsabhara St. I 4 1. Madduvalasa 1
2. Sriram Sagar 2. Changalanadu (LIS)
Assam 3. Bordikarai 1Bihar
1. Orni Res. Projects 1
Jharkhand
1. Katri 1
Karnataka 3. Yagachi 2 2. Chulkinala 2
4. Tungabhadra HLC (IS) 3. Votehole
Maharashtra 4. Khadagwasla 5. Dudhganga (IS) 6 2. Jawalgaon 4. Anjanapalsi 13
5. Upper Tapi 6. Upper Godavari 3. Kadwi 5. Aran (Pimpri)6. Wan 7. Arunavati 4. Kasari 6. Purnaneopur
5. Kasarsai 7. Wadiwale
8. Mun

58
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9Orissa
9. Andhalil10. Sayaki11. Torna12. Muktai Nagar (IS)
Rajasthan
6. Panchana 27. Chhapi
West Bengal
8. Hanumata 13. Khairabhera 2
Total 6            7 13       8         1       13 22Projects which have not actually attained 90% potential :1. Jurala (Major)-Andhra Pradesh2. Upper Indravati (Major)-Orissa3. Mahi Bajaj Sagar (Major)-Rajasthan4. Phahumara (Medium)-Assam5. Patgoan (Medium)-Maharashtra6. Igo-phey (Medium)-Jammu & Kashmir

59
APPENDIX IV
(Para 7.16)
STATUS OF COMPLETION OF PROJECTS UNDER AIBP
A. Completed Projects
1. Projects Completed on Schedule
Sl.No. State/Project Year of Entry Year of Completion
 12 3 4
Andhra Pradesh
1. Cheyyeru (Annamaya) (FTP) 2001-02 2003-04
Bihar
2. Bilasi Reservoir 1997-98 2001-02
Gujarat
3. Jhuj 1996-97 2000-01
4. Sipu 1996-97 2000-01
5. Damanganga 1997-98 2001-02
6. Karjan 1997-98 2001-02
7. Sukhi 1997-98 2001-02
8. Deo 1997-98 2001-02
9. Watrak 1997-98 2001-02
10. Harnav-II 1996-97 2000-01
11. Umaria 1996-97 2000-01
Karnataka
12. Maskinallah 2002-03 2003-04
Madhya Pradesh
13. Urmil RBC 2000-01 2004-05
14. Banjar 2000-01 2004-05

60
12 3 4
Maharashtra
15. Jayakwadi Stage-II 2000-01 2004-05
16. Kadvi (FTP) 2002-03 2004-05
17. Kasari (FTP) 2002-03 2004-05
18. Kasarsai (FTP) 2002-03 2004-05
19. Jawalgaon (FTP) 2002-03 2004-05
20. Khadakwasla (FTP) 2002-03 2004-05
Orissa
21. Improvement to Sason Canal 2002-03 2004-05
System (FTP)
22. Improvement to Salki Irrigation 2003-04 2004-05
(FTP)
Punjab
23. Ranjit Sagar Dam 1996-97 2000-01
Rajasthan
24. Jaisamand (Modernisation) 1996-97 2000-01
25. Gambhiri (Modernisation) 1998-99 2002-03
26. Chhapi (FTP) 2002-03 2004-05
27. Panchana (FTP) 2002-03 2004-05
Uttar Pradesh
28. Sarda Sahayak 1996-97 2000-01
29. Gyanpur Pump Canal 1999-2000 2003-04
30. Rajghat Dam 1996-97 2000-01
31. Gunta Nala Dam 1996-97 2000-01
32. Upper Ganga Canal including 2001-02 2003-04
Madhya Ganga Canal (FTP)
West Bengal
33. Kangsabati 1997-98 2001-02

61
2. Projects completed after due date
Sl.No. State/Project Year of Entry Scheduled year Year of
of Completion Completion
12 3 4 5
Andhra Pradesh
34. Sriramsagar St. I (FTP) 2001-02 2003-04 2005-06
35. Madduvalasa (FTP) 2001-02 2003-04 2005-06
36. Nagarjunasagar (FTP) 2001-02 2003-04 2005-06
Assam
37. Rupahi 1996-97 2000-01 2001-02
38. Boradikarai 1997-98 2001-02 2004-05
Chhattisgarh
39. Sivnath Diversion 1997-98 2001-02 2002-03
Haryana
40. Gurgaon Canal 1996-97 2000-01 2003-04
Jharkhand
41. Latratu 1997-98 2001-02 2002-03
42. Tapkara Reservoir 1997-98 2001-02 2002-03
Kerala
43. Kallada 1996-97 2000-01 2004-05
Madhya Pradesh
44. Upper Wainganga 1996-97 2000-01 2002-03
Maharashtra
45. Upper Tapi 1997-98 2001-02 2004-05
46. Wan 1998-99 2002-03 2005-06
47. Vishnupuri 2000-01 2004-05 2005-06
Orissa
48. Upper Kolab (KBK) 1997-98 2001-02 2004-05
49. Potteru (KBK) (FTP) 2001-02 2003-04 2004-05
Uttar Pradesh
50. Providing Kharif Channel in 1996-97 2000-01 2004-05
H.K. Doab

62
B. Ongoing Projects
1. Projects on Schedule
Sl.No. State/Project Year of Entry Scheduled Year
of Completion
12 3 4
Andhra Pradesh
51. Vamsdhara St.-II Ph I 2003-04 2007-08
52. FFC of SRSP 2005-06 2009-10
53. SRSP St. II 2005-06 2009-10
54. Gundlakdamma (FTP) 2005-06 2007-08
55. Tarakarama Thirtha Sagaram (FTP) 2005-06 2007-08
56. Swarnamukhi (FTP) 2005-06 2007-08
57. Palemvagu (FTP) 2005-06 2007-08
58. Thotapally Barrage (FTP) 2005-06 2007-08
Chhattisgarh
59. Kosarteda 2002-03 2006-07
60. Mahanadi Res. Pr. 2005-06 2009-10
Gujarat
61. Bhadar-II 2002-03 2006-07
Jharkhand
62. Upper Sankh 2004-05 2008-09
63. Panchkhero 2004-05 2008-09
Madhya Pradesh
64. Bawanthadi (IS) 2003-04 2007-08
65. Mahan 2003-04 2007-08
66. Omkareshwar 2003-04 2007-08
Maharashtra
Bawanthadi (IS) 2004-05 2008-09
67. Krishna 2005-06 2009-10
68. Kukadi 2005-06 2009-10
69. Upper Manar 2002-03 2006-07
70. Hatwane 2002-03 2006-07
71. Chaskaman 2002-03 2006-07
72. Upper Pen Ganga 2004-05 2008-09

63
12 3 4
73. Lower Dudhna 2005-06 2009-10
74. Warna 2005-06 2009-10
Tillari (IS) 2005-06 2009-10
75. Patgaon (FTP) 2004-05 2006-07
76. Shivna Takli (FTP) 2005-06 2007-08
77. Madan Tank (FTP) 2005-06 2007-08
78. Dongargaon (FTP) 2005-06 2007-08
79. Amravati (FTP) 2005-06 2007-08
80. Gul (FTP) 2005-06 2007-08
Manipur
81. Dolaithabi Barrage 2002-03 2006-07
Orissa
82. Telengiri (KBK) 2003-04 2007-08
83. RET Irrigation (KBK) 2003-04 2007-08
84. Kanupur 2003-04 2007-08
85. Chheligada Dam 2003-04 2007-08
Punjab
86. Remodelling of UBDC (FTP) 2005-06 2007-08
87. Kandi Canal Extension (Ph. II) (FTP) 2005-06 2007-08
Uttar Pradesh
88. Mod. Agra Canal 2002-03 2006-07
89. Jarauli Pump Canal 2003-04 2007-08
90. Mod. of Lachhura Dam 2005-06 2009-10
2. Projects likely to be delayed by One Year
Assam
91. Mod. of Jamuna Irr. 2001-02 2005-06
Jammu & Kashmir
92. Mod. of Zaingir Canal 2001-02 2005-06
93. Rafiabad High Lift Irr. 2001-02 2005-06
Karnataka
94. Upper Krishna St. II 2001-02 2005-06
95. Gandori Nala 2001-02 2005-06
Punjab
96. Shahpur Kandi 2001-02 2005-06

64
12 34
Rajasthan
97. Mod. of Gang Canal 2003-04 2005-06
West Bengal
98. Subernrekha Barrage 2001-02 2005-06
3. Projects likely to be delayed by Two Years
Andhra Pradesh
99. Gundalavagu 2000-01 2004-05
100. Maddigedda 2000-01 2004-05
101. Kanupur Canal* 2000-01 2004-05
102. Yerrakalva Res. 2000-01 2004-05
Bihar
103. Batane 2000-01 2004-05
Chhattisgarh
104. Hasdeo Bango (Ph.-III) (FTP) 2002-03 2004-05
105. Barnai (FTP) 2002-03 2004-05
Goa
106. Tillari 2000-01 2004-05
Gujarat
107. Aji-IV 2000-01 2004-05
108. Ozat-II 2000-01 2004-05
109. Brahmini-II 2000-01 2004-05
Himachal Pradesh
110. Sidhata 2000-01 2004-05
111. Changer Lift Irr. Project 2000-01 2004-05
Jammu & Kashmir
112. Rajpora Lift 2000-01 2004-05
113. Tral Lift 2000-01 2004-05
114. Igophey Irr. Pr. 2000-01 2004-05
Karnataka
115. Hirehalla (FTP) 2002-03 2004-05
116. Karanja (FTP) 2002-03 2004-05
Kerala
117. Muvattupuzha 2000-01 2004-05

65
12 3 4
Madhya Pradesh
118. Mahi 2000-01 2004-05
119. Barairpur LBC 2000-01 2004-05
Maharashtra
120. Bahula 2000-01 2004-05
121. Kumbhi (FTP) 2002-03 2004-05
Meghalaya
122. Rangai Valley 2000-01 2004-05
Orissa
123. Salandi Left Main Canal-Ambahata 2002-03 2004-05
(FTP)
Punjab
124. Irrigation to H.P . below Talwara 2000-01 2004-05
Uttar Pradesh
125. Rajghat Canal 2000-01 2004-05
West Bengal
126. Tatko 2000-01 2004-05
127. Patloi 2000-01 2004-05
128. Hanumata 2000-01 2004-05
4. Projects likely to be delayed by Three Years
Andhra Pradesh
129. Somasila (FTP) 2001-02 2003-04
Chhattisgarh
130. Jonk Diversion 1999-2000 2003-04
Gujarat
131. Sardar Sarovar (FTP) 2001-02 2003-04
Jammu & Kashmir
132. Mod. of Ranbir Canal 1999-2000 2003-04
133. Mod. of New Pratap Canal 1999-2000 2003-04
134. Mod. of Kathua Canal 1999-2000 2003-04
Madhya Pradesh
135. Sindh Phase I 1999-2000 2003-04
136. Bargi Diversion (FTP) 2001-02 2003-04
Orissa
137. Lower Indra (KBK) 1999-2000 2003-04

66
12 3 4
138. Lower Suktel (KBK) 1999-2000 2003-04
139. Rengali ((FTP) 2001-02 2003-04
140. Subernarekha (FTP) 2001-02 2003-04
141. Naraj Barrage (FTP) 2001-02 2003-04
Rajasthan
142. Mahi Bajaj Sagar 1999-2000 2003-04
Uttar Pradesh
143. Tehri 1999-2000 2003-04
144. Eastern Ganga Canal 1999-2000 2003-04
5. Projects likely to be delayed by Four Years
Bihar
145. Sone Modernisation 1998-99 2002-03
Madhya Pradesh
Rajghat dam 1998-99 2002-03
146. Sindh Phase II 1998-99 2002-03
Orissa
147. Titlagarh St-II (KBK) 1998-99 2002-03
Rajasthan
148. Bilaspur* 1998-99 2002-03
149. Narmada Canal 1998-99 2002-03
150. Chauli 1998-99 2002-03
6. Projects likely to be delayed by Five Years
Andhra Pradesh
151. Jurala 1997-98 2001-02
Assam
152. Burhi Dihing 1997-98 2001-02
153. Intg. Irr. Scheme in Kallong Basin 1997-98 2001-02
Bihar
Bansagar 1997-98 2001-02
154. Orni Reservoir 1997-98 2001-02
Jharkhand
155. Gumani 1997-98 2001-02
156. Toraj* 1997-98 2001-02
157. Kansjore 1997-98 2001-02

67
12 3 4
158. Sonua 1997-98 2001-02
159. Surangi 1997-98 2001-02
Goa
160. Salauli 1997-98 2001-02
Haryana
161. J.L.N. Lift Irrigation* 1997-98 2001-02
Himachal Pradesh
162. Shahnehar Irr. Project 1997-98 2001-02
Karnataka
163. Ghataprabha 1997-98 2001-02
Maharashtra
164. Bhima* 1997-98 2001-02
165. Upper Wardha 1997-98 2001-02
Manipur
166. Thoubal 1997-98 2001-02
Rajasthan
167. IGNP Stage-II 1997-98 2001-02
Uttar Pradesh
168. Bansagar Canal 1997-98 2001-02
169. Lakhwar Vyasi* 1997-98 2001-02
West Bengal
170. Mod. Barrage and Irrigation System of 1997-98 2001-02
DVC
7. Projects likely to be delayed by Six Years
Assam
171. Pahumara 1996-97 2000-01
172. Hawaipur lift 1996-97 2000-01
173. Dhansiri 1996-97 2000-01
174. Champamati 1996-97 2000-01
175. Borolia 1996-97 2000-01
176. Kallonga* 1996-97 2000-01

68
12 3 4
Bihar
177. Western Kosi 1996-97 2000-01
178. Upper Kiul 1996-97 2000-01
179. Durgawati 1996-97 2000-01
Gujarat
180. Mukteshwar 1996-97 2000-01
Haryana
181. WRCP 1996-97 2000-01
Jammu & Kashmir
182. Marwal Lift* 1996-97 2000-01
183. Lethpora Lift 1996-97 2000-01
184. Koil Lift* 1996-97 2000-01
Karnataka
185. Upper Krishna St. I 1996-97 2000-01
186. Malaprabha 1996-97 2000-01
Madhya Pradesh
187. Indira Sagar 1996-97 2000-01
188. Bansagar 1996-97 2000-01
Maharashtra
189. Gosikhurd 1996-97 2000-01
190. Surya* 1996-97 2000-01
191. Waghur 1996-97 2000-01
Manipur
192. Khuga 1996-97 2000-01
Orissa
193. Upper Indravati (KBK) 1996-97 2000-01
194. Anandpur Barr. 1996-97 2000-01
Tamil Nadu
195. WRCP* 1996-97 2000-01

69
12 3 4
Tripura
196. Manu 1996-97 2000-01
197. Gumti 1996-97 2000-01
198. Khowai 1996-97 2000-01
Uttar Pradesh
199. Saryu Nahar 1996-97 2000-01
West Bengal
200. Teesta Barrage 1996-97 2000-01
IS-Inter State.
FTP-Fast Track Programme.
*-11 Projects deferred by the States.

70
APPENDIX V
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES (2006-2007) HELD
ON WEDNESDAY, 6 DECEMBER 2006
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1545 hours in Committee
Room No. ‘139’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri R. Sambasiva Rao — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Rajen Gohain
3. Smt. Preneet Kaur
4. Shri Raghuveer Singh Kaushal
5. Shri Shankhlal Majhi
6. Shri Mukeem Mohammad
7. Shri Abu Ayes Mondal
8. Shri Lonappan Nambadan
9. Dr. Arun Kumar Sarma
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Indramoni Bora
11. Shri K.E. Ismail
12. Shri K.P .K. Kumaran
13. Prof. P .J. Kurien
14. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.S. Chera — Director
2. Shri P .V .L.N. Murthy — Under Secretary

71
***Minutes in respect of other matters kept separately.
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to
the sitting of the Committee.
2. The Hon’ble Chairman then welcomed Shri Abu Ayes Mondal,
M.P ., Lok Sabha who attended the sitting of the Committee for the
first time after his nomination on 28 November, 2006 to serve as a
Member of the Committee.
3. *** *** ***
4. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration
Memorandum No. 2 and the Draft Report on Action Taken by the
Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in their
Fifth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2006-
2007) of the Ministry of Water Resources. After some discussion, the
Committee adopted the Report with certain changes.
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the
above draft Action Taken Report on the basis of factual verification
from the Ministry of Water Resources and to present the same to both
the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned.

72
APPENDIX VI
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTH
REPORT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE
(i) Total number of Recommendations/Observations 26
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government
Para Nos. 1.19, 1.26, 1.30, 2.8, 2.15, 2.19, 3.17,
3.24, 4.8, 4.18, 4.19, 5.34, 5.48, 6.8, 7.16, 7.21
and 7.27
Total 17
Percentage 65.38%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies
Para Nos. 1.20, 3.12, 4.10 and 5.39
Total 4
Percentage 15.38%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee
Para Nos. 2.12, 5.15 and 5.24
Total 3
Percentage 11.53%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are
still awaited
Para Nos. 3.9 and 7.26
Total 2
Percentage 7.69%