 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
                                    (2004-05) 
2
 
 
 
                  FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
    MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES  
 
 
 
    DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2004-2005)  
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the First Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources} 
 
 
 
 
SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
December, 2004/Pausa, 1926 (Saka) 

 
SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2004-05) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
 (2004-2005) 
 
(Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
  contained in the First Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the  
Standing Committee on Water Resources)  
 
 
                           Presented to Lok Sabha on  23.12.04  
                                                   Laid   in  Rajya  Sabha  on  23.12.04 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2004/Pausa, 1926 (Saka) 

 
CONTENTS 
            
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2004-05) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  
CHAPTER I   Report  
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observa tions which have been 
accepted by the Government  
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the  
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government’s replies  
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observa tions in respect of  
which replies of the Government have not been  
accepted by the Committee  
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Observati ons in respect of which  
final replies of the Government are still awaited  
 
APPENDICES 
 
I. Copy of D.O. Letter No. 18/35/2002-GW-II, dated 02  
September 2004 from Additional Secretary, Ministry of  
Water Resources to Advisor(WR), Planning Commission 
 
II. Copy of D.O. Letter NO. 2-10/2001-CAD, dated 30 September  
2004 from Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources to Chief   
Secretaries of States 
 
III. Copy of Letter No. 2/5/2004-ER/4067, dated 01 November  
 2004 from Ministry of Water Resources to Planning  
Commission 
 
IV. Minutes of the Sixth sitting of the Committee held on  
20 December, 2004  
 
V. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the   
Recommendations/Observations contained in the First  
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)of the Committee  

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2004-05) 
 
  Shri R. Sambasiva Rao  -  Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Bhanwar Singh Dangawas 
3. Shri BikramKeshari Deo 
4. Shri Rajen Gohain 
5. Dr. M.Jagannath 
6. Smt.Preneet Kaur 
7. Shri Raghuveer Singh Kaushal  
8. Smt. Manorama Madhavraj 
9. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
10. Shri Munshiram 
11. Shri Lonappan Nambadan 
12. Shri Prabodh Panda 
13. Shri  Harilal. M. Patel 
14. Shri Laxmanrao Patil 
15. Shri Kamla Prasad Rawat 
16. Smt. Minati Sen 
17. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
18. Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh 
          *19. Shri Sita Ram Yadav 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Shri Indramoni Bora 
        **23. Shri Manoj Bhattacharya 
24. Shri Ajay Singh Chautala  
25. Smt. Sushree Devi 
26. Shri K. Karunakaran 
27. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
28. Shri Jaswant Singh 
29. Shri Sharad Yadav 
      ***30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
*Nominated w.e.f. 16.11.2004 
** Nominated w.e.f. 05.09.2004 
*** Nomination of Shri Jesudasu Seelam, M.P., changed by Chairman, Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 31 August, 2004 

 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri John Joseph   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri N.K. Sapra    - Joint Secretary 
 3. Shri A.S. Chera   - Deputy Secretary 
 4. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy   - Under Secretary 
5. Shri Ramesh Lal   - Committee Officer  

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Standing Comm ittee on Water Resources (2004-05) having 
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the 
Second Report on the Action Ta ken by Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the First Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Standing Committee on Water Resources  (2004-05) on Demands  for Grants (2004-
2005) of the Ministry of Water Resources.  
 
2. The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 23 August, 2004.  The replies of 
the Government to all the recommendations co ntained in the Report were received on 07 
December, 2004. 
 
3. The replies of the Government were ex amined and the Report was considered and 
adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 20 December, 2004. 
  
4. An analysis of the Action Take n by the Government on the    
recommendations/observations contained in the First Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee is given in Appendix-V. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;               R. SAMBASIVA RAO, 
21 December, 2004                            Chairman, 
30 Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka)        Standing Committee on Water Resources 
  
  

 
 
                                                                                           
                  
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the recommendati ons contained in their First Report on 
Demands for Grants(2004-05) of  the Ministry of Water Resources which was presented 
to Lok Sabha on 23 August 2004. 
2. Action taken notes were received from th e Government in re spect of all the 17 
recommendations/observations of the Comm ittee which have been categorised as 
follows:- 
 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been  accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Para Nos. 2.9, 2.10, 2.18, 2.24, 3.18, 3.19, 5.7, 5.14, 5.19, 6.18 and 6.19 
        ( T o t a l  –  1 1 )  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations wh ich the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: 
 
Para Nos. 5.24 and 5.31  
        ( T o t a l - 2 )  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in  respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee: 
 
Para Nos. 1.15, 1.16 and 5.42 
         ( T o t a l - 3 )  
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in re spect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
 
Para No.4.10  
         ( T o t a l - 1 )  
3. The Committee desire that final reply in respect of the 
recommendation/observation for which only interim reply has been given by the 
Government should be furnished to th e Committee within three months of the 
presentation of the Report. 

 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the recommendations/observations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
A.Inadequate Plan allocation for the Ministry of Water Resources for 2004-05 
(Recommendation Para Nos.1.15 and 1.16) 
5. ………The Committee were constrained to observe that though the Ministry had  
proposed a Plan allocation of Rs. 636.61 cror e  for the  year 2004- 2005,  the Planning 
Commission  allocated Rs.  580.00 crore  whic h  was Rs. 56.61 crore  less than  the 
proposed allocation.  The allocations for th e Ministry need to be stepped up in 
consonance with the commitment of the G overnment to give priority to water 
management…………..The Committee had recommended the Ministry to take up the 
matter  with the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance  for enhancing  the 
Plan allocation adequately at the Revise d Estimates stage  so that all  ongoing 
schemes/projects  were completed  within the scheduled time-frame to avoid  time and 
cost over-runs.   They were of the consid ered view that while the schemes/programmes 
being implemented by the Government requi re  huge allocations by the Planning 
Commission and the Ministry of Finance, it was also incumbent upon  the Ministry to 
take urgent steps to address and overcome the problems of non-approvals of schemes, 
procedural delays and  non-submission of utilization certificates by the States. 
6. The Ministry have  in their action taken reply stated that the Ministry of Water 
Resources deals with a subject matter in the State List sector and almost half of its annual 
budget allocation relate to Centrally Sponsor ed Schemes (CSS).  Expenditure on those 
schemes depends on the utilizati on of grants already released  and requirements projected 
by States.  Public investments in the water reso urces sector are mainly in the State Sector 
– reflected in the plans of respective Stat es.  It has not been possible to upscale 

 
expenditure and consequently annual budget al locations, in regard to CSS, because of 
lack of utilization and demand at State leve ls.  In the North-East (Assam), some major 
works proposed to be undertaken by Brahmaput ra Board directly as a Central Sector 
Scheme, the budget allocations could not be utilized mainly because of non-resolution of 
local issues which are in the domain of th e State Government.  Efforts are on, however, 
to work with the State Governments to ensure utilization of grants already released and to 
identify areas where central assistance could be channelized more fruitfully for better 
management of water resources issues. 
7. The Committee are not satisfied with th e incomplete reply which only reveals 
what is a known fact that the Ministry deal with a subject which is in the domain of 
States under the scheme of distribution of legislative powers between the Union and 
the State under Article 246 of the Constitution  of India.   While it is stated by the 
Ministry that expenditure on the schemes depends on the utilization of grants 
already released and requiremen ts projected by the States, the reply is silent on the 
steps taken by the Government on the re quirement of additional funds at the RE 
stage as was felt by them in their First Re port.  The admission by the Ministry that 
it has not been possible to upscale ex penditure and consequently annual budget 
allocations because of lack of utilization and demand at the Stat e level reveals that 
the lesser Plan allocation at Rs. 580 crore in BE 2004-05 by the Planning 
Commission as against Rs. 636.61 crore proposed  by the Ministry was justified on 
similar grounds.  The Committee further note that the reply is silent on the steps 
taken or proposed to be taken to overcome the problems of non approvals of 
schemes, procedural delays and non-s ubmission of utilization certificates by 

 
States/UT Governments.  They  expect the replies to their 
recommendations/observations are complete and proper without overstating the 
obvious.  The Committee, therefore, de sire that a time-frame be evolved for 
utilization of grants, submission of utiliz ation certificates and completion of on-
going projects to ensure effective channeliz ation of scarce resou rces fruitfully for 
managing the available water resources in the best possible manner.  The 
Committee also desire to be apprised of the action taken in the matter at the earliest. 
 
B.Major and Medium Irrigation Projects 
(Recommendation Para Nos. 2.9 and 2.10) 
 
8. ………..The Committee were perturbed to note that some irrigation projects taken 
up during Second and Third Plans remained in complete and desired the Government to 
identify all the completed projects  which ha d not been declared as closed by the State 
Governments only with the intention of s ecuring funds  for  maintenance  of the 
completed  portion of works for which the fund s under this sector were not envisaged.  
This was all the more pertinent when  viewed  in the context of the submission of the 
Ministry  that implementation of the major  and medium  projects was a State matter for 
which the States receive separate allocations under  the State Plans in addition to the 
funds released by Ministry of  Finance under AIBP…….. 
9. The Ministry has, in thei r action taken reply, stated that the projects taken up 
during the Second and Third Plans have already achieved about 90% or more of the 
envisaged potential.  As the State Government s were not declaring th e irrigation projects 
as completed for their own reasons, the Working Group on Major and Medium Irrigation 
Programmes for Tenth Five Year Plan has recommended that continuing old irrigation 

 
projects which have already achieved 90% or more of the ultimate potential should be 
treated as completed.  The Ministry/Central  Water Commission is in the process of 
identifying such projects in consultation with the States.  
 Irrigation being a State s ubject, the responsibility for executing irrgation projects 
rests with the State Governments.  The role of the Central Government is advisory in 
nature.  However, the Central Water Comm ission brings out the bottlenecks faced in 
execution of the projects with suggestions for remedial action by the States in their 
monitoring reports. 
10. The Committee note that though irrigation is a State subject and the 
responsibility for executing irrigation projects rests with the State/UT Governments 
and that the role of the Union Government is advisory in nature, it needs to be 
emphasized here that irrigation is an important sector and large sums out of public 
exchequer are being spent on this sector.  It, therefore, becomes the onerous duty of 
all the concerned to ensure that optimum results are achieved by timely completion 
of projects within the approved cost a nd time schedules.  The Committee further 
note that the Working Group on Major and Medium Irrigation Programmes for the 
Tenth Five Year Plan recommended that old irrigation projects which attained 90% 
or more of ultimate potential be treated as completed.  Also, th e Ministry of Water 
Resources/Central Water Commission is no w in the process of identifying such 
projects in consultation with the States/UTs, though declaring an irrigation project 
as completed is within the purview of the State/UT Governments. 
 In view of the above recommendation  of the Working Group on Major and 
Medium Irrigation Projects and as already recommended by the Committee in their 

 
First Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05), the Committee desire the Ministry 
to take urgent steps to identify within th ree months all the projec ts which are likely 
to attain 90% or more of the ultimate potential.  The Committee recommend all 
such projects to be treated as completed irrespective of an otherwise declaration by 
the State Governments.  Further, the Pl anning Commission and the Ministry of 
Finance and Water Resources, as the case may be, stop further flow of funds to such 
projects.  The Committee would like to be ap prised of the steps taken in this regard 
within three months of the presentation of this Report.  
 
C.Command Area Development (CAD) Programme 
(Recommendation Para No.4.10) 
 
11. ….The Committee noted that CAD progr amme had been  restructured and 
renamed as CADWM scheme during 2004-07 for the remaining period of the Tenth 
Plan… Under the restructured programme, State Governments had been advised to 
submit fresh DPRs of all projects by th e end of August 2004 indicating, inter-alia, time-
frame, budget and the action plan etc. for completion of CAD works…… The Committee 
had further recommended that upon receip t of fresh DPRs, the Government should 
complete all other essential formalities in a time-bound manner so as to make the projects 
under CADWM workable to enable realisation of the targeted util ization of irrigation 
potential created as a result thereof. 
12. In their action taken reply the Ministry has stated that all the State Governments 
implementing the Command Area Developm ent and Water Management Programme 
have been reminded through a D.O. lette r dated 30 September 2004 from Secretary, 
Ministry of Water Resources addressed to  the Chief Secretaries of all State/UT 

 
Governments to stick to the time frame for submission of DPRs.   Further necessary 
action to chalk out the action plan for comple ting various CAD activities in the projects 
shall be taken as soon as DPRs of all the projects are received from all the States. 
13. The Committee are unhappy with the reply  as the Ministry is merely acting 
as a go-between the Committee and the implementing agencies, i.e. the State/UT 
Governments in simply reminding them afte r the expiry of the earlier deadline to 
stick to the time frame for submission  of DPRs under CADWM without giving a 
new deadline would not suffice.  Also, the re ply of the Government does not indicate 
as to any of the States having submitted fresh DPRs of projects under CADWM.  
The Committee are of the opinion that Government needs to chalk out in advance 
the action plan for completion of various CAD activities so that as soon as the DPR 
of a project from a State is received in  the Ministry/Central Water Commission, 
further action for implementing the project gets underway without any loss of time.  
The Committee, therefore, desi re the Government to set a definite time-frame for 
submission of fresh DPRs of projects by States and in an y case not later than end of 
March 2005 so that the projects could at le ast get implemented in the next fiscal 
year.  The Committee would like to be in formed of the advance planning by the 
Ministry in this regard at the earliest. 
 
D.Critical Anti-Erosion Works in Coastal and other than Ganga Basin States 
(Recommendation Para No. 5.24) 
 
14. The  Committee had noted that a scheme  of  critical anti-erosion works  in coastal 
and other than Ganga basin States  was clea red  by the Planning Commission in February 
2004 to be taken up in two parts on pilot basis at a cost of Rs. 20.64 crore.  Approval  for 

 
the first part had come through.  The second part  of anti-river  erosion  works and raising 
embankments  in States  of Andhra Pradesh, Kerala  and Orissa had not been approved so 
as to avoid proliferation of new Centrally Sponsored Scheme s in Tenth Plan and it was 
suggested that they be taken up by the concerned States in their State Plan…...  The 
Committee were dismayed to note that lack of uniformity, as certain States had been 
included under the Scheme to the exclusion of States like Andhra Pradesh, Goa and 
Gujarat on the pretext that these States coul d  approach  the Pla nning   Commission 
directly for release of f unds under additional Central as sistance.  The Committee had 
desired that the second part of the Sche me may also be got cleared by the Planning 
Commission at the earliest to avoid damages caused by river erosion in the States of 
Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and Orissa……. 
15. The Ministry has in its action taken reply stated that the Planning Commission has 
been requested on 1 November 2004 to recons ider the new Centrally Sponsored Scheme, 
“Critical Anti River Erosion Works/Raising and Strengthening of embankments in other 
than Ganga Basin States” estimated to co st Rs.24.80 crore for approval by the Full 
Planning Commission for implementation in the Tenth Plan. 
16. The Committee are happy to note that  on their recommendation the Ministry 
has requested the Planning Commission to reconsider the new Centrally Sponsored 
Schemes ‘Critical Anti River Erosion Works/Raising and Strengthening of 
embankments in other than Ganga Basin States’ estimated to cost Rs. 24.80 crore 
for approval by the full Planning Commission for implementation in the Tenth Plan.  
The Committee are of the view that the Mini stry need to impress upon the Planning 
Commission not only to clear the scheme early for implementation in the Tenth Plan 

 
but also avoid applying different yardsticks for similar projects in different States so 
that all the affected States could be benefited under the Scheme. 
 
E.Pagladiya Dam Project 
(Recommendation Para No. 5.42) 
 
17. ………The Committee were unhappy to note that the construction work on  
Pagladiya Dam Project had been  delayed  inordinately and while the Revised Cost 
Estimates  worked out were awaiting approva l of PIB and CCEA, the project cost had 
almost doubled from Rs. 542.90 crore to Rs. 1049.16 crore.   The Committee  had 
recommended the Government to pursue the matte r vigorously  for  early  clearance by 
PIB and CCEA   and simultaneously  make all out efforts  to get the land for construction 
of the Dam Project from the Assam  Government for Rehabilitation and Resettlement  
purposes at  the earliest possible so that  the Pagladiya Dam Project was constructed 
without any further time and cost over-run. 
18. The Ministry in their action taken reply has stated that the Pagladiya Dam Project 
could not make much headway due to secu rity related problems and non-handing over of 
the land by the State Government.  The PI B meeting scheduled to be held on 22.09.2004 
was postponed as the State Government is yet to carry out the Zirat Survey (property 
evaluation).  Discussions are being held on re gular basis with the Government of Assam 
on the Zirat Survey and other sensitive pending issues for implementation of Pagladiya 
Dam Project on which action is to be taken by the State Government. 
19. It is disconcerting to ob serve the casual approach of the Ministry with regard 
to overcoming the problems being encountered in the construction of Pagladiya 
Dam Project as well as furnishing the same  reply to the Committee as given at the 

 
time of examination of Demands for Gran ts (2004-05) by the Mi nistry in August 
2004.  A perusal of the Government’s reply re veals that nothing has moved as far as 
the project is concerned.  The reply makes no mention of the progress made by the 
Water Resources Department of the Govern ment of Assam after it was nominated 
as the nodal Department for coordination with other Departments in the State in 
respect of this project.  Further, th e Committee had recommended the Ministry to 
pursue the matter vigorously for early clea rance of the project by PIB and CCEA 
on which the Ministry has preferred to me ntion only about a meeting scheduled for 
22 September 2004 which was postponed.  No new date for the same has been 
indicated in the reply.  The Committee, therefore, advise the Ministry to be more 
careful while furnishing the replies to them, besides reiterating their earlier 
recommendation for expeditious completion of the Pagladiya Dam Project. 
 
 

 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendations/Observations (Para No.2.9 and 2.10) 
 The Committee observe that  major and medium irrigation projects have been 
allocated  huge  quantum of f unds year after year for  the last many decades.  They are 
distressed to note that as on date, ther e are 162  major and 221 medium  ongoing  
irrigation projects pending  completion in different States  of the country.  It is perturbing 
 to note that  4 major Irrigat ion projects 2 in Karnataka  and one each in Andhra Pradesh  
and Maharastra and  2 medium  irrigation  proj ects in Andhra Pradesh    taken up  during  
the Second Plan and the Third Plan respec tively are still pending for completion. The 
Committee are unable to accept the plea of the Ministry that  paucity  of funds is the main 
constraint  for delay in completion of these projects.   
The Committee are  seriously concerned to note the  tardy pace of execution  of 
irrigation projects,  and recomm end the Ministry to resolve expeditiously  all causative 
factors  for delay in completion as identified by them to  ensure completion of  all these 
projects  within their scheduled time  and cost  limits  so that the long awaited  benefits  
reach  the people.  
 They further desire  the Government  to identify all the completed projects  which 
have not been declared as closed by the State Governments only w ith the intention of 
securing funds  for  maintenance  of the co mpleted  portion of works for which the funds 
under this sector ar e not envisaged.  This is  all the more pertinent when  viewed  in the 
context of the submission of the Ministry  th at implementation of the major  and medium  
projects is a State matter for which the States receive separate allocations under  the State 

 
Plans in addition to the funds released by Ministry of  Finance under AIBP.   The 
Committee desire to be apprised of the  action taken in the matter. 
 Further, the Committee note that  the targets  set for irrigation potential 
created/utilized  during th e Ninth Plan under major and medium irrigation projects was 
9.81 m. ha and  8.71 m. ha, while the achieve ment for the same was 4.10 m. ha. and 2.60 
m. ha. which resulted in abysmal short fall of 58 % and   70 % respectively.  Surprisingly, 
despite  a shortfall of 58% and 70% in attain ing the target set for creation/utilization of 
irrigation potential during the Ninth Plan, Government have set a highe r target of 9.9 m. 
ha. for creation of irrigation potential  dur ing the Tenth Plan. Obviously, the target 
appears to be  difficult if not unattainable proposition.   The Committee would like to  
share the optimism of the Ministry  for se tting up such an ambitious target and the 
measures taken or contemplated to attaint the target. 
Reply of the Government 
   As reported by the State Governments, the status of major/medium irrigation 
projects started during second and third Five Year Plans is given in the table below:-      
                                                                                                                       ( % ) 
Progress State Sl.No. Project Category When 
Started 
(Plan) Financial Physical 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
1. Nagarjunasagar Major II 86 93 
2. Thandava 
Reservoir 
Medium III 75 95  
3. Kanupur Canal Medium III 70 93 
Karnataka 4. Malaprabha Major III 87 86 
 5. TBHLC(IS) Major II 100 90 
Maharashtra 6. Bhima Major III 64 84 
 

 
  It can be seen that these projects have already achieved near about 90% or more than 
90% of the envisaged potenti al.  As the State Governments were not declaring the 
irrigation projects as comple ted for their own reasons, th e working Group on Major and 
Medium Irrigation Programme for Tenth Five Year Plan has recommended that 
continuing old irrigation projects which have  already achieved 90% or more of the 
ultimate potential should be treated as complete d.  Hence the status of the above projects 
may be taken as completed based on the above recommendation. 
 Irrigation being a State s ubject, the responsibility for executing irrigation projects 
rests with the State Governments.  The role of the Central Government is advisory in 
nature.  The Ministry of Water Resources  is extending all th e possible help for 
expeditious resolution of issues namely inter-State matters, environmental clearance, 
financial assistance through AIBP, etc.  However, issues like land acquisition, contractual 
problems, R & R Plan, court litigation, law and order problems, change in scope of 
project, etc are in the domain of the States and the role of Central Government is very 
much limited. However, the Central Water Commission brings out the bottlenecks faced 
in execution of the projects with suggestions  for remedial action by the States in their 
monitoring reports.  The progress of the proj ects and the problems faced by the States on 
completion as per schedule are reviewed in the meetings taken by the Ministry of Water 
Resources and Central Water Commission. 
 As already stated the working Group on Major and Medium Irrigation Programme 
for the Tenth Five Year Pl an recommended that continui ng old projects which have 
already achieved 90% on more of the ultimat e potential should be considered as 
completed projects. So, the Ministry of Water Resources/Central Water Commission is in 

 
the process of identifying such projects in  consultation with the States. However, 
declaring an irrigation project as completed is within the purview of the State 
Governments. 
 The working Group on Major and Medium  irrigation Programme for the Tenth 
Five Year Plan recommended Rs. 1,07,327  crore as outlay required in the  State Plan for 
Tenth Five Year Plan for cr eation of irrigation potential of 11.14 million hectare. Target 
of 11.14 million hectare was taken from the targets provided by the State Governments in 
their Plan proposals.  As the Planning Commission agreed for reduced outlay of 
Rs.71213 crore for this sector during X plan, target for creation of irrigation potential was 
also reduced proportionately to 9.9 million hectare. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendations/Observations (Para No.2.18) 
The Committee note that NWDA is e ngaged in conducting water balance and 
other related studies on a scientific basis for optimum utilization of available water 
resources in the country.   They note that  these studies are th e pre-requisite for 
preparation of feasibility reports of water tran sfer links which in turn  form the basis for 
preparation of DPRs of various projects.  NWDA completed water balance studies of 137 
basins/sub-basins, toposheet and  storage capacity studies of the identified reservoirs, 36 
water transfer links en route to preparation of pre-FRs of 31 link projects and 8 FRs of 
link projects under the peninsul ar and Himalayan Rivers development components of the 

 
national perspective plan during 2003-04.  During 2004-05,  FRs of another 7 links under 
the above components is proposed to be completed by March, 2005. 
 The Committee further note that for prep aration of DPR of Ken-Betwa link and 
Parbbti-Kalisindh-Chambal link projects, a pr ovision of Rs.14 crore has been earmarked 
out of Rs.35 crore allocated for NWDA in BE 2004-05.  However, the Committee are 
constrained to observe that though the FR of Ken-Betwa link was completed in 
November, 1996, the project is still in a nascent stage in that the basic MOU between the 
Governments of UP  and MP for preparation of DPR still remains to be signed on the 
ground that UP state  desires more water to be  allocated.  In their considered view,  had 
the  Ministry of Water Resources set a time frame for finalization of issues like signing of 
MOU,  in respect of inter-state river projects , precious time of nearly 8 years would not 
have been lost and the said project might  have been completed.  The Committee,  
therefore, strongly recommended that the Government take firm steps and fix definitive 
time frame and lay down guidelines for each individual component 
viz completion of 
FRs, preparation of DPRs and completion of projects etc. so  that the projects are 
completed and the benefits accrue within reason able time  and cost.  They desire to be 
informed of the action taken in the matter. 
Reply of the Government 
 National Water Development Agency has completed water balance studies of 
basins/sub-basins and at dive rsion points, toposheet stud ies of reservoirs and link 
alignments, storage capacity studies of reser voirs, pre-feasibility studies and feasibility 
studies towards the implementation of inter-linking of rivers in the country as follows (up 
to March, 2004): 

 
 
S.No. Item Quantity 
1. Water balance studies of basins/sub-basins 137 
2. Water balance studies at diversion points 71 
3. Toposheet and storage capacity studies of reservoirs  74 
4. Toposheet studies of link alignments  37 
5. Prefeasibility reports of links 31 
6. Feasibility Reports 11 
  
 
 In regard to signing of MOU for Ken- Betwa link, the perspective plan for 
implementation of inter basin water tran sfer proposals was approved in the 39 th meeting 
of Governing Body of NWDA on 06.12.2000 a nd envisages the implementation of 
Peninsular links by 2035 while that of Hima layan links by 2043.  NWDA’s mandate was 
to complete the feasibility reports of identifi ed link projects and as  per perspective plan 
these were scheduled for completion by 2008. 
 The Supreme Court of I ndia in the Writ Pe tition No. 512 of 2002 regarding net- 
working of rivers observed that “we do expect that the programme  when drawn up would 
try and ensure that the link projects are comp leted within a reasonable time of not more 
that ten years”.  In pursuance of this j udgement, the Government of India constituted a 
Task Force in December 2002 under the Chairmanship of Shri Suresh Prabhu, Member of 
Parliament indicating milestone dates for diffe rent tasks that include completion of FRs 
by 2005 and DPRs by 2006.  The Task Force has st ated that the penins ular links are the 
right component to begin with.  The Task For ce prioritized two links namely  (i) Parbati-
Kalisindh-Chambal link and (ii) Ken-Betwa link.  It is in this  context that the process has 
been accelerated and MOUs for taking up the DP R of these two links have been sent to 
concerned States in November 2003 for their concurrence.  While M.P. has agreed for 
signing the General MOU in respect of Ken-Betwa link, U.P. has certain apprehensions, 

 
which are being sorted out in the meetings of Consensus Group headed by Chairman, 
CWC, Chief Engineer, NWDA and Chief Engineer, CWC. 
 Further, the process of comprehensive assessment of feasibility of linking of 
rivers in the country starting from the southern rivers is in progress as envisaged in the 
National Common Minimum Programme.  
Recommendations/Observations (Para No.2.24) 
 The Committee note that  the Government  have set up a Task Force on inter-
linking of rivers  in December, 2002 which  has submitted Action Plan I and  II and also 
finalized the Terms of Reference for prepar ation of Detailed Project Reports.  Action 
Plan I submitted in April, 2003 envisages completion of 30 feasibility studies by NWDA 
by December, 2005.   A study has been given to NCAER in March, 2004 for assessing 
the ‘Economic impact of Inte r-linking Rivers Programme’ and, while doing so,  NCAER 
has also to suggest an investment roll out plan, i.e.,  a practical implementation schedule 
for Inter Linking Rivers Programme.  The re port of NCAER is still awaited.  The Action 
Plan II submitted in April, 2004,  envisages ma inly appraisal of individual projects in 
respect of economic viability, socio economic and environment impacts, preparation of 
resettlement plans and bringi ng speedy consensus among States etc.   These two reports 
are reportedly under active consideration of the Government,  Undoubtedly,  ILR 
Programme  is a gigantic  challenge but a momentous one, before the Union Government,  
viewed in the context of the perennial drought  situations faced by the southern/western 
parts and recurring floods in the northern plains of the Ga nga and Brahmaputra basins.  
The Committee note  that the task force has addr essed in its reports the intricate issues of 
economic viability, environmental and socio-economic impacts etc. on which concern 

 
was reflected  the Committee on Agriculture (2003) in their 44 th Report on Demands for 
Grants (2003-04).  They ur ge the Government to get the study given to NCAER 
expedited which will expect edly suggest an investment  roll out plan for the ILR 
Programme.  The Committee further desire the Government to make earnest efforts to get 
going the interlinking of the Northern and S outhern rivers under ILR Programme in a 
definite time schedule which, in their consid ered view, would save the nation from the 
devastating  ravages of chronic droughts and floods. 
Reply of the Government 
Task Force has received the report of NC AER and it is under their examination.  
The Government is already pursuing the Interlinking of Rivers Projects as per the studies 
conducted by NWDA.  As far as Northern Ri vers are concerned, keeping in view the 
international dimensions with neighbouri ng countries in general and Bangladesh in 
particular, the issues involved wi ll have to be resolved in consultation with Ministry of 
External Affairs at the appropriate time.  For Southern Rivers, the Government as per 
NCMP will make a comprehensive assessment.  The success of the project depends upon 
the acceptance and agreement/consensus between the States for various link projects. 
Recommendations/Observations (Para No.3.18 and 3.19) 
 The Committee observe that the Ministry  of Water Resources is responsible for 
policy formulation in the  minor irrigation at the national level though the works of minor 
irrigation are taken up by the States.   They, however, find that at the State level there are 
several agencies/ departments, panchayats, co-operatives and even individual farmers 
involved in this sector.  Minor irrigation schemes pert ain to  both ground water and 
surface water schemes having Culturable Command Area (CCA) of 2000 ha. 
individually.  They note that during the Ninth Plan,  total additional irrigation potential 
created and utilized was 5792.26 th. ha and 4606 th. ha. respectively, while for the Tenth 

 
Plan the target fixed for the same is 5.23 m.ha.  The CGWB is the apex agency involved 
with all aspects of ground water development, dissemination of technologies and 
monitoring and implementation of policies.  The outlay envisaged for this sector at 
Rs.117.70 crore in BE 2004-05 shows an increase  of Rs.10.48 crore over the BE figures 
of 2003-04.  
Further, the Committee note th at the ground water level is  declining very rapidly 
in most parts of the country.  The analysis of the trend by CGWB for the years 1994-2003 
indicates decline in ground water levels of more than 4 meters  in certain districts of the 
country.  In order to arrest  the further decline of grou nd water level, the Ministry 
submitted  for clearance a Centrally Sponsored Scheme for artificial recharge of ground 
water on the advice of the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance.   
 The Committee are surprised to find  th at the Scheme ‘Artificial Recharge of 
Ground Water’, prepared  on th e advice of  the Planning Commission, remains to be 
cleared by them as yet.  Cons idering the  laudable objective of the Artificial Recharge of 
Ground Water Scheme and the fact that the sche me  has been prepared on the advice of 
the Planning Commission, the Committee are anguished  over the delay  in launching  the 
Scheme.  The Committee, therefore, reiterat e  the recommendation of the Committee on 
Agriculture contained in their 44 th  and 50 th Reports during the 13 th Lok Sabha  and  
desire that the Scheme be launched without further delay. 
 The Committee note that as a part of the measures to arrest further decline in 
ground Water levels in the country, a model Bill for regulation and control of ground 
water Development was revised and recirculated  to the States in 1992 and again in 1996.  
So far, the Government of Andhra Prades h, Tamil Nadu, Goa, Kerala, Lakshadweep and 
Pondicherry have enacted legislations on the subject.  16 other States have initiated some 
action for enactment of such a legislation.  Furthermore, the CGWB circulated a manual 
and guide on artificial recharge to ground water to States to enable them to formulate area 
specific artificial recharge Schemes to check declining ground water levels.  The 
Committee are happy to note that  in pursuance of the efforts of CGWB, several States 

 
have taken steps to formulat e area specific schemes and the remaining States are also 
taking steps to promote rain water harvesting and artificial recharge in problem areas.     
Taking note of the fact that these vital i ssues  were also discussed at the recent 
Conference of Chief Secretaries, Princi pal Secretaries(I&WR ) and Command Area 
Authorities of States/UTs, the Committee r ecommend that the Ministry should persuade 
the States and consider giving certain incentives to States badly affected by the problem 
of declining  ground water level or wher e the ground water is the only source for 
irrigation or drinking to enable them  to ta ke immediate measures for improvement of the 
situation.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the developments in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
The views of the Parliamentary Standing Committee have since been conveyed to 
the Planning Commission, who have been re quested to expedite the approval of the 
centrally sponsored scheme on “Artificial Recharge to Ground Water and Rainwater 
Harvesting’.  A copy of letter No. 18/35/2002-GW.II dated 02.09.2004 from Additional 
Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources to  Advisor (WR), Planning Commission is at 
Appendix- I.  The matter is being further pu rsued with the Planning Commission 
vigorously. 
The Ministry is also persua ding the States to take steps/measures to tackle the 
problem of declining ground water level.  Hon’ble Minister of Water Resources has 
written a d.o. letter on 21.08.2004 to Chief Minister s of States in this  regard.  Further, 
with a view to persuade the St ates to take steps/measures to  arrest further decline in the 
ground water levels in the country, the sche me on Artificial Recharge of Groundwater 
has been proposed which is under consideration of the Planning Commission.  Under this 

 
scheme, Government may consider to give priority to such States who take steps in this 
direction.  
Recommendation (Para No. 5.7) 
 The Committee note that the Ministry of  Water Resources have been  providing 
central loan assistance /grants for flood control  works apar t from overall planning and 
coordination of flood management  activitie s.  The Tenth Plan also envisages for 
centrally sponsored scheme for  improvement  of drainage  in critical  areas of the 
country.  The Committee further observe  th at this sector has been allocated the 
maximum of Rs. 183.87 crore  out of the tota l Plan allocation of Rs. 580.00 crore in BE 
2004-2005 comprising more than 30 per cent  of plan allocation of the Ministry.  Taking 
note of the huge allocations made for this sector year after year, the Committee are 
perturbed to note that while the Work ing Group set up by Pla nning Commission has 
assessed the area prone to floods  at   45.64  m. ha. the area  benefited  from flood  
protection measures till March, 2003 is 16.45 m. ha cumulatively for all  the Nine Five 
Year Plans put together  which  amounts to less than 40 per cent in area assessed as flood  
prone.  This when viewed in the context of  the huge allocations reveals a sad and grim 
picture of the flood control  scenario in the country.  The Committee, therefore, desire the 
Government to take urgent and sustaine d steps to strengthen the flood control  
mechanism in tune with the high level of allo cations made to this sector.  The Committee 
desire to be apprised of  the action taken in the matter. 
Reply of the Government 
 Rashtriya Barh Ayog has assessed 40.00 m .ha. as flood prone area in the country 
by summing up the maximum fl ooded area in any one year during 1953-58.  Some states 

 
reported higher flood prone area to the Working Group set up by the Planning 
Commission for the X Five Year Plan.  The Working Group has compiled this figures as 
45.64 m.ha. with a remark that these figures require revaluation from the States. 
 Rashtriya Barh Ayog in its report had observed that out of 40 m.ha. area in the 
country only 80% area (32.00 m.ha.) can be  provided with a reasonable degree of 
protection.  Since beginning of planning era upto 2003,  16.45 m.ha. area had been 
provided with reasonable degree of protection. 
The Ministry of Water Resources, Govern ment of India has recently constituted a 
Task Force for Flood Management/Erosion control under the Chairmanship of Chairman, 
CWC to examine the problem of recurring floods and erosion in Assam and neighbouring 
states as well as West Bengal, Bihar a nd Eastern Uttar Pradesh, review measures 
undertaken so far and suggest short and long term measures for management of floods 
and erosion including their in ternational dimensions, institu tional arrangements, sources 
of funds etc.  The Task Force has been asked to submit its report by 31st December, 2004. 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.14) 
The Committee note that th e area north of the Ganga are chronically flood 
affected regions of UP and Bihar.  The wors t affected areas lies in  North Bihar.  The 
flood proofing programme is one of the majors  measures considered to be more cost 
effective.  The Scheme of Flood Proofing Programme in North Bihar taken up during the 
Eighth Plan is still continuing   in the Te nth Plan.  An amount  of Rs. 1.25 crore was 
released during 2003-2004 for the purpose.  The Committee note that the Ministry have 
decided to enlarge the scope of the Scheme to  include the States of Uttar Pradesh, West 
Bengal, Assam, Orrisa and Andhra Pradesh  for implementation during the year 2004-07.   

 
However,  the Planning Commission, while examining  the EFC for in principle approval, 
advised that before expanding the programme  to other States, the utility of some 
completed structures be tested.  Further, f unding  for new structures (in Bihar)  under the 
programme during current  financial  year  has been stopped to avoid  creation of 
liabilities.  The  Brahmapurtr a Board  and GFCC have reportedly initiated measures for 
current  performance  evaluation studies as advised  by the Planning Commission.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that performance evaluation studies be conducted through 
independent consultants so that the drawbacks/ deficiencies detected in the structure are 
rectified before enlarging the scope of the scheme to other States.  The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the results  of the evaluation studies at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
It was decided that the Performance Evaluation Studies in respect of the 
completed Flood Proofing schemes in Bihar would be carried out through Ganga Flood 
Control Commission (GFCC), Patna whereas Brahmaputra Board would be responsible 
for the studies in respect of schemes completed in Assam. 
The matter regarding entrusting the Performance Evaluation Studies was first 
taken up by GFCC with the Water & Land Management Institutes (WALMIS) in 
Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Assam, Orissa and H yderabad.  In the absence of response from 
the WALMIS, Water & Power Consultancy Services (India) Ltd. (WAPCOS) was 
requested by GFCC to take up the above works.  WAPCOS have now submitted their 
proposal which is under examination in GFCC. 
As regards the Performance Evaluation Studies in respect of 3 schemes completed 
by Brahmaputra Board, the said studies are being carried out through an independent 

 
agency North Eastern Regional Institute for Water and Land Management 
(NERIWALM).  The Committee would be appraised of the results on completion of the 
studies. 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.19) 
The Committee observe that  India and Nepal decided to raise, strengthen 
and extend embankments on Lalbakeya, Ka mla, Bagmati and Khando rivers to 
prevent spillage of flood waters from Ne pal to Bihar side.  The works are to be 
executed through funds of Ministry of Exte rnal Affairs in the Nepalese territory 
while on the Indian side they are to be carried out under a Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme.   The funds are released on the recommendation of GFCC.  It is further 
observed that a sum of Rs.5.00 crore could no t be utilized due to non-submission of 
Utilisation Certificates by State Government of Bihar.  The Minister had reportedly 
reviewed the progress of the scheme with State Government on 23 June, 2004 .   A 
programme for revised DPR for construction of embankments on River Bagmati  
was given for approval by the State and th e matter is also being followed by the 
State with GFCC  and the Ministry.  Furt her, negotiations with Nepal are on for 
construction of multipurpose storage dams on rivers Kamla and Bagmati.  
Reportedly, Nepal Government is of the opin ion that these projects are not feasible 
and pose serious social and environmental issues on their side.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire the Ministry to impr ess  upon the Nepal Government through 
appropriate channels for early resolution of the differences so that the project 
construction takes off smoothly and the area s affected by floods due to spillage of 
water from rivers, in Nepal are minimize d, if not completely eliminated.  The 

 
Committee also desire the Government to  take steps to improve utilization of 
allocated funds.  
Reply of the Government 
The matter regarding Kamla & Bagmati Multipurpose Projects was raised by the 
Indian side in the recently held 2 nd meeting of the India-Nepal Joint Committee on Water 
Resources held at New Delhi on 7-8 th October, 2004, which is headed by the respective 
Water Resources Secretaries of both the countri es. The Nepalese side  pointed out social 
and environmental problems exist in implementation of these projects due to the presence 
of large settlements in the reservoir areas.  It was however agreed to take up feasibility 
studies of Kamla (as a part of the study for Sapta Kosi – Sun Kosi Projects) and 
preliminary study for Bagmati Multipurpose Pr oject to be carried out by Joint Project 
Office, Sapta Kosi & Sun Kosi Investigatio ns (JPO-SKSKI) already setup in Nepal to 
ascertain likely constraints in implementation of  these projects so that the same could be 
appropriately addressed. 
As regards the utilization of  allocated funds in respect of the Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme “Raising and Strengthening of Emba nkments on Lalbakeya, Bagmati, Khando 
and Kamla rivers”, which is linked w ith the firming up the hydrological design 
parameters, the matter is being followed up with the State Government. 
Recommendation (Para No.6.18 and 6.19) 
The Committee note that  the Governme nt  have launched the Accelerated 
Irrigation Benefits Programme(AIBP) during 1996-97 for accelerating implementation of 
on going  multi-purpose projects on which  s ubstantial progress has  been made  and 
which are beyond the  resources capability  of  the State Governments  and for other  

 
major and medium irrigation projects  which ar e  in advanced stage of construction  and 
could yield  irrigation benefits in next four agricultural seasons.  The Government  have 
so far  included 181 major/medium  and 3810 surface minor irrigation schemes and an 
amount  of Rs. 14670.00 crore  has already  been  released as Central Loan Assistance,  
but, it is  a matter of great concern that only 29 major/medium projects  have been  
completed so far.  The Committee are not sa tisfied  with this slow  progress  for 
completion of the projects and are still  in doubt whether the Minist ry would be able to 
complete 37 and 46 projects  as targeted by them   during 2004-2005 and beyond 2004-
2005 in Tenth Plan respectively. 
According to the Ministry, the reasons for slow progress in completion of these 
projects are contractual problem s,  natural calamities, delay  in transferring the funds to 
the  projects by the States, diversion/parking of funds, environmental/forests clearance, 
matching funds not provided by the States, la nd acquisition problems and delay  due to 
court cases. 
Further, the Committee note that the Minist ry is not dissatisfied with the present 
arrangement of release of f unds directly by Ministry of  Finance and monitoring of 
projects by Ministry of Water Resources.   The Committee desire that the causative 
factors for the  slow  progress of the projects be  sorted out at the earliest possible and  all 
out efforts  be made to accelerate the moment um required to complete  all the projects 
under Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Progra mme within their sc heduled time limit and 
cost estimates. 
 While taking note that 3810 minor irri gation projects (fro m special category 
States) have been brought under AIBP, the Committee desire that steps be taken by the 

 
Ministry to  draw a definite time table for completion of these projects in  a period of 5 or 
6 years so that the intended benefit of irrigation do not continue to elude.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised  of the achievements made in this regards at an early date. 
Reply of the Government 
Irrigation being a state subject, the res ponsibility of execution of projects 
rests with the State Governments.  There are various factors for slow progress in 
completion of Major and Medium irrigation projects viz. the balance cost (after 
March,2004) of Projects/Project componen ts included under AIBP, the level of 
expenditure being incurred by  the respective Project Auth orities during the past 
year(s), outlays proposed by the State Governments for the remaining years of 
Tenth Five Year Plan, constraints being encountered in Project execution by the 
Project Authorities/State Governments etc. The constraints like forest clearance, 
land acquisition, R&R Problems involve pr otracted procedures which are quite 
time consuming and they are also not under the direct jurisdiction of the Irrigation/ 
Water Resources Departments of the State Governments.  For example, for land 
acquisition and R&R, State Re venue Department at District  Level is involved.  The 
delay occurs because the State Revenue Department does not attach the same 
priority to the irrigation projects as  planned by the State Irrigation/Water 
Resources Departments.  During monitoring visits of the Central Water 
Commission (CWC) officers, this aspect is looked into and they suggest/insist for 
deployment  of  an  independent   “ Land  Acquisition  Officer”  in  the  
Revenue Department where such problem of land acquisition is being faced by the 
Project Authorities. Similarly, the process of implementation of R&R Plan suffers 

 
for want of adequate staff with the State Revenue Department.  Hence, the delay in 
the project execution according to the pl anned schedule.  Nevertheless concerted 
efforts are being made/continued to be made by the monitoring teams through 
continuous interaction with the State Govern ment officers/visits to the projects to 
ensure that slippages are minimized. 
The Chief Engineers and Directors of the Monitoring Directorates of the Regional 
Offices of CWC have been info rmed to critically review th e progress of the projects 
which are anticipated for completion dur ing 2004-05 and beyond 2004-05 in Tenth Five 
Year Plan.  In this connection, it is furthe r mentioned that one of the recommendations 
made during the Conference of the State Chie f Secretaries/State Principal Secretaries/ 
Secretaries of Water Resources/Irrigation Department held on 2-3rd August,2004 at New 
Delhi was that there is a need to supplement the existing monitoring system of the States 
by including C.W.C. Officers.  Further, the major/medium projects to be included under 
AIBP, henceforth, must be free from la nd acquisition problems, R&R Plan, forest 
clearance, court  cases,  etc. so that the projects can be completed as per schedule. 
As per the revised AIBP guidelin es effective from 1.4.2004, the State 
Governments are required to furnish a Memorandum of Understanding alongwith the 
Central Loan Assistance (CLA) proposals for each project stating therein latest balance 
cost of the project after March, 2004 and the co mpletion date as well.  This is a step to 
ensure that the State Governments  adhere to  the given schedule of project completion at 
the cost indicated in the Memorandum of Understanding. 
As per the existing guidelines of AIBP, surface minor irrigation schemes are to be 
completed in a period of two years.  However,  in view of the law and order problem of 

 
the North Eastern Region and other difficultie s being faced by the States, these schemes 
could not be completed as per the schedule.  Out of 3778 schemes included under the 
programme, 2488 have already been  complete d upto July, 2004 to create an irrigation 
potential of 94.7 thousand hectare against the target potential of 190.81 thousand hectare.  
The States are being pursued vigorously  for early completion of the remaining  schemes. 

 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.24) 
5.24  The  Committee note that a scheme  of  critical anti-erosion works  in coastal and 
other than Ganga basin States  was cleared  by the Planning Commission in February, 
2004 to be taken up in two parts on pilot basis at a cost of Rs. 20.64 crore.  Approval  for 
the first part has come through.  The second part   of anti-river  erosion  works and raising 
embankments  in States  of Andhra Pradesh, Ke rala  and Orissa has not been approved so 
as to avoid proliferation of new Centrally Sponsored Scheme s in Tenth Plan and it was 
suggested that they be taken up by the concerned States in their State plan.  It is further 
noted that States have to give concurrence  to meet the matching share of expenditure.  
Four out of six States have agreed to m eet  the matching share of expenditure. The 
Committee are dismayed to note lack of uniform ity, as certain States have been included 
under the Scheme to the exclusion of States  like Andhra Pradesh, Goa and Gujarat on the 
pretext that these States could  approach  the Planning   Commission directly for release 
of funds under additional Central assistance.  The Committee, therefor e, desire that the 
second part of the Scheme may also be got cleared by the Pla nning Commission at the 
earliest to avoid damages caused by river erosion in the States of Kerala, Andhra Pradesh 
and Orissa.  The Committee may be informed of the progress made in this direction. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Planning Commission has been requested vide this Ministry’s  letter No. 2/5/2004-
ER/4067 dated 01.11.2004 (Appendix-III )  to reconsider the new Centrally Sponsored 
Scheme “Critical Anti River Erosion Works/  Raising and Strengthening of embankments 

 
in other than Ganga Basin States” estimated to cost Rs. 24.80 crore for approval by the 
Full Planning Commission for implementation in the 10th Plan. 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.16 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.31) 
 The Committee note that Assam has been extended with CLA outside the State 
Plan for execution of  flood  control    schemes  in      Brahmaputra     basin   since 1974-
75.  A sum of Rs.390.94 crore as  CLA and Rs.10.09 crore as gr ant in aid was released 
upto March 2000.   During the Ninth Plan, a Ce ntrally Sponsored Scheme ‘Flood Control 
Scheme in Brahmaputra and Barak Valley’ was framed to include North Eastern States 
including West Bengal (North Bengal) with an investment  of Rs.55.56 crore.  The 
scheme,  however,  was not approved by the Planning Commission.  The Committee note 
that the Centrally Sponsored Scheme amounting to Rs.166.68 crore, with Rs.150.00 crore 
as Central share, was formulated by Brahmaputra Board in consultation with the Ministry 
of Water Resources.  The Committee are distressed to note that such an important scheme 
proposed to be completed during the Tenth pl an period is still aw aiting approval while 
the provisions made for the scheme are bei ng surrendered for want of approval.  When 
quizzed, the Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources testified before the Committee that 
the scheme “could not be cleared due to th e announcement of election and now, it again 
has to restart  its entire journey upwards”.  He  further stated that th e Ministry of Finance 
want this scheme now be undertaken in the St ate Sector.  Having regard to the recurring 
onslaught of devastating floods in the Brahmaputra and Barak Valley and the 
irretrievable loss of life and property, th e Committee cannot accept the view of the 

 
Ministry of Finance and, therefore, reiterate  that the Scheme should be implemented as a 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme as formulated without further loss of time. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry of Finance have reiterat ed their earlier stan d that the proposed 
scheme may be implemented in a projectis ed mode like AIBP/APDRP in the State 
Sector, for which approval may be obtained fr om CCEA.  That Ministry is of the view 
that the proposal to initiat e a new Centrally Sponsored Scheme is not considered 
advisable in view of the NCMP objectives. 
 
 
       
 
 

 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1.15 and 1.16) 
 The scrutiny of   Dema nds for Grants 2004-2005 of the Ministry of Water 
Resources  shows that  the outlay  at Rs. 854.36 crore  for 2004-2005 shows an overall 
hike of Rs. 61.18 crore over  the BE of the previous year.  There is  an overall hike  of 4.5 
per cent  in the plan  ou tlay for 2004-2005  which stands at Rs. 592.00 crore over the BE 
of Rs. 566.00 crore  in 2003-2004. While  there is  an increase of  Rs. 27.33 crore  on the 
Revenue side (plan), the  capit al section (plan) shows a decl ine of 3 per cent.  On  the 
other hand,  the non-plan  allo cation both on the  Revenue and Capital se ctions shows an  
increase of 15.88 per cent  (at Rs. 243.56 cror e) and  11 per cent  (at Rs. 18.80 crore) 
respectively over the BE 2003-2004 figures. Further, the Committee  observe that  the 
outlays for the CAD has declined by Rs. 20.50 crore  from Rs. 202.00 crore (BE 2003-
2004) to Rs. 181.50 crore (BE 2004-2005).     The Committee are constrained to 
observe that though the Ministry  had proposed  a Plan allocation of Rs. 636.61 crore  for 
the  year 2004-2005,  the Planni ng Commission  has  allocate d Rs.  580.00 crore  which  
is Rs. 56.61 crore  less than  the proposed a llocation by the Ministry.  Apparently, the 
allocations for the Ministry need to be ste pped up in consonance with the commitment of 
the Government to give priority to wate r management. The reductions in allocation by 
Planning Commission are  of Rs. 11.75 crore for Major and Medium Irrigation,  Rs. 
18.50 crore for Command Area Development Pr ogramme  and Rs. 25.06 crore  for Flood 
Control  sector against the  proposals of the Ministry for 2004-2005.  The Committee  fail 

 
to understand  the rationale of the Planni ng Commission  in reducing  the proposed 
allocation for the above mentioned three importa nt sectors which in their opinion,  would  
adversely affect the progress and pace of implementation of all the on-going   vital 
projects.  The Committee note that at presen t,  there are 162 Ma jor  and 221  Medium 
Irrigation Projects pending for  completion in diffe rent  States.   They further note that  
the Command Area Development  Programme  ha s been  restructured  and renamed as 
Command Area Development  and Water Manage ment and that the  proposed targets  
under restructured  programme are envisaged for accomplishment during the remaining 3 
years of the Tenth Plan i.e. by 2006-07.  Alarmingly, the Planning Commission has to 
reduced allocation for an important programme like Flood Control despite the scourge of  
recurring floods   in certain parts of the country resulting in colossal loss of life and 
property.   
 The Committee, therefore, strongly r ecommend that the Mi nistry take up the 
matter  with the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance  for enhancing  the 
Plan allocation adequately for  the above  mentioned three sect ors at the Revised 
Estimates stage  so that all  on  going sc hemes/projects  under these sectors   are 
completed  within the scheduled time-frame to avoid  time and cost over-runs.   The 
Committee are of the considered view th at while the schemes/programmes being 
implemented by the Government require  huge  allocations by the Planning Commission 
and Ministry of Finance, it is also incumben t upon  the Ministry to take urgent steps to 
address and overcome the problems of non-approvals of schemes, procedural delays and  
non-submission of utilization certificates by the States.   The Committee desire  that they 
be apprised of the steps taken in this direction. 
  
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Water Resources deals with a subject matter in the state list sector 
and almost half of its annual budget allocation rela te to centrally sponsored schemes 

 
(CSS). Expenditure on those schemes depends on the utili zation of grants already 
released and requirements projected by states.  Public investments in the water resources 
sector are mainly in the state sector – reflected in the plans of respective states.  It has not 
been possible to upscale expenditure and consequently annual budget allocations, in 
regard to CSS, because of lack  of utilization and demand at state levels.  In North East 
(Assam), some major works proposed to be undertaken by Brahmaputra Board directly as 
a central sector scheme, budget allocations c ould not be utilized mainly because of non-
resolution of local issues which are in the domain of the state government.  Efforts are on, 
however, to work with the state governments to ensure utilization of grants already 
released and to identify areas where centr al assistance could be channelized more 
fruitfully for better management of water resources issues. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.42) 
The Committee are unhappy to note that th e out of Plan Budget allocation of Rs. 
45.00 crore for Pagladiya Dam Project for the year 2003-2004   only Rs. 3.66 crore could 
be utilized for the project due to  the State Government not being able to make available 
land for  construction of the project and reha bilitation and Resettleme nt  purposes.  An 
allocation  of Rs.40.00 crore has been earmarked for the year  2004-2005.  The 
Committee are  dismayed  to note that the construction work on  Pagladiya Dam Project 
has been  delayed  inordinately and while the Revised Cost Estimates  worked out are 
awaiting approval of PIB and CCEA, the project cost has almost doubled from Rs. 
542.90 crore to Rs. 1049.16 crore.   The Committ ee, therefore, strongly  recommend to 
Government to pursue the matter vigorously  for  early  clearance by PIB and CCEA   
and simultaneously  make all out efforts  to  get the land for construction of Dam Project 
from the Assam  Government for Rehabilita tion and Resettlement  purposes at  the 
earliest possible so that the Pagladiya Dam Pr oject is constructed without further time 
and cost over-run. 
 

 
Reply of the Government 
The Pagladiya Dam Project could not make much headway due to security related 
problems and non-handing over of the land by the State Government.    The PIB meeting 
for the revised cost scheduled to be  held on 22.09.04 was postponed as the State 
Government is yet to carry out the Zirat Su rvey (property evaluation).  Discussions are 
being held on regular basis wi th the Government of Assam on  the Zirat Survey and other 
sensitive pending issues for implementation of  Pagladiya Dam Project on which action is 
to be taken by the State Government.   
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter I of the Report) 

 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4.10) 
 The Committee observe that the Ministry of Water Resources  is implementing 
CAD  programme since 1974-75  as a centrally  sponsored programme with the objective 
of ensuring efficient utilisat ion of IPC for optimal agricultural production.  Till April, 
2003, 236 projects were covered with CCA of about 30 m. ha. spread over the entire 
country and at the end of 2003-2004, 133 C AD projects were receiving Central 
Assistance.  They further  note that CAD pr ogramme has been  restructured and renamed 
as CADWM scheme during 2004-07 for the re maining period of the Tenth Plan.  The 
revised CAD aims at continuation of components found to  be beneficial with 10 per cent 
contribution from farmers for selected activ ities, inclusion of so me new components 
essential for rectifying the deficiencies in irrigation systems and distribution of 
components which lost their utility value over time.   
 It is disconcerting to fi nd that though the Planning Commission and Ministry of 
Finance favoured funding the CAD programme on the Ninth Plan pattern during 2002-03 
and 2003-04, the Ministry of Finance did not a llow the Ministry to disburse funds during 
2003-04 on the Ninth Plan pattern.  The re structured Scheme was approved by the 
Cabinet in January, 2004.  Reportedly, the Ministry of Finance did not permit 
disbursement on old pattern on the ground that  the new scheme was not approved by the 
appropriate authority.  Under the restructur ed programme, State Governments have been 
advised to submit fresh DPRs of all projec ts by the end of August, 2004 indicating, inter-
alia, time-frame, budget and the action plan et c. for completion of CAD works.  The 
Committee hope all the States stick to the deadline for submission of fresh DPRs.  The 
Committee further recommend that upon receipt  of fresh DPRs, Government should 
complete all other essential formalities in a time bound manner so as to make the projects 

 
under CADWM workable to enable realisation of the targeted util ization of irrigation 
potential created as a result thereof. 
Reply of the Government 
 All the State Governments implementing the Command Area  
Development and Water Management program me have been reminded through a D.O. 
letter dated 30 th September, 2004 from Secretary (Water Resources) to the Chief 
Secretaries (Appendix -II)  to stick to the time frame for submission of DPRs.  Further 
necessary action to chalk out the action plan for completing various CAD activities in the 
projects shall be taken as soon as DPRs of all the projects are received from all the States. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI               R. SAMBASIVA RAO,  
23 January, 2004                      Chairman      
02 Pausa, 1926(Saka)                                            Standing Committee on Water Resource 

 
            A 1 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
       A2 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
A3 
 

 
 

 
APPENDIX-IV 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES (2004-2005) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON MONDAY, 
20 DECEMBER, 2004 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1550 hours in Committee Room ‘C’, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri R. Sambasiva Rao – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Bhanwar Singh Dangawas 
3. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo 
4. Shri Rajen Gohain 
5. Dr. M. Jagannath 
6. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
7. Shri Munshiram 
8. Shri Lonappan Nambadan 
9. Shri  Prabodh Panda  
10. Shri Harilal. M. Patel 
11. Shri Laxmanrao Patil 
12. Shri Arjun Charan Sethi 
13. Shri Chandra Bhushan Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
14. Shri Manoj Bhattacharya      
 

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri A.S. Chera   - Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy    - Under Secretary 
 
  
 
 
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting of the 
Committee.   
2. The Committee then took up for cons ideration Memorandum No. 2 and the 
Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in their First Report (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Ministry of Water Resources.  After 
some discussion, the Committee adopted the Report without any 
amendment/modification.   
3. The Committee then authorized the Chai rman to finalise the above draft Action 
Taken Report on the basis of factual verifica tion from the Ministry of Water Resources 
and to present the same to the Parliament. 
4. xxxxx     xxxxx     xxxxx 
5. xxxxx     xxxxx     xxxxx 
6. The Hon’ble Chairman then wished a ll the members of the Committee a merry 
Christmas and a very Happy and Prosperous New Year. 
The Committee then adjourned to meet again on Tuesday, 25 January, 2005. 
**************** 
 
 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
xxxxx - Minutes in respect of ot her matters kept separately. 

 
APPENDIX V 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIRST 
REPORT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE  
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations/Observations   17 
 
(ii) Recommendation/Observ ations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
 
Para Nos. 2.9, 2.10, 2.18, 2.24, 3.18, 3.19, 5.7, 5.14, 5.19,  
6.18 and 6.19 
 
T o t a l          1 1  
 
Percentage        64.70% 
   
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Para Nos. 5.24 and 5.31 
 
T o t a l          2   
      
Percentage         11.76% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations  in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the 
 Committee 
 
Para Nos. 1.15, 1.16 and 5.42 
 
T o t a l          3    
 
Percentage        17.64% 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observati ons in respect of which  
 final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
Para No.4.10  
 

 
T o t a l          1  
 
Percentage        5.88% 