 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
                                (2008-2009) 
10
 
 
 
                              FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES  
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2008-2009)  
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Ninth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources} 
 
 
 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
October, 2008/Kartika, 1930 (Saka) 
 

 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
 
(2008-2009) 
 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-2009) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Ninth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.10.2008 
                                                   Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.10.2008 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
October, 2008/Kartika, 1930 (Saka) 
 

 
 
WRC NO. 14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2008 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 

 
CONTENTS 
           PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2008-09)…………………  (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………… (v) 
 
 
CHAPTER I   Report ………………………………………… 1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been  
accepted by the Government ………………….. 10 
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the    
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government’s replies ……………………….. 29 
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of   
which replies of the Government have not been  
accepted by the Committee ……………………. 31 
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
final replies of the Government are still awaited … 32 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
  I. Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Committee  
                                    held on 20.10.2008   
 
  II. Analysis of action taken by the Government on the  
                        Recommendations / Observations contained in the Ninth  
                        Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee………. 
 
 

 
 COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON WATER RESOURCES (2008-2009) 
 
 
  Shri Rayapati Sambasiva Rao  -  Chairman 
 
          MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.        Shri Bhanwar Singh Dangawas 
3.        Shri Bikram Keshari Deo 
4.        Shri Rajen Gohain 
         5. Shri Prakash B. Jadhav 
6.  Smt. Preneet Kaur 
7. Shri Raghuveer Singh Kaushal  
             8. Shri Shankhlal Majhi 
9.       Shri Abu Ayes Mondal 
       10.        Shri Lonappan Nambadan 
11.        Shri Harilal Madhavji Bhai Patel 
             12.        Shri Vishnu Deo Sai 
13.        Dr. Arun Kumar Sarma 
14.        Smt. Minati Sen 
15.        Shri Harihar Swain 
            *16.     Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
17. Vacant 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
          **21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22.        Chowdhary Mohammad Aslam   
             23. Shri Ajay Singh Chautala    
24. Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
   25.        Shri K.E. Ismail 
           26. Prof. P.J. Kurien   
27. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
28. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
29. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley 
30. Shri Sharad Yadav 
31. Vacant 
 
 
* Nominated w.e.f. 26.08.2008 
** Smt. Manorama Madhavraj, MP, Lok Sabha resigned w.e.f. 20.10.2008 

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P.K. Grover  - Joint Secretary 
 3. Shri C.S. Joon   - Director 
 4. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy  - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri A.K. Yadav  - Committee Officer  
6. Shri G. Guite   - Sr. Committee Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2008-2009) having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Repor t on their behalf, present the Tenth Report 
on the Action Taken by Government on the reco mmendations/observations contained in the 
Ninth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water Resources (2007-
2008) on Demands for Grants (2008-2009) of the Ministry of Water Resources.  
2. The Ninth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on 22 April 2008.  
The replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were 
received on 18 August 2008. 
3. The replies of the Government were ex amined and the Report was considered and 
adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 20 October 2008. 
4. An analysis of the Action Take n by the Government on the    
recommendations/observations contained in the Ninth Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;               R. SAMBASIVA RAO, 
20 October, 2008                           Chairman, 
28 Asvina, 1930 (Saka)        Standing Committee on Water Resources  
  
 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the recommendations  / observations contained in their Ninth 
Report on Demands for Grants (2008-2009) of th e Ministry of Water Resources which was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 22 April 2008. 
2. Action taken notes were received from th e Government in respect of all the 20 
recommendations/observations of the Committee which have been categorised as follows:- 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos. 2.47, 2.48, 2.49, 2.50, 2.51, 3.36, 3.40, 3.41, 4.11, 4.12, 5.9, 6.8, 
7.21, 7.22, 7.23 and 7.24               (Total - 16) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies: 
Para Nos. 3.37        (Total - 1) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:           (Total - Nil) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in re spect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
Para Nos. 3.38, 3.39 and 5.10     (Total - 3) 
 
 
3. The Committee desire that final replies in respect of the 
recommendations/observations for which only interim replies have been given by the 
Government should be furnished to th e Committee within three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
 

 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
the recommendations/observations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A.    Speedy implementation of National Projects 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.49) 
 
5. The Committee had observed that subsequent  to their recommendation in the Seventh 
Report on Demands for Grants (2007-2008), th e Group of Ministers (GoM) approved the 
criteria for selection of ‘National Projects’ wh ich were to be brought up before the Cabinet 
for its approval.  Besides, the Finance Minister in his Budget Speech (2008-2009) announced 
that Government had declared 14 Projects as  ‘National Projects’.  A Steering Committee 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Water Re sources was being constituted to monitor the 
progress of implementation of these project s with the support of the Central Water 
Commission.  The modalities of implementation of  ‘National Projects’ were being worked 
out by the Ministry with CWC.  The Committee ha d, therefore, desired the Ministry to work 
out such modalities within the next 3 months so  as to enable early implementation of the 
projects.   
 
6. The Ministry in their action taken reply ha ve stated that the recommendations of the 
GoM regarding  National  Projects were brought before Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 
7 February 2008.   The Union Cabinet approved th e proposal with the direction that mode of 
financing be worked out in consultation with  Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance. 
Consequently, the Steering Committee for impl ementation of National Projects has been 
constituted in April 2008 under the Chairpersons hip of Secretary, Water Resources. Draft 
guidelines for implementation of National Projects have been prepared by the Ministry and 
the same have been sent to the Planning Co mmission and Ministry of Finance along with a 
note on proposed mode of financing of the National Projects. Further action will be taken 
after approval of mode of fi nancing by the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance as 
per the directions of the Union Cabinet. 

 
7. The Committee note that the Union Ca binet had approved the recommendations 
of the Group of Ministers for declaring major irrigation projects as “National Projects” 
in February 2008 with the direction that the mode of financing these national projects 
be worked out in consultation with Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance.  
Subsequently, the Ministry constituted a Steering Committee under the Chairmanship 
of Secretary, Water Resources in April 2008 to  oversee the implementation of these 
projects.  The Ministry also prepared draft guidelines in the matter, which along with a 
note on proposed mode of financing of the national projects, was sent to the Planning 
Commission and Ministry of Finance for their approval.  The Committee, however, 
regret to note that while the Union Cabinet approved the concept of national projects in 
February 2008, much time was wasted in th e follow-up action on the part of the 
Government.  Already more than six months  have lapsed since the Union Cabinet’s 
approval, but the decision regarding the dra ft guidelines for implementation of the 
‘National Projects’ and the mode of their financing have yet to be cleared by the 
Planning Commission and Ministry of Finan ce.  The Committee desire the Ministry to 
pursue vigorously with the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance for obtaining 
expeditious approval of the draft guidelines  and mode of financing of the national 
projects. 
 
B.    Report of Indian Institute of Management (IIM) on the gap between irrigation 
      potential created and utilised. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.38) 
 
8. The Committee had observed that with a view to have proper assessment of the 
reasons for the gap between the creation and u tilization of irrigation potential, the Ministry 
awarded studies through IIMs at Ahmedaba d, Bangalore, Kolkata and Lucknow.  IIM, 
Ahmedabad submitted an interim report and for others the reports were awaited.  The 
Committee hoped that the outcome of the studies being conducted by IIMs across the country 
would help the Ministry to take appropriate step s to rectify the imbalance in this respect in 
the Eleventh Plan.  They desired to be in formed of the findings of the study conducted by 
various IIMs and action taken thereon by the Ministry by 30 June 2008.   

 
9. The Ministry in their action taken reply ha ve stated that the studies relating to gap 
between the irrigation potential created and utilis ed were awarded to Indian Institute of 
Management (IIM), Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Kolkata & Lucknow in August 2007.  Due to 
delay in receipt of necessary secondary da ta /information from the respective State 
Governments and collection of primary data through field surveys, the IIMs had requested 
for extension of time.  As per revised schedul e, the reports were to be submitted by all the 
IIMs by 31 August 2008.  The findings of the studi es would be submitted for information of 
the Standing Committee soon after the receipt of the reports from IIMs. 
 
10. The Committee note that the Ministry roped in the services of Indian Institute of 
Management (IIM), Ahmedabad, Bangalore,  Kolkata and Lucknow in August 2007 to 
undertake studies on the problem of increasi ng gap between the irrigation potential 
created and utilized in the country.  The IIM s had requested for extension of time, 
citing delays in receipt of necessary seco ndary data/information from the respective 
State Governments and collectio n of primary data through field surveys.   The revised 
schedule stipulates submission of the reports by all the IIMs by 31 August 2008.    The 
Committee hope that all IIMs have by no w submitted the Reports and desire the 
Ministry to take further follow-up action thereon in a time bound manner.  The 
Committee urge the Ministry to apprise them at the earliest of the details of the findings 
of the IIMs and also the action proposed  to be taken thereon for rectifying the 
imbalance that exists between the irrigation potential created and that actually utilized 
in the country. 
 
C.    NRSA Report on 53 AIBP assisted projects.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.39) 
 
11. The Committee had observed that pursuant to their recommendation made in their 
Seventh Report that remote sensing technology be used to bridge the gap between the 
creation and utilization of irrigation potential, the Government asked the National Remote 
Sensing Agency (NRSA), Hyderabad, to assess the variations in this regard by using remote 
sensing technology.  NRSA Report revealed la rge variations in field study and remote 

 
sensing technology data in respect of the Teesta Hydel Project in West Bengal.  The large 
variation was attributed to lack of continuity  in canals at several places and non-construction 
of hydraulic structures.  The Government of  West Bengal was asked to clarify the over 
reporting in this regard.  The Committee desire d the Ministry to caution the field authorities 
to desist from over reporting of irrigation potentia l and warn them of strict action in case of 
over reporting.  They also desired to be informed of the results of NRSA studies in respect of 
53 AIBP aided projects.   
 
12. In their action taken reply, the Ministry stated that apart from two projects, i.e. Teesta 
Barrage Project and Upper Krishna Projects,  studies have been undertaken by National 
Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA) in respect of 53 AIBP assisted projects of 18 States. So far, 
reports in respect of 16 projects have been submitted by NRSA. It has been observed that 
there are variations in the created irrigation potential assessed through remote sensing and 
that reported by the Project Authorities. The Central Water Commission (CWC) has taken up 
the matter with the respective State Government s to identify the reasons for variations and 
ascertain the factual position. NR SA has been requested to expedite the completion of the 
projects. Further, Central Water Commission ha s already taken up the matter related to the 
differences in the created irrigation potential assessed by remote sensing and that reported by 
the Project Authorities with the Government of West Bengal. 
 
13. The Committee had earlier observed that pursuant to their recommendation, the 
Ministry had got studies made by Nati onal Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA), 
Hyderabad to assess the large variations th at exist between the created and utilised 
irrigation potential in the country.  They, therefore, desired the Ministry to caution the 
field authorities to desist from over-reporting of the irrigation potential, as also to be 
apprised of the results of studies carried out by NRSA in 53 AIBP aided projects in the 
country.  The Ministry have stated that  the Central Water Commission (CWC) had 
taken up the matter with the respective State Governments including Government of 
West Bengal.  The Committee regret to note th at the Ministry have given their reply in 
a very casual manner.  There is no mention as to when the CWC referred this matter to 
State Governments as also the matter relating to discrepancies in the created irrigation 

 
potential to Government of West Bengal.  The reply is also silent as to whether or not 
any specific time-frame has been given to the State Governments for submission of their 
replies.  The Committee would like to be informed  in this regard.  They also desire that 
accurate data pertaining to the creation and utilization be firmed up at the earliest, so 
that misleading information is not reported by the Government authorities.  The 
Committee would also like the Ministry to ask NRSA to submit Report in respect of all 
States and also process action to be taken thereon in a time bound manner.  The 
Committee may be apprised of the action taken in the matter at the earliest. 
 
D.    Implementation of Hydrology Project II 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.40) 
 
14. The Committee had observed that the Hydr ology Project-II is not being implemented 
in certain States as a matter of Government policy.  A budgetary allocation (plan) of Rs. 44 
crore has been made for 2008-2009 for the project.  There were 6 major consultancies costing 
a total of Rs. 81.4 crore for the entire project.  It  was expected that the consultants would be 
in place during the first quarter of 2008-09 and then activities related to procurement of 
Computer Software, machinery and equipments and execution of civil works would also pick 
up.  The cost of the project was likely to be Rs. 631.83 crore and implementation of the 
project was expected to actively start from 2008-2009 and continue till the year 2012.  The 
Committee desired that the consultants be appointed  at the earliest to avoid any further delay 
and the consequent increase in the cost of project.  The Committee had further desired the 
Ministry to review the policy for implemen ting the Hydrology project-II in the remaining 
States also. 
 
15. In their action taken reply, Government stat ed that there are six major consultancies 
to be procured under HP-II.  The procurement of three major consultancies, i.e. Technical 
Assistance (Implementation Support) and Ma nagement Consultancy, Development of 
Decision Support System (DSS-Planning) for In tegrated Water Resources Development and 
Management Consultancy and Development of Real Time Decision Support System 
Consultancy is in advanced stage. The pr ocurement process is well in progress for 

 
Consultancy for Hydrological Design Aid-Surface Water [HDA-SW]. Request for proposal 
for this consultancy has been issued to six shor t listed firms. As regards the consultancies for 
Hydrological Design Aid-Ground Water [HDA- GW] and Hydrological Design Aid-Water 
Quality [HDA-WQ], it has been decided in cons ultation with World Bank that the Terms of 
Reference of the consultancy may be finalized  with the help of Technical Assistance 
(Implementation Support) and Management consulta nt which is likely to be in place shortly 
in Project Coordination Secretariat.  The i ssue of implementing Hydrology Project-II in the 
other States will be discussed with the Wo rld Bank during the Mid Term Review of the 
project (likely to be carried out in September 2008). 
 
16. The Committee note that the Hydrology Project II (HP-II) was taken up with the 
assistance of International Bank for Reco nstruction and Development (World Bank) 
with a likely cost of Rs.631.83 crore in 13 States and 8 Central Agencies to promote the 
sustained and effective use of hydrological information system by all potential users 
concerned with water resources planning and management, contributing to improved 
productivity and cost effectiveness of water related investments to be implemented from 
2008-2009 and continued till the year 2012.  They further note with regret that the six 
Major consultancies which were proposed to be procured under HP-II at a cost of 
Rs.81.4 crore and expected to be in place by the first quarter of 2008-2009 have not 
been procured till date.  Further, it appe ars the Ministry have not drawn any time 
schedules for completion of procurement of consultancies in this regard, which is 
certain to result in further delay and consequent increase in the project cost.  The 
Committee desire the Ministry to expedite  finalisation of procurement of the 
consultancies for HP-II on top priority.  The Committee further reiterate their earlier 
recommendation to the Ministry to revie w the policy of implementing Hydrology 
Project-II in the remaining States too. Th e Committee desire to be apprised of the 
follow-up action taken in this regard at the earliest. 

 
E.    Performance evaluation studies of flood sector scheme and restructuring of    
      Brahmaputra Board. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.10) 
 
17. The Committee observed that to assess th e success of Flood Control schemes, the 
Ministry entrusted Performance Evaluation St udies of Flood Sector Schemes to ‘Indian 
Institute of Public Administration’ at a cost of Rs. 27.03 lakh.  The Study Report was 
expected by July 2008.  They also noted that a proposal for restructuring of the Brahmaputra 
Board had been under consideration of the Ministry for quite a long time now.  The 
Secretary, Water Resources had informed dur ing evidence that restructuring of the 
Brahmaputra Board requires an amendment to  the Brahmaputra Board Act.  The draft 
amendments were with the Ministry of Law fo r vetting and resolution of certain issues.  The 
Committee desired the Ministry to resolve the issues involved in the amendments without 
further loss of time and introduce the amending Bill in Parliament at the earliest.  
 
18. The Ministry have stated in the action ta ken reply that 4 progress reports were given 
by IIPA with regard to the Performance Ev aluation Studies of Flood Sector Schemes, 
entrusted to them. The analysis and processing of field data is progressing.  The final report 
is expected to be submitted by IIPA by August 2008.  
The proposal for restructuring of the Brahmaputra Board through an amendment of 
Brahmaputra Board Act is under active considera tion in the Ministry of Water Resources.  
Efforts are being made by the Ministry to resolve the issues involved in the amendments in 
consultation with the Ministry of Law at the earliest. 
 
19. The Committee note that the performance evaluation studies of Flood Sector 
Schemes was entrusted to Indian Institute of Public Administration (IIPA) at a cost of 
Rs.27.03 lakh.  The Study Report of IIPA wa s originally expected by July 2008.  
However, as per the latest reply of the Ministry, the final report about the Study 
conducted by IIPA was likely to be submitte d by August 2008.  They would like to be 
informed of the details of the final Study Report of the IIPA which might have been 

 
submitted by now.  The Committee is agonized to note the prolonged delay in the 
restructuring of Brahmaputra Board which has been under consideration of the 
Ministry for quite a long time now.  The Committee call upon the Ministry to expedite 
the finalisation of the draft amendment of Brahmaputra Board Act after expeditiously 
rounding off the consultation with the Ministry of Law and introduce the amending Bill 
in Parliament at an early date.  

 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.47) 
 
 The Committee observe that against the projection of Rs. 746 crore for 2007-2008 
and Rs. 688 crore for 2008-2009 under the plan hea d, the Ministry of Water Resources has 
been provided Rs. 600 crore each for both the financial years.  The shortfall is to the extent of 
Rs. 146 crore and Rs. 188 crore, respectively.  The allocation was reduced to Rs. 550 crore at 
RE stage 2007-2008.  According to the Ministr y, the reduced allocation at RE stage was 
primarily due to more time taken for the preparat ory work in respect of different schemes as 
it was the first year of the Eleventh Plan and expenditure was relatively less in the early part 
of the year.  The Ministry has stated that the shortfall in targets for the year 2007-2008 due to 
reduced allocation would be made up in the ne xt year through intensive monitoring of the 
physical and financial targets.  The Committee further observe that the plan allocation for the 
Central sector schemes has increased from  Rs. 312 crore during 2007-2008 to Rs. 612 crore 
during 2008-2009 after the Command Area Development & Water Management Scheme was 
transferred to State sector for which a separa te allocation of Rs. 350 crore has been made.  
The Committee expect the Ministry to utili ze the enhanced allocation during 2008-2009 and 
avoid reduction of allocation at RE stage as in  previous years.  The Committee desire the 
Ministry to review the pace of expenditure under different schemes on a quarterly basis.  
They desire to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
All Head of the Departments and Senior  Officers in-charge of Subject Matter 
Divisions closely monitor the progress on monthly basis.  The progress in respect of various 
schemes is also being reviewed by Secretary (WR) on a monthly basis.  
 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.48) 
 
 The Committee regret to observe that as many as 595 Gazetted and 1,924 non-
gazetted posts are vacant in the Ministry and its various subordinate offices.  These vacancies 
have accumulated over the years (till 2007).  The pe rusal of the details furnished reveals that 
there were 73 Gazetted and 573 non-gazetted vacancies in the Ministry and its various 
organizations upto the year 2000.  The Secretar y, Ministry of Water Resources, during the 
course of evidence admitted that they could fill up vacancies only to a limited extent and that 
due to the operation of ‘Optimization Scheme’ of the Ministry of Finance the number of 
posts stand abolished.  While sharing the concern of the Committee, the Ministry have 
informed that they have sought exemption fr om operation of the ‘Optimization Scheme’ of 
the Ministry of Finance as posts of officers in the Ministry are technical in nature which if 
remained vacant, affect the performance of  the Ministry.  The Committee recommend that 
approval of the competent authority for revivi ng the deemed abolished posts in CWPRS and 
other organizations including NEHARI under Brah maputra Board be obtained at the earliest 
and all the vacancies including the deemed abolished posts be filled up on an urgent basis.  
The Committee also recommend that all the unfilled vacancies on compassionate grounds 
against the 5% quota in the Ministry and its s ubordinate / attached offices be immediately 
filled up, if needed, by relaxation of DoPT Guidelines in respect of needy persons 
particularly in cases where the families of  deceased employees are without an earning 
member. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As in June 2008, there were 2569 vacancies in  both gazetted and non- gazetted grades in 
direct recruitment and promotion quotas in th e two attached and seven subordinate offices 
under the Ministry as indicated below:- 
Sl.No. Name of the Organisation No. of vacant posts
1. CWC 1235
2. CGWB 396
3. CWPRS 495
4. FBP 284
5. CSMRS 90
6. Main Ministry 66

 
7. UYRB Nil
8. SSCAC 03
9. BCB Nil
  2569
 
        Under the scheme of optimization of direct recruitment, a decision has been taken to 
abolish 394 direct recruitment posts meant fo r the recruitment year 2006-07, therefore, the 
number of vacancies for the year 2006-07 will be 2175(2569 - 394).    
       
Further exercise of optimization of direct  recruitment posts for the year 2007-08 is 
underway, after which the number of vacant posts  shall get further reduced.  Out of these 
2175 vacancies, 17 have been filled recently wh ile in respect of 118 direct recruitment 
vacancies requisitions have been sent to th e UPSC and SSC. Besides, in respect of 427 
vacancies meant for promotion, proposals are bei ng sent to the UPSC for fixing dates for the 
DPC meetings. After taking into account these vacancies for which action has been taken, the 
number of vacancies shall get further reduced to 1613 [2175 – (17+118+ 427)].  
 
 In respect of 174 existing vacancies, e ligible candidates are not available for 
promotion.  Out of these, relaxation in recru itment rules has been made in respect of 7 
vacancies.  Proposals for remaining posts are under examination. 
 
 As regards the appointment on compassionate grounds, concerned organizations have 
reported 22 vacancies under compassionate quota.  Proposal for filling 3 vacancies in the  
Ministry has been processed and is at the fina l stage of approval.  Concerned organizations 
have been directed to expedite the process of filling up these vacancies. 
 
 As regards the revival of posts unde r deemed abolition category, concerned 
organizations have been instructed to complete the action expeditiously. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.49) 
 The Committee are happy to note that subsequent to their recommendation in the 
Seventh Report on Demands for Grants ( 2007-2008) calling upon the Ministry of Water 
Resources to formulate a policy for declaring Major Irrigation Projects as ‘National Projects’ 
at an early date, the Group of Ministers (G oM) approved the criteria for selection of 

 
‘National Projects’ and are now to be brought  up before the Cabinet for its approval.  
Besides, the Finance Minister in his Budget Speech (2008-2009) announced that Government 
has declared 14 Projects as ‘National Projects’  of which 3 projects al one would require Rs. 
7,000 crore during the Eleventh Pla n.  The projects declared as ‘National Projects’ would be 
eligible for 90 per cent of project cost as Ce ntral Grant and the remaining 10 per cent would 
be borne by the State Governments.  A St eering Committee under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary, Water Resources is being constituted to monitor the progress of implementation of 
these projects with the support of the Central Water Commission.  The modalities of 
implementation of ‘National Projects’ are being worked out by the Ministry with CWC.  The 
Committee desire the Ministry to work out such  modalities within 3 months so as to enable 
early implementation of the projects.   
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendations of the GoM regardi ng National Projects were brought before 
Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 7 th February 2008.    The Union Cabinet approved the 
proposal with the direction that mode of fi nancing be worked out in consultation with 
Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance.  Consequently, the Steering Committee for 
implementation of National Projects has been constituted in April 2008 under the 
Chairpersonship of Secretary, Water Resour ces. Draft guidelines for implementation of 
National Projects have been prepared by the Mi nistry and same have been sent to the 
Planning Commission and Ministry of Finan ce along with a note on proposed mode of 
financing of the National Projects. Further ac tion will be taken after approval of mode of 
financing by the Planning Commissi on and Ministry of Finance as per the directions of the 
Union Cabinet. 
    Comments of the Committee 
 
   (Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.50) 
 
 The Committee observe that the threat to climate change is now considered as an 
established fact.  The Ministry of Water Resources has reportedly initiated studies on the 

 
effect of climate change on water resources by associating organizations under the Ministry, 
research institutions and reputed academic ins titutions of the country.  The CWC has been 
assigned the task of overall coordination.  The Preliminary Report on the basis of analysis of 
time series of rainfall data and flow data analysis of related secondary information 
particularly about snow melt and glacier melt and the results of the studies carried out by 
National Institute of Hydrology are likely to  be completed by June 2008.  The Committee 
desire the Ministry to enlist support from not  only the academic institutions but other NGOs/ 
individuals engaged in carrying out the studies  on the impact of climate change on water 
resources so that a practical solution to meet the adverse effects of climate change is found.  
The Committee would like to be informed of th e progress made in this regard including the 
report to be made available on the subject by the CWC.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As desired by the Committee, the Standing Committee for ‘Assessment of Impact of 
Climate Change on Water Resources’ under the Chairman, Central Water Commission 
(CWC) has been re-constituted to include a member representing NGO.  Similarly, a Steering 
Committee has also been constituted unde r the Secretary (WR) which includes 
representatives from NGO and experts.  The preliminary ‘Consolidated Report on Effect of 
Climate Change on Water Resources’ has already been finalised by CWC.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.51) 
 
 The Committee observe that efficiency in water use is as important as creation of 
irrigation potential and its fuller utilization.  The Committee are given to understand that 
irrigation efficiency in most of the irrigati on systems in the country ranges between 25% and 
35% and in exceptional cases the usage is between 40% and 45%.  The water for crop 
consumption per hectare of the gross irrigated area (4.8 feet) is much higher as compared to 
water use in USA (3 feet).  The Working Group of the National Commission on Integrated 
Water Resources Development Plan (NCIWRDP) has proposed efficiency norms for 
assessment of water requirement for irriga tion purposes from surface water.  The 
Commission was of the view that 35% to 40% efficiency in surface water and 65% to 70% 

 
efficiency in ground water will be a fair appr oximation.  The Ministry has reported that on 
farm application efficiency of 60% to 80% and conveyance efficiency of 50% to 70% has 
reportedly been achieved as per water use efficien cy studies carried out in respect of certain 
projects in Uttar Pradesh.  The CWC has taken up studies in respect of various other projects 
in different States in this regard and the studies are in progress.  The Committee urge the 
Ministry to get the assessment studies in itiated by CWC completed in a time bound manner 
which in their opinion would serve as a tool for the Ministry to evolve and initiate measures 
aimed at improving Water Use Efficiency amongst different sectors.  They also desire the 
Ministry to take suitable measures to achieve th e levels of irrigation efficiency as envisaged 
by the National Commission on Integrated Water Resources Development Plan 
(NCIWRDP).  They are also given to understand that Water and Land Management Institutes 
(WALMIs) have undertaken studies of 45 projects to assess the water use efficiency therein.  
They desire Government to take a final vi ew on the findings of the study by WALMIs and 
take remedial measures on the identified problem  areas for improving water use efficiency.   
They desire to be informed of the action taken in respect of the above. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Regarding the “Studies Related to Water Use Efficiency of the Completed Major and 
Medium Irrigation Projects”, it is submitted that  43 projects have been taken up for studies 
by CWC and following institutions have been awarded the studies. 
 
Institutions Number of Studies 
North Eastern Regional Institute of 
Water & Land Management , Assam 
5 Projects of Assam and 
3 Projects of Manipur 
Water & Land Management Institute, 
Patna 
5 Projects of Bihar 
Haryana Irrigation Research & 
Management Institute, Haryana 
2 Projects of Haryana 
Irrigation & Power Research Institute, 
Punjab 
2 Projects of Punjab 
Water and Land Management Institute, 
Lucknow 
6 Projects of Uttar Pradesh 
Water & Land Management Training & 20 Projects of Andhra Pradesh 

 
Research Institute, Hydrabad 
Total 43 Projects 
  
 The matter is being vigorously pursued with the respective organisations for early 
finalization of studies. So far, the draft final reports of the studies in respect of 35 projects 
have been completed. The matter is being pursued with concerned organisations for 
completion of the remaining studies at the earliest.  
 
 Ministry of Water Resources also provides assistance to States under AIBP for 
extension, renovation & modernisation of project s, which help in improving the efficiency. 
Similarly, the command area development and adoption of better practices for water 
management help in improving the efficien cy, Ministry of water Resources provides 
assistance to States under the scheme s “Command Area development and Water 
Management”. In order to encourage farmers in adoptions of modern techniques and better 
practices for improving the water use efficiency, Ministry of Water Resources has taken up 
“Farmers Participatory Action Research  Programme” under which 5000 programmes are 
being implemented. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.36) 
 
The budget allocation (plan) for Major a nd Medium Irrigation for the year 2008-09 
has been pegged at Rs. 209.90 crore which is Rs. 77.40 crore higher than the allocation in BE 
2007-08 of Rs. 132.50 crore which was subseque ntly reduced to Rs. 105.82 crore at RE 
stage.  The reduction at RE stage was due to de lay in finalisation of consultancies for various 
activities under Hydrology Project and delays in getting necessary inputs for the Water 
Resource Information System.  However, these delays are proposed to be made up in the next 
year through intensive monitoring of the phys ical and financial targets for which a 
mechanism of monthly review has been started.  The Committee expect the Ministry to keep 
a close watch on the achievement of physical and financial targets with an intensive 
monitoring of monthly reviews so that the allocations provided in the current year are not 
reduced at the RE stage on account of poor performa nce.  They desire to be apprised of the 
utilization of funds on this account. 

 
Reply of the Government 
 
As mentioned in reply to para 2.47, proce ss of monthly monitoring by Heads of the 
Departments has already been initiated.  Progress in respect of each of the scheme is also 
being monitored by Secretary (WR).  A letter has been addressed to heads of all the 
organisations and concerned officials requesting them for necessary actions and ensuring that 
the plan expenditure is evenly distributed during 2008-09 and budget for the plan schemes is 
fully utilized without any reduction at the RE 2008-09  stage on account of poor 
performance. The Finance Wing of Ministry of Water Resources has also instructed all the 
concerned Heads of various Wings of Ministry of Water Resources to take appropriate action 
to boost up the expenditure in the following months  of current financial year and also ensure 
that there is no reduction in the allocation unde r the schemes at the RE 2008-09  stage.  The 
expenditure during 2008-09 in respect of the Plan schemes under Major and Medium 
Irrigation upto June 2008 is Rs. 18.78 crore. This expenditure is about 8.95% of BE for the 
year 2008-09 which was only 4.38% upto June 2007 during the year 2007-08.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.40) 
 The Committee note that the Hydrology Pr oject (Phase-I) was implemented in 9 
States with the International Development A ssociation (World Bank) assistance of SDR 75.1 
million under a credit agreement with the Govern ment of India.  Hydrology Project II has 
been taken up with the assistance of International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
(World Bank) in 13 States and 8 Central Agenci es to promote the sustained and effective use 
of hydrological information system by all poten tial users concerned with water resources 
planning and management, contributing to impr oved productivity and cost effectiveness of 
water related investments.  The Hydrology Project-II is not being implemented in certain 
States as a matter of Government policy.  The budgetary allocation (plan) of Rs. 44 crore has 
been made for 2008-2009 for the project.  There ar e 6 major consultancies costing a total of 
Rs. 81.4 crore for the entire project.  It is exp ected that the consultants would be in place 
during the first quarter of 2008-09 and then ac tivities related to procurement of Computer 
Software, machinery and equipments and execution of civil works will also pick up.  The 
cost of the project is likely to be Rs. 631.83 crore and implementation of the project will 
actively start from 2008-2009 and continue till th e year 2012.  The Committee desire that the 

 
consultants be appointed at the earliest to avoid any further delay and the consequent increase 
in the cost of project.  The Committee further desire the Ministry to review the policy for 
implementing Hydrology project-II in the remaining States also. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
There are six major consultancies to be procured under HP-II. The procurement of 
three major consultancies i.e. Technical  Assistance (Implementation Support) and 
Management Consultancy, Development of Decision Support System (DSS-Planning) for 
Integrated Water Resources Development a nd Management Consultancy and Development 
of Real Time Decision Support System Consulta ncy is in advanced stage. The procurement 
process is well in progress for Consultanc y for Hydrological Design Aid-Surface Water 
[HDA-SW]. Request for proposal for this consu ltancy has been issued to six short listed 
firms. As regards the consultancies for Hydrological Design Aid-Ground Water [HDA-GW] 
and Hydrological Design Aid-Water Quality [HDA-WQ], it has been decided in consultation 
with World Bank that the Terms of Reference of  the consultancy may be finalized with help 
of Technical Assistance (Implementation Support) and Management consultant which is 
likely to be in place shortly in Project Coordinate Secretariat. 
 
The issue of implementing Hydrology Project-II in the other states will be discussed 
with the World Bank during the Mid Term Review of the project (likely to be carried out in 
September 2008). 
 
    Comments of the Committee 
 
   (Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.41) 
 
 The Committee note that the management of water resources is a highly complex task 
and involves multi disciplinary domain incl uding data execution, numerical model, 
optimization, data warehousing and the analysis  of socio-economic, environmental and legal 
issues.  Water Resources Information System plays a vital role in achieving the optimal 

 
utilization of water resources.  The scheme of Development of Water Resources Information 
System was launched in the Eleventh Plan (2007-08) with an allocation of Rs. 46 crore 
during 2008-09.  The Expenditure Finance Comm ittee of the Ministry of Finance has 
recommended an outlay of Rs. 242.3 crore.  The Committee observe that the scheme 
launched at the start of the Eleventh Plan ha s already been delayed due to non-completion of 
some components of the scheme in the first year.  They, therefore, desire the Ministry to take 
all necessary steps to increase the pace of activities under the scheme so that updated and 
more useful data is available for development of water resources in the country. 
 
Reply of the Government  
The scheme for “Development of Water Re sources Information System” has since 
been approved by CCEA during its meeting held on 12 th June 2008 at an estimated cost of 
Rs. 234.30 crores. The approval has since been c onveyed to all concerned vide order dated 
23rd June 2008. Necessary actions have already been initiated by Central Water Commission 
for implementing the various components of the schemes and completing the works as per 
target 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4.11) 
 The budgetary allocation for Minor Irrigati on for 2008-09 has been increased to Rs. 
116.10 crore which is Rs. 36.05 crore more allocation as compared to the previous year.  The 
higher allocation is provided for the expenditure  likely to be incurred on purchase of deep 
drilling rigs, implementation of demonstrative ar tificial recharge structures, construction of 
piezometers monitoring wells, etc. which could not materialize during 2007-2008.  The 
Committee regret to note further that if the works planned for previous years could have been 
completed in the scheduled time frame, no need would have arisen in the first instance for 
reduction of allocation at RE stage in 2007-08.  Also, the enhanced allocation in the current 
Financial Year could have been better utili zed for some new works.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire the Ministry to take necessa ry steps to avoid such delays in execution of 
scheduled works which not only result in cost escalation but also delay the benefits accruing 
from the scheme.   

 
Reply of the Government 
Steps taken for utilization of funds under various activities are as under: 
 
(i) Construction of Piezometers 
 Tendering process for outsourcing construction of piezometer monitoring wells is 
being completed.  During 3 rd quarter of 2008-09, 50 piezometer wells are to be 
constructed with the likely expenditure of Rs.0.50 crore whereas, 150 piezometers are 
planned for completion in 4th quarter with expenditure of Rs.1.50 crore.   
 
(ii) Artificial Recharge  
 Implementation of demonstrative artificial recharge works have been stepped up.  An 
amount of Rs.55.39 lakh has been released to States.  Proposals amounting to Rs.2.00 
crore have been received from States and are under examination in CGWB.  Funds to 
the States are expected to be released by October 2008.  States are being pursued to 
expedite submission of further proposals.   
 (iii) Procurement of Deep Drilling Rigs 
 The matter has been reviewed in the Gove rnment and CGWB have been directed to 
expedite purchase of rigs.   
 
Recommendation (Para No.4.12) 
 
 A scheme was announced in the B udget Speech during 2007-08 for recharging 
ground water through ‘Dug Wells’ in 1,065 over e xploited or critical blocks covering 100 
districts and 7 States with a cost of about  Rs.4,000 per ‘Dug Well’.  A subsidy of 100% to 
small and marginal farmers and 50% to ot hers was proposed.  No new ‘Dug Wells’ are 
proposed to be constructed, however, the scheme is being implemented through 4.455 
million existing irrigation ‘Dug Wells’ owned by farmers.  The Guidelines for 
implementation of the scheme have been circulated to the concerned State Governments.  
The capacity building / mass awareness is pr oposed to be carried throughout 2008-09.  The 
process of selection of beneficiaries has star ted.  The Committee expect that on selection of 
beneficiaries after issue of Guidelines some  constructive work would be taken up and the 

 
benefits from the recharged ‘Dug Wells’ would begin to accrue.  They would like to be 
apprised of the progress made in this regard at periodic intervals. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
• The State Sector Scheme on "Artific ial Recharge of Ground Water through 
Dugwells" is being implemented in th e 1180 Over-exploited, Critical and Semi-
Critical blocks, covering 146 districts in the State of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu.   
• Capacity building programmes have been organised in all states by NABARD. 
• Survey work for compilation of the list of beneficiaries and their bank account 
numbers is in progress in different states. 
• The States have identified Nodal Depart ment and constituted State Level Steering 
Committee (SLSC) and District Level Im plementation and Monitoring Committees 
(DLIMC). 
• Data for base line survey has been collected by CGWB. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.9) 
 
 The Committee observe that Flood For ecasting, River Management Activities and 
works related to Border Areas, and Infrastructure Development are some of the schemes 
covered under the Flood Control.  The plan a llocation for flood control sector was Rs. 66.45 
crore and Rs. 67.09 crore at BE & RE 2007-08.  Rs. 211 crore have been provided for the 
year 2008-09.  The outlay for River Management activities for 2008-09 has been proposed at 
Rs. 160 crore as against Rs. 46 crore in 2007-08.  The increase in plan allocation for 2008-09 
is on account of (i) the increase in activities of  Majuli Island, Dholla-Hattighuli entrusted to 
Brahmaputra Board; (ii) drainage developm ent works of Brahmaputra Board; and (iii) 
proposed bank protection works along border rive rs with Bangladesh and Pakistan.  The 
increased amounts will be utilized for moderni zation of data collection and transmission 
systems undertaken by installing self-recording ra in gauges, automatic water level recorders 
and satellite based communication system.  The Committee further observe that floods create 
havoc every year in almost all parts of the c ountry and they are of the opinion that if works 

 
materialize as planned than to some extent th e after effects of the fl ood could be minimized.  
The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to ensure that all works planned during the 
current financial year are completed and alloca tions are utilized fully.  An allocation of Rs. 
46.00 crore has been made for protection of Majuli Island from out of Rs. 160 crore provided 
for River Management Works.  The Committee feel that this would boost the pace of work of 
protection of Majuli Island undertaken by Brah maputra Board as there is an alarming 
decrease in area of island due to erosion by floods .  They would like to be informed of the 
progress as well as efficacy of the works undertaken for protection of Majuli Island by 
Brahmaputra Board.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
During the current financial year an alloca tion of Rs. 46 crores have been made for 
protection of Majuli Island from out of Rs . 160 crores provided for River Management 
works.  The allocation has been made to boos t the pace of work of  protection of Majuli 
Island undertaken by  Brahmaputra Board.  Presently Phase-I works with sanctioned 
estimated amount  of Rs. 41.28 crores are under fina l stage.  An expenditure of Rs. 40 crores 
has been incurred on Phase-I works and 92% of the works have been completed till June, 
2008.   
Out of Rs. 40 crores incurred by the Boar d, an amount of about Rs. 12 crores has 
been spent during the current financial year, 2008-09 till June, 2008.  
 
In view of the directions given by Hon’ble Prime Minister during the meeting chaired 
by him on 29.10.2007 for protection of the Majuli Is land effectively, the Brahmaputra Board 
prepared a fresh DPR for a sum of Rs.159 cror es covering the works of Phase-II and Phase-
III works with the increased scope of works on th e basis of the findings of model studies and 
the behavior of the river and submitted in the month of March 2008, which is under technical 
scrutiny in Central Water Commission. 
  
Further, a Standing Committee on Majuli Island was constituted by the Ministry of 
Water Resources under the Chairmanship of  Member (RM), CWC during December 2007 to 
review and suggest the measures for the protection of Majuli Island.  The Committee visited 

 
the vulnerable locations of the Majuli Isla nd during first week of the January 2008 and 
recommended some emergent works to be executed by Brahmaputra Board prior to monsoon 
of 2008 amounting to Rs.5.00 crores in addition to the works of Phase-I.   
 
The Standing Committee on Majuli visited the Majuli Island again on 16-17 June, 
2008 and visited the works on the vulnerable lo cations.  It was generally felt by this 
Committee that the overall extent of works implemented by the Brahmaputra Board was 
satisfactory. 
Recommendation (Para No.6.8) 
The Committee note that the Farakka Barrage Project was started in 1962 with the 
objective of the operation and maintenance of Farakka Barrage and associated structures 
including anti-erosion measures for safety of  the Barrage.  Farakka Barrage Project was 
allocated Rs. 75 crore during 2008-2009 as agains t Rs. 33 crore in the previous year.  
Additional allocation of Rs. 42 crore was intended for anti-erosion measures in the extended 
jurisdiction of the Farakka Barrage Project along the river Ganga-Padma main stem for 
completion before the onset of Monsoon 2008.  It is heartening to note that the anti-erosion 
measures in a combination of revetment of banks along the launching apron being carried out 
under the technical guidance of CWC have been able to arrest the bank erosion successfully 
at Panchanandpur village in district Malda.  The Committee appreciates the work completed 
under the project.  They desire the Ministry to inform them of the progress of the anti-erosion 
measures undertaken in the extended jurisdiction of the project. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
During the current financial year 2008-09, Farakka Barrage Project (FBP) Authorities 
have undertaken anti-erosion works in critical reaches, for a total length of 3270 m at a cost 
of Rs. 28.89 crore, along the river Ganga-Padma at/near the village Birnagar/ Simultala and 
Manikchak Ghat on left bank of Ganga in di strict Malda and at Ramrampur, Arjunpur and 
Duliyan villages in district Murshidabad (W B).  In addition, strengthening of partially 
damaged works, in a length of 760 m, was taken up at Birnagar/ Simultala at a cost of Rs. 
1.18 crore.  In addition, temporary works at Ma nikchak Ghat in a length of 1033 m were also 
undertaken at a cost of Rs. 1.43 crore.  Thus, the anti-erosion works at a total cost of Rs. 

 
31.50 crore were undertaken by FBP in the month of April/May, 2008 along the river Ganga-
Padma in district Malda and Murshidabad of  West Bengal.  The physical progress, as 
reported on 31st July, 2008, of the above works, is summarized as under: 
 
1. Anti-erosion works on river Ganga at  Ramrampur/ Arjunpur and Duliyan in 
district Murshidabad. 
 
The anti-erosion works downstream of the barrage in district Murshidabad at 
Ramrampur / Arjunpur and Duliyan villages were   taken up in a length of 700 m at a total 
cost of Rs. 6.07 crore.  These works have been completed (up to 97%) as reported on 
31.7.2008. 
 
2. Anti-erosion works on river Ganga at/near Birnagar in district Malda  
 
The anti-erosion works in a length of 870 m at Birnagar have been completed except 
some repair works of the existing embankmen t in low lying area which has been filled up 
with water due to onset of early monsoon a nd local problems faced in the acquisition of 
private land earlier.  The remaining work will be completed after monsoon.  In order to 
restrict the spill over of river waters over th e bank, a temporary bund has been constructed to 
sustain a river discharge of 20 lakh cusecs. 
 
3. Anti-erosion works on river Ganga near Manikchak Ghat. 
Anti-erosion works on the left bank of Ganga near Manikchak Ghat in district Malda 
were undertaken in a length of 1700 m at a co st of Rs. 14.51 crore.   As reported by the 
project authorities, 94 % of embankment construction and 95% boulder pitching were 
already completed on 31st July’2008.  The work of boulder f illed G I Crates apron, placed in 
the river under water, was slightly delayed due to onset of early monsoon this year and 88% 
work was completed on 31st July, 2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
4. Temporary anti-erosion works at Manikchak Ghat. 
Besides the regular anti-erosion works, tem porary measures were also completed in a 
length of 1033 m at Manikchak Ghat at a cost of Rs. 1.43 crore by dumping earth filled bags 
in nylon crates to arrest erosion in river bed and bank erosion.   
 
5. Repair of partially damaged works at  Birnagar/Simultala 
The partially damaged works at Birnagar/S imultala upstream of Farakka Barrage in 
district Malda in a length of 760 m are also completed at a cost of Rs. 1.18 crore. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.7.21) 
 
The Committee note that the Accelerat ed Irrigation Benefit Programme was 
conceived in 1996 to provide financial assistan ce to the States as grant for the irrigation 
projects and as an incentive to the States for cr eating irrigation infrastructure in the country.  
The Finance Minister has enhanced the allocation under AIBP for 2008-09 to Rs. 20,000 
crore, i.e. 43% increase from 2007-08.  AIBP has been revamped to complete more irrigation 
projects in the shortest possible time, 24 Major and Medium and 753 Minor Irrigation 
Projects are likely to be completed in 2007-08 creating 5 lakh hectare additional irrigation 
potential.  Based on the assessment of the proposals from the State Governments, Ministry of 
Water Resources has projected a grant requi rement of Rs. 10,200 crore for the year 2008-09 
to the Planning Commission against which Rs. 4,300 crore has been provided for AIBP for 
2008-09. The Ministry would approach the Planning Commission for additional allocation at 
Revised Estimate stage.   The Committee exp ect the Ministry also to pursue the State 
Governments to come forward with matching share of the funds which would enable them to 
mobilize the allocation of Rs. 10,200 crore project ed earlier.  The Committee, at the same 
time desire the Ministry to ensure that the f unds allocated are released in time and are fully 
utilized by the States. 
Reply of the Government 
 
In a bid to get allocation of the order of Rs.10,200 crore under AIBP, the Ministry has 
already approached Planning Commission, Ministry of Finance and Prime Minister. This will 

 
be followed up by the Ministry from time to time in order to ensure timely release of central 
Assistance under AIBP to the States to ensure full utilization of funds at the earliest.  In order 
to ensure proper utilization of AIBP funds, a series of meetings with the Secretaries 
(WR/Irrigation) of State Government have been held during May to July 2008 in which State 
Governments were persuaded to come forward w ith their AIBP release proposals at an early 
date along with utilization certificates of grants  released earlier and matching share for the 
new proposals. These issues were also di scussed in the conference of Secretaries 
(WR/Irrigation) in June 2008. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.7.22) 
 
 The Committee observe that 23 new pr ojects have been recommended by the 
Ministry of Water Resources to the Ministry of Finance for release of funds in 2007-08.  A 
perusal of the list of 23 project s reveals that only a few States have cornered the major 
portion of the Central assistance.  While the Committee are happy to note that few States are 
taking initiative and submitting good proposals fo r getting Central Assistance under AIBP, 
many others have not been able to take advant age of the vast sums being provided as Central 
Assistance year after year.   They, however, desi re the Ministry to encourage and assist other 
States to come forward with the viable pr oposals for more equitable share of funds among 
the States for AIBP so that the benefit of co mpleted irrigation projects is available to the 
farming community evenly all over the country.   
 
Reply of the Government 
The issue was discussed with the Secr etaries (WR/Irrigation) of the State 
Governments in a series of meeting on review of the AIBP during May to July 2008. The 
states were persuaded to submit viable propos als for ongoing as well as new projects as per 
relaxed guidelines of the AIBP effective fr om December 2006. The issue was also discussed 
in the conference of Secretaries (WR/Irrigation) held in June 2008. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.7.23) 
 The Committee further observe that some St ates have been conferred special category 
status for availing Central grants up to 90%.  Major / Medium Projects and Surface Water 

 
Minor Irrigation Schemes of non special categor y States benefiting drought prone / tribal 
areas are also given up to 90% grant.   Furt hermore, Government propose to provide 90% of 
project cost as grant for projects identified as ‘National Projects.’  The Committee, during the 
course of many of their on-the- spot Study Visits have also come across suggestions from 
States for consideration of their cases for 90% grant.    However, the Ministry have no 
proposal to accord special category status to th e new States.  The Committee desire that in 
view of the demand of various States for gran t of special category st atus, the Ministry of 
Water Resources / Planning Commission need to review the policy for recognition of States 
under the special category in respect of AIBP Projects.  They would like to be informed of 
the action taken in the matter.   
 
Reply of the Government 
The view of the Planning Commission has been  sought in the matter. The criteria for 
defining the State as Special Category State is decided by the National Development Council 
and requests of the States for according special st atus are to be raised by the States in the 
National Development Council. However, a pproved projects of the non special category 
states benefiting drought prone and tribal areas are already included under Accelerated 
Irrigation Benefits Programme without insisting for inclusion against a completed project and 
are provided 90% grant on proportional basis ba sed on the actual drought prone/tribal area 
benefited.  
Recommendation (Para No.7.24) 
 
 The Committee note that evaluation studies  of AIBP Projects had been taken up by 
the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation during 2004-05.  The final report 
of the Study was submitted in July 2007.  The Mi nistry of Water Resources has examined / 
studied the report and corrective action is being taken through CWC to resolve the problems 
identified by taking up the matter the with Stat e Governments.  The Committee find that the 
issues highlighted in the Report are very common and confronted by the implementing 
authorities at the field level on almost all proj ects at the implementation stage.  They have 
also come across these issues during many of thei r field visits and informal discussions with 
the implementing authorities in States.   Th e Committee recommend the Ministry to take up 

 
these issues with the State Governments and devise a solution to the problems as they 
consider these to be the causative factors for tardy implementation and resultant spilling over 
of projects from plan to plan.  They desire to be informed of the action taken in the matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has directed Central Water Commission to take up the matter with the 
State Governments/Project implementing agen cies. The CWC has taken up the matter with 
the state governments through their Regional Offices. The issues were also discussed in a 
series of meeting convened by the Secretary (WR) during May to July 2008 while reviewing 
performance of the States in water sector schemes and their programme for the year 2008-09. 
The state governments have been advised to ta ke corrective measures while CWC would be 
monitoring the progress of implementation.   
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.37) 
 
 The Committee are constrained to observe that the number of on-going projects has 
been steadily increasing ever since the Sta nding Committee on Water Resources have taken 
note of the increasing allocations made for the purpose year after year as observed by them in 
their First, Third, Fifth and Seventh Reports (14 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants.  
According to the Ministry, there were 471 on-going projects which sp illed over from Ninth 
Plan to Tenth Plan.  Out of these, 178 Projects were likely to be completed, however, only 
102 projects have been reported as completed.  In addition to the projects which spilled over 
from Ninth to Tenth Plan (369 projects), 300 new projects were proposed to be undertaken 
during Tenth Plan though only 148 are reported to have been undertaken of which only 1 
Medium and 2 ERM Projects were complete d during the Tenth Plan and remaining 145 
Projects spilled over to Eleventh Plan.  The Committee are dismayed to further observe that 
as per the report of the Working Group on Wate r Resources for the Eleventh Plan, 300 new 
projects are proposed to be taken up during the Eleventh Plan.  Thus, there is a total spill over 
of 514 projects from the Ninth Plan to the Elev enth Plan.  As the normal gestation period of 
major projects is considered to be 10 to 15 years while for medium projects the same is taken 
as 5 to 8 years, it could be safely concluded th at the projects taken during a particular plan 
period would definitely spill over to another plan even in normal course.  Given this 
backdrop, the specious plea of the Ministry that  it acts as a facilitator and provides assistance 
/ guidance as and when necessary to the Stat e Governments who plan, execute and maintain 
the water resources projects, is unacceptable.  The Ministry’s argument that new Projects are 
included on the request / requirement of the State Governments does not hold good and 
points to the failure on the part of the Ministry  to guide the States properly on this aspect.  
The Committee are of the opinion that the Pl anning Commission and the Ministry of Water 
Resources should have acted tough keeping in view the overall financial health of majority of 
the State Governments who are not in a position to  raise even the O & M costs in respect of 
many of the major projects.  The Committee,  therefore, recommend that the Planning 

 
Commission and the Ministry give a careful thought on putting a cap on the number of new 
projects that could be proposed by the State G overnments as in the case of funding of AIBP 
Projects where the Ministry gives sanction for in clusion of a new project only if one of the 
on-going projects has been completed.  The Co mmittee would like to be apprised of the 
measures taken or proposed to be taken on this aspect.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As desired, the Planning Commission has been consulted in the matter. Planning 
Commission has expressed concern over the pro liferation of taking up of new irrigation 
projects and in the Eleventh Plan document has noted “New projects should be undertaken 
only after confirming that adequate funds for ongoing Programmes are available, in the State 
Plan as well as the availability of Central Assistance by the Planning Commission.  However, 
many states take up new projects in the name of rectifying the regional imbalance, and 
meeting the requirement of different areas.  The states are empowered to take up the projects 
in irrigation on their own wisdom as water is a state subject.   The State Plan funds allocated 
by the Planning Commission are in the form of  block grants and loans and States are 
empowered to do the inter-se sectoral distri bution which includes irrigation and may fund 
new projects also. Hence, capping the number of  new projects has to be done by the States 
and Planning Commission would persuade the States against taking up the new projects 
without completing the old projects”.  
 
Broadly, the Ministry of Water Resources is in agreement with the view expressed by 
the Planning Commission.  
  
 

 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE: 
 
 
 
 
 
-  NIL -

 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.38) 
 
 The Committee are perturbed to note that against a target of 6.5 m.ha. additional 
irrigation potential only 4.543 m.ha. irrigation potential has been created which amounts to 
approx. 70% achievement.  The shortfall was due  to non-allocation of sufficient funds by the 
State Governments under the State Plan, delay in land acquisition, rehabilitation of displaced 
persons, etc.  Further, about 81% of the created potential through MMI Projects has been 
assessed to be utilized.  With a view to have proper assessment of the reasons for the gap 
between the creation and utilization of irrigation potential, the Ministry awarded studies 
through IIMs at Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Kolkata and Lucknow.  The IIM, Ahmedabad 
submitted an interim report and for others the reports are awaited.  Furthermore, an ambitious 
target of creation of 9 m.ha. irrigation poten tial through MMI has been fixed by the Ministry 
for the Eleventh Plan.  The Committee’s examination of the issue revealed a continuous trend 
of lesser than the targeted creation and further lesser utilization than the actual creation of 
irrigation potential.  The Committee in th eir earlier Reports have been prodding the 
Government to make earnest efforts to incr ease the creation as well as its utilization of 
potential.  The Committee hope that the outco me of the studies being conducted by IIMs 
across the country would help the Ministry to ta ke appropriate steps to rectify the imbalance 
in this respect in the Eleventh Plan.  They w ould like to be informed of the findings of the 
study conducted by various IIMs and action taken thereon by the Ministry by 30 June, 2008.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The studies related to gap between the i rrigation potential created and utilised were 
awarded to Indian Institute of Management (IIM), Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Kolkata & 
Lucknow in August 2007. Due to delay in receipt of necessary secondary data /information 
from the respective State Governments and coll ection of primary data through field surveys, 
the IIMs have requested for the extension of tim e. As per revised schedule the reports are to 
be submitted by all the IIMs by 31
st August, 2008.  

 
The findings of the studies would be submitted for kind information of the Standing 
Committee soon after the receipt of the reports from IIMs. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
Recommendation (Para No.3.39) 
 
 The Committee observe that pursuant to their recommendation in the Seventh Report 
that remote sensing technology be used to bridge the gap between the creation and utilization 
of irrigation potential, the Government asked the National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA), 
Hyderabad, to assess the variations in this  regard by using remote sensing technology.  
NRSA Report reveals large variations in fiel d study and remote sensing technology data in 
respect of the Teesta Hydel Project in West Benga l.  The large variation is attributed to lack 
of continuity in canals at several places a nd non-construction of hydraulic structures.  The 
Government of West Bengal has been asked to clarify the over reporting in this regard.  The 
Committee regret to note that the fragmented por tions of the canals / infrastructures created 
have been considered as potential created whereas it should have been on actual basis.  The 
Committee desire the Ministry to caution the fiel d authorities to desist from over reporting of 
irrigation potential and warn them of strict action in case of over reporting.  The Committee 
also desire to be informed of the results of NRSA studies in 53 AIBP aided projects.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Apart from two projects i.e. Teesta Barra ge Project and Upper Krishna Projects, 
studies have been undertaken by National Remote  Sensing Agency (NRSA) in respect of 53 
AIBP assisted projects of 18 St ates. So far, reports in respect of 16 projects have been 
submitted by NRSA. It has been observed that th ere are variations in the created irrigation 
potential assessed through remote sensing and th at reported by the Project Authorities. The 
Central Water Commission (CWC) has taken up the matter with the respective State 
Governments to identify the reasons for varia tions and ascertain the factual position. NRSA 
has been requested to expedite the completion of the projects.  

 
 Further, Central Water Commission has al ready taken up the matter related to the 
differences in the created irrigation potential assessed by remote sensing and that reported by 
the Project Authorities with the Government of West Bengal.  
 
    Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5.10) 
 
 The Committee note that to assess the succe ss of Flood Control schemes, the Ministry 
has entrusted Performance Evaluation Studies of Flood Sector Schemes to ‘Indian Institute of 
Public Administration’ at a cost of Rs. 27.03 lakh.  The Study Report is expected by July 
2008.  The Committee would like to be informed  of the findings of the report and action 
taken by the Ministry thereon.  They are, how ever, constrained to note that a proposal for 
restructuring of the Brahmaputra Board has b een under consideration of the Ministry for 
quite a long time now.  The Secretary, Water Resources informed during evidence that 
restructuring of the Brahmaputra Board requi res an amendment to the Brahmaputra Board 
Act.  The draft amendments are with the Ministry of Law for vetting and resolution of certain 
issues.  The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to resolve the issues involved in the 
amendments without further loss of time and introduce the amending Bill in Parliament at the 
earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government  
 
In regard to the Performance Evaluation Studies of Flood Sector Schemes entrusted to 
Indian Institute of Public Administration, it is  mentioned that IIPA has 4 progress reports.  
Based on these reports, the present status of progress of work is given below: 
 
(a) IIPA team has so far visited the following sites: 
 
(i) 10 anti-erosion/bank protection works sites in Tamil Nadu, Uttar 
Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal and Assam, 
(ii) 2 drainage system improvement sites in Bihar and Orissa, 

 
(iii) 23 Flood Forecasting / Hydrological  Observation sites of CWC in 
Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Benga l, Orissa, Tamil Nadu, Puducherry 
and Assam, 
(iv) Investigation site of Teesta Hydro Electric Project in Sikkim, and 
CWC offices  at Varanasi and Kolkata. 
 
(a) The team collected all available project related documents, conducted detailed 
interviews with senior officer of the CWC, controlling and monitoring these sites 
and discussed the relevant issues with all site level staff.  Project level documents 
such as DPR, monitoring reports and othe r reports prepared by experts prior to 
approval of some of these projects have been collected and are being analyzed.  
 
(b) The team has also collected the relevant letters and copies of contract signed by 
the State Government indicating important dates and flow of funds in the specific 
project cycle.  The team has also photographically documented various aspects of 
operations and site conditions.  
 
The analysis and processing of field data is  progressing.  The final report is expected 
to be submitted by IIPA by August, 2008.  
 
The proposal for restructuring of the Brahmaputra Board through an amendment of 
Brahmaputra Board Act is under active considera tion in the Ministry of Water Resources.  
The efforts are being made by the Ministry to resolve the issues involved in the amendments 
in consultation with the Ministry of Law at the earliest. 
 
    Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;               R. SAMBASIVA RAO, 
20 October, 2008                           Chairman, 
28 Asvina, 1930 (Saka)        Standing Committee on Water Resources  
 

 
APPENDIX – I 
  
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2008-2009) HELD ON MONDAY, 20  OCTOBER 2008 
  
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1545 hour s in Committee Room ‘C’, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri R. Sambasiva Rao – Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Bhanwar Singh Dangawas 
3. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo 
4. Shri Rajen Gohain 
5. Shri Shankhlal Majhi 
6. Shri Abu Ayes Mondal 
7.       Shri Lonappan Nambadan 
8.       Shri Harilal Madhavbhai Patel 
 
 
                    RAJYA SABHA 
 
9.      Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
10.      Smt. Vasanthi Stanley 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P.K. Grover   - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
and briefed the Members on some impor tant aspect of examination of the subject “Inter Linking of 
Rivers”.   

 
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following : 
(i) Memorandum No.2 and the Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations contained in  their Ninth Report (Fourteenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2008-2009) of the Ministry of Water Resources; and 
(ii) Draft Report on the subject “Inter Linking of Rivers”.  After some discussion, the 
Committee adopted both the Reports without any amendment/modification. 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to  have the above draft Reports finalized on the 
basis of factual verification from the Ministry of Water Resources and to pres ent the same to both the 
Houses of Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

 
APPENDIX II 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE NINTH REPORT 
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE  
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations/Observations   20 
 
(ii) Recommendation/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
 
Para Nos. 2.47, 2.48, 2.49, 2.50, 2.51, 3.36, 3.40, 3.41, 4.11,  
4.12, 5.9, 6.8, 7.21, 7.22, 7.23 and 7.24 
 
T o t a l          1 6  
P e r c e n t a g e         8 0 %   
  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Para No. 3.37  
 
T o t a l            1    
P e r c e n t a g e          5  %  
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the 
 Committee 
 
Para No. Nil 
 
T o t a l          N i l   
Percentage 0 % 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
Para Nos. 3.38, 3.39 and 5.10  
  
T o t a l            3  
P e r c e n t a g e          1 5 %  
 
 
 