8
STANDING COMMITTEE
ON WATER RESOURCES
(2007-2008)
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-2008)
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Water Resources)
EIGHTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 ( Saka)

EIGHTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
WATER RESOURCES
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2007-2008)
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Water Resources)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.11.2007
Laid  in  Rajya Sabha  on 22.11.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)


W.R.C. No. 8
Price : Rs. 91.00
© 2007 BY LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of
Business in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Jainco Art India,
New Delhi-110 005.

CONTENTS
PAGE(S)
COMPOSITION OF THE C OMMITTEE (2007-08) .......................................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report ............................................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have
been accepted by the Government ........................ 11
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies .................................... 27
CHAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee ……………………. .. 31
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which final replies of the Government are still
awaited .......................................................................... 33
APPENDICES
I. A brief note on the outcome of the research
projects completed during the last five years
(since April 2002) under R&D Programme ......... 40
II. Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Committee
held on 02 November, 2007 .................................... 82
III. Analysis of action taken by the Government on
the Recommendations/Observations contained
in the Seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
of the Committee ....................................................... 84
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE
ON WATER RESOURCES (2007-08)
Shri R. Sambasiva Rao— Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhanwar Singh Dangawas
3. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo
4. Shri Rajen Gohain
5. Shri Prakash B. Jadhav
6. Smt. Preneet Kaur
7. Shri Raghuveer Singh Kaushal
8. Smt. Manorama Madhavraj
9. Shri Shankhlal Majhi
10. Shri Abu Ayes Mondal
11. Shri Lonappan Nambadan
12. Shri Harilal Madhavaji Bhai Patel
13. Shri Vishnu Deo Sai
14. Dr. Arun Kumar Sarma
15. Smt. Minati Sen
16. Shri Harihar Swain
17. Vacant
18. Vacant
19. Vacant
20. Vacant
21. Vacant
Rajya Sabha
22. Chowdhary Mohammad Aslam
23. Shri Ajay Singh Chautala
24. Kumar Deepak Das
(iii)

25. Smt. Sushree Devi
 26. Shri K.E. Ismail
27. Prof. P .J. Kurien
28. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania
29. Shri Tiruchi Siva
30. Shri Sharad Yadav
31. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Sapra — Joint Secretary
3. Shri C.S. Joon — Director
4. Shri P .V .L.N. Murthy — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri A.K. Yadav — Committee Officer
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Water Resources
(2007-2008) having been authorised by the Committee to submit the
Report on their behalf, present the Eighth Report on the Action Taken
by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in
the Seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee
on Water Resources (2006-2007) on Demands for Grants (2007-2008) of
the Ministry of Water Resources.
2. The Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 28 April,
2007. The replies of the Government to all the recommendations
contained in the Report were received on 08 August, 2007.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report
was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on
02 November, 2007.
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Seventh Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-III.
   N
EW D ELHI; R. SAMBASIVA RAO,
19 November, 2007 Chairman,
28 Kartika, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Water Resources.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources deals
with the action taken by the Government on the recommendations/
observations contained in their Seventh Report on Demands for Grants
(2007-2008) of the Ministry of Water Resources which was presented
to Lok Sabha on 28 April, 2007.
2. Action taken notes were received from the Government in respect
of all the 20 recommendations/observations of the Committee which
has been categorised as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government:
Para Nos. 1.18, 1.19, 1.26, 1.31, 2.14, 2.33, 2.37, 3.22, 4.14,
5.13, 5.24 and 6.26
(Total — 12)
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies:
Para Nos. 2.25 and 6.33
(Total — 2)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee:
Para Nos. 7.18
(Total — 1)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final
replies of the Government are still awaited:
Para Nos. 2.26, 3.23, 4.15, 6.27 and 7.19
(Total — 5)
3. The Committee desire that final replies in respect of the
recommendations/observations for which only interim replies have
been given by the Government should be furnished to the Committee
within three months of the presentation of the Report.

2
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the
Government on some of the recommendations/observations in the
succeeding paragraphs.
A. Development of better technology to make unusable water utilisable
Recommendation (Para No. 2.14)
5. The Committee noted that though the annual precipitation
(including snow melt) is 4,000 BCM (Billion Cubic Metre), the average
annual water availability is assessed at 1,869 BCM only due to loss on
account of evaporation. Of this, total utilizable water resource is
assessed at 1,123 BCM ( i.e. 690 BCM of utilizable surface water flow
and 433 BCM of annual replenishable ground water). The per capita
availability of water at national level has also reduced from 5,177 m
3
(Cubic Metre) in 1951 to 1,820 m 3 in 2001 with variation in water
availability in different river basins. Admittedly, 746 BCM (or more
than one-third) of water is lost annually to sea on account of the lack
of suitable technology, and the Chairman, CWC had admitted, during
evidence, that a better technology would minimise this loss of water.
The Committee also desired the Government to find a better technology
to make the un-utilizable water fit for use, and that research activities
be undertaken immediately for the purpose. The Committee further
desired the Government to seek the help of the Ministries of Science
and Technology and other concerned Organisations and work in close
cooperation with them in this regard.
6. The Ministry has, in its action taken reply, stated that it noted
the direction of the Committee to fully utilize the allocations made in
the Budget by advance planning of the activities required to be
undertaken during the year 2007-08. The advice of the Committee
regarding development of appropriate technology and taking up
research had also been noted.
7. The Committee had recommended the Ministry to find a better
technology to make fit for use the un-utilizable water of the country
going into the sea and for achieving this objective, the Committee
had also recommended the Ministry to undertake necessary research
activities at the earliest and to seek the assistance and cooperation
of the Ministry of Science and Technology and other concerned
Organisations in this regard. However, the reply of the Ministry
makes no mention as to what concrete steps have been taken or are
proposed to be taken by the Government towards finding a better
technology to make the country’s un-utilizable water fit for use. The
reply is also silent as to the steps taken or are being initiated to

3
achieve this goal by seeking the assistance of the Ministry of Science
and Technology and other allied Organisations. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire the
Ministry to take urgent concrete steps towards finding a better
technology to make one-third of our un-usable water fit for use
through appropriate steps.
B. Bridging gap between created irrigation potential and its utilization.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.26)
8. The Committee observed that with the sustained and systematic
development of irrigation started from the First Five Year Plan, the
irrigation potential from Major, Medium and Minor Irrigation Projects
had increased from 22.60 million hectare in 1951 to 102.7 million hectare
approximately as against the utilisation of irrigation potential so created
ranged between 22.60 million hectare in 1951 and 87.23 million hectare
approximately at the end of the X Plan. The utilisation of created
irrigation potential stands at 84 per cent. The Government expected
reduction in the gap between potential created and utilised by the
Centrally Sponsored Schemes of CAD&WM which supports activities
like construction of field channels, on-farm development, etc. Although
the XI Plan had commenced, the Planning Commission has not finalised
the State Plans for 2007-2008 as yet. The Committee desired that the
State Plans for 2007-2008 be finalised without any further loss of time
to enable the State Governments to commence/continue works during
the current year. The Committee also desired that by using remote
sensing technology, the gap between the created irrigation potential
and its utilisation would reduce.
9. The Ministry has, in its reply, stated that the rate of creation of
irrigation potential out-paces the rate at which area is presently being
covered under field channels as States are facing difficulty in providing
their matching share. The deferred maintenance of canals is also
responsible for the gap in utilization of irrigation potential.
Regarding the use of remote sensing technology for assessing the
actual utilisation of the created irrigation potential, it is to submit that
Ministry of Water Resources has got a study done by NRSA in respect
of 2 projects namely Teesta Barrage Project in West Bengal and Upper
Krishna Project in Andhra Pradesh. Further, National Remote Sensing
Agency, Hyderabad has been associated in the study for assessment of
irrigation potential created under 53 AIBP funded projects in the
country.

4
10. The Committee note that the reply of the Ministry regarding
use of remote sensing technology to reduce the gap between the
created irrigation potential and its utilisation in the country is not
complete. The Ministry has also not apprised them of the results of
the study conducted by National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA)
in respect of two projects, viz., T eesta Barrage Project in West Bengal
and Upper Krishna Project in Andhra Pradesh. The Committee,
therefore, desire that they may be apprised of results of the remote
sensing studies carried out by NRSA on the above stated projects at
the earliest. They also desire to be informed of the outcome of the
study undertaken by NRSA, Hyderabad for assessment of irrigation
potential created under 53 AIBP funded projects.
C. Artificial Recharge of Ground Water through dug wells
Recommendation (Para No. 3.23)
11. The Committee observed that the Finance Minister had
proposed a new scheme on Artificial Recharge of Ground Water
through ‘dug wells’ in 1,065 over-exploited or critical blocks at a cost
of Rs. 4,000 per dug well covering 100 districts in 7 States, viz. Andhra
Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan
and Tamil Nadu. The Scheme would provide 100% subsidy to the
small and marginal farmers and 50% subsidy to other farmers. It was
to be finalised shortly in consultation with the concerned
State Governments, NABARD and CGWB. The Committee had desired
finalisation of all preparatory work for the said Scheme at the earliest,
and that they might be apprised of the action taken and the progress
made in the matter at frequent intervals.
12. The Ministry has, in its reply, stated that subsequent to the
announcement of the scheme on the artificial recharge of ground water
through dug wells in hard rock areas in the budget speech of Finance
Minister on 28.02.2007, a meeting was taken by Secretary (WR) on
23.03.2007 with representatives from concerned State Governments,
officers from NABARD, Central Ground Water Board and Ministry of
Water Resources. Thereafter, a draft note for consideration of Cabinet
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) was prepared and circulated
to all concerned Ministries/Departments viz. Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs and Expenditure), Department of
Drinking Water Supply , Department of Agriculture and Cooperation,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Planning Commission and PMO for their
comments. The proposed scheme covers 1180 over-exploited, critical
and semi-critical blocks, falling mainly in hard rock areas in the States

5
of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karanataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu at an estimated cost of Rs. 1871.10 crore.
The net cost of the scheme works out to be Rs. 1723.87 crore, which
includes subsidy component and other charges. The scheme envisages
ground water recharge through 4.455 million existing irrigation dug
wells.
13. The Committee note that Secretary, Water Resources held a
meeting on 23 March, 2007 with the representatives of concerned
State Governments, Officers of NABARD, Central Ground Water
Board and Ministry of Water Resources in the aftermath of the
announcement of the Scheme on Artificial Recharge of Ground Water
through dug wells by the Finance Minister. They further note that
a draft note for consideration of Cabinet Committee on Economic
Affairs (CCEA) was reportedly circulated by the Ministry to all
concerned Ministries/Departments, viz ., Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs and Expenditure), Department of
Drinking Water Supply, Department of Agriculture and Cooperation,
Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Planning Commission and the PMO for
their comments. However, the reply of the Ministry is silent as to
the responses received from concerned Ministries/Departments and
the time frame in which the scheme is proposed to be finalised/
operationalised. The Committee desire the Ministry to finalise in a
time bound manner the details of the Scheme for implementation
which would be of great help in the over-exploited or critical blocks
located in Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu so as to benefit the marginal
and other farmers. The Committee desire to be apprised of the
progress made in this regard.
D. Enactment of PIM Legislation
Recommendation (Para No. 4.15)
14. The Committee observed that National Water Policy 2002 laid
great emphasis on participatory approach in Water Resource
Management. The participation of the farmers in management of
irrigation includes transfer of responsibility for O & M and collection
of water charges for the Water Users’ Associations (WUAs). The
Committee also observed that Participatory Irrigation Management
(PIM) legislation had not been enacted in many States. So far, 11 States
had either enacted exclusive legislation or amended their Irrigation
Act for involvement of farmers in irrigation management. The
Committee desired the Ministry to review the progress of

6
implementation of PIM in the context of National Water Policy 2002
and report the matter to the National Water Resources Council (NWRC)
for appropriate directions. They also desired that PIM legislation be
enacted in the remaining States at the earliest. The Committee also
desired to be informed of the outcome of the review and the directions
given by the National Water Resources Council in this regard.
15. The Ministry has, in its reply, stated that necessary action as
desired by the Committee, shall be initiated in the matter, inter-alia,
pursuing the issue of enactment of PIM legislation by the remaining
States. The matter shall be placed before the National Water Resources
Council as and when its meeting takes place.
16. The Committee note that though they had recommended the
Ministry to review the progress of implementation of PIM in the
context of National Water Policy 2002 and report the matter to the
National Water Resources Council for appropriate directions, the
Ministry in its reply merely stated that necessary action would be
initiated on the issue of enactment of PIM laws by the remaining
States, and that the matter would be placed before the National
Water Resources Council when its meeting takes place. They had
also desired that PIM Legislation be enacted in the remaining States
at the earliest. The reply is silent as to when NWRC is likely to
meet and discuss the issue. There is also no mention of the efforts
being made by Government to persuade the remaining States to
enact the PIM Legislation. The Committee, therefore, desire the
Ministry to furnish full and complete reply in future. They desire
that this matter may be placed before NWRC at the earliest. The
Committee also desire to be apprised of the details of the steps
taken by the Ministry to induce these States for enacting PIM
legislation.
E. Early processing of Review Report of the Ministry of Statistics
and Programme Implementation on AIBP
Recommendation (Para No. 6.27)
17. The Committee observed that the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation had taken up evaluation of AIBP during
2004 with the help of ten different Consultancy Firms who evaluated
the AIBP performance in the whole country. The draft report was
submitted during December 2006 which has been under examination.
Further, the Planning Commission also proposed to take up a similar
study during 2007. The Committee had recommended the Ministry to
expeditiously process the Review Report submitted during December
2006. The Committee further recommended the Government to initiate

7
the remedial measures suggested by the Review Report to further
improve and streamline the processes and procedures governing the
implementation of AIBP .
18. The Ministry has, in its action taken reply, stated that the
Report on review of AIBP submitted by the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation is under consideration of the Ministry of
Water Resources. The State-wise and project-wise recommendation
would be taken up with the State Governments for taking necessary
corrective measures.
19. The Committee are anguished to note that despite the passage
of almost a year since the Review Report was submitted in December
2006, the Ministry of Water Resources has not been able to process
the Review Report on AIBP of the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation. The Committee are unable to
comprehend the reasons for such a delay in this regard and wonder
as to when the State-wise and project-wise recommendation would
be taken up with the State Governments for taking necessary
corrective measures pertaining to the implementation of AIBP as
stated by the Ministry in its reply. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Ministry to take urgent steps to process the Review
Report of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
on AIBP . They desire to be informed of the progress made in this
regard.
F. Changes in the National Environment Policy 2006 to increase
storage capacity
Recommendation (Para No. 7.18)
20. The Committee observed that the review of the Ministry of
Water Resources carried out by the Planning Commission as a part of
its Mid Term Review of the Five Year Plans of the Ministry suggested
that shortfall in achievement of targets is a reflection of the fact that
funds for irrigation in the State Sector had fallen short of the envisaged
levels which itself was a result of lower levels of potential created
earlier. The Working Group of Eleventh Plan further reviewed the
position, according to whom, this situation points to a deeper malaise
afflicting the Plans. The Committee, therefore, recommended the
Ministry and the Planning Commission to order an independent
evaluation of the system of target fixation, if need be, by a reputed
professional/research organisation to achieve the desired results in
future plans.

8
The Committee further observed that the existing storage capacity
was Rs.71.70 BCM. It was proposed to create storage capacity
amounting to 30.57 BCM through the projects under construction and
additional storage of 71.34 BCM could be created through the projects
under consideration. Further, the Ministry had suggested for
modification of clause relating to mandatory environmental clearance
for major Projects to the Ministry of Environment and Forests. However,
the Ministry informed that the National Environment Policy 2006
approved in May 2006 did not include the suggestions of the Ministry
of Water Resources. The Committee opined that in order to increase
the storage capacity, the suggestions of the Ministry from the
environmental angle need to be re-looked as more than one-third of
the utilisable water is going into the sea. The Committee also desired
the Ministry to pursue the matter with the Ministry of Environment
and Forests to make suitable changes in the National Environment
Policy 2006.
21. The Ministry has, in its reply, stated that the Ministry of
Environment and Forests had already been requested for necessary
action in the matter.
22. The Committee are constrained to observe that the reply of
this recommendation is also incomplete as has been observed in
respect of other recommendations in earlier paras of this Report.
They find that the reply has been given in a very casual manner.
The reply is silent on their earlier recommendation that the Ministry
and the Planning Commission order an independent evaluation of
the system of target fixation, if need be, by a reputed professional/
research organisation to achieve the desired results in future plans.
However, the reply does not indicate the view taken by Government
on this recommendation of the Committee. Besides, the Committee
had also noted the proposal to increase the storage capacity by 30.57
BCM through projects under construction and by 71.34 BCM through
projects under consideration. On the Ministry’s suggestion for
modification of clause relating to mandatory environmental clearance
for projects to the Ministry of Environment and Forests, which were
glaringly ignored in the National Environment Policy 2006, the
Committee had desired in its Report, that in order to increase the
storage capacity, the Ministry may pursue the matter with the
Ministry of Environment and Forests to make suitable changes in
the National Environment Policy 2006. The reply furnished does not
indicate the response of the Ministry of Environment and Forests to
the suggestions of Ministry of Water Resources. The Committee,
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire the

9
Ministry to apprise them of the action taken in regard to the setting
up of an independent evaluation of the system of projection of targets
in successive plans, and also to pursue with the Ministry of
Environment and Forests to make suitable changes in the National
Environment Policy 2006. The Committee would also advise the
Ministry to desist against the tendency of providing incomplete
replies to their recommendations in future.
G. Policy on National Projects
Recommendation (Para No. 7.19)
23. The Committee also observed that irrigation water charges in
most states were not even adequate to recover the O&M cost except
Gujarat and Maharashtra which have been able to meet full O&M cost
from the revenue earned through water tariffs. In the context of water
tariffs, the need for regulatory mechanism to ensure sustainability of
resources and facilities created had been discussed in the 12th Meeting
of the National Water Board. The Committee desired the Ministry to
impress upon the States to set up the regulatory mechanism for
optimum, judicious and equitable management, allocation and
utilisation of the limited water resources available. The Mid Term
review had proposed to set up an Expert Group comprising officials
of Ministries/Departments, NGOs etc. to review the issue of ground
water ownership in line with international practices and suggest a line
of action for implementation during Eleventh Plan. The Expert Group
on ground water was to submit its report to the Planning Commission
on 31 May 2006 which was, however, delayed due to extensive
consultation required in the matter and the report was expected shortly.
The Committee had urged the Ministry of Water Resources and the
Planning Commission to process the suggestions/recommendations of
the Expert Group on ground water expeditiously.
The Committee came across a suggestion for declaring the Teesta
Barrage Project as a National Project fully funded by the Central
Government. In this context, the Ministry informed that the
suggestion of West Bengal Government had been received and the
concept of the National Project was under consideration of the
Ministry. The Committee desired the Ministry to formulate a policy
for declaring major irrigation projects as ‘National Projects’ at an
early date.
24. The Ministry has, in its action taken reply, stated that the
concept of the National Project had been incorporated in the Cabinet
Note for continuation of AIBP in the XI Plan and the same was under

10
Inter Ministerial circulation. Further action would be taken on approval
of Union Cabinet to the Cabinet Note. The Report of the Expert Group
constituted by the Planning Commission had been finalised and would
reportedly be submitted to Planning Commission shortly.
25. The reply of the Ministry is silent on many aspects of this
recommendation too. The action taken by Government to impress
upon the States to set up the regulatory mechanism for optimum,
judicious and equitable management, allocation and utilisation of
the limited water resources available has not been indicated in the
reply. The Committee is disappointed that the Ministry has furnished
only a partial reply to the recommendation of the Committee, and
therefore, desire that relevant information pertaining to the
Committee’s recommendation on the setting up of regulatory
mechanism for use of water resources may be furnished at the
earliest. They would also like to be informed of the details of the
decision taken by Government on the concept of ‘National Projects’
under consideration of the Union Cabinet at an early date. They
further desire speedy remedial action on the recommendations
contained in the Report of the Expert Group on Ground Water. They
desire to be apprised of the recommendations and the action taken
by Government thereon.

11
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
To augment plan outlay for irrigation, to project outlays in more
realistic terms and to expedite DPR of Ken-Betwa link project
Recommendation (Para No. 1.18)
The examination of the Budgetary provisions of the Ministry of
Water Resources contained in Demands for Grants (2007-2008) shows
a provision of Rs. 898.16 crore excluding the funds earmarked for
AIBP and other water resources programmes. This is 9.02 per cent
less, i.e. Rs. 100 crore less on the Plan side than that provided in BE
2006-2007. It shows an overall reduction in allocation of Rs. 89.15 crore,
while there was an increase of Rs. 87.65 crore in BE 2006-2007 over
the corresponding figure of 2005-2006. The Plan outlay (Revenue
Section) in BE 2007-2008 at Rs. 570 crore shows a decline of 14.81 per
cent though the outlay on Non-Plan at Rs. 283.01 crore shows an
increase of 10.39 per cent over the respective outlays in 2006-2007.
Similarly, the provision in the Capital Section, both Plan and Non-Plan
put together at Rs. 45.15 crore shows a decline of 26.9 per cent. The
Committee note that as in the previous three Financial Years, the BE
provision (Rs. 669.11 crore) in 2006-2007 too was reduced at the RE
stage to Rs. 520.86 crore showing a 22.15 per cent reduction. This
reduction was primarily due to revision in the estimate of DPR of
Ken-Betwa link and also due to delay in getting permission from the
Ministry of Environment and Forests among others. A perusal of the
budgetary allocation in percentage terms in respect of the Irrigation
Sector from the First Five Year Plan at 23.22 per cent to Tenth Five
Year Plan at 6.33 per cent reveals a progressively declining trend though
the expenditure incurred (by both State and Central Governments) on
irrigation in the country in absolute terms has increased from
Rs. 455.07 crore in the First Plan to Rs. 95,743.52 crore (anticipated) at
the end of the Tenth Plan. The Ministry has reportedly discussed the
issue of the progressive reduction of outlays as a percentage of GDP
with the Planning Commission though the Planning Commission has
not made any commitment in this regard. The Committee view very
seriously the declining trend of outlays for irrigation as a percentage
of GDP even though in absolute terms there has been a manifold

12
increase in the expenditure in this sector in successive Five Year Plans.
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the share of outlay
in respect of irrigation in the overall plans needs to be augmented
substantially to attain the level of outlay as existing during the First
Five Year Plan from the present level of outlay of 6.33 per cent. The
Committee desire the Ministry to project their outlays at the BE stage
in more realistic terms to avoid the pitfall of reductions at the RE
stage. The Committee also desire the Ministry to finalise the revised
estimate of DPR of Ken-Betwa link expeditiously and complete the
preparation of DPR in the shortest possible time. They further desire
to be apprised of the action taken in the matter.
Reply of the Government
The direction of the Committee for projecting outlays in more
realistic term have been noted and will be strictly adhered to while
preparing budget estimates. Necessary instructions are being issued to
all concerned.
The present estimated cost of DPR of Ken-Betwa Link is Rs. 36.30
crore and the work of DPR is scheduled to be completed in June 2008.
Need of keeping allocation for schemes to be implemented during
XI plan at reasonable levels to attain their intended objectives
Recommendation (Para No. 1.19)
Further, the Committee observe that with a view to rationalize the
plan schemes of the Ministry, the schemes with similar activities have
been clubbed and an effort has been made to reduce the number of
schemes. This exercise resulted in bringing down their number from
68 schemes in the Tenth Plan to 20 schemes during the Eleventh Plan.
These 20 schemes cover all the on-going activities of the Ministry and
also provide for all new programmes envisaged during the Eleventh
Plan. Some of the activities which were covered under Central Sector
Schemes or Centrally Sponsored Schemes now stand transferred to the
State Sector. According to the Ministry, this has resulted in reduced
outlay for 2007-2008. The Committee note that two new schemes—one
on Information, Education and Communication and the other on River
Basin Organisations/Authority are likely to be introduced during the
year 2007-2008. Besides this, 11 schemes/projects which were approved
for the Tenth Plan and have achieved the set targets have been
discontinued in the Eleventh Plan. The Committee desire that the
allocation for the 20 schemes be kept at reasonable levels so as not to
hinder their outcome adversely. The Committee also desire the Ministry

13
to launch at the earliest the two new schemes proposed for introduction
in 2007-2008 to attain their intended objectives. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard within three
months of presentation of this Report.
Reply of the Government
Appropriate allocations have been made for various schemes with
a view to meet the immediate requirement of all identified activities
planned during 2007-08 and the intended outcome is likely to be
achieved as per schedule. Actions have already been initiated for
preparation of SFC/EFC memorandum in respect of the two new
schemes and the matter is being followed up with all concerned.
Private sector participation in water management and project planning
Recommendation (Para No. 1.26)
The Committee note that the National Water Policy 2002
recommended private sector participation, i.e. Public-Private Partnership
in planning, development and management of water resources projects
for diverse uses wherever feasible, with greater emphasis on publicity
measures through electronic, print and other media in an inter-active
manner. As the activities of the Ministry are mostly related to
investigation, planning, design and research and development, it
involves private sector and NGOs in certain activities related to
awareness programme. The Ministry also provides support in specific
activities such as organization of workshop, seminar etc. on issues
related to water resources. Apart from involvement in Mass Awareness
programmes, the private sector and NGO participation is being
encouraged in Irrigation Management, Artificial Recharge of
Groundwater, Renovation of Water Bodies and Research &
Development. However, the Guidelines for private sector participation
in water management have not been brought out by the Ministry. The
Committee also note that the Ministry of Water Resources organized
a Symposia in New Delhi to celebrate ‘World Water Day’ on 22 March
2007 which was inaugurated by the Prime Minister wherein he called
for collective wisdom to resolve water conflicts and appealed for
making water conservation a national obsession. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the Ministry to issue the Guidelines for private
sector participation in water management for not only making their
involvement and participation broad based but also benefit from the
vast pool of talent and expertise available in the private sector so that
the benefits of the Schemes/Programmes percolate to a large section
of the population. The Committee also recommend the Government to

14
take suitable steps to increase the private sector participation in project
planning and other related activities which in their opinion would go
a long way in the successful implementation of schemes like Artificial
Recharge of Ground Water, etc. and the clarion call of the Hon’ble
Prime Minister would become a reality in the near future. The
Committee would like to be informed of the steps taken in this
direction.
Reply of the Government
Appropriate action has already been taken by the Ministry of Water
Resources regarding involvement of Non-Governmental Organisations
(NGOs) with several activities. The NGOs are being associated with
the research activities in water sector. The Ministry of Water Resources
has put the guidelines of submission of projects on web site and the
Indian National Committees have been advised to pursue with various
organisations for submission of proposals in prescribed format and
furnishing all necessary details. This will help to increase the
participation of Non-Governmental Organisations in an interactive
manner. They will also be associated in disseminating information on
water policy and water decision. Similarly NGOs have been actively
associated with the mass awareness programmes.
Audit objections contained in C&AG’s Reports on the issue of
diversion/misutilization of Central Loan Assistance (CLA) under AIBP .
Recommendation (Para No. 1.31)
The Committee are happy to note that as a result of their
continuous prodding and the efforts made by the Ministry, 13 of the
15 State Governments have responded to the Audit Observations
contained in the Report of C&AG (No.15 of 2004) on the issue of
diversion/misutilisation of the Central Loan Assistance (CLA) under
AIBP which were discussed by the Committee in their Third and Fifth
Reports on Demands for Grants 2005-2006 and 2006-2007 respectively.
The Committee further note that some of the State Governments have
agreed to reversal of expenditure incurred on non-intended uses while
some have claimed that expenditure has been incurred on the project
components which are eligible for funding under AIBP . The Ministry
now proposes to take up the matter with each of the State Governments
after analyzing their response. The State Governments have, however,
not specified any reason for delay in submission of their response.
The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to advise the State
Governments to accord the highest priority for resolving the Audit
Observations contained in the C&AG’s Reports and settle the matters

15
urgently. They desire the Ministry to analyze the responses of the
State Governments on priority basis and intimate the outcome of the
efforts made in this regard at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
In order to resolve the issue, the Secretary (WR) convened a
meeting of the concerned States on 3rd April 2007. In the meeting,
emphasis was given by the Secretary (WR) to accord highest priority
for resolving the Audit Observations contained in C&AG’s Report.
Following the meeting, compliance reports have been received in the
Ministry and the same are under scrutiny. The Ministry of Water
Resources is pursuing the matter with concerned States for resolving
the audit observations and is also monitoring the utilization of funds
very closely to avoid any diversion of funds.
Need of advance planning for full utilization of allocations and
development of appropriate technology to minimize fresh water going
waste into the sea.
Recommendation (Para No. 2.14)
The Committee observe that though the average annual
precipitation (including snow melt) is 4,000 BCM, 2,131 BCM is the
loss on account of evaporation and the average annual water
availability is assessed at 1869 Billion Cubic Metre (BCM). Of this,
total utilizable water resource is assessed as 1,123 BCM, i.e. utilizable
surface water flow is 690 BCM and annual replenishable ground water
is 433 BCM. The per capita availability of water at national level has
also reduced from 5,177 m
3 (Cubic Metre), in 1951 to a level of
1,820 m 3 in 2001 with variation in water availability in different river
basins. Admittedly, more than one-third, i.e. 746 BCM of water is not
utilizable and goes to sea on account of the lack of suitable technology.
It has further been admitted by the Chairman, CWC during evidence
that a better technology will ensure that the loss of 746 BCM could be
minimised. The Committee are, however, constrained to observe that
on the one hand the allocation of Rs.114.01 crore provided in BE
2006-07 was reduced by about Rs. 44 crore at the RE stage on account
of less expenditure under National Water Development Agency
(NWDA) due to revision in the estimate of Detailed Project Report
(DPR) of Ken-Betwa link and also delay in getting permission from
the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) and late initiation
of the Hydrology Project, on the other the allocation in BE 2007-08 at
Rs. 132.50 crore is Rs. 18.49 crore more allocation than the BE
2006-2007 is considered nominal. Surprisingly, the allocation under

16
“Major and Medium Irrigation” of the Ministry of Water Resources is
primarily for investigation, planning, design and research activities and
is not for completion of the on-going major and medium irrigation
projects which is met out of the State Plans by the State Governments.
The Committee desire the Government to fully utilise the allocations
made in the Budget by advance planning of the activities required to
be undertaken during the year. The Committee are unhappy to note
that more than one-third of our fresh water available on the surface
is going waste into the sea merely for want of a better technology .
They, therefore, desire the Government to find a better technology to
make the un-utilisable water fit for use. Research activities for the
purpose should be undertaken immediately. This is very much essential
because a vast majority of the rural - urban population and agriculture
to a large extent are deprived of the availability of water. The
Committee further desire the Government to seek the assistance of the
Ministries of Science and Technology and other concerned Organisations
and work in close cooperation with them in this regard. They desire
to be apprised of the progress made in the matter at quarterly intervals.
Reply of the Government
The direction of the Committee has been noted to fully utilize the
allocations made in the Budget by advance planning of the activities
required to be undertaken during the year 2007-08. The advice of the
Committee regarding development of appropriate technology and taking
up research has also been noted.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report)
To fill up vacant post in the Central Water Commission (CWC)
Recommendation (Para No. 2.33)
The Committee note that the Central Water Commission (CWC) is
entrusted with the general responsibility of initiating, coordinating and
monitoring of schemes in consultation with the State Governments for
control, conservation and utilisation of water resources in the country.
A perusal of the Plan allocation in respect of the CWC reveals a
disturbing trend wherein the allocations at the BE stage are reduced
considerably at the RE stage and BE in subsequent years is again
increased. However, the BE for 2007-2008 has drastically come down
to Rs. 2 crore from Rs. 28.68 crore in BE 2006-2007. The reason given
for lesser allocation at RE stage was on account of less expenditure

17
due to vacant posts and delay in receipt of payment from consultants
carrying out specialised studies. The Ministry in a subsequent reply
furnished to the Committee indicates that the total allocation for the
schemes proposed to be implemented through CWC is Rs. 53 crore for
2007-2008 which, however, is not reflected in the Budget documents
adequately. The Committee desire the Ministry to fill up the vacant
posts and devise a system of timely receipt of release of payments
from consultants.
Reply of the Government
During XI plan period the number of Central Sector/Centrally
Sponsored Schemes have been rationalized by clubbing the schemes
with similar objectives. The allocation for Central Water Commission
is accordingly reflected in Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry
of Water Resources under various schemes, namely Development of
Water Resources Information System, Hydrology Project, Investigation
of Water Resources Development Schemes, National Water Academy,
Dam Safety Studies and Planning, Flood Forecasting, River Management
Activities and works related to Border Areas and Infrastructure
Development.
Actions have already been initiated by the Central Water
Commission for filling up the vacant posts at the earliest.
A time bound programme for completion of studies and release of
payment etc. are included in the proposal while awarding such works
to consultants. Central Water Commission have been advised to adhere
to such action plans strictly.
Research and Development Programme
Recommendation (Para No. 2.37)
The Committee note that the Ministry provides financial assistance
by way of grants to academicians/experts in the Universities, IITs,
and recognised R&D Laboratories/Institutes to promote research work
in the field of water resource sector. Grants are also provided to the
organisations to take up research schemes on specific problems related
to thrust areas and identified regional problems. The allocation for
2007-2008 for this at Rs. 30 crore shows an increase of Rs. 16.94 crore
over the allocation of 2006-2007. According to the Ministry, there is no
major enhancement in the allocation for the year as rationalisation of
the plan schemes related to R&D programme of the Ministry and its
attached offices/organisations has been attempted to by clubbing

18
them in the XI Plan. Further, the R&D Schemes entrusted to various
research and academic institutions are approved after detailed scrutiny
of the schemes by these organisations. However, due to non-submission
of sufficient schemes and non-clearance of all the received schemes,
the allocation of Rs. 13.06 crore for 2006-2007 was revised to Rs. 8
crore on this account. The Ministry has reportedly advised the Indian
National Committees to vigorously pursue the organizations for
submission of proposals which would help in improving the utilization
of the allocated amount. The Committee urge the Ministry to obtain
sufficient number of schemes and get them approved well in time to
fully utilise the allocated amount of Rs. 30 crore for 2007-2008. The
Committee would also like to be apprised of the results of various
research activities undertaken by the organizations to whom grants
have been provided by the Ministry during the last five years.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Water Resources has put the guidelines of
submission of projects on web site and the Indian National Committees
on various specialized topics i.e. Hydrology, Hydraulics, Irrigation and
Drainage, Geo-technical Engineering and Construction Material &
Structures have been advised to vigorously pursue the case with various
organizations with a view to consider higher number of research
proposal and fully utilize the allocations made during 2007-08. A brief
note on the outcome of the research projects completed during the last
five years is enclosed (Appendix-I).
To step up allocation for minor irrigation.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.22)
The Committee observe that the majority of the Minor Irrigation
Schemes relate to surface water sources funded from the public sector
outlay. The ultimate irrigation potential from Minor Irrigation Schemes
has been assessed as 81.42 m.ha. of which the surface water schemes
contribute 17.3 m.ha. The Minor Irrigation Sector also includes Ground
Water Schemes. Minor Irrigation Projects are planned and executed by
the State Governments and also by the private sector as per their own
requirement and priorities. However, the Government of India provides
financial assistance under AIBP for Minor Irrigation Scheme proposed
by the special category States, KBK districts of Orissa etc. The allocation
(Plan) of Rs. 100.94 crore in BE 2006-2007 was reduced to Rs. 92.30
crore at RE stage and further reduced to Rs. 80.05 crore in BE 2007-
2008. In spite of lesser allocation in RE 2006-2007 and BE 2007-2008,
the Ministry claims that the overall objectives of the scheme would

19
not be adversely affected and the progress affected, if any, would be
made up in the next year. Minor Irrigation potential likely to be created
at the end of the X Plan is estimated at 60.42 m.ha against the target
of 81.42 m.ha. The Working Group of the Eleventh Plan has
recommended a target of 7 m.ha. of potential creation for the Eleventh
Plan. To attain the said target of potential creation, the Ministry
proposes to revise the stipulation of 100 hectares for surface water
Minor Irrigation Schemes under AIBP to 50 hectares and the 10 per
cent beneficiary contribution in cost for post construction maintenance
is to be done away with. Viewed in this backdrop, the Committee
cannot but conclude that creation of potential through Minor Irrigation
has been adversely affected owing to lesser allocations therefor. The
Committee, therefore, desire the allocation for Minor Irrigation to be
stepped up during the Eleventh Plan to enable the States to attain the
targeted 7 m.ha. of potential as recommended by the Working Group.
They also desire to be apprised of the steps proposed to be taken for
attaining the targeted potential.
Reply of the Government
With the approval of Union Cabinet, the stipulation of 100 ha for
surface water Minor Irrigation Schemes under AIBP is reduced to
50 ha and 10% beneficiary contribution in cost for post construction
maintenance has also been done away with.
In order to give boost to creation of irrigation potential through
Surface Water Minor Irrigation Schemes, Working Group on Water
Resources for XI Plan has proposed an outlay of Rs. 35,850 crore under
MI Sector including minor surface water scheme, ground water,
Restoration of water bodies, micro irrigation, artificial recharge and
rain water harvesting. Under AIBP , surface water minor irrigation
schemes in the special category states and schemes benefiting drought
prone and tribal area in the non-special category states are being
funded. Ministry proposed to keep an outlay of Rs. 5400 crore (Grant)
under AIBP for funding Minor Irrigation Schemes as mentioned above
to create irrigation potential of 7.50 lakh Ha.
The Government of India has also sanctioned a Pilot Scheme of
“National Project for Repair, Renovation & Restoration of Water Bodies
directly linked to Agriculture” in January 2005 with an estimated cost
of Rs. 300 crore to be shared by Centre and State in the ratio of 3:1.
The objectives of the scheme are to restore and augment storage
capacities of water bodies and also to recover and extend their lost
irrigation potential. The water bodies having culturable command area

20
of more than 40 hectares and upto 2000 hectares are included under
the pilot scheme in one or two districts in each state. The Scheme has
been approved for 26 district projects in 15 states, namely, Andhra
Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh,
Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Himachal Pradesh, J & K,
Gujarat, Kerala and Maharashtra at an estimated cost of Rs. 299.92
crore and Central Share of Rs. 170.8301 crore has been released to the
states till 31st March 2007. These projects cover 1098 water bodies
with total original culturable command area of 1.72 lakh hectares. After
Repair, Renovation and Restoration works, an additional irrigation
potential of 0.78 lakh hectares is likely to be generated from present
status.
Hon’ble Finance Minister in his Union Budget Speech on 28.02.2007,
announced an scheme on “Artificial Recharge of Ground Water through
Dugwells in Hard Rock Areas” in seven states viz. Andhra Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Karnataka, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat and Madhya
Pradesh costing Rs. 1800 crore. The draft note for consideration of
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) is under consideration
in Ministry of Water Resources. The proposed scheme covers 1180
over-exploited, critical and semi-critical blocks, falling mainly in hard
rock areas of these states at an estimated cost of Rs 1871.10 crore, out
of which, central share would be Rs 1723.87 crore. The scheme
envisages ground water recharge through 4.455 million dugwells. The
scheme is expected to result in creation of additional irrigation potential
through recharge of existing operational irrigation dugwells and
rejuvenation of the irrigation dugwells, which have gone into disuse
on various counts including lowering of ground water level below
economic depth of pumping.
Moreover, during XI Plan a provision of Rs. 100 crore has been
made in the scheme on “Ground Water Management and Regulation”
for artificial recharge and rainwater harvesting studies to be taken up
in the priority areas viz. over-exploited and critical assessment units,
urban areas etc. Under this, 75 artificial recharge studies have been
proposed to be taken up by Central Ground Water Board. The proposed
studies would also help in creation of additional irrigation potential in
the affected areas.
Command Area Development Programme – to make 10% contribution
of farmers in selected activities non-mandatory.
Recommendation (Para No. 4.14)
The Committee observe that the Working Group of the Planning
Commission for Tenth Plan, after detailed meetings and consultations

21
with State Governments and the administrators of CAD, restructured
and renamed the CAD programme as Command Area Development &
Water Management Programme with effect from 1 April 2004. The
allocation for the programme was Rs. 205.70 crore in 2006-2007 against
the actual expenditure of Rs. 199.90 crore in 2005-2006. However, the
BE 2006-2007 allocation was marginally reduced to Rs. 191.08 crore at
the RE stage 2006-2007 while in contrast BE 2007-2008 shows increased
allocation at Rs. 300 crore, i.e. a substantial jump of 94.30 crore over
BE of the preceding year. According to the Ministry, the reduction in
allocation at RE stage was due to lower demand from the State
Governments in the initial stage of financial year as also overall
reduction in the RE outlay for the Ministry. The RE has, however,
been restored to the BE level at the final stage. The Ministry further
added that in view of the expenditure pattern of 2005-2006 and 2006-
2007 it expects the allocated funds in BE 2007-2008 to be fully utilised
and the scope of the programme is proposed to be scaled up.
The Working Group of the Planning Commission for Eleventh Plan
has recommended upward revision of the Central share in the funding
pattern, withdrawal of 10% mandatory contribution by farmer / WUA
and scaling up the scope of the programme by addition of new projects.
This necessitated the increased allocation in BE 2007-2008 though it
expressed its inability to indicate the number of new projects which
may be added to the programme during 2007-2008. The basis of the
Working Group recommendation for withdrawal of 10% mandatory
contribution by farmers/WUA’s was the demand of the State
Governments to that effect on the ground that majority of the farmers
are marginal and small and hence not in a position to contribute,
apart from the inability of some of the State Governments to collect
10% mandatory contribution resulting in non-receipt of Central
assistance. The Committee agree to the recommendations of the
Working Group of the Planning Commission for Eleventh Plan for
making 10 per cent contribution of farmers non-mandatory and desired
the Ministry to take an early decision in the matter. They desire to be
apprised of the decision taken by the Government in this regard at
the earliest.
Reply of the Government
In accordance with the recommendations of the Working Group of
the Planning Commission for XI Plan necessary changes are proposed
to be made in the Command Area Development & Water Management
Programme including the mandatory requirement of 10% contribution
by farmers in selected activities. The EFC Memo incorporating necessary

22
changes in the scheme has already been prepared and circulated to
the concerned Ministries/Departments for comments. After receipts of
comments the proposal shall be moved for approval of the Expenditure
Finance Committee/Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs.
Flood Control – streamlining of the process of making allocations
and monitoring of physical and financial progress.
Recommendation (Para No. 5.13)
The Plan allocation for Flood Control has drastically come down
from Rs. 248.22 crore in BE 2006-2007 to Rs. 66.45 crore in BE
2007-2008. Prior to that the Ministry could expend an amount of
Rs. 162.21 crore against an allocation of Rs. 231.63 crore during the
year 2005-2006. The Ministry attributed the shortfall in utilisation to
delay in timely submission of sound technical proposals by the States
and non-submission of Utilisation Certificates, the field investigation
in respect of Saptakosi Hi Dam Project, effected by law and order
problem in Nepal, non-completion of Zirat survey in respect of Pagladia
Dam Project, etc. Similarly, the allocation for 2006-2007 was reduced to
Rs. 175.27 crore at RE stage 2006-2007 due to delay in submission of
sound technical proposals by the States of West Bengal, Bihar and
Uttar Pradesh.
The Committee note with concern a disquieting trend in earmarking
of BE of successive years at high levels even while the allocations for
the previous years were brought down substantially at the RE stage
and the final utilisations were less than the reduced RE allocations. A
closer examination of this trend reveals that the Ministry failed to
obtain the requisite details of proposals while deciding the allocation
at the BE stage. This resulted in downward revision of the allocations
by the Planning Commission/Finance Ministry at the RE stage. The
outlay under the Flood Control during the Tenth Plan was Rs. 970.44
crore of which the total expenditure is expected to be Rs. 641.53 crore
approximately which is way below the initial outlays projected for
Flood Control before the Tenth Plan commenced. The Committee
observed that all the schemes/works under Flood Control have been
clubbed under two broad schemes,  viz. (i) Flood Forecasting; and
(ii) River Management activities and works related to border areas.
Further, a separate plan scheme, viz. ‘Flood Management Programme’
has been proposed under the State Sector for the Eleventh Plan wherein
major works of anti-erosion and flood control in flood affected States
would now be supported from Central Plan Outlay for the flood sector.

23
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to streamline the
process by which allocations in respect of Flood Control are decided
and fix the budget estimates in such a way that there is minimal
reduction of allocation at the RE stage. This also calls for improving
the system of monitoring not only of the physical progress of works
under Flood Control but also keep track of expenditure incurred,
submission of Utilisation Certificates and, above all, submission of
sound technical proposals from the State Governments. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard at the
earliest.
Reply of the Government
The observations of the Committee regarding earmarking allocations
at BE stage at a higher level and need for utilization of the allocations
have been noted for future compliance. One of the reasons for
non- utilization of funds by Brahmaputra Board during 2005-06 and
2006-07, as already stated, was the non completion of zirat survey for
the Pagladiya Project by Government of Assam due to the resistance
from a section of project affected people. The matter has been taken
up at the level of Chief Secretary of Assam to complete the zirat survey.
The recommendations of the Committee to streamline the process
by which allocations in respect of flood control are decided and to fix
the Budget Estimates in such a way that there is minimal reduction of
allocation at RE stage have also been noted. In this connection, a time
bound work programme (Action Plan for 2007-08) for implementation
of different schemes by Brahmaputra Board has been prepared and
placed in the 38th meeting of the Standing Committee of Brahmaputra
Board held on 9.7.2007 at Guwahati for optimal utilization of allocation
during 2007-08. For submission of schemes/proposals for flood control
and river management works under Flood Management Programme
(a State-sector scheme) guidelines are being prepared considering the
different aspects like scope of the scheme, implementation
arrangements, financial arrangements, monitoring and evaluation
mechanism etc. In this regard, a meeting was taken by Secretary,
Ministry of Water Resources with Secretaries of the States of Assam,
West Bengal and other States on 27.6.2007 in which the State
Governments were impressed upon to submit their sound proposals
for funding under the State sector schemes at the earliest, so that the
release of funds could be made in time and the funds could be fully
utilized. The progress of expenditure is being monitored by the Ministry
on periodical basis.

24
Brahmaputra Board — implementation of the Task Force Report
Recommendation (Para No. 5.24)
The Brahmaputra Board — a statutory body under the Ministry of
Water Resources with jurisdiction of the entire 7 States in the North
East Region including Sikkim and Northern parts of West Bengal under
Brahmaputra and Barak Valley is assigned the work of survey/
investigation and preparation of Master Plans for control of floods,
bank erosion and improvement of drainage congestion giving due
importance to development and utilisation of water resources in the
region. The Pagladia Dam Project, Harange Drainage Development
Scheme, protection of Majuli Island are some of the important schemes
being executed by the Board. The Government of India approved a
scheme of Rs. 150 crore with 90% grant and 10% loan in December
2004 for taking up critical flood control and Anti-erosion schemes in
Brahmaputra and Barak Valley. The Board as a part of its activities
has prepared 36 Master Plans and the approved Master Plans have
been circulated to the concerned State Governments for implementing
specific works thereunder. The Secretary during evidence clarified that
works for the Brahmaputra Board are covered under two different
heads — one River Management activity and works related to border
rivers under the Central Sector and the other — Flood Management
Scheme under the State Sector for which Rs. 399 crore have been
reflected in the State Sector. The works, therefore, would not be affected
adversely for want of funds. The Secretary further informed that the
Task Force Schemes will be included in Flood Management generic
scheme during the Eleventh Plan and implementation of the Task Force
Report formed by the Prime Minister in 2004 would not be
discontinued. The Committee desire the Ministry to draw a time-bound
programme for implementation of the Task Force Report and appraise
them of the progress of the works under implementation.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the Committee to draw a time bound
programme for implementation of the Task Force Report have been
noted for guidance.
All the States in Brahmaputra & Barak Valley have already been
requested to submit the schemes proposed to be executed during
XI plan under flood sector. All the States (except Meghalaya) in
Brahmaputra and Barak Valley (including Sikkim & West Bengal) have
furnished the schemes for inclusion in the proposed “Flood
Management Programme for Flood Control and River Management
Works ( a State sector scheme)”.

25
The schemes are under scrutiny with Brahmaputra Board for
recommendations for inclusion under XI Five Year Plan.
The Task Force schemes will be included in the XI Five Year Plan
on the basis of prioritization by the State Governments.
A time bound programme for implementing the schemes will be
drawn after the schemes have been prioritized.
The recommendations of the schemes for release of funds will be
made by the Empowered Committee headed by Chairman,
Brahmaputra Board for those schemes which fulfil the prescribed
criteria.
Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP) — need of keeping
a close watch on physical and financial progress.
Recommendation (Para No. 6.26)
The Committee note that in view of the precarious resource
capability of the States, the Central Government had launched the
Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP) in 1996-97 to provide
Central Loan Assistance (CLA) to approved major and medium
irrigation projects to expedite implementation of these projects. The
allocation was kept at Rs. 2,350 crore in BE 2006-07 against which
proposals amounting to Rs. 3,795 crore were forwarded to Ministry of
Finance. The Ministry, in a subsequent reply, informed that CLA of
Rs. 3,795 crore has been released by the Ministry of Finance for AIBP
as recommended by the Ministry of Water Resources. The releases are
made by Ministry of Finance as the AIBP is a ‘State Sector’ Scheme.
The time leg between forwarding of proposals by the Ministry and
release of funds by Ministry of Finance is between 15 days and one
month. The Committee also note that the Finance Minister in his Budget
Speech has proposed to extend more budgetary support for irrigation
projects under AIBP by enhancing allocation for 2007-2008 to the tune
of Rs. 11,000 crore — an increase of Rs. 3,879 crore (54.47%) from
Rs. 7,121 crore in 2006-07. Further, the progress in respect of on-going
projects is being closely monitored and the Ministry of Water Resources
has taken up the matter with all State Governments which has resulted
in a relatively high achievement during this year. The Ministry
expressed the hope that the enhanced allocation for 2007-2008 will be
fully utilized. The Planning Commission does not make project-wise
allocation. The AIBP grants are released for the individual projects
based on the proposals submitted by the State Governments and
appraisal carried out by CWC of the physical and financial progress

26
of the project. The Committee desire the Ministry to keep a close
watch not only on the physical progress of the projects but also on
the expenditure incurred thereon to obviate adverse criticism by C&AG
and other such bodies as earlier taken note of by the Committee in
their Third and Fifth Reports on Demands for Grants 2005-06 and
2006-07 respectively as some of the States have diverted/mis-utilised
the CLA under AIBP in earlier years.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Water Resources is keeping close watch on physical
and financial progress of the projects included in AIBP due to which,
outcomes of the AIBP has been quite satisfactory in terms of potential
creation during recent years. In order to avoid diversion of CA released
under AIBP , the Ministry of Water Resources has made built in
safeguards such as Utilization Certificate to be signed by the Secretary
in charge of Water Resources/Irrigation Department and should contain
not only financial achievements but also physical achievements as
contained in MOU. In addition, the monitoring teams of the Central
Water Commission during their field visit to the projects are also
monitoring the status of utilization of the AIBP funds.

27
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
To complete ongoing projects spill over to XI plan before taking up
new projects
Recommendation (Para No. 2.25)
The Committee observe that according to the Report of the Working
Group on Water Resources for the XI Five Year Plan, there are 471 on-
going projects (169 Major, 219 Medium and 83 ERM) which have spilled
over from the IX Plan with a balance cost of about Rs. one lakh crore
at latest estimated cost including escalation in some projects. According
to the Working Group, 178 projects (48 Major, 91 Medium and
39 ERM) are likely to be completed and the remaining 293 of these
may spill over to the XI Plan. The Committee further observe that
300 new projects (78 Major, 136 Medium and 86 ERM) were taken up
during the X Plan which takes the tally of total number of projects to
593 spilling over to the XI Plan. The Working Group has assessed that
during the XI Plan period 337 projects (72 Major, 133 Medium and
132 ERM) are likely to be completed. The Committee fail to understand
the rationale behind taking up new projects even while the projects
started earlier have been spilling over from one Plan to another.
According to the Ministry , the shortfall in the completion of projects
as identified by the Working Group is attributed to the shortfall in the
envisaged level of funding for irrigation in the State Sector. In addition,
thin spreading of the available resources has also been cited as an
important factor contributing to lesser number of projects being
completed in successive Five Year Plans. To overcome these problems
the Working Group has proposed higher plan allocation for the
irrigation sector in State Plans as well as AIBP coupled with enhanced
monitoring and interaction with the State officials. The Ministry also
proposes to utilise remote sensing technology for monitoring of the
projects which would help in verification of the project implementation
and identification of bottlenecks. In view of the continuous spill over
of the projects from one Plan to another, the Committee recommend
that no new projects be taken up by Government during the XI Plan
till completion of the 593 projects that have already spilled over to the
XI Plan.

28
Reply of the Government
Irrigation is a State subject and planning and execution of the
irrigation projects is within the purview of State Government. The
Working Group on Water Resources for XI Plan has emphasized need
of new storage projects stating that “In India, the rainfall pattern is
widely varying in time and space. Bulk of the precipitation occurs
during four monsoon months which amounts to about 75% of the
total annual rainfall. As a result, the Indian rivers, particularly the
non-perennial ones, carry very meager discharge during non-monsoon
months. This situation warrants for creation of storages as much as
possible to hold the excess flow of monsoon months in order to offset
the imbalance arising out of skewed pattern of rainfall. In the process
of planned development of water resources since independence, live
storage in the country has been built up from 15.6 km
3 at the time of
independence to present level of about 213 km 3. Even after attainment
of such storage position, the per capita storage in the country is only
about 210 m 3, which is way behind the achievement in many of the
developed and developing countries. Harnessing of 690 km 3 utilizable
surface water will only be possible if sufficient numbers of new projects
are taken up across the country .” The Standing Committee on Water
Resources has also pointed out the need of new storage projects in the
para 7.18 of their Report presented to Lok Sabha on 28th April 2007.
It is also to point out that most of the ongoing projects which are
not getting completed due to some problems, have yielded benefits
such as irrigation potential, drinking water, hydro power etc. Such
projects are Sardar Sarovar, Gosikhurd, Teesta etc.
As far as AIBP is concerned, Group of Ministers while reviewing
the Cabinet Note on “AIBP: Relaxation in criteria” in November, 2006,
have suggested that 1:1 criteria for inclusion of new projects in AIBP
in lieu of completion of one project in a State should continue but the
projects included in Prime Minister’s Package for agrarian distress
districts, approved projects benefiting drought prone/Tribal area and
approved projects in the States having irrigation development below
National average may be included in AIBP in relaxation to 1:1 criteria
of AIBP . Union Cabinet accepted the recommendation of GOM and
accordingly Ministry is following the Cabinet decision.
Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies
Recommendation (Para No. 6.33)
The Committee note that a Pilot Project launched in January 2005
with an estimated cost of Rs. 300 crore to be borne by the Centre and

29
the States in the ratio of 3:1 was to be implemented during the
remaining period of the Tenth Plan and the projects were required to
be completed within two years from the sanctioned date. So far,
2 works have been completed during 2005-2006, 267 number of works
were completed upto December 2006 and 810 number of works are
targeted to be completed by March, 2007. Some spill over works will
be completed in 2007-2008 benefiting 26 districts in 15 States. The
Finance Minister in his Budget Speech of 2007 has proposed that under
the project, some State Governments have signed agreements with the
World Bank for implementation of the Projects and some States are
planning to do so. Further, an amount of Rs. 100 crore has been
provided for 2007-08 in the State Sector under Central Plan Outlays.
About Rs. 54 crore of this amount will be utilized for spill over projects
under the pilot scheme. The remaining will be for providing 25% of
the cost in the World Bank assisted projects. It is targeted to complete
about 500 water bodies under the pilot scheme by March 2007 and
the remaining 598 water bodies by March 2008. In the World Bank
assisted project, the work will commence in the first phase of tanks
and it is proposed to complete them by the end of two years. The
Committee desire the Government to monitor the implementation of
these projects by the States earnestly as they are aimed to increase the
storage capacities which are quite low, as observed by them elsewhere
in this Report since approximately 746 BCM of water is going waste
into the sea. They further desire the Government to ensure that the
projects targeted to be completed by March 2008 do not spill over to
the next year which, in their opinion, would not only increase their
cost but also delay in attaining the desired objectives. The Committee
may be informed of the progress made in this direction at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
Out of total 1098 water bodies, work in 625 water bodies could be
completed till March, 2007 in different States. Requests for extension
of time for completion of remaining 473 water bodies have been
received from different State Governments. Accordingly, keeping in
view the requests made by the State Governments extension of time
ranging from 6 months to 12 months is being accorded to the State
Governments for completion of spill over work. As per the information
provided by the State Governments all spill over activities under the
Pilot Scheme on “National Project for Repair, Renovation & Restoration
of Water Bodies directly linked to Agriculture” are to be completed by
March 2008.
As regards monitoring the implementation of the scheme, it is
mentioned that since this is a State sector scheme, the nodal

30
departments of State Governments have overall responsibility for
planning, implementation, supervision and monitoring of the project.
The project implementation is done at the district level through the
District Level Implementation Committee (DLIC) chaired by District
Collector. There is provision for involving the local community, reputed
NGOs for monitoring, supervision, coordination with Panchayats etc.
The DLIC is responsible for all aspects of implementation-execution at
site, procurement of material, selection of NGOs, deciding involvement
of contractors, NGOs, WUAs, etc. Executive Engineer is the nodal
officer at the District Level for project implementation and functions
as Member Secretary for the DLIC. The Ministry of Water Resources
is also keeping track of overall monitoring and implementation of the
scheme. The projects are being monitored in the States through Central
Water Commission. On-site inspections are also being conducted by
the officers of this Ministry.

31
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT
BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Need of making suitable changes in the National Environment Policy
2006 as per the suggestions of MoWR in order to increase storage
capacity.
Recommendation (Para No. 7.18)
The Committee observe that the review of the Ministry of Water
Resources carried out by the Planning Commission as a part of its
Mid-term Review of the Five Year Plans of every Ministry as well as
the State Plans revealed that creation of irrigation potential in first
2 years of the Tenth Plan was significantly below the levels projected
by State Governments and therefore, scaling down of targets was
unavoidable. The review suggests that this shortfall in achievement of
targets is a reflection of the fact that funds for irrigation in the State
Sector fell short of the envisaged levels, which itself is a result of
lower levels of potential created earlier. As a corollary , the Planning
Commission scaled down the target for creation of irrigation potential
at the Mid Term Appraisal stage from 9.936 million hectare to
6.5 million hectare for Major and Medium irrigation and from
6.807 million hectare to 4 million hectare for Minor irrigation. The
Working Group of Eleventh Plan has further reviewed the position
and has projected that a target of 5.29 m.ha for MMI and 3.52 m.ha
for MI would be achieved by the end of Tenth Plan. According to
them, this situation points to a deeper malaise afflicting the system of
projecting targets in successive Plans. The Committee, therefore,
recommend the Ministry and the Planning Commission to order an
independent evaluation of this system of target fixation, if need be, by
a reputed professional/research organization to achieve the desired
results in future Plans.
The Committee further observe that a target of 16 m.ha. for creation
of irrigation potential of which 9 m.ha. under MMI and 7 m.ha. under
MI with a higher outlay of Rs. 1,97,750 crore through State and Central
Plan has been proposed for the Eleventh Plan against an outlay of
Rs. 84,735 crore for Tenth Plan. The present storage capacity is
71.70 BCM. It is proposed to create storage capacity amounting to

32
30.57 BCM through projects under construction and additional storage
of 71.34 BCM could be created through the projects under consideration.
The Mid Term Review also suggests for increase in cost limit of major
projects from Rs. 100 to Rs. 250 crore and CCA limit from 10,000 to
25,000 hectare. Further, the Ministry suggested for modification of clause
relating to mandatory environmental clearance for major projects to
the Ministry of Environment and Forests. However, the Ministry has
informed that the National Environment Policy 2006 approved in May
2006 does not include the suggestions of the Ministry of Water
Resources. The Committee are of the opinion that in order to increase
the storage capacity, the suggestions of the Ministry from the
environmental angle need to be re-looked as more than one third of
the utilisable water is going waste into the sea. The Committee also
desire the Ministry to pursue the matter with the Ministry of
Environment and Forests to make suitable changes in the National
Environment Policy 2006.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Environment and Forests has already been
requested for necessary action in this regard.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter-I of the Report)

33
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
To reduce gap between created irrigation potential and its utilization
Recommendation (Para No. 2.26)
The Committee further observe that with the sustained and
systematic development of irrigation started from the First Five Year
Plan, the irrigation potential from Major, Medium and Minor Irrigation
Projects has increased from 22.60 million hectare in 1951 to 102.7 million
hectare approximately as against the utilisation of irrigation potential
so created ranged between 22.60 million hectare in 1951 and 87.23
million hectare approximately at the end of the X Plan. The utilisation
of created irrigation potential stands at 84 per cent. The Government
expects reduction in the gap between potential created and utilised by
the Centrally Sponsored Schemes of CAD&WM which supports
activities like construction of field channels, on-farm development, etc.
Although the XI Plan has commenced, the Planning Commission has
not finalised the State Plans for 2007-2008 as yet. The Committee desire
that the State Plans for 2007-2008 be finalised without any further loss
of time to enable the State Governments to commence /continue works
during the current year. The Committee also desire that by using remote
sensing technology, the gap between the created irrigation potential
and its utilisation would reduce. The Committee would like to be
informed of the progress made as a result of the steps taken by the
Government in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Out of the irrigation potential of 102.7 million ha. created so far,
the area covered under the construction of field channels so far since
1973-74 is about 18 million ha., mainly under major and medium
projects. The rate of creation of irrigation potential out-spaces the rate
at which area is presently being covered under field channels as States
are facing difficulty in providing their matching share. Moreover,
deferred maintenance of canals is also responsible for the gap in
utilization of irrigation potential. Efforts are being made to revamp
the Command Area Development and Water Management Programme

34
to include 8 M.Ha. of additional area under field channels and
8.5 M.ha. area under correction of conveyance deficiency during
XI Plan. Besides the programme is now proposed to be State friendly
as Central share is proposed to be enhanced. Copy of EFC note is
circulated to all Ministries and views of Planning Commission are
awaited.
Regarding finalization of State Plan allocation, Planning Commission
has been requested to look into the matter. Planning Commission has
informed that the Annual Plan 2007-08 for all States/UTs except Goa
and Uttar Pradesh have been finalized. The sector-wise outlays in
Annual Plan 2007-08 for 20 States and 4 UTs have also been finalized
and those of the remaining States/UTs are being finalized.
Regarding the use of remote sensing technology for assessing the
actual utilisation of the created irrigation potential, it is to submit that
Ministry of Water Resources has got a study done by NRSA in respect
of 2 projects namely Teesta Barrage Project in West Bengal and Upper
Krishna Project in Andhra Pradesh. Further, National Remote Sensing
Agency, Hyderabad has been associated in the study for assessment of
irrigation potential created under 53 AIBP funded projects in the
country.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report)
To reflect allocations for CGWB in the budget document
appropriately—artificial recharge of ground water through dug wells.
Recommendation (Para No. 3.23)
Further, the Committee observe that CGWB is entrusted with the
task of surveys, investigations, exploration, augmentation and regulation
of ground water resources of the country. Besides, the Board is also
taking up special studies on R&D, artificial recharge, etc. The allocation
for CGWB also shows a disturbing trend wherein the allocations at
the BE stage were reduced considerably at the RE stage, which have
been further reduced in BE in the next year. The BE for 2007-2008 has
drastically come down to Rs. 1.50 crore from Rs. 91.34 crore in BE
2006-2007. However, the Ministry in a subsequent reply furnished to
the Committee informed that the total budget for CGWB is reflected
in the scheme ‘Ground Water Management and Regulation’. The
Committee desire that the allocations need to be appropriately reflected
in the Budget Documents.

35
Furthermore, the Committee observe that the Finance Minister has
proposed a new scheme on Artificial Recharge of Ground Water
through ‘dug wells’ in 1,065 over exploited or critical blocks covering
100 districts in 7 States, costing Rs. 4,000 for each ‘dug well’. The
Scheme has proposed to provide 100 per cent subsidy to the small
and marginal farmers and 50% subsidy to other farmers. The Scheme
will be finalised shortly in consultation with the concerned State
Governments, NABARD and CGWB. The scheme will be implemented
in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan, Maharashtra,
Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, Gujarat and Tamil Nadu. The Committee
desire that all the preparatory work for launching the Artificial Recharge
of Ground Water through ‘dug wells’ scheme be finalised at the earliest.
They desire to be apprised of the action taken and progress made in
the matter at frequent intervals.
Reply of the Government
With a view to rationalize plan schemes of the Ministry of Water
Resources, schemes with similar activities have been clubbed.
Accordingly the budget for CGWB is reflected in the scheme “Ground
Water Management & Regulation” which is Rs. 75.50 crore. Rs. 1.50
crore has been separately kept for the scheme “Rajiv Gandhi National
Ground Water and Research Institute”.
Subsequent to the announcement of the scheme on artificial
recharge of ground water through dug wells in hard rock areas in the
budget speech of Finance Minister on 28.02.2007, a meeting was taken
by Secretary (WR) on 23.03.2007 with representatives from concerned
State Governments, officers from NABARD, Central Ground Water
Board and Ministry of Water Resources. Thereafter a draft note for
consideration of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) has
been prepared and circulated to all concerned Ministries/Departments
viz. Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs and
Expenditure), Department of Drinking Water Supply, Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation, Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Planning
Commission and PMO for their comments. The proposed scheme covers
1180 over-exploited, critical and semi-critical blocks, falling mainly in
hard rock areas in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu at an
estimated cost of Rs. 1871.10 crore. The net cost of the scheme works
out to be Rs. 1723.87 crore, which includes subsidy component and
other charges. The scheme envisages ground water recharge through
4.455 million existing irrigation dug wells.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report)

36
Command Area Development Programme–implementation of PIM.
Recommendation (Para No. 4.15)
The National Water Policy 2002 laid great emphasis on participatory
approach in Water Resource Management. The participation of the
farmers in management of irrigation includes transfer of responsibility
for O&M and collection of water charges for the WUAs. One time
functional grant @ Rs. 600 per hectare to be shared between the Centre,
State and farmers is being paid to outlet level WUAs as incentive, the
interest from which is used for maintenance. In view of the declining
interest rates over the past 3 years, the Working Group for the Eleventh
Plan has recommended enhancement of the functional grant to the
WUAs and Central grant for motivation activities, training and capacity
building of farmers. The Committee also observe that PIM Legislation
has not been enacted in many States. So far 11 States have either
enacted exclusive legislation or amended their Irrigation Act for
involvement of farmers in irrigation management while Gujarat had
experimented with the idea of farmers’ cooperative movement in this
regard and the enabling Act for PIM is on the cards. The issue of
implementation of PIM was discussed in detail by the National Water
Board at its meeting held on 5 January 2007 due to which a separate
National Level Workshop on PIM was not organised. It may, however,
be pertinent to observe that the National Water Board while
emphasising on the States to enact PIM Legislation at the earliest, has
not recommended any time frame for doing so. The Committee desire
the Ministry to review the progress of implementation of PIM in the
context of National Water Policy 2002 and report the matter to the
National Water Resources Council for appropriate directions. They also
desire that PIM legislation is enacted in the remaining States at the
earliest. The Committee also desire to be informed of the outcome of
the review and the directions given by the National Water Resources
Council in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Necessary action as desired by the Committee, shall be initiated in
the matter, inter-alia, pursuing the issue of enactment of PIM legislation
by the remaining States. The matter shall also be placed before National
Water Resources Council as and when its meeting takes place.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report)

37
Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP) — to process
expeditiously the Review Report of the Ministry of Statistics and
Programme Implementation on AIBP .
Recommendation (Para No. 6.27)
The Committee further observe that the Twelfth Finance
Commission has recommended abolition of loan component and the
States are incurring expenditure of State-share mostly from their Plan
allocations. In order to achieve the target of completion of projects,
the Ministry of Water Resources has stepped up monitoring of the
projects. The Ministry has also taken up monitoring of creation of
irrigation potential by the Remote Sensing Technology to confirm the
actual achievement on site. An irrigation potential of 15 lakh hectare
is proposed to be created of which 13.5 lakh hectare will be through
major and medium irrigation projects and 1.5 lakh hectare through
surface minor irrigation schemes under AIBP . A Fast Track Programme
was launched in February 2002 to be completed in two working seasons
those Major and Medium Irrigation Projects which are nearing
completion. The Fast Track Programme has now been discontinued
from 2006-07 as per the revised guidelines. This has been done as a
part of the process to rationalize the procedure for release of funds
under AIBP . The Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
had taken up evaluation of AIBP during 2004 with the help of ten
different Consultancy Firms who evaluated the AIBP performance in
the whole country. The draft report has been submitted during
December 2006 which is under examination. Further, the Planning
Commission has also proposed to take up a similar study during 2007.
The Committee recommend the Ministry to expeditiously process the
Review Report submitted during December 2006. The Committee
further recommend the Government to initiate the remedial measures
suggested by the Review Report to further improve and streamline
the processes and procedures governing the implementation of AIBP
in the coming years. They would like to be apprised of the action
taken in this matter at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
The Report on review of AIBP submitted by the Ministry of
Statistics & Programme Implementation is under consideration with
Ministry of Water Resources. The State-wise and project-wise
recommendation would be taken up with the State Governments for
taking necessary corrective measures.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report)

38
Expeditious processing of suggestions/recommendations of the expert
group on ground water — formulation of policy for declaring major
irrigation projects as “National Projects.”
Recommendation (Para No. 7.19)
The Committee also observe that irrigation water charges in most
States are not even adequate to recover the O&M cost except Gujarat
and Maharashtra which have been able to meet full O&M cost from
the revenue earned through water tariffs. In the context of water tariffs,
the need for regulatory mechanism to ensure sustainability of resources
and facilities created was discussed in the 12th Meeting of the National
Water Board while the Maharashtra Water Regulatory Authority is
already functional, the States of Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh,
Rajasthan, Orissa, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh have stated that the
process of setting up of the regulatory mechanism is under formulation.
The Committee desire the Ministry to impress upon the States to set
up the regulatory mechanism for optimum, judicious and equitable
management, allocation and utilisation of the limited water resources
available. The Mid Term Review proposed to set up an Expert Group
comprising officials of Ministries/Departments, NGOs, etc. to review
the issue of ground water ownership in line with the international
practices and suggest a line of action for implementation during
Eleventh Plan. The Expert Group on ground water was to submit its
report to the Planning Commission on 31 May 2006 which was,
however, delayed due to extensive consultations required in the matter
and the report is expected shortly . The Committee urge the Ministry
of Water Resources and the Planning Commission to process the
suggestions/recommendations of the Expert Group on ground water
expeditiously. Further, the Mid Term Appraisal also notes that Women
Self Help Groups need to be promoted in a major way. The Committee
are happy to learn that in pursuance of the provisions of National
Water Policy, the guidelines for PIM emphasised upon the States to
consider representation of women in WUAs at all levels and as a
result thereof many of the State Governments have amended their
Irrigation Acts or specific Acts on PIM have been formulated with
provisions for participation of women.
The Committee have come across a suggestion for declaring the
Teesta Barrage Project as a National Project fully funded by the Central
Government. In this context, the Ministry has informed that the
suggestion of the West Bengal Government has been received and the
concept of the National Project is under consideration of the Ministry.
The Committee desire the Ministry to formulate a policy for declaring

39
major irrigation projects as ‘National Projects’ at an early date. The
Committee desire to be apprised of the action taken in this regard at
the earliest.
Reply of the Government
The concept of the National Project has been incorporated in the
Cabinet Note for continuation of AIBP in the XI Plan and the same is
under Inter Ministerial circulation. Further action will be taken on
approval of Union Cabinet to the Cabinet Note.
The Report of the Expert Group constituted by the Planning
Commission has been finalized and reportedly will be submitted in
Planning Commission shortly.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter-I of the Report)
   N
EW D ELHI; R. SAMBASIVA RAO,
19 November, 2007 Chairman,
28 Kartika, 1929 (Saka) Standing Committee on Water Resources.

40
APPENDIX I
(Para No. 2.37)
BRIEF NOTE ON THE RESEARCH SCHEMES COMPLETED
DURING THE LAST FIVE YEARS (SINCE APRIL 2002)
UNDER THE R&D PROGRAMME OF MoWR
Thirty five (35) research schemes have been completed under the
R&D Programme of MoWR during the last five years (since April
2002). A list of these schemes indicating the title of scheme, name of
Principal Investigator (PI), name of the institute and the sanctioned
cost is enclosed. A brief note on each of the completed scheme
containing the objectives and findings of the study is also enclosed.
These research schemes, fully funded by MoWR, were successfully
carried out at various Central and State Government research institute/
organizations, universities, IITs and WALMIs etc. The subject covered
by these schemes span across wide spectrum of water resources and
include irrigation, drainage, agronomy, water management, hydraulic
structure, surface and ground water hydrology.
Further eighty-two (82) research schemes have been sanctioned
during the past 5 years. Most of these schemes are ongoing.
List of research schemes completed during the last 5 years
(since April 2002) under the R&D Programme of MoWR
(as on 20.7.2007)
Sl.No. Title of Project Name of Institute Name of PI Sanctioned
Cost (Rs.)
12 34 5
1. Quantification and alleviation of Crop Losses Punjab Agricultural Dr. H.S. Uppal 1001000
due to Floods and Impact of Floods on Ground University, Ludhiana
Water Recharge
2. Integrated Hydrological Studies in Kodaveeti Nagarjuna University, Sh. P . Sankara 265000
Vegu Watershed Nagarjunanagar, Pitchaiah
Guntur
3. Developing Guidelines for EIA of a completed Pondicherry Professor S.A. 864000
water resources project in Tamil Nadu University, Kalapet Abbasi (Director)
4. Hydrological & Ecological Studies on the Pondicherry Professor S.A. 1648700
Oustery Lake Ecosystem University, Kalapet Abbasi

41
 12 3 4 5
 5. Development of Dynamic Flood Frequency Indian Institute of Dr. N.K. Goel 360000
Model Technology Roorkee
 6. Water quality assessment and charaterization Anna University, Dr. R. Ramesh 679800
in Pondicherry region Chennai
 7. Ground water studies using satellite data, Physical Research S.K. Gupta/ 1530000
Helium and geophysical techniques—A pilot Laboratory, Dr. P .R. Reddy/
study project Ahmedabad Dr. R.L. Dhar
 8. Feasibility of artificial recharge study through National Geophysical Dr. V .S. Singh 1097000
mathematical modeling in Kongal river basin, a Research Institute,
hard rock region in Nalgonda District, AP Hyderabad
 9. Ascertaining arsenic mobilisation in Soil-Water- Bidhan Chandra Dr. Saroj Kumar 957000
Plant system and exploring the possible Krishi Vishwa Sanyal
remedial measure, West Bengal Vidyalaya, Nadia
10. The effect of water logging and intensive Andhra University, Prof. M. Gangadhar/ 938000
agriculture on ground water regime in deltaic Vishakhapatnam Prof. C. Subbarao
region
11. Hydro-economic interaction between tank & Tamil Nadu Prof. K. Palanisami 669000
Well water and possibilities for conversion of Agricultural
tank into percolation tank University,
Coimbatore
12. Environmental studies of surface and ground Jawaharlal Nehru Dr. M. Aniji Reddy 536380
water down stream of Pennar river Andhra Technological
Pradesh University,
Hyderabad, A.P .
13. Impact of urbanisation on ground water—A University of Prof. A.K. Sinha 634000
study from Jaipur city and hinterland Rajasthan, Jaipur
14. Laboratory investigation on use of perforated National Institute of Dr. N.B.S. Rao 942000
hollow cylinder as a solution for coastal erosion Technology
problems Karnataka, Surathkal
15. Studies on under water bodies in the combined College of Dr. M.L. Narsimham 750000
wave and current field Engineering, K.
Rangarao University,
Visakhapatnam
16. Scale effect in a mixed flow pump Jadhavpur Dr. T.K. Saha 653000
University, Calcutta
17. Scour protection around bridge piers and Indian Institute of Sh. T. Gangadhariah 695000
abutments Technology, Kanpur
18. Remote sensing aided idealisation of space Indian Institute of Dr. Nayan Sharma 1325280
time variant behaviour of channel geometry of Technology Roorkee
river Brahmaputra
19. Preparation of a critical note on Lacey’s method Indian Institute of Dr. U.C. Kothyari 25000
for predicting scour and updating of State of art Technology Roorkee
report on scour around bridge piers

42
12 34 5
20. A reviewing on the scour protection methods Indian Institute of Dr. T. Gangadhariah 40000
around bridge piers and abutments Technology, Kanpur
21. Development of Coastal Protective Structure in Indian Institute of Dr. J.S. Mani 1788000
Tamil Nadu Technology, Madras
22. Developing Drip Irrigation System for Field Punjab Agricultural Dr. H.S. Uppal 647000
Scale Implementation for Orchard and Field University, Ludhiana
Crops
23. Geographic Information System Design for Jawaharlal Nehru Sh. I.V . Murali 925000
Environmental Impact Assessment of Irrigation Technological Krishna
Project A case study of Nagarjunasagar right University,
bank canal command area Hyderabad, A.P .
24. Studies for combating salinity problem in the Gulbarga University , Dr. G.R. Naik 602000
Upper Krishna Project (UKP) area Gulbarga
25. Performance Studies of Sprinkler Drip and Punjab Agricultural Dr. N.K. Narda 458000
Surface Irrigation Methods University, Ludhiana
26. Development of Simulation Model for Dynamic Water Resoruces Sh. P .M. Modi 325000
Regulation of Canal Network Engineering and
Management
Institute, Samiala
27. Determination of Optimal cropping Pattern and Water Resources Sh. D.T. Shete 294000
Release Policy for a Conjunctive use of Surface Engineering and
and ground water by linear programming Management
Institute, Samiala
28. Status Report on History of Irrgn. for Andhra INCID, Bhikaji Cama Sh. A. Narayana 338000
Pradesh & Tamil Nadu Place, New Delhi Rao
29. Improving water use efficiency of crops and Water Technology Sh. B.R. Sharma 56000
cropping system Centre, Indian
Agricultural research
Institute, New Delhi
30. Fabric based material for canal lining Indian Institute of Prof. B.L. Deopura 3896000
Technology, Delhi
31. Solar power trickle irrigation system for sandy College of K. Yella Reddy 697400
tracts of coastal Andhra Pradesh Agriculture, Andhra
Pradesh Agricultural
University
32. Modelling of Diffusion in Concrete Parameters Indian Institute of Dr. Bishwajit 442000
and Determination Technology, Delhi Bhattacharjee
33. Software development for 3-D finite element Indian Institute of Dr. P .N. Godbole 1200000
analysis of sub-structures in water charged rock Technology Roorkee
masses for River Valley Projects
34. Nonlinear Finite Element Analysis for Design Central Building Dr. Prabhat Kumar 984000
of Underground Openings Research Institute,
Roorkee
35. Evaluation of Compaction Control Method Indian Institute of Dr. Manoj Dutta 971000
Technology, Delhi

43
1
Title of scheme : Quantification and Alleviation of Crop Losses
due to Floods and Impact of Floods on
Ground Water Recharge
Name of PI : Dr. H.S. Uppal
Institute : Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 10,01,000
Objectives
•T o conduct surveys and estimate the extent and nature of
damage to crops in relation to duration, intensity and time
of occurrence of floods and identify production constraints
of flooded lands.
• Quantification of crop damage estimates by crop cutting
sampling approach
• Study the impact of floods on the ground water recharge
•T o study the mode of damage to crops
•T o develop agronomic, soil and nutrient management
measures to mitigate the damage to crops due to floods
•T o demonstrate and disseminate the soil-water and crop
management technologies developed to cultivators in flood
prone areas.
Findings:
• The extent and nature of damage to crops in relation to
duration, intensity and time of occurrence of floods and
identified production constraints of flooded lands were
estimated.
• The impact of floods on the ground water recharge was
studied.
• Research activities to study the mode of damage to crop.
• Agronomic, soil and nutrient management measures were
investigated to mitigate the damage to crops due to floods.

44
2
Title of scheme : Integrated Hydrological Studies in Kodaveeti
Vegu Watershed
Name of PI : Sh. P . Sankara Pichaiah
Institute : Nagarjuna University, Nagarjunanagar, Guntur
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 2,65,000
Objectives:
• Deeper understanding of the hydrological cycle and thereby
evaluating the causative factors of drought;
• Estimate the impact of drought on surface and groundwater
resources.
• Identify methodologies for moisture conservation during
cropping periods and extending them to larger areas.
• Bringing awareness among the people on the ecological
friendly concepts of land and water management for
enhancing productivity and increasing the recharge.
• Interact with various institutions for initiating long-term
development plans in the region.
Findings:
Even though there is a scarcity of water in Kondaveeti V egu
watershed, there is no mechanism to manage and develop the water
resources. So, water flowing through ‘local vagus’ should be stored
near the village itself. It should not be allowed to add to the main
course. For this water balance studies on individual vagus should be
taken up.
3
Title of scheme : Developing Guidelines for EIA of a completed
water resources project in Tamil Nadu
Name of PI : Professor S.A. Abbasi
Institute : Pondicherry University, Kalapet
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 8,64,000
Objectives:
• Collecting and collating all available information on Sathanur
dam.
• Assessing the beneficial as well as adverse impacts of each
project;

45
Findings:
The water resources projects located upstream of the Sathanur
reservoir have an indirect bearing on the Sathanur reservoir water
quality by impacting the water quality of the feeder streams.
No exotic or endangered species of flora or fauna have been
reported in the dry, deciduous reserve forest.
As per the criteria for seismicity (IS: 1993-1984), Sathanur dam is
located in the zone II reflecting moderate risk of the area tot he seismic
hazards. But there have been no instances of tremors or landslides in
the region since the Sathanur reservoir was created in 1958.
The dead storage space provided in the Sathanur reservoir was
meagre 0.1232 Mm3  i.e. 0.05% of the reservoir capacity, which was
very less according to the design criteria of reservoirs.
Due to the less capacity-inflow ratio in the Sathanur reservoir (0.35),
much of the sediments are discharged over the spillways as the
residence time of the sedimentladen water in the reservoir decreases.
The reservoir water can be categorised as highly eutrophic because
of the (i) high EC (>200 umhos, Rawson, 1960; Berg et al., 1958),
(ii) high alkalinity values (Phillipose, 1960; Spencer, 1974) and (iii)
high bicarbonate values (Moss, 1973; Munawar, 1970). As per the criteria
of Moyles (1946) the reservoir can be categorized as a hard water
body due to the high alkalinity values.
An increasing trend has been observed during the summer months
in the case of total solids, dissolved solids, calcium hardness, and
chlorides, which could be explained due to the evapo-transpiration
factor. However, the parameters—alkalinity, total hardness, magnesium,
and sulfates-showed declining trends.
4
Title of scheme : Hydrological & Ecological Studies on the
Oustery Lake Ecosystem
Name of PI : Professor S.A. Abbasi
Institute : Pondicherry University, Kalapet
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 16,48,700
Objectives:
An in depth integrated study of the Oustery lake and its catchment
leading to a (a) thorough understanding of the biotic and abiotic factors

46
contributing to the lake eco-system and their inter-relationship, with
special reference to the community dynamics of the birds, fishes and
commercially important invertebrates, (b) a precise assessment of the
extent of disruption to the eco-system caused so far and the measures
necessary for the eco-restoration of the wetland, and (c) delineation of
strategies based on the funding of this study, for sustainable
management of tropical wetland in general.
Findings:
Water of the lake can be classified as class 2, with moderate salinity.
The pH of the lake is in the mild-to-alkaline range. Interestingly, the
water of the lake at the north-east extreme has the highest pH. The
pH of the soil and the bore well water was in the slightly acidic to
mildly alkaline range.
The hydraulic retention time (HRT) of the water in Oussudu lake
has altered drastically in the past few years. An increase in the
residence time of Oussudu lake can be attributed to the following
reasons (i) people in the catchment of Oussudu are now turning to
borewells for irrigation water than relying on Oussudu lake and its
channels, and (ii) the abundance of rains has kept the lake filled for
the past three years, which is unusual for Oussudu lake. Thus the
lake, being left disused, had slowly been accumulating the runoff
nutrients and sediments becoming hypereutrophic.
The plankton population of Oussudu lake was dominated by
diatoms due to the meso-eutrophic calcium contents and highly alkaline
eutrophic nature of the water. The presence of a large number of
phytoplankton, seven out of ten species, constituting about 80% of the
phytoplantkon density, are indicative of water pollution. A comparison
of the two Communities during 1997 and 1999 construe that the
plankter diversity, composition and structure has changed drastically.
Also the decrease in the ratio of zooplankton to phytoplankton density
is indicative of enhanced primary productivity and eutrophic nature
of the lake.
A comparison of the primary productivity values of Oustery lake
with that of the other lakes indicate that the lake is tending towards
hyper-eutrophy.
The lake is well-mixed, and thus the chemical and thermal
stratification of the lake are not very significant. The thermal and the
O2 profiles follow an orthograde curve.

47
Diurnal variation is pronounced and significant in the case of all
the parameters except alkalinity, chlorides, total hardness, and total
dissolved phosphorous. Except for phosphorous and nitrogen, no
significant difference was observed in the concentration of water
constituents in the epilimnion and hypolimnion.
5
Title of scheme : Development of Dynamic Flood Frequency
Model
Name of PI : Dr. N.K. Goel
Institute : Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 3,60,000
Objectives:
1. Estimation of parameters of stochastic rainfall models
including regionalisation of rainfall parameters.
2. Development of various dynamic flood frequency models
i.e. various combinations of stochastic rainfall, infiltration
and rainfall runoff models.
3. Application of these models to more and more watersheds
having long term reliable runoff data.
4. It is envisaged in the project to concentrate the efforts in
above directions and finally suggest an alternate
methodology for carrying flood frequency analysis based
on the dynamics of the catchment and rainfall characteristics.
The above objectives would require creation of catchment
and meteorological data base and its processing for the
selected region. It is proposed to use a GIS package for
this. Limited field studies for infiltration and catchment
parameters stochasticity are also proposed.
Findings:
1. A physically based flood frequency distribution has been
derived using joint PDF of exponentially distributed rainfall
intensity and duration, curve number for excess rainfall
computation and kinematic wave as effective rainfall-runoff
model.
2. Physically-based derived flood frequency distribution (DFFD)
models offer a promising alternative to the conventional

48
approaches for estimating the PDF of flood flows at an
ungauged site. DFFD methods are unique because they
integrate knowledge of the physical processes with
probabilistic analyses. The stochastic rainfall model used in
this study accounts for correlation between rainfall intensity
and  duration which were earlier assumed to be either
independent of each other or negatively correlated. The
results of application of this model to four Indian watersheds
and one watershed of United States indicate that correlation
has an important impact on the estimated quantities.
3. Only nine gauging sites of subzone 3c, the upper portions
of Narmada and Tapi basins of India have been found to
be homogeneous with the region. Mean annual flood of
various sites of subzone 3c can be found from regression
equation between catchment characteristics (area and length
of main stream) and mean annual flood.
4. Amount parametric methods of Regional flood frequency
analysis, Generalized Pareto distribution based on
L-moments was found best. Growth curves were developed
for parametric methods and one non-parametric method
(new application of ANN). After evaluation of growth curves
it was noticed that growth curve developed by ANN closely
fits with observed value and with best-fit distribution. Thus,
the study demonstrates that the growth curve developed
by ANN can be used to estimate flood quantilies at both
gauged and gauged catchments in the upper portions of
Narmada and Tapi basins of India i.e. Sub zone 3C.
6
Title of scheme : Water quality assessment and characterization
in Pondicherry region
Name of PI : Dr. R. Ramesh
Institute : Anna University, Chennai
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 6,79,800
Objectives:
•T o identify sources of pollutants affecting the quality of
available water resources in Pondicherry region.
•T o prepare inventory of different sources of contaminants.

49
•T o assess the spatial and temporal variation of major and
trace elements in the groundwater and surface water of
Pondicherry Region and to understand the processes
controlling the seasonal variation of these elements.
•T o determine the spatial variation of the various forms of
inorganic nutrients (NO 3-N; NO 2-N; NH 4-N and PO 4) in
ground water and to evaluate the impacts of agricultural
activity on water quality in this region.
Findings:
The dominant cations and anions of the groundwater in
Pondicherry region were found to be in the order of Na>Ca>Mg>K
and HCO
3>CI>SO 4 (meq rl) respectively. The predominant
hydrochemical facies of groundwater were identified as Na+KHCO 3,
CaHCO3 and MgHCO 3.
It is seen that the major ion concentrations are predominantly
influenced by natural agencies than the anthropogenic activities. Also
the findings reveal that the over exploitation of groundwater has invited
the problem of sea water intrusion along the coast line and results in
the increase of major ions such as Na and Cl.
The distribution of nutrient concentration indicates that leaching
of the fertilizers applied to croplands resulted in the enrichment of
nutrients in groundwater of agriculture area in Pondicherry region.
The study indicates that the trace elements are mostly derived
from anthropogenic sources (industrial and municipal waste discharges),
which are being delivered into the hydrological systems either directly
or indirectly. The residual level of organochlorine pesticides are found
to be 3 to 4 times more in agriculture area than in urban area.
The study reveals that the salt water has intruded into the coastal
alluvial aquifer for about 3000 metres irreversibly. The zone between
3000 metres and 6000 metres from the coastline will always be under
the dynamic influence of salt water and fresh water.
7
Title of scheme : Ground water studies using satellite data,
Helium and geophysical techniques—A pilot
study project
Name of PI : Dr. S.K. Gupta/Dr. P .R. Reddy/Dr. R.L. Dhar

50
Institute : Physical Research Laboratory, Ahmedabad
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 15,30,000
Objectives:
1. To ascertain the potential of natural helium surveys in
combination with remote sensing data and geophysical
surveys for characterizing faults/fractures in hard rock areas,
especially with reference to their groundwater potentials.
2. To conduct pilot studies for understanding direction and
rate of movement of groundwater in hard rocks using
artificially injected helium at selected locations with a view
to determine transmission and dispersion properties of the
aquifers and to recommend appropriate sites for construction
of artificial recharge structures.
Findings:
Two prominent lineaments were identified from analysis of remote
sensing data by NRSA and the helium survey was undertaken along
and across these lineaments.
In general, the tubewells located along the major lineaments and
dolerite dykes in the Kavadapalli area showed anomalous helium
concentration. The groundwater helium anomaly became relatively less
prominent in the locations away from the lineament. The soil-gas in
the region did not show any significant Helim anomaly possibly due
to weathered nature of the soil zone, which facilitates quick permeation
and escape of Helium released from the fractures and fissures in the
bedrocks. The groundwater, being closer to the fractures and fissures
in the bedrocks, however, did successfully trap the Helium emanating
from the lineament zone as reflected in higher Helium anomaly in
groundwater.
Detailed electrical resistivity profiling, sounding and imaging was
undertaken at selected locations along the major identified Deshmukhi
lineament in the Kavadapalli area. The results indicated that regions
with high groundwater helium anomaly did have deeper fracture zones
and also thick weathered top layer. Tubewells in such regions also
had relatively higher yield-suggesting that groundwater helium
anomalies are associated with deeper fractures, but occurrence of
groundwater also requires thick weathered zones connecting to these
fractures.

51
This study has ascertained that Helium survey along and across
the lineaments already identified by remote sensing can provide
valuable information in terms of mobilisation and migration of water
from deeper sources and also narrows down the search zone for
geophysical surveys. This kind of information can not be obtained
even with rigorous analyses of remote sensing data of high resolution.
8
Title of scheme : Feasibility of artificial recharge study through
mathematical modeling in Kongal river basin,
a hard rock region in Nalgonda District, AP
Name of PI : Dr. V .S. Singh
Institute : National Geophysical Research Institute,
Hyderabad
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 10,97,000
Objectives:
1. Characterization of groundwater flow regime in Kongal
basin.
2. Assessment of dynamic groundwater potential through
mathematical modeling
3. Artificial recharge feasibility study to augment the
groundwater resources through mathematical modeling.
Findings:
In view of continuing demand for groundwater, detail geophysical,
hydrogeological investigations and data analysis has been carried out
and aquifer system in the basin has been conceptualized. The various
geo-informations have been integrated through the application of GIS
and an integrated groundwater potential map has been prepared. Geo-
electrical soundings have been carried out to delineate depth to
basement. The aquifer parameters have been estimated through
pumping test. Various stresses on the aquifer system have been
evaluated. Finally these inputs have been considered to construct
mathematical model. The model has been calibrated against observed
water level. The model is then used to predict the trend of water level
for an additional recharge considering artificial recharge. It has been
found that the depletion in the groundwater can be arrested even
with additional 5% of recharge.

52
9
Title of scheme : Ascertaining arsenic mobilisation in Soil-
Water-Plant system and exploring the possible
remedial measure, West Bengal
Name of PI : Dr. Saroj Kumar Sanyal
Institute : Bidhan Chandra Krishi Vishwa Vidyalaya,
Nadia
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 9,57,000
Objectives:
1. To ascertain the arsenic contamination in soil/plant in deep
tube well command area, with special emphasis on the role
of soil separates to restrict the mobilisation of arsenic from
soil to plant.
2. To establish technique for de-arsenification of arsenic
contaminated ground water on storing in existing ponds.
Findings:
•F rom the observations recorded during the period from
December 1, 2003 to March 31, 2005 under the present
investigation, the groundwater in the areas of study was
found to be highly contaminated with the toxin, i.e., arsenic.
• The total loading of arsenic in the field soils was moderate
to high, while the Olsen-extractable arsenic (labile soil pool)
was also considerable. The farmers of the given study areas
had a tendency to include boro paddy in the cropping
sequences practised.
• There was also a considerable build-up of arsenic in the
crops cultivated in the present study areas supported by
irrigation with contaminated groundwater, in which arsenic
content in different plant parts generally fell in the order:
root>stem>leaf>economic produce.
• On storing contaminated groundwater (from STW) in a
pond, there was gradual lowering (on standing) of arsenic
loading of the stored pond water, while its progressive build-
up in the corresponding sediment samples.

53
• The arsenic sorption/desorption processes in the given
experimental soils was thermodynamically unfavourable
which would facilitate the presence of arsenic species in
soil solution, thereby leading to its phyto toxicity and entry
into the human food-web through plant uptake.
• The findings, based on the analysis of arsenic loading in
different plant parts of several standing and harvested crops
at different periods of time round the year, convincingly
demonstrated the usefulness, as a potential remedial option,
of adoption (by the farmers of the present affected areas of
study) of the farmer-remunerative, comparatively lower
water demanding cropping sequences, thereby cutting down
the given toxin load in the soil-crop systems under
examination. This also helps in bringing down the possibility
of entry of arsenic in the human food-web.
10
Title of scheme : The effect of water logging and intensive
agriculture on ground water regime in deltaic
region
Name of PI : Prof. M. Gangadhar/Prof. C. Subbarao
Institute : Andhra University, Vishakhapatnam
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 3,98,000
Objectives
•T o study the quality of groundwater.
•T o delimitate the intensity of water logging and its effect
on ground water.
•T o investigate the effect of intensive agriculture on ground
water.
Findings
•F rom the observation wells data, it is noticed that the ground
water build up in the command area has a close relationship
to the location of the observation wells to the canal network
system, then topographic situation and the geological terrain.
• The increasing trend of the electrical conductivity is an
indication of the increase of the Total Dissolved Salts, which

54
is an index of the deterioration of the quality of ground
water.
• It is recognized fact that there will be a ground water build
up consequent to the supply of water by surface sources of
irrigation and deterioration of the quality of the ground
water.
• If crops with high water requirements like rice are always
sown and imported water is used for irrigation, the chances
are high that the area will become waterlogged. When such
crops are to be raised, they should be rotated with other
crops that require less water. Further, wet crops should not
be raised on highly permeable soils.
• An area is considered as water logged when the water-air
ratio in the pores of root-zone of the crop rise such that it
adversely affects the yield of the crop and makes the soil
progressively unproductive. That’s why fertilizers are used
enormously in this area for increasing the yield. Therefore
the water logging and intensive agriculture are inter-related.
Both are adversely effect the quality of ground water.
11
Title of scheme : Hydro-economic interaction between tank &
well water and possibilities for conversion of
tank into percolation tank
Name of PI : Prof. K. Palanisami
Institute : Tamil Nadu Agricultural University,
Coimbatore
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 6,69,000
Objectives:
•T o study the interaction between tank and well water usage
in different zones of Tamil Nadu.
•T o explore the possibilities for conversion of tanks into
percolation ponds.
Findings:
•W ater requirements for different crops were calculated based
on the survey data and the difference between recommended

55
amount of water and actual amount of water used by the
farmers per acre was significant. paddy and sugarcane crops
utilized more water in direct tank irrigation commands than
in percolation tank commands. When compared to
recommended water use, paddy and sugarcane used
relatively more water in both the type of tank commands.
The garden land crops such as chillies, cotton, tomato,
turmeric, maize, tapioca, gingelly, ground nut, ashgourd and
cumbu utilized even less than the recommended water in
both types of tank commands which shows the efficiency
of irrigation in summer periods (on-tank) rather than in
rainy (tank) season in both the tank commands. In the case
of rainy season, the tank water used by the farmers was
more and consequently leading to quick drying of the tanks
within two months.
• The amount of excess water used by the farmers compared
to the recommended level in both of the tank commands
was taken into account to work out the wastage due to
over uses during tank irrigation periods. The wastage of
tank water was determined based on the average amount
of water used by percolation tank farmers. Out of 36
irrigation tank commands, about 60228 ha. cm. of water
could have been wasted out every year in normal rainfall
situations. This wastage should have been saved through
percolation ponds by way of assured recharges in the wells.
12
Title of scheme : Environmental studies of surface and ground
water down stream of pennar river Andhra
Pradesh
Name of PI : Dr. M. Aniji Reddy
Institute : Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University,
Hyderabad, A.P .
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 5,36,380
Objectives:
•T o establish a monitoring network for determining the
quality of surface and shallow ground water.
•T o identify potential coastal aquifers and mapping of these
aquifers in order to assess the ground water resources and
groundwater draft.

56
•T o monitor chemical quality and prepare depth-wise-quality
maps to show salinity distribution at various levels. The
specific aim of this study is to assess the impact of existing
or proposed human activities on saltwater intrusion and to
develop seawater-freshwater interface model to predict the
intrusion.
•T o conduct solute transport modelling studies with a view
to propose movement of saltwater and freshwater interface.
Findings:
The surface water resources possess high silt load during monsoon
period resulting in acute drinking water scarcity problems in the rural
environment. Similarly, the industrial and irrigation water supplies are
adversely affected since these regions are situated in the tail end
portions of the irrigation water system.
The groundwater occurs in the study area under unconfined and
semi-confined conditions, though rainfall is the principal source of
recharge, a secondary source of recharge is expected through the lateral
percolation from Pennar River during monsoon and flood periods.
Besides, a major portion of the recharge to the ground water is
contributed through return seepage of irrigation water. The ground
water is mostly utilized for irrigation purposes.
Among the cations and anions present in the ground water sodium
and chloride are predominant in the study region. Total hardness is
largely influenced by Mg content. Non-carbonate hardness is present
in the entire study area.
From the present study it is clear that saltwater intrusion on surface
water is the main problem in the study area. Seawater from the Bay
of Bengal is the main contributor to salinity, and this is caused by the
reduction in the Pennar water flow which lowers the River and canals
water level and ultimately paves the way for saline water intrusion in
to the fresh water zone of the study area. The problem gets severe
during the dry period when the Pennar and its tributaries chocked
because of the drastic fall of fresh water supply in the River and its
canals. This situation is increasingly worsening and in the future it
will lead to a terrible environmental hazard unless a suitable ambitious
approach is made. The surface waters in the coastal line of study area
mostly used for drinking purposes. However the people near the coast
and people along the drains face serious drinking water problems.
Also the deeper aquifers of beach ridges are highly inflected by
seawater intrusion.

57
13
Title of scheme : Impact of urbanisation on ground water—
A study from Jaipur city and Hinterland
Name of PI : Prof. A.K. Sinha
Institute : University of Rajasthan, Jaipur
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 6,34,000
Objectives:
• Evaluation of water resource availability and its
sustainability.
• Assessment of impact of urbanization on the water resources
and quality of the water.
• Identification of pollutants, their source, mobility and
delineation of ground water zones affected by pollutants
particularly by nitrate and fluoride.
•T o identify measures for harvesting the rainwater in order
to augment availability of water resources.
•T o enhance awareness among the city dwellers regarding
rooftop recharge methods and safety of recharge zone.
Findings:
• The main reason for over exploitation of natural resources
especially ground water is population, urbanization and
industrialization.
• The main reason for the deterioration of quality and
depletion of quantity are urbanization, industrialization and
indiscriminate use in the agricultural practices.
• Due to urbanization and industrialization, recharge area has
reduced and it is producing adverse effect on quantity and
quality.
• The VES-1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 14, 17, 18, 19 are suitable for dug
well construction as well as for dug-cum-bore well and bore
well construction.
•G roundwater development stage has increased from 152.73%
in 1998 to 255.01% in 2002.
• Rechargeable open space has decreased from 41.6% in 1970
to 11.2% in the same area as in 1970 and in 2001.
•T otal ground water prospects area of the area has  decreased
from 1507.75 sq. kms. in 1970 to 1345.75 sq. kms. in 2001.

58
14
Title of scheme : Laboratory investigation on use of perforated
hollow cylinder as a solution for coastal
erosion problems
Name of PI : Dr. N.B.S. Rao
Institute : National Institute of Technology Karnataka,
Surathkal
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 9,42,000
Objectives
To conduct detailed experimental studies to understand the
performance characteristics of perforated hollow pile breakwater.
1. Two rows of perforated Hollow piles.
2. Two single row of perforated hollow piles.
3. Single row of suspended perforated hollow piles.
4. Single row of suspended porous piles.
5. Semi-submerged perforated piles.
Findings:
A field investigation has been conducted near KREC open beach
of Dakshina Kannada District (D.K.) to study the mechanism of beach
erosion along D.K. coast and to monitor the effect of construction of
sea walls on adjacent beaches as well as in front of it. The bottom
profiles were taken by a sea sled which is fabricated in the Department
of Applied Mechanics and Hydraulics, KREC, Surathkal. The profiles
were taken both during pre-monsoon and post-monsoon seasons of
1995 and 1996 at selected locations.
Based on the investigation on beach profiles, the following
conclusions are drawn:
1. The beach considered for present study is under dynamic
equilibrium. Though there are seasonal changes, there is no
net erosion or deposition along the stretch.
2. The sea wall properly constructed and located neither
accelerates the erosion in front of it nor causes erosion in
the neighbouring beaches.
3. The movement of sediment is predominantly on-shore
off-shore and the beaches in the coast are under dynamic
equilibrium.

59
15
Title of scheme : Studies on under water bodies in the
combined wave and current field
Name of PI : Dr. M.L. Narsimham
Institute : College of Engineering, K. Rangarao
University,  Visakhapatnam
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 7,50,000
Objectives:
To study the stability criteria for under water bodies in the
combined wave and current field through experiments and theory.
Findings:
• Pipes of smaller size experience lower force when positioned
in the middle of a three pipe array configuration compared
to the pipe facing the wave and the extreme pipe. However
the pipe of largest diameter tested experiences a greater
force for higher waves. Pipes facing the wave are subjected
to greater force when their diameter in large.
• Pipe of 0.115 m has resulted in the extreme values of C
m
and C d when located at mid-position when the current is
in line with the wave.
• The curve fitting (2nd order) has resulted in lower values
of regression coefficient (r 2) for pipes of larger size
corresponding to the variation of the force coefficients with
KC number and Reynolds number. Inconsistent correlation
has been observed when these variations are analysed by
considering the pipe size.
• Mean values of C
m when current is inline with the wave
increases in the range 55 < KC < 75 for lower wave heights
and currents of higher magnitudes. For highest wave
generated (0.25) the mean value of C
m increases continuously
with KC number for the largest current (2.0 m/s) and
decreases slightly in the range of 45 < KC < 70 followed by
a slight increase for the current of moderate magnitude
(1.5 m/s) beyond KC equal to 70 when the current waves
are in the same direction.

60
• When the current is opposing the wave, the mean value of
Cm decreases in the range 20 < KC < 30 for waves of larger
heights generated under to currents of least magnitude. For
waves of least height mean inertia coefficient increases
initially followed by a decrease beyond KC number of 35.
For moderate currents the mean value of C
m increases
gradually within a small range for waves of larger heights
and the range of variation of C
m under this current for
waves of lowest height is larger. No consistent trend of
variation of current of height magnitude has been noted in
this regard.
• Several limitations do exist in the study which made the
investigation very complex and as such it has been realized
that there exists a lot of scope for further research in the
area of combined wave-current interaction studies.
16
Title of scheme : Scale effect in a mixed flow pump
Name of PI : Dr. T.K. Saha
Institute : Jadhavpur University,  Calcutta
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 6,53,000
Objectives:
1. To develop appropriate test rig involved in the development
of hydraulic machines, particularly, mixed flow machines,
about which information available in literature are few and
scanty.
2. To study the appropriate Scale Model Law as required for
the above and to suggest appropriate modifications, of the
Scale Model Law particularly for mixed flow machines on
the basis of physical observations to be collected after the
completion of (1) above.
3. To make use of the potential expertise of the Department
for the benefits of the manufacturers of hydraulic machines
who quite often approach for technical help.
Findings:
The effect of increasing tip clearance is to reduce the efficiency all
along the span. The efficiency is also lower for larger flow rates. As

61
the flow rate is decreased the efficiency steadily increases for the flow
rates presented. The decrease in flow rate increases the pressure rise
across the blades causing thickening of the boundary layer. The
reduction in skin friction as the boundary layer thickens would
contribute to lowering of the losses. In addition the blade force
increasing with drop in flow coefficient, thus increasing the effective
lift to drag ratio which in turn increases the efficiency. Presumably the
losses would increase sharply if flow separation takes place. This has
not occurred in the range of test.
The overall efficiency and head rise very linearly with flow
coefficient in the region not far removed from the designed point. The
efficiency and head rise also vary linearly with flow coefficient. The
variation of efficiency with Reynolds’ Number appears to be well
described by a scale up formula of the Hotton—Ackeret type but with
slightly different value for the Reynolds’ Number dependent and
independent fraction of loss.
17
Title of Scheme : Scour protection around bridge piers and
abutments
Name of PI : Sh. T. Gangadhariah
Institute : Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 6,95,000
Objectives:
1. To explore the details of mechanism of local scour and to
study the characteristics of primary horseshoe vortex under
dynamics of flow.
2. To conduct a comprehensive experimental investigation on
the scour reduction capabilities of four different types of
scour prevention devices as well as various combinations
thereof.
Findings:
The cause of local scour around a bridge pier is a horseshoe vortext
induced by three dimensional separation of the upstream flow. The
vortext acts as a scraper in dislodging the sediment from upstream of
the pier and transporting and ejecting it into turbulent wake at the
downstream of the pier.

62
An analysis of the combined laboratory and field data were carried
out and an enveloping curve fitted to the data predicts the maximum
scour depth for a given discharge intensity, depth of the flow, size of
the obstruction and sediment characteristics. It was amply evident that
all efforts aimed at scour protection must be aimed at proper handling,
i.e., by weakening, arresting or modifying the horseshoe vortex.
Performance potential, i.e., effectiveness in reducing scour for
various devices have been worked out and it is observed that collar
plate is the best suited for situations with varying angles of attack of
flow. In two device combination, performance of the combination is
better than the individual performances of either of the two devices
involved, even though it is not a linear combination. Collar plate with
slot appear to be most effective combination in reducing the scouring.
Similarly, three device combination formed a superior composite device
to any two device combination of the constituent devices. The overall
factor of safety of a composite device is much higher than that of any
of the individual devices, though the elements of risk and the
conditions warranting susceptibility to failure of a device do not get
eliminated in combination. A simple method to estimate the combined
performance of a number of devices, given the individual performance
of a number of devices has been suggested.
The results of the present studies provides insight into the basic
causes of local scour, which helps in focusing remedial efforts towards
mitigating the menace of the horseshoe vortext. The efficacy of a scour
protection device is a measure of its ability to weaken, arrest or modify
the scouring horseshoe vortext. The evolved comparative rating of
various suggested scour protection devices, their combinations along
with their favoured situations are expected to provide suitable
guidelines in selecting appropriate scour protection devices for safer
performance and economical design of pier foundations.
18
Title of scheme : Remote sensing aided idealisation of space
time variant behaviour of channel geometry
of river Brahmaputra
Name of PI : Dr. Nayan Sharma
Institute : Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 13,25,280
Objectives:
1. To correlate river cross-section with respect to time.
2. To correlate river cross-section with respect to space.

63
3. To study the river shift patterns with respect to time and
space using satellite data.
4. Generation of cross-section, shift pattern, top width with
respect to space and time using input from satellite and
hydrographic survey data, resulting in development of
spatio-temporal model.
Findings:
The results predicted by ANN models showed that it is capable of
handling inprecise, inperfect and incomplete data and has the facility
for its periodic upgradation with new additional data input.
The application of ANN technique for spatio-temporal modeling
of channel cross-section profile of the highly braided Brahmaputra river
has indicated that its deployment is quite encouraging.
The predictive capacity of ANN model for simulation of bankline
migration behaviour of the Brahmaputra is seen to be promising and
accuracy can be further improved by incorporation of year-wise satellite
data since 1990 in the model till data.
It could be seen that the ANN based models can reasonably
simulate past, present and future cross-section profiles and top-widths
of a braided alluvial stream with complex channel geometry like the
Brahmaputra.
The remote sensing data analysis of bankline shift showed that
the Brahmaputra river has a mixed trend of channel boundary
migration towards North and South directions depending upon nature
of river bank and local flow pattern. However, it is observed that the
general tendency of river migration is somewhat towards south.
Remote sensing data analysis has also focused on the ongoing
major shifting processes of the confluence zone of mainstreams of the
Brahmaputra near Sadiya, which is presently undergoing radical change
in channel pattern, similar to a case of river avulsion.
Remote sensing tool offers one of the efficient data sets facilitating
repetitive synoptic coverage of data, which can help in understanding
and analyzing complex changes of river dynamics with confidence
and more accuracy.

64
Flume experiment has corroborated the incidence of ongoing
erosion process along southern bank of the Brahmaputra near Majuli.
The present maiden endeavour on development on an ANN-based
spatio-temporal model for the river Brahmaputra showed promising
and critical findings, which undoubtedly warrant further research into
this gray area.
19
Title of scheme : Preparation of a critical note on Lacey’s
method for predicting scour and updating of
state-of-art report on scour around bridge
piers
Name of PI : Dr. U.C. Kothyari
Institute : Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 25,000
Objectives:
To update state-of-art report on “Scour around bridge piers”
prepared by CBIP .
Findings:
1. Several equations proposed in the past three decades for
predicting scour depth at bridge piers needs to be verified
with the help of detailed field data from sandy rivers. The
available scour data collected in India by Inglis and RDSO
are not complete.
2. Automatic scour measuring systems have been developed
abroad and are being used there. But these are not available
in India. Some details of Iowa Scour Meter, HR-Wallingford
Scour Meter, and DHL Scour Meter that are available are
mentioned in the report. Taking ideas from this, a concerted
effort needs to be made to develop indigenous scour meter.
3. The recent advances made in research related to bridge pier
scour gives more emphasis on computation of temporal
variation of scour depth for determining the design scour

65
depth. The main logic behind such a philosophy being that
for given discharge in the river the time required to develop
equilibrium scour depth may be very large (more than 3 to
4 days). The design flood flows do not last this much long
therefore, they are not able to scour upto their maximum
potential.
4. Adequate information is not available for rational
determination of scour depth in cohesive soils. It is necessary
to collect and analyse the data in clayey materials in
laboratory and in the field. The methods proposed by Kand
and Namjoshi and Ansari  et al  as well as other methods
developed recently needs further checking with additional
data before they can be recommended for use.
5. There is a great paucity of scour data in gravel-bed rivers
and hence concerted effort should be made to collect such
data in India. For such scour, Lacey-Inglis equation should
not be used. Melville-Suthereland, and Kothyari-Garde-Ranga
Raju’s methods are more appropriate. However, for the same
condition, these methods give varying results. Hence, further
verification needs to be carried out using additional data.
20
Title of scheme : A reviewing on the scour protection methods
around bridges piers and abutments
Name of PI : Dr. T. Gangadharaiah
Institute : Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 40,000
Objectives:
1. To present the details of mechanism of local scour and the
characteristics of primary horseshoe vortex under dynamics
of flow.
2. To present estimation on construction scour in bridge
passages and grip length for piers.
3. To give estimation on the scour reduction capabilities of
different types of scour prevention devices as well as various
combinations thereof.

66
4. To present the vortex mechanism for scouring around
abutments and their scour protection.
Findings:
Knowledge of the extent of scour area and the equilibrium scour
depth is very important in the safe and economic design of foundation
of bridge piers and abutments. Design considerations for fixing the
free board height, depth of flow before construction of bridges,
constructions scour depth of flow in bridge during flood passage, local
scour depth around piers and abutments and grip length to hold the
pier against the hydrodynamic force are needed to be thoroughly
understood.  Proper selection of scour protection method to arrest the
action of horseshoe vortext on the sediment bed is very essential.
Several research works by different institutions in the world has been
carried out in the field and guiding equations have been developed
for knowing the extent of scour area, equilibrium scour depth and
appropriate scour protection methods. This state-of-art report reviews
the research works carried out and presents the mechanism of scouring
process and provides design/construction methods for knowing the
extent of scour area, equilibrium scour depth and appropriate scour
protection measures. This review is very useful for working
professionals for understanding the genesis and rationale of equations
for estimation of the scour area and equilibrium scour depth as well
as for design of scour protection methods under different river flow
and sediment bed conditions.
21
Title of scheme : Development of Coastal Protective Structure
in Tamil Nadu
Name of PI : Dr. J.S. Mani
Institute : Indian Institute of Technology, Madras
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 17,88,000/-
Objectives:
1. To study the wave attenuation characteristics of the
submerged pipe breakwater under both regular and random
waves and present the results in a non-dimensional form as
a function of relative depth/wave steepness parameter.

67
2. To study wave structure interaction characteristics by the
measurement of velocity, close to the structure and to present
the results in non-dimensional form as a function of wave
steepness parameter.
3. Development of a new field concept for protective work
based on the laboratory investigations and conduct field
trials.
Findings:
1. By adopting, a unit of pipe breakwater (an assembly of
three pipes) it is possible to control transmission coefficient
by about 20%. However in order to reduce the force
experienced by the pipe breakwater, it would be advisable
to adopt ds/d ratio>0.6
2. By adopting two units of pipe breakwater 30 to 40%
reduction in transmission coefficient can be achieved for
ds/d> 0.6. The studies indicate that the change in spacing
between the two units does not influence significantly the
transmission characteristics.
3. Studies conducted with randon waves for single unit indicate
that K is of the order of 0.6 for Hi/gT
2 > 0.008. In case of
two units of pipe breakwater K as low as 0.5 can be
achieved by adopting 50% submergence for the structures.
4. By placing the single unit of pipe breakwater on the shore,
it is found that substantial reduction in wave reflection can
be achieved by adopting D/d = 0.178. The force ratio is in
general constant and is of the order of 0.6 irrespective of
D/d ranging between 0.178 and 0.256.
5. Field measurements carried out with the single unit of pipe
breakwater placed on the shore indicate that the structure
is capable of retaining sediment on the up drift side and on
the rear of the structure. Shorelines recession on the north
of the structure is minimal, thus ensuring the stability of
the coastline. Survey carried out under different phases of
the study indicate that over a period of six months, beach
erosion on the north reached a stable value of about 25%
compared to the initial volume of sand. During the same
period, accretion on the south has also reached stable
conditions with the percentage or accretion of the order of
300% compared to the initial value.

68
22
Title of scheme : Developing Drip Irrigation System for Field
Scale Implementation for Orchard and Field
Crops.
Name of PI : Dr. H.S. Uppal
Institute : Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 6,47,000
Objectives:
To develop drip irrigation with suitable agro-techniques for
adoption in field to minimize the cost and increase its operational
efficiency.
Findings:
•C rop - Brassica napus L. (Hybrid Gobhi Sarson): Lesser
amount of irrigation water was applied which subsequently
resulted in lesser amount of water use by the crop which
reduced the seed yield of Brassica napus significantly as
compared to higher amount of water use by the crop. Water
use efficiency was also reduced where the water use was
less.
•C rop - Brassica carinata A. Br. (American Sarson): The results
of one year investigation indicated that lesser amount of
irrigation water applied, reduced the seed yield of Brassica
carinata significantly as compared with the treatment of
higher amount of irrigation water applied. Similar was the
trend for growth characters of plant height, periodic dry
matter production.
•C rop - Wheat: Reduced total amount of irrigation water
reduced the grain and straw yield, plant height, ear bearing
number of tillers.
• Studies on Brassica napus, Brassica carinata, Triticum durum
and Triticum aestiwum spp. of wheat suggest lesser amount
of irrigation application may be applied through any
irrigation method viz. surface irrigation or drip irrigation
may prove deterimental to growth and yield of these crops.

69
23
Title of scheme : Geographic Information System Design for
Environmental Impact Assessment of
Irrigation Project. A case study of
Nagarjunasagar right bank canal command
area
Name of PI : Sh. I.V. Murali Krishna
Institute : Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University,
Hyderabad, A.P .
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 9,25,000
Objectives:
• Environmental Impacts and socio-economic aspects of water
resources projects.
•T o design GIS as a methodology for environmental impact
assessment and database establishment.
•T o quantify the micro-climatic changes, if any, in general
due to the Nagarjunasagar Project within the study region.
•T o evaluate the impact of the project on environmental
parameters.
•T o provide a decision support system in terms of GIS, so
that socio-economic analysis can be carried out.
•T o provide data (within the study region of the part of
Nagarjunasagar Right Bank Canal Command (Area)
pertaining to the natural resources environment and socio-
economic conditions in a database at mandal/village level.
•T o attempt to evaluate the cost benefit ratio of water usage.
•T o assess and diagnose the irrigation system performance.
•T o evaluate the adequacy of the irrigation system to meet
demands of farmers and match cropping plans and
calendars.
Findings:
Satellite data, environmental attributes, socio-economic data and
topographic information have been used to conceptualize, define,

70
formulate and demonstrate a Geographic Information System (GIS) for
irrigation management and environmental impact assessment of
Nagarjunasagar Right Bank Canal Command Area.
Prior to Nagarjunasagar Project (NSP) the entire command area
was dependent on monsoon for crop production. With the irrigation
through NSP , the overall socio-economic status of farmers has improved
considerably. Various socio-economic impacts of irrigation due to the
project, such as impact of irrigation on farm economy and household
economy, cropping pattern, yields of principal crops, have been
examined. Various problems such as salinisation, alkalization,
Waterlogging, increased incidence of water related diseases, water
quality, ecological degradation, groundwater table changes, etc. have
been identified and mitigation measures suggested.
24
Title of scheme : Studies for combating salinity problem in the
Upper Krishna Project (UKP) area
Name of PI : Dr. G.R. Naik
Institute : Gulbaga University, Gulbarga
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 6,02,000
Objectives:
To take action for combating salinity problem at the initial stage
of the irrigation of lands under Upper Krishna Project. Salt tolerance
studies in local plant species, their field performance and influence on
combating salinity problem (crops sugarcane, mulberrry, soyabean,
groundnut, banana and grapes). Experiment using tree species like
Sesbania and Prosopis for reducing salinity in the fields, Bringing
awareness amongst the farmers on salinity problems. Development of
Bo-drainage concept with suitable bio-drainage agent for improving
productivity of desired crops to be grown in the UKP region.
Findings:
1. UKP area is prone to develop severe salinity and alkalinity
problem in case the water management is not properly
followed.
2. The presence of salts such as Na, Ca, Mg, SO
4 and Cl makes
it difficult to solve the problem by engineering approach
and hence the best strategies are to develop or select salt

71
tolerant cultivars and use of newer technologies like bio-
drainage and microbial desalinization.
3. The screeing for salt tolerance at laboratory and field level
has helped in identifying the genotypes/varieties of local
crops, which can be grown under moderate salinity
condition.
4. Biodrainage using Moringa oleifera and desalinizing using
VAM looks profitable approach for combating salinity
problem in the field conditions.
25
Title of scheme : Performance Studies of Sprinkler Drip and
Surface Irrigation Methods
Name of PI : Dr. N.K. Narda
Institute : Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 4,58,000
Objectives:
1. To study the influence of design variables on water
distribution pattern and other performance parameters under
different operating conditions for sprinkler and drip
irrigation systems.
2. To quantify the various water losses occurring during
sprinkler and drip irrigation and correlate them with
prevailing weather conditions.
3. To study the effect of quality of irrigation water on salt
distribution in soil profile and crop yields using drip
irrigation system.
4. To evaluate and compare the water use efficiency, water
economy and yield using sprinkler, drip and surface
irrigation systems.
Findings:
• evaporation losses increased with the increase in wind speed,
solar radiation, wetted radius, riser heights and operating
pressure and vice versa. The losses were found to decrease
with increase in nozzle size, sprinkler discharge. Regression

72
equations of evaporation losses on individual as well as
different combinations of meteorological parameters and
sprinkler system parameters, were computed.
•T o minimize operation losses, the sprinkler should be
operated at low values of wind speed, air temperature, solar
radiation, which implies that the sprinkler should be
operated either in the late evenings or early mornings.
• Rectangular pattern of sprinklers was found to be
comparatively better than square and triangular pattern for
reduced evaporation losses.
• The drip irrigated tomato plants had higher specific water
uptake during the early stages of growth, as compared to
furrow irrigated for the 0-15 cm and 15-30 cm soil depths.
Later these values tapered off towards the end of the season,
to become identical with furrow irrigated ones.
•T rickle irrigation resulted in enhanced crop yields (22.26-
56.09%) over furrow irrigation schemes. Near potential yield
for Punjab Kesri variety of tomatoes can be achieved by
placing laterals along the crop row and applying water
equivalent to 1.00 (PET).
•W ater use efficiency for water application 0.80 (PET), when
laterals were placed along the crop row and at a distance
of 20 cm from the crop row, was highest amongst all the
treatments.
•G reater number of fruits per plant (47) and yield per plant
(1314 g) were recorded for treatment having laterals placed
along the crop row and water applied equivalent to 1.00
(PET).
26
Title of scheme : Development of Simulation Model for
Dynamic Regulation of Canal Network
Name of PI : Sh. P .M. Modi
Institute : Water Resources Engineering and
Management Institute, Samiala
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 3,25,000
Objectives:
To develop a model for evaluating hydraulic response of a
conveyance and distribution network to change in inflow, type and

73
setting of control structures and channel physical features as well as
for determining the best combination of controllable parameters to
meet predetermined system performance goals.
Findings:
A mathematical model was developed using Borland C++ language
and compiled on PC computer under DOS environment. This model
takes into account all the three types of operational methods namely,
constant downstream depth, constant upstream depth and control
volume.
The model was applied to study the different operation scenarios
for initial reaches of Sardar Sarovar Main Canal. For this model
application study purpose, all the three operational concepts control
volume method, constant upstream depth method and constant
downstream depth method are applied though Sardar Sarovar Main
Canal is planned to be operated on “Controlled Volume Concept” only .
27
Title of scheme : Determination of Optimal Cropping Pattern
and Release Policy for a Conjunctive use of
Surface and ground water by linear
programming
Name of PI : Sh. D.T. Shete
Institute : Water Resources Engineering and
Management Institute, Samiala
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 2,94,000
Objectives:
To develop optimal management decisions regarding the use of
surface and groundwater for the existing cropping pattern of selected
command area under Vaghodia Branch Canal of Deo Irrigation Scheme.
To formulate a mathematical model for the system which could be
solved using simplex algorithm of linear programming.
Findings:
• At present 40% to 100% irrigation intensity is achieved in
the command area. Therefore by optimization technique in
different strategies (Strategy-I Considering unit costs of
surface and groundwater; Strategy-2 Considering space

74
integration; Strategy-3 Considering space time integration)
the irrigation intensities from 100% to 170% can be achieved.
• For space-time integration the maximum irrigation intensity
can be achieved and the water (either surface water and
groundwater or both) is also available in any month and
hence, this strategy is recommended.
• Results suggests that the change in 20% increase in selling
price/yield gives maximum benefits and the change in 20%
decrease in selling price yield gives minimum benefits to
whatsoever minor or strategy is being considered.
• The benefits for space integration are comparatively less
than space-time integration which have the maximum
benefits.
28
Title of scheme : Status Report on History of Irrigation for
Andhra Pradesh & Tamil Nadu
Name of PI : Sh. A. Narayana Rao
Institute : INCID, Bhikaji Cama Palace, New Delhi
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 3,38,000
Objectives:
To prepare documents bringing out the irrigation practices and
management adopted in the different periods from pre-historic times
up to late eighties in the States of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu.
Findings:
Two documents namely “History of Irrigation Development in
Tamil Nadu” and History of Irrigation Development in Andhra Pradesh
were prepared and published.
The publication on “History of Irrigation Development in Tamil
Nadu” contains seven chapters and covers irrigated agriculture in
Sangam age, development of irrigation during pre-British rule i.e.,
during the periods of Cheras, Cholas, Pandyas and Pallavas, during
British rule and after Indian independence. The report also covers
future perspectives of irrigation development in Tamil Nadu.

75
The publication on “History of Irrigation Development in Andhra
Pradesh” contains seventeen chapters covering the development of
irrigated agriculture right from the pre-Mughal period, through the
British period and the period after independence. The report also covers
future perspectives of irrigation development in Andhra Pradesh.
29
Title of scheme : Improving water use efficiency of crops and
cropping system
Name of PI : Sh. B.R. Sharma
Institute : Water Technology Centre, Indian Agricultural
Research Institute, New Delhi
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 56,000
Objectives:
The main objective of the scheme is to collect, collate, synthesize
and prepare a state-of the art report on “Efficiency of Crops and
Cropping System”. The publication will show different alternative for
improving water use efficiency under diverse agro-climatic conditions
for the benefit of practicing engineers, irrigation managers and project
planners.
Findings:
A State-of-Art report on “Improving Water Use Efficiency of Crops
and Cropping System” has been prepared. The report contains five
chapters describing various aspect and concepts related to Water Use
Efficiency. The report also provides detailed description on measures
required for increasing water use efficiency through crop management
as well as through modifications in Agronomic practices.
30
Title of scheme : Fabric based material for canal lining
Name of PI : Prof. B.L. Deopura
Institute : Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 38,96,000
Objectives:
•T o develop HDPE fabric based lining which are puncture
and tear resistant, in order to reduce the loss of water
through seepage.

76
•T o analyse the new lining developed (using Finite Element
Methods) for failure of material.
Findings:
A fabric-based shear material has been developed for water lining
applications. Generally LDPE films are used in India for lining in
canals and water ponds, but these films get punctured during
construction itself and hence serve little purpose in controlling water
seepage. Internationally, HDPE sheets with thickness of around 2mm
are used. However, as these are thick sheets, there is significant cost
of transportation and installation. Geomembrance developed at IIT,
Delhi is of around 0.5 mm thickness with puncture and other properties
comparable to the ones used internationally. The cost of this product
is in the range of Rs. 80/- to Rs. 150/- sq. meter. These sheets are
typically used in buried versions to protect from (a) stealing/vandalism
and (b) direct sunrays to increase the life. These sheets supports all
type of protective layers like soil cover, stone pithcing, brick layer
with or without mortar, concrete layer etc.
These sheets have been used successfully to line a channel at Water
Technology Centre, Indian Agriculture Research Institute (IARI) New
Delhi, a pond at IIT, Delhi, as well as at Water Technology Centre for
Eastern Region (WTCER), Bhubaneswar.
The results show that the seepage is significantly controlled with
these sheets. IARI experience demonstrated that there is increased flow
of water in the channel and the sheets could be reused. Thus, the
geomembranes developed at IIT, Delhi are useful for seepage control
of a range of applications i.e. canal, tanks, dams and other water bodies.
These could also be used in rehabilitation of canals, dams, etc. These
may prove most effective in expansive soils where concrete lining
would result into cracks.
31
Title of scheme : Solar power trickle irrigation system for sandy
tracts of coastal Andhra Pradesh
Name of PI : K. Yella Reddy
Institute : College of Agriculture, Andhra Pradesh
Agricultural University
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 6,97,400
Objectives:
• installation of solar pumping unit in a shallow well and
study of its performance.

77
• Installation of trickle irrigation system and study of
hydraulic performance of micro sprinklers and inline drip/
biwall tube. (Design variables: spacing pressure, discharge,
size of micro sprinklers).
•T o test the unit performance on nursery and vegetable crops
in farmers field.
Findings:
• The SPV pump discharge was in the range of 1.31 to
1.82 lps during the experimentation. Average pumping
volume of water per day was about 52.4 m 3.
• The water table depths remained shallow in the range of
0.55 to 2.16 m and use of shallow wel SPV pumpset is
justificable for pumping water in caartal areas around
Bapatla.
• At operating pressure of 0.515 kg/cm 2, the droplet sizes of
micro sprinkler was in the range of 0.56 to 0.70 mm. This
indicates that the droplet sizes are comparatively finer and
hence micro sprinklers can be used for raising nursery and
vegetable crops, as the impact will not cause damage to
tender leaves.
• The SPV pumping system is capable of irrigating a tomato
crop in an area of 4800 sq.m. with the requirement of
12 mm lateral of 3200 m length, 36 mm sub-main and main
of 120 m and 42 m lengths respectively are required with
4 flow control valves.
• Banana crop in an area of 7200 sq.m. can be grown under
the existing SPV pumping system with the requirement of
12 mm lateral of 3600 m length, 40 mm submain and main
pipes of 160 m and 47 m lengths respectively and 4 flow
control valves are required.
• The economic analysis indicated that the daily cost of
owning 900 watt SPV pumping system comes to Rs. 17.70
only.
32
Title of scheme : Modelling of Diffusion in Concrete Parameters
and Determination
Name of PI : Dr. Bishwajit Bhattacharjee
Institute : Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 4,42,000
Objectives:
To investigate how does the diffusion co-efficient of chloride ion
and moisture vary with the fundamental control parameters of concrete,

78
namely, water-cement ratio, cement-content and curing conditions. The
type of cement and the aggregate type remaining invariant.
To relate diffusion co-efficient of chloride ion and moisture to the
pore structure of concrete by measuring the pore structure of the
identical concrete where diffusion measurement has been performed.
To investigate the interaction of concentration of sulphate ions
present in water on the diffusion co-efficient of chloride.
Findings:
In the present research work, firstly, general model that takes care
of chloride and moisture diffusion through unsaturated concrete
considering the dominant mechanism involved (capillary suction in
addition to diffusion) has been presented together with a simple
experimental set-up. Also a finite difference calculation procedure has
been presented through which the transport coefficients in unsaturated
as well as saturated concrete can be estimated.
Chloride transport properties are governed mainly by the porosity
and pore size distribution. The porosity and pore size distribution
again are governed by the mix parameters on the transport coefficients,
9 mixes with 3 cement content and 3 water-cement ratio have been
adopted. Triplicate specimens have been used in all cases. Two periods
of curing have been adopted.
Solutions of different concentrations have been adopted to study
the effect of concentration of the penetrating solution on the transport.
NaCl and CaCl
3
 solutions have been used to study the effect of action
type. Two initial specimen conditioning regime has been adopted. As
the characteristics of concrete, it is necessary to know the variation of
chloride transport with concrete pore structure ( i.e. porosity and pore
size distribution of concrete). A limited micro-structural study has been
carried out, using Mercury Intrusion porosimeter to study the variability
of the transport coefficients with the micro-structure of concrete and
also a model has been presented with pore size distribution data as
input to determine the transport coefficients.
The relevant conclusions drawn include utility of the model and
the experimental method, conclusions regarding the dependence of
transport coefficients with the concentration inside the concrete, the
dependence of transport coefficients on the microstructure of concrete.

79
33
Title of scheme : Software development for 3-D finite element
analysis of sub-structures in water charged
rock masses for River Valley Projects
Name of PI : Dr. P .N. Godbole
Institute : Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 12,00,000
Objectives:
•T o propose suitable constitutive relationship for dry jointed
rock masses.
•T o modify these constitutive relationships for the case of
saturated jointed rock masses.
•T o propose constitutive relationship for reinforced jointed
rock masses.
•T o suggest a suitable constitutive relationship for the material
in the discontinuity zone.
•T o propose a fully Three Dimensional Finite Element
Formulation for finding the stress distribution around any
of the structures irrespective of whether the rock mass is in
a dry or whether it is in saturated state.
• Development of a general purpose finite element analysis
package which takes into account all the above features of
geology.
Findings:
Derivation of general constitutive relationship for reinforced/un-
reinforced, jointed rock mass in dry/saturated state has been done. An
empirical method for design of support system for underground
excavation has been devised. 3-D Finite Element Analysis package for
analysis of underground excavation in jointed rock mass has been
prepared (and also tested with some of the available results). A pre-
processor to support the main program for mesh data generation and
graphical checking of the input has also been developed.

80
34
Title of scheme : Nonlinear Finite Element Anlysis for Design
of Underground Openings
Name of PI : Dr. Prabhat Kumar
Institute : Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 9,84,000
Objectives:
The objective of the scheme is to develop a finite element method
based mathematical model for simulation of underground medium and
its excavation. The emphasis will be placed on the accuracy of modeling
as well as on speed of computation. The mathematical model shall be
verified against the benchmark problems, the solution which is available
in literature. The solution of some actual problem will then be taken
up to establish the mathematical model as well as to identify future
research needs.
Findings:
Analytical and numerical elasto-visco-plastic solution of
underground opening located in an initially stressed medium are
compared, where the mathematical model of the opening comprises
finite and infinite elements. There is satisfactory agreement between
analytical and numerical results. Some important problems such as
sequential excavation and slip zone construction in a jointed medium
are also considered.
35
Title of scheme : Evaluation of Compaction Control Method
Name of PI : Dr. Manoj Dutta
Institute : Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi
Sanctioned Cost : Rs. 9,71,000
Objectives:
The objective of the scheme is to assess the characteristics of
different compaction control methods and indicate which method are
most suited for in-situ determination of density in different soil types
using following criteria (a) Rapidity—on the basis of time taken for

81
performing the test on field, (b) Accuracy—on the basis of comparison
of values of density obtained at different points in tank to the tank
density, (c) sensitivity—on the basis of the ability of the test to clearly
identify small variations in test (d) Ease of interpretation—on the basis
of skill required in evaluating the density from the result obtained.
Findings:
In the light of five parameter, i.e., accuracy, precision, sensitivity,
rapidity and ease of interpretation, different techniques for in-situ
density measurement are compared. The results show that the Dynamic
Cone Penetration method is the most suited and the Nuclear Density
method is the least suited method for measurement of in-situ density
in sand.

82
APPENDIX II
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING
COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES (2007-2008)
HELD ON FRIDAY, 02 NOVEMBER 2007
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1545 hours in Committee
Room ‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri R. Sambasiva Rao – Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Bhanwar Singh Dangawas
3. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo
4. Shri Rajen Gohain
5. Shri Prakash B. Jadhav
6. Shri Raghuveer Singh Kaushal
7. Smt. Manorama Madhavraj
8. Shri Shankhlal Majhi
9. Shri Abu Ayes Mondal
10. Shri Lonappan Nambadan
11.D r. Arun Kumar Sarma
12. Smt. Minati Sen
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri K.E. Ismail
14. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania
15. Shri Tiruchi Siva
16. Shri Nandi Yellaiah
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri N.K. Sapra — Joint Secretary
2. Shri C.S. Joon — Director
3. Shri P .V .L.N. Murthy — Deputy Secretary

83
At the outset, the Hon’ble Chairman welcomed the Members to
the sitting of the Committee.
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration
Memorandum No.2 and the Draft Report on Action Taken by the
Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in their
Seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2007-
2008) of the Ministry of Water Resources. After some discussion, the
Committee adopted the Report without any amendment/modification.
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to have the above
draft Action Taken Report finalized on the basis of factual verification
from the Ministry of Water Resources and to present the same to both
the Houses of Parliament.
4. *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.

84
APPENDIX III
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED
IN THE SEVENTH REPORT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
OF THE COMMITTEE
(i) Total number of Recommendations/Observations 20
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government
Para Nos. 1.18, 1.19, 1.26, 1.31, 2.14, 2.33, 2.37,
3.22, 4.14, 5.13, 5.24 and 6.26
Total 12
Percentage 60%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the
Committee do not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies
Para Nos. 2.25 and 6.33
Total 2
Percentage 10%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of
which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee
Para No. 7.18
Total 1
Percentage  5%
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
final replies of the Government are still awaited
Para Nos. 2.26, 3.23, 4.15, 6.27 and 7.19
Total 5
Percentage 25%