 
16 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2012-2013) 
                 
         
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
                 
         
                 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
         
         
REPAIR, RENOVATION AND RESTORATION OF WATER BODIES 
         
         
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
  
 
         
            
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
November, 2012/Agrahayana,1934 (Saka) 
         

 
SIXTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2012-2013) 
          
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
                 
         
REPAIR, RENOVATION AND RESTORATION OF WATER BODIES 
         
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.11.2012  
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 27.11.2012 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
         
November, 2012/Agrahayana,1934 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
  Page No.(s) 
 CONTENTS   
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2011-2012)  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2012-2013)  
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
(iv) 
 
(v) 
 
(vi) 
PART – I 
 
REPORT 
   
Chapter –   I Introductory 
 
 
         1 
Chapter –  II Water Bodies: Roles and Associated Problems 
 
 
        5 
 
Chapter – III 
Government Initiatives for Repair, Renovation and 
Restoration of Water Bodies  
      18 
 
  
 
 
Chapter – IV 
 
 
 
Chapter – V
  
Funding of the Scheme on Repair, Renovation and 
Restoration of water bodies & its Implementation 
 
 
Monitoring & Evaluation, Public Awareness and       
Convergence of Efforts 
 
 
 
 
      38 
 
 
 
               45 
   
 

  
 
PART – II 
 
(A) MINUTES 
 
 
(i)    
 
Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Committee (2011-12) held on 14.10.2011. 
 
58 
(ii)    Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Committee (2011-12) held on 28.11.2011. 
 
61 
(iii)   Minutes of the Thirteenth Sitting of the Committee (2011-12) held on 
30.08.2012. 
 
64 
(iv)   Minutes of the Second Sitting of the Committee (2012-13) held on 31.10.2012.  
    
67 
 
(B)   APPENDICES 
 
 
Appendix – I Sample of guidelines since issued to achieve convergence of 
efforts in respect of RRR of water bodies. 
 
69 
Appendix – II Letter No. 4 -4/2011-WB/804 dated 18.09.2012 received from 
Ministry of Water Resources. 
90 
   
Appendix – III Letter No. 4 -4/2011-WB dated 03.10.2012 received from Ministry 
of Water Resources. 
 
94 
 
 

WRC No. 37 
 
         
         
 
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
         
 © 2012 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha  
(Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES (2011-12) 
 
  Shri Dip Gogoi  -  Chairman 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi 
3. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske 
4. Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
5. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
6. Shri Virender Kashyap 
7.        Dr. Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan. 
8. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
9. Shri Nityananda Pradhan 
       10.         Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
11.         Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
              12.         Shri S.P.Y. Reddy  
13.         Shri Arjun Roy 
14.         Shri Jagadanand Singh 
15. Shri Murarilal Singh 
16.         Shri N. Chaluvaraya Swamy 
17.         Smt. Annu Tandon 
18.         Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
19.         Dr. P. Venugopal 
20.         Shri Sajjan Singh Verma 
21. Shri Kuldeep Bishnoi* 
  
              RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.         Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder  
23. Smt. Vandana Chavan# 
24.         Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
25. Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
26. Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan 
27. Dr. Ashok S. Ganguly 
28.   Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
    29. Shri Mangala Kisan 
           30. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
 31. Smt. Bimla Kashyap Sood 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Rita Jailkhani  - Additional Director 
 3. Shri Ginsuanlian Guite  - Committee Officer 
 
 
* Appointed w.e.f. 25.11.2011. 
# Smt. Vandana Chavan, MP, RS was appointed w.e.f. 04.05.2012. Shri Ranjitsinh Vijaysinh Mohite-Patil, MP, 
RS retired w.e.f.02.04.2012. 
  
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES (2012-13) 
  
  Shri Dip Gogoi  - Chairman 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2.        Shri Kamlesh Balmiki 
3.        Smt. Raj Kumari Chauhan 
4. Dr. Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan 
5. Smt. Shruti Choudhry 
6. Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit 
7.        Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
8. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
9. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
       10.        Shri Kabindra Purkayastha 
11.       Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao  
             12.        Shri S.P.Y. Reddy  
13.         Shri Arjun Roy 
14.         Shri Rakesh Sachan 
15. Shri Kalyan Singh 
16. Shri Murarilal Singh 
17.         Dr. P. Venugopal  
18. Shri Sajjan Verma 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21.  Vacant 
  
              RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.        Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
23. Smt. Vandana Chavan 
24.        Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
25. Shri Anil Madhav Dave  
26. Dr. Ashok S. Ganguly  
27. Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan 
28. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
    29. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
           30. Shri A.V. Swamy 
 31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Rita Jailkhani  - Additional Director 
 3. Shri Ginsuanlian Guite  - Committee Officer 
 
 
Shri A.H. Khan Choudhry, MP, Lok Sabha ceased to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f. 
28.10.2012. 
              
 
 

ABBREVIATIONS 
 
KBK  : Koraput, Bolangir and Kalahandi (districts of Odisha) 
CAAA  : Controller, Aids, Accounts and Accounting 
CCA  : Culturable Command Area 
CWC  : Central Water Commission 
CGWB  : Central Ground Water Board 
DEA  : Department of Economic Affairs 
DLIA  : District Level Implementation Agency 
DPAP  : Drought Prone Area Programme 
DPC  : District Planning Committee 
DPRs  : Detailed Project Reports 
Ha  : Hectare 
MoEF  : Ministry of Environment & Forests 
MoWR  : Ministry of Water Resources  
MNREGA : Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment and     
   Guarantee Scheme 
NLCP  : National Lake Conservation Plan 
NWCP  : National Wetland Conservation Programme 
PRI  : Panchayati Raj Institution 
RRR  : Repair, Renovation and Restoration (of water bodies) 
RWAs  : Residents Welfare Associations 
SLNA  : State Level Nodal Agency 
TAC  : Technical Advisory Committee 
UTs  : Union Territories 
WAPCOS : Water and Power Consultancy Services Ltd. 
WQRCs : Water Quality Review Committee 
WUAs  : Water Users' Associations 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Water Resources (201 2-2013) having bee n 
authorized by the Committee, do present on their behalf the Sixte enth Report to Parliament on 
'Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies'. 
2. The Committee (20 11-2012) took up the subject “ Repair, Renovation and Restoration of 
Water Bodies' for a detailed examination and Report.  The Committee were briefed by t he 
representatives of the Ministry of Water Resources on the subject at their sitting held on 14 October 
2011. The Committee also took oral evidence of the  representatives of the Ministry of Water 
Resources on various aspects of the subject at their sitting held on 28 November 2011.   
3. The Committee at their sitting held on 30 August 2012 considered and adopted the Report 
subject to amendments/modifications made in the Report after incorporating the suggestions made 
by the Hon'ble Members and the corrections arising out of factual verification of the Report by the 
Ministry. Before the Report could be presented, the term of the last Committee expired and the Draft 
Report  has been re -considered and re -adopted by the Standing Committee on Water Resources 
(2012-13) at their sitting held on 31.10.2012.  
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks  to the officers of the Ministry  of Water 
Resources who appeared before the Committee and placed their considered views. They also wish 
to thank the Ministry of Water Resources for furnishing the requisite material on the points raised by 
the Committee in connection with the examination of the subject. 
5. The Committee would like to place on record their sense of deep appreciation for the 
invaluable assistance rendered  to them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
  
 
NEW DELHI                                                      DIP GOGOI, 
16 November, 2012                                                Chairman, 
25 Kartika, 1933(Saka)                                       Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 

PART-I 
REPORT 
CHAPTER-I 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
  
 The National Water Policy 2002 acknowledges that w ater is a prime natural resource, 
a basic human need and a precious national asset. Planning, development, conservation and 
management of water resources need to be governed by broad national perspective.  Water 
is part of a larger ecological system. It is also a scarce and precious national resource to be 
planned, developed, conserved and m anaged as such, and on an integrated and 
environmentally sound basis, keeping in view the socio -economic national perspective  and 
the needs of the States. It is one of the most crucial elements in developmental planning. As 
the country has entered the 21st  century, efforts to develop, conserve, utilize and manage 
this important resource in a sustainable manner, have to be guided by the national 
perspective.  
1.2 Water, as a resource is one and indivisible: rainfall, river waters, surface ponds and 
lakes and ground water and snow are all part of one system. 
1.3 Through the ages  Indian agriculture has been sustained by natural and man -made 
water bodies such as lakes, tanks, ponds and similar structures.  A water body is a structure 
where rain water is accumula ted or water is stored by diversion from a stream, nala or river.  
Water Bodies serve as storage reservoirs of water in the monsoon dependent areas of the 
economy where there exist a shorter period of rainfall and a long dry spell with very high 
deviation of annual rainfall.  The small storage tanks are called ponds or bundhis which are 
mostly community owned.  The large storage tanks whose command varies from 20 to 2000 
hectares are generally constructed by government department or local bodies.    

1.4 According to the Third Minor Irrigation Census (2000-2001), there are 5.56 lakh tanks 
and storages in the country under surface flow and surface lift Schemes as minor irrigation 
source creating 6.27 million hectare of irrigation potential. Out of 5.56 lakh ta nks, 4.71 lakh 
are in use. Remaining 0.85 lakh tanks are not in use due to one reason or the other. Due to 
non-use of these 15% tanks , nearly one million hectare of irrigation potential is lost.  A large 
numbers of these tanks suffer from sub -optimal irrig ation related utilization due to 
deterioration of the tank structure and canal distribution system.    
1.5 During the X Five Year Plan, the Government of India launched in January, 2005 a 
Pilot Scheme for Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of water b odies as a state 
sector scheme.  The pilot scheme envisaged a Plan outlay of Rs. 300 crore to be shared by 
Centre and State in the ratio of 3:1. The objective of the Pilot Scheme on water bodies was to 
restore and augment storage capacities of water bodies  and to recover and extend their lost 
irrigation potential. The water bodies having original irrigation culturable command between 
40 hectare to 2 ,000 hectare were eligible for funding under the Pilot Scheme.  The Central 
share of Rs 197.30 crore was released upto March, 2008 under the scheme for taking up 
1,098 water bodies in 26 districts of 15 states  with a target to create 0.78 lakh hectares of 
additional irrigation potential.  The Scheme is applicable in whole of the country.  
1.5(A) Subsequently, Gove rnment had approved a State Sector Scheme for Repair, 
Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of water bodies with two components (i) one with 
domestic support with an outlay of Rs.1,250 crore and (ii) another with external assistance 
with an outlay of Rs.1,500 c rore for implementation during XI Five Year Plan.  A sum of 
Rs.841.91 crore has since been released under the scheme of RRR of water bodies with 
domestic support till date for taking up 3,341 water bodies in 12 States.  Out of 3,341 water 
bodies, works have been completed in 1,481 water bodies.   

1.6 In brief the basic features of the Scheme are comprehensive improvement of 
selected tank systems including restoration; improvement of catchment areas of tanks; 
increase in storage capacity of water bodies; inc reased availability of drinking water; capacity 
building of communities; user groups standing committee for Panchayats and State 
Government; Ground Water recharge etc.  The Scheme is implemented at village/block level; 
District level and State Level with t he help of a Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) which 
shall include representatives from Central Water Commission (CWC) and Central Ground 
Water Board (CGWB).  The Ministry of Water Resources coordinates the programme under 
the Scheme at the central level.   The Scheme will be dealt in detail in the subsequent 
chapters of the Report. 
1.7 In the course of examination of the subject, t he Committee took evidence of the 
following witnesses :  
(i) Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources on 14.10.2011. 
(ii) Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources and Member (WP&P), C entral Water 
Commission on 28.11.2011. 
Apart from oral testimony of the witnesses mentioned above, the Committee obtained 
background papers and documents from the Ministry.  For questions which need ed further 
clarifications after evidence, post -evidence replies/clarifications were obtained from the 
Ministry of Water Resources. 
1.8 The Committee's examination of the subject "Repair, Renovation and Restoration of 
water bodies" inter-alia include review of th e role of water bodies, status of development of 
water bodies in India, and measures taken by the Government for repair, renovation and 
restoration of water bodies.  Further, other related aspects, including the views of the Ministry 
have been dealt with in the succeeding chapters of this Report. 

 

 
CHAPTER-II 
WATER BODIES : ROLES AND ASSOCIATED PROBLEMS 
 
 A  water body or 'body of surface water' has been defined as "a discrete and 
significant element of surface water such as a lake, a reservoir, a stream, a river or canal, 
part of a stream, a traditional water or a stretch of coastal water."   
(a) Traditional water bodies and their upkeep 
 
2.2 The Indian agriculture has been sustained through the ages by natural and man -
made water bodies such as lakes, tank s, ponds and similar other structures.  Water bodies 
under traditional systems include tanks, bhandaras (Maharashtra), phad irrigation (North -
western Maharashtra), Khadin and baolis (Rajasthan), Vav or Vavdi (Gujarat), Ahar Pynes 
(Bihar), dung or jumpois (Jalpaiguri district, West Bengal) and Zing (Ladakh, J&K).   
2.3 Water Bodies serve as storage reservoirs of water in the monsoon dependent areas 
of the country where there exist a shorter period of rainfall and a long dry spell with very high 
deviation of annual rainfall.  The small storage tanks are called ponds or bundhis which are 
mostly community owned.  The large storage tanks whose command varies from 20 to 2 ,000 
hectares are generally constructed by government department or local bodies.  Agriculture is 
the main occupation of rural population in India. Irrigation has played a pivotal role in India‟s 
agricultural production and growth. Both at national and regional levels, agricultural growth 
and overall development closely follow the growth pattern in irrigation. Investment in irrigation 
sector invariably holds the key to open up the rural economy and provides impulse for overall 
rural development.  The role of water bodies in the development of rural economy is, 
therefore, potentially vital.    

(b) Status of development of water bodies in India 
2.4  According to the Third Minor Irrigation Census (2000-01), there were 5.56 lakh tanks 
and storages in the country under surface flow and surface lift schemes as minor irrigation  
source, creating 6.27 million  ha. of irrigation potential.   Out of 5.56 lakh tanks, 4.71 lakh 
tanks are in use, and the remaining 0.85 lakh tanks are not in use due to one reason or the 
other.  Due to non -use of 15% tanks, one million ha. of irrigation potential is lost.   The 
Committee desired to know the contributory factors responsible for non -utilisation of 0.85 
lakh tanks in the country.  To this query, the Ministry submitted as under: 
"The main factors responsible for water bodies  permanently not in use are due to 
salinity, dried up water bodies, destroyed beyond repair, due to sea water intrusion, 
due to industrial effluents etc." 
 
2.5 The Committee enquired whether the Ministry had undertaken any studies to identify 
the water bodies located in different parts of the country  and to state  the results of such 
studies block -wise and State -wise/ UT -wise and also to provide details of the  specific 
problems associated with water bodies in different regions which need special techniques for 
rejuvenating them.  To this, the Ministry in their written post-evidence reply stated as follows : 
"The Ministry of Water Resources does not undertake any study for identification of 
water bodies. It is the State Governments who identify the water bodies and give 
detailed information about water bodi es viz existing CCA, CCA lost etc.  in respect of    
each water body for its coverage under various schemes of the Ministry.  The 
information of water bodies is available in the Third Census of Minor Irrigation 
schemes (2005).   According to the Third Cens us of Minor Irrigation schemes (2005), 
there are 5.56 lakh water bodies in the country with irrigation potential of 62.71 lakh 
hectare." 
 
 The State -wise details of water bodies with irrigation potential created is given in              
Table 2.5 as provided by the Ministry.  The Ministry also stated that traditional water bodies 
are used in rural areas which inter alia  include various purposes, viz. domestic, drinking, 

irrigation, horticulture  etc.  However, the status of these water bodies is not available with 
the Ministry. 
Table – 2.5 
                          State-wise details of water bodies with irrigation potential created                                                            
    S.No. Name of State Number of water 
bodies 
Irrigation Potential created in h.a 
1 Andhra Pradesh 75561 1640572 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 299 8956 
3 Assam 1020 29976 
4 Bihar 14555 294800 
5 Chhattisgarh 42717 203134 
6 Goa  2877 5245 
7 Gujarat 4150 260709 
8 Haryana 561 2956 
9 Himachal Pradesh 712 4963 
10 Jammu & Kashmir 781 63064 
11 Jharkhand 42210 139949 
12 Karnataka 27610 402129 
13 Kerala 11641 107965 
14 Madhya Pradesh 39831 292898 
15 Maharashtra 69631 502892 
16 Manipur 2 210 
17 Meghalaya 270 3368 
18 Mizoram 610 1322 
19 Nagaland 161 1523 
20 Odisha 30651 563614 
21 Punjab 449 2526 
22 Rajasthan 2813 167511 
23 Sikkim 428 12616 
24 Tamil Nadu 38743 956078 
25 Tripura 468 8576 
26 Uttar Pradesh 3978 32517 
27 Uttarakhand 9690 82572 
28 West Bengal 118276 466335 
29 Andaman & Nicobar 1052 3085 

 
30 Chandigarh 0 0 
31 Dadra & Nagar Haveli 44 236 
32 Delhi 54 239 
33 Pondicherry 14756 8644 
  Total : 556601 6271180 
 
2.6 When the Committee asked about the criteria for categorization of water bodies as 
small or large, the number of water bodies in the country Stat e-wise/UT-wise and the 
expenditure incurred on the maintenance since the last five years, the Ministry in a post-
evidence written reply explained as follows: 
"The criteria for categorization of water bodies as large and small, information about 
expenditure incurred on the upkeep and maintenance of these water bodies are not 
available with the Ministry.  However, water bodies with CCA of more than 40 hectare 
are considered to be the large water body for RRR scheme." 
 
2.7 With regard to the  decline in the num ber of water bodies noticed throughout the 
world, including those in India, the Committee enquired from the Ministry whether any survey 
has been made in this regard in India  and also to furnish  the details thereof and the position 
of India, vis-à-vis other  countries.  T he Ministry of Water Resources in their post -evidence 
reply submitted that no information is available with them in this regard. 
2.8 The Committee observed that there is poor maintenance of traditional water bodies 
resulting in reduced storag e capacity and lower efficacy.  When the Committee asked the 
reason for poor maintenance of traditional water bodies  and the steps taken to improve their 
maintenance for more storage and higher efficacy  and would  a shift of management 
practices to local bo dies like local Panchayats, WUAs, RWAs, etc. help in better 
maintenance of water bodies in the country and whether the Government initiated any action 
in this regard, the Ministry replied as under : 

"The State Governments are responsible for management -related issues on various 
action programmes since undertaken  in the water sector for bringing about water use 
efficiency. However, the Ministry is also having continuous interactions with the State 
Governments for making various programmes being run by the S tate Governments 
with the assistance of the Ministry. The Ministry of Water Resources is also 
contemplating a new scheme on Repair, Renovation and Restoration of water bodies 
with more involvement of local panchayats, WUAs, RWAs, etc."  
 
2.9 The Committee were also informed that there has been deterioration in the quality of 
water in water bodies.   When asked to furnish the reasons for deterioration in the quality of 
water in water bodies, the Ministry of Water Resources in a post-evidence reply mentioned 
the following factors : 
"(1) Indiscriminate disposal of sewage into the water bodies is one of the prime 
causes of deterioration of water quality.  In most of the cases , domestic sewage is 
generally discharged as such in the untreated, treated or partially  treated form into 
the nearby water bodies where it can cause severe sanitary and other water pollution 
problems. 
 
(2) Agricultural waste usually originates in the form of runoff from the agricultural 
field and animal farms , which consists of large number of chemicals called agro -
chemicals in the form of fertilizers, organic manure, pesticides, etc which ultimately 
enter into water bodies causing in deterioration of water quality.  The agricultural 
runoff is considerably rich in nutrients like nitrogen, pho sphorous, organic matter and 
pesticides which causes problem of nitrification toxicity to aquatic life. 
 
(3) Industrial waste water has the greatest potentiality for polluting water bodies.  
The industrial waste has pollutants of almost all kinds ranging f rom simple nutrients 
and organic matter to complex toxic substances.  The waste from industries like 
sugar factories, dairies, paper and pulp, tanneries, distilleries, metal plating industries 
which release substantial quantities of heavy metals and organi c matter , causes 
heavy pollution. 
 
(4) Mining activities lead to gradual damage to the surface as well as ground 
water resources.  Mining industry discharges millions of liters of water every day to 
the adjacent water bodies and thereby causing water pollu tion in and around mining 
areas." 
 

2.10 Regarding the  remedial measures proposed to be taken by the Ministry to prevent 
and arrest deterioration in the quality of water bodies , the Ministry in their written reply stated 
as under : 
"Water Quality Assessment  Authority (WQAA) has been constituted under 
Environment Protection Act, 1986; vide Gazette Notification S.O. 583(E) dated 29 th 
May, 2001 by the Ministry of Environment & Forests, Government of India, New 
Delhi. At present, t he WQAA is a 16 - Member inter -ministerial Authority. Secretary 
(Ministry of Environment & Forests) is the Chairman of WQAA and Joint Secretary 
(Administration), Ministry of Water Resources is its Member Secretary. The functions 
of WQAA are to direct the agencies (government/local -bodies/non-governmental) to 
standardize method(s) for water quality monitoring and to ensure quality of data 
generation for utilization thereof, to take measures so as to ensure proper treatment 
of waste water with a view to restoring the water quality of the ri ver/water bodies to 
meet the designated-best-uses; to take up research and development activities in the 
area of water quality management; to promote recycling, re -use of treated 
sewage/trade effluent for irrigation in development of agriculture; to draw a ction plans 
for quality improvement in water bodies, and monitor and review/assess 
implementation of the schemes launched/to be launched to that effect; to draw 
scheme(s) for imposition of restriction in water abstraction and discharge of treated 
sewage/trade effluent on land, rivers and other water bodies with a view to mitigating 
crisis of water quality; to maintain minimum discharge for sustenance of aquatic life 
forms in riverine system; to utilize self -assimilation capacities at the critical river 
stretches to minimize cost of effluent treatment; to provide information to pollution 
control authorities to facilitate allocation of waste load; to review the status of quality 
of national water resources (both surface water & groundwater (except – that due t o 
geogenic aspect) and identity “Hot Spots” for taking necessary actions for 
improvement in water quality; to interact with the authorities/committees constituted 
or to be constituted under the provisions of the said Act for matters relating to 
management of water resources; to constitute/set -up State -level Water Quality 
Review Committees (WQRC) to coordinate the work to be assigned to such 
committees; and to deal with environmental issues concerning surface and ground 
water quality (except – that due to ge ogenic aspect ) which may be referred to it by 
the Central Government or the State Government relating to the respective areas."   
 
2.11 When asked to identify the areas / zones in different States where water bodies have 
deteriorated severely due to unaut horized dumping and discharge and the steps 
taken/proposed to be taken to curb the deteriorating trend, the Ministry in their written reply 
submitted that no information was available with them in this regard.   

2.12 The Committee further observed that alleged encroachments being made on water 
bodies by local bodies like Municipalities and Panchayats.   When asked whether the Ministry 
is aware of such encroachments on water bodies by local bodies like Municipalities and 
Panchayats, the Ministry in their wri tten reply stated  that they were not aware of any 
encroachments made on water bodies by local bodies. 
2.13 When asked further if the Govt. has any interaction with State Governments with 
regard to deterrent or  penalty provisions to tackle such encroachmen ts, the Ministry replied 
as under : 
"Removal of encroachments is the subject matter concerning the State 
Government/local body.  As and when any such issue is brought to the notice of the 
Ministry of Environment & Forests, i.e., the Nodal Ministry for the scheme on National 
Lake Conservation Plan(NLCP) ,  it is referred to the respective State Governments 
for necessary action at their end." 
 
2.14 During the evidence held on 14.10.2011, the Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources 
further elaborated as under : 
"………………… (regarding encroachments) happening on water bodies, we have 
always been writing to State Governments to make the law.  If the Central 
Government proposes any Central Law all the State Governments oppose saying 
that this is not your subject.  They  do not allow us to make any regulation for any 
control of any water body.  The constitution does not allow it.  So they are correct.  
So, we cannot have any Central Law as far as this is concerned." 
 
 Again he further added : 
 
"I think this problem is in all States and in most towns.  Encroachment slowly creeps 
upon the water bodies since they belong to no one.  Very soon the water bodies dry 
up.  People come and settle down there and after sometimes, they claim the title and 
with the help of unscrupulous bureaucrat and local politicians, they manage to sell 
this off.  There has been steady decline especially in urban areas of the water bodies.  
We have been taking this up with the State Governments ……………..  But as far as 
law is concerned this is a very loc al phenomenon and it needs a lot of vigilance from 
the municipalities or from the small town committees or whatever local bodies which 
are there to control the administration." 
 

2.15 The Committee also drew the attention to the fact that as a measure for r epair, 
renovation and restoration of water bodies, there is a need to care for maintenance of the 
existing water bodies in rural areas and also to turn water bodies in urban areas into 
aesthetic, decorative objects.  In response to this suggestion, the Ministry informed in written 
reply that they are agreed with this idea. 
2.16 It noted that in most of the States, the smaller water bodies are entrusted to the local 
Panchayats for maintenance and management while the bigger ones are vested with the 
Water Resources/Irrigation Departments.   When Committee enquired about the methods 
employed by the local Communities across the country for the maintenance and 
management of their water bodies,  the Ministry informed that water is a State subject and as 
such, the management of water bodies comes within the purview of the State Government. 
2.17 During the evidence the Committee enquired about the monitoring of water bodies of 
the State.   The Secretary responded as under : 
"We have no power of direction to a State in  a subject which is State subject.  We 
cannot tell them to do anything.  We can only advise them please do it." 
 
2.18 When the Committee further enquired whether any study has been made to evaluate 
the efficacy of the methods/techniques presently employed for upkeep of water bodies and to 
furnish the findings of such efforts, the Ministry replied as follows : 
"The Scheme envisages concurrent evaluation and impact assessment by an 
independent body which will look into the method of management of water bodies .  
The Ministry has already identified the agency." 
 
2.19 When the Committee enquired about the standard of the methods/techniques 
presently employed in maintenance and management of water bodies in India vis-a-vis those 
employed abroad, the Ministry replied that a decision on the subject needs to be taken on the 
basis of evaluation results of existent schemes on water bodies. 

2.20 The Committee observe that water is a prime natural resource, a basic human 
need and a precious national asset.   Water as a re source is indivisible: rainfall, river 
waters, surface ponds and lakes and ground water are part of a single unit, which 
needs a holistic and efficient management to ensure their long -term quality and 
availability.  Noting that traditional water bodies, kn own by their different names, such 
as bhandaras (Maharashtra), phad irrigation (North-western Maharashtra), Khadin and 
baolis (Rajasthan), Vav or Vavdi (Gujarat), Ahar Pynes (Bihar), dung or jumpois 
(Jalpaiguri district, West Bengal) and Zing (Ladakh, J&K),  have through the ages been 
providing sustenance to Indian agriculture, the Committee hardly need to emphasize 
the importance of water bodies in the overall development and management of water 
resources in the country.   Further, water bodies serve as st orage reservoirs of water 
in monsoon dependent areas where there exist a shorter period of rainfall and a long 
dry spell with very high deviation of annual rainfall.  Also,  traditional water bodies are 
used in rural areas which, inter-alia, include various purposes, viz. domestic, drinking, 
irrigation, horticulture, etc.    The Committee, are, therefore, of the considered view 
that there is an imperative need to ensure proper, efficient and sustainable 
management and development of water bodies all over th e country through sustained 
inputs of efforts, funds and programme primarily by the Government  (both Central and 
State) and secondarily by individuals, groups, institutions and local bodies.   In order 
to put in place a comprehensive legislative framework, the Committee reiterate the 
need for inclusion of the subject 'water' in the Concurrent List. 
2.21 The Committee note that according to the Third Minor Irrigation Census (2000 -
01) Report, there were 5.56 lakhs tanks and storages in the country under surfac e flow 
and surface lift schemes as minor irrigation, creating 6.27 million ha. of irrigation 

potential.   The Committee, however, note that out of 5.56 lakh s tanks and storages in 
the country, only 4.71 lakhs tanks are presently in use, and the remaining 0 .85 lakhs 
(15%)  tanks/storages are not in use for one reason or the other.   Due to non -use of 
15% tanks, one million ha. of irrigation potential is lost.   The Committee are deeply 
concerned that due to salinity, dried up water bodies, water bodies destroyed beyond 
repair, sea water intrusion  and industrial effluents, etc. , an alarming number of water 
bodies are becoming permanently unusable.  What the Committee find worrisome and 
unpleasant to note in this regard is that despite clearly identifying the c auses for 
deterioration of the quality of water, the Government has not cared to compile precise 
figures on the number and status of water bodies .   The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government compile a comprehensive and up to date information 
about the exact number and the status of water bodies spread all over the country 
State-wise to initiate an all -out, and integrated effort s for repair, renovation and 
restoration of  water bodies.   The Committee are shocked to know that the Ministry 
has not undertaken any study for identification of water bodies, giving the plea that 
water is a State subject and it is for State Governments to undertake such a task.   The 
Committee are also dis tressed to know  that the Union Water Resources Ministry has 
not evolved any criteria for categorization of water bodies as large or small and the 
expenditure incurred on their upkeep and maintenance.   Obviously, due to non -
availability of data regarding the number, size and status  of  all the water  bodies  
across  t he  country , no comprehensive and coordinated efforts can be made by the 
Centre and States for repair, renovation and restoratio n of water bodies.  T he 
Committee, therefore, strongly  recommend that the Government  in the first instance  
collect and compile such data and information at the earliest and place it on public 

domain such as WRIS and website of the Ministry so as to serve as a  useful tools for 
policy-makers, planners, bureaucrats, various water users and other stake -holders.  
They also desire the G overnment to launch a suitable scheme  in consultation with the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Environment & Forests for achieving the goal at 
the earliest and apprise the Committee in due course. 
2.22 The Committee are distressed to note that apart from decline in the number of 
water bodies, there has been quality deterioration in water bodies.   The factors 
attributed for such a deterioration include indiscriminate disposal of sewage, mostly 
untreated domestic sewage into the water bodies ; discharge of agricultural wastes  
from agro -chemicals run -off in the form of fertilizers,  organic manure, pesticides ; 
industrial wastes  etc. from industries like sugar factories, dairies, paper and pulp  
industries, tanneries, distilleries, metal plating industries  – all of which release 
pollutants ranging from simple nutrients and organic matter to complex toxic 
substances; and mining activities which lead to gradual damage to the surface as well 
as ground water resources.   Noting that pollution of surface water b odies like rivers, 
lakes, ponds, tanks etc. can affect the quality of ground water in aquifers hydraulically 
connected with them due to percolation, the Committee recommend that the Ministry 
of Water Resources may in conjunction with the Ministry of Enviro nment and Forests 
issue appropriate advisories to  the State Governments  to institute an effective 
mechanism for monitoring the water quality in water bodies, so that  pollution of water 
bodies is arrested and a lasting solution worked out for the long-term interests of the  
nation.   The Committee also note that the Government of India in 2001 , constituted 
Water Quality Assessment Authority (WQAA) under the Environment Protection Act, 
1986 with Secretary, Ministry of Environment & Forests as Chairman and J oint 

Secretary (Administration), Ministry of Water Resources as its Member Secretary to 
direct the agencies (government/local bodies/non -governmental) to standardize 
method(s) for water quality monitoring and also for ensuring quality of data generation 
for utilisation of water and other related functions.   The Committee , therefore,  
recommend that the Government keep tab on the efforts of WQAA on water quality 
monitoring by insisting on submission of periodic assessment reports on status of 
water quality in lakes, tanks, ponds etc. at least on biennial basis.   Further, they also 
strongly recommend that these reports of WQAA be made available to various State 
Governments on annual basis, highlighting the specific cases where deterioration in 
quality of wate r has reached alarming  levels and calls for prompt remedial action.   
The Committee also note reports of encroachments on water bodies allegedly made 
by local bodies like Municipalities and Panchayats, which is a worrisome 
development.  Considering the vi tal importance of water bodies, the Government of 
India cannot be a helpless bystander on the ground that removal of encroachments on 
water bodies is a State matter.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that 
the Government of India need to take ap propriate measures to highten national 
awareness and to build a strong national programme for removal of encroachments 
on water bodies by local bodies, first by instituting a thorough study in the matter, and 
then enact deterrent or enhance penalty provisi ons effective enough to tackle such 
encroachments in consultation with the Ministry of Environment & Forests .  The 
Committee further recommend that in order to encourage repair, renovation and 
restoration of water bodies, specially lakes, tanks and ponds , the Government need to 
institute novel measures  in coordination with the Ministry of Environment & Forests  
and States/UTs and not only to save them from being lost, but also to turn these water 

bodies into aesthetically appealing scenic spots.  The Committ ee would also like to be 
apprised of the status of the action taken up in this regard at the earliest. 
2.23 The Committee observe that in most of the States, the smaller water bodies are 
entrusted to the local Panchayats for maintenance and management whil e the bigger 
ones are vested with the Water Resources/Irrigation Departments of the States/UTs.   
Given the fact that one million ha. of irrigation potential is lost in the country due to 
non-use of 15% of tanks out of a total of 5.56 lakh s tanks and stora ges available in 
India, the Committee asked the Government the methods presently employed by local 
communities all over India for the maintenance and management of water bodies, with 
a view to observe  the efficacy of th ose methods.   However, the stock rep ly of the 
Ministry was that the management of water bodies comes within the purview of the 
State Governments .  Such an attitude of helplessness is not acceptable to the 
Committee when  the Ministry has already identified an independent body/agency 
which wil l look into the method of management of water bodies.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the independent body identified may be asked to 
expeditiously complete its work of evaluation of the methods presently applied for 
management of water bodies in  the country, so that shortcomings , if any, in this area 
may be rectified and necessary remedies explored and implemented.   They would 
also like to be apprised of the outcome of such efforts in due course. 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-III 
GOVERNMENT INITIATIVES FOR REPAIR, RENOVATION AND RESTORATION 
OF WATER BODIES 
 
During the X Five Year Plan, a Pilot Scheme for Repair, Renovation and Restoration 
(RRR) of water bodies as a state sector scheme was launched by the Government of India.  
The scheme was launched in 2005.  The S cheme envisaged a plan outlay of Rs.300 crore to 
be shared by the Centre and State in the ratio of 3:1.   1,098 water bodies spread over 15 
States were selected  under the Scheme .  The works have been completed in 1085 water 
bodies, while the rest of water bodies were deleted from work list by the concerned States.   
Subsequently, Government had approved a State Sector Scheme for Repair, 
Renovation and Restoration(RRR) of water bodies with two components (i) one with 
domestic support with an outlay of Rs.1,2 50 crore and (ii) another with external assistance 
with an outlay of Rs.1,500 crore for implementation during XI Five Year Plan.  
A. BASIC FEATURES OF THE SCHEME 
(a) Repair, Renovation & Restoration of water bodies with domestic support 
3.2 The Scheme of Repa ir, Renovation & Restoration (RRR) of water bodies has two 
components viz. RRR with domestic support and RRR with external assistance.  The 
Government of India approved the Scheme of Repair, Renovation & Restoration (RRR) of 
water bodies with domestic supp ort during the year 2009 at an outlay of Rs. 1 ,250 crore 
for implementation as a state sector scheme during the XI Plan period. The scheme provides 
for comprehensive improvement of water bodies, catchment area treatment, command area 
development and capacity building of stakeholders. Central assistance of  90% of the cost of 
the project cleared by the Technical Advisory Committee(TAC) of the State Government and 
released by the Ministry, is available in case of Special Category States, KBK (undivided)  

districts of  Odisha and projects located in drought prone, tribal and Naxal affected areas.  
Projects benefiting other areas of Non -Special Category States are eligible for 25% Central 
assistance, whereas the remaining 75% are to be raised by the concerned St ates.  The 
guidelines for the Scheme have already been circulated to the State Government and can be 
accessed on the website (www.mowr.gov.in) of the Ministry of Water Resources. 
3.3 The Committee have also been informed that the objectives of the Scheme of Repair, 
Renovation & Restoration (RRR) of water bodies were to restore and augment storage 
capacities of water bodies, and also to recover and extend their lost irrigation potential.  
When asked to furnish the basic features of the Scheme, the Ministry in their written reply 
stated as follows : 
"The pilot Scheme on Repair, Renovation and Restoration(RRR) of water bodies 
envisages taking up of restoration of water bodies having original irrigation Cultural 
Command Area of 40 -2,000 hectare, to revive, augme nt and utilize their storage and 
irrigation potential.  The States were to take up repair of related structures like check 
dams, weirs, bunds, and water conveyance systems."  
 
(b) Repair, Renovation and Restoration of water bodies with external assistance 
3.4 The Committee observed that d uring the year 2008 , a  Scheme of Repair, 
Renovation and Restoration of water bodies with external assistance  was approved by 
the Government of India  (GoI) at a cost of Rs. 6 ,000 crore for about 23,000 water bodies.  
Under the Scheme, funding will be 100% loan from the World Bank .  25% of the total cost to 
the project as loan is taken as liability of Government of India and passed on as additional 
Central assistance (100%) grant to the States for the project and the balance 7 5% loan is 
taken by the Government of India from the World Bank and is passed on to the concerned 
States on back to back basis and is to be repaid by the States .   The objectives of the 
Scheme cover improvement of catchment areas of water bodies, command a rea 

development, increase in the capacity of the water body, ground water recharge, 
improvement in agriculture/horticulture productivity, development of tourism, cultural 
activities, increased availability of drinking water.   Under this Scheme, the States  may take 
up the repair, renovation and restoration of water bodies having a minimum of 20 hectare 
original irrigation culturable command area and up to 2 ,000 hectare.   The 
approval/monitoring of the Scheme is carried out by the World Bank.  The appraisal process 
is coordinated by the Department of Economic Affairs.   
(c) Criteria for Selection of States for RRR 
 
3.5 On being asked about  the criteria adopted to select the States for RRR of water 
bodies for the Pilot Scheme,  the Ministry in its post-evidence written reply stated as follows : 
"The criteria for selection of States for the Pilot Scheme was on the basis of 
recommendations of the Central Water Commission (CWC),  for which States 
submitted their DPRs to CWC regional office and subsequently, the CWC  submitted 
their recommendations on DPRs to MoWR for release of funds.  The final selection of 
DPRs were made in the Ministry on the basis of decision taken by an Empowered 
Committee." 
 
3.6 The Committee were informed that under the Pilot Scheme, projects submitted by the 
State Governments were cleared by the State Technical Advisory Committee and 
subsequently the project proposals were examined by the Central Water Commission before 
recommendation to the Ministry of Water Resources for necessary funding. T he DPRs were 
finally approved by an Empowered Committee under the chairmanship of Additional 
Secretary (WR).  The Empowered Committee include d the representatives of Ministry of 
Agriculture, Ministry of Rural Development and Ministry of Water Resources.   
(d) Implementation of  the Scheme 
3.7 Regarding implementation of the RRR Scheme, the Committee further observed that 
arrangements are in place at village/block level, district level and State level.  When asked 

the mechanism put in place to ensure coordin ation of concerned  bodies at these  three 
levels of administration, the Ministry in their written submission stated as under: 
"The State Governments prepared projects under the Scheme with the involvement 
of the community, Panchayati Raj Institution(PRI), Water Users‟ Associations. The 
DPR had specific plan for handing over the revived facility for operation, monitoring 
and maintenance to community organizations suggests WUA or PRI." 
 
3.8 On being a sked whether the present arrangement regarding implementati on of the 
RRR Scheme is efficacious to ensure optimum result, the Ministry replied as follows :  
"No complaints were received from the State Government about the implementation 
mechanism suggested in the guidelines of the Scheme." 
 
 
3.9 On being  asked wheth er the Government provides similar technical support to the 
State Governments for repair, renovation and restoration (RRR) of water bodies , the Ministry 
submitted in their written reply as under: 
"Presently, the Scheme of RRR of water bodies do not have an y provision to give 
technical support for the Scheme." 
 
3.10 When asked if there is any proposal/plan to give such technical support to the State 
Governments for the RRR Scheme, the Ministry in their post-evidence reply stated that the 
new scheme on RRR of  water bodies  for implementation during XII Plan  is at 
conceptualization stage. 
(e) Planning of the projects under the Scheme 
3.11 The Committee also observed  that the States may take up planning and 
implementation of projects under RRR Scheme generally in  the manner prescribed for it.  
According to it, a project may be prepared with an individual water body or for a group of 
water bodies with sub -basin approach.   All water bodies included in the project will be given 

a unique code number. States will acco rdingly undertake census of these water bodies and 
get complete list of water bodies along with unique code in the first stage.                                   
3.12 When asked whether the States covered under RRR Scheme complied with the 
guidelines prescribed for planning and implementation of projects till date, the Ministry 
submitted in their written reply as under: 
"During the XI Five Year Plan , a sum of Rs. 811.85 crore has been released for 3341 
water bodies for the States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, C hhattisgarh, Gujarat, 
Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh (Bundelkhand) , Meghalaya, Maharashtra, 
Odisha, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh (Bundelkhand). All the proposal s have been 
received in accordance with the guidelines for the Scheme of RRR of water bodies 
and water bodies , covered under the scheme have been allotted necessary unique 
code required for the Scheme of RRR of water bodies." 
 
3.13 The Committee further observed that the DPR of a project has to include information 
on certain aspects including deta ils of present status of the water bodies with reasons for 
deterioration in condition, rainfall data during the last 10 years, details of original CCA, etc.  
When asked to give the numbers of DPRs prepared by States for RRR Scheme till date, the 
Ministry in their post-evidence written reply stated as under: 
"A total of 3 ,341 water bodies have been funded under the Scheme of RRR of water 
bodies with domestic support which includes 1321 water bodies in Odisha,427 water 
bodies in Karnataka,1 ,029 water bodies i n Andhra Pradesh,15 water bodies in 
Bihar,28 water bodies in U ttar Pradesh(Bundelkhand),78 in M adhya 
Pradesh(Bundelkhand),1 water body in Meghalaya(Umiam Lake),258 water bodies in 
Maharashtra,34 water bodies in Gujarat, 131 water bodies in Chhattisgarh, 16  water 
bodies in Rajasthan and 3 water bodies  in Haryana." 
 
The Ministry also informed that all DPRs prepared for above water bodies are in 
accordance with the guidelines issued by the Ministry for the Scheme of RRR of water 
bodies. 
 
 
 

 
(f) Scope of work in the DPR 
3.14 Regarding the scope of work in DPR, it is stated that works such as de -silting in 
terms of quantum of silt to be removed, repair of conveyance system, strengthening of 
bund(s), repair of weirs and sluices, catchment treatment, command area development, soil 
erosion prevention works, quality control measures be included in it.   On being further asked 
if necessary tools, equipments and also expertise have been employed in implementing RRR 
Scheme, the Ministry in its post-evidence reply stated as follows : 
"As per the guidelines of the Scheme of RRR of water bodies, the Scheme is 
executed by the State Government s through their District Level Implementation 
Agency i.e. the district unit of the Nodal Department/Agency responsible for 
implementation of the scheme.  Technical expertise etc. wherever required is 
provided by the State Government to improve the implementation mechanism.  
Besides, there are contractual arrangements made by the State Government for 
implementation of the scheme." 
 
  
3.15 The Committee further observed that targeted benefits under RRR project will include 
creation of additional  irrigation potential, increase in agriculture/horticulture/pisciculture 
production and productivity, increase in recharge of ground water, improveme nt in water use 
efficiency, increase in availability of drinking water, impact on water quality, and promotion of 
tourism and culture.   On being asked  how RRR Scheme will help to raise  water use 
efficiency and increase in recharge of ground water ,  the Ministry in its post-evidence written 
reply stated as follows: 
 
"The Scheme of RRR of water bodies inter alia  include capacity building at the 
grassroot level  for which State Governments take various steps to arrange 
workshops at State/WUA/grassroot levels to improve water use efficiency as well as 
to increase  ground water recharge  through various techniques of rainwater 
harvesting which inter alia includes desiltation of water bodies resulting in increase in  
rate of ground water percolation through the d esilted bottom of water bodies having 
permeable geological formation underneath. Besides, the Scheme of RRR also 

creates additional irrigation potential resulting in increased productivity, increase in 
availability of drinking water etc."  
 
3.16 Regarding procedure for submission of proposals, the Committee was informed  that 
in case of Panchayats, the Projects are to be prepared and forwarded to District Planning 
Committee (DPC) for inclusion in the District Plan.   The Details Project Reports (DPRs) will 
then be forwarded to District Level Implementation Agency (DLIA) for onward transmission to 
the State Level Nodal Agency (SLNA).  When asked  about the number of DPRs prepared on 
the basis of project proposals made by Panchayats and received by the Ministry, the Ministry 
furnished the following reply : 
"A total of 3,341 revised projects/DPRs have been received from 12 States as per the 
guidelines of the Scheme." 
 
 Table 3.16 contains t he details of water bodies taken up and funds released under 
the scheme of RRR of water bodies with domestic support. 
Table 3.16 
 Funds released to States under the Scheme of RRR of water bodies with domestic support  
 
 (Rupees in crores) 
 
Name of State 
No. of 
Water 
Bodies 
Total 
Project cost  
Committed 
Central 
Share 
Fund 
released 
during  
2009-10 
Fund 
released 
during  
2010-11 
Fund 
released  
during 
2011-12 
Fund 
released 
During  
2012-13 
Total 
released 
funds 
Odisha 1321 254.33  228.89        72.12 75.00 70.33  217.45 
Karnataka 427 232.77  209.49 74.04 47.47 77.51  199.02 
Andhra Pradesh 1029 339.69 305.72  189.00   189.00 
Bihar 15 64.45 55.30  25.00  27.54 52.54 
U.P.(Bundelkhand) 28 46.15 41.53  29.08   29.08 
M.P.(Bundelkhand) 78 41.89 10.47  7.33 2.62  9.95 
Meghalaya 
(Umiam Lake) 
1 44.57 
(Irrigation related 
2.83) 
2.54  1.78 0.64  2.42 
Maharashtra 258 135.08 119.34   80.53  80.53 
Gujarat 34 17.47 15.72   10.61  10.61 
Chhattisgarh 131 122.91 110.61   34.68  34.68 
Rajasthan 16 11.35 7.45   7.07  7.07 
Haryana 3 40.24 10.06   7.04 2.52 9.56 
Total 3341 1350.9 1117.12 146.16 374.66 291.03 30.06 841.91 
 

3.17 The Committee were  also informed that  on the basis of proposals received in 
accordance with the guidelines of the RRR Scheme, release of funds for 3,341 water bodies 
with the project cost of Rs.1,350 crore for the States of Andh ra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, 
Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh (Bundelkhand), Meghalaya, Maharashtra, 
Odisha, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh have been processed.  Funds to the tune of Rs.653.43 
crore have been released to all these States except  Rajasthan under the Scheme.  When 
asked for the reason for non-release of funds to the State of Rajasthan under RRR Scheme, 
the Ministry in their post -evidence reply stated that the State Govt. of  Rajasthan has been 
released Rs.7.07 crore during the year  2011-12 for RRR of water bodies for undertaking 
activities in 16 water bodies.  A further sum of Rs. 2.05 crore will be released to Rajasthan on 
receipt of Utilisation Certificate in respect of Rs. 5.02 crore already released. 
3.18 When the Committee aske d about the norms applied by the Ministry for release of 
funds to the States under RRR Scheme and  initiatives taken  to induce other remaining  
States to submit duly approved DPRs for release of funds under RRR Scheme, the Ministry 
in a post-evidence reply stated as under : 
"Funds have been released for those project proposals which are approved by State 
Technical Advisory Committee and are as per the guidelines of the Scheme of RRR 
of water bodies.  The State Government have been requested to submit proje ct 
proposals which they can undertake and complete within the Plan period." 
 
3.19 In this regard, the Secretary during the evidence stated as under : 
"…………. It is very difficult to sanction without any proposal …………. whichever has 
applied to us from the State Government, we have tried to accommodate everyone of 
them even though there is limited fund." 
 
3.20 The Committee were informed  that the Scheme for Repair, Renovation and 
Restoration (RRR) of water bodies does not cover provision of funds for private w ater bodies.  

When the Committee enquired from the Ministry about the number of private water bodies in 
the country – State-wise/UT-wise and block-wise, the Ministry gave the following reply : 
" As per the Third Census of Minor Irrigation(2005),there are t otal of 5.56 lakh water 
bodies,  out of which  2.39 lakh are public water bodies, which implies  that there are  
3.17 lakh private water bodies." 
 
3.21 When t he Committee asked the Ministry to state the reasons for excluding private 
water bodies from the p urview of this Pilot Scheme and also whether the Ministry has any 
proposal to include such water bodies under the Scheme in future,  the Ministry in their post-
evidence reply stated as under:  
 
 "The Ministry is to cover public water bodies in the first in stance. Presently, there are 
no proposals for covering private water bodies under the Scheme of RRR of water 
bodies."   
 
3.22 Regarding the types of works undertaken under this Scheme in 15 States, the 
Ministry informed as follows : 
"The work undertaken un der the Pilot Scheme inter alia  includes desilting, repair 
sluice work, pitching, repair of canals attached to the water bodies." 
 
3.23 Asked whether there is a proposal to extend this Pilot Scheme to the remaining 
States, the Ministry in their post-evidence reply submitted as follows : 
"The Government of India has already approved a Scheme on Repair, Renovation 
and Restoration of water bodies for its implementation in all States during XI Plan."    
3.24 When t he Committee asked the Ministry about the relev ance of RRR scheme for 
water-starved areas of the country including Bundelkhand, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and 
eastern Maharashtra, the Ministry replied as under : 
"Under the pilot Scheme of National Project for Repair, Renovation and Restoration 
(RRR) of water bodies directly linked to agriculture implemented from 2005  to 2008, 
funds to the tune of Rs 197.30 crore  were released  to 15 States.  Evaluation of the 
scheme was taken up in 9 States of Odisha, West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, 
Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. The 
evaluation work was undertaken by Directorate of Water Management (ICAR), 
Bhubaneswar, Water and Land Management & Training and Research Institute, 

Hyderabad, Centre for Water Resources and D evelopment & Management, 
Kozikhode, Kerala and National Remote Sensing Agency, Hyderabad. The evaluation 
reports submitted by these organisations indicate positive outcomes like increase in 
storage capacity of water bodies, improved overall               socio-economic condition 
in the project area due to increase in cropped area, crop productivity, total production, 
marketable surplus and cropping intensity." 
 
3.25 As regard the prospects of RRR Scheme for hilly States such as Uttarakhand, 
Himachal Pradesh , J ammu & Kashmir and North -Eastern States including Assam and 
whether special provision/plan has been put in place or being proposed for above two 
categories of States, i.e. water -starved areas and hilly States under the Pilot Scheme, the 
Ministry also further stated as follows : 
"The Ministry of Water Resources has the Scheme for RRR of Water Bodies with 
domestic support.  Under the scheme  funding pattern will be in the ratio of 25: 75 
(Centre: State) for non -special category States and in the ratio of 9 0:10 for special 
category States (N orth Eastern States including Sikkim, Himachal Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand, J ammu & Kashmir and undivided Koraput, Bolangir and Kalahandi 
(KBK) districts of Odisha) and also for drought prone/naxal affected/tribal areas."  
 
B. NATIONAL LAKE CONSERVATION PLAN 
 
3.26 For conservation and management of polluted and degraded lakes in urban and 
semi-urban areas of the country, the Ministry of Environment & Forests is implementing the 
Centrally sponsored scheme of National Lake Conserva tion Plan (NLCP) since June, 2001 
on 70:30 cost sharing basis between the Central Government and the respective State 
Governments. The mandate of the NLCP Scheme is pollution prevention and conservation of 
perennial lakes.  The Plan includes core component s of interception, diversion and treatment 
of wastewaters before their entry into the lake, catchment area treatment, shoreline 
protection, in-lake treatment such as aeration, de -weeding, de-siltation, bio-remediation and 
bio-manipulation etc. Non core act ivities include lake front eco -development and public 
participation.  

3.27 On being asked  whether any evaluation has been undertaken by the Ministry to 
assess their  performances,  the Ministry replied as follows : 
"For evaluation of NLCP scheme, six lakes  have been identified. These include 
Vengainahkere lake, Nagavara lake and Jarganahalli lake in Bangalore (Karnataka), 
Powai lake in Mumbai (Maharashtra), Nainital lake in Uttrakhand and Mirik lake in 
Darjeeling (West Bengal). Presently, evaluation is unde r process by the consultants 
namely, M/s Wilbur Smith Associates Pvt. Ltd, Bangalore and M/s SMEC (India) Pvt. 
Ltd, Gurgaon." 
 
3.28 The Ministry also informed the Committee in their post -evidence reply that total outlay 
under the XI Plan towards the NLCP S cheme is Rs.440 crore.  Based on the proposals 
received from different States, the Ministry has so far sanctioned projects for conservation of 
61 lakes in 14 States, at a total cost of Rs.1 ,028.19 crore.  Out of Govt. of India share of 
Rs.812.63 crore, an amount of Rs.374.89 crore was released for implementation of these 
projects.  Proposals for new lakes are considered for sanction subject to their admissibility as 
per NLCP guidelines, pollution status, prioritization and availability of funds under the Plan. 
C. NATIONAL WETLANDS CONSERVATION PROGRAMME 
 
3.29 The National Wetland Conservation Programme (NWCP) was initiated by the 
Government of India in 1987, with the aim to conserve wetlands in the country, to prevent 
their degradation and ensure overall con servation of biodiversity. The Ministry of 
Environment & Forests has identified 115 wetlands  in the country covering 24 States and 2 
UTs, for their conservation and management under the programme.  The activities under the 
management action plan include d ata collection, survey and demarcation, inventorization, 
catchment area treatment, protection measures, water management, biodiversity 
conservation, weed control, pollution control, education and awareness / community 
participation etc.  

3.30 The Ministry informed the Committee that under NWCP, 100% financial assistance is 
provided for implementation of the Management Action Plans (MAPs) of identified wetlands 
and research projects for R&D activities in priority areas to supplement MAPs. The Ministry 
of Environment & Forests has notified the Wetlands (Conservation and Management Rules, 
2010) under the Environment (Protection Act, 1986).   
3.31 In reply to a question of the Committee whether any evaluation has been undertaken 
by the Ministry to assess their pe rformances and the findings ther eof, the Ministry replied as 
follows : 
"For evaluation of activities carried out under MAPs, five wetlands were identified 
where the scheme is in operation for more than 5 years. WII, Dehradun has carried 
out the evaluation studies. These include Pong Dam (H imachal Pradesh), Harike 
(Punjab), Deeper Beel (Assam), Chilka Lake ( Odisha) and Tso Morari (J ammu & 
Kashmir)." 
 
 The main findings of the evaluation of National Wetland Conservation Programme 
(NWCP) by the Ministry are reproduced below : 
(i)   Deeper Beel (Assam): 
 
• Effluent mitigation and intersection of domestic sewage also needs to be tackled 
immediately. 
• Hard Engineering measures need to be developed for hydrological and ecological 
integrity. 
• Adequate manpower/ expertise lacking 
• Fisheries cooperatives  have elevated  socio -economic conditions of communities 
because of conservation interventions  
• Development of R&D base to supplement MAPs in an effective manner. 
 
(ii)   Chilka (Odisha): 
 
• Invasion of  Phragamites  karka after opening of mouth needs to be attended 
immediately 
• Ecological intervention has helped  raising socio-economic status of fishers.  
•  Due to salinity weeds have been controlled to some extent   
• State has developed perfect institutional  mechanism and linkages  
• Effective monitoring mechanism  
• Fisheries regulation passed through Assembly 

• Comprehensive long-term MAP being prepared through small grant funds of Ramsar 
Convention  
 
(iii)  Tso Moriri (J&K): 
 
• Impact of tourism and domestic wastes needs attention  
• Incentives need to be given to local communities to stop bio-mass destruction. 
• Consideration of various incentives like vehicles etc. because of extremities of 
climate.  
• Hard engineering measures not required  
• Communities need to be involved in decision- making processes 
• R&D facilities to be provided to have adequate research data base to supplement 
MAP 
 
(iv)  Harike (Punjab)  
: 
• Lack of inter-sectoral co-ordination a major setback 
• Control of water hyacinth needs to be tackled by stopping effluent / sewage en tering 
into water body 
• Need of STPs to stop effluents which are responsible for prolific growth of weeds    
• Effective monitoring mechanism needed  
 
(v)   Pong Dam (HP) : 
 
• Execution of MAP not effective and needs to be improvised to get best results 
• Communities to be involved in decision making process 
• Research data base inadequate  
• Timely utilization of funds a main drawback 
• Monitoring needs to be effective 
• Needs constitution of authority to avoid conflicts between Forest and Environment 
Deptts at state level  
 
3.32 Regarding the total funds sanctioned and incurred on National Wetland Conservation 
Programme, the Ministry in its post-evidence reply stated as follows :- 
"So far, an amount of Rs.109.14 crore has been released to the concerned State 
Governments for conservation activities in identified wetlands of the country. That 
included an expenditure of Rs.55.94 crore during last five years." 
 
3.33 The Committee observe that during the X Five Year Plan the Government of 
India launched a Pilot Scheme in 2005  for Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) 
of water bodies as a State sector scheme with a plan outlay of Rs.300 crore to be 
shared by the Centre and States in the ratio of 3:1.  They also note that the selection of 

States for the pilot scheme is made ou t of the Detailed Project Reports 
(DPRs)/proposals submitted by the States to the CWC, who then submit their 
recommendations on DPRs to the Ministry of Water Resources for release of funds.  
The final selections of DPRs is made in the Ministry by an Empowe red Committee 
under the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary (WR)  with representatives of 
Ministries of Agriculture and Rural Developments as well .   Noting that the 
Government had approved the scheme on RRR of water bodies for implementation in 
all States /UTs during the XI Plan, the Committee urge that the Ministry of Water 
Resources vigorously pursue the matter with the States so that the approved DPRs 
are implemented. The Committee further recommend that the Government of India 
highlight the multiple and  huge benefits arising out of  the RRR of water bodies 
through appropriate measures including organising frequent meetings, seminars and 
sustained public campaigns so that all the States implement the Scheme of RRR.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the measures initiated in this regard. 
3.34 The Committee note that the State Governments prepare projects under the 
Scheme with involvement of the Community, Panchayat Raj Institution (PRI) and Water 
Users' Associations(WUAs).  The Committee also obser ve that DPR for RRR Scheme 
has specific provision for handing over the revived facility for operation, monitoring 
and maintenance to community organisations, WUAs or PRIs.  Noting that the National 
Water Policy 2002 emphasize s management of water resources through participatory 
approach by involving not only the Government agencies but also all stakeholders in 
various aspects of planning, designing and management, and also given the fact that 
no complaints have so far been received from the State Government s about the 
implementation mechanism as suggested in the Guidelines of the Scheme, the 

Committee hope that the Ministry would cause strict vigil to be maintained over the 
concerned bodies at three levels for implementation of RRR Scheme in order to derive 
optimum benefits and make the Scheme a great success. 
3.35 The Committee note that under the Scheme of Repair, Renovation and 
Restoration of water bodies (both with domestic support as well with external 
assistance), the Government of India has offered fin ancial assistance to the States on 
generous terms for implementation of the Scheme by them.  Under RRR Scheme with 
domestic support, for instance, the Central assistance for Special Category States and 
water bodies benefiting drought prone area/tribal area /Naxal affected areas has been 
fixed to the tune of 90% of total cost of projects, with the States needing to raise the 
balance share of only 10% from their own resources.  Similarly, under the terms 
offered to the States in case of RRR Scheme with external assistance, as much as 25% 
of the total loan obtained from World Bank is being provided to the States as Central 
assistance(grant), with the States having to repay the remaining 75% of the total World 
Bank loan on back to back basis.  The Committee trust  that given firm will and 
determination to implement the RRR Scheme by the States and the financial 
assistance being made by the Union Government, the 5.56 lakh water bodies, which 
are presently in a State of neglect, decline and deterioration, would be re stored and 
rejuvenated expeditiously.    The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to 
take further necessary steps to incentivise the States by enhancing the domestic and 
external assistance to 50% to all the States to come up with proposals for 
implementation under the RRR Scheme of water bodies domestic support and with 
external assistance.  The Committee would like to know the fresh initiatives taken by 
the Government in this regard. 

3.36  The Committee also note that there is no provision for giving technical support 
to State Governments under the Scheme of RRR of water bodies.  Given the fact that 
the Government has been consistently increasing the outlays under programmes such 
as the AIBP since the beginning of the XI Plan to assist the States  to complete the 
ongoing Major and Medium Irrigation projects, the Committee are strongly of the view 
that projects under implementation under RRR Scheme may also be included and 
given high priority under AIBP so that efforts made do not slacken due to fun d 
constraints.  Further, the Committee  recommend that the Ministry may explore the 
feasibility of providing technical support to States/UTs where RRR Scheme is being 
implemented to recover and restore lost water bodies.  
3.37 The Committee observe that under the RRR Scheme, a project may be prepared 
by the States with an individual water body or for a group of water bodies with sub -
basin approach.  Accordingly, all water bodies included in the project will be given a 
unique code number, and the States will accordingly undertake census of these water 
bodies and get complete list of water bodies along  with unique code in the first stage.  
The Committee were also informed that during the XI Five Year Plan, a sum of 
Rs.811.85 crore has been released for 3,341 water bodies for 12 States namely, Andhra 
Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh 
(Bundelkhand), Meghalaya, Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh 
(Bundelkhand).  All the proposals received have been in accordance with the 
stipulated guidelines and water bodies under the Scheme have been allotted 
necessary unique code.  The Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry urge 
the States for completion of exercise of taking census of all water bodies within their 
respective jurisdiction without further delay.  They would also recommend that the 

Ministry scrupulously insist on the States to allot unique code for all water bodies 
included under the proposal for RRR Scheme as required under the guidelines. 
3.38 The Commit tee observe that the scheme of RRR of water bodies inter-alia 
include capacity building at the grass root level.  To this end, State Governments are 
taking various steps to arrange workshops at State Level/WUA/ grass root level to 
improve water use efficien cy as well as to increase ground water recharge through 
various techniques of rainwater harvesting, which include desiltation of water bodies 
resulting in increase in rate of ground water percolation through the desilted bottom 
of water bodies having perme able geological formation underneath.  In addition, the 
scheme of RRR also is expected to create additional irrigation potential resulting in 
increased productivity, increase in availability of drinking water, etc.  Noting that the 
Government has been impl ementing various schemes for augmentation of ground 
water in the country, including the State sector scheme called "Artificial Recharge of 
ground water through dug wells" in 7 States at an estimated cost of Rs.1,536.75 crore, 
the Committee desire special initiative be taken by the Government while planning and 
implementing the RRR Scheme so that the goal of ground water augmentation is 
accorded top priority.  The  Committee believe that through mutual consultation s, 
meetings, etc., a common approach can be w orked out by the Government for 
recasting the programme of the Scheme of RRR of water bodies to provide impetus to 
their efforts to achieve increased recharge o f ground water.  This would also prevent 
duplication of works and wastages of precious funds in Water Resources sector.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the endeavours made by the Government in 
this behalf. 

3.39 The Committee note with concern that as per the Third Census of Minor 
Irrigation (2005), there are 5.50 lakh water bodies in the country, out of which 2.39 
lakhs are public water bodies and remaining 3.17 lakhs are private water bodies.  The 
Committee were informed that the Scheme for RRR of water bodies does not cover 
3.17 lakhs water bodies spread across the country.  The Committe e deplore exclusion 
of private water bodies from the RRR Scheme of the Government , which dents a 
gaping loop-hole in the otherwise laudable scheme, particularly as it is a necessity to 
preserve the water bodies.     Noting that the Ministry's proposal is to  cover public 
water bodies as the first priority, the Committee urge the Government to explore the 
viability of extending State funding to private water bodies during the XII Plan, or to 
atleast explore the possibility of inducing States/UTs to take up wit h owners of such 
private water bodies and to incentivize them to take measures to revive, repair, 
renovate and develop water bodies by undertaking works such as desilting, repairing 
sluice work, pitching, repair of canals attached to the water bodies, etc. 
3.40 The Committee further observe that under the Centrally sponsored National 
Lake Conservation Plan (NLCP)  being implemented by the Ministry of Environment & 
Forests since June 2001 for conservation and management of polluted and degraded 
lakes in urba n and semi -urban areas of the country, a total of Rs.374.89 crore out of 
Government of India 's  share of Rs. 812.63 crore was released for implementation of 
projects sanctioned in respect of 61 lakes located in 14 States from among States 
from whom proposals were received.  A total outlay of Rs.440 crore has been allocated 
under the XI Plan towards the Scheme.  Besides, the Ministry has initiated the work of 
evaluation of the NLCP by identifying 6 lakes for the purpose, viz. Vengainahkere lake, 
Nagavara lake and Jarganahalli lake in Bangalore (Karnataka), Powai lake in Mumbai 

(Maharashtra), Nainital lake in Uttrakhand and Mirik lake in Darjeeling (West Bengal).  
The evaluation process is being carried out by  two private firms based at Bangalore 
and Gurgaon.   The Committee strongly desire to see the early completion of this 
evaluation works being undertaken on the performances of NLCP scheme .  They 
would also like to be apprised of the findings of the evaluation reports on NLCP as 
and when received by MoEF from the two private consultancy firms. 
3.41 The Committee note that under the National Wetland Conservation Programme 
(NWCP) initiated by the Government in 1987, the Ministry of Environment & Forests 
has identified 115 wetlands in 24 States and 2 UTs for co nservation and management.  
Under it, 100% financial assistance is provided for implementation of Management 
Action Plans (MAPs) of identified wetlands and research projects for R&D activities in 
priority areas to supplement MAPs, and so far an amount of R s.109.14 crore has been 
released to the concerned State Governments, including Rs.55.94 crore incurred 
during last 5 years.  Noting that conservation and management of the wetlands could 
contribute to the goal of repair, renovation and restoration of water  bodies being 
carried out by the Ministry in 15 States of the country, the Committee recommend that 
the suggestions made by WII, Dehradun under MAP s for evaluation of work in 5 
identified wetlands, viz. Pong Dam (Himachal Pradesh), Harike (Punjab), Deeper Beel 
(Assam), Chilika Lake (O disha) and Tso Morari (J&K) may be taken up by the 
concerned Ministry for early remedial action.  Further, the Committee recommend that 
evaluation works on the performance of NWCP may be extended to other of 110 
remaining wetla nds and more thrust be given by enhancing fund allocation to the 
programme.  They would like to be apprised of further action taken by Government in 

this regard.   The Committee would also like to emphasise on the need for ensuring 
proper coordination amongst the Ministries concerned in executing the programme. 

 
CHAPTER-IV 
FUNDING OF THE SCHEME ON REPAIR, RENOVATION AND RESTORATION OF 
WATER BODIES & ITS IMPLEMENTATION 
 
(a) Release of funds 
 
The Ministry have stated that a  budget provision of Rs.399 crore wa s kept during 
2009-10 for the Scheme of RRR of Water Bodies. During the year 2010 -11, a budget 
provision of Rs. 600 crore was kept for meeting the Central component of  the funding.  An 
amount of Rs. 374.66 crore has been released during 2010 -11.  A budget provision of Rs. 
684 crore has been kept for the scheme of RRR of water bodies during the year 2011 -12. 
When asked the reason for release of only Rs. 374.66 crore as against a budget provision of 
Rs. 600.00 crore during 2010-11, the Ministry gave the following reply : 
"The reason for less release of funds under the Scheme during 2010 -11 was due to 
the stand taken by Department of Expenditure on an issue relating to committed 
liability under the Scheme for the States of Karnataka and O disha. However, the 
impasse has since been resolved with the downsizing of the project proposals for the 
States of Odisha and Karnataka." 
 
4.2  It is also stated that Rs.139 crore w ere proposed to be released for the States of 
Maharashtra (Rs. 83.52 crore), Gujarat (Rs. 11 crore ), Chhattisgarh (Rs. 37.44 crore) and 
Haryana (Rs. 7.04 crore) as on 9.9.2011.  Clarifications were sought from Government of 
Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh and Meghalaya.  When 
asked whether the fund s have been released to th ese States and whether  any deadline has 
been set up for States' reply where clarifications were sought by the Ministry, the Ministry in 
written reply have stated as under: 
"While funds have been released to Maharashtra, Gujarat, Chhatisgarh and Haryana , 
funds are yet to be released to the States of Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, 
Madhya Pradesh, Meghalaya etc. Funds will be released to these States on receipt of 

clarification and also on fulfilling the set norms as prescribed in the guidelines by the 
State Governments." 
 
(b) Funding of the Scheme 
 
4.3 Regarding the funding pattern for RRR Schemes with external assistance, it is stated 
that States may take up projects for funding under External Assistance, wherein 25% of the 
World Bank loan is taken by Central Government and passed to States as Central assistance 
and the remaining 75% of the loan is passed to the concerned States on back to back basis  
and repaid by the States .   When asked if the Government of India would step in to repay 
World Bank in case of failure by States to repay,  the Ministry in a post -evidence reply stated 
as under: 
 "As per the guidelines of the Scheme of RRR of water bodies with external 
assistance, the office of Controller, Aids, Accounts and Accounting (CAAA) of 
Economic Affairs , Ministry of Finance, are required to keep track of claims of 
disbursement claims made by the State Governments and shortfall, if any, in the 
matter so as to take corrective steps in time for avoiding any fault in the payment 
schedule prescribed by the Wo rld Bank for the scheme. According to the information 
furnished by the Department of Economic Affairs, there is no report about the case of 
failure by any State Government to repay the World Bank loan." 
 
4.4 The Ministry informed the Committee during evide nce that the Government of Odisha 
had requested for release of Rs.81.78 crore during 2011 -12 for implementation of schemes 
on RRR, in addition to Rs.72.12 crore and Rs.75 crore already released in 2009 -10 and 
2010-11.  A total sum of Rs 217.45 crore has si nce been released to the State Government 
of O disha so far under the scheme of RRR of w ater bodies with domestic support.    The 
Committee was further informed that the Ministry agreed to undertake monitoring of progre ss 
including release of second instalme nt. When queried how monitoring work for the schemes 
of RRR in Odisha is proposed to be carried out, the Ministry submitted as under : 
"The Scheme of  RRR of water  bodies envisages an  inbuilt  monitoring  mechanism  
with the involvement  of officials from the Ministry, CGWB as well as State   officials.  
While  the State level  officials are  to keep continuous liaison with the District Level  

Implementing Agency for generating monthly   information on financial  and physical  
progress of the implementation  of  the  Scheme, the  Regional  Directors  in the  
field  offices of  CGWB are  also  required to  visit 1-2 water  bodies   every  month 
to  keep  track  of   progress  of  implementation of  work  undertaken  under  the  
scheme.  The 
   State Government  of O disha has undertaken work in 1321 water bodies which 
includes 307 DPAP catetory water bodies and 1014 tribal category water bodies 
viz. Balasore (6), Bargarh (56), KBK(Balangir) (83), Deogarh (7), Dhenkenal (26), 
Gajapati (37), Ganjam (579), Jajpur (2 2), BK -Kalahandi (51), Kandhama (35), 
Keojjhar (50), KBK -Korapur (23), KBK -Malkanjir (13), Mayurbhanj (63), KBK -
Nabrangpur (12), Nayagarh (79), KBK -Naupada (35), KBK -Rayagada (34), 
Sambalpur (47), Sonepur (18) and Sundargarh (45). The State Government of 
Odisha has already developed a detailed management information system in 
respect of water bodies taken up, water bodies completed, CCA revived, etc." 
 
4.5 As per guidelines  made by the Ministry , necessary budget provision for the total 
amount of the project  for both Central and State shares are to be kept in the State Plan 
Budget for the relevant year.  When asked if necessary guidelines have been issued to the 
States to comply with this provision  and the feedback  received from the States thereon, the 
Ministry gave the following reply: 
 "The guidelines of the Scheme are very specific for keeping explicit provision for the 
project (both state and central share for the scheme). The State Governments are 
keeping necessary provision in the State budget and funds a re being released to only 
those states which comply with the requirement of keeping necessary budget 
provision in the State budget for the scheme. 
 
4.6 When the Committee enquired about the process for obtaining the approval of the 
proposal under the RRR S cheme and the reasons for the delay thereof, the Secretary 
responded during the evidence as under : 
"Sir, there is a fault in our system.  Difficulties are in our processing also.  Though our 
Ministry is responsible for this Scheme but its approval and san ction is being done by 
Ministry of Finance.  We have given this suggestion, if it is our Scheme, then its 
approval and sanction should also be vested with us." 
 

4.7 On being asked whether the Ministry has taken initiatives/propose to take any 
initiative fo r simplifying the process of sanctioning projects under the RRR Scheme, the 
Ministry in their post evidence written reply stated as below:  
 "A detailed Scheme on RRR of water bodies is at conceptualization stage." 
 
 
 4.8 The Committee further asked the Mi nistry during the evidence about duration of the 
Scheme of RRR on water bodies.  To this query, the representative of the Ministry replied as 
under: 
"It is only for the XI Five Year Plan…..All the schemes that we are sanctioning are 
supposed to be over by March, 2012, that is, within this financial year." 
 
4.9 When asked further whether these projects/schemes would be completed within 2 -3 
years given for completion by the Ministry, the Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources stated 
as under: 
"This Scheme was approved by Planning Commission only for the XI Five Year Plan.  
They said that we should complete the Scheme by March, 2012.  However, if some 
State Governments are not able to complete, we will request the Planning 
Commission to allow us to extend the Scheme further." 
 
4.10 The Committee pointed out that the Ministry should formulate 'water budget' to aim at 
augmenting water collection in the country, and to assess water requirements of farmers per 
crop,  present capacity for storing water and needed ste ps to storing water annually. When 
asked to comment on whether there is any proposal to formulate a water budget for water 
augmentation, conservation  and better management of water, the Secretary deposed as 
follows:  
 " The RRR Scheme of water bodies does  not have any such provision of „water 
budget‟ to aim at augmenting water collection in the country, and to assess water 
requirements of farmers per crop,  present capacity for storing water and needed 
steps to storing water annually.  However, National Co mmission for Integrated Water 
Resources Development in its report in 1999 has carried out „Water Budget‟ by 

assessing water availability & water demands and suggested steps required for 
optimum development of water resources.  The National Water Mission, inter-alia, 
proposes „water budget‟ to facil itates water augmentation, conservation and better 
management of water." 
 
4.11 The Committee observe that a provision of Rs.684 crore has been kept in the 
Budget 2011-12 for RRR Scheme.  They also note that Rs.139  crore were proposed to 
be released for the States of Maharashtra  (Rs.83.52 crore), Gujarat  (Rs.11 crore), 
Chattisgarh (Rs.37.44 crore) and Haryana(Rs.7.04 crore) as on 09.09.2011 .  Funds have 
been released to Maharashtra, Gujarat, Chattisgarh and Haryana .   Funds to be 
released to the States of Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh and 
Meghalaya are awaiting receipt of clarification s with regard to the fulfillment of the 
guidelines by the State Governments.  The Committee , in this connection no te that 
works are in progress in a total of 10887 water bodies in the country, 3000 in Andhra 
Pradesh, 5763 in Tamil Nadu, 1224 in Karnataka, and 900 in Odisha under RRR 
Scheme with external assistance.  Of these, 686 water bodies in Andhra Pradesh and 
2407 water bodies in Tamil Nadu have been reported to be completed.  No information 
is available regarding the progress of work in respect of the remaining two States, 
namely, Karnataka and Odisha under this category of the RRR Scheme.  Further, out 
of the estimated cost of Rs.4444.28 envisaged for the 10887 water bodies, the Central 
share (i.e. 25% loan component) is Rs.733.05 crore, out of which only Rs.454.35 crore 
had been released till 19 December 2011.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Ministry to  vigorously pursue with the State Governments of Himachal Pradesh, 
Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh and Meghalaya to complete the stipulated 
formalities expeditiously so that  

funds are released to these States and they start the work of RRR of water bodies  
without further delay.   
 
4.12 The Committee note that for the Scheme of RRR of water bodies with external 
assistance, the office of Controller, Aids, Accounts and Accounting (CAAA) of 
Department of Economic Affairs(DEA), Ministry of Finance is required u nder the 
guidelines of the RRR Scheme to keep track of disbursement claims made  by State 
Governments. As per information furnished by the DEA, no report about default in 
repayment of World Bank loan by States had been received till 24.01.2012.    The 
Committee would like the Ministry to continue its strict watch on the external funding 
of RRR Scheme as well as loan repayment. 
 
4.13 The Committee were informed that a total of Rs. 217.45 crore had been released 
as on 24.01.2012 to the State of Odisha under t he Scheme of RRR of water bodies with 
domestic support. They were also given to understand that the Ministry would 
undertake monitoring of progress, including release of the second instalment. When 
queried on how monitoring work for the schemes of RRR in O disha is proposed to be 
carried out, it was informed to the Committee that the RRR Scheme envisages an 
inbuilt monitoring mechanism while the State level officials are to keep continuous 
liaison with the District Level Implementing Agency (DLIA) for genera ting monthly 
information on physical and financial progress of the implementation of the Scheme.   
The Regional Directors in the field offices of CGWB are also required to visit 1 -2 water 
bodies every month to keep track of          the progress of impleme ntation of work 
undertaken under the Scheme, and that  the  State  

Government of Odisha has undertaken work in 1,321 water bodies which includes 307 
DPAP category water bodies and 1,014 tribal category water bodies of the State. The 
Committee, therefore, r ecommend that the implementation of the works be pursued 
vigorously so that these works are completed within the shortest possible time.   The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome in the matter within six months.  
4.14 Taking note of the fact  that the Ministry is responsible for the Scheme of RRR 
of water bodies, but the power of approval and sanction of a project under the Scheme 
is with Ministry of Finance and also that the Scheme of RRR of water bodies is only for 
XI Five Years Plan, and al l the projects being sanctioned are supposed to be over by 
March 2012, i.e. within the current year,  the Committee, therefore, recommend that (a) 
a comprehensive report be placed before the Committee showing the status of the 
projects sanctioned, complete d and on going and the expenditure incurred and likely 
to be incurred,  State -wise and year -wise since the inception of the Scheme; (b) the 
Scheme, given its huge benefits, be extended in the 12 th Plan; and (c) the entire 
responsibility for processing and sanctioning the projects under the Scheme be 
entrusted to the Ministry of Water Resources for its efficient implementation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CHAPTER-V 
MONITORING & EVALUATION, PUBLIC AWARENESS AND CONVERGENCE OF 
EFFORTS 
 
(a) Monitoring & Evaluation 
The Ministry i nformed the Committee that regular monitoring of the physical and 
financial progress and the outcome of the projects is to be carried out at each stage.  
Monitoring is done with the association of the standing committees of the Panchayats.  When 
asked to furnish the number of frequencies monitoring of RRR scheme being carried out with 
the Panchayats and the outcome of such monitoring, the Ministry in its post -evidence reply 
stated as below : 
 
" While the State Government is having its own monitoring mechanis m with the 
involvement of Standing Committees of panchayats for progress of  water bodies 
undertaken under the Scheme of RRR of water bodies and the  State Nodal officer is 
required to keep continuous liaison with the District Level Implementation Agency f or 
generating monthly information on physical and financial progress of the 
implementation of the Scheme,  the Ministry has also initiated action for development 
of regular monitoring mechanism with the involvement of CGWB and Ministry 
officials. The information related to progress of work undertaken by various states are 
submitted to the Ministry on regular basis." 
 
 The information regarding completion of work on RRR Scheme as per reports 
received from CGWB/ State Governments is given at Table – 5.1. 
Table – 5.1 
Work completed as per reports received from   
Central Ground Water Board/ State Governments 
 
Name of State  No. of 
water 
bodies 
Total 
project 
cost 
in Crore 
Committed 
Central 
Share 
Fund 
released 
during 
2009-10 
Fund 
released 
during 
2010-11 
Fund 
released 
during                
2011-12 
Fund 
released 
during 
2012-13 
Number of 
water 
bodies 
completed 
No. of 
water 
bodies in 
progress 
Odisha 1321 254.33 228.89 72.12 75.00 70.33  1044 277 
Karnataka 427 232.77 209.49 74.04 47.47 77.51  354 73 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
1029 339.69 305.72  189.00   N.A. 1029 
Bihar 15 64.45 55.30  25.00  27.54 N.A. 15 

 
U.P. 
(Bundelkhand) 
28 46.15 41.53  29.08   N.A. 28 
M.P 
(Bundelkhand) 
78 41.89 10.47  7.33 2.62  72. 6 
Meghalaya 
(Umiam Lake) 
1 44.57 
(Irrigation 
related 
2.38) 
2.54  1.78 0.64  N.A 1 
Chhattisgarh 131 122.91  110.61   34.68  N.A 131 
Gujarat 34 17.47 15.72   10.61  N.A 34 
Haryana 3 40.24 10.06   7.04 2.52 1 2 
Maharashtra 258 135.08 119.34   80.53  N.A 258 
Rajasthan 16 11.35 7.45   7.07  10 6 
Total 3341 1350.9 1117.12 146.16 374.66 291.03 30.06 1481 1860 
 
5.2 It is also stated that evaluation and impact assessment of the scheme is to be done 
by independent agencies to be identified by the Ministry of Water Resources.  The 
Government has since identified Water and Power Consultancy Services (WAPCOS) Ltd. for 
concurrent evaluation/impact assessment of the RRR scheme.  The progress report is to be 
generated and copy of the said report is required to be sent to the Nodal Officer, i.e. Director 
(WB), MoWR by the end of every m onth. When the Committee asked to furnish the findings 
of the concurrent evaluations/impact assessments of the RRR scheme by WAPCOS Ltd. and 
whether the monitoring by the WAPCOS Ltd. is adequate enough and what remedial or 
corrective measures have been tak en following the studies and monitoring by the WAPCOS  
Ltd., the Ministry in its                             post-evidence reply stated as under :                    
 "The Scheme of Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of water bodies with 
domestic supp ort which is  being implemented during XI Five Year Plan Period, 
envisages concurrent evaluation and impact assessment by an independent agency to 
be identified by the Ministry of Water Resources. Accordingly, the Ministry of Water 
Resources has identified WAPCOS Ltd. for concurrent evaluation /impact assessment 
of the scheme.  The work will commence after the mechanism for release of funds to 
WAPCOS Ltd. is vetted by the concerned State Governments." 
5.3 During the evidence, the Secretary, Ministry of Wate r Resources elaborated as 
under : 
"The advice of the Hon'ble Members is right, that is why we are paying to public 
sector undertaking so that they send their man to get independent on the ground 

evaluation done.  We desire that when the work is in progress  there then the 
evaluation should be done and along with it when the work is over, then submit to us 
complete evaluation Report because we are also apprehensive that this all is looking 
good on the paper but whether the work is being done there or not.  Bu t to whoever 
Parliamentarian we have talked, they are saying that the work is going on quite 
well……………  This is why we have given the work for evaluation to WAPCOS." 
 
5.4 The Ministry also stated  that States will send Utilization Certificate s to the 
Government of India for release of instalments in case of RRR Schemes having external 
assistance.   On being asked how many States have furnished such Utilization Certificates as 
of now and whether the Ministry strictly adhered to this norm while releasing addit ional 
instalments of funds to the States till date, the Ministry submitted the following reply : 
 "As per the provision of the Scheme of RRR of water bodies with external assistance, 
disbursement claims are to be submitted by the State Governments to the C ontroller 
of Aid, Accounts and Auditing (CAAA) of the Department of Economic Affairs, 
Ministry of Finance with a copy to Ministry of Water Resources for further necessary 
action in relation to release of funds. Physical Progress Report is also to be sent t o 
MoWR alongwith disbursement claim."  
 
5.5 The Committee was informed that out of the Central Plan, outlay of Rs.1,250 crore 
available for the Scheme during the XI Plan, 5% of Central share shall be made for 
strengthening of implementation mechanism, conc urrent evaluation and impact assessment 
to be carried out by the independent agencies identified by the Ministry of Water Resources 
and will be released on the recommendation of the Ministry.    When the Committee enquired 
as to whether 5% of the Central s hare has been released as stipulated  and the names of the 
independent agencies identified by the Ministry who are the recipients of this fund . To this 
query, the Ministry replied as follows :  
"While as per the provision of the Scheme,5% of Central share are to be segregated 
for undertaking work relating to concurrent evaluation and impact assessment under 
the scheme by an independent agency to be identified by MoWR, it has been 
proposed to release 2.5% of the central share for undertaking concurrent evalua tion 
and impact assessment under this scheme. The MoWR has since identified 
WAPCOS Ltd for the work related to evaluation ; however, work will commence after 

the mechanism for release of funds to WAPCOS Ltd. is vetted by the State 
Governments."  
 
 
5.6 It is also stated that the approval / monitoring of the scheme of RRR of Water Bodies 
with external assistance is carried out by the World Bank.  The appraisal process is 
coordinated by the Deptt. of Economic Affairs. Asked whether it has any proposal to carry out 
monitoring of the scheme on its own, the Ministry in its post-evidence reply stated as below : 
 
 "Yes, the Ministry also gets information about progress of work under World Bank 
assisted Scheme of RRR of water bodies." 
 
 
5.7 The Committee pointed out w hether any feedback is received from the World Bank 
as regards progress of the RRR scheme.  To this, the Ministry furnished a written reply giving 
the details of progress of work on the Scheme of RRR of water bodies with external 
assistance, which are give n at Table – 5.7.  When asked further to give the outcome of the 
appraisal process being coordinated by Dep artment of Economic Affairs , the Ministry stated 
as follows : 
 "The World Bank Mission appraises the project for taking decision about funding and 
suggestions made by the appraisal mission is incorporated in the project document 
through mutual consultation with the State Government/World Bank/Department of 
Economic Affairs.  Besides, an elaborate mechanism is in place for effective 
implementation and p roper utilization of the loans received from the external 
agencies, which involves disbursement monitoring as well as physical and financial 
monitoring of the project.  A few of the steps taken by Multilateral Institutions Division, 
DEA for planned complet ion and fast disbursement of loans are (i) Close review of  
projects through Tripartite Portfolio Review Meetings; comprising the donor, DEA and 
the project authorities (including representatives of Central Ministry/State 
Government); State portfolio revie w meetings; special review meetings for problem 
projects; monitoring through correspondence; and field visits (ii) Capacity building of 
project authorities to ensure that the projects are implemented as per planned 
schedule."  

Table – 5.7 
Details of progress of work on RRR Scheme with external assistance 
 
 
State Project 
Cost 
Loan 
Compo-
nent 
CCA No. of 
Water 
Bodies 
Central share release (Rs. In crore) 
Central 
Share 
i.e. 25% 
loan 
compo-
nent 
2007-
08 
2008-
09 
2009-
10 
till 
19 
Dec, 
2011. 
Total 
Andhra 
Pradesh  
1044.30 835.00 2.50 3000 208.85 8.59 3.09 18.27 32.54 62.49 
Tamil 
Nadu 
2547.00 2182.00 4.00 5763 337.50 18.78 85.66 170.40 89.44 364.27 
Karnataka  306.98 268.78 0.52 1224 67.20 0.00 1.40 1.01 17.19 19.60 
Odisha 546.00 448.00 1.20 900 119.50 0.00 5.03 0.63 2.33 7.99 
Total 4444.28 3733.78 8.22 10887 733.05 27.37 95.17 190.31 141.50 454.35 
 
Total 686 water bodies completed in Andhra Pradesh. 
Total 2407 water bodies completed in Tamil Nadu. 
 
5.8 The Committee have also been informed  that the role of the Union Water Ministry will 
be to monitor the progress under the Scheme through periodic reports from the States and 
field visits. On being asked to give the details of such periodic reports from the States and 
field visits undertaken by the Ministry till date, the Ministry submitted as follows: 
"While the CGWB Regional Director s are to visit at least two water bodies in the 
concerned states on monthly basis and submit report to the Ministry, the Monitoring 
report is made available also by the State Governm ents. The Ministry officials have 
also visited different States implementing the scheme of RRR of water bodies and 
submitted their report to the Ministry." 
 
5.9 When asked further to furnish  details of such reports and field visits undertaken by 
the Ministry till November, 2011, the Ministry in a post-evidence reply state as under :  
"The tour reports by the Ministry officials are available in respect of States of O disha, 
MP, Meghalaya, Bihar.  However, CGWB/State reports are available for all States 

where the Scheme is under implementation. The progress of work in most of the 
States are found to be satisfactory except in Andhra Pradesh." 
 
5.10 Regarding the details about the post -implementation evaluation and impact 
assessment of projects done by the Minist ry till date  and the main findings of such studies  
thereof, the Ministry stated as under: 
"The Ministry conducted evaluation for pilot schemes , and the past evaluation result s 
submitted by various organizations  indicate positive outcomes like increase in 
storage capacity of water bodies, improved overall socio economic condition in the 
project area due to increase in cropped area, crop productivity, total production, 
marketable surplus and cropping intensity." 
 
(b) Public Awareness 
 
5.11 It is stated that public participation and social awareness among the masses are 
essential for the upkeep of water bodies.  Regarding the steps taken by the Government to 
ensure public participation and create mass social awareness in works relating to water 
bodies, the Ministry replied in its post evidence reply that the scheme of RRR of water bodies 
envisages capacity building, awareness programme at grass root level for which the State 
Governments are to organize workshops at grass root levels for creating awareness/capac ity 
among stakeholders and the scheme has inbuilt funding mechanism for undertaking such 
activities. 
5.12 The Ministry submitted that they have no power of direction to a State as water is a 
subject but they have circulated a model law on rain water harves ting, which many States 
have accepted.   The Committee further enquired whether there is any proposal/plan to 
prepare a model law on RRR of water bodies in the country on the line of model law on rain 
water harvesting, the Ministry gave its reply as under : 
 "Presently, no such proposal is existent." 
 

(c) Convergence of efforts on RRR of water bodies 
5.13 The Ministry has  stated that the Plan for convergence with efforts made under other 
programmes such as MNREGA, watershed development programme and scheme of rural 
drinking water supply has been made, and the joint guidelines for convergence between 
MNREGA and programmes of Ministry of Water Resources have already been issued in this 
regard.  The joint convergence guidelines since issued to achieve convergen ce of efforts in 
respect of RRR of water bodies are reproduced at Appendix - I. 
5.14 The Committee desired to know when this plan for convergence with efforts made 
under other programmes is proposed to be achieved , the details of mechanism to be made, 
the intended benefits to be achieved and plan to achieve similar convergence with other 
cognate Ministries like Environment & Forests, Rural Development and Agriculture is to be 
achieved. To this query, the Ministry in a post-evidence reply stated as below : 
 "MNREGA visualizes creation of durable community assets with the help of funds 
released under employment guarantee programme.  Seven schemes of MoWR 
including rejuvenation and desilting of water bodies have been identified for 
dovetailing with MNREGA."  
 
5.15 It is stated that a Task Force on Convergence with MNREGA Scheme was set up 
with representatives from different Ministries and Departments, implementing programmes 
having complementarities with MNREGA.  It is also suggested t hat efforts be made to make  
use of MNREGA Scheme for repair, renovation and restoration of water bodies at village 
level. Asked to comment on the viability of this option to revitalize the RRR scheme and 
whether the two schemes can be dovetailed for achieving optimum results, the Mi nistry 
replied as follows : 
"For t he projects for activities where convergence has been proposed under 
MNREGA, no funds have been released under the Scheme of RRR of water bodies 
for such activities." 

5.16 The Committee was also informed  that efforts are n eeded not to mix RRR Scheme 
with MNREGA Scheme but to make ponds under the RRR Scheme in States having scanty 
rains. Asked to comment on this suggestion, the Ministry in its post -evidence reply stated as 
under: 
 "The new scheme on RRR of water bodies is at conceptualization stage." 
5.17 The Committee observe that regular monitoring of the physical and financial 
progress and the outcome of the projects is stipulated to be carried out at each stage.  
In this regard, the Committee also note the reply of the Mi nistry that the State 
Government is having its own monitoring mechanism with the involvement of 
Standing Committee on Panchayats for progress of RRR of water bodies under the 
Scheme and that the State nodal officer is required to keep continuous liaison wi th the 
District Level Implementation Agency  (DLIA) for generating monthly information on 
the physical and principal progress of the implementation of the Scheme.  
Additionally, the Ministry's reply also state s that it got the information related to 
progress of work undertaken by various States submitted to the Ministry on regular 
basis, although no details about the frequencies of submission of this information 
have been mentioned by the Ministry.   The Committee note with displeasure that 
despite the effor ts being made on the monitoring front by the Ministry and State 
Governments, little tangible progress has been made given the number of Schemes 
sanctioned.  For example, while 1 ,761 projects have been taken up for implementation 
under RRR Scheme i n Odisha, only 1 ,321 projects have been taken up at an 
expenditure of Rs. 14,929.71 lakhs so far.  The number of projects completed are 142, 
out of 1,761 projects taken up in O disha.  Further, out of a total number of 3341water 
bodies under RRR Scheme in the countr y, only 1481 had been shown to be completed 

by 18 September, 2012 as per the information received from Central Ground Water 
Board/State Governments.   Further the tardy pace of completion of works is evident 
from the fact that Rs.374.66 and Rs.291.03 crore  released during 2010 -11 and 2011 -12 
respectively under the Scheme.  The Committee, therefore, would like the Ministry to 
vigorously pursue with the States for eliciting the active participation of standing 
committee of Panchayats to actively implement RRR  Scheme in all the States/UTs 
where it is being implemented.  They also strongly recommend that specific, 
achievable targets be set up for achievements within a specified time -frame so that 
minimum time and cost overruns are encountered during the progress of the Scheme.  
The Committee also desire the Ministry to insist on submission of information relating 
to progress of work undertaken in various States/UTs with specific number of 
frequency.    
5.18 The Committee observe that evaluation and impact assessm ent of the RRR 
Scheme is to be done by independent agencies, and that the Government has 
identified Water and Power Consultancy Services (WAPCOS) Ltd. for this task.  The 
progress report is to be generated and a copy of it is to be sent to the Nodal Office r, 
i.e. Director(WB), Ministry of Water Resources by the end of every month.  The 
Committee are concerned to note that the work of WAPCOS Ltd. regarding concurrent 
evaluation and impact assessment of the RRR Scheme is to commence only after the 
mechanism f or release of funds to WAPCOS Ltd. has been vetted by the concerned 
State Governments.  The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to pursue the matter 
with the State Governments so that the exercise on vetting the mechanism for release 
of funds to WAPCOs  Ltd. is completed by State Governments without delay to ensure 

smooth work of concurrent evaluation/impact evaluation by WAPCOS Ltd. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the further action taken in the matter. 
5.19 The Committee also note that State s are mandatorily required to send 
utilization Certificate(UCs) to the Government of India for release of instalments in 
case of RRR Schemes having external assistance.  Asked to comment how many 
States have furnished such UCs till date and whether the Min istry strictly adhered to 
this norm while releasing additional instalments of funds to the States, the Ministry 
have not furnished the information as desired by the Committee but merely narrated 
the procedure for submission of disbursement claims by the St ates to the Central 
Government.   The Committee would like the Ministry to provide requisite information 
on the number of States/UTs which have furnished UCs to the Government of India for 
release of additional instalments to the States/UTs in case of RRR Schemes having 
external assistance.  The Committee would also like to know the particulars of the 
cases in which the norms for releasing such funds to States/UTs under the Scheme 
were not adhered to or diluted.  
5.20 The Committee note that apart from appr oval/monitoring of RRR Schemes with 
external assistance being carried out by the World Bank, the Ministry is presently 
monitoring the progress of the Scheme of RRR of water bodies through periodic 
reports from the States and through its own field visits.  It is stated that while Regional 
Directors, CGWB are mandatorily required to visit at least two water bodies in the 
concerned States on monthly basis and submit report to the Ministry, the monitoring 
reports from the State Governments are also made availab le to the Ministry in addition 
to the field visit reports of the officials of the Ministry.  The Committee, are, however, 
dissatisfied that while tour reports by officials of CGWB/States having ongoing RRR 

Scheme under implementation are available for all States, the tour reports by officials 
of the Ministry are available only in respect of the States of Odisha, Madhya Pradesh, 
Meghalaya and Bihar out of 15 States/UTs  having RRR programme.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire the Ministry to extend its field visits to the other remaining 
States/UTs also covered under the RRR Scheme and apprise the Committee of the 
broad findings of the reports of such visits to all the 15 States/UTs.  Further, noting 
the reply of the Ministry that the progress of work in the S tate of Andhra Pradesh has 
been found to be rather unsatisfactory, the Committee would like the Ministry to 
request the State Government of Andhra Pradesh to identify the problem hampering 
the progress of work in RRR Schemes in Andhra Pradesh and apprise t he Committee 
of the remedial action taken/proposed to be taken by it at the earliest.  
5.21 Acknowledging that public participation and social awareness among the 
masses is essential for the upkeep of water bodies, the Committee note the 
Government's reply  that the Scheme of RRR of Water Bodies envisages capacity 
building, awareness programme at grass root level for which the State Governments 
are supposed to organize workshops at grass root levels for creating 
awareness/capacity among the stakeholders.   T he Committee would like the Ministry 
to assume a proactive role for capacity building and increasing awareness programme 
at grass root levels, instead of relegating this task to the State Governments' wholly.  
They sincerely believe that the Ministry and i ts subordinate/attached bodies located in 
different States/UTs need to mobilize efforts by sponsoring educational 
institutions/groups/societies/ associations/NGOs for organizing workshops, seminars 
and related activities for creating awareness among all th e stakeholders and the 
general masses as regards the need for repair, conservation and restoration of water 

bodies located across the country.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that care and preservation of water bodies should figure prominentl y in all 
public/mass campaign activities in print and electronic media undertaken by the 
Government in the water resources sector in order to draw the much needed public 
attention to this vital issue. They would also like to be briefed of any further 
developments in this regard.    Further, the Committee strongly feel that 
comprehensive guidelines be formulated and circulated among the States/UTs for 
taking urgent and effective steps for repair, renovation and restoration of water 
bodies.  The Committee, th erefore, urge the Government to explore the possibility of 
drafting comprehensive guidelines on water bodies.   The Committee would like to be 
apprised of action taken by the Government in this regard.   
 5.22 The Committee note that the Government has mad e a plan for convergence of 
efforts made under other programmes such as MNREGA, Watershed Development 
Programme and scheme of Rural Drinking Water Supply.   A Task Force on 
convergence with MNREGA Scheme was also set up with representative from different 
Ministries and Departments, implementing programmes having complementarities 
with MNREGA.  In this regard, it is stated that while MNREGA visualises creation of 
durable community assets with the help of funds released under employment 
guarantee programme, s even schemes of MoWR including rejuvenation and desilting 
of water bodies have been identified.    Moreover, convergence guidelines should have 
been prepared in consultation with the Ministry of Water Resources.  The Committee 
were however informed that fo r the projects where convergence has been proposed 
under MNREGA, no funds have been released under the scheme of RRR of water 
bodies. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should identify 

specific activities/works under MNREGA which could b e dovetailed with the ongoing 
Scheme of RRR on water bodies in order to avoid duplication of works, fund wastage 
and also achieve the long -term objective of rejuvenation and revitalisation of water 
bodies all over the country.  The Committee further desire  to be informed of the 
composition, mandate, power, tenure etc. of the Task Force set up for convergence of 
efforts by the MoWR.    
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                DIP GOGOI 
16 November, 2012                                                Chairman, 
25 Kartika, 1934 (Saka)                   Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
 
     

MINUTES – (i) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2011-12) HELD ON FRIDAY, 14 OCTOBER 2011 
  
The Committee  sat from 1130 hours to 1330 hours in Room No. 62, First Floor, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
         Shri Dip Gogoi – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.       Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi 
3. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske 
4. Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
5. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
6.         Shri Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan. 
7.       Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
8.       Shri Nityananda Pradhan 
       9.         Shri S.P.Y. Reddy  
10.       Shri Arjun Roy 
11.       Shri Jagadanand Singh 
12. Shri Murarilal Singh 
13.        Shri N. Chaluvaraya Swamy 
14.        Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
 
         RAJYA SABHA 
 
15.       Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
16. Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
17.       Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
18. Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan  
19. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
           20. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
  
 
 

SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Director 
 3. Smt. Rita Jailkhani  - Additional Director 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES  
 
1. Shri Dhruv Vijai Singh, Secretary 
2. Shri Sudhir Garg, Joint Secretary (Admn.) 
3. Smt. Ananya Ray, JS&FA 
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Water 
Resources, Environment & Forests, Agriculture, Finance and Rural Development  to the 
sitting of the Committee convened  for briefing the Members  on " Repair, Renovation and 
Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies” 
2. After the introduction, the Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources briefed the 
Committee on the subject.  Thereafter, the Joint Secretary (Admn.), Ministry of Water 
Resources gave power point presentation on 'Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of 
Water Bodies'.   The Members sought clarifications on various issues relating to the 
performance, functions as well as financial status of  the pilot scheme on RRR of water 
bodies to which the representatives replied in part.  The major concerns raised and 
discussed during the sitting of the Committee included the need : 
(i) to extend the period for implementation of pilot scheme RRR of Water Bodies 
beyond one year and carry forward in the 12th Five Year Plan; 
 
(ii) to restore water bodies and create new ones; 
  
(iii)  to have the power of approval and sanction of the scheme with the 
implementing agency; 
 
(iv) for simplifying numerous formalities involved in the scheme; 
 

(v) to protect existing water bodies from encroachment and also to prepare a 
model law for sending to the States; 
 
(vi) to have regular physical verification of water bodies  and check on 
encroachment; 
 
(vii) for Water Resources Department to make water budget f or augmenting the 
water restoration in the country and involvement of public participation in the 
restoration of water bodies projects; 
 
(viii) for mainstreaming of education on water as a precious national resource; 
 
(ix) to tackle the silting of water bodies; 
 
(x) to give directions by the Ministry to the States for recharging of ground water ; 
and 
 
(xi) for identification and notification of the disappearing water bodies. 
 
3. The Committee asked the Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources to furnish writte n 
replies to queries raised by Members during the meeting which could not be replied orally. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept for record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
**************** 
  

MINUTES – (ii) 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2011-12) HELD ON MONDAY, 28 NOVEMBER 2011 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1610 hours in Committee Room 'C', Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
              Shri Dip Gogoi – Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.   Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi 
3.  Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
4.   Shri Haribhau Jawale 
5.   Shri Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan. 
6.   Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
7.   Shri Nityananda Pradhan 
8.           Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
9.         Shri S.P.Y. Reddy 
       10.         Shri Murarilal Singh  
11.         Smt. Annu Tandon 
12.   Dr. P. Venugopal 
13.         Shri Sajjan Singh Verma 
 
         
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
14.         Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
15.   Shri Mangala Kisan 
16.       Shri Ranjitsinh Vijaysinh Mohite-Patil      
           17.   Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
  
1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Director 
 3. Smt. Rita Jailkhani  - Additional Director 
 

 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES  
 
1. Shri Dhruv Vijai Singh, Secretary 
2. Shri M.E. Haque, Member (WP&P), CWC 
3. Shri N. Muruganandam, Joint Secretary, Deptt. of Rural Development 
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministr ies of Water 
Resources, Rural Development  and Environment & Forests  to the sitting of the Committee 
convened for taking evidence  on "Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of Water 
Bodies." 
2. After the introduction, the Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources initiated the 
deliberation on the s ubject.    The Members then raised some queries to which the 
representatives replied.  The major concerns raised during the sitting of the Committee 
included the following : 
(i) the need  to redevelop, renovate and restore water bodies which have 
deteriorated due to unauthorized dumping and discharge; 
(ii) to sensitize the State Governments in view of the encroachments being made on 
water bodies by local bodies like municipalities and panchayats and others; 
(iii) to care for water bodies in rural areas so that they are not  lost, as also to turn 
water bodies into aesthetic, decorative objects; 
(iv) to secure coordinated efforts among various Ministries for solution of problems 
associated with water bodies; 
(v) the need to focus on small irrigation projects than those of big dams; 
(vi) need to first propagate the importance of RRR scheme on irrigation 
Departments; 
 

(vii) to make use of MNREGA Scheme for repair, renovation and restoration of  
      water bodies at village level; 
(viii) the need for direct funding of RRR Scheme than through convergence with     
      other schemes like MNREGA; 
(ix)       not to mix RRR Scheme with MNREGA Scheme, but to dig ponds under      
       the Scheme in States with scanty rains; and  
(x)        MNREGA Scheme being labour-oriented and not flexible, should not be used    
       beyond a point in RRR Scheme. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
3. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept for record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
**************** 
 

MINUTES – (iii) 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2011-12) HELD ON THURSDAY, 30 AUGUST 2012 
   
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1545 hours in Room No. 62, First Floor, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Dip Gogoi – Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske 
3. Shri Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan 
4. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
5. Shri S.P.Y. Reddy 
6. Shri Arjun Roy 
7. Shri Jagadanand Singh 
8. Smt. Annu Tandon 
9. Shri Sajjan Singh Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
11. Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
12. Dr. Ashok S. Ganguly 
13. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar  - Director 
2. Smt. Rita Jailkhani    - Additional Director 
  
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.  
3. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Reports on 

(i)  Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/ observations 
contained in the Eleventh Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on "Review of Central Soil 
and Materials Research Station"; and  
(ii)  Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies. 
4. After deliberation, the Committee adopted the draft Report at Sl. No. (i) above without 
any modification.  The Committee adopted the draft Report at Sl. No. (ii) above with the 
modifications/amendments shown in the Annexure. 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to fina lize both the above mentioned 
Reports in the light of the amendments suggested and present the same to the Hon‟ble 
Speaker/both the Houses of Parliament.  
The Committee then adjourned 

 ANNEXURE 
(MODIFICATIONS/AMENDMENTS MADE BY STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES IN THEIR DRAFT REPORT ON REPAIR, RENOVATION AND 
RESTORATION OF WATER BODIES AT THEIR SITTING HELD ON 30 AUGUST 2012) 
 
Page 13, 
Para 2.21 
Line 7 
 
For …..an alarming number of water bodies are becoming permanently 
unusable but the Government have no precise figures with them. 
 
Read “….an alarming number of water bodies are becoming permanently 
unusable.  What the Committee find worrisome and unpleasant to note 
in this regard is that despite clearly identifying the causes for 
deterioration of the qu ality of water, the Government has not cared to 
compile precise figures on the number and status of water bodies.” 
 
Page 34, 
Para No. 3.39 
Line 5 
 
For ….which dents a gaping loop-hole in the otherwise laudable scheme. 
 
Read “….which dents a gaping loop -hole in the otherwise laudable scheme, 
particularly as it is a necessity to preserve the water bodies.” 
 
Page 36 
Para No. 3.41 
 
After  They would like to be apprised of further action taken by Government in 
this regard. 
 
Add The Committee would also like to e mphasise on the need for ensuring 
proper coordination amongst the Ministries concerned in executing the 
programme. 
 
Page 42 
Para No. 4.12 
Line 7 
 
For  …..and crucial loan repayment by the  States to World Bank, so that no 
scope for default is left in this regard, which could adversely dent 
India’s credit worthiness in the eyes of international financial 
institutions. 
Read ….as well as loan repayment. 

MINUTES – (iv) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2012-13) HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 31 OCTOBER 2012 
  
The Committee sat from 1130 hours to 1200 hours in Committee Room 'D', Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  Shri Dip Gogoi – Chairman 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Kamlesh Balmiki 
3. Dr. Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan 
4. Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
5. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
6. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal  
7. Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao 
8. Dr. P. Venugopal 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
10. Smt. Vandana Chavan 
11. Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
12. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
13. Shri A.V. Swamy 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar  - Director 
2. Smt. Rita Jailkhani    - Additional Director 
  
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.   
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the draft Reports on (i)  Action Taken by 
Government on the recommendations/ observations contained in the Eleventh Report         
(15th Lok Sabha) on "Review of Central Soil and Materials Research Station"; and (ii)  Repair,  

Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies.   After deliberation, the Committee adopted the 
above two draft Reports without any modification.   
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to present the above two Reports to 
both the Houses of Parliament in the ensuing Session. 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
 
 
 
  

Appendix – I 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Joint Convergence Guideline 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA) 
 
(Ministry of Rural Development) 
& 
 
Programmes of Water Resources 
 
(Ministry of Water Resources) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
ACRONYMS 
 
 
 
1. AWP  Annual Work Plan 
 
2. AIBP  Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme  
 
3. BPL  Below Poverty Line 
 
4. BRG  Block Resource Group 
 
5. CEO  Chief Executive Officer 
 
6. CAD  Command Area development 
 
7. CADWM   Command Area Development and Water Management 
 
8. DLIC  District Level Implementation Committee 
 
9. DPC  District Programme Coordinator 
 
10. DRG  District Resource Group 
 
11. ERM  Extension, Renovation & Modernization 
 
12. GP  Gram Panchayat 
 
13. IAY  Indira Awas Yojana 
 
14. IEC  Information Education & Communication 
 
15. IP  Intermediate Panchayat 
 
16. LR  Land Reform 
 
17. MIS  Management Information System 
 
18. MORD  Ministry of Rural Development 
 
19. MOWR  Ministry of Water Resources 
 
20. NREGA  National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
 
21. NREGS  National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme 
 
22. OFD  On- Farm Development 
 
23. PRIs  Panchayati Raj Institutions 
 
24. PMU  Project Management Unit 
 
25. RD  Rural Development 
 
26. RRR  Repair, Renovation and Restoration 
 
27. SC  Scheduled Caste 
 
28. ST  Scheduled Tribe 
 
29. SGSY  Swaranjayanti Grameen Swarozgar Yojana 
 
30. TAC  Technical Advisory Committee 
 
31. WR  Water Resources 
 
32. WUA  Water Users Association 
 
33. ZP  Zila Parishad 

 
 
 
1.  NREGA: Introduction 
 
 
The National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA), notified on September 7, 
2005, marked a paradigm shift from the previous wage employment  programmes  with its 
rights-based   approach   that  makes   the  Government   legally   accountable   for  providing 
employment to those  who demand it. T he Act aims at enha ncing livelihood security of 
households in rural areas of the country by providing at least one hundred days of guaranteed 
wage employment in a financial year to every household whose adult members volunteer to 
do unskilled manual work. 
The  primary  objective  of  the  Act  is  augmenting  wage  employment.  Its  auxiliary 
objective is strengthening natural resource management through works that address causes of 
chronic poverty like drought/ Degradation of l and in command areas and so encourage 
sustainable development. Further, NREGA by encouraging works on water harvesting, soil 
conservation, Irrigation, flood protection, afforestation and plantation, helps to insulate local 
community   from   adverse   effects   of   climate   change   the   process   outcomes   include 
strengthening grass root processes of democracy and infusing transparency and accountability 
in governance. 
 
Under NREGA large sums of public  investments are made.   Leveraging these 
investments   towards  sustainable   livelihood  requires  inter-sectoral   convergence.     Since 
NREGA planning is decent ralized and funds transferred are untied, works can be planned/ 
structured  and  executed  as  per  local  specific  requirements.     NR EGA  thus  becomes  a 
significant entry point for convergence with other development programmes. 
 
Such inter sectoral convergence becomes instrumental towards 
 
™  Establishing  synergy  among  different  government  programmes  in  planning  & 
implementation to optimize use of public investments 
™   Enhancing economic Opportunities 
™  Strengthening Democratic Processes 
™  Mitigating the effects of Climate Change 
™  Creating conditions for sustainable Development 
 
2. Convergence: 
 
Convergence is an evolving process and while   broad principles can be laid out at the 
Centre, the actual contours of convergence will be determined by the resources at the district 
and the field level. Also, to fully identify the possibilities of convergence, it may be necessary 
to make a beginning with select programmes, so that the experience of implementation may 
further deepen to refine strategies for convergence. 
 
With this perspective, a Task  Force on Convergence with NREGA was set up with 
representatives  from different Ministries and Departments,  implementing  programmes with 
complementarities   with  NREGA.  The  Task  Force  recommended  beginning  with  select 
 

programmes of select Ministries.   The Ministry of Water Resources which was represented 
on t he Task Force was identified as an important partner to NREGA, as more than 50% of 
NREGA  works  relate  to  water  conservation/  management.    Possibilities  of  convergence 
between NREGA and the programmes of MoWR were discussed between the two Ministries 
and based on these discussions,  convergence  areas and modalities were identified  and the 
following guidelines for convergence of water conservation/ irrigation works taken up under 
NREGA and under the programmes of the MoWR are being issued. 
 
3. Convergence between NREGA and Programmes of MoWR. 
 
Convergence  between  NREGA  and Programmes  of MoWR is mutually  beneficial. 
There is a gap between the irrigation potential created and that utilised. Many of the irrigation 
projects in the country have also been under operation below their potential due to inadequate 
maintenance, which is one of the important factor for reduced irrigation efficiency at project 
level. This has resulted in the problem of low efficiency of water usage and low productivity. 
Increasing  trend  of  water  logging,  salinity  and  alkalinity  is  offsetting  the  advantages  of 
irrigation by rendering the affected areas unproductive or under-productive.  The process of 
reclamation is far exceeded by an additional area becoming water logged and saline/alkaline. 
 
There are seven programme of MOWR being implemented in the country with works 
similar or complementary to NREGA works.  Details may be seen in Annexure 1. 
 
4.  Parameters of Convergence: 
 
Works identified under NREGA for convergence  will be planned and executed within the 
parameters of NREGA i.e. 
 
a)          The cost of material component of projects including the wages of the skilled and 
semi-skilled workers taken up under the scheme shall not exceed forty percent of the total 
project cost. 
b)        As far as practicable, a task funded under the scheme shall be performed by using 
manual labor and not machines. 
c)         No Contractors will be engaged. 
 
5. Modalities for Convergence 
In operational terms, convergence of activities under various schemes of Ministry of Water 
Resources with NREGS will require coordination between these programmes at the levels of 
5.1Management 
5.2 Planning 
5.3Works 
 
 
5.1 Management 
 
5.1.1)  The  District  Programme  Coordinator,  NREGA  (Collector/CEO)    will  constitute  a 
District  Resource  Group(DRG)    at the district  level  with  representatives  from  the Water 
Resources   Department,   Department of R ural Development( NREGA and SGSY) and 
Panchayati  Raj  and  a  s imilar  resource  group  at  the  Block  level  (BRG)  will  also  be 
constituted. 
 
 
 

5.1.2) The  groups will facilitate 
a.         Knowledge sharing.   Familiarization of all the members of the group on guidelines 
of Water Resources schemes and NREGS.   Th is will clarify the programme parameters for 
convergence. 
 
b.         Planning.  Since under both programmes, there are ongoing activities as well as those 
that have to be planned afresh, the group will have to determine the nature of interventions in 
the ongoing works and lay down a plan ning process that conforms to the guidelines of both 
programmes for the activities that have to be planned anew. 
c.         Communication.  Since  both programmes  aim at participatory  processes,  effective 
IEC  with  the  local  community,   user  groups,  workers  will  have  to  be  planned  and 
implemented.  .. 
d.         Training:  Training of personnel/agencies responsible  for NREGS and Programmes 
of Water Resources must be planned and  implemented 
e.         Technical  support:   Techno-feasible  norms for works selection,  technical  designs 
and appropriate technologies for water  bodies restoration/water harvesting/ ground water 
recharge/Irrigation    projects, etc. will have to be formulated by technical experts available 
with Water Resources Department who would also provide technical support for supervision 
and  evaluation   of  NREGA   works  so  that  they  conform  to  appropriate   designs  and 
technologies. 
f.         Resource Pooling: 
i.Human   Resources: Under NREGA dedicated personnel are to be deployed.   NREGA 
also permits      dedicated personnel for works.  Such personnel should be appropriately 
trained by the professionals of the WR Dept in water management technologies. 
ii.Financial:  Information  on  financial  resources  available  and  expected  to  be  made 
available in the ensuing years will be shared.   This will determine the quantum of 
works/activities that can be taken up and indicate where activity convergence will enable 
gap-filling or augmentation in scale/value and list out activities to be funded under both 
the programmes separately. 
iii.Informational:    Data  management  could  be  converged  through  the  use  of  MIS  of 
NREGS  which  provides  work wise/ beneficiary  wise details.   Any additional  feature 
required by the WR Dept may be incorporated in the NREGS MIS, after discussion with 
the Ministry of RD.   The GIS for ground water data developed by WR Dept may be 
made available for use for planning and executing NREGA water related works. 
g. Monitoring  and evaluation.   Joint monitoring  and supervision  of activities  should be 
planned.   Baseline assessment,  Concurrent  appraisal  and documentation  and evaluation  of 
impact of WR schemes and NREGS on a set of indicators for creation of irrigation potential 
ground water recharge and efficient use of irrigation systems and their effectiveness in 
responding to the needs of the community could be initiated. Quantification  of benefits of 
works undertaken could also be taken up. 
 
5.2 Planning: 
Guidelines  of NREGA stipulate the formulation  of perspective  plan to facilitate  advance 
planning and to provide a development perspective for the district.  The aim is to identify the 
types of NRE GA works that should be encouraged in the district and the potential linkages 
between these works and long term employment generation and sustained development. The 
NREGA perspective plan identifies the needs and gaps in the  district in all  sectors, not just 
related to works permissible under NREGA.  Thus, the planning of water resources projects 
 

is a necessary factor in the NREGA perspective plan. Multilayer planning of projects of WR 
Dept can be dovetailed in the NREGA perspective plan. 
 
The Annual Work Plan (AWP) of NREGA lists the shelf of projects recommended by the 
Gram Sabha and finalized by the Gram Panchayat/IP/ZP. AWP will be broadly based on the 
perspective plan but must be endorsed by the Gram Sabha/PRIs as per the Act. The NREGA 
plan will be based on the permissible works under Schedule I of the Act. 
 
For this purpose, Block level resource persons may be trai ned on the methodology of 
convergence  between  WR  schemes  and  NREGS.    They  will  guide  the  Gram  Sabha  in 
preparing the Village Plan, so that the AWP of NREGS accommodates the requirements of 
the WR projects of WR department in a complementary manner and the selection of works, 
and their sequence is dovetailed into a well-linked programme. 
 
The institutional platform for such dovetailing will be the Gram Sabha at the village level, 
and then the GP.  The Programme Officer and the BRG at the Block level and the DPC and 
the DRG at the district level, will ensure that the selection of works under NREGS and WR 
programmes are in mutual coordination. The DRG will ensure that in converging the plans of 
both the programmes, technical quality of th e plan is maintained as per the norms of water 
resources  programmes.      The  Department  of Water  Resources  will  share  its  database  of 
ground/surface water resources for that district with the group  to e nable the formulation of 
feasible water related projects as a result of NREGA planning process. 
 
For integrated development of irrigated area, it is necessary that the project of a village  is 
prepared on Command Area Development approach, integrating all the activities into a 
project. In this project, the activities allowed under NREGA and those to be covered under 
schemes of MoWR may be clearly indicated. 
 
All the works/ activities required for the integrated development of the command area 
will be shown clearly in terms of the size of area/ work, estimated cost, and the programme 
under which these are to be covered, so as to ensure that all the required works/activities have 
been proposed and there is no duplicity. A typical exercise is given at Annexure-2. 
 
The Command  area proposed  for development  under NREGA  and the area under 
ongoing  programmes  of  MOWR  have  to  be  incorporated  in    the  projects  separately. 
However, with every project report, a stateme nt showing different works/activities 
proposed  under  different  programmes  be  attached,  so  that  it  is  ensured  that  all  the 
required works/activities have been proposed and also there is no duplicity. 
 
Since the District Collector / CEO Zila Parishad are coordinators of programmes at district 
level   related   to  Agriculture   Development,   therefore,   they   should   converge   all  these 
programmes starting from planning to monitoring, for integrated development of the area. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
5.3 Works: 
 
Works under NREGS may be of four categories: (i) Works approved in the current 
year but not yet started (ii) Ongoing works (iii)     Works completed (iv) Works yet to be 
selected for the next financial year (as part of the  annual planning process). Therefore, 
convergence would need to be planned, keeping in view of these varying stages of works. 
 
The operation may be undertaken at three levels.  In case of the first scenario, where works 
have  been  included  in  the  shelf  of  projects,  but  not  started  yet,  the  Shelf  of  projects 
formulated under NREGS may be re-scrutinized to assess the feasibility of works selected. 
The  Water  Resources  department  may  share  their  data  base  on  ground/surface  water 
resources in that area/district so that it may be assessed to appropriate selection of works.    In 
case of the second  and third scenarios,  the expertise  of the Water  Resources  department 
should be marshalled for quality supervision, and in planning the next set of activities.    The 
List of works completed/ taken up will be shared with Dept. of Water Resources which will 
indicate  appropriate  activities/technologies  for each work for value addition.     In case of 
planning new works, the suggestions given above in Para 5.2 may be considered. 
 
6. Convergence through works may be effected in any of the following ways: 
A.  Gap filling through NREGS for similar work under Water Resources Schemes 
B.  Dovetailing inputs into a Common Project 
C.  Area Approach 
D.  Value addition through  NREGA works 
E.  Technical  support  for  ensuring  quality  in  planning,  selection  and  execution  of 
NREGA works 
 
A) Gap Filling/ Enhancing scale 
 
Under this, permissible works may be converged for Gap Filling/ Enhancing scale resources 
for common needs and inputs. 
 
I)   Artificial Recharge of Ground Water under the schemes of Dug well recharge 
and Ground Water Management and Regulation: 
 
Artificial  recharge  of ground  water  is one of the most  efficient  ground  water 
management tools for ensuring sustainability of ground water resources. Many areas of the 
country   having   limited   aquifer   storage   potential   are  facing   acute   problems   of  over 
exploitation and depletion of ground  water resources. Presently two schemes viz. Dug well 
recharge  scheme  and Ground  Water  Management  and Regulation  are being  implemented 
under  Ministry  of Water  Resources.  These  programmes  may  be integrated  with  NREGA 
initiatives/projects. 
 
II) Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies: 
 
The Scheme of RRR of Water Bodies includes the comprehensive  improvement  of 
selected tank systems, catchment area treatment, command area development  and capacity 
building of stakeholders.   There is a provision of Rs. 2750 crore for these works during XI 
Plan. Under different programmes, the Govt. of India and the State Governments channelize 

funds, which can easily meet the requirement of funding some of the components of projects 
relating to RRR of water bodies.   However, in order to projectise this investment in a way 
that can facilitate  comprehensive  rehabilitation  and subsequent  management  of the water 
bodies, it is  necessary that these partial investments are dovetailed and integrated with 
investments under NREGS. 
 
The convergence of this project with related activities under NREGA will  maximise 
benefits.   Accordingly, common projects may be prepared and implemented. 
 
III) Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP): 
 
This programme is for Major, Medium  and Minor Irrigation Projects and Extension, 
Renovation & Modernization  of Irrigation projects which (a) having investment clearance of 
Planning Commission  can be completed in the next four financial years (b) are not receiving 
any other form of financial assistance. This programme is being implemented throughout the 
country.      Surface  Minor Irrigation Schemes of the states of North East, Hilly states (HP, 
Sikkim,  J&K and Uttaranchal)  and drought  prone and tribal districts  are also eligible  for 
assistance under the programme. 
 
Central grant at the rate of 90% of the estimated cost for completion of the project is 
provided  in  the  special  category  states,  projects  in  KBK  districts  in  Orissa  and  project 
benefitting  the tribal areas, drought prone and flood prone areas.   For major and medium 
projects in other areas central grant is provided at the rate of 25% of the estimated cost. 
 
The  earth  works  like  embankment   construction,  desilting  of  canal  etc.,  minor 
irrigation schemes can also be taken up under NREGA with close coordination and planning 
with the project implementing agencies. 
 
 
 
IV) Flood Management Programme: 
 
Flood Management  Works like construction/  r aising and strengthening  of 
embankments, anti-erosion works, drainage development, flood proofing works etc. are being 
funded  by  the  Ministry  of  Water  Resources  under  the  Flood  Management  Programme. 
Smaller schemes costing up to Rs.  one crore involving the labour oriented flood management 
works, and not covered under this programme can be taken up under NREGA. 
 
 
 
 
B) Dovetailing inputs into a common Project: 
 
I) Farmer’s Participatory Action Research Programme (FPARP): 
 
Ministry   of  Water  Resources   is  implementing   this  programme   at  5,000  sites 
throughout  the country.  Under  this  programme  new  irrigation  technologies  developed  by 
various agricultural universities, research institutes, etc. are being demonstrated to farmers as 
a measure of cr eating awareness amongst farmers to save water. There are number of 
technologies where involvement of manpower is of very high magnitude such as construction 
of Jal Kund, in situ moisture  conservation,  etc.   These programmes  can also be taken up 
under NREGA. 
 
 

C) Area Approach 
 
I) Command Area Development & Water Management Programme (CADWM): 
 
Command  area development  and water management  programme  aims at   efficient 
utilisation  of irrigation  water for optimising  agricultural  productivity  and production  from 
irrigated lands in a coordinated  manner on a sustainable basis   and increasing the pace of 
tackling the problem of waterlogging  by bringing in newer technologies  like sub- surface 
drainage and bio-drainage under the realm of this programme. 
 
The works allowed under NREGA are such that they cover almost all the activities 
required for C ommand Area Development. Planning NREGA works with    command area 
development from outlet of drain of a command area to Water source  will yield  benefits in 
terms  of  better  utilisation  of  irrigation  potential  created,  better  efficiency  of  water  use, 
increase  in  intensity  of  irrig ation,  increase  in  agriculture  production  and  productivity, 
increase in farmer’s income etc. 
 
Works/ activities required under CADWM are- 
 
i) Renovation  and de-silting  of existing  irrigation  tanks  and control  structures  within  the 
irrigated Commands. 
 
ii)   Correction of system deficiencies above outlet up to distributaries of   4.25 cumec (150 
cusec) capacity. 
 
iii) Construction of field channels 
 
iv) Full package On- Farm Development (OFD) Works including Field channels, realignment 
of field boundaries, land levelling/ shaping. 
 
v) Construction of Field, intermediate and Link drains 
vi) Land levelling and shaping 
vii)  Conjunctive  use  of  surface  water  and  ground  water-  It  serves  the  dual  purpose  of 
increasing the area under irrigation on the o ne hand through supplementing canal water for 
irrigation and reduces water logging on the other. 
 
viii) Reclamation of water logged areas in irrigated commands of CAD Projects. 
 
Out of these activities, three activities at Sl. No. i), vi) and vii) have now been deleted 
from CADWM, however, these activities are permitted under NREGA. 
 
The work of Irrigat ion Canal is also  permitted under NREGA. Therefore, under the 
activity,  “Correction  of system deficiencies  above outlet up to distributaries  of 150 cusec 
capacity”, the complete work or the earthwork part can also be taken up under NREGA as a 
gap filling, wherever required. 
 
Similarly,  the  work  of Irrigation  facility,  Land  Development,  is  covered  under  NREGA. 
Therefore, these works on the Individual land of SC/ST/BPL/ Beneficiary of Land Reform 
and IAY can be carried out under NREGA as a gap filling and on Individual land of other 
than SC/ST/BPL/ Beneficiary of Land Reform and IAY can be carried out under CADWM. 
 
 

In view of above, for integrated development  of Command area, the project of a 
Command area should be prepared by integrating all the activities into a whole project with 
convergence. Activities allowed under NREGA be planned / covered under NREGA and left 
over work be covered under programmes of the Ministry of Water Resources. 
 
The convergence has been elaborated in detail at Annexure-2. 
 
 
 
D. Value Addition: 
 
The work of Canal plantation may be carried out in the Command area under NREGA 
as value addition. The work of Canal fair weather road can  also be taken up under NREGA. 
 
E. Technical support: 
The technical norms i.e. required Survey, Planning, Design as p er Technical Manual 
being  used  by the WR  department,  is to be followed,  so that the works  are sustainable, 
productive  and  economical.    For  illustration,  in Command  Area  Development  and  water 
Management Programme, Planning, Designing and specification are to be followed as per the 
Guidelines / manual of Water Resource Department. 
 
7.  Cost Norms: 
 
Under  NREGA,  there  is  neither  cost  norm  for  the  area  nor  unit  cost  for  work  / 
Activity. However, the unit cost for works/ activity in Command areas to be carried out under 
NREGS will also be as per cost norms / unit cost under CADWM, AIBP and RRR of Water 
Bodies of Water Resource Department in the area/ local requirement. 
 
8. Execution: 
 
i) 50 % of Works under NREGA like Desilting of tanks and canals, Construction of Field 
Channel, Field Drains etc. which are labor intensive can be executed by the Panchayat with 
the guidance of District Level Implementation Committee of water resource programmes and 
concerned Technical staff of Water Resource Department. 
 
ii) 50% work in the Command area under NREGA, like Correction of system deficiencies 
above  outlet  up to distributaries  of 150 cusec  and construction  of intermediate  and Link 
drains   etc.   be  assigned   to  the  concerned   water   user   associations.   In  Water   User’s 
Associations,  which are constituted in every Command area, one member from Panchayat 
should be co-opted in such areas. 
 
In the  areas, not covered under CADWM project, these Works/ activities should be 
assigned to the concerned line department i.e. Water Resource Department. 
 
9.  Monitoring: 
 
The Ministries of Water Resources and Rural Development   will jointly monitor the 
implementation  of the scheme and ensure concurrent evaluation through quarterly physical 
and   financial   reports,   inspection   visits,   meetings   with   senior   officers   of   the   State 
Governments, workshops for experie nce sharing, learning and dissemination and impact 
assessment  studies,  etc.    The  social  audit  of the  project(s)  should  be  carried  out  by  the 
concerned Gram Sabha. The monitoring of the work(s) should be done with the association of 

the Standing Committee of the Panchayat at the appropriate level. At the village level, the 
focal point for organization and implementation of project will be the WUA of command area 
farmers and other eligible tank users such as fisherman etc. The WUA will play an active role 
in  the  planning,  implementation,   supervision,  maintenance  of  tank  systems  and  other 
necessary activities.  The WUA should report to the Gram Sabha in these matters from time 
to time. However, for the convergence of different programmes with NREGS the monitoring 
agency independent of the construction agency will be appropriate. District Collector who is 
District Programme Coordinator NREGA as well as head of DLIC will monitor all aspects of 
implementation  and convergence and thereby bring about a qualitative improvement in the 
implementation of the programmes. 
 
 
10. Post Project Management: 
 
Post Project Management, particularly after completion of the project, for sustainability is 
very necessary.  Therefore, all projects, depending on the nature of works involved in these 
projects, after completion should be handed over to Water  Users’ 
Associations/PRIs/Departments  concerned,  as the case may be, for their use   and related 
repair and maintenance etc. 
 
11. Non -Negotiable in work execution: 
 
a.   Only Job Card holders to be employed for NREGA component. 
b.   Muster rolls to be maintained on work site, with copies in the Gram Panchayat and to 
be electronically maintained on nrega.nic.in 
c.   Social Audits to be done through Gram Sabhas. 
d.   Wage payments will be through  no-frills accounts in Banks/Post Office 
 
 
12. Pilots for convergence of programmes: 
 
In selected districts representing a bio-geographic, pilot projects on convergence may 
be taken up.  These will be operationalised in accordance with the processes suggested above. 
The pilots will be like action research  and will be concurrently  evaluated  for identifying 
further possibilities and up scaling. 
 
13.  Funding will be through NREGA and WR programmes:  Procedure for settlement of 
accounts, inclusion of proje cts, establishing coordination at diffe rent levels for effective 
implementation  of converged project   proposals, details of monitoring and evaluation   etc. 
will be decided subsequently in con sultation with concerned State Governments wherein the 
pilot projects are taken. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

12 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-1: Objective, funding, subsidy, unit cost, norms, area coverage, institutional framework etc. under NREGS and the different 
programmes of water resource department are as follows-- 
S.N 
O 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(A) 
Content 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(B) 
NREGS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) 
Programmes under Water Resource Department 
Command 
Area 
Developme 
nt  & 
Water 
Manageme 
nt 
(CADWM) 
 
(D) 
Repair, Renovation 
and Rest oration of 
Water Bodies. 
 
 
 
 
 
(E) 
Dug  well 
Recharge 
Scheme 
 
 
 
 
 
(F) 
Ground  water 
management 
and  Regulation 
Scheme. 
 
 
 
 
(G) 
Flood 
Control   and 
River 
management 
Works. 
 
 
 
 
(H) 
Accelerate 
d 
Irrigation 
Benefits 
Programm 
e (AIBP) 
(I) 
Farmer’s 
participation 
Action 
Research 
Programme 
(FPARP). 
 
(J) 
1. Objective i)  To  enhance 
livelihood 
security in rural 
areas   by 
providing    at 
least  100  days 
of  guaranteed 
wage 
employment  in 
a financial year 
to   every 
household 
whose   adult 
members 
volunteer to do 
unskilled 
Efficient 
utilization 
of  created 
irrigation 
potential. 
To  restore  and 
augment storage 
capacities of water 
bodies., and a lso to 
recover and extend 
their lost irrigation 
potential 
To  recharge 
ground water 
To demonstrate 
the effi cacy of 
artificial 
recharge  &  rain 
water harvesting 
techniques. 
To  take  up 
flood 
management 
works   in   an 
integrated 
manner. 
Major, 
medium, 
and  minor 
irrigation 
projects and 
Extension, 
Renovation 
& 
moderniza- 
tion   of 
major  and 
medium 
irrigation 
projects. 
Field 
demonstration 
of technologies 
developed   by 
the  institutes 
which    will 
enhance  yield 
and income per 
drop of water. 

13 
 
 
 
 
 
  manual work. 
ii)  Creation  of 
durable  assets 
and 
strengthening 
the   livelihood 
resource    base 
of  the   rural 
poor. 
       
2. Funding/ 
Subsidy 
i)  100%  on 
unskilled 
labour and 
ii) 75 % of the 
Cost    of 
material  and 
wages   for 
skilled  and 
semi-skilled 
workers. 
Funding 
pattern  of 
50:    50 
between 
centre  and 
states, State 
share 
include   10 
% 
contributio 
n by the 
beneficiary. 
On 
software 
activities 
subsidy 100 
to75%. 
Funding    pattern    of 
25: 75 be tween centre 
and states for water 
bodies   under 
domestic support for 
non-special category 
states and 90:10  for 
special     category 
states as well as naxal 
affected/ drought 
prone/  tribal  areas. 
For ex ternally aided 
programmes    (EAP), 
75%   is   lo an   taken 
from the world  bank 
and passed  on  to the 
concerned states on 
back   to   back   basis 
and is to be repaid by 
the  states.  The 
balance 25% is taken 
as   liability   of   GOI 
100% subsidy 
to Marginal & 
Small 
farmers. 50% 
subsidy to 
other farmers. 
100% funding 
from Central 
Government. 
Special 
Category 
States- 
90:10 
between 
centre  and 
states. 
Other States- 
75:25 
between 
centre  and 
states. 
For 
restoration  of 
damaged 
flood 
management 
works-90:10 
between 
centre  and 
states. 
Central 
grant   90% 
to  special 
category 
states 
(North- 
Eastern 
States, 
drought 
prone   area, 
tribal  area 
&  flood 
prone  area). 
25%  to 
Non-special 
category 
states. 
100%   funding 
from  MoWR  . 
Expenditure 
incurred  above 
the  approved 
cost   will  be 
borne   by   the 
Institutes 
themselves. 

14 
 
 
 
 
 
    which is al so taken as 
loan from the World 
bank. Central funding 
in  f orm  of  grant  to 
the State. 
     
3. Unit Cost/ 
Cost 
norms 
Nil i) Correction 
of  system 
deficiencies 
above 
Outlet up to 
distributarie 
s              of 
150cusec 
capacity – 
Rs.   4000 
per ha. 
To       Field 
Drains--- 
Rs.   5000 
per ha. 
Rs.40000-45000  per 
hectare. 
Unit  cost  Rs. 
3600   to   Rs. 
5700, varying 
from state to 
state 
As  per  local 
requirement 
As  per  local 
requirement 
project cost 
based on 
design and 
B.S.R. 
Rs. 50,000/- or 
the  approved 
cost   per 
demonstration 
whichever     is 
less, limited to 
100 
demonstration 
per institute. 
4. Area 
coverage 
Entire country. Command 
areas   of 
Major  & 
Medium 
Irrigation 
Project  in 
Plane  areas 
and  Minor 
irrigation 
Project also 
Water bodi es having 
original irrigation 
culturable command 
area of 20 ha. Up to 
2000 hectare will be 
considered under 
externally aided 
programme. For 
scheme  under 
domestic support, the 
Hard  rock 
areas   in   the 
states of A.P., 
Gujarat, 
Karnataka, 
Madhya 
Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, 
Rajasthan and 
Tamil Nadu. 
Over- exploited/ 
Critical blocks, 
urban areas 
showing steep 
decline in GW, 
Drought     prone 
&water scarcity 
area,  Costal 
areas, Sub- 
mountainous/ 
Entire 
country 
Projects   on 
eligibility 
criteria 
from  Entire 
country. 
Command 
areas 

15 
 
 
 
 
 
   in  Hilly 
areas. 
proposals  will  be for 
irrigation  as  well  as 
for non irrigation 
tanks. Private owned 
water bodies not 
covered. 
 hilly  areas, 
Areas   with 
geogenic 
contamination of 
GW. 
   
5. Institutio 
nal 
frame- 
work 
i)Central 
Employment 
Guarantee 
Council 
ii)State 
employment 
Guarantee 
Council 
iii)District 
Panchayat 
iv) 
Intermediate 
Panchayat 
v)  Village 
Panchayat, 
gram sabha 
District 
Collector  is 
the  District 
coordinator 
NREGA 
i)  State 
Level 
Committee. 
ii)Water 
Users 
Association 
i)  State  Technical 
Advisory committee. 
ii)   District   level 
Implementation 
Committee.   Chaired 
by District collector. 
iii)    Water  Users 
Association. 
i)State   Level 
Steering 
Committee 
(SLSC) 
ii)  District 
level 
Implementati 
on 
Committee. 
Chaired  by 
District 
collector. 
i)State  level 
Technical 
Coordination 
Committee(SLT 
CC) 
ii)Local 
Technical 
Coordination 
Committee 
(LTCC)  Chaired 
by  District 
collector 
i) State TAC, 
State Flood 
control 
Board. 
ii)Water 
Resources 
Department 
i)State 
Level 
Committee 
 

16 
 
 
 
 
 
6. Conver-
gence 
Convergence 
of NREGA 
funds  with 
funds  from 
other  sources 
for the creation 
of  durable 
assets is 
permissible 
The drafted 
schemes 
henceforth 
should 
provide 
clear 
Linkages, 
Integration 
and conver-
gence  to 
such 
schemes for 
holistic 
develop- 
ment. 
Issues    on 
convergence of the 
project with related 
activities under other 
schemes should be 
achieved and this 
aspect should  be 
brought out clearly. 
 The work would 
be implemented 
as per guidelines 
framed under 
NREGS by the 
MORD. 
 Earth works 
like 
Desilting  of 
canal etc. 
 
   

17 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-2:A typical exercise  on the identification of  the works/ activities to be covered under NREGS, CADWM, AIBP, Dug Well Recharge 
and Ground Water Management and Regulation Scheme, Flood Management Programme, FPARP  and RRR of water bodies of Water Resource 
Department, separately with the size of area/ work, estimated cost, programme under which proposed and the year in which proposed. 
Name of Command area: ------------, Area of the Command ------------ Name of Village: ----------------, Name of Panchayat/Block/District: 
 
 
S.N 
o. 
Work/Activity Kind of Area Size  of 
area 
 
/work 
Esti 
mat 
ed 
Cost 
 
(lak 
h) 
Programme 
 
Under  which 
Proposed 
Year in which Proposed 
2009 
-10 
2010- 
11 
2011- 
12 
2012 
-13 
(i) Renovation    of   traditional    water 
bodies/ Desilting 
        
 a)  Renovation  and  de-silting  of 
existing irrigation tanks. 
Common  land  /Government 
land 
  NREGA     
 a)  Reno vation  and  de-silting  of 
existing irrigation tanks and control 
structures within the irrigated 
Commands. 
Common  land  /Government 
land 
  RRR of water 
bodies/ 
CADWM 
Programme 
    
(ii) Irrigation   canals   including   minor 
irrigation 
        
  
a)  Major,   Medium,   and  Extension, 
Renovation  &  Modernization 
 
 
land acquired by the Govt. for 
  AIBP     

18 
 
 
 
 
 
 irrigation  projects  (other  than  earth 
work and desilting). 
construction.        
 b)Major, Medium, and Extension, 
Renovation   &  Modernization 
irrigation projects (Earth work and 
desilting). 
   NREGA/AIBP     
 c)Minor Irrigation Schemes    NREGA/AIBP     
 d)  Correction  of  system  deficiencies 
above  outlet  up  to  distributaries  of 
4.25   cumec   (150   cusec)   capacity. 
(Earth work) 
-----------------do------------------ 
-- 
  NREGA     
 e)  Correction  of  system  deficiencies 
above  outlet  up  to  distributaries  of 
4.25   cumec   (150   cusec)   capacity. 
(other than earth work) 
---------------do------------   CADWM 
Programme 
    
(iii) Irrigation facility         
 a)Survey,  Planning  and  designing  of 
OFD works 
Complete Command Area   CADWM 
Programme 
    
 b)Construction of field channels Individual land of SC/ST/BPL/ 
beneficiary of LR/IAY 
  NREGA     
 b)Construction of field channels Individual  land  of  other  than 
SC/ST/BPL/benefy of LR/IAY 
  CADWM 
Programme 
    

19 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) Ground Water recharge 
 
a)Artificial recharge through Dug well 
 
 
All lands requiring recharge 
  NREGA/ Dug 
well Recharge/ 
G.W. mgt & 
Regulation 
    
(v) Land Development         
 a)  Full  package  On-  Farm 
Development (OFD) W orks including 
Field channels, realignment of field 
boundaries, land levelling/ shaping 
Individual land of SC/ST/BPL/ 
beneficiary of LR/IAY 
  NREGA     
 a) Full  package OFD Works including 
Field channels, realignment of field 
boundaries, land levelling/ shaping 
Individual land of other than 
SC/ST/BPL/beneficiary of 
LR/IAY 
  CADWM 
programme 
    
 b)Land levelling and shaping Individual land of SC/ST/BPL/ 
beneficiary of LR/IAY 
  NREGA     
 c) Land Development Common land   NREGA     
(vi) Flood  Control/    Drainage  in water 
logged 
        
 a) Flood  Management Works like 
construction/ raising and strengthening 
of embankments, anti erosion works 
drainage development and flood 
proofing, etc. 
 
(Costing up to  1 crore) 
All land requiring works   Flood 
Management 
Programme/N 
REGA 
    
 b) Construction of drains. --------------do--------------   NREGA     

20 
 
 
 
 
 
 c) Reclamation  of waterlogged  areas/ 
drainage 
--------------do--------------   NREGA/ 
CADWM 
programme 
    
 d)Bio-drainage ---------------do---------   NREGA/ 
CADWM 
programme 
    
 d) Conjunctive use Individual land of SC/ST/BPL/ 
beneficiary of LR/IAY 
  NREGA     
(vii) Plantation         
 Canal Plantation Common  /Government land   NREGA     
(viii 
) 
Popularisation   of   New 
Technological for efficient use of 
water 
 
a)Demonstration 
    
 
FPARP 
    
 b) In situ moisture conservation works Command area   NREGA/FPA 
RP 
    
(ix) Rural connectivity ---------do------------   NREGA     
  Common  land/  forest 
land/Canal Road 
  NREGA     

21 
 
LIST OF DISTRICTS IDENTIFIED FOR CONVEREGENCE BETWEEN NREGS AND SCHEMES OF 
MOWR 
 
S. 
No. 
State District 
names 
1 A. P. Karimnagar, Kurnool, Nalgonda, Chittoor, Khammam, 
Mehboobnagar, Medak 
2 Arunachal Pradesh Pumpumpre, East Siang 
3 Assam Bongaigaon, Lakhimpur, Darrang, NC Hills 
4 Bihar Vaishali,  Muzaffarpur, Goplaganj, Saran, Gaya, Jamui, Nawada 
5 Chhattisgarh Surguja, Bastar, Kabirdham, Rajnandgaon, Raipur 
6 Gujarat Dahod, Dang, Banaskantha, Sabarkantha 
7 H. P Kangra, Solan, Mandi, Sirmaur 
8 Jharkhand East Singhbhum, Chatra, Koderma, Gumla, Palamu, Deoghar, 
Jamtara 
9 Karnataka Gulbargh, Gadag, Hassan, Chikmaglur, Kolar, Shimoga 
10 Kerala Malappuram, Palakkad, Thiruvananthapuram 
11 M. P. Mandla, Jhabua, Betul, Panna, Devas 
12 Manipur Thoubal, Churachandpur 
13 Meghalaya West Garo hills, Ribhoi 
14 Maharashtra Satara, Dhule, Amaravati, Nandubar, Akola, Pune 
15 Orissa Mayurbhanj, Ganjam, Bolangir, Bargarh 
16 Punjab Hoshiarpur, Ropar 
17 Rajasthan Ajmer, Jalore, Dungarpur, Bikaner, Sikar, Kota, Tonk 
18 Tamil Nadu Dindigul, Villupuram, Kanyakumar, Pudukkottai, Sivaganga 
19 Uttar Pradesh Gonda,  Banda,  Lalitpur,  Pratapgarh,   Allahabad,  Chitrakoot,   
Jalaun, Jhansi, Hardoi 
20 Uttaranchal Champawat, Nainital, Uttarkashi 
21 West Bengal Bankura, Bardwan, Birbhum, Purulia 
 

22 
 
Appendix – II 
 
 
No. 4-4/2011-WB 
Government of India 
Ministry of Water Resources 
Minor Irrigation Division 
   
Room No. 3, B Wing, Ground Floor, 
Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi, dated: 18.9.2012 
 
 
Subject:   Standing Committee on Water Resources – Draft report on “Repair,      
Renovation & Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies” 
 
Reference: O.M. No. 16/5/WR/2011 dated 17.08.2012. 
   
 I am directed to refer to your letter on the subject ment ioned above.  The draft 
report has been examined and found to be in order.  However the comments/ suggestion 
of MoWR on the draft report are enclosed herewith for information and appropriate action.  
As desired a copy of the draft report (in original) is being returned herewith. 
Encl: As above 
Sd/- 
(S.L. Jain) 
Senior Joint Commissioner (MI) 
Telefax No. 23387834 
E.Mail: sl.jain@nic.in 
 
To 
 
Ms. Rita Jailkhani, 
Additional Director,  
Lok Sabha Secretariat, 
Room No. 609, 6th floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi-110001. 

23 
 
Comments / Observation on Draft Report on Repair, Renovation and 
Restoration (RRR) of water bodies 
 
The Draft Report on Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of water bodies has 
been thoroughly examined and following comments are made: 
 
Chapter I: Para 1.6 
 
 This para describes about the basic features of the scheme for RRR of water 
bodies with domestic component.  Therefore, one para giving details of this scheme may 
be added before Para 1.6 as detailed below: 
 
 Subsequently, Government had approved a State Sector Scheme for Repair, 
Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of water bodies with two components (i) one with 
domestic support with an outlay of Rs. 1250/ - crore and (ii) another with external 
assistance with an outlay of Rs. 1500/ - crore for implementation during XI Five Year Plan.  
A sum of Rs. 841.91 crore has since been released under the scheme of RRR of water 
bodies with domestic support till date for taking up 3341 water bodies in 12 states.  Out o f 
3341 water bodies, works have been completed in 1481 water bodies. 
 
Chapter 3: Section A:      Basic features of the Scheme 
 
 Para 3.2 describes the scheme for RRR of water bodies with domestic support.  
Just before Para 3.2 describes about the Pilot Sch eme of RRR approved during X Plan.  
Therefore, to make more clarity, a paragraph about the scheme for RRR during XI Plan 
may be added  as detailed below: 
 
 Subsequently, Government had approved a State Sector Scheme for Repair, 
Renovation and Restoration ( RRR) of water bodies with two components (i) one with 
domestic support with an outlay of Rs. 1250/ - crore and (ii) another with external 
assistance with an outlay of Rs. 1500/- crore for implementation during XI Five Year Plan. 
 
Para 3.10 
 
 Following words may be inserted between water bodies and is 
 For implementation during XII Plan 
 
Para 3.12 
 
 Funds released during XI Plan were Rs. 811.85 crore not Rs. 731.40 crore 
mentioned in the Draft Report. 
 The table 3.16 mentioned in the Draft Report has been upd ated and is enclosed 
herewith as Annexure-1. 
 
Para 3.17 
 
 The funds released to Govt. of Rajasthan has been updated as given below 
 The State Govt. of Rajasthan has been released Rs. 7.07 during the year 2011 -12 
for RRR of water bodies for undertaking activities in 16 water bodies.  
  
The table 5.1 given on page 31-32 has been updated and enclosed herewith as Annexure-
2  

24 
 
Annexure-1 
Table 3.16 
Funds released to States under the Scheme of RRR of Water Bodies with domestic support 
 
(Rupees in crores) 
 
 
 
 
Name of State 
No. of Water 
Bodies 
Total Project 
cost 
Committed 
Central Share 
Fund released 
during 
2009-10 
Fund released 
during 
2010-11 
Fund released 
during 
2011-12 
Fund released 
during 
2012-13 
Total released 
funds 
Orissa 1321 254.33  228.89        72.12 75.00 70.33  217.45 
Karnataka 427 232.77  209.49   74.04 47.47 77.51  199.02 
Andhra Pradesh 1029 339.69 305.72  189.00   189.00 
Bihar 15 64.45 55.30  25.00  27.54 52.54 
U.P.(Budelkhand) 28 46.15 41.53  29.08   29.08 
M.P.(Bundelkhand) 78 41.89 10.47  7.33 2.62  9.95 
Meghalaya 
Umiam Lake 
1 44.57  
(Irrigation 
Related 2.83) 
2.54  1.78 0.64  2.42 
Maharashtra  258 135.08 119.34   80.53  80.53 
Gujarat 34 17.47 15.72   10.61  10.61 
Chattisgarh 131 122.91 110.61   34.68  34.68 
Rajsthan 16 11.35 7.45   7.07  7.07 
Haryana 3 40.24 10.06   7.04 2.52 9.56 
Total 3341 1350.9 1117.12 146.16 374.66 291.03 30.06 841.91 

25 
 
Annxure-2 
Table 5.1 
Work Completed as per reports received from  
Central Ground Water Board / State Governments. 
 
 
Name of State No. of water 
bodies 
Total project 
cost 
in crore 
Committed Central 
Share 
Fund 
released 
during 
2009-10 
Fund released 
during 
2010-11 
Fund released 
during         2011-
12 
Fund 
released 
during 2012-
13 
Number of water 
bodies completed 
No. of water 
bodies in 
progress 
Orissa 1321 254.33 228.89 72.12 75.00 70.33  1044 277 
Karnataka 427 232.77 209.49 74.04 47.47 77.51  354 73 
Andhra Pradesh 1029 339.69 305.72  189.00   N.A. 1029 
Bihar 15 64.45 55.30  25.00 -- 27.54 N.A. 15 
U.P. (Bundelkhand) 28 46.15 41.53  29.08   N.A. 28 
M.P. (Bundelkhand) 78 41.89 10.47  7.33 2.62  72 6 
Meghalaya Umiam 
Lake 
1 44.57 (Irrigation 
related 2.38) 
2.54  1.78 0.64  N.A. 1 
Chhattisgarh 131 122.91 110.61   34.68  N.A 131 
Gujarat 34 17.47 15.72   10.61  N.A 34 
Haryana 3 40.24 10.06   7.04 2.52 1 2 
Maharashtra 258 135.08 119.34   80.53  N.A 258 
Rajasthan 16 11.35 7.45   7.07  10 6 
 
Total 3341 1350.9 1117.12 146.16 374.66 291.03 30.06 1481 1860 
 

26 
 
Appendix - III 
 
No. 4-4/2011-WB 
Government of India 
Ministry of Water Resources 
Minor Irrigation Division 
.... 
Room No. 3, B Wing, Ground Floor, 
Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi, dated: 3.10.2012 
 
Subject:   Parliamentary Standing Committee on Water Resources – Factual verification of the Draft Report on Repair, Renovation & Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies 
 
Reference: O.M. No. 16/5/WR/2011 dated 25.09.2012. 
   
 I am directed to refer to your letter on the above subject wherein Ministry of Water Resources were requested to indicate the  reasons for variation in the data and 
also the reasons for delay in returning the factually verified report to the Committee Secretariat.  It is to inform that Draft Report on scheme on RRR of water bodies is based 
on the information supplied by MoWR vide letter dated 19/24.1.2012.  Since the Draft Report was received in the Ministry in the month of August, 2012, the information given 
in the Draft Report has been updated and some introductory information regarding scheme on RRR of water bodies to be implemented during XI Plan has been added before 
some para to bring out more clarity in the  Report.  The reason for delay in furnishing the comments on the above report is due to delay in receipt of information on lat est 
physical progress report of works completed on number of water bodies taken up under the scheme of RRR of water bodies from State Government.   
  
This issues with the approval of Commissioner (Projects). 
(S.L. Jain) 
Senior Joint Commissioner (MI) 
Telefax No. 23387834 
E.Mail: sl.jain@nic.in 
To 
Shri T.G. Chandrasekhar, 
Director, 
Lok Sabha Secretariat, 
Room No. 609, 6th floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi-110001

27 
 
 