 
1 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
                                (2010-2011) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2010-2011)  
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources} 
 
 
 
SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
March, 2011/Chaitra, 1933 (Saka) 
 
6 

 
2 
 
SIXTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2010-2011) 
 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2010-2011) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23.03.2011 
                                                     Laid in Rajya Sabha on 23.03.2011 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2011/Chaitra, 1933 (Saka) 

 
3 
 
WRC NO. 24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2011 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 

 
4 
 
CONTENTS 
           PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2010-11)…………………  (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………… (v) 
 
 
CHAPTER I   Report ………………………………………… 1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been  
accepted by the Government …………………..  
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the    
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government’s replies ………………………..  
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of   
which replies of the Government have not been  
accepted by the Committee …………………….  
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
final replies of the Government are still awaited …  
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
  I. Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the Committee  
                                    held on 17.03.2011.   
 
  II. Analysis of action taken by the Government on the  
                        Recommendations / Observations contained in the Second 
                        Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee………. 
 
 

 
5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON WATER RESOURCES (2010-11) 
 
  Shri Dip Gogoi  -  Chairman 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi 
3. Shri Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan 
4. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
5. Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
6. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
7. Shri Virender Kashyap 
8. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
       9.          Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
10.        Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
             11.        Shri S.P.Y. Reddy  
12.        Shri Arjun Roy 
13.        Smt. J. Shantha 
14.        Shri K. Shivkumar alias J.K. Ritheesh 
15.     Smt. Annu Tandon 
16. Dr. P. Venugopal (Tiruvallur) 
17.  Shri Sajjan Verma 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
              RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.        Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
23. Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
24.         Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
25. Dr. Ashok S. Ganguly 
26. Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan 
27. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
28.  Shri Mangala Kisan  
    29. Shri Ranjitsinh Vijaysinh Mohite-Patil 
           30. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
 31. Smt. Bimla Kashyap Sood 
              
 
 
 

 
6 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
 3. Shri B.S. Dahiya  - Director 
 4. Smt. Rita Jailkhani  - Additional Director 
5. Shri A.K. Yadav  - Committee Officer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
7 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing C ommittee on Water Resources (20 10-2011) having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Sixth Report on the 
Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the Second Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water Resources (20 10-2011) on Demands for 
Grants (2010-2011) of the Ministry of Water Resources.  
2. The Second Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on 20 April 2010.  The 
replies of the Government to a ll the recommendations contained in the Report were received on  21 
July 2010. 
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and adopted by 
the Committee at their sitting held on 17 March 2011. 
4. An analysis of the Action Ta ken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the Second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;              DIP GOGOI, 
17 March, 2011                                Chairman, 
26 Phalguna, 1932 (Saka)           Standing Committee on Water Resources 
  
 
 
 
 

 
8 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources deals with the action taken 
by the Government on the recommendations / observations contained in their Second Report 
(15th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (20 10-2011) of the Ministry of Water Resources 
which was presented to Lok Sabha on 20 April 2010. 
2. Action taken notes were received from the Government in respect of all the 2 6 
recommendations/observations of the Committee which have been categorised as follows:- 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos. 1.3, 2.40, 2.41, 2.42, 2.45, 2.46, 2.47, 2.48, 3.17, 3.19, 3.20, 4.12, 
4.13, 4.14, 5.11, 6.16, 6.17, 6.19 and 6.20          (Total - 19) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government‟s replies: 
Para Nos. 2.43, 2.44, and 6.18              
 (Total -03) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies  of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee:  
Para Nos. 2.49, 3.18 and 5.10      (Total - 03) 
 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final repl y of the Government 
is still awaited: 
Para Nos. 3.16        (Total - 01) 
 

 
9 
 
3. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of the 
recommendations/observations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
A.    Augmenting staff strength in Ministry through revival  of posts under deemed 
abolition. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.47) 
 
4. The Committee , while noting that the present staff strength was not sufficient for the 
smooth functioning of various wings of the Ministry , had recommended that the Ministry should 
pursue vigorously with the Ministry of Finance for revival of some posts  gone under deemed 
abolition and which are crucial for smooth functioning of the Ministry particularly on technical 
side which constitutes the backbone of the activities of the Ministry of Water Resources.  The y 
also recommended that the Ministry of Water Resources should conduct a fresh review of staff 
strength to ascertain the actual requirement of the staff and officers in its various wings and 
offices and the bodies under it considering the importance of its expanding mandate. 
5. The Ministry, in its ac tion taken reply, stated that a  number of posts in the Ministry and 
the organizations under it have been revived  in recent years with the approval of Ministry of 
Finance.   In the light of Standing Committee‟s recommendation, a fresh exercise has now 
been initiated for revival of posts  under deemed abolition.   All the organizations under the 
Ministry have been requested to intimate the number and names of the technical posts which 
they would like to recommend for revival.  The proposal is being taken up wi th the Ministry of 
Finance for revival of posts.  Further, Staff Inspection Unit of the Ministry of Finance has 
already been requested to conduct a study of the manpower requirement of the Ministry and its 
organizations.  
6. The Committee had urged the Min istry to pursue with the Ministry of Finance for 
revival of posts  under deemed abolition which are crucial for smooth functioning of the 
Ministry, and also to undertake a fresh review of staff strength to ascertain the actual 
requirement of manpower in it s various wings and offices and the bodies under it.  The 
Ministry has, in its reply, stated that it is initiating a fresh exercise for revival of posts 
going under deemed abolition in the light of th e Committee’s recommendation and 

 
10 
 
taking up the matter with the Ministry of Finance again.   Further, the Staff Inspection 
Unit of Ministry of Finance has also been requested to conduct a study of manpower 
requirement of the Ministry and its organizations.   The Committee, therefore, call upon 
the Ministry to  expedite completion of th e exercise for revival of posts  under deemed 
abolition and also ensure that the desired staff strength  is in position at the earliest, so 
that the smooth functioning of the M inistry is not impaired in any way.  The Committee 
would, i n the meanwhile, like to be apprised of the findings of the study being 
undertaken by the Staff Inspection Unit of Min istry of Finance in this regard at the 
earliest.  
 
B.    Time-frame for submission of Utilization Certificates  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.49) 
 
7. The Committee had noted that a number of  Utilisation Certificates (as on 31.12.2009) 
from Institutions/Autonomous Bodies and State Governments were outstanding in respect of 
Grants released upto 31 March 2007.   The Committee had therefore desir ed that in order to 
ensure timely submission of UCs, the Ministry while releasing the funds should put some 
conditions like imposition of penalty for failure in submission of UCs in time.  They had 
expressed confidence that such or similar innovative measu res can certainly be devised by the 
Ministry to contain the pendency of UCs. 
8. The Ministry in its action taken reply stated that the State Governments are required to 
submit proposals for release of Central assistance each year in time along with utiliza tion 
certificate for fund s released in preceding years.  No further Central assistance is released to 
States without submission of utilization certificates.  The State Governments are also pursued 
vigorously from time to time in different forums to submit the pending utilization certificates.     
 
9. The Committee note that the State Governments /organisations are required to 
submit proposals for release of Central assistance each year in time along with 

 
11 
 
utilization certificates (UCs) for fund s released in t he preceding year .  The Committee 
would like to reiterate that in order to curb the State’s tendencies for non -utilisation of 
Central assistance there is a need to ensure timely submission of UCs by State 
Governments.  For the purpose, measures like imposition of penalty may be thought of 
in respect of States who fail to submit the same in time.  The Committee deplore that 
this persistent problem has been plaguing the Ministry for long.    The Committee hardly 
need to stress that the proper and timely  utilization of allocated funds is a necessary 
condition precedent for release of further funds .  They ,  therefore reiterate that the 
Ministry ensures strict compliance by the States on the issue of submission of UCs for 
ensuring timely and proper utilization o f Central funds released to the States and 
organizations working under them.  They also reiterate their earlier recommendation 
contained in the First and Fifth Report s on Demands for Grants that a definite time -
frame for submission of UCs should be set in corporating a penalty clause to ward off 
such delays.  The States may also be asked  to review periodically the reconciliation of 
accounts of States’ implementing agencies. 
 
C.    Need for regularizing backlog of Unapproved Projects under XI Plan. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.18) 
 
10.  The Committee had observed that the Schemes under Plan Sector require investment 
clearance from Planning Commissio n for which there is an established procedure. But in spite 
of well-defined policy and guidelines in place, a larg e number of major and medium projects 
have been under execution without investment clearance from the Planning Commission. They 
had desired that while considering to bring the unapproved projects under the category of 
approved projects, Ministry of Water R esources should impress upon the State Governments 
to accord first priority to such unapproved projects at various stages of completion for getting 
them regularised instead of sending new proposals for sanction. 

 
12 
 
11. The Ministry in its action taken reply s tated that o ut of 477 spilled over projects, 300 
projects (90 major, 136 Medium and 74 ERM) were unapproved. However, out of 553 projects 
ongoing in XI Plan, 288 projects (comprising 74 major, 137 medium and 77 ERM ) are 
unapproved. These unapproved project s are estimated to cost Rs. 91,508 crore and             
Rs. 30,864  crore have  been spent till X Plan. 
Further, in CWC , 186 new and 77 revised projects are un der various stages of 
appraisal, which include 62 new and 31 revised projects accepted by the Ad visory Committee 
of MoWR conditionally or otherwise awaiting investment clearance form the Planning 
Commission. The Ministry of Water Resources has held 15 meetings of Advisory Committee of 
MOWR and 134 major/medium projects have been cleared in last 3 yea rs ending March 2010. 
Ministry of Water Resources is also taking up the issue with the State Governments from time 
to time. 
12. The Committee had desired the Ministry to impress upon  the State Governments 
for getting regularized the long-pending, unapprov ed projects in the ongoing XI Plan, 
instead of sending new proposals for investment clearance from the Planning 
Commission.  The Ministry, in its reply, has simply stated that out of 553 projects 
ongoing in XI Plan, 288 projects comprising 74 major, 137 me dium and 77 ERM projects 
are unapproved and that these are estimated to cost the exchequer Rs.91,508 crore.  The 
reply of the Ministry is , however, silent on the efforts being made for regulation of these 
288 unapproved projects, as desired by the Committe e.  The Committee deplore the 
perfunctory manner in which such a vital issue has been sidetracked by the Ministry.  
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Ministry of 
Water Resources impress upon  the State Governments to get regularized their 
unapproved schemes which are at various stages of completion, before sending new 
proposals to the Planning Commission for investment clearance. 
 
D.    Development of Water Resources Information System (WRIS) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.19) 

 
13 
 
13. The Committee had noted that the management of Water Resources is a highly 
complex task that involves multi -disciplinary domains including data acquisition, numerical 
modelling, optimisation, data warehousing, and the analysis of socio -economic, environmental 
and legal issues.  The development of Water Resources Information System (WRIS) was 
approved in June 2008 for implementation during the XI Plan with the to tal outlay of Rs.234.30 
crore.  Two main activities under the scheme are (i) Data Bank and Online Information System, 
and (ii) Creation of Watershed Maps and Geographic Information System. The works related to 
studies for assessment of irrigation potential by remote sensing technique are also undertaken 
under the scheme.  The website of Indi a WRIS has been launched during 2009.  The 
Development of WRIS by Indian Space Research Organization is under progress.  About 
86.7% of the works related to data entry has also been completed.  The Committee had 
expressed the hope that development of WRIS would be taken up at a faster pace so that the 
information uploaded becomes available and utilized for various studies, research and to help 
evaluate various schemes.  
14. The Ministry in the action taken replies has submitted that t he objective of the pla n 
scheme, Water Resources Information System (WRIS) is to develop information system on 
water resources at the national level. The Water Resources Information System website was 
launched during 2010 -11 and the work is under progress in ISRO – DOS. The WRIS  website 
proposes to have web enabled query system on its data base to generate any desired basin 
wise information. The matter has been taken up with the Department of Space for ensuring 
timely completion of the target.  The Department of Space has informe d that the first phase of 
WRIS would be operational by September 2010.  The Ministry in a further communication dated 
22 February, 2011, has informed that the first version of the information system was  
inauguarated by the then Minister of Water Resources on 7  December 2010 at New Delhi.   
The project is scheduled to be completed by December 2012. 
15. The Committee , while keeping in view the promise of many -sided applications 
held out by WRIS, had desired fast -tracking of its development so that the uploade d 
information becomes available and is utilized for various studies, research and also to 
help evaluate various schemes. The Committee hope that the remaining version of the 

 
14 
 
Information System would be completed by the scheduled date, i.e. December 2012. 
They would like to be kept informed of the latest position  in this regard  at regular 
intervals. 
E.    Feed back from States on studies of NRSA Hyderabad 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.20) 
 
16. The Committee had noted that reports of 52 projects were received f rom NRSA 
Hyderabad on the remote sensing monitoring of AIBP assisted major and medium irrigation 
projects.  The reports were analyzed and the analysis of the results indicated that the variations 
between the figures of irrigation potential creation as repo rted by the respective State 
Governments and that assessed by the remote sensing data were within + 15% in respect of 
30 projects. However, in other cases the variations were relatively higher.  The monitoring of 
projects through remote sensing also helped  in identifying the specific reasons for non -creation 
of irrigation potential and also in identifying the specific location where the works remained 
incomplete resulting in non -utilization of created facilities.  The Committee had hoped that the 
good work would continue with greater vigour so as to expand its reach.  The Committee had 
expressed their desire to be apprised of the response of various States to whom project reports 
and findings have been conveyed , and also desired that services of NRSA be exte nded to 
other activities of water resource availability, conservation, depletion and development 
particularly the ground water. 
17. The Government in reply intimated that the State Governments have been requested to 
give feedback in respect of those projects where variation was large. CWC field units have also 
been directed to pursue with the State Governments and obtain the feedback from the States. 
The efforts are made by the Project Authorities to close the gaps in the canal network wherever 
pointed out in the Report of the National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) of the Department of 
Space. Further, AIBP assisted   extension of the work of assessing potential creation by 
cartosat satellite data to 50 additional irrigation projects has been approved. In addition, several 
activities in water sector have been undertaken by using remote sensing data in association 

 
15 
 
with NRSC by concerned organizations of the Government of India as well as the State 
Governments.  
 Further, a major project to study the snow and glacier in the country has been launched 
by Ministry of Environment & Forest and ISRO.  In addition, satellite derived inputs have also 
been used in assessing the feasibility of proposed irrigation projects in upper Betwa basin on 
part of Ken -Betwa link proje ct. River morphology studies have also been carried out by using 
remote sensing data.  
18.  The Committee , while pointing out that a variation in figures of irrigation 
potential created as reported by State Governments and as assessed by NRSA, 
Hyderabad was in the range of + 15% in case s of 32  out of 52 AIBP assisted projects, 
had desired to know the responses of the concerned State Governments to the findings 
of NRSA .  Far from satisfied with the reply, the Committee would like the Ministry to 
gather the responses of various States in the matter  expeditiously.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
F.    Achieving set target for Minor Irrigation in XI Plan. 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.13) 
 
19.    The Committee had regretted to note that despite downward revision in the target for 
creation of Minor Irrigation, the actual output was further down. The target for XI Plan has been 
fixed at 7 mha against which actual creation in first two years is meagre 1.79 mha, a figure f ar 
from encouraging.  During the mid- term appraisal, the target for XI Plan  has also been revised 
to 4.50 mha.  They, therefore, had desired to be apprised of the strategy and the measures to 
be taken by MOWR to achieve the revised target fixed for XI Pl an during the remaining period 
of the Plan.  The Committee had further desired to be apprised of the State -wise break-up of 
irrigation potential to be created during XI plan and achieved so far. 
20. According to t he Ministry, the irrigation projects includ ing the minor irrigation projects 
are undertaken by respective State Governments as per their own priorities.  With a view to 
encourage the completion of ongoing projects and help States in creation of irrigation potential, 

 
16 
 
Government of India provides fin ancial assistance under Accelerated Irrigation Benefit s  
Programme (AIBP).  In case of minor irrigation schemes, the Central assistance to States is 
provided to the projects in the States of North -Eastern Region, Hilly States namely, Himachal 
Pradesh, Jamm u & Kashmir, Utt arakhand, undivided Koraput, Bolangir and Kalahandi (KBK) 
districts of Orissa and projects benefiting tribal areas and drought prone areas.  As per the 
updated information provided by the respective State Governments, a total of 2.322 milli on 
hectare of irrigation potential has been created through minor  irrigation schemes since April  
2007.   
21.  The Committee had  desired the Ministry to apprise them of the strategy and the 
measures which it may take up for achieving the revised target fixe d for XI Plan during 
the remaining period of the Plan, and also the detailed break-up of irrigation potential to 
be created during XI Plan and the achievements made so far.  The Ministry’s reply, while 
mentioning Central financial assistance to help the States to complete the ongoing 
irrigation projects under AIBP, also stated that a total of 2.322 Mha. of irrigation potential 
had been created through MI since April 2007.  But while giving these details, the State-
wise target for creation of irrigation pote ntial during XI Plan , the utilization of the 
potential created, the shortfalls  as also the appropriate strategy and the steps for 
achieving the revised, scaled down target during the remaining period of XI Pla n have 
not been furnished to the Committee.  Th ey, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that State-wise target for creation of irrigation potential for XI Plan and 
suitable strategy/steps for attainment of the revised, scaled  down target for the 
remaining plan period may be furnished to the Committee without further loss of time. 
 
G.    Flood Control. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.10) 
 
22. The Committee had noted that there was reduction in Plan allocation at RE Stage due 
to late starting of anti -erosion works by the Brahmaputra Board and del ay in finalisation of the 

 
17 
 
tenders for procurement of telemetry equipment and had asked the Ministry to fix responsibility 
for the delay.   
23. The Ministry in action taken repl y stated that the reasons for delay in taking up anti -
erosion works by Brahmaputra Board and delay in finalisation of the tenders for procurement of 
telemetry equipment by the Central Water Commission leading to reduction at the RE 2009 -10 
stage are being enquired.  It is, however, mentioned that the work for supply, installation, tes t 
and commissioning of 222 Telemetry Stations has been awarded by the Central Wa ter 
Commission in April 2010. Efforts are also being made to obviate such delays in 
implementation in future. 
24.  The reply of the Government is not acceptable as they firmly believe that the anti-
erosion works being carried out by the Brahmaputra Board were being badly managed.  
Obviously, due to delay in finalization of the tenders for procurement of telemetry 
equipment by the Central Water Commission le d to reduction at the R E (2009-10) stage  
for Flood control .    The Ministry , while conceding the delay, has given assurance  to 
obviate such delays in future.    The Committee desire the Ministry to fix responsibility 
for delay in finalisation of the tenders for pro curement of te lemetry equipment and also 
to put in place firm accountability procedures.    The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken to fix responsibility for the delay within three months of 
presentation of this Report.  
 
H.    Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6.16) 
 
25.   The Committee had noted that AIBP was launched in 1996-97 to give loan assistance 
to the States to help them complete some of the   incomplete projects which were in advanced 
stage of completion and to create additional irrigation potential in the country.  The Committee , 
not satisfied with the progress achieved under AIBP scheme , had desired that concerted and 
concrete efforts be made to make the programme successful by achieving the targets.   

 
18 
 
26. The Government in action taken repl y submitted that u p to March 2009, irrigation 
potential of 5.94 mha was reported to have been created under the AIBP.  During 2009 -10, 
irrigation potential of about 9.00 lakh ha . is estimated to have been created though the same 
would be confirmed by end of working season in July 2010.  Apart from 110 major / medium 
projects already reported as completed, 14 more projects are expected to have been 
completed for which completion report is awaited and is likely to be receiv ed shortly.  7 ,882 
surface MI schemes are also reported as completed under AIBP so far.  The Ministry of Water 
Resources is making concerted efforts for making AIBP a more successful programme.  
27     In view of the tardy pace of progress  under AIBP schem e, the Committee had 
recommended for concerted and concrete efforts on the part of Ministry of Water 
Resources to achieve the targets to make the programme successful.   The reply of the 
Ministry, however, mentioned that a miniscule irrigation potential of only about 9.00 lakh 
ha. was likely to be created during 2009 -10, and only 14 additional projects are expected 
to be completed in addition to 110 major/medium projects already completed.   The 
Committee not satisfied with the progress made so far under AI BP, desire that vigorous 
and sustained efforts be made  by the Ministry so that the targets set under AIBP could 
be achieved without further delays.   The Committee also feel that the AIBP Scheme 
needs to be restructured and the monitoring mechanism suitabl y strengthened so that 
the AIBP achieves the intended objectives without time and cost overrun. 
 
I.    Status of 43 MMI Projects and  MI schemes under AIBP. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6.17) 
28. The Committee had noted that a large number of Med ium Irrigation Schemes under 
AIBP were pending for release of subsequent instalment for want of request of State  
Governments and utilization  certificates for the i nstalments released earlier.  They had 
therefore, desired MoWR to take up the matter vigorously with Sta te Governments regarding 
delay in submission of utilization certificates and request for release of grant.  They had also 
desired to fix some time frame for submission of UCs alongwith a penalty clause  so that  State 

 
19 
 
Governments may expedite submission of UCs in time.  The Committee had liked to see the list 
of defaulter States and the projects and their costs that are likely to be affected. 
 
29. The Ministry in reply stated that the State Governments usually submit UCs for earlier 
released grant under AIB P along with proposals for next instalment of grant and it is a 
continuous process. The delay in submission of UCs occurs if the grant released under AIBP 
could not be utilized due to slow progress of works which occurs due to various reasons such 
as land acquisition problems, resettlement and rehabilitation problems, contractual problems, 
geological surprises, litigation etc. The Ministry of Water Resources consistently reviews 
performance of the projects under AIBP and suggest remedial measures for timely  completion 
of the projects. The Ministry usually do es not approve extension of time for completion of 
projects unless there is full justification for delay and obtains undertaking from State 
Governments that any further cost overrun due to time overrun sh all be borne by the State 
governments themselves. The projects indicated below have not approached MoWR for further 
release of grant after 2007-08 and Utilization Certificate for the  
last grant are pending with them. 
Amount in Rs Crores 
S.No. State / Project Grant released in  
2007-08 
 Andhra Pardesh  
1 Pushkara 13.96 
2 Gollavavu 32.12 
3 Valligallu 26.25 
4 Nilwai 15.55 
 Bihar  
5 4 MI schemes 3.55 
 Jharkhand  
6 Gumani 3.71 
7 Sonua 0.90 
 Karnataka  
8 Varahi 0.29 
 Madhya Pradesh  
9 Indira Sagar 94.77 
 Orissa  

 
20 
 
10 Titlagarh 17.33 
11 Chhaligadda 5.53 
 
30. Noting that a number of  MMI projects and  MI/new schemes were pending for 
release of subsequent instalment for want of request of State Governments and 
utilization certificates (UCs) for the r eleased instalments, the Committee had 
recommended the Ministry to vigorously take up the matter with the State Governments 
besides fixing some  time frame for submission of UCs alongwith a penalty clause to  
secure compliance.   The Committee had also sought the list of defaulter States and  the  
projects  alongwith their costs   that are likely to be affected.   In its action taken  reply 
the Ministry has merely given the names of projects in defaulting States along with the 
grants released in the year 2007 -08 without furnishing details of time and cost overrun 
of the projects.   The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and 
call upon the Ministry of Water Resources to fix some time frame for submission of UCs 
besides introducing a pen alty clause to compel States to submit UCs in time.   The 
Committee would further like to be apprised of not only the list of AIBP projects in 
defaulting States along with amount of the grant released, but also the status of these 
projects, including the p ercentage of Central grant already released to each of the 
projects and the revised time line and cost for the completion of the said projects.   
 
 
 

 
21 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No.1.3) 
 
The Committee note that despite assurance given by the Secretary, Ministry of Water 
Resources before the Committee regarding submission of action taken notes on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the First Report of the Committee (2009 -10), the 
Ministry has failed to furnish the action taken notes even after the lapse of prescribed period of 
three months from the date of presentation of Report.  The Committee take an adverse note of 
this and desire that action taken notes on the First Rep ort of the Committee be furnished 
expeditiously.  The reasons for the inordinate delay may also be furnished to the Committee for 
their consideration. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The action taken notes on the First Report of the Committee were furnished by this 
Ministry on 7.5.2010.  The main reason for delay in furnishing the action taken notes is 
attributable to time taken in collecting information from various organizations, including State 
Governments.   The delay is, however, regretted.    
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.40) 
 
 The Committee note that the budget provision in the Demands for Grants of the MoWR 
for the year 2010 -11 is Rs.1,131.52 crore.  This excludes the funds earmarked for Accelerated 
Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP) and other Water Resour ces Programmes which are 
directly released by the Ministry of Finance under Centrally Assisted Programme.  There is an 
increase of Rs.100 crore (14.04%) in the Plan side in comparison to Budget Estimate 2009 -10.  
The Demand shows an overall increase of Rs. 101.98 crore (9.01%) over the corresponding 
figure of BE 2009 -10.  The Plan allocation was reduced from Rs.612.00 to Rs.552.00 crore at 

 
22 
 
RE 2009-10 stage, i.e. a decrease of 9.95%, whereas the Non -Plan expenditure was raised by 
8.94%, i.e. from Rs.417.54 cr ore to Rs.458.55 crore, which consists of Revenue Section of 
Rs.455.39 crore and Capital Section of Rs.3.16 crore.  According to the Ministry, the allocations 
for the year 2010 -11 are considered sufficient for meeting the requirement of various activities 
planned during the year under different Plan Schemes.  The increase of Rs.100 crores for 
Central Sector Scheme is mainly due to increase in the allocation for the schemes of „Ground 
Water Management and Regulation‟, „Hydrology Project‟, „Investigation of W ater Resources 
Development Schemes‟, „Farraka Barrage  Project‟, „Flood Forecasting‟, „Infrastructure 
Development‟ and „Rajiv Gandhi National Ground  Water Training and Research Institute‟. The 
reductions in the allocation at RE stage have been made mainly  in respect of  Hydrology 
Project, Research and Development, Flood Forecasting, River Management & Works in Border 
Areas due to delay in procurement of equipment, delay in taking up morphological studies, 
delay in finalization of award of works related to installation of telemetry system.  The 
Committee note that the reasons attributed by the Ministry for reduction in allocation at RE 
stage, far from plausible, reflect poor budgeting, lack of foresightedness, lack of proper Central 
control and monitoring on the part of the Ministry.  They, therefore, desire the Ministry to evolve 
a rational and sound system of budgeting so that there is no reduction in allocations at the RE 
stage in future.  Needless to say, reduction in allocation at the RE stage, is prima facie, 
indicative of poor planning, lack of monitoring and poor control by the Ministry over field offices 
/ attached / subordinate offices / institutes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In view of the recommendation of the Standing Committee, various organizatio ns have 
been advised for estimating the final requirements very meticulously and ensure that the 
allocated funds are effectively utilized to fully achieve the physical and financial targets. They 
have also been asked for regular monitoring of the projects in respect of schemes implemented 
by them. Simultaneously, the progress is being reviewed by the Secretary (WR) every month 

 
23 
 
with a view to identify the constraints and bottlenecks and take necessary remedial measures 
to ensure that the targets are fully achieved.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.41) 
 
 The Committee note that during the year 2008 -09 the actual expenditure was less than 
the Budget estimates as the Ministry incurred expenditure of Rs.830 crore against BE of 
Rs.906 crore.  The Committee further note  that the expenditure was erratically distributed 
during all the quarters of 2009 -10.  They, therefore, desire the Ministry to incur expenditure 
strictly according to the directions of the Ministry of Finance so as to avoid March rush of 
expenditure.  It i s, therefore, imperative that the Ministry watch and monitor the flow of 
expenditure throughout the year so as to ensure strict scrutiny before the release of funds.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The pace of expenditure under various schemes is reviewed in t he Ministry of Water 
Resources at the level of Secretary (WR) on monthly basis.  Meetings of all concerned Wing 
Heads and Heads of Organizations are also convened at regular intervals to identify the 
bottlenecks in implementation of schemes, if any, and ta ke appropriate remedial measures to 
accelerate the implementation.  Further, instructions of Ministry of Finance on FRBM ceiling, 
including incurring of not more than 15% expenditure during the last month of the financial 
year, are followed. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.42) 
 
 The Committee note that the number of spill over projects into the Eleventh Five Year 
Plan works out to 477 including 166 major 222 medium and 89 ERM projects.  Some of these 
projects have been under execution from as back as the Second Five Year Plan, i.e. to say 
from the year 1956-57.  About 63% of the above 477 projects are unapproved and are ineligible 
for Central assistance.  Also, 309 new projects including 78 major, 145 medium and 86 ERM 

 
24 
 
were proposed to be taken up during the XI P lan.  Though detailed information about 
completion of all the ongoing projects and delay of new projects during XI Plan has not been 
made available by the State Governments, as per updated information available on AIBP, 37 
major/medium/ERM projects have be en reported as completed during XI Plan till March 2010 
and 10 new projects have been taken up under the AIBP.  Further, the Committee observe that 
delay in implementation of irrigation projects occurs due to various reasons such as resource 
crunch with th e States, land acquisition problems, resettlement and rehabilitation problems, 
contractual problems, litigation, delay in execution of work by other agencies such as railway or 
highway, etc.   The Committee are unhappy to note that due to delay in completi on of projects, 
notwithstanding the reasons these usually spill over to next plan.  The Committee desire that 
MoWR should take concrete steps so that spilled over projects, particularly of the distant past 
five year plans, are completed during the Eleventh Plan period itself.   
  
Reply of the Government 
 
 As per the Report of the Working Group on Water Resources for XI Five Year Plan, 477 
projects (including 166 major, 222 medium and 89 ERM) were likely to spill over to XI Plan. 
Working Group also anticipat ed completion of 178 Project (including 48 Major, 91 Medium and 
39 ERM)  during X Plan. However, all of these 178 projects could not be completed and 76 
projects (including 16 major,   51 medium and 9 ERM) were spilled over to XI Plan along with 
477 projects, making   553 projects (182 Major, 273 Medium and 98 ERM ) spill over  to  XI 
Plan.  
Irrigation being a state subject, execution and completion of irrigation projects is within 
the purview of the respective State Governments. Out of 321 projects which w ere taken up 
prior to IX Plan, 132 projects have been included in AIBP since 1996 and 30 projects out of 
these have been completed till March 2010. Ministry of Water Resources is pursuing States by 
convening meetings and urging the States to expedite completion. 
  

 
25 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.45) 
 
 The Committee note that the Ministry of Water Resources proposes to establish two 
River Basin Organisations (RBOs) for Mahanadi and Godavari river basins during XI Plan 
under River Boards Act, 1956. The main purpos e of creation of RBOs is preparation of the 
comprehensive and integrated basin plan for sustainable development of available resources to 
derive optimum benefits  and Integrated management of Water Resources with active 
participation of the stake holders.   These RBOs can also provide a platform for discussion 
among co-basin States for arriving at consensus on interstate issues. As per the River Boards 
Act 1956, the RBOs are to be established in consultation with the interested States.  The 
proposals for ab ove two RBOs in this regard have been sent to the co -basin States for their 
comments which are awaited.   The Committee appreciate the efforts of the Ministry and desire 
that the matter be pursued vigorously and conclusively at appropriate levels with the concerned 
State Governments.  Action needs to be initiated for such RBOs for other river basins as well 
so that solution of many water disputes among the co -basin States could be resolved amicably 
and swiftly.  They are of the considered view that efficaci ous functioning of RBOs will obviate 
the need for  formation of new Water Disputes Tribunals. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It has been proposed to set up two RBOs/River Boards in the XI plan under the River 
Boards Act 1956 in respect of Mahanadi and Godavari basins  As per the Act,  the RBOs are to 
be established in consultation  with and for the interested States. The proposal in this regard 
was sent to the co -basin states for their views.  They were reminded vide letters dated 
13.1.2009, 25.05.2009 and 11.8. 2009.  The matter was also discussed in the 13 th meeting of 
National Water Board held on 18 th September, 2009 with concerned States.  The States were 
again requested on 7.1.2010 & 23.3.2010 to give their views in this regard.  The Govt. of 
Chhattisgarh has  favoured the proposal of setting up of Mahanadi River Basin 
Organisation(MRBO) and  Godavari River Basin Organisation (GRBO) with certain 

 
26 
 
observations.  The Govt. of Orissa has also favoured the setting up of MRBO with certain 
observations.  However, the Govt. of Maharashtra has not favoured the proposal of setting up 
of MRBO and GRBO at this stage.  Other co -basin States of Godavari & Mahanadi basin have 
not offered their views.   The matter is being pursued with all concerned State Governments 
As the set ting up of RBO is a time consuming process, initially the efforts are focused 
on these two basins only.  After the success in the setup of RBO in Mahanadi & Godavari 
basins, the setting up of RBOs on other basins would also be taken up.  
It has been propos ed to set up two RBOs/River Boards in the XI plan under the River 
Boards Act 1956 in respect of Mahanadi and Godavari basins  As per the Act,  the RBOs are to 
be established in consultation  with and for the interested States. The proposal in this regard 
was sent to the co -basin states for their views.  They were reminded vide letters dated 
13.1.2009, 25.05.2009 and 11.8.2009.  The matter was also discussed in the 13 th meeting of 
National Water Board held on 18 th September, 2009 with concerned States.  The States were 
again requested on 7.1.2010 & 23.3.2010 to give their views in this regard.  The Govt. of 
Chhattisgarh has favoured the proposal of setting up of Mahanadi River Basin 
Organisation(MRBO) and  Godavari River Basin Organisation (GRBO) with certain  
observations.  The Govt. of Orissa has also favoured the setting up of MRBO with certain 
observations.  However, the Govt. of Maharashtra has not favoured the proposal of setting up 
of MRBO and GRBO at this stage.  Other co -basin States of Godavari & Maha nadi basin have 
not offered their views.   The matter is being pursued with all concerned State Governments 
As the setting up of RBO is a time consuming process, initially the efforts are focused 
on these two basins only.  After the success in the setup of  RBO in Mahanadi & Godavari 
basins, the setting up of RBOs on other basins would also be taken up.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.46) 
 
 The Committee note that Dams require constant management and monitoring and to 
establish an institutional system to maintai n and regularly monitor the safety of dams, 
legislation is required to be made.  The Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly and the West 

 
27 
 
Bengal Legislative Assembly have passed Resolutions empowering the Parliament to pass the 
necessary Dam Safety Act.  The legislation on dam safety would help the States in adopting 
uniform dam safety norms.   Such statutory dam safety norms will provide for proper surveillance, 
inspection and maintenance of dams of certain parameters to ensure their safe functioning.  
According to the Ministry, the proposed Dam Safety Bill, 2010 is under finalization in consultation 
with the Ministry of Law & Justice and is expected to be taken up during the Fourth Session of 15th 
Lok Sabha. The Committee, therefore, desire that the said Dam Safety Legislation be introduced 
expeditiously in Parliament within the stipulated time. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As regard introduction of Dam Safety Bill, 2010 it is mentioned that the Cabinet in its 
meeting dt. 13.5.2010 considered the Dam Safety Bill, 2010 and approved the Bill with certain 
modifications which are being carried out in consultation with the Ministry of Law & Justice.  
After finalization of the same, the Bill would be introduced in Parliament. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.47) 
 
 The Committee note that there are 12 Wings in the Ministry.  According to the MoWR 
the present staff strength is not sufficient for the smooth functioning of the various activities of 
the Ministry, as over a period of time, on the one hand the sanctioned posts have be en 
abolished due to various reasons, like abolition of 2/3 rd of direct recruitment vacancies every 
year since 16.5.2001 till 31.3.2009 under the Annual Direct Recruitment Plan of the Ministry of 
Finance, and on the other hand new activities have been assig ned to the Ministry.   According 
to the Ministry, efforts have been made to augment the staff strength by revival of posts gone 
under deemed abolition though a few new posts have also been created.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate that the Ministry sho uld pursue vigorously with the Ministry of Finance for 
revival of some posts gone under deemed abolition and  which are crucial for smooth 
functioning of the Ministry particularly on technical side which constitutes the backbone of the 

 
28 
 
activities of the Mi nistry of Water Resources.  The Ministry of Water Resources should also 
conduct a fresh review of staff strength to ascertain the actual requirement of the staff and 
officers in its various wings and offices and the bodies under it considering the importan ce of its 
expanding mandate. 
Reply of the Government 
 
A number of posts have been revived in this Ministry and its organizations in recent 
years with the approval of Ministry of Finance.   In the light of Standing Committee‟s 
recommendation, a fresh exerci se has now been initiated for revival of posts going under 
deemed abolition.   All the organizations under the Ministry have been requested to intimate the 
number and names of the technical posts which they would like to recommend for revival.  The 
proposal is being taken up with the Ministry of Finance for revival of posts.  Further, it is 
mentioned that Staff Inspection Unit of Ministry of Finance has already been requested to 
conduct a study of the manpower requirement of the Ministry and its organizations.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 6 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.48) 
 
The Committee note that replies to several Audit Paras for the year 2007 -08 and 2008-
09 are still at the stage of preparation of draft Action Taken Notes.  They were apprised that the 
process of final settlement of each para is very time consuming and piecemeal settlement of 
individual para is not permitted.  However, they are unable to accept the explanation of the 
Ministry of Water Resour ces that since the offices of the Ministry including attached and sub -
ordinate offices, autonomous organizations and statutory bodies are located far and across the 
country and therefore, collection of information from the controlling officers causes delay .  The 
explanation sounds hollow and baseless considering the lead taken by India in IT application.  
Further, the Committee would like to caution the Ministry that wilful delay in furnishing 

 
29 
 
explanation to the Audit or any sign of non cooperation gives mi sgivings and only adds to 
suspicion and mistrust.  They hope that the Ministry would take appropriate measures to 
computerize the functioning of its offices including field formations for speedy exchange of 
communication and would also take suitable steps to settle the audit findings/observations 
expeditiously.    
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Water Resources has taken appropriate measures to expedite the pace of 
submission of Draft ATN/Final ATN.  In this direction, efforts are also being made to 
computerize the functioning of offices, including field formations, which will facilitate speedy 
compilation and transmission of information.    
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.17) 
 
 The Committee note that the target for creation of irrigation potential through major and 
medium irrigation projects during X Plan was 9.936 mha which was reduced to 6.5 mha during 
Mid-Term Appraisal of X Plan. The reported creation of irrigation potential was 5.30 mha 
through major and medium irrigation projects during X Plan as agai nst the target of 9.936 mha. 
The target for creation of irrigation potential through major and medium projects during XI Plan 
is 9.0 mha.  The  total irrigation potential of 1.86 mha  has been created during the first two 
years of XI Plan i.e. during 2007 -08 and 2008 -09.  At mid term appraisal of the XI Plan the 
target has since been revised to 5.00 mha.  The Committee are anguished to note that targets 
were reduced in Tenth Plan and even those reduced targets could not be achieved.  The same 
pattern is also seen in the XI Plan as the figures of reference at 2 years and mid term appraisal 
of scheme indicate that only 1.86 mha irrigation potential has been created thus far.  With this 
snail‟s pace, the much reduced target of 5.00 mha prima facie  appears to be  unachievable.  
The Committee are, therefore, of the considered view that something has gone awry with the 
plan target formulation process and the Ministry must, therefore, reflect deeply to devise 
suitable measures to achieve the target fixed so as to avoid cost and time overrun. 

 
30 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Irrigation being a State subject, the planning, implementation, development and 
maintenance of water resources projects is the responsibility of the State Governments. 
However, the realization of targeted potential lies with the implementing authorities. The 
Planning Commission has further observed that during the formulation of the XI Plan and its 
targets (in the year 2006 -07), the average cost of the creation of irrigation potential was about 
Rs.1.7 lakh per hectare which has risen to the extent of Rs.2.00 to 3.5 lakh per hectare 
because of price hike in material, labour cost and land acquisition etc, Against the revised 
target of 6.5 mha in Mid -Term Appraisal (MTA) of X Plan, the irrigation potential crea tion 
through major and medium irrigation projects in X Plan was 5.30 mha  (81.53%) . Further, the 
target set for XI Plan was 9.0 mha which has been revised to 5.00 mha in MTA of XI Plan., 
against which creation of total irrigation potential of 2.98  mha du ring the first three years of 11th 
Plan i.e. 2007 -08, 2008 -09 & 2009 -10 has been reported so far by the State Governments. 
Some of the major issues in non-achievement of the target in irrigation sector are as under: 
 Environment and forest clearances. 
 Rehabilitation and resettlement issues. 
 Land acquisition problems. 
 Contractual Litigations. 
 Lack of operation and maintenance. 
 
Ministry of Water Resources is pursuing the matter with respective State Governments 
and making all out efforts to ensure the achievement of revised target. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.19) 
 
 The Committee note that the management of Water Resources is a highly complex task 
that involves multi -disciplinary domains including data acquisition, numerical modelling, 
optimisation, data warehou sing, and the analysis of socio -economic, environmental and legal 
issues.  The development of Water Resources Information System (WRIS) was approved in 

 
31 
 
June 2008 for implementation during the XI Plan with the total outlay of Rs.234.30 crore.  The 
Budget allocation (Plan) has been earmarked at Rs.66.00 crore for the year 2010 -11 which is 
Rs.4.00 crore less as compared to BE 2009 -10. The objective of the scheme is to develop 
information system for water resources.  All the processed information will be made a vailable to 
all users through a web enabled system.  Two main activities under the scheme are (i) Data 
Bank and Online Information System, and (ii) Creation of Watershed Maps and Geographic 
Information System. The works related to studies for assessment of  irrigation potential by 
remote sensing technique are also undertaken under the scheme.  The website of India WRIS 
has been launched during 2009.  The Development of WRIS by Indian Space Research 
Organization is under progress.  In respect of minor irrigat ion census, 99.4% field work has 
been reported as completed.  About 86.7% of the works related to data entry has also been 
completed.  At this stage the Committee hope that development of WRIS will be taken up at a 
faster pace so that the information uploaded becomes available and utilized for various studies, 
research and to help evaluate various schemes.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The objective of the plan scheme, Water Resources Information System (WRIS) is to 
develop information system on water resource s at the national level. The Water Resources 
Information System web site was launched during 2010 -11 and the work is under progress in 
ISRO – DOS. The WRIS web site proposes to have web enabled query system on its data 
base to generate any desired basin wi se information. The matter has been taken up with 
Department of Space for ensuring timely completion of the target.  Department of Space has 
informed that the first phase of WRIS would be operational by September 2010.  
 
Further Reply of the Government 
 
During XI Plan CWC & ISRO are jointly developing web based Water Resources 
Information System.  In this information system 30 GIS layers (as given below) will be 
developed.  This information system will be on 1:50000 scale with WGS 84 projection system.  

 
32 
 
The project is scheduled to be completed by December 2012.  The first version of the 
information system was inaugurated by the then Hon‟ble Minister for Water Resources Shri 
Pawan Kumar Bansal on 7 th December 2010 at New Delhi.  The URL of website is www.india-
wris.nrsc.gov.in/webgis.php. 
 
Sl.No. Name of GIS Layer 
 
1.  Basin, sub basin, catchment, water shed 
2.  River network 
3.  Digital Elevation Model 
4.  Administrative boundary like International, State, District & Block boundary 
5.  Village boundary 
6.  Town/village location and extent 
7.  Road network 
8.  Major tourist station 
9.  Location of Major & Medium Irrigation Projects 
10.  Location of Hydroelectric Project 
11.  Location of Multipurpose projects 
12.  Major & Medium Irrigation command boundary 
13.  Waterlogged and salt affected area in major & medium command 
14.  Soil samples of Major & Medium Irrigation Project command 
15.  Canal Network 
16.  Surface water bodies 
17.  Ground water observation well location & data 
18.  Litholog data with aquifer data 
19.  Land use/ Land cover 
20.  Land degradation 
21.  Wasteland map 
22.  Snow cover area 
23.  Flood inundation map 
24.  Drought prone area map 
25.  Inland navigation waterways 
26.  Inter-basin transfer link as per NWDA 
27.  Hydro-meteorological (Gauge & Discharge) sties of CWC 
28.  Meteorological station of IMB & CWC 
29.  Climate related data 
30.  Pollution monitoring station/water quality station of CWC 
  
[Ministry of Water Resources Letter No.3/129/2010-RS/207 dated 22.02.2011] 

 
33 
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
  Recommendation (Para No.3.20) 
 
 The Committee further note that reports of 52 projects have been received from NRSA 
Hyderabad on the remote sensing monitoring of AIBP assisted major and medium irrigation 
projects.  T he reports have been analyzed and the analysis of the results indicated that the 
variations between the figures of irrigation potential creation as reported by the respective State 
Governments and that assessed by the remote sensing data were within + 15% in respect of 
30 projects. However, in other cases the variations were relatively higher.  The monitoring of 
projects through remote sensing also helped in identifying the specific reasons for non -creation 
of irrigation potential and also in identifying the s pecific location where the works remained 
incomplete resulting in non -utilization of created facilities.  According to the Ministry, the 
findings of the studies have been conveyed to respective State Governments for necessary 
action.  The Committee is happy to note that reports of NRSA, Hyderabad is proving as a major 
help in finding the status/lacuna in the implementation of projects.  The Committee hope that 
the good work will continue with greater vigour so as to expand its reach.  The Committee 
would li ke to be apprised of the response of various States to whom project reports and 
findings have been conveyed.  They also desire that services of NRSA should be extended to 
other activities of water resource availability, conservation, depletion and developm ent 
particularly the ground water. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 State Governments have been requested to give feedback in respect of those projects 
where variation was large. CWC field units have also been directed to pursue with the State 
Governments and obt ain the feedback from the States.  
The efforts are made by the Project Authorities to close the gaps in the canal network wherever 
pointed out in the Report of the National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) of the Department of 

 
34 
 
Space. Further, AIBP assisted   e xtension of the work of assessing potential creation by 
cartosat satellite data to 50 additional irrigation projects has been approved. In addition to the 
assessment of irrigation potential creation for AIBP assisted projects, several activities in water 
sector have been undertaken by using remote sensing data in association with NRSC by 
concerned organizations of the Government of India as well as the State Governments. Some 
of important works undertaken by NRSC are as under. 
 
a. Satellite Remote Sensing base d sedimentation analysis for selected reservoirs in India 
jointly with Central Water Commission. 
b. Assessment and Monitoring of Water Logging & Salinity in Major & Medium Irrigation 
Project in the country jointly with Central Water Commission. 
c. Preparation of  maps showing prospective zones of groundwater occurrence and 
recharge on 1:50,000 scale under Rajiv Gandhi National Drinking Water Mission 
(RGNDWM) jointly with Department of Drinking Water Supply. 
d. Monitoring and evaluation of Watersheds treated under NWD PRA jointly with Ministry 
of Agriculture. 
e. Satellite based evaluation study of 14 major irrigation commands under Command Area 
Development (CAD) programme 
f. Snowmelt runoff forecasting in Sutluj basin jointly with Bhakra Beas Management 
Board. 
g. Organization of  training courses on   “Application of Remote Sensing GIS in water 
sector” jointly with National Water Academy, Pune. 
h. Development of Water Resources  Information  System jointly with Central Water 
Commission  
 Further, a major project  to study the snow an d glacier in the country has been 
launched by Ministry of Environment & Forest and ISRO.  In addition, satellite derived inputs 
have also been used in assessing the feasibility of proposed irrigation projects in upper Betwa 

 
35 
 
basin on part of Ken -Betwa link project. River morphology studies have also been carried out 
by using remote sensing data.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No.18 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
  Recommendation (Para No.4.12) 
 
 The Committee note that Minor Irrigation Schemes  are those ground water and surface 
water schemes which have a culturable command area upto 2,000 hectares individually.  
During XI Plan period many schemes under Minor Irrigation have been transferred to State 
Sector and some others have been merged in a new scheme.  The Budget Allocation (Plan) for 
Minor Irrigation Scheme during 2010 -11 is Rs.116.50 crore which is Rs.42.50 crore more as 
compared to the previous financial year in 2009 -10. The schemes covered under Minor 
Irrigation are Ground Water Manageme nt and Regulation, Rajiv Gandhi National Training and 
Research Institute for Ground Water and Infrastructure Development. The reasons for 
increased allocation for 2010-11,  as submitted by the Ministry, are enhanced activities for work 
in respect of rain w ater harvesting and artificial recharge of ground water, work of office 
building of CWC and CGWB and for training of officers of State Governments in India and 
abroad.  The Committee hope that the increased allocation of Rs.116.50 crore would be utilised 
fully in 2010 -11.  The Committee, however, desire that they may be apprised of the 
achievement under the schemes of rain water harvesting and artificial recharge of ground water 
during the first two years of the XI Plan. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In the 1 st year of XI Plan, State implementing agencies were requested to prepare 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) for proposed Demonstrative Projects indicating design and cost 
estimate.  CGWB regional Offices, jointly with State Agencies made feasibility studies for 

 
36 
 
preparation of DPRs.  State Level Technical Advisory Committees in States were also 
constituted for recommending project proposals submitted by State Agencies for release of 
funds to construct artificial recharge structures under demonstrative recharge com ponent of 
Central Sector Scheme. 
 In the 2nd year of the Plan, 8 project proposals for construction of recharge structures in 
States of Tamil Nadu, Kerala, West Bengal, Punjab and Arunachal Pradesh were approved.  In 
the 3rd year of Plan, 8 more proposals were approved and the progressive release of Rs. 15.36 
crore made against the total project cost of Rs. 25.06 crores to the States of Kerala, Punjab, 
Arunachal Pradesh, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh and 
Madhya Pradesh.    
 In order to utilize the enhanced allocation during 2010 -11 under the scheme, the matter 
is being vigorously pursued with the States through Central Ground Water Board and periodical 
review of the physical and financial progress of the works are being un dertaken by the Ministry 
of Water Resources.      
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.13) 
 
 The Committee note that the target for creation of irrigation potential through Minor 
Irrigation during X Plan was 6.807 mha which was revised to 4.00 mha at mid term appra isals 
and actual creation of potential was 3.52 mha and its utilization was 2.82 mha.  The target for 
creation of irrigation potential through MI during XI Plan is 7 million hectare and the 
achievement, as reported by the respective State Governments during  the first two years of XI 
Plan, i.e. during 2007-08 and 2008-09 has been 1.79 Million hectare.   The Committee regret to 
note that despite downward revision in the target for creation of irrigation, the actual output was 
further down. The target for XI Pl an has been fixed at 7 mha against which actual creation in 
first two years is meagre 1.79 mha, a figure far from encouraging.  During the mid - term 
appraisal, the target for XI Plan has also been revised to 4.50 mha.  The Committee, therefore, 
would like to be apprised of the strategy and the measures to be taken by MOWR to achieve 
the revised target fixed for XI Plan during the remaining period of the Plan.  The Committee 

 
37 
 
would also like to be apprised of the State -wise break-up of irrigation potential to  be created 
during XI plan and achieved so far. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The irrigation projects including the minor irrigation projects are undertaken by 
respective State Governments as per their own priorities.  With a view to encourage the 
completion of ongoing projects and help States in creation of irrigation potential, Government of 
India provides financial assistance under Accelerated Irrigation Benefited  Programme (AIBP).  
In case of minor irrigation schemes, the central assistance to States is p rovided to the projects 
in the States of North -Eastern Region, Hilly States namely, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Uttrakhand, undivided Koraput, Bolangir and Kalahandi (KBK) districts of Orissa and 
projects benefiting tribal areas and drought prone ar eas.  As per the updated information 
provided by the respective State Governments, a total of 2.322 million hectare of irrigation 
potential has been created through minor irrigation schemes since April, 2007.  State -wise 
details are as under: 
State-wise irrigation potential created under Minor Irrigation during XIth 
Plan  upto 22.06.2010 
S. No.       State/UT Irrigation Potential created               
  (in thousand hectare) 
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 Total 
1 Andhra Pradesh 93.621 0.000 1.220 94.841 
2 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 7.000 4.350 3.470 14.820 
3 Assam 10.661 25.709 50.944 87.314 
4 Bihar 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 
5 Chhattisgarh 19.524 29.520 27.126 76.170 
6 Goa 0.384 0.472 0.106 0.962 
7 Gujarat 50.810 70.270 22.130 143.210 

 
38 
 
8 Haryana 2.150 6.788 3.236 12.174 
9 Himachal Pradesh 2.700 2.800 29.472 34.972 
10 Jammu & Kashmir 13.450 0.000 12.120 25.570 
11 Jharkhand 8.482 24.210 2.828 35.520 
12 Karnataka 14.431 41.709 0.000 56.140 
13 Kerala 6.818 8.636 0.462 15.916 
14 Madhya Pradesh 22.680 49.480 1.092 73.252 
15 Maharashtra 0.000 35.000 29.423 64.423 
16 Manipur 0.000 0.000 2.072 2.072 
17 Meghalaya 0.932 5.056 4.589 10.577 
18 Mizoram 3.031 5.248 3.509 11.788 
19 Nagaland 4.195 3.872 3.344 11.411 
20 Orissa 34.354 50.250 6.654 91.258 
21 Punjab 26.202 0.000 0.000 26.202 
22 Rajasthan 11.010 5.870 3.000 19.880 
23 Sikkim 1.080 0.797 0.914 2.791 
24 Tamil Nadu 1.700 98.000 264.580 364.280 
25 Tripura 0.508 0.270 0.812 1.590 
26 Uttar Pradesh 494.400 373.200 34.030 901.630 
27 Uttaranchal 29.280 12.086 12.139 53.505 
28 West Bengal 31.936 48.959 9.105 90.000 
29 UTs 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 
  Total 891.339 902.552 528.377 2322.268 
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 21 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 

 
39 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.14) 
 
 The Committ ee note that the Scheme of Ground Water Management & Regulation 
(GWM&R) was launched at a cost of Rs. 460 crore for implementation by Central Ground 
Water Board during XI Plan.  Demonstrative projects on Artificial Recharge to ground water and 
Rain Water Harvesting proposed to be taken up under Central Sector Scheme by CGWB, at an 
estimated cost of Rs. 100 crore with 100% funding by the Central Government.  Exploratory 
Drilling,  Carrying out Ground Water Management studies, Ground Water regime monitoring 
through observation wells and Regulation and Control of ground Water development through 
CGWA are other activities covered in the Scheme.  S o far the State Level Technical Advisory  
Committees (SLTAC) of the 11 States (Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Ka rnataka, 
Punjab, West Bengal, Mizoram, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and 
Orissa) have forwarded the proposals to the CGWB for funding under  ‘demonstrative projects 
on artificial recharge‟ and  ‘rain water harvesting‟ component of the schem e.  The proposal, in 
respect of the remaining States  are under preparation . D uring the XI Plan, a total of 794 
Artificial Recharge Structures in 7 States have been proposed for funding from Central Sector 
Scheme, out of which 121 AR structures are complete d and remaining are under progress.   
Efforts are being made to make these schemes popular / mandatory in public so that adverse 
effects of over exploitation of ground water can be dealt with.  The efforts include m ass 
awareness programmes, workshops and p ublication of Information brochures in local 
languages.  The Committee appreciate the efforts being made to make aware the masses 
about the importance of water, adverse effects of over exploitation etc.  However, the 
Committee regret to note that against a  target of 794 Artificial Recharge Structures during XI 
Plan only 121 structures have been completed whereas half of the term of the XIth  plan is 
over.  Considering such a tardy pace of execution, the Committee are highly concerned and 
worried how the tar gets would be achieved by the end of the XIth Plan. Therefore, the 
Committee desire that Ministry of Water Resources should pursue the matter with the State 
Governments with greater vigour and persuade them to push forward the pace of construction 

 
40 
 
of remai ning structures of artificial recharge so that the targets fixed for the XI Plan are 
achieved. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Out of 794 recharge structures approved, 318 have been completed upto March, 2010.  
Further, Regional Directors and CGWB are constantly pursuing the matter with State 
Government implementing agencies to complete construction of the recharge structures in 
approved demonstrative artificial recharge projects on priority following timelines indicated in 
project proposals so as to complete the work by March, 2011.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.11) 
 The Committee note that two  on -going schemes of X plan, namely, „Establishment and 
Modernization of Flood Forecasting Network in India including Inflow forecast‟ and 
„Strengthening and modernization o f flood forecasting and hydrological observation network in 
the Brahmaputra and Barak Basin‟ of Central Water Commission (CWC) have been 
amalgamated into a combined scheme, namely, “Flood Forecasting” during XI Plan.  Under the 
new scheme, it is proposed ( i) to modernize the flood forecasting network by installing 
automatic water level and rainfall sensors at all the observation sites and satellite based 
transmission system for getting real time flood data expeditiously and (ii) to develop appropriate 
software/models for flood/inflow forecasting to reduce the time for analysis of data.  The outlay 
on Flood Forecasting for the year 2010-11 has been increased to Rs.36.00 crore in comparison 
to Rs.25.00 crore at BE 2009 -10. The increase of  Rs.11 crore in the o utlay is mainly for 
procurement of telemetry equipment, the work orders of which are being finalized and 
payments will be made in 2010 -11 which could not be done in 2009 -10.  Presently, Flood 
Forecasts are issued by CWC at 175 stations (28 Inflow Forecast Stations and 147 Level 
Forecast Stations).  The existing data acquisition and transmission system, though time tested 
for the past 35 years, needs modernization.   During X Plan, the work of modernization of 
existing data acquisition, forecasting and trans mission network at 168 data collection stations 
was undertaken by CWC.   The activity of flood forecasting comprises Level Forecasting and 

 
41 
 
Inflow Forecasting.  The level forecasts help the user agencies in deciding mitigating measures   
The Inflow Forecast ing is used by various dam authorities in optimum operation of reservoirs 
for safe passage of flood downstream as well as to ensure adequate storage in the reservoirs 
for meeting demands during non -monsoon period.  At present, accuracy of flood forecasts 
issued to the local authorities by CWC is above 96%.   During the X Plan, the activity of 
installation of telemetry equipments at 168 stations in the five river basins namely, the Godavari 
(63 nos.), the Krishna (41 nos.), the Brahmaputra (21 nos.), the Dam odar (20 nos.), the 
Yamuna (15 nos.) and part of Mahanadi basin (8 nos.) was undertaken.  Due to time and other 
constraints, works on only 147 stations could be completed out of 168 stations and the works 
for the remaining 21 stations spilled over to XI Pl an.  During XI Plan, the targets of 222 
telemetry stations have been fixed.  The target for 99 stations has been revised from 2009 -10 
to 2010-11.  The remaining 123 telemetry stations are proposed to be installed during  2011 -
12.  The Committee hope that t he Ministry would  make sincere and concerted efforts to install 
the remaining 123 telemetery equipments by 2011 -12.  The particulars of the States if any, 
where the Union Government have not installed their own telemetery equipments may also be 
furnished along with the reasons for such omission. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The work for supply, installation, test and commissioning of 222 Telemetry Stations has 
been awarded by Central Water Commission in April, 2010.  Central Water Commission has 
constituted an Implementation Committee, headed by the Chief Engineer, to monitor the 
progress of works.  The target of installation of 99 telemetry stations during 2010 -11 and 
remaining 123 telemetry stations during 2011-12 has been fixed. 
 The telemetry equipment ar e not installed by CWC so far in the States of Tamil Nadu, 
Kerala, Goa, Punjab, Sikkim, Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Tripura, Mizoram and Jammu & 
Kashmir.  These states would be covered under telemetry network in the next Five Year Plan.  

 
42 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6.16) 
 
 The Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP) was launched during 1996 -97 to 
give loan assistance to the States to help them complete some of the incomplete 
major/medium irrigation projects which were in an advanced stage of completi on with a view to  
speed up creation of additional irrigation potential in the country.  Grant component has been 
introduced in the programme from April 2004 like other Central sector schemes.  As per the 
existing  AIBP criteria effective from December 200 6, grant amounting to 25% of the project 
cost for major and medium irrigation projects in non -special category States  and 90% grant of 
the project cost in special category States are provided to the selected projects.  The minor 
irrigation schemes in non -special category States falling in drought prone/tribal areas are 
treated at par with special category States and are released 90% grant of the project cost.  
Drought prone/Tribal area and flood prone area are also eligible for 90% grant of the project 
cost.  After commencement of this Programme 110 major/medium and 6,959 Surface MI 
Schemes have so far been completed.  An additional irrigation potential of 5.486 million hectare 
has been created through major/medium irrigation projects and an irrigation pote ntial of 0.454 
million hectare has been created through Surface MI Schemes upto March 2009. Of the 65 
major/medium projects initially included in the Prime Minister‟s relief package for agrarian 
distressed districts of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala and  Maharashtra, so far 38 projects 
have been funded under AIBP.   The State Governments have reported creation of 18.60 lakh 
ha. (1.86 mha) irrigation potential through major/medium projects during first two years of XI 
Plan of which 10.817 lakh ha. (1.08 mh a) were through AIBP assisted major/medium projects 
and through surface water minor irrigation schemes it is 2.175 lakh ha  (0.21 mha).  The 
Committee note that AIBP was launched to give loan assistance to the States to help them 
complete some of the   incomplete projects which were in advanced stage of completion and to 
create additional irrigation potential in the country.  As per the information made available to the 
Committee, the irrigation potential created under AIBP up to March 2009 is 5.940 mha (4. 846 
mha under MMI projects and 0.454 mha under surface MI projects).    Moreover, out of 275 
MMI projects and 10316 surface MI schemes funded under the scheme till 01.02.2010 only 110 

 
43 
 
MMI and 6,959 surface MI scheme have so far been completed.  The Committ ee are not at all 
satisfied with the progress achieved under AIBP scheme so far and desire that concerted and 
concrete efforts be made to make the programme successful by achieving the targets.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Up to March 2009, irrigation pote ntial of 5.94 mha was reported to have been created 
under the AIBP.  During 2009 -10, irrigation potential of about 9.00 lakh ha is estimated to have 
been created though the same will be confirmed by end of current working season in July 2010.  
Apart from 1 10 major / medium projects already reported as completed, 14 more projects are 
expected to have been completed for which completion report is awaited and is likely to be 
received shortly.  7882 surface MI schemes are also reported as completed under AIBP s o far.  
The Ministry of Water Resources is making concerted efforts for making AIBP a more 
successful programme. 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 27 of Chapter-I of the Report 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6.17) 
 
 A list each of the ongoing MM I projects and surface MI schemes under AIBP indicate 
that there are 43 MMI projects and a large number of MI/new schemes  pending for release of 
subsequent instalment for want of request of State  Governments and utilization  certificates for 
the instalments released earlier.   The Committee are surprised to note that State Governments 
have neither submitted utilization certificate nor requested for subsequent release of funds.  
The Committee are of the view that such delay in submission of utilization cer tificate leads to 
cost overrun and time overrun and delay in benefits to farmers in the form of irrigation facilities.  
The Committee desire MoWR to take up the matter vigorously with State Governments 
regarding delay in submission of utilization certifica tes and request for release of grant.  They 
also desire to fix some time frame for submission of UCs alongwith a penalty clause that may 

 
44 
 
be a tool of deterrence and force State Governments in submitting UCs in time.  The 
Committee would also like to see th e list of defaulter States and the projects and their costs 
that are likely to be affected. 
Reply of the Government 
The State Governments usually submit UCs for earlier released grant under AIBP along 
with proposals for next instalment of grant and it is a  continuous process. The delay in 
submission of UCs occurs if the grant released under AIBP could not be utilized due to slow 
progress of works which occurs due to various reasons such as land acquisition problems, 
resettlement and rehabilitation problems,  contractual problems, geological surprises, litigation 
etc. The Ministry of Water Resources consistently reviews performance of the projects under 
AIBP and suggest remedial measures for timely completion of the projects. The Ministry usually 
do not approv e extension of time for completion of project unless there is full justification for 
delay in completion of projects and usually obtains undertaking from State Governments that 
any further cost overrun due to time overrun shall be borne by the state govern ments 
themselves. The projects indicated below have not approached MoWR for further release of 
grant after 2007-08 and Utilization Certificate for the last grant are pending with them. 
                                                            Amount in Rs Crores 
S.No. State / Project Grant released in 
2007-08 
 Andhra Pardesh  
1 Pushkara 13.96 
2 Gollavavu 32.12 
3 Valligallu 26.25 
4 Nilwai 15.55 
 Bihar  
5 4 MI schemes 3.55 
 Jharkhand  
6 Gumani 3.71 
7 Sonua 0.90 

 
45 
 
 Karnataka  
8 Varahi 0.29 
 Madhya Pradesh  
9 Indira Sagar 94.77 
 Orissa  
10 Titlagarh 17.33 
11 Chhaligadda 5.53 
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 30 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6.19) 
 
 The Committee note that for the year 2009 -10, Budget allocation of Rs.8,000 crore has 
been made by the Ministry of Finance for AIBP which includes Rs.1,800 crore for the National 
Projects.  The Union Cabinet in February 2008 approved the proposal of the Ministry of 
Water Resources on implementation of National P rojects with Central assistance of 90% of 
the cost of the project. A new project is eligible for consideration for inclusion in the 
scheme of National Project with the approval of the Union Cabinet if it is an International 
project where usage of water in India is required by a treaty or where Inter -state projects 
which are dragging on due to non -resolution of inter -state issues including river inter -
linking projects and Intra -state projects with additional potential of more than 2 lakh ha. 
and with no disp ute regarding sharing of water. The Central Government has declared 14 
water resource projects as National Projects.   Out of these 14 projects, detailed project reports 
of nine projects are under various stages of preparation. DPR of Ken -Betwa Link Projec t was  
prepared and sent for concurrence of M.P. and U.P. Govts.  Reportedly, the comments of the 
Government of U.P. and M.P. on the DPR are under examination by NWDA.  The Committee 
desire NWDA to take early decision on the comments of the State Governmen ts on the DPR of 
Ken-Betwa link.  The Committee also note that no addition in the Scheme of National Project 

 
46 
 
has been made in the last one year.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the reasons 
therefor.  The Committee also desire that to increase t he irrigation potential, MoWR should 
consider to include more projects in the Scheme of National Projects. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Keeping in view overall availability of budget allocation, two new projects, namely 
Polavaram Project of Andhra Pradesh and  Bargi Diversion Project of Madhya Pradesh are 
under active consideration of the Ministry for inclusion in the scheme of national projects.  The 
High Powered Steering Committee for National Projects has approved their inclusion in the 
scheme of national pr ojects and further action is being taken by this Ministry for obtaining EFC 
clearance required for seeking the approval of Union Cabinet. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6.20) 
 
 The Committee note that Irrigation is one of the six components for development of 
rural infrastructure under Bharat Nirman.  Against the aim of creation of irrigation potential of 10 
million hectare (Mha) in four years, i.e. from 2005 -06 to 2008 -09, 7.31 Mha has been created 
upto March 2009.  The target for creation of irrigation potentia l during the year 2009 -10 and 
2010-11 is stated to be 3.50 million ha.  The Committee express their unhappiness over the 
non-achievement of the target under the „Bharat Nirman‟.  They observe that creation of 
irrigation potential remained below the target under Bharat Nirman.  They desire the 
Government to give serious consideration to it and take concerted steps to improve the 
situation during the remaining period of Bharat Nirman. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Water being a State subject, planning and impleme ntation of water resources projects 
are undertaken by respective State Governments. However, central assistance is provided to 
states under various programmes/schemes of the Ministry of Water Resources. As per the 
information provided by State Governments,  the total irrigation potential created during the four 

 
47 
 
years i.e., during the period 2005-06 to 2008-09 is 7.31 million hectares against the target of 10 
million hectares, which is 73% of the total target. The remaining target is set to be achieved in 
the extended period of Bharat Nirman i.e. in 2009 -10 and 2010 -11 by enhanced funding in 
AIBP and improvement in delivering irrigation system. Creation of 3.5 million hectares of 
irrigation potential has been targeted in the next two years i.e., 1.75 million h ectares each 
during 2009-10 and 2010-11. Further, irrigation potential of 1.63 million hectare has since been 
reported to be created by the State Governments during 2009 -10 and it is expected that the 
target of creation of 1.75 mha would be fully achieved during the year 2009-10.  

 
48 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.43) 
 
 The Committee note that the Eleventh Plan document provides that while sanc tioning 
new irrigation projects, it would be made obligatory for the project authorities to implement 
micro irrigation in at least 10% of the command area as micro -irrigation has the potential to 
transform Indian agriculture. Under the scheme of Command Ar ea Development and Water 
Management (CADWM) Programme approved for the XI Plan period, a provision has been 
made to provide financial assistance to the states for development of infrastructure to facilitate 
use of sprinkler and drip irrigation system as an  alternative to construction of field channels.  
The assistance is admissible for construction of stilling tank, pump house and laying of 
conveyance pipes to farmers‟ fields.  However, there is no statutory provision for making it 
obligatory.  The Task For ce on Micro Irrigation constituted by the Government of India has 
assessed a potential of 69 mha. (27 mha under drip and 42 mha under sprinkler) to be 
achieved under micro irrigation.  The target for XI Plan period under micro irrigation is 28 lakh 
ha. (2.8 mha).  The Committee note that so far only about 1.7 mha  (about 2.5% of potential 
area)  has been achieved which is a small fraction of micro irrigation potential.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that while sanctioning new projects, it should be ma de obligatory for the 
project authorities to implement micro irrigation in atleast 10% of the command area.  They also 
desire that a time bound programme be chalked out to achieve the targets fixed for 11 th Plan.  
The Committee may also be apprised of the action taken by the Government to implement the 
recommendations of the Task Force on Micro Irrigation.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 Based on the recommendation of the Task Force on Micro Irrigation constituted by the 
Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), the Depart ment of Agriculture & Corporation has launched a 

 
49 
 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme on Micro Irrigation in Jan., 2006.  Under the Scheme, the 
assistance is provided to all category of farmers at the rate of 50% of the cost of drip and 
sprinkler system and at the rate of 75% of the cost of demonstration.  In order to implement the 
recommendation of Task Force to implement Micro Irrigation in new projects, the Ministry of 
Agriculture has requested all the States that all irrigation projects may be linked with Micro 
Irrigation so that maximum land can be brought under the cultivation with minimum use of 
water.  
Task Force on Micro Irrigation constituted by the Government of India has assessed a 
potential of 69 million hectares (27 million hectares under drip irrigation  and 42 million hectares 
under sprinkler Irrigation) to be achieved under Micro irrigation.  As per information furnished 
by Ministry of Agriculture, about 17.69 lackh hectares has been achieved under Micro Irrigation 
in the country.  The target for 11th Plan period under micro irrigation is 28 lakh hectares. 
Some important recommendations of the Task Force are -micro Irrigation to be 
promoted in a holistic manner, assistance for MI to be viewed as an investment for 
infrastructure support,  MI to be made co mpulsory in  new projects, no tax to be levied on MI 
system and adequate post installation maintenance and extension services  to be provided.  
In order to promote water use efficiency in irrigation a provision has been made with 
effect from 1.4.2008 under the Command Area Development and Water Management 
Programme to provide financial assistance to  the States for development of infrastructure from 
outlet to farmers fields to facilitate use of sprinkler/ drip irrigation system as an alternative to 
construction of field channels.  The assistance under CADWM Programme is not admissible for 
sprinkler and drip irrigation systems but is limited to construction of a stilling tank, pump house 
and laying of conveyance pipes up to farmers fields.  The cost norms as a pplicable for on-Farm 
Development works will also be applicable for such works.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
50 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.44) 
 
 The Committee observe that the subject of water is presently being dealt at the Centre 
by a number of Ministries/Departments.  In such a s ituation where jurisdictions which generally 
overlap, effective coordination among different ministries and convergence of programmes 
becomes quite essential.  The Committee note that a suggestion was made by the National 
Development Council in 2002 for a single administrative Ministry for water and to begin with, 
setting up of a National Water Resources Programme Coordination Committee under the 
chairmanship of Member (Agriculture and Water resources), Planning Commission.  It has also 
been brought to the notice of the Committee that keeping in view the responsibilities vested 
with the Ministry of Water Resources and inter -Ministerial coordination machineries already in 
position, the Planning Commission is of the view that the existing administrative arrang ements 
in regard to the water sector need not be disturbed for the present.  National Water Resources 
Council representing all the concerned Ministries and States was set up in 1983 under the 
Prime Minister.  Ministry of Water Resources looks after a Techn ical Advisory Committee on 
Irrigation, Flood Control & Multipurpose Projects headed by the Secretary, Ministry of Water 
Resources.  The Committee believes that keeping in view the role of various Ministries / 
Departments in dealing with water, effective co ordination among different Ministries is 
absolutely essential to avoid delay in the projects requiring assistance from other Ministries/ 
Departments. The Committee, therefore, desire that a sound mechanism be evolved on priority 
for effective and purposive  coordination among all the concerned Ministries dealing with water.  
All information relating to water depletion, water flow, contamination of surface water and 
ground water across the country or matters connected therewith be compiled, collated and 
developed and put under a suitable template for easy access of all.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Regarding the need for effective coordination among all the concerned Ministries 
dealing with water, the Parliamentary Standing Committee was informed about the specif ic 
suggestions included in the Xth Plan document approved by the National Development 

 
51 
 
Council.  The Parliamentary Standing Committee was also informed of the subsequent 
observations of the Planning Commission.  Keeping in view the responsibilities vested w ith the 
Ministry of Water Resources and that inter Ministerial coordination machineries are already in 
position, the Planning Commission expressed the view that existing administrative arrangement 
in regard to water sector need not be disturbed for the pre sent.  While taking note of the above 
observation, the Parliamentary Standing Committee has desired that a sound mechanism be 
evolved for priority and purposive coordination among all concerned Ministries dealing with 
water.  In this regard, the Planning Commission has further informed as under: 
“Water Resources Management in the country is to make a transition to the Integrated 
Water Resources Management (IWRM) with river basin as a hydrologic unit for management.  
For this, Ministry of Water Resources has  already initiated setting up of River Basin 
Organisations (RBO) for two of the river basins in the country.  These RBOs would consist of 
various stakeholders in the basin including various institutions (both Governmental and NGOs) 
for IWRM.  Also at the N ational level, National Water Resources Council under the Prime 
Ministry has representations of concerned Central Ministries and States.  All major and Medium 
Irrigation projects and flood control projects appraisal and approval are done by the Advisory 
Committee of the Ministry of Water Resources which has members from various Ministries 
including Planning Commission and State Governments.” 
As regards accessibility of information about water to all, it is stated that one of the 
goals of the National Water Mission is to bring comprehensive water data base in public 
domain. It has been proposed in the Draft Mission Document that all information, except the 
data of sensitive and clarified nature, would be placed in public domain to facilitate and 
promote citizens action in water conservation, augmentation and preservation. Central Ground 
Water Board has developed a web enabled ground water information system and has initiated 
action to place it in public domain. Similarly, Central Water Commission is working wi th 
National Remote Sensing Centre to develop web -enabled Water Resources Information 
System. 
 

 
52 
 
Sharing of knowledge and information between the Central Ground Water Board and 
other Ministries is a continuous process. Data related to ground water resources i s exchanged 
on a regular basis with the Ministries concerned in the form of reports and maps, Ground Water 
Year books and also through CDs and floppies as and when required. Important information 
regarding the ground water resources of the country is also available on the website of CGWB 
(www.cgwb.gov.in). Coordination of activities between these Ministries is also achieved through 
inter-ministerial committees on issues of common interest at appropriate levels. The web -
enabled Ground Water Information System of CGWB, launched on 22.03.2010 has provided an 
internet-based platform for dissemination of ground water related information to stakeholders.  
The Water Resources Information System website has since been launched wh ich 
provides general information about various activities included under the project and seeks 
feedback.  The work relating to launching of 1 st phase of WRIS is under progress in ISRO – 
DOS. The WRIS web site proposes to have web enabled query system on it s data base to 
generate any desired basin wise information.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.6.18) 
 
 The Committee note that releases under AIBP are made only after confirmation of 
Budget provision for the year made by the State Governments for both Central and S tate 
share.  The Committee also note that a new project is included in the AIBP on the basis of 
specific proposal received from State Governments in accordance with the AIBP guidelines.  10 
to 15 new projects are likely to be included in AIBP during 2010 -11.   As on 15.03.2010, a sum 
of Rs.4,886.3265 crore has already been released to the States from the allocation of Rs.9,700 
crore. The proposals received from various States are under examination to ensure that the 
guidelines are strictly adhered to. The e xplanation furnished is that in view of the proposals 
under examination, the allocated funds are likely to be utilized fully during the current financial 
year and that the steps are being taken to ensure full utilization of funds allocated for AIBP 
during 2010-11.  The Committee find no cogent ground for such over -optimism as only 
Rs.4,886.3265 crore, i.e.  about 53% of the allocated Rs.9,700 crore had been utilized upto 

 
53 
 
15.03.2010.  The manner in which the Ministry might have spent 47% of the remainder fun ds 
during 2009 -10, defies reason and sound budgetary practices.  The Committee, however, 
would like to see the final outcome after the close of the financial year 2010-11. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
 The budget allocation for AIBP for the year 2009 -10 was Rs. 8000 crore.  The total 
releases made during the year were of Rs. 6945.59 crore which is about 87% of the total 
budget allocation.  Release proposals of about Rs. 600 crore could not be recommended for 
want of revised investment clearance of the Plannin g Commission for those projects of which 
revised cost estimates were approved by the TAC and proposals were ready with the Ministry.  
Further, release proposal of one national project for Rs. 635.28 crore was sent to the Ministry 
of Finance but funds could  not be released during 2009 -10 and was actually released during 
June 2010.  Thus, proposals processed in this Ministry were enough to utilize full budget 
allocation available under AIBP.  A total central assistance of Rs.6945.5903 crore was actually 
released to States during 2009-10.  

 
54 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE: 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.49) 
 
 The Committee note that 43 and 21 Utilisation Certificates (as on 31.12.2009) worth 
Rs.2.22 crore and Rs.38.38 crore from 65 Institutions/Autonomous Bodies and State 
Governments respectively were outstanding in respect of Grants released upto 31 March 2007.   
Out of 42 UCs outstanding involving Rs.38.42 crore, of whic h Rs.36.79 crore belong to State 
Governments under Command Area Development Scheme.  Low allocation in the State Budget 
for CADWM Programme is mainly responsible for non utilization of central assistance and 
consequent delay in submission of UCs.  Further,  according to the explanation furnished to the 
Committee, State Governments are being periodically emphasized upon to accelerate the pace 
of implementation so as to utilize the unspent Central assistance. In addition, officers of the 
Ministry of Water Reso urces also visit the States to review the progress and expedite the 
submission of pending UCs.   In order to overcome such a distressing situation, the Committee 
desire that while funds are released to States, MoWR should also put conditions for timely 
submission of UCs like imposition of penalty where States fail to submit utilization certificates in 
time.  They are confident that such or similar innovative measures can certainly be devised by 
the Ministry to contain the pendency of UCs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The State Governments are required to submit proposals for release of central 
assistance each year in time along with utilization certificate for fund released in preceding 
years.  No further central assistance is released to states without submissi on of utilization 
certificates.  The State Governments are also pursued vigorously from time to time in different 
forums to submit the pending utilization certificates.     
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No.9 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 
55 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.18) 
 The Committee observe that Schemes under Plan Sector require investment clearance 
from Planning Commission for which there is an   established procedure.   In cases of MMI 
projects, the State Planning Boards are empowered to cle ar the proposals if inter -State issues 
are not involved.  In spite of well-defined policy and guidelines in place, a large number of 
major and medium projects have been under execution without investment clearance from 
Planning Commission.  The unapproved projects aggregate 300  in the Tenth Plan, comprising 
90 major, 136 medium, and 74 ERM projects, were likely to spill over to the Eleventh Five Year 
Plan.  Expenditure estimated to be incurred on these projects up to the Tenth Plan is about 
Rs.41128 crore.  However, out of 553 projects ongoing in XI Plan,  290  projects are 
unapproved including  75 major 136  medium and  79  ERM  which are estimated to cost 
Rs.93670, to be funded out of their own resources to the States.  As a result of efforts made by 
the Government of India, 184 projects are under various stages of appraisal by CWC including 
61 projects accepted by the Advisory Committee of MoWR conditionally or otherwise awaiting 
investment clearance from the Planning Commission.  The Committee desire that  while 
considering to bring the unapproved projects under the category of approved projects, Ministry 
of Water Resources should impress upon the State Governments to accord first priority to such 
unapproved projects at various stages of completion for gett ing regularised instead of sending 
new proposals. 
Reply of the Government 
 Out of 477 spilled over projects, 300 projects (90 major, 136 Medium and 74 ERM) 
were unapproved. However, out of 553 projects ongoing in XI Plan,  288  projects are 
unapproved including  74 major, 137  medium and  77  ERM. These   unapproved projects are 
estimated to cost Rs. 91,508 Crore and   Rs. 30,864   Crore have  been spent till X Plan. 
Further, in CWC 186 new and 77 revised projects are under various stages of appraisal 
including 62 New and 31 Revised projects accepted by the Advisory Committee of MoWR 
conditionally or otherwise awaiting investment clearance form the Planning Commission. The 
Ministry of Water Resources has held 15 meetings of Advisory Committee of MOWR and 134  

 
56 
 
major/medium projects have been cleared in last 3 years ending March, 2010. Ministry of 
Water Resources is also taking up the issue with State Governments from time to time.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No.12 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.10) 
 
The Committee note that though the management and control of flood falls under 
jurisdiction of State Governments, the Central Government initiates various supportive 
measures. Apart from overall planning and coordination of  flood management activities, the 
Ministry has been providing assistance/grants for flood control works.  The allocation for Flood 
Control for the year 2009 -10 at Rs.295.75 crore  was reduced to Rs.270.29 crore at the RE 
stage and again increased to  Rs.31 0.24 crore (BE) for 2010 -11.  The reduction of plan 
allocation at RE stage according to the Ministry is mainly due to Anti - erosion works taken up 
by Brahmaputra Board were started late and delay in  finalization of the tenders for 
procurement of telemetry equipment.  This is yet another glaring example of faulty planning and 
budgetary assumption to say the least.  The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry to fix 
responsibility for delay. 
Reply of the Government 
  The reasons for delay in taking up anti-erosion works by Brahmaputra Board and delay 
in finalization of the tenders for procurement of telemetry equipment by Central Water 
Commission leading to reduction at the RE 2009 -10 stage are being enquired.  It is, however, 
mentioned that the work fo r supply, installation, test and commissioning of 222 Telemetry 
Stations has been awarded by Central Water Commission in April 2010.   Efforts are also being 
made to obviate such delays in implementation in future. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No.24 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 
57 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.16) 
 The planning, formulation and execution of all Major and Medium Irrigat ion (MMI) 
Projects are carried out by the concerned State Governments and the required funds are 
allocated in their State Plan.  The Budget allocation (Plan) of Rs.219.20 crore for Major and 
Medium Irrigation for the year 2009 -10 was reduced to Rs.189.20 c rore, i.e. reduction of          
Rs. 30 crore at the Revised Estimates stage.  T he reduction in the allocations at RE stage is in 
respect of two schemes namely, “Hydrology Project” for non -procurement of equipment and 
“Research and Development” due to dela y in taking up morphological studies.  According to 
Ministry the reduction at RE stage would result in some delays in the completion of identified 
activities. However, physical targets are planned to be achieved during the remaining years of 
the XI Plan.    The Committee feel that if proper planning had been done in advance and 
conscientious efforts made to acquire the needed equipments and to conduct the 
morphological studies well in time, reduction in the Budget estimates could have been avoided.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry of Water Resources formulate their Budget 
estimates meticulously and also exercise effective superintendence, direction and control over 
its various offices/institutes  since they are all accountable to Parliament  through the Ministry.  
The Committee would also like a detailed review by the Government of the research 
institutes/bodies under the Ministry to be placed before them in due course.    
 
Reply of the Government 
In view of the recommendation of the Standing  Committee, various organizations have 
been advised for estimating the final requirements very meticulously and ensure that the 
allocated funds are effectively utilized to fully achieve the physical and financial targets. They 

 
58 
 
have also been asked for regular monitoring of the projects in respect of schemes implemented 
by them. Simultaneously, the progress is being reviewed by the Secretary (WR) every month 
with a view to identify the constraints and bottlenecks and take necessary remedial measures 
to ensure that the targets are fully achieved.  
Regarding the recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee about 
detailed review of the research institutes/bodies under the Ministry, it is submitted that actions 
have been initiated by the Ministry for in dependent review of performance of different research 
organizations during the Xth Plan.  The independent evaluators are also required to make 
suggestions for improving the functioning of the various organizations. The work has already 
been taken up in respect of the following organizations: 
S.No. Institute/Organization Evaluating Agency 
1. Central Water & Power Research 
Station 
Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay 
2. Central Soil Materials Research 
Station  
 Indian Institute of Management, 
Bangalore 
3. National Water Academy  Indian Institute of Management, 
Bangalore 
4. Central Ground Water Board Consulting Engineering Services 
(India) Private Limited, New Delhi 
  
The Ministry would undertake detailed review of the research institutes /bodies after t he 
receipt of the independent evaluation of various research institutions and submit the report to 
the Committee in due course. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                            DIP GOGOI 
17 March, 2011                                     Chairman, 
26 Phalguna, 1932 (Saka)            Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 

 
59 
 
APPENDIX - I 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
HELD ON THURSDAY, 17 MARCH 2011 
  
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1540 hours in Committee Room „D‟, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  
Shri Dip Gogoi – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan 
3. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
4. Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
5. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
6. Shri Virender Kashyap 
7. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
8. Shri J. Shantha 
9. Shri Sajjan Verma 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Balwinder Singh 
11. Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
12. Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
13. Dr. Ashok S. Ganguley 
14. Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan 
15. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
16. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
                 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Director 
 
 
 

 
60 
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.   
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration Memorandum No.2 and the Draft 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in their Second Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2010 -11) of the Ministry 
of Water Resourc es. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the Report without any 
amendment/modification. 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to have the above draft Action Taken 
Report finalized on the basis of factual verification from the Ministry of Wa ter Resources and to 
present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
4. ***     ***    *** 
  
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
 
___________________________________________________________________________________ 
*** Minutes in respect of other matters kept separately. 
 

 
61 
 
APPENDIX II 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SECOND REPORT 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE  
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations/Observations   26 
 
(ii) Recommendation/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
 
Para Nos. 1.3, 2.40, 2.41, 2.42, 2.45, 2.46, 2.47, 2.48, 3.17, 3.19, 
     3.20, 4.12, 4.13, 4.14, 5.11, 6.16, 6.17, 6.19 and 6.20 
 
Total         19 
Percentage        73.07% 
   
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
 
Para No. 2.43, 2.44 and 6.18  
 
Total         03   
Percentage         11.54 % 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the 
 Committee 
 
Para No. 2.49, 3.18 and 5.10 
 
Total         03  
Percentage 11.54 % 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
Para Nos. 3.16 
  
Total           01 
Percentage        03.85% 
 