 
1 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2011-2012) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2011-2012)  
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources} 
 
 
 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
May, 2012/Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) 
 
13 

 
2 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
 
(2011-2012) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2011-2012) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  03.05.2012 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  03.05.2012 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
May, 2012/Vaisakha, 1934 (Saka) 

 
3 
 
WRC NO. 32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2011 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 

 
4 
 
CONTENTS 
           PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2010-11)…………………    (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………   (iv) 
 
 
CHAPTER I   Report ………………………………………   1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been 17 
accepted by the Government …………………..  
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the   47 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government‟s replies ………………………..  
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of   48 
which replies of the Government have not been  
accepted by the Committee …………………….  
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  60 
final replies of the Government are still awaited …  
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
  I. Vacancy position of chemical discipline.   62 
 
  II Total Dam Capacity in different countries   65 
 
  III Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee held 66 
                                        on 20.03.2012.   
 
  II. Analysis of action taken by the Government on the  68 
                          Recommendations / Observations contained in the Eighth 
                          Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee………. 
 
 

 
5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES (2011-12) 
 
  Shri Dip Gogoi  -  Chairman 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi 
3. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske 
4. Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
5. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
6. Shri Virender Kashyap 
7.        Shri Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan. 
8. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
9. Shri Nityananda Pradhan 
       10.        Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
11.        Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
             12.        Shri S.P.Y. Reddy  
13.        Shri Arjun Roy 
14.        Shri Jagadanand Singh 
15. Shri Murarilal Singh 
16.        Shri N. Chaluvaraya Swamy 
17.        Smt. Annu Tandon 
18.        Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
19.        Dr. P. Venugopal 
20.        Shri Sajjan Singh Verma 
21. Shri Kuldeep Bishnoi 
  
              RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.        Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder  
23. Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
24.         Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
25. Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan  
26. Dr. Ashok S. Ganguly 
27. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
28.  Shri Mangala Kisan  
    29. Shri Ranjitsinh Vijaysinh Mohite-Patil 
           30. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
 31. Smt. Bimla Kashyap Sood 
 
              
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri B.S. Dahiya  - Director 
 3. Smt. Rita Jailkhani  - Additional Director 
 4. Shri G. Guite   - Committee Officer 
5. Shri Samresh Kumar Parcha - Sr. Committee Assistant 
 

 
6 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Water Resources (201 1-2012) having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present the Thirteenth Report on 
the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the Eighth Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water Resources (2010 -2011) on Demands for 
Grants (2011-2012) of the Ministry of Water Resources.  
2. The Eighth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on 17 August 2011.  The 
replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on  1 3 
December 2011. 
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and adopted by 
the Committee at their sitting held on 21 March 2012. 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the  recommendations/observations 
contained in the Eighth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;              DIP GOGOI, 
26 March, 2012                                Chairman, 
6 Chaitra, 1934 (Saka)                      Standing Committee on Water Resources 
  
 
 
 
 

 
7 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources deals with the action taken 
by the Government on the recommendations / observations contained in their Eighth Report 
(15th Lok Sabha) on "Demands for Grants  (2011-12)" of the Ministry of Water Resources which 
was presented to Lok Sabha on 17 August 2011. 
2. Action taken notes were received from the Government in respect of all the 25 
observations/recommendations of the Committee which have been categorised as follows:- 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted b y the 
Government: 
Para Nos. 2.54, 2.55, 2.56, 2.58, 2.59, 2.60, 3.13, 3.14, 3.15, 4.21,  (Total - 18) 
     4.22, 4.23, 5.23, 5.24, 5.27, 5.28, 6.3 and 7.9   
  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government‟s replies: 
Para Nos. NIL                          (Total - NIL) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee:  
Para Nos. 2.53, 4.24, 4.25, 5.25, 5.26 and 7.8    (Total -06) 
 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the Government 
is still awaited: 
Para No. 2.57                (Total - 01) 
 

 
8 
 
3. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of the 
recommendations/observations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A.  Budgetary Allocation 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.53) 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
4.  The Committee noted that in regard to actual utilization of allocated funds during 2009 -
10 it was less than Budget Estimate in all sections except in the revenue section of Non -Plan 
allocations.  In 2010-11 at revised estimate stage there was decrease of Rs.116.00 crore in the 
Plan allocation and an increase of Rs.84.36 crore in the Non -Plan allocation.   The Committee, 
therefore, recommend ed the Ministry to strictly monitor all projects/schemes/field 
offices/attached offices, etc. through the well defined monitoring system leading to effective 
utilization of the funds allocated.   The Committee imp ressed upon the Ministry to incur 
expenditure strictly under the Rules/Regulations/Directions/orders framed or issued by                 
the Ministry of Finance from time to time.  The Ministry should also minutely watch the flow of 
expenditure throughout the year so that funds are released after due scrutiny and satisfaction. 
5. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"A number of factors are attributed for delay in completion of programmes/ projects.  
However, all possible efforts are m ade by the Ministry to foresee the factors attributed 
to delay of projects so that there is no need to reduce allocation at RE stage.  Further, 
the progress is closely monitored in the Ministry of ensure that the allocated funds are 
fully utilized and budget estimate is not reduced at the RE stage.  The guidance issued 
by Ministry of Finance from time to time is noted." 
 
6. Not convinced with the reply of the Ministry, t he Committee are of the view that 
the Ministry make thorough pre-Plan exercise to identify problem areas causing delay in 
completion of programmes/projects before making budgetary allocations, specially for 

 
9 
 
those schemes which run for a full period of Five Years Plan.  They further desire that 
the Government  take concrete and effective , corrective measures to complete the 
projects within the stipulated time and allocations and the Committee be apprised of the 
initiative taken in this regard.   The Committee also reiterate that s trict and effective 
monitoring of the projects/schemes/field office s/attached offices, etc. be made by the 
Ministry through a well -defined, centralised monitoring system at the Centre.  The 
Committee desire to be apprised of further action taken in this regard. 
 
B. Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.55) 
7. The Committee had noted that the National Water Policy 2002 had emphasized that the 
management of Water Resources should incorporate a participatory approach by involving not 
only the Government agencies but also all stakeholders in var ious aspects of planning, design 
and management.   While noting that more emphasis had been given to participatory approach 
for which there has been an increased consciousness in States about the need for actively 
involving farmers in the management of irr igation system , the Committee had recommended  
the MoWR to persuade all remaining States/UTs by way of holding meetings/seminars etc. to 
make PIM a grand success so that benefits are reaped by ultimate beneficiaries.  The 
Committee had also desired that a periodic monitoring and review mechanism on the working 
and performance of WUAs be devised by the Ministry so that shortcomings may be removed by 
taking necessary corrective steps.   
 

 
10 
 
8. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"The Minis try of Water Resources since 1985 has been encouraging farmers‟ 
participation in water distribution and management of irrigation system in the projects 
under Command Area Development Programme (CADP). Guidelines were issued in 
1987 by MoWR for farmers‟ par ticipation in water management primarily for projects 
under CADP which cover all aspects like past experience of PIM in India and abroad, 
objectives of PIM, area of operation of farmers, their duties and responsibilities, training 
and monitoring.  
 
MoWR ha s been organizing national level training programmes on PIM in 
various parts of the country for CAD functionaries.   
 
The remaining states/union territories are being persuaded to enact PIM 
legislation through writing letters and meeting state officials. T he issue of PIM 
legislation was recently discussed during the “Annual Conference of Principal 
Secretaries/Secretaries of Irrigation, Water Resources & Command Area Development 
Departments” held on April 27, 2011 at New Delhi. As per the information provide d by 
the State Governments, 63,167 Water Users‟ Associations (WUAs) have been formed 
in various States covering an area of 14.62 Mha under different commands of Irrigation 
Projects.  
 
The field offices of Central Water Commission (CWC) have been entrusted to 
monitor the progress of implementation of PIM programme as well as working and 
performance of WUAs in the states. The MoWR also monitors through progress reports 
and field visits of its officers." 
 
9. The Committee note that 63,167 Water Users' Associat ion (WUAs) have been 
formed in various States covering an area of 14.62 Mha. under different commands of 
Irrigation Projects, which is an increase from 56,934 WUAs covering an area of 13,538 
Mha. under different command of irrigation projects .  Underlining the fact that end users 
involvement is a vital element for distribution and management of water, the Committee  
reiterate that the Ministry give focused attention to PIM  programme by vigorously 
pursuing with the remaining States/UTs so that the goal of P IM programme are achieved 
within the XII Plan.  Th ey also desire that the Ministry keep continuous ta b on the 
monitoring work of the CWC on the progress of implementation of PIM programme as 

 
11 
 
well as working and performance of WUAs in the States.  The Commi ttee further 
recommend the Ministry  to explore the viability of giving financial incentives to 
performing organizations (WUAs) / individuals working in the PIM programme so that 
increased involvement of farmers, water users, and other stakeholders to make the 
programme a grand success.   
 
C. Bharat Nirman 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.57) 
10. The Committee had noted that one of the six components for development of rural 
infrastructure under „ Bharat Nirman‟ is irrigation.   The irrigation component of Bharat Nirman 
aimed at creation of Irrigation potential of 10 Mha. during 2005 -06 to 2008 -09.   However, it 
was estimated that 7.2 Mha. of irrigation potential has been created during the said period.    
Against this, as per information received from the States, i rrigation potential of 2.37 Mha. has 
been created upto September 2010 .  The Committee while observing that there is still a 
shortage of 1.13 Mha. of irrigation potential which is required to be created , had hoped that 
remaining irrigation potential would h ave been created by March 2011 without any shortfall.  
The Committee had desired to be apprised about total irrigation potential created upto March 
2011.   
11. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under : 
"As per the information received from the State Governments in respect of creation of 
irrigation potential during 2009 -10, irrigation potential of 1.85 million hectare has 
already been created. So far, limited information has been received in respect of 
creation of irrigation potential during 2010-11. Creation of 1.23 MHa of irrigation 
potential has been reported so far by the States during 2010 -11. The total irrigation 
potential created under Bharat Nirman upto March 2011 is 10.39 Mha. However, the 
complete information is yet to be received from 5 State Governments." 
 

 
12 
 
12. The Committee note that a total of 10.39 Mha. irrigation potential has been 
created upto March 2011 under Bharat Nirman  indicating that a meag re irrigation 
potential of only 0.71 Mha. has been created since 200 8-09 upto March 2011 under 
Bharat Nirman.  The information is yet to be received from 5 States but surprisingly the 
names of the said States have not been revealed.  The Committee would like the Ministry 
to gather the requisite dat a from the se 5 States  and inform them abo ut the total 
irrigation potential created .  They would also like the Ministry to pull its socks and take 
corrective steps/strategy for achievement of targets set for Bharat Nirman.   
D. Major and Medium Irrigation (MMI) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.14) 
13. The Committee had noted that the target of creation of irrigation potential through MMI 
during XI Plan was 9.0 million hectares, which was revised to 5.00 Mha. at MTA stage. The 
Committee were disappointed to note that target for creation of irrigation pot ential ha d been 
reduced at MTA stage and had, therefore, recommend ed that the MoWR make concerted 
efforts to find the crux of the problem and remove all shortcomings which create hurdles in 
achieving the targets.  The Committee had also recommended that be fore setting the targets 
the Ministry should do complete and thorough ground work, so that realistic targets are fixed 
and also achieved within the stipulated time frame. 
14. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under : 
"The Ministry of Water Resources has analyzed the reasons for delay in completion of 
the projects.  It is observed that projects get delayed due to land acquisition problems, 
contractual problems, Resettlement and rehabilitation problems, geological surprises 
during the project implementation, works related to projects to be executed by other 
than water resources/ irrigation department such as highway crossing, railway crossing, 

 
13 
 
short working seasons in the hilly states, law and order problems etc.  In order to get 
the projects c ompleted in short possible time, thereby leading to early creation of 
irrigation potential as also to achieve the targets set of irrigation potential, the Ministry 
of Water Resources has taken several measures.  The AIBP guidelines have been 
modified from time to time.  The State government is to also inform remedial measures 
taken by them to remove bottlenecks in project implementation.  However, Ministry will 
continue to monitor that the targets set are achieved expeditiously." 
 
15. The Committee note various reasons attributed to delay in project completion .  
They also note that the AIBP guidelines have been modified from time to time and the 
State Government s are also asked to inform remedial measures taken by them to 
remove bottlenecks in project implem entation. The  Committee would like to reiterate 
that a complete and thorough ground work needs to be done by the Ministry to foresee 
possible impediments on the track of each individual MMI projects and the reafter work 
out the corrective measures in consul tation with  the respective State Governments.  
They, therefore, desire  the Government in the first place to set to work in right earnest 
in this regard and then set targets achievable within a stipulated time frame.  The 
Committee, therefore,  recommend that the Ministry  strictly monitor all th e set targets  
including giving of directions/instructions to States responsible for delay in project 
implementation.    
 
E. Ground Water Management & Regulation 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.24) 
16. The Committee had  expressed their serious concern over ground water management, 
depletion of ground water level and recharge of ground water. The Committee had noted that 
the Central Government in the Ministry of Environment and Forests has constituted the Central 

 
14 
 
Ground water Board as an authority for the purpose of regulation and control of Ground Water 
Management and Development to regulate and control, management and development of 
ground water in the country and to issue necessary regulatory directions for the purpose.  The 
Committee had noted  that CGWA has issued directions to Chief Secretaries in 12 States and 2 
Union Territories to adopt artificial recharge to ground water and to promote rain water 
harvesting in order to ensure augmentation of depleting ground water resources and desire that 
similar directions be issued to the remaining States/UTs in this regard.   
17. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under : 
"Central Ground Water Authority has issued directions to the Chief Secretaries on 8 th 
August, 2006 to adopt artificial recharge to ground water and promote rainwater 
harvesting in order to ensure augmentation of depleting ground water resources, in the 
states/UTs of Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Gujarat, Punjab, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamilnadu, Kerala, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal, UT 
of Daman & Diu, UT of Pondicherry.  As large number of “Over Exploited”, “Critical” 
and “Semi Critical”  blocks in respect of ground water development exist in these 
states/UTs.  Immediate attention for Regulation and Management of ground  water was 
required.   
 
All the above States have amended building bye -laws to make Rain Water 
Harvesting Mandatory.  Besides these many States/UTs are undertaking various 
measures to promote rain water harvesting .  Implementation of Sardar Patel Sahbhagi 
Jal Sanchay Yojana & Sujlam Suflam Yojna by Government of Gujrat, Bhagidari 
Programme by Delhi Government, Shivkalin Pani Sathawan Yojana by Maharashtra 
Government, implementation of rain water harvesting on massi ve scale in Government 
buildings, private housed/institutions and commercial building in urban & rural areas by 
Government of Rajasthan and revival of conventional methods of rain water harvesting 
in ponds, lakes, wells, step wells by Government of Karnata ka are a few such 
measures initiated by the State Governments.    
Subsequently Central Ground Water Authority has also issued direction for regulation of 
ground water and rainwater harvesting: 
 
 Direction dated 5 th October, 2007 to Civic Bodies dealing with  drinking water 
supply network in the notified “Over Exploited areas” for construction of ground water 
abstraction structures for drinking and domestic use and structures of Rainwater 
Harvesting/Artificial recharge to ground water. 

 
15 
 
 
 Direction dated 8 th October, 2009 for implementation of Scheme of ground 
water recharge measures along  all National Highways, State Highways and other 
major roads by CRRI, National Highways Authority of India , CPWD, State PWDs; 
along rail tracks and other establishments of Ind ia Railways, in the Stadia by Sports 
Authority of India, BCCI, Departments of Sports and Youth Affairs and in the Airports by 
Airport Authority of India, Ministry of Civil Aviation for Promoting Rain Water 
Harvesting/adoption of artificial recharge to Grou nd Water in the country (except in the 
water logged areas). 
 
 Direction dated 8 th October, 2009 for adoption of rainwater harvesting by all the 
Group Housing Societies/Institutions/Schools/Hotels/Industrial Establishment falling in 
the Over Exploited and Critical areas.   
 
 Direction dated 25 th September, 2010 to large and medium Industries using 
ground water in the over exploited and critical areas in the country to take up water 
conservation measures and including recharge of ground water/rain water harvest ing 
and adopt practices of treatment, recycle and reuse of waste water in their premises.   
In all 82 areas in the country have been notified for ground water regulation through 
various notifications, which include recent notifications for 39 areas  in Pun jab (12), 
Rajasthan(20) and Haryana(7) vide public notice dated 13.08.2011  and also entire 
Gurgaon District.  Regulation of ground water in notified areas is being done through 
Authorized Officers appointed under Section 4 of EPA (1986).  
Ministry of Water Resources had circulated Model Bill to all States and Union Territories 
for enacting a legislation in their respective States.  So far 11 states & UTs have 
enacted legislation and 19 states and UTs have initiated the action for enactment of 
legislation on the lines of Model Bill."  
 
18. The Committee note that in response to CGWA's directions dated                                 
8th August, 2006, the States/UTs of Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, Gujarat, Punjab, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil  Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, 
Uttaranchal, UT of Daman & Diu, UT of Pondicherry have amended building bye -laws to 
make rain water harvesting mandatory, and many other States/UTs are undertaking 
various measures to promote rain water harvesting.  The y also note that the Ministry of 
Water Resources had circulated Model Bill to all the States/UTs for enacting a legislation 
in their respective States/UTs, as a result of which 11 States had enacted legislation on 

 
16 
 
the lines of the Model Bill and 19 other States/UTs have initiated action for the same.  
The Committee, while appreciating these efforts made by different States/UTs and the 
CGWA for augmenting ground water in the country, would like the Ministry to prod the 
remaining 19 States/UTs to complete the  enactment of legislation on the line of the 
Model Bill.  Additionally, these States/UTs may also be financially incenti vized, specially 
in case of States/UTs having water scarcity areas.  The Committee are of the opinion 
that if earnest and concerted effo rts are made by the Government, States/UTs and the 
concerned implementing organizations to implement the provisions of the Model Bill on 
ground water, the day may not be far off when the country will see the depleting trend in 
ground water become stabilize d and available water in aquifers is augmented in volume 
and its quality improved. 
F. Shortfall in achieving Targets under GWM & R 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.25) 
 
19. The Committee had noted that Physical targets vis-à-vis achievement under the 
Ground Water Management Regulation during XI Plan (2007 -12) and year-wise target fixed for 
the years 2007 -08, 2008 -09, 2009-10 and 2010 -11 have not been achieved in almost all the 
schemes.   While deploring that the MoWR has failed to achieve the various targets fix ed for 
Hydro Chemical Studies, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry identify the 
bottlenecks, fix responsibility on the officers responsible for the delays and complete the targets 
in the remaining period of the XI Plan.  They  had expected complete action taken note on each 
of the aforesaid recommendations within next three months.  Further, considering the 

 
17 
 
significance and viability of the minor irrigation projects in the hilly areas, more funds need to 
be allocated and schemes sanctioned for th eir early execution including the Renuka dam 
project in Himachal Pradesh. 
20. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under : 
"The shortfall in achievement of targets fixed for XI Plan has been mainly due to vacant 
posts of Chemists.  During the period, 2007 -2011, there have been vacant post of 
Senior Chemist, Asstt. Chemist, STA and Suptdg. Chemist.  Eight posts of Senior 
Chemist remained vacant during 2007 -08 and 2008 -09 and one post of Suptdg. 
Chemist remained vacant during 2009-10 and 2010-11, which could not be filled up due 
to non-availability of eligible Chemists.  Further, three posts of Asstt. Chemist and four 
posts of STA were abolished during 2007 -08.  In addition, requisitions had been sent 
for filling up of direct quota posts of Asstt.   Chemists through UPSC and those of STA 
through SSC.  Four posts of STA are under process for revival.  As on 31 st March, 
2011, out of a total of 79 posts of Chemists at different levels, 21 posts are vacant and 
are under different stages of recruitment/r evival.  Year wise status of vacancy position 
of chemists is given in Annexure - I."    
 
21. The Committee note  with concern that the shortfall in achievement of targets 
fixed for XI Plan has been mainly due to vacancy in the posts of chemists, numbering 2 1 
altogether, viz. the posts of Senior Chemist, Assistant Chemist, STA and Superintending 
Chemist during the period 2007 -2011.    They deplore the fact that the Ministry has 
chosen to sit on the matter which was already in the making since 2007, and recomm end 
that the Ministry take concrete steps immediately to ensure that the 21 vacant posts of 
Chemists are filled up urgently through new recruitment s or by the process of revival of  
posts.  The Committee note that the reply of the Ministry is silent about t he  
recommendation of the Committee  for enhanced allocation of funds for minor irrigation 
projects located in hilly areas, including the Renuka Dam Project in Himachal Pradesh 
and also their early sanction to ensure their early execution .  Hopefully, the Government 

 
18 
 
will pay attention to the problem of hilly States so that minor irrigation projects are 
allocated adequate funds and the projects commissioned without delay.   The 
Committee also desire the Ministry to promptly address the problems of old rigs, n on-
availability of major components of such models of oil rigs, manpower shortage etc. 
which have been identified as other reasons for non-achievement of targets.     
 
G. Flood Control 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.25) 
 
22 The Committee had noted that Governm ent of India has formulated National Water 
Policy 2002 incorporating various guiding principles for better flood management and circulated 
to all the States and concerned agencies for implementation.  The Committee ha d further noted 
that for implementation of the Flood Plain Zoning approach in the country, a model draft bill for 
flood plain zoning legislation was circulated by the Union Government in 1975 to all the states.  
The Committee had liked to be apprised of further progress made by the MoWR to purs ue all 
the remaining States to enact the aforesaid legislation to control the menace of recurrent 
floods.   
23. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under : 
"The Central Water Commission has been continuously impressing upon the states the 
need to take follow up action to implement the flood plain zoning approach. A model 
draft bill for flood plain zoning legislation was also circulated by the Union Government 
in 1975 to all the states. 
 
There has been resistance on the part of the states to fo llow up various aspects of flood 
plain management including possible legislation. The state of Manipur had enacted the 
flood plain zoning legislation way back in 1978 but the demarcation of flood zones is yet 
to be done. The state of Rajasthan has also enacted legislation for flood plain  
 

 
19 
 
management in the state but enforcement thereof is yet to be done. The government of 
Utter Pradesh has decided to take suitable measures for regulating the economic / 
development activities in the flood plains. The Govern ment of Bihar initiated action to 
prepare flood plain zoning maps, which are essential before any executive measures 
could be undertaken. The Government of West Bengal had intimated that a draft bill on 
flood plain zoning was under process. Other States ar e yet to take action for enactment 
of legislation." 
 
 
24. The Committee note that there have been resistance from the States other than 
Manipur and Rajasthan who have enacted legislation for follow -up ac tion on various 
aspects of the Flood P lain management  including the possible legislation and 
afterwards the demarcation of flood zones/enforcement on the line laid down by the 
Model Bill circulated by the Union Government in 1975 to the States. The Committee 
also note that although the States of Manipur and Rajasthan have enacted legislation on 
Flood Plain Zoning, further action taken has been impeded in these States, due to non -
demarcation of flood zones in Manipur and non -enforcement of legislation in Rajasthan.   
A draft bill on this subject is under proce ss with Government of West Bengal and two 
other States, namely Uttar Pradesh and Bihar have also initiated preliminary measures .  
However, all the remaining States are yet to take action for enactment of Flood Plain 
Zoning legislation.   The Committee desi re the Ministry to identify  areas/zones in the 
country which are prone to the annual menace of floods and initiate special plan/scheme 
to tackle the menace of recurring floods within a definitive time frame.  They also 
reiterate that the remaining States may be persuaded to enact the legislation on Flood 
Plain Zoning expeditiously in their own benefit. 
 

 
20 
 
H. Need to increase per capita storage capacity of water 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.26) 
25. The Committee had noted that in the last few years floods have caused havoc in the 
country and a large amount of water was allowed to flow out to the sea.    The Committee also 
noted that as per the Report of the Working Group on Water Resources for the XI Five Year 
Plan (2007 -2012) constituted by the Planning Commiss ion, the per capita storage in the 
country is only about 210 M 3  which is way behind the achievement in many of the developed 
and developing countries.  The Committee were of the considered view that at present total live 
storage capacity created by comple ted dams in the country is about 253 BCM but they would 
like the MoWR to furnish a comparative table indicating the live storage capacity created by 
other countries.  The Committee, therefore, desire d that the MoWR take all necessary steps to 
increase the per capita storage and apprise the Committee in this regard. 
26. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under : 
"Water being a State subject, several measures for development and management of 
water resources are undertaken by the respective Sta te Governments which include 
creation of storages, restoration of water bodies, rainwater harvesting, artificial 
recharge to ground water and adoption of better management practices etc.  
Government of India is providing central assistance to the State Gov ernments through 
various schemes/programmes such as Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme 
(AIBP), Command Area Development and Water Management (CAD & WM); Repair 
Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies etc. 
 
Storage based water resources projects i n the country are vital for conservation of 
rainfall/runoff and mitigating the spatial and temporal variations in water availability. 
Therefore, to overcome the shortage of water during non -monsoon months, a large 
number of dams have been constructed in th e country in different river basins. As a 
result of this, the total live storage capacity of the dams completed in the country has 
gone up during successive Five Year Plans.   In addition to this, minor storage projects, 
diversion structures functioning as  run of river schemes, minor irrigation schemes 
utilizing surface water and ground water also cater to the conservation and 

 
21 
 
management of water. A Statement indicating the total dam capacity in the countries 
referred to in the Para is given at Annexure–II." 
 
27. The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the Mi nistry. The Committee 
would like to point out that the figure of 210 M 3 of per capita storage of water for India as 
reported by the Working Group on Water Resources for XI Plan (2007 -12) constituted by 
Planning Commission is way below corresponding figures for several other countries, 
viz.  Russia, USA, Turkey and China.   Considering the vast need of water by our agro -
based economy and the country's rapidly increasingly population, the Committe e would 
like the Government to make vigorous and  concrete efforts to increase the per cap ita 
storage of water specially in flood prone river systems of the country, which will also 
lead to flood moderation while at the same time arrest a large volume of wa ter allowed to 
flow out annually to the sea. 
 
I. Initiatives in North East 
  
Recommendation (Para No.7.8) 
28. The Committee had noted that the MoWR has taken significant initiatives through 
Brahmaputra Board, Central Water Commission (CWC), Central Ground Water Board (CGWB), 
Central Soil and Material Research Station (CSMRS), Central Water and Power Research 
Station (CWPRS), National Institute of Hydrology and National Projects Construction 
Corporation Ltd. (NPCC) for the development of North Eastern Region .  The Committee had 
also note d that no new major/medium project was taken up under AIBP during the last five 
years because no new proposal has been received from the NE Region.  The Committee were 

 
22 
 
emphasised the need to launch a special drive to attract t he North Eastern States to start new 
projects for accelerating their development. 
29. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under : 
"Irrigation being a State subject, the irrigation projects planned, executed and funded by 
the State Governments  themselves as per their priorities.  However, this Ministry 
provides Central assistance under AIBP (started in 1996 -97) to State government for 
expeditious completion of ongoing irrigation projects which were in advance stage of 
construction.  It has been  observed that in North -Eastern States, the State 
Governments have shown their thrust towards minor irrigation projects in general.  
During last 5 years 3302 new surface minor schemes of North -Eastern States have 
been included in AIBP, out of which 1968 sc hemes have been completed and 2.06248 
lakh Ha. of irrigation potential has been created.  During this period, Central assistance 
of Rs.2293.6465 crore under AIBP has been released to these projects." 
 
30. The Committee note the Ministry's reply that State Governments in the North -
Eastern region have generally shown preference towards minor irrigation projects.   The 
Committee feel that considering the relative geographical remoteness  and economic 
backwardness of the North -Eastern region, which is otherwise  richly endowed with 
water resources, the Ministry should make special efforts to encourage and incentivise 
the  State Governments of this region to submit proposals for taking up Major and 
Medium  Irrigation projects .   The Committee would like to be apprised of the see fresh 
efforts made by the Government for development of Major and Minor Irrigation in the 
North-Eastern region. 
 
 

 
23 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.54) 
 
 The Comm ittee note that during the XI Plan, process was initiated for selection of 
potential basins where River Basin Organisations (RBOs) can be created in consultation with 
co-basin States by the MoWR.  The establishment of three RBOs were planned in the XI Plan  
period.  In regard to status of creation of RBOs, the Ministry informed that they proposed to 
establish two RBOs for rivers basins namely Mahanadi and Godavari during XI Plan under 
River Boards Act, 1956.  The RBOs are to be established in consultation wi th the interested 
States.  The proposals for above two RBOs in this regard have been sent to the co-basin states 
for their comments which are awaited.  Their establishment would depend upon consensus and 
co-operation of the concerned States.  The Committee  are happy to note that the Ministry has 
made all out efforts at various levels to get the concurrence/comments of all co -basin States of 
Mahanadi and Godawari basins for establishment of River Basin Organisations.  However, all 
the co -basin States have no t concurred for establishment of River Basin Organisation of 
Mahanadi and Godavri River Basins.  The Committee feel that the MoWR needs to convince 
the co -basin States regarding benefits envisaged for them in the Scheme.  The Committee 
desire the Ministry to vigorously pursue the matter with renewed zeal with the co -basin States 
for the establishment of River Basin Organisation/Authority for the enormous benefits that 
would accrue to them. 
 

 
24 
 
Reply of the Government 
The proposals for above two RBOs in this re gard have been sent to the co -basin states 
for their comments. The Ministry has made efforts at various levels to get the 
concurrence/comments of all the co -basin states of Mahanadi and Godavari basins for 
establishment of River Basin Organisations.  Howev er, concurrence of all co -basin states have 
not been conveyed.  The suggestions of the Standing  Committee has been noted and matter 
will be pursued with them.  
Recommendation (Para No.2.55) 
 
The Committee note that the National Water Policy 2002 has empha sized that the 
management of Water Resources should incorporate a participatory approach by involving not 
only the Government agencies but also all stakeholders in various aspects of planning, design 
and management.   Recognizing the need for legal framewo rk for Participatory Irrigation 
Management (PIM), MOWR has brought out a model act to be adopted by the States for this 
purpose.   Under the strategy for XI Plan, the PIM is one of the identified thrust areas.  The 
Committee also note that  as of now, 15 S tates, namely, Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, 
Chhattisgarh, Goa,  Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, 
Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh have either enacted exclusive legislation or 
amended their Irrigation Acts for  involvement of farmers in irrigation management. As regards 
implementation by remaining States/UTs, the MoWR informed that the remaining State 
Governments have been advised from time to time to enact PIM Act expeditiously.  
Furthermore, the Committee note  that 56,934 Water User Associations (WUAs) have been 

 
25 
 
formed in various States covering an area of 13.538 Mha. under different commands of 
Irrigation Projects.  The provision has been made to give financial grant to these WUAs and 
States like Maharashtra, Gujarat, Rajasthan and Bihar have assigned them the duties of 
collection of water charges and allowing them to retain some fixed percentage of collected 
water charges for better operation and maintenance of irrigation infrastructure.  The Committee 
are delighted to note that under PIM, more emphasis has been given to participatory approach 
for which there has been an increased consciousness in States about the need for actively 
involving farmers in the management of irrigation system.  The Committee recomme nd  the 
MoWR to persuade all remaining States/UTs by way of holding meetings/seminars etc. to make 
PIM a grand success so that benefits are reaped by ultimate beneficiaries.  The Committee 
also desire that a periodic monitoring and review mechanism on the working and performance 
of WUAs be devised by the Ministry so that shortcomings may be removed by taking necessary 
corrective steps.   
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Water Resources since 1985 has been encouraging farmers‟ 
participation in water distribution and management of irrigation system in the projects under 
Command Area Development Programme (CADP). Guidelines were issued in 1987 by MoWR 
for farmers‟ participation in water management primarily for projects under CADP which cover 
all aspects like past experience of PIM in India and abroad, objectives of PIM, area of operation 
of farmers, their duties and responsibilities, training and monitoring.  
MoWR has been organizing national level training programmes on PIM in various parts 
of the country for CAD functionaries.   

 
26 
 
The remaining states/union territories are being persuaded to enact PIM legislation 
through writing letters and meeting state officials. The issue of PIM legislation was recently 
discussed during the “Annual Conference of Princ ipal Secretaries/Secretaries of Irrigation, 
Water Resources & Command Area Development Departments” held on April 27, 2011 at New 
Delhi. As per the information provided by the State Governments, 63,167 Water Users‟ 
Associations (WUAs) have been formed in various States covering an area of 14.62 Mha under 
different commands of Irrigation Projects.  
The field offices of Central Water Commission (CWC) have been entrusted to monitor 
the progress of implementation of PIM programme as well as working and performa nce of 
WUAs in the states. The MoWR also monitors through progress reports and field visits of its 
officers. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No.9 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.56) 
 The Committee note that the Hydrolo gy Project Phase -II has been taken up with the 
assistance of International Bank of Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) w.e.f. 5 April 
2006.  The duration of the Project is six years.  The estimated cost of the project is Rs. 631.83 
crore supported with l oan of US$ 104.98 million from IBRD.   MoWR is the nodal agency for 
implementation of the project.  The Committee also note that the Project is being implemented 
in 13 States, viz. Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Puducherry, Punjab  and Tamil Nadu and 8 

 
27 
 
Central Organisations, viz. Bhakra Beas Management Board (BBMB), Central Pollution Control 
Board (CPCB), Central Water Commission (CWC), Central Ground Water Board (CGWB), 
Central Water & Power Research Station (CWPRS), National Institute of Hydrology (NIH), India 
Meteorological Department (IMD), and Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR).  Hydrological 
Information System is being used by all the Implementing Agencies for water resources 
planning and management. The Committee further observe that the allocation in the Plan 
Budget was Rs.38.10 crore in 2009 -10 and Rs. 53.00 crore in 2010 -11 while Rs.80.00 crore 
has been proposed in the 2011 -12.   However, during RE stage in 2009 -10 and 2010-11 these 
were reduced to Rs. 25.10 crore and 31.00 crore respectively.   The main reasons for the 
substantial reduction have been delay in procurement and installation of various equipment, 
completion of civil work for various buildings and hiri ng of consultants for development of web 
graphic information system etc.  As per MoWR, the project has not been affected due to 
reduction in allocation of funds as far as Central Implementing Agencies are concerned.  The 
Committee further note that the pro ject will not be completed within the prescribed period of 6 
years for which some Implementing Agencies have sought extension of time to be finalized in 
consultation by them with the World Bank  and MoWR.  The Committee note that a 
comprehensive mechanism has been prescribed for monitoring the progress by different 
agencies.  The Committee are of the view that due to initial teething problems which might not 
have been taken into consideration, the project could not be completed within the stipulated 
period of six years.  This exhibits lack of proper planning, management, coordination and 
implementation thereto on the part of the Ministry.  The Committee are constrained to point out 
that the project is getting assistance from the International Bank of Reconst ruction and 

 
28 
 
Development (IBRD) and delay in completion of the project will not only adversely affect the 
good-will of our country globally but will affect future assistance from IBRD or other foreign 
Institutions also.  The Committee expect the MoWR to tak e all necessary steps to complete the 
project within the renewed target date i.e. by June 2014 positively.  The Committee express 
their grave anxiety over the fact that there is an urgent need to undertake a comprehensive 
hydrological survey of the ground water by the MoWR in conjunction with the Deptt. of 
Space/ISRO. 
 
Reply of the Government 
A national Level Steering Committee (NLSC) headed by the Secretary, Ministry of 
Water Resources with State Secretaries/ Principal Secretaries of the concerned Departme nts 
as member is monitoring the Project. In addition to above, a Project Coordination Secretariat 
(PCS) has been created in the Brahmaputra & Barak (B&B) Wing of MoWR for monitoring and 
co-ordination of the project.   PCS is also functioning as the secretariat of NLSC. 
Every year, each Implementing Agency prepares its Annual Work Plan (AWP) and 
Procurement Plan (PP), which are got approved form the World Bank. Monthly reviews of the 
progress made by all the implementing Agencies is being done by PCS as per the approved 
AWP & PP. The procurement and technical issues raised by the Implementing Agencies are 
being resolved by PCS in consultation with Technical Assistance & Management Consultancy 
(TAMC).  Regular weekly meetings as well as frequent interactions a re also held with TAMC for 
monitoring and resolution of the specific issues and other critical issues for smooth 
implementation of the Project and achievement of the physical/financial targets as proposed in 
AWP & PP.   Besides that, regular interactions w ith the Implementing Agencies are also made 

 
29 
 
through visits, telephone and emails. However, there is little progress made by few of the 
Implementing Agencies on account of administrative delays within those organizations. This is 
being vigorously followed a t all levels to ensure that the envisaged expenditure under HP -II is 
incurred and the project is completed on time.   
Recommendation (Para No.2.58) 
 
 The Committee note that MoWR assist the State Governments in availing external 
assistance to fill up the r esources gap and state -of-the-art technology for Water Resources 
development for irrigation schemes.  The Committee further note that there are 19 on -going 
externally aided projects from different funding agencies viz. World Bank (11), Asian 
Development Ba nk (2) and the other bilateral agencies,  namely,  Japan International 
Cooperation Agency (JICA) (5) and Kreditanstalt fur Wiederaufbau (Kfw), Germany (1).  Out of 
the11 on -going externally aided projects assisted by World Bank, 3 relate to water sector 
restructuring in the States of Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh  and Rajasthan; 2 relate to water 
sector improvement in the States of Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh; 4 relate to community 
based tank management in the States of Orissa, Karnataka (Phase I & Phase  II) and Andhra 
Pradesh; 1 relates to irrigated agriculture modernization and water bodies restoration and 
management of Tamil Nadu and 1 relates to Hydrology Project (Phase II), which covers 13 
States. The name of States and projects are given at Annexure –III.    The Committee observe 
that there are two projects namely Madhya Pradesh Water Sector Restructuring Project and 
Uttar Pradesh Water Sector Restructuring Project which have not been completed within the 
stipulated time frame and in respect of which  extension of time has been sought.  The reasons 

 
30 
 
attributed by the Ministry for delay in implementation of projects and slow utilization of funds 
inter-alia include delay in land acquisition, clearance from other departments, delay in 
appointment of consul tants, frequent transfer of staff, lack of adequate skilled man -power, 
failure on the part of contractors to carry out civil work and non availability of inland suppliers or 
inadequate response to global tenders.  The Committee are of the considered view t hat had the 
implementing agencies in India worked in a well coordinated, planned and organized manner 
the situation of delay in project implementation could have been definitely avoided.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that these two projects be compl eted within the extended 
time frame so that further cost overrun could be avoided and the desired benefits reach the 
beneficiaries at the earliest.  As regards projects which are under pipeline, the Committee 
desire that all agencies involved from the init ial stage till the completion of the project should 
foresee all hurdles whether technical or otherwise and find solution before hand and take 
appropriate action so that projects are completed within the targeted date. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Wa ter Resources had informed Principal Secretary/Secretary,  Water 
Resources of the State Governments of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh to take necessary 
steps/measures so that Madhya Pradesh Water Sector Restructuring Project and Uttar 
Pradesh Water Secto r Restructuring Project are completed with the extended period of time 
and no further extension of time is sought. 
 Further, Principal Secretary/Secretary, Water Resources of the State Governments of 
Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Karnataka, Oriss a, Chhattisgarh, Tamil Nadu, Uttar 
Pradesh and West Bengal have also been requested to take necessary steps/measures to 

 
31 
 
complete the on-going externally aided projects concerning them within the stipulated period of 
time.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.59) 
 
   The Committee are dismayed to note that as on 31.03.2011 there are a large number 
of UCs pending involving a substantial  amount in respect of grants/loans released upto 
31.3.2008 for institutions/ Autonomous Bodies and State Govts.   According to the po sition 
clarified by the Ministry the position of outstanding Utilization Certificates in number and the 
amounts involved keep on changing and the same are monitored both by the different 
departments issuing/releasing the grants and by individual Pay and Ac counts Officers before 
payment is released.  This fact has also been clarified by the representative of the MoWR while 
deposing before the Committee.  In regard to action taken to obtain all UCs in time, the 
Committee have been informed that PAOs monitor receipts of Utilization Certificates at the time 
of actual release of grants in aid.  No grants are being released without getting the UCs for the 
grant released for the previous year. Due to monthly meetings with Head of Departments 
(HODs)  organized at the JS & FA level, the number of Utilization Certificates have come down. 
No grant is released to the same institution wherever the Utilization Certificates are pending 
and compliance is lacking from that institution.  Keeping in view all the facts, the Comm ittee 
recommend  that  apart from releasing funds after obtaining the UCs from the previous year, 
they also consider the feasibility of imposing some penalty on the authorities who show 
lackadaisical approach towards fund management and their utilization.  They also recommend 

 
32 
 
that MoWR should coordinate and keep strict vigil on the implementation of Schemes and 
timely submission of UCs by way of field inspection, periodic reviews, etc. 
 
Reply of the Government 
As far as pending UCs are concerned, all contro lling authority have already been 
requested to pursue the grantee institutions to submit UCs which were overdue, in the 
prescribed format and was also informed that no further grant will be released to the institutions 
who do not submit UCs in time and in prescribed format.  In the light of recommendation of 
Parliament Standing Committee, all the Wing Heads have been informed that no grant should 
be released to the same institutions wherever UCs are pending and compliance is lacking from 
that institution and imposing some penalty on the authorities who show lackadaisical approach 
towards fund management and their utilization.   
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.60) 
 The Committee note that a number of Audit Paras for the years 2009 -10 and 2010 -11 
were at the stage of preparation of draft Action Taken Notes.  The Committee have, however, 
been informed that expeditious measures were taken by the MoWR to deal with all the audit 
paras of CAG, as a result of which presently only six paras relating to 2010 -11 were pending .  
The Committee appreciate the efforts made by the Ministry to bring pendency of audit paras to 
minimum level.  The Committee hope that the Ministry would strive hard to continue such 
efforts in future also so that audit findings/observations are attended  to and corrective action 
taken within the stipulated time frame.  The Committee be apprised about the position of six 
pending paragraphs within three months of the presentation of this Report. 

 
33 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The valuable observations of the Pa rliament Standing Committee noted for dealing 
Action Taken Note on pending C&AG audit paras.  The Final ATN on the quoted 6 C&AG Audit 
Paras has already been forwarded to the Monitoring Cell of Ministry of Finance for settlement.   
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.13) 
 The Committee note that MoWR plays a pivotal role by providing technical know how to 
the State Governments through its subsidiary organizations for planning, formulation and 
execution of all Major and Medium Irrigation Projects.  The budget allocat ion (Plan) was 
reduced by Rs.68.4 crore from Rs.251.00 crore to Rs.181.60 crore at RE stage.  The reason 
for this reduction is stated to be in respect of two schemes namely, "Hydrology Project" and 
"Research and Development".  The Ministry is also in agreement that the reduction at RE stage 
would result in some delays in the completion of identified activities.  However, physical targets 
are planned to be achieved during the remaining period of  the XI Plan.  The Committee 
express their serious concern over  reduction of allocation at RE stage again because while 
examining Demands for Grants for the year 2010-11, the Committee had pointed out the similar 
fact in their Second Report (15th Lok Sabha).  The Committee also regret to note that despite 
their recommendation in this regard, the reduction during 2010 -11 is by Rs.68.4 crore whereas 
it was by Rs.30.00 crore during 2009 -10 which shows an increasing trend.  The Committee 
observe that the MoWR has not taken the recommendation of the Committee in the right 
earnest in spite of giving assurance by them in their action taken reply to the aforesaid report.  
The Committee are constrained to recommend again that the MoWR formulate their budget 

 
34 
 
estimates judiciously and with pre -planning besides exercising effective  control over its various 
Offices/Institutes so that no room is left for reduction in Budget Estimates in future.   
Reply of the Government 
The B.E. in respect of HP -II for the year 2011 -2012 has been finalized after detailed 
discussions and deliberations with all the Central Implementing Agencies under HP -II.  Major 
deliverables in respect of the consultancies and procurement of equipments by the 
Implementing Agencies are scheduled for 2011 -2012. Reviews of monthly expenditure are 
being done with Central I As. They are requested to expedite their procurements and incur 
expenditure as proposed for year 2011 -12. In this respect, all necessary technical and 
procurement related assistance is being regularly provided by PCS/TAMC. 
 
 Out of total reduction of Rs.68 .40 crore from BE to RE for the year 2010 -11, the 
reduction in respect of “R&D” in „Water Sector‟ is only Rs.12.00 crore, (with BE as Rs. 54.00 
crore & RE as Rs.42.00 crore) where as the reduction from BE to RE for the year 2009 -10 was 
of the order of Rs.1 7.00 crore(with BE as Rs.52.00 crore and RE as Rs.35.00 crore).  The 
reduction from BE to RE is less for the year 2010 -11 in comparison to that of the year 2009 -10 
which is a decreasing trend.  Efforts are also being made to minimize the gap of BE and RE i n 
future. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.14) 
 The Committee note that the target of creation of irrigation potential through MMI during 
XI Plan was 9.0 million hectares, which was revised to 5.00 Mha. at MTA stage. As against 
this, the State Governments have r eported creation of irrigation potential of 2.97 million 

 
35 
 
hectares during the first three years of XI Plan, i.e. 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10.  As per the 
latest reports from the States the actual total physical anticipated achievement by the end of 
2010-11 is 4.925 Mha., therefore, at the time of MTA, the targets were revised from 9 to 5 Mha.  
According to the Ministry, the Central Government has been consistently increasing the outlays 
under AIBP to assist States to complete the on -going Major and Medium I rrigation Projects.  It 
is highly disappointing to find that target for creation of irrigation potential has been reduced at 
MTA stage.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the MoWR make concerted efforts to 
find the crux of the problem and remove all  shortcomings which create hurdles in achieving the 
targets.  The Committee also recommend that before setting the targets the Ministry should do 
complete and thorough ground work, so that realistic targets are fixed and also achieved within 
the stipulated time frame. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry of Water Resources has analyzed the reasons for delay in completion of 
the projects.  It is observed that projects get delayed due to land acquisition problems, 
contractual problems, Resettlement and rehabilitation problems, geological surprises during the 
project implementation, works related to projects to be executed by other than water resources/ 
irrigation department such as highway crossing, railway crossing, short working seasons in the 
hilly states, law and order problems etc.  In order to get the projects completed in short possible 
time, thereby leading to early creation of irrigation potential as also to achieve the targets set of 
irrigation potential, the Ministry of Water Resources has taken sev eral measures.  The AIBP 
guidelines have been modified from time to time.  The State government is to also inform 

 
36 
 
remedial measures taken by them to remove bottlenecks in project implementation.  However, 
Ministry will continue to monitor that the targets set are achieved expeditiously. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.15) 
 The Committee note that the Command Area Development (CAD) Programme was 
started as a Centrally Sponsored Sche me in the year 1974 -75 with the objective to bridge the 
gap between irrigation potential created and that utilized through micro level infrastructure 
development for efficient water management and enhancement of agricultural production and 
productivity so as to improve socio -economic conditions of the farmers. The programme was 
restructured and renamed as Command Area Development & Water Management 
(CAD&WM) with effect from 1.4.2004. Under the CAD&WM Programme financial assistance is 
being provided to the S tate Governments on 50:50 basis for construction activities and 75:25 
basis to carry out training programmes for field functionaries/farmers, monitoring, evaluation, 
adaptive trials and demonstrations.   Initially, 60 major and medium irrigation projects were 
taken up under the CAD Programme, covering a Culturable Command Area (CCA) of about 
15.00 million hectare. There are now 145 ongoing projects with CCA of 16.02 Mha. The 
scheme is being implemented as a State Sector Scheme during the XIth Five Year Plan  
(2008-09 to 2011-12).  According to the Ministry the evaluation studies conducted with regard 
to performance of CADWM Programme, there has been a positive impact of the programme.  
The Committee also note that the latest guidelines on Command Area Develop ment and 

 
37 
 
Water Management (CADWM) programme stipulates that a State Govt. is required to enter 
into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) at the time of inclusion of a project under 
CADWM.  The  State  Govts.  have to do phasing of expenditure and physical w orks year wise 
till completion of the project. This has had a positive impact on the time bound implementation 
of projects. Moreover, State Governments are more forthcoming for inclusion of project under 
the programme now.  They, however, need to focus mor e on capacity building of farmers and 
field functionaries.  The Committee are pleased to note the achievements of physical targets 
upto December 2010 for the period 2008 -09 to 2011 -12 as well as after its transfer to State 
Sector Scheme.  The Committee observe that pace of implementation under CAD&WM is very 
encouraging and hope that the Ministry would make all possible endeavour to implement the 
Scheme in letter and spirit. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Water Resources has been making all poss ible endeavour to implement 
the Command Area Development & Water Management (CAD&WM) Programme in letter and 
spirit.  The State Governments are being pursued to enter into the Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) for individual project for its targeted and timely completion.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.4.21) 
 
 The Committee note that Minor Irrigation Schemes are those ground water and surface 
water schemes which have a culturable command area upto 2,000 hectare individually.  

 
38 
 
Surface Water Minor Irrigation Schem es are generally funded from the public sector outlay.  
Many schemes under Minor Irrigation have been transferred to State Sector in the XI th Plan and 
some others have been merged in a new scheme.  The Committee also note that the Plan 
allocation during 20 10-11 was reduced from Rs.112.50 crore to Rs.103.40 crore at RE stage 
due to general cut in Revised Estimates of MoWR as a whole.    The Committee further note 
that budget allocation for Minor Irrigation Scheme for 2011 -12 is earmarked at Rs.146.00 crore 
which is Rs.33.90 crore more than the previous year 2010 -11.  For this the Ministry clarified 
that due to rise in expenditure on regular works and likely expenditure to be made for 
construction of piezometers and to release funds to the implementing agencie s for 
demonstrative projects on rain water harvesting and artificial recharge during XI Plan the 
allocation has been increased.  The Committee hope that the Ministry would utilise the 
increased allocation fully during the year 2011 -12.  The Committee, howe ver, recommend that 
in order to utilise the enhanced allocation during 2011 -12 the Ministry pursue the matter 
vigorously with the States and undertake periodical reviews of the physical and financial 
progress of the work. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Efforts a re made to utilize the increased allocation during the year 2011 -2012. The 
Matter is under active pursued with the states for expediting submission of Detailed Projects 
Reports (DPRs) for demonstrative recharge projects and completion of ongoing projects. In fact 
during the current year, as on 15.09.2011, a sum of Rs. 23.87 crore has been released for 
these projects. Construction of piezometers is also progressing satisfactory. A total of 644 
piezometers have been constructed as on date. Physical and financ ial progress of various 

 
39 
 
activities is being reviewed regularly at the levels of Chairman, CGWB and Ministry of Water 
Resources. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4.22) 
 The Committee note that creation of potential for the XI Plan for Minor Irrigation has 
been kept as 7 Mha. which was revised by the Planning Commission as 4.5 Mha. during Mid 
Term Appraisal on the ground that as against anticipated annual rate of creation of irrigation 
potential of about 1.4 Mha., the average rate for the same during the first three years is about 
0.774 Mha. per year.  As per the latest reports from the States the actual physical performance 
during 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10(anticipated) are 0.818 Mha., 1.276 Mha. and 1.489 Mha.  
respectively with target for 2010 -11 being 1.294 Mha.    The total physical anticipated 
achievement by the end of 2010 -11 is 4.878 Mha.  Keeping in view the physical and financial 
performance of the sector at the time of Mid Term Appraisal, the targets were revised from 7 
Mha. to 4.5 Mha.  However, the actual  achievement during the XI Plan, keeping in view the 
trend so far is likely to be between 5 - 5.5 Mha.  In regard to achieving targets during the Plan, 
the Ministry has been consistently increasing the outlays under the AIBP since the beginning of 
the Plan  to assist the States for surface Minor Irrigation Schemes with 90% financial grant 
being made available to Schemes in NE region and special category States, drought prone and 
tribal areas.  The Committee further note that Planning Commission has been enco uraging 
States for involving WUAs for the Management of Minor Irrigation Schemes.  The Committee 
have also been informed that the cost per hectare of irrigation potential creation assumed at 
the beginning of the XI Plan for the Major and Medium Irrigation and Minor Irrigation  sectors 
were Rs 1.7 lakh/ha and Rs 0.90 lakh/ha respectively and this cost has gone up during the 

 
40 
 
Plan period due to increase in the cost of construction materials.  The Committee are of the 
considered view that before setting any tar gets a well planned and thorough study be carried 
out to assess the achievable targets.  The Committee recommend that tentative targets along 
with complete details of Scheme be forwarded for vetting to the Planning Commission in the 
first instance and afte r obtaining their view/approval, further action be taken to launch the 
Scheme so that revision of targets and cost overrun is avoided. 
Reply of the Government 
 The target of 7 Mha during XI th Plan under Minor Irrigation Sector was as per the 
recommendations of the Working Group for XI th Plan after analyzing the data received from the 
respective states.  The final target and outlays will be decided by the Planning Commission. 
The respective State Governments will finalize their corresponding targets dependin g upon the 
outlays decided by the Planning Commission.  The target fixed for Accelerated Irrigation 
Benefit Programme (AIBP) is being monitored through Central Water Commission / Ministry of 
Water Resources as per the existing procedure.  At present, the c ost per ha of irrigation 
potential creation for MI schemes under AIBP is Rs.2 lakh per ha with the condition wherever 
the estimated cost of the project is more than Rs.1.5 lakh per ha, the AIBP assistance is limited 
to cost norm of Rs.1.5 lakh per ha.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.4.23) 
 
 The Committee note that Ground Water Management & Regulation Scheme was 
launched with the merger of some Tenth Plan Schemes at a cost of Rs.460.00 crore for 
implementation by the Central Ground Water Board during XI Plan.  The  Committee also note 

 
41 
 
that under this Scheme allocation was reduced during 2010 -11 at RE stage by Rs.22.00 crore 
though again increased at BE for 2011 -12 to Rs.132.00 crore despite actual expenditure of 
Rs.68.82 crore in 2009 -10.  As per the Ministry, due t o general cut in Revised Estimates of 
MoWR as a whole, the allocation in this Scheme was also reduced.  The reason for this was 
stated to be slow progress of work prior to RE finalization.   However, the scheme picked up 
towards the end of the FY 2010 -11 and, therefore, higher allocation has been made for 2010 -
11 and physical targets will be achieved during this year.  Moreover, increased allocation was 
made during 2010 -11 and 2011 -12 due to likely increase of expenditure on regular works, 
construction of piezometers and to release  funds to implementing agencies for demonstrative 
projects on rain water harvesting and artificial recharge.  The Committee desire that concerted 
efforts be made by the Ministry to avoid reduction of allocations at RE stage in fut ure so that 
manpower and resources are not wasted in the estimation of allocations time and again.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As desired, all out efforts are being made to utilize the increased allocation during the 
year 2011 -12 and avoid reduction of alloc ations at RE stage.  During the current year, an 
amount of Rs. 26.00 crore has been allocated for demonstrative artificial recharge scheme 
under Ground Water Management and Regulation, against which a sum of Rs. 23.87 crore has 
been released to state imple menting agencies for construction of recharge structures till 
15.09.2011. Six more projects costing Rs. 17.00 crore are under scrutiny before release of 
installments for construction of the recharge structures. Total allocation will be fully utilized by 
end of quarter ending December, 2011, and RE will be demanded keeping in view the 

 
42 
 
requirement of released of funds for on -going projects and new projects in hand. All other 
activities under the scheme are also progressing well. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5.23) 
 
 The Committee note that the Plan allocation for Flood Control for the year 2010 -11 was 
earmarked at Rs.250.50 crore.  However, it was reduced to Rs.225.01 crore at the Revised 
Estimate stage for the same financial year and again increased to Rs. 238.01 crore for 2011 -
12.  The reasons for this are stated to be the late start of anti -erosion works by Brahmaputra 
Board and the effects of agitation on investigation works of Sapta Kosi High Dam Multi Purpose 
Project in Nepal and uncertain political situation in Nepal.  The reasons put forward by the 
Ministry only reflect regrettable lack of foresightedness and seriousness while assessing the 
allocations. The Committee are disturbed to note that the plan allocation was reduced for such 
an important programme of national importance.   
 
Reply of the Government 
The investigation works of Sapta kosi Dam Multi Project in Nepal are delayed due to 
disturbance/law and order problem in the Project Area. The issue of providing security to 
project officials and equipments have been taken up with the Government of Nepal during 
various bilateral meetings. The Government of Nepal has, now, established one Police Post at 
Barahkshetra and has assured requisite security to the project officials. Action has been 
initiated by the Joint Project Office, to take up/restart the field investigation works. 

 
43 
 
The allocation for Brahmaputra board was reduced to Rs.73.49 crore at RE stage from Rs.80 
crore at BE stage, due to non receipt of techno -economic clearance of the revised estimate for 
the Scheme “Projection of Majuli Island from flood and erosion Phase -II & III, Assam and 
estimate for “Restoration of rivers Dibang and Lohit to their original courses at Dholla 
Hatighull”. The same has been obtained now and the works are in progress. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5.24) 
 
 The Committee further note that World Commission on Dam (WCD) in its report “Dam 
and Development” had suggested an integrated approach to flood management in the year 
2000.  The three -pronged strategy was through structural and  non-structural means, isolating 
the threat of floods through structural, technological and policy alternatives and increasing 
peoples capacity to cope with floods.  However, Government of India rejected the Draft India 
Country Report as the consultants were reluctant to amend the draft report accommodating the 
view of the Government of India.  According to the Ministry, WCD report was not based on 
factual and authentic information, later on Executive Director, United Nation Environment 
Programme who met th e then Minister of Water Resources on 02.05.2002 was also apprised  
of the circumstances under which India had rejected  the aforesaid report.    The Committee 
are surprised to find that the Ministry which was responsible to provide factual and authentic 
information to World Commission on Dam so that India is rightly projected in the International 
report failed in providing factual and authentic information.  The Committee deprecate this 
approach of the Ministry and desire that the Ministry should be carefu l in future while dealing 
with the international agencies so that India's image is not dented in the International fora. 

 
44 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendations/observations of the Committee have been taken note of and 
Ministry will be more careful in future in dealing with International agencies. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5.27) 
 The Committee note that the Scheme titled “Reconstruction, remodeling & 
Improvement of embankments in Sunderban and adjoining areas in the districts of North & 
South 24 Pargan as damaged by severe cyclone „Aila‟,” for restoring the embankments in the 
above areas estimated to cost Rs.5,032.00 crore formulated by Irrigation and Waterways 
Directorate (I&WD), Government of West Bengal was cleared by the Ganga Flood Control 
Commission on 21.01.2010 and also approved by the Advisory Committee of Ministry of Water 
Resources in its meeting held on 28.01.2010. The investment clearance for the scheme was 
accorded by the Planning Commission on 02.07.2010.  The physical execution of work is 
getting delayed due to non -acquisition of land.  The Committee further note that 1st Phase of 
the Scheme with an estimated cost of Rs.1,339.50 crore has been included for providing 
Central assistance under the State Sector Scheme “Flood Management Programm e” and two 
instalments of Central assistance amounting to Rs.525.75 crore. have been released to the 
State Government for the Scheme till date. The State Government has utilized a total amount 
of Rs.294.61 crore only including State share amounting to Rs.1 07.11 crore till date. Further,  
the first phase works of the scheme involve acquisition of 5996 acres of land.  The process for 
acquisition of land is in progress and possession of about 70 acres of land has been received 
so far.  Irrigation & Waterways Di rectorate, Government of West Bengal has completed all 

 
45 
 
formalities related to issue of work order for the scheme. However, the work order has not been 
issued as the possession of land has not yet been received by the Department. The reason of 
underutilization of funds by the State Government towards the aforesaid scheme is mainly due 
to delay in starting the physical work due to non -availability of land.  The Committee are 
unhappy to note that the process of acquisition of land  was not completed and, there fore, 
physical work has been delayed.  The responsibility in this regard has been put on the State 
Governments and the Ministry has tried to absolve itself of the same.  The MoWR has been 
collecting regular progress of the Scheme from the State Government on monthly basis.  The 
Committee are surprised to note that despite inordinate delay in executing the Scheme, no 
tangible efforts have apparently been made by the MoWR to persuade the State Government 
in this regard.  The Committee, therefore, recommend th at concerted efforts be made by the 
Ministry to pursue the State Government to implement the Scheme at the earliest to avoid any 
time and cost overrun.   
Reply of the Government 
The schemes titled “Reconstruction, remodeling & improvement of embankments in  the 
Sunderbans and adjoining areas in the district of North & South 24 Paraganas damaged by 
severe cyclone AILA” was formally started by the Irrigation and waterways directorate, 
Government of West Bengal(I&WD) in March, 2010. 
 Keeping in view that the sc heme could be completed in a period of three years, the 
schemes was bifurcated in two phases and the works amounting to Rs. 1339.50 crore, which 
could be completed during XI Plan period was included for funding under the Flood 
Management programme for XI P lan.  An amount of Rs. 187.50 crore was released as 1 st 

 
46 
 
installment of Central Assistance to the state Government vide Ministry of Finance Order dated 
12.3.2010. 
 Keeping in view the importance of the scheme, a continuous watch on progress of the 
scheme is being made by obtaining monthly report of progress from the I&WD through GFCC 
since May 2010.  Based on the reports received from I&WD, the action by I&WD for 
implementation of scheme in a time bound manner could be summarized as under: 
 Land acquisition Consultant was engaged by I&WD in November, 2009 to expedite the 
process of land acquisition.   It was so planned that the sufficient land is available with 
I&WD by October 2010 to start the physical work by Nov. 2010. 
  A dedicated project Management Unit h eaded by an office in the rank Chief Engineer 
was setup in the Irrigation and Waterways Directorate for the implementation of the 
scheme.  The unit formally stared working in July 2010. 
 Several Committee have been formed by the State Government vested with  requisite 
power to accord speedy approval in financial matter and to monitor the physical and 
financial progress. 
 A firm “consulting Engineering Services(India) Private Limited” was engaged in August 
2010 as Project Management Service provider to assist t he Irrigation and Waterways 
Directorate in preparation of bid document, evaluation of bid, quality control, 
supervision and overall project monitoring. 
 
The total requirement of land for the 1 st phase of the scheme was about 5996 acres of 
land in the North  & South 24 Parganas District of West Bengal.  Keeping in view the time 

 
47 
 
required for completing the routine process of acquisition of land, I&WD started the process 
well in advance, so that sufficient land could be available with them by the end of October  
2010. Payment of Rs.284.41 crore was also made to the LA collectors of the concerned 
districts by September 2010. 
 Keeping in view the slow progress of land acquisition and other activities related to 
implementation of scheme, a team of Ministry of Water Resources and GFCC visited the work 
sites from 22.10.2010 to 24.10.2010 for holding discussion with the State Government officers 
to appraise the latest status of land acquisition and other actions for timely implementation of 
the scheme.  
 The team visite d various sites at which the work are proposed and thereafter held 
detailed discussions with Secretary (I&WD), Government of West Bengal in his office at 
Jalsampad Bhawan, Salt Lake City Kolkata.  It was decided that the State Government should 
chalk out a  meticulous planning of deployment of resources by the contractors, including 
machinery, material and labour so that the physical targets could be fulfilled.  It was also 
suggested that the State Government may closely monitor acquisition of land and infor m 
MoWR progress on monthly basis. 
 Since, the District Administration failed to hand over the land as per the schedule, a 
review meeting was convened by the Hon‟ble Minister -in-charge, I&WD on 16.10.2010.  The 
meeting was attended by the District Magistrat e of the concerned district and other officials.  
The District Administration assured to put their full efforts for acquisition of land.  Thereafter, 
another meeting was held on 7.2.2011 in the chamber of the Chief Secretary, Government of 
West Bengal whic h was attended by Principal Secretary, Land and Land Reforms Department 

 
48 
 
and the concerned District Collectors.  The land Department assured to provide possession of 
about 1000 acre of land by March 2011.  But no tangible progress was made due to state 
elections. 
 After the state election was over, efforts were again intensified and the Hon‟ble 
Minister-in-charge, I&WD held a meeting with the concerned District Collectors on 30.5.2011 to 
expedite the process of land acquisition.  He further held meeting with  District Collectors in the 
presence of public representatives and BDOs at Alipore on 2.6.2011 and Barasat on 7.6.2011 
to discuss issues related to land acquisition for South 24 Parganas and North 24 Parganas 
respectively. 
 A meeting was also convened by t he Chief Secretary, in presence of Hon‟ble Chief 
Minister on 4.6.2011 to review the progress of implementation of Aila Project and its allied 
compensation packages. 
 Review meeting was again taken by the Chief Secretary on 9.8.2011 in the presence of 
Hon‟ble Minister -in-Charge, I&WD, Principal Secretary, Land and Land Reforms Department 
and the Collectors of the concerned Districts.  The District Administration has assured to 
handover the possession of 2300 acres (1300 acres in North 24 Parganas and 1000 ac res in 
South 24 Parganas) of land to I&WD by the end of October 2011.  Possession of another 1700 
acres of land in South 24 Parganas will be handed over by the end of December 2011. 
 In spite of the efforts made by I&WD by pursuing the matter at the highes t level, the 
process of land acquisition has become the major bottleneck in the implementation of the 
project. 
 

 
49 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5.28) 
 
  The Committee note that the main objective of the Scheme is the construction of dam 
and canal system to protect  an area of 40,000 ha in Nalbari area of Assam from recurring 
floods of the river Pagladiya and to provide irrigation to a Gross Command Area of 54,160 ha. 
annually (average).   The project is to generate 3 MW of hydro -electricity from Canal release 
as inc idental benefit.   Presently the work is held up on the project.  The reasons, as per 
Ministry, are that the project is held up due to non -completion of Zirat survey (property 
assessment) and land acquisition by the State Govt. of Assam due to resistance f rom a 
section of the people likely to be displaced because of construction of project.  The Committee 
also note that the matter had been taken up by the MoWR with State Government at various 
levels, but Bodo Territorial Council has not agreed for construct ion of dam at present location 
due to submergence in Bodoland area.  The Committee further note that Brahmaputra Board 
has carried out survey for an alternative project location near Assam -Bhutan Border but no 
other suitable site is available.  This view h as been conveyed to the State Government and 
their response is being expedited.  The Committee are of the view that considering the 
benefits of flood moderation, irrigation and power to the desired extent, the MoWR should 
again take up the matter with the State Government and Bodo Territorial Council for its early 
and amicable resolution within a definite time frame. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 A meeting was held with Member, Water Resources Development of BTC on 10 -06-
2011 wherein the CE (I&W) made a presen tation and explained the outcome of study on 

 
50 
 
alternative dam site and positive aspect of present proposal.  Member, W.R. of BTC assured to 
place the proposal in Council‟s meeting of BTC and he also assured that the Council may form 
a committee to study the  proposal and to arrive at the decision.  Though no work is going on 
except for R&M of assets created, efforts are on to remove the stalemate. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6.3) 
 
 The Committee note that the main objective of the Farakka Barrage Project is 
“operation and maintenance of Farakka Barrage and associated structures including anti -
erosion measures for safety of barrage”.  Besides the special repairs of the barrage gates, 
project colony, etc. bank protection works are included in the Plan Scheme.  The Committee 
further note that the Plan allocation for the year 2011 -12 is Rs.70.40 crore,  a decrease of 
Rs.11.60 crore for the current fiscal year in comparison to BE 2010 -11 which was Rs.82.00 
crore and reduced to Rs. 62.00 crore at RE Stage.  The Committe e are not satisfied with the 
stereotyped reply furnished by the Ministry that less number of anti -erosion works were 
undertaken and works on repair and maintenance of main barrage and head regulator at 
Farakka and barrage at Jangipur, repair and maintenanc e of feeder canal were not undertaken 
during 2010 -11.  The Committee apprehend that the main objective of the Farakka Barrage 
Project has not been achieved and, therefore, recommend that a thorough probe be ordered 
and responsibility be fixed for laxity in  this regard.  The Ministry should take all necessary 
corrective action to avoid such recurrences.    
 
 

 
51 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Works are implemented by Farakka Barrage Project (FBP) on the recommendation/ 
decision taken in the meeting of TAC of FBP. The  Planning for execution of work during the 
year 2010-11 and 2011-12 was formulated by the FBP based on the recommendation/ decision 
of TAC and availability of technical/ engineering man -power in the FBP.  Accordingly the plan 
allocation in RE 2010 -11 and 2 011-12 was proposed as Rs.62 crore and Rs. 70.40 crore 
respectively. 
 
During the current FY; 2011 -12, out of the plan allocation of Rs. 70.40 crore during the 
year 2011-12, an expenditure of Rs.46.35 crore has been incurred till September, 2011 which 
is more that 65% of the plan allocation. It is likely that more works than envisaged at the BE 
stage would be implemented. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.7.9) 
 
 The Committee further note that the ongoing projects are getting delayed by more than 
10 years reportedly,  due to law and order problem, delay in land acquisition, contractual 
problem, short working season, etc.  The Committee have been informed that the MoWR has 
taken several measures to cut delay in projects completion considerably.  The Committee hope 
that the Government would continue their efforts in this direction with renewed and sustained 
vigour and report the tangible outcome to the Committee within three months of the 
presentation of this report to Parliament. 
 

 
52 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 It has now bee n decided that further release of funds for a particular year will be made 
only when land required for work for that year is in possession of the State Government and a 
certificate to that effect duly signed by the Secretary (WR)/Irrigation is appended wit h the 
proposal.  On the issue of coordination with various authorizes concerned, the States have 
been requested to form Project/State level committees to monitor the projects which would take 
care of such issues.  Further, it is also proposed to lay due em phasis on these issues during 
the process of monitoring. 
 The actual utilization of the targeted irrigation potential starts only after command area 
development (CAD) works have been completed.  Ministry of Water Resources has initiated 
action for taking u p the project under CAD&WM along with AIBP with a view to ensure early 
utilization of created irrigation potential.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
53 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
-  NIL - 

 
54 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.53) 
 
 The Committee note that the total budget estimate of the MoWR for the year 2011 -12 is 
Rs.1,249.33 crore comprising Plan allocation of Rs.732.00 crore and Non -Plan allocation of 
Rs.517.33 crore excluding allocations of Rs.12,620.00 crore transfer to the States for 
Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP) and other Water Resources pro gramme by 
the Ministry of Finance.  The Committee further note that in the Plan allocation (Revenue 
Section) there has been an increase of Rs.31.70 (5.24%) whereas the increase in Non -Plan 
allocation is Rs.97.81 crore (19.03%) for the year 2011 -12.  On the  other hand in Capital 
Section plan allocation of Rs.95.80 crore has shown decrease of Rs.11.70 crore ( -10.88%) for 
2011-12.  The Committee also note that in regard to actual utilization of allocated funds during 
2009-10 it was less than Budget Estimate in  all sections except in the revenue section of Non -
Plan allocations.  In 2010 -11 at revised estimate stage there was decrease of Rs.116.00 crore 
in the Plan allocation and an increase of Rs.84.36 crore in the Non -Plan allocation.  According 
to the Ministry , the allocation for the year  2011 -12 is considered sufficient for meeting the 
requirement of various activities planned during the year under different Plan Schemes.  There 
is a marginal increase in the overall Plan allocation for schemes viz. Ground Wat er 
Management Regulation, Hydrology Project, Information, Education and Communication, River 

 
55 
 
Basin Organisations and Dam Safety Studies.  In regard to inclusion of Rs.80.00 crore in 
"Hydrology Project" (a World Bank assisted Scheme) in BE of 2011 -12, this Project, as per 
MoWR is a Central Sector Scheme and hence the present system of showing this project along 
with other Central Sector Schemes in this budget may continue unlike AIBP which is a State 
Sector Scheme.  The Committee further note that the Plan a llocation has been reduced at RE 
stage in 2010-11 under Plan head by an amount of Rs.140.00 crore as against Rs.712.00 crore 
at BE stage relating to numerous Schemes.   The reasons put forth by the Ministry are not at all 
convincing to the Committee.  The Committee note that reduction of allocation at the RE stage 
shows poor pre -planning, lack of monitoring and control. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Ministry to strictly monitor all projects/schemes/field offices/attached offices, 
etc. through the well defined monitoring system leading to effective utilization of the funds 
allocated. 
 The Committee further note that total actual expenditure for Plan allocation was less 
than the Budget Estimates and Non -Plan allocation was more than the Budget Estima tes for 
the year 2009 -10.  Regarding the uneven distribution of expenditure in each quarter during 
2010-11, the Ministry stated that the expenditure is not evenly distributed in the Non -Plan side 
as the expenditure in this side mainly consists of salary co mponents.  Moreover, the March 
salary is booked in the next financial year, i.e. April hence the first quarter expenditure is more 
than the Second and Third quarters.  The Committee, therefore, impress upon the Ministry to 
incur expenditure strictly under the Rules/Regulations/Directions/orders framed or issued by 
the Ministry of Finance from time to time.  The Ministry should also minutely watch the flow of 
expenditure throughout the year so that funds are released after due scrutiny and satisfaction.  

 
56 
 
Reply of the Government 
 A number of factors are attributed for delay in completion of programmes/ projects.  
However, all possible efforts are made by the Ministry to foresee the factors attributed to delay 
of projects so that there is no need to reduce alloc ation at RE stage.  Further, the progress is 
closely monitored in the Ministry of ensure that the allocated funds are fully utilized and budget 
estimate is not reduced at the RE stage.  The guidance issued by Ministry of Finance from time 
to time is noted. 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 6 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4.24) 
 
 The Committee, during the evidence of the representatives of the MoWR, expressed 
their serious concern over ground water management, depletion  of ground water level and 
recharge of ground water.  The representative of MoWR asserted that it has not been given 
proper attention because they have not received much response from States on regulation of 
ground water.  Now, as far as recharging is conc erned, they had two Schemes.  One Scheme 
was the demonstrative recharge for which money is very limited.  They have only Rs.100 crore 
and out of that some money is given to various organizations and agencies to implement the 
Scheme.  Some work has already been done.  In some cases good work has been done in 
ground water recharge.  However, in some States, the work is not very satisfactory.  The 
Committee further note that the Central Government in the Ministry of Environment and Forests 
has constituted the Central Ground water Board as an authority for the purpose of regulation 
and control of Ground Water Management and Development to regulate and control, 

 
57 
 
management and development of ground water in the country and to issue necessary 
regulatory directions for the purpose.  The Committee are happy to note that CGWA has issued 
directions to Chief Secretaries in 12 States and 2 Union Territories to adopt artificial recharge 
to ground water and to promote rain water harvesting in order to ensure augmentation of  
depleting ground water resources and desire that similar directions be issued to the remaining 
States/UTs in this regard.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of the 
directions issued to the States/UTs and further initiatives being take n or contemplated by the 
CGWA to regulate and control the management and development of ground water in more 
effective and purposive manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Central Ground Water Authority has issued directions to the Chief Secretaries on 8 th 
August, 2006 to adopt artificial recharge to ground water and promote rainwater harvesting in 
order to ensure augmentation of depleting ground water resources, in the states/UTs of Andhra 
Pradesh, Haryana, Gujarat, Punjab, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajastha n, Tamilnadu, 
Kerala, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal, UT of Daman & Diu, UT of Pondicherry.  As 
large number of “Over Exploited”, “Critical” and “Semi Critical” blocks in respect of ground 
water development exist in these states/UTs.  Immediate atte ntion for Regulation and 
Management of ground  water was required.   
All the above States have amended building bye -laws to make Rain Water Harvesting 
Mandatory.  Besides these many States/UTs are undertaking various measures to promote rain 
water harvesti ng.  Implementation of Sardar Patel Sahbhagi Jal Sanchay Yojana & Sujlam 

 
58 
 
Suflam Yojna by Government of Gujrat, Bhagidari Programme by Delhi Government, Shivkalin 
Pani Sathawan Yojana by Maharashtra Government, implementation of rain water harvesting 
on massive scale in Government buildings, private housed/institutions and commercial building 
in urban & rural areas by Government of Rajasthan and revival of conventional methods of rain 
water harvesting in ponds, lakes, wells, step wells by Government of Karna taka are a few such 
measures initiated by the State Governments.    
Subsequently Central Ground Water Authority has also issued direction for regulation of 
ground water and rainwater harvesting: 
 Direction dated 5 th October, 2007 to Civic Bodies dealing wit h drinking water supply 
network in the notified “Over Exploited areas” for construction of ground water 
abstraction structures for drinking and domestic use and structures of Rainwater 
Harvesting/Artificial recharge to ground water. 
 Direction dated 8 th October, 2009 for implementation of Scheme of ground water 
recharge measures along  all National Highways, State Highways and other major roads 
by CRRI, National Highways Authority of India , CPWD, State PWDs; along rail tracks 
and other establishments of Ind ia Railways, in the Stadia by Sports Authority of India, 
BCCI, Departments of Sports and Youth Affairs and in the Airports by Airport Authority of 
India, Ministry of Civil Aviation for Promoting Rain Water Harvesting/adoption of artificial 
recharge to Ground Water in the country (except in the water logged areas). 
 Direction dated 8 th October, 2009 for adoption of rainwater harvesting by all the Group 
Housing Societies/Institutions/Schools/Hotels/Industrial Establishment falling in the Over 
Exploited and Critical areas.   

 
59 
 
 Direction dated 25 th September, 2010 to large and medium Industries using ground 
water in the over exploited and critical areas in the country to take up water conservation 
measures and including recharge of ground water/rain water harvestin g and adopt 
practices of treatment, recycle and reuse of waste water in their premises.   
In all 82 areas in the country have been notified for ground water regulation through 
various notifications, which include recent notifications for 39 areas  in Punja b (12), 
Rajasthan(20) and Haryana(7) vide public notice dated 13.08.2011  and also entire Gurgaon 
District.  Regulation of ground water in notified areas is being done through Authorized Officers 
appointed under Section 4 of EPA (1986).  
Ministry of Water Resources had circulated Model Bill to all States and Union Territories 
for enacting a legislation in their respective States.  So far 11 states & UTs have enacted 
legislation and 19 states and UTs have initiated the action for enactment of legislation on the 
lines of Model Bill.  
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 18 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4.25) 
 The Committee further note that Physical targets vis-à-vis achievement under the 
Ground Water Management Regulation d uring XI Plan (2007-12), year-wise target fixed for the 
years 2007 -08, 2008 -09, 2009 -10 and 2010 -11 have not been achieved in almost all the 
schemes.  The reasons for non -achievement of targets, as stated by the Ministry inter-alia are 
that most of the rig s are old, major components of these models are not readily available, 
shortage of manpower, etc.  The Ministry during evidence also clarified that in regard to 

 
60 
 
monitoring of groundwater studies, geo -physical studies, hydro chemical studies – in 
groundwater management and regulation schemes, they have achieved their targets and in 
some places they have even exceeded their targets.  About the groundwater exploration, 
during the last year there was a slight shortfall which they are covering this year.  About geo-
physical studies, they would be trying to cover the remaining part of it this year.  They will also 
be completing  the hydro -chemical studies during this year.  While deploring that the MoWR 
has failed to achieve the various targets fixed for Hydro Che mical Studies, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry identify the bottlenecks, fix responsibility on the officers 
responsible for the delays and complete the targets in the remaining period of the XI Plan.  
They expect complete action taken note on eac h of the aforesaid recommendations within next 
three months.  Further, considering the significance and viability of the minor irrigation projects 
in the hilly areas, more funds need to be allocated and schemes sanctioned for their early 
execution including the Renuka dam project in Himachal Pradesh. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The shortfall in achievement of targets fixed for XI Plan has been mainly due to vacant 
posts of Chemists.  During the period, 2007 -2011, there have been vacant post of Senior 
Chemist, Asstt. Chemist, STA and Suptdg. Chemist.  Eight posts of Senior Chemist remained 
vacant during 2007 -08 and 2008 -09 and one post of Suptdg. Chemist remained vacant during 
2009-10 and 2010 -11, which could not be filled up due to non -availability of eligible Chemists.  
Further, three posts of Asstt. Chemist and four posts of STA were abolished during 2007 -08.  In 
addition, requisitions had been sent for filling up of direct quota posts of Asstt.  Chemists 
through UPSC and those of STA through SSC.  Four posts of STA are under process for 

 
61 
 
revival.  As on 31 st March, 2011, out of a total of 79 posts of Chemists at different levels, 21 
posts are vacant and are under different stages of recruitment/revival.  Year wise status of 
vacancy position of chemists is given in Annexure - I.    
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 21 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5.25) 
 The Committee note that Government of India has formulated National Water Policy 
2002 incorporating various guiding princi ples for better flood management and circulated to all 
the States and concerned agencies for implementation.  To enable State Governments to 
undertake various structural measures, Central assistance is being provided to State 
Governments under "Flood Manag ement Programme" of MoWR during XI Plan.  The 
Committee further note that National Disaster Management Authority is also associated with 
the floods.  Mass awareness is also created regarding flood management through various 
programmes of MoWR under Informa tion, Education & Communication (IEC) Scheme.  The 
Committee further note that for implementation of the Flood Plain Zoning approach in the 
country, a model draft bill for flood plain zoning legislation was circulated by the Union 
Government in 1975 to all  the states.  There has been resistance on the part of the States to 
follow up various aspects of the flood plain management including the possible legislation.  
Only the states of Manipur and Rajasthan have enacted the legislation but the demarcation of 
flood zones/ enforcement is yet to be done.  Further, the States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and  
West Bengal have initiated actions in this regard.  Other States are yet to take action for 
enactment of legislation.  The Committee also note that due to large sc ale displacement of 

 
62 
 
people settled in flood plains and their settlement, the States are finding it difficult to enact the 
required legislation.  The Committee would like the MoWR to pursue all the remaining States to 
enact the aforesaid legislation to control the menace of recurrent floods.   
 
Reply of the Government 
The Central Water Commission has been continuously impressing upon the states the 
need to take follow up action to implement the flood plain zoning approach. A model draft bill 
for flood plain zoning legislation was also circulated by the Union Government in 1975 to all the 
states. 
There has been resistance on the part of the states to follow up various aspects of flood 
plain management including possible legislation. The state of Manipur had en acted the flood 
plain zoning legislation way back in 1978 but the demarcation of flood zones is yet to be done. 
The state of Rajasthan has also enacted legislation for flood plain management in the state but 
enforcement thereof is yet to be done. The gover nment of Utter Pradesh has decided to take 
suitable measures for regulating the economic / development activities in the flood plains. The 
Government of Bihar initiated action to prepare flood plain zoning maps, which are essential 
before any executive mea sures could be undertaken. The Government of West Bengal had 
intimated that a draft bill on flood plain zoning was under process. Other States are yet to take 
action for enactment of legislation.   
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 24 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 

 
63 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5.26) 
 
 The Committee note that in the last few years floods have caused havoc in the country 
and a large amount of water was allowed to flow out to the sea.  The reason stated was that 
there was not much in frastructure for storage of water.  XIth Plan documents also suggested 
that the ideal solution for flood control is the creation of adequate storage in flood prone river 
systems.  The Committee further note that the average annual precipitation is estimate d at 
4,000 Billion Cubic Metre (BCM) in the country.  After accounting for the natural process 
evaporation, etc. the average annual water availability in the country is assessed as 1,869 
BCM.  Further, it is estimated that owing to topographic, hydrologica l and other constrains, the 
utilizable water is 1,123 BCM.  As per available assessment, about 450 BCM of surface water 
and 231 BCM of ground water resources is being utilized for diverse purposes and rest of the 
water could be considered to be flowing dow n to sea.  The Committee also note that as per the 
Report of the Working Group on Water Resources for the XI Five Year Plan (2007 -2012) 
constituted by the Planning Commission, the per capita storage in the country is only about 210 
M3  which is way behind the achievement in many of the developed and developing countries.  
According to the Ministry the reason for this is limited availability of water resources and large 
population.  The Committee are, however, of the considered view that at present total liv e 
storage capacity created by completed dams in the country is about 253 BCM but they would 
like the MoWR to furnish a comparative table indicating the live storage capacity created by the 
countries referred to para 5.14 supra of this Report.  The Committe e, therefore, desire that the 
MoWR take all necessary steps to increase the per capita storage and apprise the Committee 
in this regard. 

 
64 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Water being a State subject, several measures for development and management of 
water resources are undertaken by the respective State Governments which include creation of 
storages, restoration of water bodies, rainwater harvesting, artificial recharge to ground water 
and adoption of better management practices etc.  
  Government of India is prov iding central assistance to the State Governments through 
various schemes/programmes such as Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP), 
Command Area Development and Water Management (CAD & WM); Repair Renovation and 
Restoration of Water Bodies etc. 
Storage based water resources projects in the country are vital for conservation of 
rainfall/runoff and mitigating the spatial and temporal variations in water availability. Therefore, 
to overcome the shortage of water during non -monsoon months, a large nu mber of dams have 
been constructed in the country in different river basins. As a result of this, the total live storage 
capacity of the dams completed in the country has gone up during successive Five Year Plans.   
In addition to this, minor storage proje cts, diversion structures functioning as run of river 
schemes, minor irrigation schemes utilizing surface water and ground water also cater to the 
conservation and management of water. A Statement indicating the total dam capacity in the 
countries referred to in the Para is given at Annexure–II. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No.27 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 

 
65 
 
Recommendation (Para No.7.8) 
 The Committee note that the MoWR has taken significant initiatives through 
Brahmaputra Board, Central Water Commission (CWC), Central Ground Water Board (CGWB), 
Central Soil and Material Research Station (CSMRS), Central Water and Power Research 
Station (CWPRS), National Institute of Hydrology and National Projects Construction 
Corporation Ltd. (NPCC) for the development of North Eastern Region.  The Committee also 
note that no new major/medium project was taken up under AIBP during the last five years 
because no new proposal has been received from the NE Region.  The Committee are of the 
view that the MoWR  need to launch a special drive to attract the North Eastern States to start 
new projects for accelerating their development. 
Reply of the Government 
 Irrigation being a State subject, the irrigation projects planned, executed and funded by 
the State Gover nments themselves as per their priorities.  However, this Ministry provides 
Central assistance under AIBP (started in 1996 -97) to State government for expeditious 
completion of ongoing irrigation projects which were in advance stage of construction.  It ha s 
been observed that in North -Eastern States, the State Governments have shown their thrust 
towards minor irrigation projects in general.  During last 5 years 3302 new surface minor 
schemes of North -Eastern States have been included in AIBP, out of which 1 968 schemes 
have been completed and 2.06248 lakh Ha. of irrigation potential has been created.  During 
this period, Central assistance of Rs.2293.6465 crore under AIBP has been released to these 
projects.  
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 30 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 
66 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.57) 
 
 The Committee note that one of the six components for development of rural 
infrastructure under „ Bharat Nirman‟ is irrigation.   The irrigation component of Bharat Nirman 
aims at creation of Irrigation potential of 10 Mha. during 2005 -06 to 2008-09.   However, it was 
estimated that 7.2 Mha. of irrigation potential has been created dur ing the said period.  
According to the Ministry, the State Governments have reported creation of irrigation potential 
of 7.31 Mha. during 2005 -06 to 2008 -09 and creation of 3.5 Mha. of irrigation potential has 
been targeted in the next two years i.e. 1.75 Mha. each during 2009 -10 and 2010-11.  Against 
this, as per information received from the States, irrigation potential of 2.37 Mha. has been 
created upto September 2010.  However, the complete information upto the end of March 2011 
is likely to be received  by June 2011.  The Committee also note that the Ministry of Finance 
has allocated Rs. 12,620.00 crore under Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP) and 
other Water Resources Programme during 2011 -12 as against Rs. 11,500.00 crore during 
2010-11.   It has been further informed that Irrigation potential of 1.05 million hectare is 
targeted for creation during 2011 -12 through projects covered under AIBP.  The Committee 
observe that there is still a shortage of 1.13 Mha. of irrigation potential which i s required to be 
created.  The Committee hope that remaining irrigation potential would have been created by 

 
67 
 
March 2011 without any shortfall.  The Committee, therefore, be apprised about total irrigation 
potential created upto March 2011.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As per the information received from the State Governments in respect of creation of 
irrigation potential during 2009 -10, irrigation potential of 1.85 million hectare has already been 
created. So far, limited information has been received in re spect of creation of irrigation 
potential during 2010 -11. Creation of 1.23 MHa of irrigation potential has been reported so far 
by the States during 2010 -11. The total irrigation potential created under Bharat Nirman upto 
March 2011 is 10.39 Mha. However, the complete information is yet to be received from 5 State 
Governments.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                            DIP GOGOI 
26 March, 2012                                          Chairman,                 
06 Chaitra, 1934 (Saka)            Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 

 
68 
 
ANNEXURE-I    
VACANCY POSSITION OF CHEMICAL DISCIPLINE 
 
31.03.2008 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Post 
Pay Band Sanctioned  Filled Vacant Remarks 
1. Supdt. Chemist PB-3 (Rs. 15600-
39100/-) +GP Rs. 
7600/- 
01 01 -  
2. Senior Chemist PB-3 (Rs. 15600-
39100/-) +GP Rs. 
6600/- 
08 02 06 These post could not be 
filled due to non -
availability of eligible 
Scientists “C”. 
3. Chemist PB-3 (Rs. 15600-
39100/-) +GP Rs. 
5400/- 
22 22 -  
4. Asst. Chemist PB-2 (Rs. 9300-
34,800/-) +GP 
Rs. 4800/- 
26 23 03 The posts pertains to 
DR quota and were 
abolished by the 
Screening Committee.  
5. STA(Chemical) PB-2 (Rs. 9300-
34,800/-) +GP 
Rs. 4600/- 
27 19 08 Requisition for 04 posts 
was sent to the SSC 
and remaining posts 
were under abolition 
under ADRAP for the 
year 2006-07. 
 
31.03.2009 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Post 
Pay Band Sanctioned  Filled Vacant Remarks 
1. Supdt. Chemist PB-3 (Rs. 
15600-39100/-) 
+GP Rs. 7600/- 
01 01 -  
2. Senior Chemist PB-3 (Rs. 
15600-39100/-) 
+GP Rs. 6600/- 
08 - 08 These post could not 
be filled due to non -
availability of eligible 
Scientists “C”. 
3. Chemist PB-3 (Rs. 
15600-39100/-) 
+GP Rs. 5400/- 
22 22 -  

 
69 
 
 
4. Asst. Chemist PB-2 (Rs. 9300-
34,800/-) +GP 
Rs. 4800/- 
23 21 02 The post were 
approved by the 
Screening Committee 
and requisition was 
sent to the UPSC. 
5. STA(Chemical) PB-2 (Rs. 9300-
34,800/-)+GP 
Rs. 4600/- 
24 18 06 Requisition for 04 
posts was sent to the 
SSC and remaining 02 
posts are under 
revival.  
31.03.2010 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Post 
Pay Band Sanctione
d  
Fille
d 
Vacant Remarks 
1. Supdt. Chemist PB-3 (Rs. 
15600-39100/-) 
+GP Rs. 7600/- 
01 - 01 This post could not be 
filled due to non -
availability of eligible 
Scientists “D”. 
2. Senior Chemist PB-3 (Rs. 
15600-39100/-) 
+GP Rs. 6600/- 
08 08 -  
3. Chemist PB-3 (Rs. 
15600-39100/- ) 
+GP Rs. 5400/- 
23 11 12 Filling of 06 posts 
through promotion 
and 06 posts 
through direct 
recruitment is under 
process.  
 
4. Asst. Chemist PB-2 (Rs. 9300-
34,800/-) +GP 
Rs. 4800/- 
23 20 03 Promotion Orders were 
issued, Joining 
awaited.  For filling of 
direct quota posts is 
under process.  
5. STA(Chemical) PB-2 (Rs. 9300-
34,800/-) +GP 
Rs. 4600/- 
24 20 04 02 Posts are under 
revival and for 
remaining 02 posts 
letter was iss ued to the 
surplus cell for 
issuance of NOC. 
 

 
70 
 
31.03.2011 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of the 
Post 
Pay Band Sanctioned  Fille
d 
Vacant Remarks 
1. Supdt. Chemist PB-3 (Rs. 
15600-39100/-) 
+GP Rs. 7600/- 
01 - 01 This post could not be 
filled due to non -
availability of eligi ble 
Scientists „D‟ 
2. Senior Chemist PB-3 (Rs. 
15600-39100/-) 
+GP Rs. 6600/- 
08 08 -  
3. Chemist PB-3 (Rs. 
15600-39100/-) 
+GP Rs. 5400/- 
23 10 13 1. DPC proposal for 
06 posts was sent 
to the Ministry.  
DPC convened and 
order issued during 
April, 2011. 
2. Revised requisition 
for 07 DR quota 
posts has been 
sent to the UPSC 
during August, 
2011. 
3. As regard to the 
Promotion quota 
posts for 2011 -12, 
DPC will be initiated 
after the final 
outcome of the 
case filed by Dr 
Renu Rastogi.   
4. Asst. Chemist PB-2 (Rs. 9300-
34,800/-)+GP 
Rs. 4800/- 
23 21 02 Requisition sent to the 
UPSC. 
5. STA(Chemical) PB-2 (Rs. 9300-
34,800/-)+GP 
Rs. 4600/- 
24 19 05 1. 02 post are under 
revival.  For 01 post 
requisition sent to 
the SSC. 
2. For remaining 02 
posts letter issued 
to the surplus cell 
for issuance of 
NOC. 
 

 
71 
 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 
Total Dam Capacity in different Countries  are as follows: 
  
 
Country        Total Dam Capacity (km3) 
 
 
 
 
 
        (Source: - FAO; AQUASTAT) 
 
 
Russia 812.80  
Australia 71.78 
USA 680.30 
Turkey 651.00 
Spain 52.65 
Mexico 180.00 
China 562.40 
South Africa 30.53 

 
72 
 
ANNEXURE – III 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2011-12) HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 21 MARCH 2012 
  
The Committee sat from 1 530 hours to 1 600 hours in Committee Room  'C', Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Dip Gogoi – Chairman 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.         Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi 
3          Shri Haribhau Jawale 
4.         Shri Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan. 
5.       Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
6.       Shri Jagadanand Singh 
       7.         Smt. Annu Tandon 
8.         Dr. P. Venugopal 
9.         Shri Sajjan Singh Verma 
  
              RAJYA SABHA 
 
10.       Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder  
11.       Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
12. Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan 
 13. Shri Ranjitsinh Vijaysinh Mohite-Patil 
 14.  Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
 
              
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.  Shri Devender Singh  -  Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri B.S. Dahiya  -  Director 
3.  Smt. Rita Jailkhani  -  Additional Director 
        
 
 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.   

 
73 
 
 
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration Memorandum No.3 and the 
Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in their Eighth Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on 
Demands for Grants (2011 -12) of the Ministry of Water Resources. After some 
discussion, the Committee adopted the Report without any amendment/modification.  
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to present the same to 
Parliament during the current session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 

 
74 
 
ANNEXURE – IV 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE EIGHTH REPORT 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE  
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations/Observations    25 
 
 
(ii) Recommendation/Observations which have been accepted    
by the Government  
 
Para Nos.  2.54, 2.55, 2.56, 2.58, 2.59, 2.60, 3.13, 3.14, 3.15,  
4.21, 4.22, 4.23, 5.23, 5.24, 5.27, 5.28, 6.3 and 7.9   
 
Total          18 
Percentage         72.00%
   
  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
 
 
Total          00  
Percentage          0 % 
 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies    
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Para Nos. 2.53, 4.24, 4.25, 5.25, 5.26 and 7.8 
 
Total          06  
Percentage   24 % 
 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply 
 of the Government Is still awaited 
 
Para Nos. 2.57 
  
Total            01 
Percentage         4.00% 