 
1 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
                                             (2013-2014) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
 
 
 
REPAIR, RENOVATION AND RESTORATION OF WATER BODIES 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Sixteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources} 
 
 
 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 
 
19 

 
2 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
 
 
REPAIR, RENOVATION AND RESTORATION OF WATER BODIES 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Sixteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17.12.2013 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17.12.2013 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 

 
3 
 
WRC No. 41 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2011 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 

 
4 
 
CONTENTS 
            PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2013-2014)…………………   (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………    (v) 
 
 
CHAPTER I   Report ………………………………………    1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been  23 
accepted by the Government …………………..  
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the    48 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government’s replies ………………………..  
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of    50 
which replies of the Government have not been  
accepted by the Committee …………………….  
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which   55 
final replies of the Government are still awaited …  
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
  I. Year-wise and State-wise funds released during XI Plan  56 
 
  II. Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Committee held on  57 
                                       10.12.2013.   
 
  III. Analysis of action taken by the Government on the   60 
                          Recommendations/Observations contained in the Sixteenth 
                          Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES (2013-2014) 
 
  Shri Dip Gogoi  -  Chairman 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Kameshwar Baitha 
3. Shri Kamlesh Balmiki 
4. Smt. Raj Kumari Chauhan 
5. Dr. Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan 
6. Smt. Shruti Choudhry 
7.        Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
8. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
9. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
10. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
       11.        Shri Kabindra Purkayastha 
12.       Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao  
             13.        Shri Arjun Ray 
14.        Shri S.P.Y. Reddy  
15.         Shri Rakesh Sachan 
16. Shri Kalyan Singh 
17. Shri Murarilal Singh** 
18.         Shri D.K. Suresh* 
19. Dr. P. Venugopal 
20. Shri Sajjan Verma 
21. Vacant 
  
              RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.        Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
23. Smt. Vandana Chavan 
24. Shri Anil Madhav Dave  
25. Dr. Ashok S. Ganguly  
26. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
27. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
    28. Shri A.V. Swamy 
           29. Smt. Wansuk Syiem 
30. Vacant 
 31. Vacant 
 
* Nominated w.e.f. 09.09.2013 
** Expired on 04.10.2013. 

 
6 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Pawan Kumar  - Director 
 3. Smt. Rita Jailkhani  - Additional Director 
 4. Shri G. Guite   - Committee Officer 
 
 

 
7 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Water Resources (201 3-2014) having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present the Nineteenth Report on 
the Action Taken by Go vernment on the recom mendations/observations contained in the Sixteenth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water Resources (201 2-2013) on Repair, 
Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies.  
2. The Sixteenth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok S abha on 27 November, 2012.  
The replies of the Government to all the recommendations /observations contained in the Report were 
received on 26 September, 2013. 
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and adopted by 
the Committee at their sitting held on 10 December, 2013. 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the Sixteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-III. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                       DIP GOGOI, 
16 December, 2013                                        Chairman, 
25 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                  Standing Committee on Water Resources 
  
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
 
 

 
8 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources deals with the action taken 
by the Government on the recommendations / observations contained in their Sixteenth Report 
(15th Lok Sabha) on 'Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies ' which was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 27 November 2012. 
2. Action taken notes were received from the Government in respect of all the 23 
recommendations/observations of the Committee which have been categorised as follows: - 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos. 2.20, 2.21, 3.33, 3.34, 3.35, 3.36, 3.37, 3.38, 3.40, 3.41, 4.11, 4.13, 
4.14, 5.17, 5.18, 5.20, 5.21 and 5.22     (Total - 18)
         
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do n ot desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies: 
Para Nos. 4.12 and 5.19                   (Total -02) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee:  
Para Nos. 2.22, 2.23 and 3.39      (Total -03) 
 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the Government 
is still awaited: 
Nil                 (Total - NIL) 

 
9 
 
3. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of the 
recommendations/observations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A.   Traditional water bodies and their upkeep 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.20) 
 
4. The Committee observed that water is a prime natural resource, a basic human need 
and a precious national asset.  Water as a resource is indivisible; rainfall, river waters, surface 
ponds and lakes and ground water are part of a single unit, which needs a holistic and efficient 
management to ensure their long -term quality and availability.  Noting that traditional water 
bodies, known by their different names, such as Bhandaras (Maharashtra), phad irrigation 
(North-western Maharashtra), Khadin and Baolis (Rajasthan), Vav or Vavdi (Gujarat), Ahar 
Pynes (Bihar), Dung or Jumpois (Jalpaiguri district, West Bengal) and Zing (Ladakh, Jammu & 
Kashmir) have through the ages been providing sustenance to Indian agriculture, the 
Committee hardly needed to emphasize the importance of water bodies in the overall 
development and management of water resources in the country.  Further, water bodies serve 
as storage reservoirs of water in monsoon dependent areas where there exist a shorter period 
of rainfall and a long dry spell with very high deviation of annual rainfall.  Also, traditional water 
bodies are used in rural areas which, inter-alia, include var ious purposes, viz. domestic, 
drinking, irrigation, horticulture, etc.  The Committee, were, therefore, of the considered view 
that there is an imperative need to ensure proper, efficient and sustainable management and 
development of water bodies all over the country through sustained inputs of efforts, funds and 
programme primarily by the Government (Both Central and State) and secondarily by 

 
10 
 
individuals, groups, institutions and local bodies.  In order to put in place a comprehensive 
legislative framework, the Committee reiterated the need for inclusion of the subject 'water' in 
the Concurrent List. 
5. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"The institutional structure proposed for implementation of the scheme during XII Plan 
is as under: 
 
 Water Users’ Association (WUA) at the Gram Panchayat Level:  
The WUA would plan and participate in the implementation of renovation, pisciculture, 
tree planting and command area development works, as also maintenance and 
management, including water distribution and conflict-resolution across uses and users. 
The WUA would also earn revenues by charging for its services from its members and 
build up a corpus for maintaining and managing the water bodies over time.  The Non -
Government Organisations (NGOs) may also play a role in implementation, planning 
and execution of the scheme subject to State Government’s decision. 
 Cascade Association (CA): 
Wherever water bodies within a mini -watershed are interlinked in a cascade through a 
network of channels, the CAs  will be responsible for renovation, cleaning and 
excavation of feeder channels and repairs to diversion weirs/ regulators on feeder 
channels. They will also help resolve conflicts across WUAs within the cascade on 
water sharing and maintenance responsibilities. 
 
 WUA Federation at the Block Level: 
This will help in mobilizing funds for rehabilitation of water bodies from various sources, 
organizing training programmes for WUAs, monitoring O&M of rehabilitated system as 
also the performance of Water User Associations and Cascade Association 
 
 For inclusion of ‘water’ in the “Concurrent List” amendment in the Constitution 
would be required."  
 
6. The Committee note that for implementation of the scheme of ‘Repair, 
Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies’ in the XII Five Year Plan, the Government 
have proposed to involve Water User s Associations (WUAs) at the Gram Panchayat 
Level for maintenance and management of water bodies.  The Non -Government 

 
11 
 
Organizations (NGOs) will also be involved in implementation, planning and execution of 
the scheme as per the d iscretion of State Governments.  In case of water bodies 
interlinked in a cascade through a network of channels within a mini watershed, 
Cascade Associations (CAs) will be made responsible for renovation and  maintenance 
of water bodies and shall also resolve water conflicts across WUAs within the cascade .  
Further WUA Federation is proposed to be involved at  the block level and assist in 
mobilizing funds for rehabilitation of water bodies from various sources, organizing 
training programmes for WUAs, monitoring of organization and maintenance of 
rehabilitated system as also the performance of WUAs and CA.  The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the modalities of the scheme incorporated in the XII Five Year Plan 
and the role entrusted to the local bodies in the operation of the scheme. 
7. The Committee also note that inclusion of ‘Water’ in the Concurrent List would 
require amendment to  the Constitution.  However, no reply has been furnished with 
regard to any  steps / measures / initiative taken  or proposed to be taken by the 
Government to bring ‘Water’ in the C oncurrent List.  Taking note of the non-committal / 
evasive attitude of the Government , the Committee urge the Government to take 
expeditious measures for required amendment to the Constitution. 
 
B. Status of development of water bodies in India 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.21) 
 
8. The Committee noted that according to the Third Minor Irrigation Census (2000 -01) 
Report, there were 5.56 lakh tanks and storag es in the country under surface flow and surface 

 
12 
 
lift schemes as minor irrigation, creating 6.27 million ha of irrigation potential.  The Committee, 
however, noted that out of 5.56 lakh tanks and storages in the country, only 4.71 lakh tanks 
were in use, a nd the remaining 0.85 lakh (15%) tanks/storages were not in use for one reason 
or the other.  Due to non -use of 15% tanks, one million ha of irrigation potential is lost.  The 
Committee were deeply concerned that due to salinity, dried up water bodies, wat er bodies 
destroyed beyond repair, sea water intrusion and industrial effluents, etc., an alarming number 
of water bodies were becoming permanently unusable.  What the Committee found worrisome 
and unpleasant to note in this regard was that despite clearly  identifying the causes for 
deterioration of the quality of water, the Government had not cared to compile precise figures 
on the number and status of water bodies.  The Committee, therefore, recommended that the 
Government compile a comprehensive and up t o date information about the exact number and 
the status of water bodies spread all over the country, State -wise to initiate an all -out, and 
integrated efforts for repair, renovation and restoration of water bodies.   The Committee were 
shocked to know tha t the Ministry had not undertaken any study for identification of water 
bodies, giving the plea that water is a State subject and it is for State Governments to 
undertake such a task.   The Committee were also distressed to know that the Union Water 
Resources Ministry had not evolved any criteria for categorization of water bodies as large or 
small and the expenditure incurred on their upkeep and maintenance.   Obviously, due to non -
availability of data regarding the number, size and status of all the water  bodies across the 
country, no comprehensive and coordinated efforts could be made by the Centre and States for 
repair, renovation and restoration of water bodies.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommended that the Government in the first instance co llect and compile such data and 

 
13 
 
information at the earliest and place it on public domain such as WRIS and website of the 
Ministry so as to serve as a useful tool for policy -makers, planners, bureaucrats, various water 
users and other stake-holders. They also desired the Government to launch a suitable scheme 
in consultation with the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Environment & Forests for 
achieving the goal at the earliest and apprise the Committee in due course. 
 
9. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"Compilation of the number and status of water bodies spread all over the country is 
proposed to be done along with census of minor irrigation projects."   
 
10. The Committee note that the collection of data on total number of water bodies in 
the country, their status , etc., is proposed to be undertaken along with census of minor 
irrigation projects.  However no specific time frame has been mentioned  for taking up 
and completion of this work .  Further, the reply does not mention  anything about 
devising a suitable scheme , in consultation with other concerned Ministries, such as  
Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Environment and Forest s for maintaining water 
bodies.  The Committee are of the considered view that n o meaningful policy / strategy / 
measure for improving water bodies can be formulated in the absence of vital 
information on the actual number of existing water bodies, their status , etc.   Given the 
imperative need to compile data on water bodies, the Committee recomm end that this 
work should be taken up expeditiously with a sense of urgency.  Also, the Committee 
reiterate that a well coordinated scheme in conjunction with Ministries of Agriculture  

 
14 
 
and Environment and Forest s should be laid out for renovation , restoration and proper 
upkeep / maintenance of water bodies. 
Recommendation (Para No.2.22) 
 
11.  The Committee were distressed to note that apart from decline in the number of water  
bodies, there had been quality deterioration in water bodies.  The factors attrib uted for such a 
deterioration include indiscriminate disposal of sewage, mostly untreated domestic sewage into 
the water bodies; discharge of agricultural wastes from agro -chemicals run -off in the form of 
fertilizers, organic manure, pesticides; industrial wastes etc. from industries like sugar factories, 
dairies, paper and pulp industries, tanneries, distilleries, metal plating industries – all of which 
release pollutants ranging from simple nutrients and organic matter to complex toxic 
substances and mini ng activities which lead to gradual damage to the surface as well as 
ground water resources.  Noting that pollution of surface water bodies like rivers, lakes, ponds, 
tanks etc. can affect the quality of ground water in aquifers hydraulically connected wit h them 
due to percolation, the Committee recommended that the Ministry of Water Resources may in 
conjunction with the Ministry of Environment and Forests issue appropriate advisories to the 
State Governments  to institute an effective mechanism for monitor ing the water quality in 
water bodies, so that  pollution of water bodies is arrested and a lasting solution worked out for 
the long-term interests of the nation.   The Committee also noted that the Government of India 
in 2001, constituted Water Quality As sessment Authority (WQAA) under the Environment 
Protection Act, 1986 with Secretary, Ministry of Environment & Forests as Chairman and Joint 
Secretary (Administration), Ministry of Water Resources as its Member Secretary to direct the 

 
15 
 
agencies (government/ local bodies/non -governmental) to standardize method(s) for water 
quality monitoring and also for ensuring quality of data generation for utilisation of water and 
other related functions.   The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Government keep 
tab on the efforts of WQAA on water quality monitoring by insisting on submission of periodic 
assessment reports on status of water quality in lakes, tanks, ponds etc. at least on biennial 
basis.   Further, they also strongly recommended that these reports of  WQAA be made 
available to various State Governments on annual basis, highlighting the specific cases where 
deterioration in quality of water had reached alarming levels and calls for prompt remedial 
action. The Committee also noted reports of encroachment s on water bodies allegedly made 
by local bodies like Municipalities and Panchayats, which is a worrisome development.  
Considering the vital importance of water bodies, the Government of India could not be a 
helpless bystander on the ground that removal o f encroachments on water bodies is a State 
matter.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended  that the Government of India 
needed to take appropriate measures to heighten national awareness and to build a strong 
national programme for removal of encro achments on water bodies by local bodies, first by 
instituting a thorough study in the matter, and then enact deterrent or enhance penalty 
provisions effective enough to tackle such encroachments in consultation with the Ministry of 
Environment & Forests.  The Committee further recommended that in order to encourage 
repair, renovation and restoration of water bodies, specially lakes, tanks and ponds, the 
Government need ed to institute novel measures in coordination with the Ministry of 
Environment & Forests  and States/UTs and not only to save them from being lost, but also to 

 
16 
 
turn these water bodies into aesthetically appealing scenic spots. The Committee also desired 
to be apprised of the status of the action taken up in this regard at the earliest. 
12. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
 The Scheme involves monitoring in three levels : - Water Users’ Association (WUA) 
at the Gram Panchayat Level, Cascade Association (CA) and WUA Federation at the 
Block Level. The involvement of local  /block administrative levels will ensure that 
encroachment on the water bodies are avoided. 
 
13. The Committee observe that the reply furnished by the Ministry  is far from 
satisfactory as no specific reply has been furnished with regard to initiating stro ng 
national awareness programme to tackle the issue of encroachment on the water 
bodies.  The Committee , therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the 
Ministry of Water Resources in conjunction with Ministry of Environment and Forest s 
should issue advisories to State Governments /UTs to institute an effective mechanism 
for monitoring the quality  of water of all water bodies.  Further, the Government should 
also ensure biennial submission of assessment reports on quality  of water in lakes, 
tanks, ponds, etc., by the Water Quality Assessment Authority (WQAA) and these 
reports should be made available to State Government s to enable them to take prompt 
remedial action in specific cases where deterioration in water quality is observed.  The 
Committee are of the considered view that in order to stop encroachment of water 
bodies, apart from  involving local bodies in the management of water bodies , it is 
imperative to launch a strong national programme for creating mass awareness for the 
repair, renovation and restoration of water bodies as also for the preservation of their 

 
17 
 
pristine form .  The Committee should be apprised of the measures taken in this regard 
within a period of three months. 
Recommendation (Para No.2.23) 
 
14.  The Committee observed that in most of the States, the smaller water bodies w ere 
entrusted to the local Panchayats for maintenance and management while the bigger ones 
were vested with the Water Resources/Irrigation Departments of the States/UTs.   Given the 
fact that one million ha.  of irrigation potential is lost in the country due to non -use of 15% of 
tanks out of a total of 5.56 lakhs tanks and storages available in India, the Committee asked 
the Government the methods presently employed by local communities all over India for the  
maintenance and management of water bodies, with a view to observe the efficacy of those 
methods.   However, the stock reply of the Ministry was that the management of water bodies 
comes within the purview of the State Governments.  Such an attitude of he lplessness was not 
acceptable to the Committee when the Ministry had already identified an independent 
body/agency which will look into the method of management of water bodies.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommended that the independent body identified m ight be asked to expeditiously 
complete its work of evaluation of the methods presently applied for management of water 
bodies in the country, so that shortcomings, if any, in this area may be rectified and necessary 
remedies explored and implemented.   They also desired to be apprised of the outcome of such 
efforts in due course. 
15. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"The Scheme involves monitoring in three levels :- Water Users’ Association (WUA) 
at the Gram Panchayat Level, Cascad e Association (CA) and WUA Federation at the 

 
18 
 
Block Level. The involvement of local /block administrative levels will ensure that 
shortcomings, if any, in this area may be rectified and necessary remedies explored 
and implemented." 
 
16.  The Committee deplore the cavalier manner in which the Ministry has submitted 
the Action Taken Notes.  Instead of giving any information on the independent body 
identified to look into the method of managem ent of water bodies, the reply  simply 
indicates the engagement of loc al bodies at various levels for management of water 
bodies.  The Committee therefore, desire to be apprised of the details of the independent 
agency identified for the purpose of evaluation of th e existing methods of water bodies  
management, and the timeli ne by which the agency would complete its assigned 
mandate.  They further desire that independent evaluation of existing methods should 
be carried out in a time bound manner so as to identify the shortcomings and remedial 
action taken at the earliest.  The Committee desire to be apprised of the details in this 
regard.  
 
C. Government initiatives for Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.33) 
 
17.  The Committee observed that during the X Five Year Plan the Government o f India 
had launched a Pilot Scheme in 2005 for Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of Water 
Bodies as a State sector scheme with a plan outlay of Rs.300 crore to be shared by the Centre 
and States in the ratio of 3:1.  They also noted that the select ion of States for the pilot scheme 
is made out of the Detailed Project Reports (DPRs)/proposals submitted by the States to the 
CWC, who then submit their recommendations on DPRs to the Ministry of Water Resources for 

 
19 
 
release of funds.  The final selections  of DPRs is made in the Ministry by an Empowered 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary (WR) with representatives of 
Ministries of Agriculture and Rural Development as well.   Noting that the Government had 
approved the scheme on RRR of Water Bodies for implementation in all States/UTs during the 
XI Plan, the Committee urged that the Ministry of Water Resources vigorously pursue the 
matter with the States so that the approved DPRs are implemented. The Committee further 
recommended that the Government of India highlight the multiple and huge benefits arising out 
of the RRR of Water Bodies  through appropriate measures including organising frequent 
meetings, seminars and sustained public campaigns so that all the States implement the 
Scheme of  RRR.  The Committee desired to be apprised of the measures initiated in this 
regard. 
18. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"Aspects related to  highlighting the multiple and huge benefits arising out of the RRR 
of water bodies thr ough appropriate measures including organising frequent meetings, 
seminars and sustained public campaigns would be taken care of while implementing 
the Scheme in XII Plan." 
 
19.  The Committee note that the repl y furnished by the Ministry highlight only  one 
aspect i.e. mass public campaigns to generate awareness of benefits of R epair, 
Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies during XII Five Year Plan, while no 
information on progress of Implementation of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) has been 
furnished.  The Committee would therefore, desire that the details of DPRs which have 
been implemented till date be furnished. Also the Government should indicate measures 
taken / proposed to be taken for faster implementation of DPRs. 

 
20 
 
20. Further, the Committee are  surprised to find that though the scheme of RRR of 
Water Bodies was introduced way back during the X Five Year Plan, no efforts have 
been made / measures initiated by the Government so far , to publicise the multiple 
benefits of RRR and  the same is to be d one while implementing the scheme in XII Five 
Year Plan.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that speedy and efficacious measures 
should be taken,  to heighten public awareness so that the benefits of the scheme are 
widely disseminated and the Committee apprised within three months. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.37) 
 
21.  The Committee observed that under the RRR Scheme, a project may be prepared by 
the States with an individual water body or for a group of water bodies with sub -basin 
approach.  Accordingly, all water bodies included in the project will be given a unique code 
number, and the States will accordingly undertake census of these water bodies and get 
complete list of water bodies along with unique code in the first stage.  The Committee were 
also informed that during the XI Five Year Plan, a sum of Rs.811.85 crore had been released 
for 3,341 water bodies for 12 States namely, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, 
Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh (Bundelkhand), Meghalaya, Maharashtra, Odisha , 
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh (Bundelkhand).  All the proposals received had been in 
accordance with the stipulated guidelines and water bodies under the Scheme had been 
allotted necessary unique code.  The Committee strongly recommended that the Ministry urge 
the States for completion of exercise of taking census of all water bodies within their respective 
jurisdiction without further delay.  They also recommended that the Ministry scrupulously insist 

 
21 
 
on the States to allot unique code for all water bodies  included under the proposal for RRR 
Scheme as required under the guidelines. 
22. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"All water bodies included in the scheme are proposed to be given a unique code 
number."  
 
23. As already recommended by the Committee in para no . 10 of  this Report,  the 
work relating to compilation of data on water bodies must be speeded up for effective 
implementation of the scheme for Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.39) 
 
24.   The Committee noted with concern that as per the Third Census of Minor Irrigation 
(2005), there were 5.50 lakh water bodies in the country, out of which 2.39 lakhs were public 
water bodies and remaining 3.17 lakhs were private water bodies.  The Co mmittee were 
informed that the Scheme for RRR of Water Bodies  did not cover 3.17 lakhs water bodies 
spread across the country.  The Committee deplored exclusion of private water bodies from the 
RRR Scheme of the Government, which dent ed a gaping loop -hole in the otherwise laudable 
scheme, particularly as it is a necessity to preserve the water bodies.   Noting that the Ministry's 
proposal was to cover public water bodies as the first priority, the Committee urged the 
Government to explore the viability of ex tending State funding to private water bodies during 
the XII Plan, or to at least explore the possibility of inducing States/UTs to take up with owners 
of such private water bodies and to incentivize them to take measures to revive, repair, 

 
22 
 
renovate and de velop water bodies by undertaking works such as desilting, repairing sluice 
work, pitching, repair of canals attached to the water bodies, etc. 
 
25.  The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under : 
  
"The present proposal is to cover public water  bodies under the scheme of RRR of 
water bodies." 
 
 
26. The Committee observe that the Ministry ha s again submitted the same position 
in its reply as informed earlier that under the existing scheme of R epair, Renovation and 
Restoration of Water Bodies , only public water bodies are proposed to be covered.  The 
Committee express their displeasure that the Government has not reconsidered the 
issue in the light of the fact that by including only public water bodies, the benefits of 
RRR scheme are being restrict ed. Since more than half  of the total water bodies (3.17 
lakh water bodies out of a total of about 5.50 lakh water bodies in the country) are under 
private ownership, the Committee are of the firm and unanimous view that RRR scheme 
should be extended to private water bodies as well in some form or the other, to achieve 
the objective of preserving water bodies which is precious nat ional resource. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation to explore the viability of 
extending State funding to p rivate water bodies during XII  Five Year Plan or to at least 
explore the possibility of inducing State s / UTs to take up with the owners of such 
private water bodies and to incentivize them to take measures to revive, repair, renovate 
and develop the water bodies. 
 

 
23 
 
D. Funding of the Scheme on Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies 
and its implementation. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4.14) 
 
27.   Taking note of the fact that the Ministry was responsible for the Scheme of RRR of 
water bodies, but the power of approval and sanction of a project under the Scheme was with 
Ministry of Finance and also that the Scheme of RRR of Water Bodies  was only for XI Five 
Year Plan, and all the projects being sanctioned were supposed to be over by March 2012, i.e. 
within the current year,  the Committee  recommended that (a) a comprehensive report be 
placed before the Committee showing the status of the projects sanctioned, completed and on 
going and the expenditure incurred and likely to be incurred,  State -wise and y ear-wise since 
the inception of the Scheme; (b) the Scheme, given its huge benefits, be extended in the 12th 
Plan; and (c) the entire responsibility for processing and sanctioning the projects under the 
Scheme be entrusted to the Ministry of Water Resources for its efficient implementation.  
28.  The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under : 
 
"The list showing the status of project s sanctioned, completed and on -going and the 
expenditure incurred year -wise and State –wise during XI Plan is at Appendix-I. The 
scheme of Repair, Renovation and Restoration for XII Plan is under finalisation. EFC 
Memo of the scheme has been prepared and circulated."  
 
 
29. The Committee had recommended for giving the power to approve and sanction 
a project under the sc heme of Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies to 
the Ministry of Water Resources.   The action taken reply furnished by the Ministry is , 
however, silent on th e issue.  The Committee , therefore, reiterate that the entire 
responsibility for proc essing and sanctioning  of the projects under the scheme be 

 
24 
 
entrusted to the Ministry of Water Resources for its efficient implementation.  The 
Committee would also like to be apprised about the rationale behind the existing system 
of sanction and approval of the projects under the scheme by the Ministry of Finance. 
 
E. Monitoring and Evaluation, Public Awareness and Convergence of Efforts. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5.17) 
 
30.   The Committee observed that regular monitoring of the physical and financial prog ress 
and the outcome of the projects was stipulated to be carried out at each stage.  In this regard, 
the Committee also noted the reply of the Ministry that the State Government was having its 
own monitoring mechanism with the involvement of Standing Comm ittee on Panchayats for 
progress of RRR of water bodies under the Scheme and that the State nodal officer was 
required to keep continuous liaison with the District Level Implementation Agency (DLIA) for 
generating monthly information on the physical and pr incipal progress of the implementation of 
the Scheme.  Additionally, the Ministry's reply also state d that it got the information related to 
progress of work undertaken by various States submitted to the Ministry on regular basis, 
although no details about  the frequencies of submission of this information ha d been 
mentioned by the Ministry.   The Committee noted with displeasure that despite the efforts 
being made on the monitoring front by the Ministry and State Governments, little tangible 
progress had been made given the number of Schemes sanctioned.  For example, while 1,761 
projects had been taken up for implementation under RRR Scheme in Odisha, only 1,321 
projects had been taken up at an expenditure of Rs. 14,929.71 lakhs so far.  The number of 
projects completed was 142, out of 1,761 projects taken up in Odisha.  Further, out of a total 

 
25 
 
number of 3341 water bodies under RRR Scheme in the country, only 1481 had been shown to 
be completed by 18 September, 2012 as per the information received from Centra l Ground 
Water Board/State Governments.   Further the tardy pace of completion of works was evident 
from the fact that Rs.374.66 and Rs.291.03 crore were released during 2010 -11 and 2011 -12 
respectively under the Scheme.  The Committee, therefore, desired the Ministry to vigorously 
pursue with the States for eliciting the active participation of Standing C ommittee of 
Panchayats to actively implement RRR Scheme in all the States/UTs where it was being 
implemented.  They also strongly recommended that specifi c, achievable targets be set up for 
achievements within a specified time -frame so that minimum time and cost overruns are 
encountered during the progress of the Scheme.  The Committee also desired the Ministry to 
insist on submission of information relatin g to progress of work undertaken in various 
States/UTs with specific number of frequency.    
31.  The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under : 
 
"During XII Plan, it is envisaged to have active participation of Standing Committee of 
Panchayat Z ila Parishad, Water User Association in the implementation of RRR 
Scheme."   
 
 
32. The Committee note that as recommended by the m, active participation of 
Standing Committee of Panchayat Zila Parishad and Water User Association is 
envisaged for implementat ion of the scheme  for Repair, Renovation and Restoration of 
Water Bodies in XII Five Year Plan.   The reply of the Ministry is, however, silent on fixing 
specific and achievable targets and submission of information relating to progress of 
work undertaken by various States / UTs within prescribed periodicity.   The           

 
26 
 
Committee would therefore, again urge the Ministry for setting up achievable targets 
under the RRR Scheme for completion of work within specific time period and  also 
submission of progr ess report  of work undertaken at specific intervals to ensure 
completion of projects without time and cost overruns. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5.18) 
 
33.   The Committee observed that evaluation and impact assessment of the RRR Scheme 
was to be done by inde pendent agencies, and that the Government ha d identified Water and 
Power Consultancy Services (WAPCOS) Ltd. for this task.  The progress report was to be 
generated and a copy of it is to be sent to the Nodal Officer, i.e. Director(WB), Ministry of Water 
Resources by the end of every month.  The Committee were concerned to note that the work of 
WAPCOS Ltd. regarding concurrent evaluation and impact assessment of the RRR Scheme 
was to commence only after the mechanism for release of funds to WAPCOS Ltd. ha d been 
vetted by the concerned State Governments.  The Committee, therefore, urge d the Ministry to 
pursue the matter with the State Governments so that the exercise on vetting the mechanism 
for release of funds to WAPCO S Ltd. was completed by State Government s without delay to 
ensure smooth work of concurrent evaluation/impact evaluation by WAPCOS Ltd. The 
Committee desired to be apprised of the further action taken in the matter. 
34.  The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under : 
 
"Ministry Of Wat er Resources has identified Water and Power Consultancy Services 
(WAPCOS) Ltd. for impact assessment studies of the water bodies taken up under the 
scheme of RRR.  The draft MoU to be signed between MoWR and WAPCOS is under 
finalization. During XII Plan, i t is envisaged that the concurrent evaluation of the 
Scheme would be got done by the State Governments themselves by involving NGOs 

 
27 
 
and other Agencies.  However, the impact assessment of the completed water bodies is 
proposed to be carried out by/through independent agencies." 
 
35. The Committee note that  the impact assessment of the completed water bodies 
under the scheme of RRR is proposed to be carried out by /through independent 
agencies.  However, the reply is silent about the status of independent agen cies, their 
particulars, etc., which Government propose to engage for this purpose.  It is also silent 
about any time frame by which they will be assigned this work.  The Committee are of 
the firm opinion that, it is also of utmost importance to rope in th e services of State 
agencies in works of impact assessment of the completed water bodies under the 
scheme of RRR, and they, therefore, urge the Government to take necessary steps in 
this regard.  The Committee would also further  like to be apprised about t he status,  
particulars of independent agencies, their functions, period by which they will be 
appointed, and submit report(s) etc. at the earliest. 
Recommendation (Para No.5.20) 
 
36.   The Committee noted that apart from approval/monitoring of RRR Schemes with 
external assistance being carried out by the World Bank, the Ministry was monitoring the 
progress of the Scheme of RRR of water bodies through periodic reports from the States and 
through its own field visits.  It was stated that while Regional Direct ors, CGWB were 
mandatorily required to visit at least two water bodies in the concerned States on monthly basis 
and submit report to the Ministry, the monitoring reports from the State Governments were also 
made available to the Ministry in addition to the  field visit reports of the officials of the Ministry.  
The Committee, were, however, dissatisfied that while tour reports by officials of CGWB/States 

 
28 
 
having ongoing RRR Scheme under implementation were available for all States, the tour 
reports by officials of the Ministry are available only in respect of the States of Odisha, Madhya 
Pradesh, Meghalaya and Bihar out of 15 States/UTs having RRR programme.  The Committee, 
therefore, desired the Ministry to extend its field visits to the other remaining State s/UTs also 
covered under the RRR Scheme and apprise the Committee of the broad findings of the 
reports of such visits to all the 15 States/UTs.   Further, noting the reply of the Ministry that the 
progress of work in the State of Andhra Pradesh had been fo und to be rather unsatisfactory, 
the Committee desired the Ministry to request the State Government of Andhra Pradesh to 
identify the problem hampering the progress of work in RRR Schemes in Andhra Pradesh and 
apprise the Committee of the remedial action taken/proposed to be taken by it at the earliest.  
37.  The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under : 
 
"The scheme of RRR of water bodies for implementation in XI Plan has been closed 
w.e.f. 31.3.2012.  The Scheme for implementation in XII Plan is under 
formulation/finalization.  In XII Plan, it is proposed that CWC Field Unit would monitor 
the RRR of water bodies.  The Concurrent evaluation of the water bodies would be 
carried out by the State Government and the report would be submitted to 
CWC/MoWR." 
 
38. The Committee note that in the XII Five Year Plan, monitoring of RRR of Water 
Bodies is proposed to be carried out by the Central Water Commission (CWC) Field Unit 
and concurrent evaluation would be done by State Governments who would submit th e 
report to CWC / Ministry of Water Resources. However, no information has been 
furnished with regard to the time limit by which these reports will be submitted.   In view 
of the poor performance of the scheme during the X and XI Five Year Plan periods, the 
Committee are of the firm view that time bound monitoring is essential for ensuring 

 
29 
 
timely completion of projects.  Therefore, the Committee desire that the Ministry should 
emphasize on submission of evaluation reports within a specified period to enable 
implementation of corrective action immediately and comp letion of the project without 
delay.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the details in this regard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

 
30 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.20) 
 
The Committee observe that water is a prime natural resource, a basic human need 
and a precious national asset.  Water as a resource is indivisible; rainfall, river waters, surface 
ponds and lakes and ground water  are part of a single unit, which needs a holistic and efficient 
management to ensure their long -term quality and availability.  Noting that traditional water 
bodies, known by their different names, such as Bhandaras (Maharashtra), phad irrigation 
(North-western Maharashtra), Khadin and baolis (Rajasthan), Vav or Vavdi (Gujarat), Ahar 
Pynes (Bihar), dung or jumpois (Jalpaiguri district, West Bengal) and Zing (Ladakh, Jammu 
&Kashmir) have through the ages been providing sustenance to Indian agriculture, the 
Committee hardly need to emphasize the importance of water bodies in the overall 
development and management of water resources in the country.  Further, water bodies serve 
as storage reservoirs of water in monsoon dependent areas where there exist a shorte r period 
of rainfall and a long dry spell with very high deviation of annual rainfall.  Also, traditional water 
bodies are used in rural areas which, inter -alia, include various purposes, viz. domestic, 
drinking, irrigation, horticulture, etc.  The Committ ee, are, therefore, of the considered view that 
there is an imperative need to ensure proper, efficient and sustainable management and 
development of water bodies all over the country through sustained inputs of efforts, funds and 
programme primarily by th e Government (Both central and state) and secondarily by 
individuals, groups, institutions and local bodies.  In order to put in place a comprehensive 

 
31 
 
legislative framework, the Committee reiterates the need for inclusion of the subject 'water' in 
the Concurrent List. 
Reply of the Government 
 The institutional structure proposed for implementation of the scheme during XII Plan is 
as under: 
 Water Users’ Association (WUA) at the Gram Panchayat Level:  
The WUA would plan and participate in the implementation of  renovation, pisciculture, tree 
planting and command area development works, as also maintenance and management, 
including water distribution and conflict-resolution across uses and users. The WUA would also 
earn revenues by charging for its services from its members and build up a corpus for 
maintaining and managing the water bodies over time.  The Non -Government Organisations 
(NGOs) may also play a role in implementation, planning and execution of the scheme subject 
to State Government’s decision. 
 Cascade Association (CA): 
Wherever water bodies within a mini -watershed are interlinked in a cascade through a 
network of channels, the CAs will be responsible for renovation, cleaning and 
excavation of feeder channels and repairs to diversion weirs/ regulators o n feeder 
channels. They will also help resolve conflicts across WUAs within the cascade on 
water sharing and maintenance responsibilities. 
 
 WUA Federation at the Block Level: 
This will help in mobilizing funds for rehabilitation of water bodies from variou s sources, 
organizing training programmes for WUAs, monitoring O&M of rehabilitated system as 
also the performance of Water User Associations and Cascade Association 
 
 For inclusion of ‘water’ in the “Concurrent List” amendment in the Constitution 
would be required.  

 
32 
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para Nos. 6 and 7of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.21) 
The Committee note that according to the Third Minor Irrigation Census (2000 -01) 
Report, there were 5.56 lakh tanks and storages  in the country under surface flow and surface 
lift schemes as minor irrigation, creating 6.27 million ha of irrigation potential.  The Committee, 
however, note that out of 5.56 lakh tanks and storages in the country, only 4.71 lakhs tanks are 
presently in  use, and the remaining 0.85 lakhs (15%) tanks/storages are not in use for one 
reason or the other.  Due to non -use of 15% tanks, one million ha of irrigation potential is lost.  
The Committee are deeply concerned that due to salinity, dried up water bodie s, water bodies 
destroyed beyond repair, sea water intrusion and industrial effluents, etc., an alarming number 
of water bodies are becoming permanently unusable.  What the Committee find worrisome and 
unpleasant to note in this regard is that despite clearly identifying the causes for deterioration of 
the quality of water, the Government has not cared to compile precise figures on the number 
and status of water bodies.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government 
compile a comprehensive and up to date information about the exact number and the status of 
water bodies spread all over the country, State -wise to initiate an all -out, and integrated efforts 
for repair, renovation and restoration of water bodies.   The Committee are shocked to know 
that the Ministry has not undertaken any study for identification of water bodies, giving the plea 
that water is a State subject and it is for State Governments to undertake such a task.   The 
Committee are also distressed to know that the Union Water Resourc es Ministry has not 
evolved any criteria for categorization of water bodies as large or small and the expenditure 

 
33 
 
incurred on their upkeep and maintenance.   Obviously, due to non -availability of data 
regarding the number, size and status of all the water bodies across the country, no 
comprehensive and coordinated efforts can be made by the Centre and States for repair, 
renovation and restoration of water bodies.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend 
that the Government in the first instance collect  and compile such data and information at the 
earliest and place it on public domain such as WRIS and website of the Ministry so as to serve 
as a useful tool for policy -makers, planners, bureaucrats, various water users and other stake -
holders. They also desire the Government to launch a suitable scheme in consultation with the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Environment & Forests for achieving the goal at the 
earliest and apprise the Committee in due course. 
Reply of the Government 
 Compilation of the number and status of water bodies spread all over the country is 
proposed to be done along with census of minor irrigation project.   
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.33) 
 
The Committee observe that during the X Five Year Plan the Government of India 
launched a Pilot Scheme in 2005 for Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of water 
bodies as a State sector scheme with a plan outlay of Rs.300 crore to be shared by the Centre 
and States in the ratio of 3:1.  They also note that the selection of States for the pilot scheme is 

 
34 
 
made out of the Detailed Project Reports (DPRs)/proposals submitted by the States to the 
CWC, who then submit their recommendations on DPRs to the Ministry of Water Resources for 
release of funds.  The final selections of DPRs is made in the Ministry by an Empowered 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary (WR) with representatives of 
Ministries of Agriculture and Rural Developments as well.   Noting that the Government had 
approved the scheme on RRR of water bodies for implementation in all States/UTs during the 
XI Plan, the Committee urge that the Ministry of Water Resources vigorously pursue the matter 
with the States so that the approved DP Rs are implemented. The Committee further 
recommend that the Government of India highlight the multiple and huge benefits arising out of 
the RRR of water bodies through appropriate measures including organising frequent 
meetings, seminars and sustained pub lic campaigns so that all the States implement the 
Scheme of RRR.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the measures initiated in this 
regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 Aspects related to  highlighting the multiple and huge benefits arising out of the  RRR of 
water bodies through appropriate measures including organising frequent meetings, seminars 
and sustained public campaigns would be taken care of while implementing the Scheme in XII 
Plan. 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para Nos. 19 and 20 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 

 
35 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.34) 
The Committee note that the State Governments prepare projects under the Scheme 
with involvement of the Community, Panchayat Raj Institution (PRI) and Water Users' 
Associations(WUAs).  The Commit tee also observe that DPR for RRR Scheme has specific 
provision for handing over the revived facility for operation, monitoring and maintenance to 
community organisations, WUAs or PRIs.  Noting that the National Water Policy 2002 
emphasizes management of w ater resources through participatory approach by involving not 
only the Government agencies but also all stakeholders in various aspects of planning, 
designing and management, and also given the fact that no complaints have so far been 
received from the St ate Governments about the implementation mechanism as suggested in 
the Guidelines of the Scheme, the Committee hope that the Ministry would cause strict vigil to 
be maintained over the concerned bodies at three levels for implementation of RRR Scheme in 
order to derive optimum benefits and make the Scheme a great success. 
Reply of the Government 
The same implementation process has been proposed for the scheme to be 
implemented during XII Plan.  The Scheme involves monitoring in three levels -  Water 
Users’ Association (WUA) at the Gram Panchayat Level, Cascade Association (CA) and WUA 
Federation at the Block Level .  Field visits through regional offices of CWC are proposed to be 
carried out to monitor the progress of the scheme and make the scheme a great success. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
36 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.35) 
 
The Committee note that under the Scheme of Repair, Renovation and Restoration of 
water bodies (both with domestic support as well with external assistance), the Government of 
India has offered financial assistance to the States on generous terms for implementation of the 
Scheme by them.  Under RRR Scheme with domestic support, for instance, the Central 
assistance for Special Category States and water bodies benefiting drought prone area/tribal 
area/Naxal affected areas has been fixed to the tune of 90% of total cost of projects, with the 
States needing to raise the balance share of only 10% from their own resources.  Similarly, 
under the terms offered to the States in case of RRR Scheme with external assistance, as  
much as 25% of the total loan obtained from World Bank is being provided to the States as 
Central assistance(grant), with the States having to repay the remaining 75% of the total World 
Bank loan on back to back basis.  The Committee trust that given firm  will and determination to 
implement the RRR Scheme by the States and the financial assistance being made by the 
Union Government, the 5.56 lakh water bodies, which are presently in a State of neglect, 
decline and deterioration, would be restored and rejuv enated expeditiously.    The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Government to take further necessary steps to incentivise the States 
by enhancing the domestic and external assistance to 50% to all the States to come up with 
proposals for implementation un der the RRR Scheme of water bodies domestic support and 
with external assistance.  The Committee would like to know the fresh initiatives taken by the 
Government in this regard.  
 
 

 
37 
 
Reply of the Government 
As recommended by the Standing Committee, the fundi ng pattern has been modified in the 
proposed scheme of RRR of water bodies for XII Plan. The proposed funding pattern is as 
below: 
 For Special Category States (North -Eastern States including Sikkim, Himachal 
Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Uttarakhand and undivi ded Koraput, Bolangir and 
Kalahandi (KBK) districts of Orissa) as well as projects benefiting desert/drought 
prone/tribal/naxal-affected areas,  funding will be 90% by the Government of India  as 
Central Assistance  and 10% by States Governments. 
 
 For Non -Special Category States, the funding pattern will be 50% by Government of 
India as Central Assistance and 50% by State Government. 
 
The balance cost of the project as state share 10% in case of Special Category States and 
50% in case of Non -Special Category States is to be arranged by the State Governments from 
their own resources. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.36) 
 
The Committee also note that there is no provision for giving technical support to State 
Governments under the Scheme of RRR of water bodies.  Giv en the fact that the Government 
has been consistently increasing the outlays under programmes such as the AIBP since the 
beginning of the XI Plan to assist the States to complete the ongoing Major and Medium 

 
38 
 
Irrigation projects, the Committee are strongly of the view that projects under implementation 
under RRR Scheme may also be included and given high priority under AIBP so that efforts 
made do not slacken due to fund constraints.  Further, the Committee recommend that the 
Ministry may explore the feasibi lity of providing technical support to States/UTs where RRR 
scheme is being implemented to recover and restore lost water bodies. 
Reply of the Government 
The scope of the scheme has been enhanced in the XII Plan. The proposed budget 
outlay in XII Plan is m ore than that kept for the XI Plan. As recommended by the Committee it 
is envisaged to provide technical assistance to states through field offices of CWC / CGWB. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.37) 
 
The Committee observe that under the RRR Scheme, a project ma y be prepared by the 
States with an individual water body or for a group of water bodies with sub -basin approach.  
Accordingly, all water bodies included in the project will be given a unique code number, and 
the States will accordingly undertake census of  these water bodies and get complete list of 
water bodies along with unique code in the first stage.  The Committee were also informed that 
during the XI Five Year Plan, a sum of Rs.811.85 crore has been released for 3,341 water 
bodies for 12 States namely , Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, 
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh (Bundelkhand), Meghalaya, Maharashtra, Odisha, Rajasthan and 
Uttar Pradesh (Bundelkhand).  All the proposals received have been in accordance with the 
stipulated guidelines and water bodies under the Scheme have been allotted necessary unique 

 
39 
 
code.  The Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry urge the States for completion of 
exercise of taking census of all water bodies within their respective jurisdiction without fur ther 
delay.  They would also recommend that the Ministry scrupulously insist on the States to allot 
unique code for all water bodies included under the proposal for RRR Scheme as required 
under the guidelines. 
Reply of the Government 
All water bodies inclu ded in the scheme are proposed to be given a unique code 
number.  
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.38) 
 
The Committee observe that the scheme of RRR of water bodies inter -alia inclu de 
capacity building at the grass root level.  To this end, State Governments are taking various 
steps to arrange workshops at State Level/WUA/grass root level to improve water use 
efficiency as well as to increase ground water recharge through various tec hniques of rainwater 
harvesting, which include desiltation of water bodies resulting in increase in rate of ground 
water percolation through the desilted bottom of water bodies having permeable geological 
formation underneath.  In addition, the scheme of R RR also is expected to create additional 
irrigation potential resulting in increased productivity, increase in availability of drinking water, 
etc.  Noting that the Government has been implementing various schemes for augmentation of 

 
40 
 
ground water in the co untry, including the State sector scheme called "Artificial Recharge of 
ground water through dug wells" in 7 States at an estimated cost of Rs.1,536.75 crore, the 
Committee desire special initiative be taken by the Government while planning and 
implementing the RRR Scheme so that the goal of ground water augmentation is accorded top 
priority.  The Committee believe that through mutual consultations, meetings, etc., a common 
approach can be worked out by the Government for recasting the programme of the Sche me of 
RRR of water bodies to provide impetus to their efforts to achieve increased recharge of 
ground water.  This would also prevent duplication of works and wastages of precious funds in 
Water Resources sector.  The Committee would like to be apprised of  the endeavours made by 
the Government in this behalf. 
Reply of the Government 
Ground water recharge is also one of the objectives of the scheme.  Though there may 
be schemes with similar objectives but the criteria for selection of water body under the 
scheme has been so made so as to avoid duplicity of funding to the same water body under 
different schemes of Govt. of India. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.40) 
 
The Committee further observe that under the Centrally sponsored National Lake 
Conservation Plan (NLCP)  being implemented by the Ministry of Environment & Forests since 
June 2001 for conservation and management of polluted and degraded lakes in urban and 
semi-urban areas of the country, a total of Rs.374.89 crore out of Government of India's  share 

 
41 
 
of R s. 812.63 crore was released for implementation of projects sanctioned in respect of 61 
lakes located in 14 States from among States from whom proposals were received.  A total 
outlay of Rs.440 crore has been allocated under the XI Plan towards the Scheme.  Besides, the 
Ministry has initiated the work of evaluation of the NLCP by identifying 6 lakes for the purpose, 
viz. Vengainahkere lake, Nagavara lake and Jarganahalli lake in Bangalore (Karnataka), Powai 
lake in Mumbai (Maharashtra), Nainital lake in Utt rakhand and Mirik lake in Darjeeling (West 
Bengal).   The evaluation process is being carried out by  two private firms based at Bangalore 
and Gurgaon.  The Committee strongly desire to see the early completion of this evaluation 
works being undertaken on the performances of NLCP scheme.  They would also like to be 
apprised of the findings of the evaluation reports on NLCP as and when received by MoEF 
from the two private consultancy firms. 
Reply of the Government 
The committee will be appraised of the find ings of evaluation works as soon as the 
evaluation reports of NLCP are received from MoEF. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.41) 
 
The Committee note that under the National Wetland Conservation Programme 
(NWCP) initiated by the Government in 1987, the Ministry of  Environment & Forests has 
identified 115 wetlands in 24 States and 2 UTs for conservation and management.  Under it, 
100% financial assistance is provided for implementation of Management Action Plans (MAPs) 
of identified wetlands and research projects fo r R&D activities in priority areas to supplement 

 
42 
 
MAPs, and so far an amount of Rs.109.14 crore has been released to the concerned State 
Governments, including Rs.55.94 crore incurred during last 5 years.  Noting that conservation 
and management of the wetl ands could contribute to the goal of repair, renovation and 
restoration of water bodies being carried out by the Ministry in 15 States of the country, the 
Committee recommend that the suggestions made by WII, Dehradun under MAPs for 
evaluation of work in 5  identified wetlands, viz. Pong Dam (Himachal Pradesh), Harike 
(Punjab), Deeper Beel (Assam), Chilika Lake (Odisha) and Tso Morari (Jammu & Kashmir) 
may be taken up by the concerned Ministry for early remedial action.  Further, the Committee 
recommend that evaluation works on the performance of NWCP may be extended to other of 
110 remaining wetlands and more thrust be given by enhancing fund allocation to the 
programme.  They would like to be apprised of further action taken by Government in this 
regard.  T he Committee would also like to emphasise on the need for ensuring proper 
coordination amongst the Ministries concerned in executing the programme. 
Reply of the Government 
The subject matter pertains to MoEF.   However it is stated that all possible safegu ards 
are being taken to prevent overlapping of works under various Ministries of Government of 
India. 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.11) 
 
The Committee observe that a provision of Rs.684 crore has been kept in the Budget 
2011-12 for RRR Scheme.  They also note  that Rs.139 crore were proposed to be released for 
the States of Maharashtra (Rs.83.52 crore), Gujarat (Rs.11 crore), Chhattisgarh (Rs.37.44 

 
43 
 
crore) and Haryana(Rs.7.04 crore) as on 09.09.2011. Funds have been released to 
Maharashtra, Gujarat, Chattisgarh and Haryana.   Funds to be released to the States of 
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh and Meghalaya are awaiting receipt of 
clarifications with regard to the fulfillment of the guidelines by the State Governments.  The 
Committee, in this c onnection note that works are in progress in a total of 10887 water bodies 
in the country, 3000 in Andhra Pradesh, 5763 in Tamil Nadu, 1224 in Karnataka, and 900 in 
Odisha under RRR Scheme with external assistance.  Of these, 686 water bodies in Andhra 
Pradesh and 2407 water bodies in Tamil Nadu have been reported to be completed.  No 
information is available regarding the progress of work in respect of the remaining two States, 
namely, Karnataka and Odisha under this category of the RRR Scheme.  Further, o ut of the 
estimated cost of Rs.4444.28 envisaged for the 10887 water bodies, the Central share (i.e. 
25% loan component) is Rs.733.05 crore, out of which only Rs.454.35 crore had been released 
till 19 December 2011.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the  Ministry to vigorously 
pursue with the State Governments of Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh 
and Meghalaya to complete the stipulated formalities expeditiously so that funds are released 
to these States and they start the work of RRR of water bodies without further delay.   
Reply of the Government 
 During 2011-12, a fund of Rs. 0.64 Cr has been released to Gov. of Meghalaya, Rs. 
2.62 Cr to Govt. of Madhya Pradesh. However, no funds could be released to the state of 
Himachal Pradesh and Jam mu & Kashmir during the same period. Conference of the Principal 
Secretaries was held in the month of July 2012 in which all the States including Himachal 

 
44 
 
Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh & Meghalaya were requested to complete the 
stipulated formal ities expeditiously so that the funds are released and work of RRR water 
bodies start without further delay. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4.13) 
 
The Committee were informed that a total of Rs. 217.45 crore had been released as on 
24.01.2012 to the State of Odi sha under the Scheme of RRR of water bodies with domestic 
support. They were also given to understand that the Ministry would undertake monitoring of 
progress, including release of the second installment. When queried on how monitoring work 
for the schemes  of RRR in Odisha is proposed to be carried out, it was informed to the 
Committee that the RRR Scheme envisages an inbuilt monitoring mechanism while the State 
level officials are to keep continuous liaison with the District Level Implementing Agency (DLIA ) 
for generating monthly information on physical and financial progress of the implementation of 
the Scheme.   The Regional Directors in the field offices of CGWB are also required to visit 1 -2 
water bodies every month to keep track of the progress of impl ementation of work undertaken 
under the Scheme, and that the  State Government of Odisha has undertaken work in 1,321 
water bodies which includes 307 DPAP category water bodies and 1,014 tribal category water 
bodies of the State. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the implementation of the 
works be pursued vigorously so that these works are completed within the shortest possible 
time.   The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome in the matter within six months.  
 

 
45 
 
Reply of the Government 
As per the information available, 1044 water bodies have been completed out of a total 
of  1321 number of water bodies taken up in Odisha during XI Plan.        
 
Recommendation (Para No.4.14) 
 
Taking note of the fact that the Ministry is responsible for the S cheme of RRR of water 
bodies, but the power of approval and sanction of a project under the Scheme is with Ministry 
of Finance and also that the Scheme of RRR of water bodies is only for XI Five Years Plan, 
and all the projects being sanctioned are suppose d to be over by March 2012, i.e. within the 
current year,  the Committee, therefore, recommend that (a) a comprehensive report be placed 
before the Committee showing the status of the projects sanctioned, completed and on going 
and the expenditure incurred  and likely to be incurred,  State -wise and year -wise since the 
inception of the Scheme; (b) the Scheme, given its huge benefits, be extended in the 12th Plan; 
and (c) the entire responsibility for processing and sanctioning the projects under the Scheme 
be entrusted to the Ministry of Water Resources for its efficient implementation.  
Reply of the Government 
The list showing the status of project sanctioned, completed and on -going and the 
expenditure incurred year-wise and State –wise during XI Plan is at Appendix - I. The scheme 
of Repair, Renovation and Restoration for XII plan is under finalisation. EFC Memo of the 
scheme has been prepared and circulated.  
 

 
46 
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 29 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5.17) 
 
The Committee observe that regular monitoring of the physical and financial progress 
and the outcome of the projects is stipulated to be carried out at each stage.  In this regard, the 
Committee also note the reply of the Ministry that the S tate Government is having its own 
monitoring mechanism with the involvement of Standing Committee on Panchayats for 
progress of RRR of water bodies under the Scheme and that the State nodal officer is required 
to keep continuous liaison with the District L evel Implementation Agency (DLIA) for generating 
monthly information on the physical and principal progress of the implementation of the 
Scheme.  Additionally, the Ministry's reply also states that it got the information related to 
progress of work underta ken by various States submitted to the Ministry on regular basis, 
although no details about the frequencies of submission of this information have been 
mentioned by the Ministry.   The Committee note with displeasure that despite the efforts being 
made on the monitoring front by the Ministry and State Governments, little tangible progress 
has been made given the number of Schemes sanctioned.  For example, while 1,761 projects 
have been taken up for implementation under RRR Scheme in Odisha, only 1,321 proje cts 
have been taken up at an expenditure of Rs. 14,929.71 lakhs so far.  The number of projects 
completed is 142, out of 1,761 projects taken up in Odisha.  Further, out of a total number of 
3341 water bodies under RRR Scheme in the country, only 1481 had been shown to be 
completed by 18 September, 2012 as per the information received from Central Ground Water 

 
47 
 
Board/State Governments.   Further the tardy pace of completion of works is evident from the 
fact that Rs.374.66 and Rs.291.03 crore released during 2010-11 and 2011 -12 respectively 
under the Scheme.  The Committee, therefore, would like the Ministry to vigorously pursue with 
the States for eliciting the active participation of standing committee of Panchayats to actively 
implement RRR Scheme in all th e States/UTs where it is being implemented.  They also 
strongly recommend that specific, achievable targets be set up for achievements within a 
specified time -frame so that minimum time and cost overruns are encountered during the 
progress of the Scheme.  The Committee also desire the Ministry to insist on submission of 
information relating to progress of work undertaken in various States/UTs with specific number 
of frequency.    
Reply of the Government 
 During XII Plan, it is envisaged to have active parti cipation of Standing Committee of 
Panchayat Zila Parishad, Water User Association in the implementation of RRR Scheme.   
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 32 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5.18) 
 
The Committee observe that evaluation and impact assessment of the RRR Scheme is 
to be done by independent agencies, and that the Government has identified Water and Power 
Consultancy Services (WAPCOS) Ltd. for this task.  The progress report is to be generated and 
a copy of it is to be sent to the Nodal Officer, i.e. Director(WB), Ministry of Water Resources by 

 
48 
 
the end of every month.  The Committee are concerned to note that the work of WAPCOS Ltd. 
regarding concurrent evaluation and impact assessment of the RRR Scheme is to commence 
only after the mechanism for release of funds to WAPCOS Ltd. has been vetted by the 
concerned State Governments.  The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to pursue the 
matter with the State Governments so that the exercise on vetting the mechanism for release of 
funds to WAPCOs Ltd. is completed by State Governments without delay to ensure smooth 
work of concurrent evaluation/impact evaluation by WAPCOS Ltd. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the further action taken in the matter. 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry Of Water Resources has identified Water and Power Consultancy Services 
(WAPCOS) Ltd. for impact assessment studies of the water bodies taken up under the scheme 
of RRR.  The draft MoU to be signed between MoWR and WAPCOS is un der finalization. 
During XII Plan, it is envisaged that the concurrent evaluation of the Scheme would be got 
done by the State Governments themselves by involving NGOs and other Agencies.  However, 
the impact assessment of the completed water bodies is pro posed to be carried out by through 
independent agencies. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 35 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 
49 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5.20) 
 
The Committee note that apart from approval/monitoring of RRR Schemes with external 
assistance being carried out by the World Bank, the Ministry is presently monitoring the 
progress of the Scheme of RRR of water bodies through periodic reports from the States and 
through its own field visits.  It is stated that while Regional Directors, CG WB are mandatorily 
required to visit at least two water bodies in the concerned States on monthly basis and submit 
report to the Ministry, the monitoring reports from the State Governments are also made 
available to the Ministry in addition to the field vi sit reports of the officials of the Ministry.  The 
Committee, are, however, dissatisfied that while tour reports by officials of CGWB/States 
having ongoing RRR Scheme under implementation are available for all States, the tour reports 
by officials of the M inistry are available only in respect of the States of Odisha, Madhya 
Pradesh, Meghalaya and Bihar out of 15 States/UTs having RRR programme.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire the Ministry to extend its field visits to the other remaining States/UTs also 
covered under the RRR Scheme and apprise the Committee of the broad findings of the 
reports of such visits to all the 15 States/UTs.  Further, noting the reply of the Ministry that the 
progress of work in the State of Andhra Pradesh has been found to be rat her unsatisfactory, 
the Committee would like the Ministry to request the State Government of Andhra Pradesh to 
identify the problem hampering the progress of work in RRR Schemes in Andhra Pradesh and 
apprise the Committee of the remedial action taken/proposed to be taken by it at the earliest.  
 
 
 

 
50 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The scheme of RRR of water bodies for implementation in XI Plan has been closed 
w.e.f. 31.3.2012.  The Scheme for implementation in XII Plan in under formulation/finalization.  
In XII Plan , it is proposed that CWC Field Unit would monitor the RRR of water bodies.  The 
Concurrent evaluation of the water bodies would be carried out by the State Government and 
the report would be submitted to CWC/MoWR. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 38 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5.21) 
Acknowledging that public participation and social awareness among the masses is 
essential for the upkeep of water bodies, the Committee note the Government's reply that the 
Scheme of RRR of Water Bodies envisages capacity building, awareness programme at grass 
root level for which the State Governments are supposed to organize workshops at grass root 
levels for creating awareness/capacity among the stakeholders.   The Committee would like the 
Ministry to assume a proactive role for capacity building and increasing awareness programme 
at grass root levels, instead of relegating this task to the State Governments' wholly.  They 
sincerely believe that the Ministry and its subordinate/atta ched bodies located in different 
States/UTs need to mobilize efforts by sponsoring educational institutions/groups/societies/ 
associations/NGOs for organizing workshops, seminars and related activities for creating 
awareness among all the stakeholders and the general masses as regards the need for repair, 

 
51 
 
conservation and restoration of water bodies located across the country.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend that care and preservation of water bodies should figure 
prominently in all public/mas s campaign activities in print and electronic media undertaken by 
the Government in the water resources sector in order to draw the much needed public 
attention to this vital issue. They would also like to be briefed of any further developments in 
this reg ard.    Further, the Committee strongly feel that comprehensive guidelines be 
formulated and circulated among the States/UTs for taking urgent and effective steps for repair, 
renovation and restoration of water bodies.  The Committee, therefore, urge the G overnment to 
explore the possibility of drafting comprehensive guidelines on water bodies.   The Committee 
would like to be apprised of action taken by the Government in this regard.   
Reply of the Government 
 These aspects related to implementation of the  Scheme and would be taken care of 
while implementation of the Scheme during XII Plan. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5.22) 
 
The Committee note that the Government has made a plan for convergence of efforts 
made under other programmes such as MNREGA, Watershed D evelopment Programme and 
scheme of Rural Drinking Water Supply.   A Task Force on convergence with MNREGA 
Scheme was also set up with representative from different Ministries and Departments, 
implementing programmes having complementarities with MNREGA.  I n this regard, it is stated 
that while MNREGA visualises creation of durable community assets with the help of funds 

 
52 
 
released under employment guarantee programme, seven schemes of MoWR including 
rejuvenation and desilting of water bodies have been identif ied.    Moreover, convergence 
guidelines should have been prepared in consultation with the Ministry of Water Resources.  
The Committee were however informed that for the projects where convergence has been 
proposed under MNREGA, no funds have been release d under the scheme of RRR of water 
bodies. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should identify specific 
activities/works under MNREGA which could be dovetailed with the ongoing Scheme of RRR 
on water bodies in order to avoid duplication o f works, fund wastage and also achieve the long -
term objective of rejuvenation and revitalisation of water bodies all over the country.  The 
Committee further desire to be informed of the composition, mandate, power, tenure etc. of the 
Task Force set up for convergence of efforts by the MoWR.    
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Rural Development had constituted a Task Force to explore effective 
modalities of convergence with NREGA for the various schemes of Government of India. The 
Task Force comprised r epresentatives from Ministries of Water Resources, Environment and 
Forests, Agriculture, Human Resources, Women & Child Development and Department of 
Land Resources. The Task Force recommended that a beginning of convergence may be 
made on pilot basis with select programmes of select Ministries. 
The Water Management Programme (WMP) of the Department of Land Resources was 
identified as an important scheme for convergence with NREGA, as more than 50% of NREGA 

 
53 
 
works relate to soil & water conservation. Apart f rom the Task Force, a series of meetings held 
between Department of Rural Development and Department of Land Resources, in which the 
scope for convergence between NREGA and IWMP were discussed. Based on the 
discussions, convergence areas and modalities for  convergence were identified. Accordingly, 
detailed guidelines for convergence between NREGA and IWMP have been developed.  
In the XII Plan, it is proposed to converge all RRR Projects with Integrated Watershed 
Management Programme (IWMP) in such a way tha t the treatment of the catchment of water 
bodies to be restored happens pari -passu with the repair and renovation of water bodies. From 
April, 2013 onwards, the RRR scheme in rural areas is proposed to be implemented in 
convergence with the IWMP so that th e catchment areas of the water bodies selected will get 
covered under the IWMP.  Water Bodies could be selected in those watershed areas which 
have already received treatment under IWMP or are within the watersheds which are going to 
be treated.  The exist ing Watershed Management Committees will be fully involved in the 
planning and execution of the projects.  Each project will also have its Water Users’ Association 
(WUA) to manage command area development and conjunctive use of ground water. However, 
proposals received during 2012-13 would be processed without this condition.  
As per the “Guidelines for  Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of  Water Bodies  
with External Assistance” issued by MoWR in 2009, the tentative allocation for Catchment Area 
treatment was considered as 15% - 20% of the estimated cost. The same is proposed to be 
adopted for XII Plan. The estimated total cost of water bodies is Rs. 10000 crores and the 
Central assistance is estimated as Rs. 6235 crores. Accordingly, tentative allo cation for 

 
54 
 
Catchment Area Treatment works is estimated as Rs.2000 crores. The labour component can 
be considered as Rs. 1000 crores and 50% of this cost i.e. Rs. 500 crores can be funded under 
NREGA by the State Governments under convergence for Catchment Area Treatment works of 
RRR of Water Bodies.  
 
 

 
55 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4.12) 
 
The Committee note that for the Scheme of RRR of wate r bodies with external 
assistance, the office of Controller, Aids, Accounts and Accounting (CAAA) of Department of 
Economic Affairs(DEA), Ministry of Finance is required under the guidelines of the RRR 
Scheme to keep track of disbursement claims made  by State Governments. As per information 
furnished by the DEA, no report about default in repayment of World Bank loan by States had 
been received till 24.01.2012.    The Committee would like the Ministry to continue its strict 
watch on the external funding of RRR Scheme as well as loan repayment. 
Reply of the Government  
 In XII Plan, funding from external agencies is not envisaged. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5.19) 
 
The Committee also note that States are mandatorily required to send utilization 
Certificates (UC s) to the Government of India for release of installments in case of RRR 
Schemes having external assistance.  Asked to comment how many States have furnished 
such UCs till date and whether the Ministry strictly adhered to this norm while releasing 
additional installments of funds to the States, the Ministry have not furnished the information as 
desired by the Committee but merely narrated the procedure for submission of disbursement 

 
56 
 
claims by the States to the Central Government.   The Committee would like the Ministry to 
provide requisite information on the number of States/UTs which have furnished UCs to the 
Government of India for release of additional installments to the States/UTs in case of RRR 
Schemes having external assistance.  The Committee would a lso like to know the particulars of 
the cases in which the norms for releasing such funds to States/UTs under the Scheme were 
not adhered to or diluted.  
Reply of the Government 
 The processing for release of funds for the RRR of water bodies with external  
assistance is being done by Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance directly.  
 
 
 

 
57 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.22) 
 
 The Committee are distressed to note that apart from decline in the number of water  
bodies, there has been quality deterioration in water bodies.  The factors attributed for such a 
deterioration include indiscriminate disposal of sewage, mostly untreated domestic sewage into 
the water bodies; discharge of agricultural wastes from agro -chemicals run -off in the form of 
fertilizers, organic manure, pesticides; industrial wastes etc. from industries like sugar factories, 
dairies, paper and pulp industries, tan neries, distilleries, metal plating industries – all of which 
release pollutants ranging from simple nutrients and organic matter to complex toxic 
substances and mining activities which lead to gradual damage to the surface as well as 
ground water resources.  Noting that pollution of surface water bodies like rivers, lakes, ponds, 
tanks etc. can affect the quality of ground water in aquifers hydraulically connected with them 
due to percolation, the Committee recommend that the Ministry of Water Resources ma y in 
conjunction with the Ministry of Environment and Forests issue appropriate advisories to the 
State Governments  to institute an effective mechanism for monitoring the water quality in 
water bodies, so that  pollution of water bodies is arrested and a lasting solution worked out for 
the long-term interests of the nation.   The Committee also note that the Government of India in 
2001, constituted Water Quality Assessment Authority (WQAA) under the Environment 
Protection Act, 1986 with Secretary, Ministry  of Environment & Forests as Chairman and Joint 

 
58 
 
Secretary (Administration), Ministry of Water Resources as its Member Secretary to direct the 
agencies (government/local bodies/non -governmental) to standardize method(s) for water 
quality monitoring and also  for ensuring quality of data generation for utilisation of water and 
other related functions.   The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government keep tab 
on the efforts of WQAA on water quality monitoring by insisting on submission of periodic 
assessment reports on status of water quality in lakes, tanks, ponds etc. at least on biennial 
basis.   Further, they also strongly recommend that these reports of WQAA be made available 
to various State Governments on annual basis, highlighting the specific c ases where 
deterioration in quality of water has reached alarming levels and calls for prompt remedial 
action. The Committee also note reports of encroachments on water bodies allegedly made by 
local bodies like Municipalities and Panchayats, which is a wo rrisome development.  
Considering the vital importance of water bodies, the Government of India cannot be a helpless 
bystander on the ground that removal of encroachments on water bodies is a State matter.  
The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend  that the Government of India need to take 
appropriate measures to heighten national awareness and to build a strong national 
programme for removal of encroachments on water bodies by local bodies, first by instituting a 
thorough study in the matter, and then e nact deterrent or enhance penalty provisions effective 
enough to tackle such encroachments in consultation with the Ministry of Environment & 
Forests.  The Committee further recommend that in order to encourage repair, renovation and 
restoration of water bodies, specially lakes, tanks and ponds, the Government need to institute 
novel measures in coordination with the Ministry of Environment & Forests and States/UTs and 
not only to save them from being lost, but also to turn these water bodies into aesthetic ally 

 
59 
 
appealing scenic spots.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of the status of the 
action taken up in this regard at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Scheme involves monitoring in three levels : - Water Users’ Association (WUA) 
at th e Gram Panchayat Level, Cascade Association (CA) and WUA Federation at the Block 
Level. The involvement of local /block administrative levels will ensure that encroachment on 
the water bodies are avoided. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 13  of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.23) 
 
The Committee observe that in most of the States, the smaller water bodies are 
entrusted to the local Panchayats for maintenance and management while the bigger ones are 
vested with the Water Resources/Irrigation Departments of the States/UTs.   Given the fact that 
one million ha. of irrigation potential is lost in the country due to non -use of 15% of tanks out of 
a total of 5.56 lakhs tanks and storages available in India, the Committee asked the 
Government the methods presently employed by local communities all over India for the 
maintenance and management of water bodies, with a view to observe the efficacy of those 
methods.   However, the stock reply of the Ministry was that the management o f water bodies 
comes within the purview of the State Governments.  Such an attitude of helplessness is not 
acceptable to the Committee when the Ministry has already identified an independent 

 
60 
 
body/agency which will look into the method of management of wate r bodies.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the independent body identified may be asked to expeditiously 
complete its work of evaluation of the methods presently applied for management of water 
bodies in the country, so that shortcomings, if any, in this area may be rectified and necessary 
remedies explored and implemented.   They would also like to be apprised of the outcome of 
such efforts in due course. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Scheme involves monitoring in three levels :- Water Users’ Assoc iation (WUA) 
at the Gram Panchayat Level, Cascade Association (CA) and WUA Federation at the Block 
Level.  The involvement of local /block administrative levels will ensure that shortcomings, if 
any, in this area may be rectified and necessary remedies explored and implemented.   
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.39) 
 
The Committee note with concern that as per the Third Census of Minor Irrigation 
(2005), there are 5.50 lakh water bodies in the country, out of which 2.39 lakhs are public water 
bodies and remaining 3.17 lakhs are private water bodies.  The Committee were informed that 
the Scheme for RRR of water bodies does not cover 3.17 lakhs water bodies spread across the 
country.  The Committee deplore exclusion of private water bodies from the RRR Scheme of 

 
61 
 
the Government, which dents a gaping loop -hole in the otherwise laudable scheme, particularly 
as it is a necessity to preserve the water bodies.    Noting that the Ministry's pr oposal is to 
cover public water bodies as the first priority, the Committee urge the Government to explore 
the viability of extending State funding to private water bodies during the XII Plan, or to at least 
explore the possibility of inducing States/UTs t o take up with owners of such private water 
bodies and to incentivize them to take measures to revive, repair, renovate and develop water 
bodies by undertaking works such as desilting, repairing sluice work, pitching, repair of canals 
attached to the water bodies, etc. 
Reply of the Government 
 The present proposal is to cover public water bodies under the scheme of RRR of water 
bodies. 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 26 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 
62 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-  NIL - 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                            DIP GOGOI 
16 December, 2013                                                   Chairman,                 
25 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)            Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 

 
63 
 
APPENDIX – I 
[Vide Para 28 of Chapter I] 
 
YEAR-WISE AND STATE-WISE FUNDS RELEASED DURING XI PLAN  
 
                                  (in Rs. crore) 
Name of State Fund released 
during  
2009-10 
Fund released 
during  
2010-11 
Fund released 
during  
2011-12 
Fund released 
during  
2012-13 
 
Total 
Orissa 72.12 75.00 70.33  217.45 
Karnataka 74.04 47.47 77.51  199.02 
Andhra Pradesh  189.00   189 
Bihar  25.00  27.54 52.54 
U.P. (Bundelkhand)  29.08  10.379 39.459 
M.P (Bundelkhand)  7.33 2.62  9.95 
Meghalaya 
(Umiam Lake) 
 1.78 0.64  
2.42 
Chhattisgarh   34.68  34.68 
Gujarat   10.61  10.61 
Haryana   7.04 2.52 9.56 
Maharashtra   80.53  80.53 
Rajasthan   7.07  7.07 
Total 146.16 374.66 291.03 40.439 852.289 
 
 
 

 
64 
 
APPENDIX -  II 
[Vide Para 3 of the Introduction] 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2013-2014) HELD ON TUESDAY, 10 DECEMBER 2013 
  
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1550 hours in Committee Ro om 'B', Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Dip Gogoi – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Dr. Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan 
12. Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
13. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
14. Shri Kabindra Purkayastha 
15. Shri Arjun Ray 
16. Shri S.P.Y. Reddy 
17. Shri D.K. Suresh 
18. Dr. P. Venugopal 
19. Shri Sajjan Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Dr. Ashok S. Ganguly  
12. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
    13. Smt. Wansuk Syiem 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Devender Singh   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Pawan Kumar   - Director 
3. Smt. Rita Jailkhani    - Additional Director 

 
65 
 
  
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee .  
xxxx   xxxx   xxxx    xxxx  
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the draft Reports on (i)  Action 
Taken by the Government on the obse rvations/recommendations contained in the Sixteenth 
Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on 'Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies' which was 
presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 27.11.2012 and (ii) Action Taken by the 
Government on the observatio ns/recommendations contained  in  the  Seventeenth  Report  
(15th Lok Sabha)  on 'Demands for Grants (2013 -14)' of the Ministry of Water Resources  which 
was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 29.04.2013 .  After deliberation s, the 
Committee adopted the above two draft Reports subject to amendment suggested by Members 
of the Committee in respect of Recommendation contained in Para 35 of the Draft Report on 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Sixteenth Report on 'Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies'.  The suggested 
amendments (as shown in the italics and also underlined) have been carried out in Para No. 35 
of the Draft Report, and which is reproduced below : 
"The Committee note that the impact assessment of the completed water bodies under 
the scheme of RRR is proposed to be carried out by/through independent agencies.  
However, the reply is silent about the status of independent agencies, their particulars, 
etc., which Government propose  to engage for this purpose.  It is also silent about any 
time frame by which they will be assigned this work.  The Committee are of the firm 
opinion that, it is also of utmost importance to rope in the services of State s agencies in 
works of impact assess ment of the completed water bodies under the scheme of RRR, 
and they, therefore, urge the Government to take necessary steps in this regard .  The 

 
66 
 
Committee would also further  like to be apprised about the status, particulars of 
independent agencies, their functions, period by which they will be appointed, and 
submit report(s) etc. at the earliest. 
3. xxxx   xxxx   xxxx     
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the said two Reports in 
the light of verbal and consequential changes and also  to present the same to both the 
Houses of Parliament.  
The Committee then adjourned 
 
 
 
xxxx Minutes in respect of other matters kept separately 

 
67 
 
APPENDIX - III 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTEENTH REPORT 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE  
  
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations/Observations    23 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted    
by the Government  
 
Para Nos.  2.20, 2.21, 3.33, 3.34, 3.35, 3.36, 3.37, 3.38, 3.40,  
      3.41, 4.11, 4.13, 4.14, 5.17, 5.18, 5.20, 5.21 and 5.22   
 
Total          18 
Percentage         78.26%
  
  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Para Nos.  4.12 and 5.19 
 
Total          02  
Percentage          8.70 % 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies    
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Para Nos.  2.22, 2.23 and 3.39 
 
Total          03  
Percentage   13.04 % 
 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply 
 of the Government is still awaited 
 
Total            00 
Percentage         0% 