7 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURES 
(2010-2011) 
                 
         
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
                 
         
                 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
          
         
"THE DAM SAFETY BILL, 2010" 
         
         
         
SEVENTH REPORT 
  
 
         
            
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
JUNE, 2011/JYAISTHA, 1933 (Saka) 
         

 2 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2010-2011) 
          
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
                         
THE DAM SAFETY BILL, 2010 
  
         
 
Presented to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 04.06.2011 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17.08.2011 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17.08.2011 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
         
JUNE, 2011/JYAISTHA, 1933 (Saka) 

 3 
 
WRC No.  26 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs.110.00  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
         
        © 2011 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha  (Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 4 
 
  
 
        CONTENTS   
 
Page No.(s) 
 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2010-2011)  
 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
 
 
 
(v) 
 
 
REPORT 
   
Chapter-I Background 1 
 
Chapter – II 
 
 
Clause by Clause examination 
 
10 
  
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
Annexure-I List of State Governments/Experts/Individuals who 
have given suggestions/comments on ―The Dam 
Safety Bill, 2010‘. 
 
                          35                    
Annexure-II The Dam Safety Bill, 2010.  
        
                                  
 
Annexure-III Minutes of the sittings of the Standing Committee on 
Water Resources held on  4.10.2010, 26.10.2010, 
3.11.2010, 27.12.2010, 24.03.2011 and 12.05.2011 
 
 
 

 5 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES (2010-2011) 
  
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Dip Gogoi  -  Chairman 
 
          MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi 
3. Shri Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan 
4. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
5. Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
6. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
7. Shri Virender Kashyap 
8. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
9.          Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
10.        Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
11.        Shri S.P.Y. Reddy  
12.        Shri Arjun Roy 
13.        Smt. J. Shantha 
14.        Shri K. Shivkumar alias J.K. Ritheesh 
15.     Smt. Annu Tandon 
16. Dr. P. Venugopal (Tiruvallur) 
17.  Shri Sajjan Verma 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22.        Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder* 
23. Shri Kumar Deepak Das* 
24.         Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
25. Dr. Ashok S. Ganguly* 
26. Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan 
27. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
28. Shri Mangala Kisan  
29. Shri Ranjitsinh Vijaysinh Mohite-Patil 
30. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
31. Smt. Bimla Kashyap Sood 
 
 
*Nominated w.e.f. 21.09.2010. 
Shri Beni Prasad Verma, MP,Chairman ceased to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f. 
19.01.2011 on his appointment as MoS. 
Shri Dip Gogoi, MP appointed as the Chairman of the Committee w.e.f. 24.02.2011. 

 6 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
 
1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Secretary 
2. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri B.S. Dahiya  - Director 
4. Shri Joginder Singh  - Under Secretary 
5. Shri A.K. Yadav  - Committee Officer  
     
   
 

 7 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2010 -2011) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Seventh Report 
on ―The Dam Safety Bill, 2010.‖ 
2. The Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha and was referred by the Hon‘ble Speaker to the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources on 9 September, 2010 for examining and Report.  
3. In the process of examination of the Bill, the Committee took oral evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Water Resources and Central Water Commission on 
27.12.2010 and 24.03.2011.  The Committee also sought written information on various aspects 
of the Bill from the Ministry. 
4. The Committee invited the views of States/Experts/Individuals on the Bill through 
Memorandum.  On 26.10.2010 and 03.11.2010, they also depos ed before the Committee to 
share their views and give their suggestions on the proposed amendments. 
5. The Committee considered and adopted the Report on the Bill at their sitting held on           
12 May 2011.   
6. The Committee wish to express their than ks to the representatives of the Ministry of 
Water Resources  and Central Water Commission who appeared before the Committee and 
placed their considered views  and also for furnishing  written notes and information as desired 
by the Committee in connection wi th the examination of the Bill.  The Committee also wish to 
express their thanks for tendering evidence before the Committee and furnishing 
inputs/suggestions by the States/Experts/Individuals on the Bill. 
7. For facilitation of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold in the body of the Report.  
  
 
NEW DELHI                                DIP GOGOI, 
02  June, 2010                                                  Chairman, 
12 Jyaistha, 1933(Saka)            Standing Committee on Water Resources 

 8 
REPORT 
CHAPTER – I 
A. Background 
 
1.1 A d am is a critical infrastructure for multipurpose uses such as irrigation, power 
generation, flood moderation and supply of water for drinking and industrial purposes, which has 
been constructed with large investments. Other physical assets, such as hydro power plants, 
irrigation network, drinking and industrial network, municipal supplies, etc. are also linked with the 
dams. Thus, it becomes a national responsibility to take necessary steps to ensure the safety of 
dams. 
1.2 An unsafe dam constitutes a hazard to human life, flora and fauna, ecology and public 
and private assets.  Further, safety of dams is very important for safeguarding the huge 
investment in critical physical infrastructure and the benefits derived from the projects.   . 
Therefore, the safety of dam is a matter of great concern to the nation. 
1.3 According to the ‗National Register of Large Dams -2009‘,  compiled by the Central Water 
Commission (CWC), there are 5,101 large dams owned by the Union/State Governments, Public 
Sector Undertakings and private entities.   
1.4 The need for ensuring dam safety had been engaging the attention of the Government of 
India for over decades.  The erstwhile Ministry of Irrigation, therefore, constituted a Standing 
Committee in 1982, headed by the Chairman, Central Water Commission to review the existing 
practices and to evolve unified procedures for the safety of dams. The Standing Committee 
submitted its report titled, ―Report on Dam Safety Procedures‖ in July 1986.  The report elaborates 
the then existing procedures, their evaluation and suggestions for institutional arrangements for 

 9 
dam safety at the level of the States and the Centre. One of the actions recommended in the 
report was enactment of a Dam Safety Legislation. 
1.5 As a follow up to this recommendation, a draft ―Dam Safety Bill‖ was prepared by CWC in 
1987. The same was circulated in January 1988 to the members of the National Committee on 
Dam Safety (N CDS) comprising representatives from all the dam owning States and 
Organizations which was formed in 1987.  Subsequently, the matter was pursued with the State 
Governments by the Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR) and the Central Water Commission. 
The matter was also pursued through the National Committee on Dam Safety (NCDS), and 
comments/suggestions were obtained from twelve member States in the NCDS, i.e. Andhra 
Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, 
Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. 
1.6 Based on the comments/suggestions of the State Governments, the Draft Bill was 
comprehensively reviewed in CWC and a modified draft was prepared in 2002. This Draft Bill was 
circulated to the Principal Secretaries/Secretaries of Irrigation / Water Resources / PWD of the 
States. The States have responded well to the Draft Bill.  The Government of Bihar enacted the 
Dam Safety Act, 2006 in line with the Draft Bill circulated by the Ministry and the same was 
published in the Bihar Gazette on 4  May 2006. The Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly 
adopted a Resolution on 24 March 2007 that the Dam Safety legislation should be regulated in 
the State of Andhra Pradesh by an Act of Parliament.  The West Bengal Legislative Assembly 
also passed a Resolution on 24 July 2007 empowering the Parliament to pass the necessary 
Dam Safety Act.  
 

 10 
Introduction of Dam Safety Bill, 2010 in Lok Sabha 
1.7 The ‗Dam Safety Bill, 2010‘ was introduced in Lok Sabha on 30 August 2010.  The 
Speaker, Lok Sabha referred the said Bill to the Standing Committee on Water Resources for 
detailed examination and report. 
1.8 The Dam Safety Bill seeks to enjoin responsibility on the Central   Government, 
State Governments and owners of specified dams to set u p an institutional mechanism 
for ensuring safety of such dams and reporting the action taken. It defines the duties and 
functions of these institutions in relation to perpetual surveillance, routine inspections, 
operation and maintenance, maintenance of lo gbooks, instructions, funds for 
maintenance and repairs, technical documentation, reporting, qualifications and training 
of concerned manpower etc. Provisions have been made concerning the necessity of 
periodical inspections, instrumentations and establish ment of hydrological and 
seismological stations. The Bill addresses the issues of emergency action plan and 
disaster management, and also enlists the requirements of comprehensive dam safety 
evaluation. 
1.9 The provisions of the proposed legislation , once enacted, shall apply to the 
States of Andhra Pradesh and  West Bengal whose legislative Assemblies have passed 
statutory Resolution to that effect, the Union Territories and also to their public sector 
undertakings and to the Public Sector Undertakings of t he Central Government.   It shall 
also apply to such owners of the specific dams other than those owned or controlled by 
the Central Government or the State Government.   The provisions of the proposed 
legislation, once enacted,  shall also apply to other S tates if resolution to that effect is 

 11 
passed by the Houses of Legislature of those States under Clause (1) of Article 252 of 
the Constitution. 
1.10 The Dam Safety Bill, 2010, inter-alia, provides for –  
 
(a)  constitution of a National Committee on Dam Saf ety, consisting of a  
Chairperson, eight members, specialists or experts in the field of dam 
safety and a  Member-Secretary, to ensure proper surveillance, 
inspection, operation and  maintenance of all specified dams and ensure 
their safe functioning; 
 
(b)  establishment of a Central Dam Safety Organisation in the Central Water  
Commission to provide, inter alia, the technical and managerial 
assistance to the  State Dam Safety Organisations or the State Dam 
Safety Cells, the Non -State Dam Safety Organisations or  the Non-State 
Dam Safety Cells; to settle the unresolved  points of issues between the 
State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell  of two States, 
or between the State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell  
of a State and the Non -State Dam Safety Organisation or the Non -State 
Dam Safety Cell, etc.; 
 
(c) constitution of the State Committee on Dam Safety by the State 
Governments having more than twenty specified dams, to ensure proper 
surveillance, inspection, operation and maintenance of all specified dams 
in that State and to ensure their safe functioning; 
 
(d)  establishment of the State Dam Safety Organisations in States having 
more than twenty specified dams to discharge such functions as may be 
prescribed by the concerned State Government; 
 
(e)  establishment of the State Dam Safety Cells in States, having twenty or 
less than twenty number of specified dams, to discharge such functions 
as may be prescribed by the concerned State Government; 
 
(f)  establishment of Non -State Dam Safety Organisations by the dam 
owners (other than the Central Government or State Governments) 
having more than ten  specified dams, to discharge such functions as 
may be specified by the Central Dam  Safety Organisation or the State 
Dam Safety Organisation; 
 
(g)  establishment of Non -State Dam Safety Cell by the dam owner (other 
than the Central Government or State Governments), having ten or less 
than ten numbers of specified dams, to discharge such functions as may 

 12 
be specified by the Central  Dam Safety Organisat ion or the State Dam 
Safety Organisation; 
 
(h)  an obligation upon every owner of a specified dam to establish 
operational and maintenance set up for undertaking pre -monsoon and 
post-monsoon inspections  and special inspections during and after 
floods, earthquakes, etc.; 
 
(i)  an obligation upon the concerned State Dam Safety Organiation, Non -
State Dam Safety Organisations, State Dam Safety Cell and Non -State 
Dam Safety Cell to arrange for comprehensive safety evaluation of every 
specified dam at least once in every ten years; 
 
(j)  an obligation upon the Central Dam Safety Organisation to forward its 
annual  report to the National Disaster Management Authority and the 
State Dam Safety  Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, Non -State 
Dam Safety Organisation o r Non-State Dam Safety Cell to forward their 
annual reports on safety status of dams to the  concerned State Disaster 
Management Authority; 
 
(k)  empowers the Central Government and the State Governments to make 
rules to carry out the provisions of the proposed legislation. 
 
1.11 The Committee invited suggestions/comments from the experts, State 
Governments and individuals in the form of Memoranda.  Apart from taking evidence of 
the officials of the MoWR, the Committee also took evidence of non-official experts in the 
field of dam safety.  Written replies to the list of points were also obtained from the 
MoWR.  A list of the experts, organizations who have given suggestions on The Dam 
Safety Bill, 2010 are given at Annexure – I. 
1.12 A general scrutiny of the  Bill reveals that in the event of failure of a dam or the 
Dam owner not obeying the directions/provisions of the Bill, the responsibility will be of 
the owner of the dam.  However, there is no mention of the  penalty to be imposed on 
such owner or anyone r esponsible for the failure of the dam causing disaster in 
downstream or the upstream of the dam. 

 13 
1.13 During evidence the Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources accepted that there 
is no penalty clause in the proposed Bill.  Hence, no rules can be made to provide for 
penalty in case of failure.  There should be an enabling clause in the Bill to move further 
on the issues.  It was also informed that while the draft of the Bill was circulated to all the 
State Governments the penalty clause was not there. 
B. General Observations 
1.14 The Committee have examined the Bill in the light of the aforementioned 
facts, suggestions received from non-official experts in the field of dam safety , 
State Governments and individuals and the information furnished by the Minist ry 
of Water Resources .  Though t he Committee have made a wide range of 
recommendations, they feel that many of the recommenda tions may not 
necessarily require amendment(s) in the Bill itself , as considering the need  for  
flexibility to meet the operational  exigencies,  the Government may make 
appropriate provisions in the rules, regulations and orders framed under the 
legislation, once enacted.   There is also scope for withdrawal of some 
clause(s)/sub-clause(s) which can better form part of the Rules/Guidel ines to be 
framed in exercise of the power of delegated legislation to avoid the rigour of 
amending the parent legislation from time to time.   
1.15 The Committee note that safety of dam s is very important for safeguarding 
the huge investment in critical p hysical infrastructure and the benefits derived 
from the projects.  There are 5 ,101 large dams as recorded in 'National Register of 
Large Dams – 2009' owned by  the States and the Non-State entities.  The 

 14 
Committee recall that the then Ministry of Irrigatio n (Government of India),  while 
realizing the importance of ensuring safety of dams, had constituted a Committee 
in 1982 headed by the Chairman, CWC to review the existing practice and to 
evolve unified procedures for safety of dams.  The Committee submitte d its 
report, ―Report on Dam Safety Procedure‖ in July 1986.  Based on one of the 
recommendations of the Committee the draft Dam Safety Bill was prepared by 
CWC in 1987 and circulated in January 1998 to the Members of National 
Committee on Dam Safety (NCDS ) which was formed in 1987 and to the dam 
owning States and Organisations.  Suggestions were obtained from twelve 
Member States.  Based on these suggestions/comments , the first draft was 
prepared in 2002 and circulated to Ministries (Irrigation/PWD) of the  States. Taking 
into account the suggestions/comments received from various 
States/Organisations the Dam Safety Bill, 2010 has been introduced in August 
2010 in  Lok Sabha .  The Committee feel that it took an undue long period to 
formulate the Bill on dam s afety for which process was initiated long back in the 
year 1986 and, surprisingly, it took almost 25 years to come before the Parliament.  
Nevertheless, the Committee are pleased that the Bill has ultimately been 
introduced after due and wide ranging cons ultation with the stake holders and 
others. 
1.16 The Committee note the Bill contains provision for periodical inspection of 
dams and emergency action plan.  However, in case of any dam failure or for not 
following the directions provided in the Bill, ther e is no provision for imposition of 

 15 
penalty on the owner or on the person(s) responsible for dam safety.   The 
Committee feel that the Bill will not prove as effective as it should in the absence 
of any penal clause  for such grave omission.  The Committee a re of the 
considered view that the statutory provision for punishment will be a deterrent 
and  also add to the sense of responsibility among the dam owners or persons 
responsible for the maintenance of the dam . As the safety of dams is of 
paramount concern, the Committee recommend that the provision to impose 
penalty for dam failure and causing disaster in the downstream/upstream of dam 
be suitably incorporated in the Bill. 
1.17 The Committee note that there is no provision  in the Bill to compensate the 
affected people in case of any disaster taking place due to the failure of the dam.  
They, therefore, desire that an adequate provision be made in the Bill for 
compensation to the affected people. 
1.18 The Committee also recommend that the concerned agencies must keep 
themselves abreast of the rapid strides made in the field of science and 
technology and adopt the latest innovations not only while constructing the new 
dams but ke ep these in view as well during periodic reviews of the dams already 
constructed to assure their safety.  
1.19 The Committee note that there is no mention in the proposed Bill regarding 
constitution of an independent regulatory authority to keep an overview the 
implementation of the Dam safety measures as contemplated .   They , therefore, 

 16 
desire creation of such an authority  to monitor and achieve the intended 
objectives behind the Bill. 
 
CHAPTER – II 
CLAUSE BY CLAUSE EXAMINATION 
I Preamble of the Bill 
2.1 The Preamble of The Dam Safety Bill, 2010 reads as under : 
―A BILL to provide for p roper surveillance, inspection, operation and 
maintenance of all dams of certain parameters in India to ensure their safe 
functioning and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
 
WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for uniform dam safety pro cedure which 
shall ensure national investment and benefits by safeguarding human life, 
livestock and property; 
 
AND WHEREAS Parliament has no power to make laws for the States with 
respect to any of the matters aforesaid except as provided in articles 249 and 
250 of the Constitution; 
           
AND WHEREAS in pursuance of clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution, 
resolutions have been passed by all the Houses of Legislatures of the States of 
Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal to the effect that the matters  aforesaid should 
be regulated in those States by law made by the Parliament.‖ 
 
2.2 The ‗safeguardin g of human life, livestock and property‘ is mentioned in the 
Preamble of the Bill whereas safety of aquatic life and natural resources  which would 
also be adversely affected due to the dam failure has not found any place. 
 2.3 Further, the reasoning of the Ministry that the Parliament has no powers to enact 
a legislation on its own on the subject ‗water‘ was not found convincing.  When asked as 
to why it needs to be mentioned  in the Bill, when entry 56 of the Union List provide s that 
‗Regulation and development of Inter State rivers and river valleys to the extent to which 
such regulation and development under the control of the Union is declared by 

 17 
Parliament to be e xpedient in the public interest'  and such basins cover more than 92% 
of the country's area and almost all the dams, and why the Bill proposed  to be enacted  
under article 252 of the Constitution, the Ministry in reply stated as follows : 
―The owner ship of dams and their maintenance predominantly falls in the 
purview of the State governments and is given effect by them. As of now 
‗regulation of the safety of dams‘ has not been declared by the Parliament to be 
expedient in public interest. Further ini tial efforts for dam safety legislation were 
directed towards enactment of appropriate legislation by respective State 
Governments, and accordingly the State of Bihar enacted the Dam Safety Act, 
2006.  Some of the States favoured the idea of a uniform cent ral legislation on 
dam safety.  The States of Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal have adopted 
resolutions in their States for an Act of Parliament and , therefore, this Bill has 
been proposed under Article 252 of the Constitution.‖ 
 
2.4 Further during evidence before the Committee, the Secretary , Ministry of Water 
Resources stated: 
―A lot of experts have said that we should not follow this route and we should go 
under entry 56 and the Union Government should enact a legislation, but this 
being a federal Governme nt we thought it may be better to persuade the States 
to adopt this law instead of just saying that you may do it.  So, we have not 
accepted this recommendation.‖  
 
2.5 The Ministry of Water Resources in reply to a query of the Committee in this 
regard submitted as follows : 
―About 80% of India‘s large dams are now more than 20 years old and require 
high level of monitoring and remedial actions concerning their safety. Due to the 
rapid growth of India‘s population, most of these dams have serious hazard 
potential spanning over multiple States and hence their safety is of national 
importance.  
 
The Dam Safety Bill can also be taken up under the provisions of entry 56. 
However this will require a much wider political consensus and may become time 
consuming. The present route of taking up the Bill under Article 252 has bec ome 
possible after considerable efforts on the part of CWC and MOWR, and provides 
for an opportunity for initiating the much needed dam safety reforms.‖ 
 
II Clause 2 (a) – Application of the Act 

 18 
2.6 Clause 2 (a)  which provides for application of the Act, reads as under : 
2. The provision of this Act applies, - 
 
(a) ―In the first instance, to the whole of the States of Andhra Pradesh, 
West Bengal and to all the Union territories; and it shall also a pply to 
such other State which adopts this Act by resolution passed in that 
behalf under clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution.‖ 
 
2.7 Article 252  of the Constitution empowers Parliament of India to legislate on any subject 
in List II of the 7th Schedule of the Constitution provided two or more States give consent for such 
legislation and the resolution is adopted by their respective legislatures empowering the 
Parliament to pass an Act in this regard, which shall apply to those States.  
  Article 252 further provides that such a legislation shall also apply to those States whose 
Legislatures pass such a resolution.    
 
2.8 In this connection, t he Ministry informed the Committee that some of the States 
formed the idea of a uniform Central legislation on dam safety.    When asked whether 
this Act would be a ‗m odel act‘ for the States or the States could be at liberty to adopt 
the act with or without amendment, the Ministry of Water Resources submitted as under: 
‖States are at liberty to adopt this Dam Safety Act  (as and when enacted) . 
However, in such cases, full provisions of the Act will become applicable to them 
and no modification or moderation will be possible. 
 
Alternatively, the States may choose to enact their own Dam Safety Act; and for 
this purpose, they may treat the Central Dam Safety Act 2010 as a model Act.‖ 
 
2.9 The Committee note that ‗regulation of the Safety of Dams‘ has not yet 
been declared by the Parliament to be expedient in public interest.  However, they 
are not inclined to accept  the view  that the Parliament has no powers to make 
laws for the States as stated in the Preamble of the Bill.  Since, in terms of Entry 

 19 
56 of the Union List of the Constitution, Parliament may declare  by law  if it is 
expedient in public interest make a la w for dam safety which is apparently an 
inter-State matter.   The Committee, therefore, desire that Preamble of the Bill be 
modified by deleting the sentence  ‗and whereas Parliament has no power to make 
laws for the States with respect to any of the matters  aforesaid except as provided 
in articles 249 and 250 of the Constitution.‘    The Committee also desire that the 
words, ―including safety of aquatic life and natural resources‖ be added after the 
words livestock and property in the Preamble.  
2.10 According to article 252 of the Constitution ,  Parliament can legislate on 
any subject in List II of the Seventh Schedule  of the Constitution provided two or 
more States give consent for such legislation and the resolution is adopted by 
their respective legislatu res empowering Parliament to pass an Act in this regard 
which shall apply to those States.  In the instant case also, the State of Andhra 
Pradesh and West Bengal have passed resolution s empowering the Parliament to 
pass the necessary Dam Safety Act.  Hence , this proposed  Act at the first stage 
will be applicable to Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal and all Union territories.  
The State Government s can also enact their own Dam Safety Act by treating the 
Central Dam Safety Act as a model act.  The Committee, however, desire that after 
the Dam Safety Bill is passed by the Parliament, the MoWR pursue with the State 
Governments to adopt this Act by passing a resolution in this regard in their 
legislatures on priority basis given the serious objectives behind the legislation. 
III Clause 3 - Definitions 

 20 
2.11 Clause 3 defines certain expressions  used in the Bill. The term, ‗Safety 
assurance‘ is not mentioned anywhere in the Bill.  The Committee feel that on the lines 
of ‗Nuclear Safety Bill ‘, the safety assurance which  is an undertaking of pre -emptive 
action in order to prevent any accident, given the ecology of the dams and the impact o n 
the dams, the definition of ‗Safety Assurance‘ should be added and suitably incorporated 
in the Bill. 
2.12 The Secretary, MoWR during  evidence before the Committee while agreeing to 
the suggestion elaborated as follows : 
―……….we would take this on and see how we can suitably incorporate this.‖ 
 
2.13 Clause 3 (j) defines the ‗inspection‘ and provides as under : 
 
― ‗inspection’ shall mean  visual examination of all components of dam and its 
appurtenances and includes examination of non -overflow blocks, spillways, 
abutments, stilling basin, piers, bridge, downstream toe, drainage galleries, 
operation of mechanical systems , interior of outlet  conduits, instrumentation 
records and record-keeping arrangements of instruments.‖ 
 
2.14 In the view of the Committee t he word ‗visual‘ in this clause does not seem to be 
suitable as it appears that it restricts the process of examination.  While doing inspection 
one can visually inspect the dam even by sitting at distant place or simply passing 
through the site and say that the inspection has been done.   
2.15 When the Committee desired to know the response of the MoWR, the Secretary, 
MoWR during evidence, inter-alia stated :  
―I find problem with this particular clause.  …………. This visual inspection can 
be misused…………………..  We would just put the word examination  and add a 
checklist so that we can say that these things must be checked during 
examination.‖ 
 

 21 
2.16 The Committee debated at length over various definitions of the 
expressions used in the Bill.  They, therefore, strongly feel that the definitions of  
‗Safety´ and ‗Safety Assurance‘ be added under Clause 3 in the Bill and the details 
thereof be suitably incorporated  elsewhere in the Bill.  They also desire that the 
word ‗visual‘ may be replaced by ‗on site‘ in the clause 3 (j) as the term 'visual' 
restricts the scope and process of examination  and can be misused while doing 
the inspection.  Accordingly, definition at Clause 3 (j) be modified. 
IV. Clause 4 – Constitution of National Committee  
2.17 Clause 4 which provides for Constitution of National Committee on Dam Safety 
reads as under : 
―With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by  notification, 
appoint, there shall be constituted, for the purposes of this Act, a National 
Committee to be known as the ―National Committee on Dam Safety‖ consisting 
of the following members, namely:— 
 
(a) Chairman, Central Water Commission – ex officio, Chairperson; 
(b) Member, Design and Research Wing, Central Water Commission — ex  
     officio,Vice- Chairperson; 
(c) Member (Hydro), Central Electricity Authority—ex officio, Member; 
(d) Commissioner (Projects), Ministry of Water Resource – ex officio,   
     Member; 
(e) Director General, Geological Survey of India – ex officio, Member; 
(f) Director General, Indian Meteorological Department – ex officio, Member; 
(g) Scientist E, Ministry of Environment and Forests — ex officio, Member; 
(h) Engineer-in-Chief or equivalent officer of Irrigation Department of States     
      having specified dams – ex officio, Members; 
(i) Engineer-in-Chief or equivalent Officer of other Dam owning Organisations    
       with specified dams — ex officio, Members; 
(j)    Specialists or experts in the field of dam safety to be nominated by the    
       Central Government—Members; and 
(k) Chief Engineer, Central Dam Safety Organisation, Central Water   
Commission—ex officio, Member Secretary.‖ 
 

 22 
2.18 Elaborating on the number o f Members of NCDS, repre sentation of the St ates 
and recording of decisions by vote on the question of dam safety , the Secretary, Ministry 
of Water Resources deposed : 
―I would like to say something which the Standing Committee can consider.  This  
NCDS is a 50-Member Committee and this Committee has representatives of all 
the State Governments.  This Committee is supposed to supervise, inspect and 
monitor.  It passes decisions by vote.  Safety is absolute.   It cannot be decided 
by majority and where two State Governments are represented.  Then there may 
be two views on a dam.  Safety should be absolute and safety should be 
something that it is not questionable.   Perhaps, role of this Committee should be 
advisory where people come with technical papers and ha ve discussion. Instead 
of big Committee, may be a small professional Committee should be there.‖ 
 
2.19 In response to the reply of Ministry, the Committee suggested why not there 
should be a Core Technical Committee having technical experts which can take the 
decision after getting all the inputs.  It would also help in avoiding the influence of the 
vested interest s in the National Committee.  To this suggestion Secretary, MoWR 
responded positively and stated that he will look into this suggestion.  
2.20 When asked about the role of Technical Core Committee which is a professional 
Committee and as to its areas of functioning vis -à-vis NCDS, the Secretary, MoWR 
stated as under : 
―The Bill will say that is what the role of NCDS and this is what the role of the  
Core Technical Committee.  We will try and put members of NCDS.  May be they 
need some outside experts because all the expertise is not available.  So, in the 
Core Technical Committee, if they need to get some outside safety expert or 
some outside dam exp ert, they must have all those flexibility so that their 
recommendations carry weight of international opinion also behind them.‖ 
 
2.21 Surprisingly, the Committee noticed that representation of the National Institute 
of Hydrology, the Central Soil and Mate rial Research Station and  the Central Water and 
Power Research Station was found missing from the list of Members of NCDS.   The ir 

 23 
contribution in the construction or planning of a dam cannot be neglected.   These 
technical expert bodies are there for a lo ng time having vast experience of handling 
issues involved in dam safety and maintenance and need representation in the NCDS.   
When asked to co mment on this, the Ministry in reply stated that they agree to 
the suggestion.  
2.22 The Committee further sugge sted for inclusion of experts in the fie ld of 
earthquake and flood risk management from National Disaster Management Authority in 
the National Committee on Dam Safety to which Ministry of Water Resources agreed to. 
2.23 The Committee note that according to  the provisions made in the Clause 4, 
the m embership of National Committee on Dam Safety would go beyond 50.  
Further, having representatives of all S tates having specified dams would also 
provide a chance to groups of vested interests  or those States whic h are  not 
going to benefit from the project , to influence the decision of the NCDS.  To 
restrict the number of persons in NCDS , it is suggested to make the 
representatives of only those 5 or 7 States which have the largest number of 
specified dams.  Moreov er, if a Core Technical Committee (CTC) consisting of 
only technical experts is formed it would be of much help in arriving at a viable 
and unbiased final decision.   The Core Technical Committee would have both the 
responsibility as well as the accountabi lity on record for which they have to stand 
by.  The Committee would like the Ministry to make provision to this effect in the 
Bill.   They also desire that the respective roles of CTC and NCDS  need to be well 
defined.  The Committee also desire that the representation of  the National 

 24 
Institute of Hydrology, the Central Soil and Materials Research Station, Central 
Water and Power Research Station and the National Disaster Management 
Authority in the N ational Committee on Dam Safety be suitably indicated in  the 
Bill.   
V Clause 6 (1) – Meetings of the National Committee on Dam Safety 
2.24 Clause 6 (1) which deals with the meetings of the National Committee on Dam 
Safety reads as follows : 
―(1) The National Committee shall meet at such times and places and sh all 
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its 
meetings (including quorum at such meetings) as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government: 
Provided that the National Committee shall meet at least twice in a year: 
Provided further that the National Committee may invite,— 
(a) the representative of the owner of a specified dam in such meetings where 
his dam is taken up for deliberation; 
(b) such specialists or experts in Dam Safety, as it may consider appropriate, for 
the discharge of its functions.‖ 
 
2.25 Considering the fact that d uring monsoon season, all the dams of India operate 
in full scale, hence incur operational vulnerability and invite attention or detailed 
monitoring of the dam.  Besides, slow compliance in inte r-State data sharing for early 
warning on release of water from dam h as been an issue in the past.  The 
representatives of the Ministry shared the concern of the Committee during evidence. 
2.26 The Committee note that the proposed Bill provides for meeting  of the 
National Committee on Dam Safety to take place at least twice a year.  However, 
keeping in view the operation of the dams during monsoon season and slow 
compliance in inter -State data sharing for early warning on rele ase of water from 

 25 
dams has been an issue in the past, the Committee feel that one meeting of the 
National Committee be held before the onset of monsoon season.  It will also help 
dam owners in making necessary preparations for management of the dams 
during monsoon when maximum water is available at the dam site s.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that provision for such a meeting be made 
accordingly in the Bill. 
 
VI Clause 8 (2) (d) & (e) –Functions of National Committee; and 
 Functions of CDSO  Clause 11(1) (e) 
 
2.27 Clause 8 (2) (d) & (e) which deals with the functions of National Committee reads 
as under : 
―(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the  
 functions of the National Committee shall include,—……. 
(d) to analyse the causes of failures in cases of  major dam failures and suggest 
changes in the plan philosophy, specifications, construction, operation and 
maintenance practices in order to avoid re-occurrence of such failures; 
(e) to evolve comprehensive dam safety management approach as an 
integration of dam safety evaluation, risk assessment and risk management.‖ 
 
2.28 Further, some of the Members desired that the word ‗assurance‘ be added at the 
end of 8 (2) (e).  This will give an impression that the guarantee is given in a way that the 
dam is safe. 
 
2.29 Clause 11 (1) (e) reads as under: 
 
 ―(1) The Central Dam Safety Organisation shall,- 
  (e)  maintain the records of major dam failures in the country.‖  
 
2.30 The Committee note that the word ‗failure‘ connotes a very limited ramification.  
There may be ‗incidents‘ which may occur without failure of the dam and can be 

 26 
controlled through intervention.  The d am incidents , therefore, need to be defined to 
cover or include : 
(a) any structural damage to the dam and appurtenant works; 
(b) any unusual readings of instruments in the dam; 
(c) any unusual leakage through the dam body; 
(d) any change in the leakage regime; 
(e) any boiling or artesian conditions noticed below an earth dam; 
(f) any stoppage or reduction in leakage from the foundations or dam face 
into the drainage gallery, for rigid dams with such a gallery; 
(g) any incidence of malfunctioning or inappropriate operation of gates; 
(h) occurrence of any flood, the peak of which exceeds 70% of the proper or 
necessary design flood, or of the available flood discharge capacity; 
(i) occurrence of a flood, which resulted in encroachment on the available 
freeboard, or the freeboard as necessary as per good design practice; 
(j) any erosion in the near vicinity, up to 1 km., downstream of the spillway, 
waste weir, etc; 
(k) any unusual or surreptitious movement in or around the dam site which 
may raise safety concerns or impinge on the safety and security of the 
dam;  
(l) any other incidence, which, an alert  dam engineer can relate to Dam 
Safety concerns; 
2.31 The Ministry in a written reply accepted  the suggestion for inclusion of ‗incident‘ 
in clauses 8 (2) (d) and 11 (1) (e) of the Bill. 
2.32 The Ministry in a written reply also agreed to include the definition of ‗Dam 
Incident‘ under clause 3 (f). 
2.33 The Committee note that an ‗incident‘ can occur without failure of the dam 
and may have been controlled by timely human intervention.  The inciden t can 

 27 
also lead to failure if not attended to in time.  They , therefore, desire that the word 
‗failure‘ be replaced by ‗incident‘ in Clause 8 (2) (d) and Claus e 11(1) (e).   They 
also desire that the ‗incident‘ also be defined suitably after Clause 3 (f).  The 
Committee further desire that word ‗assurance‘ be suitably incorporated in Clause 
8 (2) (e) after the word s ‗risk assessment and risk management‘ as suggested by 
the Committee elsewhere in this report and suitably defined in the Bill. 
VII Clause 9 – Establishment of Central DSO 
 
Clause 9 provides for establishment of Central DSO which reads as under: 
 
2.34 "The Central Government shall, for the purposes of this Act, by notification, 
establish a separate division under the Ministry of Water Resources, in the 
Central Water Commission, an Organisation to be known as the ―Central Dam 
Safety Organisation‖ to be headed by an officer not below the rank of Chief 
Engineer." 
  
2.35 The Committee observe  that there need s to be quality enrichment in the Dam 
Safety Organsiation, may be, to include some national experts of repute in the field of 
dam construction.  When asked to comment, the Ministry in a written reply stated : 
―The requirement of necessary expertise will be addressed by the CWC/ MoWR 
while constituting the CDSO.‖ 
 
 
VIII Clause 10 – Appointment of Employees of CDSO  
2.36 The Clause 10 deals with the appointment of employees of the Central Dam 
Safety Organisation reads as under : 
―(1) The Central Government shall, for the purpose of enabling the Central Dam 
Safety Organisation to perform its functions under this Act, provide such 
number of officers, and other employees as it may consider necessary. 
 

 28 
(2) The functions, powers and terms and conditions of service of the employees  
appointed under sub -section (1) shall be such as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government.‖ 
 
2.37 The Committee note  that the Bill has not specified expertise required fo r a 
person to be a Member of the Central Dam Safety Organisation  anywhere.  However, 
such requirement of expertise has been pres cribed for the Members of State/Non -State 
Dam Safety Organisations and State/Non State Dam Safety Cells.    Hence, the Bill be 
modified accordingly. 
2.38 The Ministry in a written comment furnished in this regard stated that the 
suggestion is acceptable and accordingly a new Clause may be added under Section 10 
above the Clause 10 (1) as mentioned below : 
―The Central Dam Safety Organisation shal l consist of persons having 
professional qualifications and sufficient experience in the field of safety of dams 
preferably from the areas of dam -designs, hydro -mechanical engineering, 
hydrology, geo-technical investigation and instrumentation or such othe r fields as 
the Central Government may consider appropriate.‖ 
 
2.39 The Committee note that while the expertise required to be a Member of the 
States/Non-States Dam Safety O rganisations/Cell ha s been specified in different 
clauses, the requisite expertise for appointment of the Members of the Central 
Dam Safety Organisation has not been specified.   The Committee recommend 
that a clause/sub -clause specifying the requisite expertise of the Members of 
CDSO be included in the Bill at the appropriate place. 
 
IX Clause 11 (1) (c) and 11 (1) (d) - Functions of Central Dam Safety 
Organisation 
 

 29 
2.40 Clause 11 (1) (c) and 11 (1) (d) which deal  with functions of Central Dam Safety 
Organisation reads as follows : 
―11 (1) The Central Dam Safety Organisation shall,— 
(c) maintain liaison with the State Dam Safety Organisation or the State Dam 
Safety Cell, as the case may be, of each State and the Non -State Dam Safety 
Organisation or Non -State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, of each dam 
owning Organisation for standard isation of dam safety related data and 
practices, and related technical or managerial assistance; 
(d) publish and update from time to time the standardised guidelines and 
checklists or format or proforma for routine inspection and detailed investigations 
of dams and appurtenances.‖ 
 
2.41 The Committee w ere informed that the National Disaster Management 
Authority‘s interim report to Cabinet Secretariat on Crisis Management Plan for Dam 
Safety, prepared on the basis of the deliberations made with the representatives of State 
Governments, has proposed a framework for national level early warning system.  This 
is required for exchange of real time hydrological and meteorological data and operation 
of reservoirs among concerned States.  However, the Bill has no such provision. 
2.42 When asked , the Ministry of Water Resources accepted the suggestion and 
agreed to make suitable modification.  They also informed that for Early Warning System 
the requirement of observations Stations in the catchment area has been take n up in 
Clause 33. 
2.43 The Committee note that the National Disaster Management Authority 's 
interim report to the Cabinet Secretariat on Crisis Management Plan for Dam 
Safety, prepared on the basis of the deliberation s made by representative s of 
State Gov ernments has proposed a framework for national level early warning 
system.  This is required for exchange of real time hydrological and 

 30 
meteorological data and operation of reservoirs by the dam owners .  Keeping in 
view the high utility of the proposed ear ly warning system, the Committee 
recommend that provision in the Bill be made for set ting up of a National Level 
Early Warning System accordingly.  
 
X Clause 28(1) – Construction or operation or alteration of dams  
 
2.44 Clause 28(1) which deals with the construction or operation or alteration of dams 
reads as under : 
―All new specified dams shall be investigated, designed and constructed by the 
organisations recognised for the said purpose.‖ 
 
2.45 The Committee feel that  the organizations which  shall inves tigate, design and 
construct all the new specified dams sh ould be recognized and  or accredited by the 
CDSO or the concerned SDSO for the said purpose.    By recognizing such bodies there 
will be more agencies to choose from who can execute the assigned work efficiently. 
2.46 Accordingly, w hen the Committee desired to know as to which body is doing 
accreditation, the Secretary, MoWR during evidence stated that at the moment there is 
no such body. 
2.47 Another representative of the Ministry during evidence elaborated on the issue 
as under : 
―We are empowering the Central Dam Safety Organisation at the Central Level 
to recognize such bodies which can do investigation, design or construction.‖ 
 
2.48 The Ministry in their comments furnished to the Committee agreed  with the 
suggestions to modify the Clause 28 (1).   

 31 
2.49 It is noticed that there is no mention of the standard s or practices to be used  in 
designing or evaluating the safety of the dams except that the functions of the National 
Committee include ―to moni tor and evaluate dam safety practices in various States and 
suggest improvements to bring dam safety practices in conformity with latest 
international practices consistent with Indian conditions‖.  However, there is need to add 
relevant standard codes and guidelines of the Indian standards to be followed and 
reasons, if any ,  for depart ure be recorded.  It has been observed that the State 
standards are less stringent than the BIS Standards and they do not fo llow the BIS  
standard. 
2.50 The Ministry in a written reply agreed to add a Clause below 28 (2) as under : 
―Every organization referred to in sub -section (1) shall for the purpose of 
designing or evaluating the safety of the dam make use of the relevant standard 
codes and guidelines of the Bureau of India n Standards, and record the reasons 
for departure, if any.‖   
 
 
2.51 The Committee are of the considered view that the ‗accredi tation‘ of all the 
organizations which will investigate, design and construct all specified dams is 
necessary to enable the owner  of the dam to have more agencies to choose for 
the purpose.  The Committee, therefore, desire that ―and or accredited by the 
Central or the State Dam Safety Organization or the State Government‖ be added 
before ―for the said purpose‖ in clause 28 (1). 
2.52 The Committee notice that there is no mention of standards o r practices to 
be followed in designing or evaluating the safety of the dams in the Bill.  The 
Committee are apprehensive that in the absence of prescribed standards, different 

 32 
agencies/State Go vernments would adopt/ follow different standards.   The 
Committee recommend for the inclusion of a new Clause making it mandatory for 
use of the standard codes and guidelines fixed by the Bureau of Indian Standards 
and furnishing of reasons if any departu re is made in the design or dam safety 
evaluation.   
XI Clause 31 (2) – Periodical Inspection 
 Clause 31 (2) reads as under : 
―Without prejudice to sub -section ( 1), every owner of a specified dam shall 
undertake special inspections, of each of his dams to be undertaken by the 
engineers referred to in sub section (1), during and after floods, after earthquake, 
and if any sign of distress or unusual behaviour is noticed in the dam, 
appurtenance or reservoir fringes.‖ 
 
 The clause specifies the special inspect ion of a dam to be done by the 
engineers.  However, competency of the engineer has not been mention ed anywhere 
which is very important for the person authorised to do the inspection. Further, apart 
from earthquake, flood, other natural calamities, etc. can also be the cause of damage to 
dams. 
2.53 The Committee note that clause 31 (2) provides for special inspection of 
dams by the engineer s during or after the flood , earthquake, etc.  However, the 
Committee foresee that there can be other natural calamities  which can damage 
the dam and engineers should also be competent enough t o undertake such 
inspections. They, therefore, recommend that instead of ‗engineers‘, the wor d 
‗competent engineers‘ be added to the clause  and provision also made for special 

 33 
inspection after a natural calamities to detect any possible danger or threat to the 
health or safety of the dam. 
XII Clause 34 (1) & (2) – Installation of seismological stations  
2.54 Clause 34 (1) & (2) which deals with the Installation of seismological station s 
under Chapter VII where provisions for safety, inspection and data collection , reads as 
under : 
―(1) Every owner of a specified dam, in the case of specified dam being of thirty 
meters height or above or specified dam being falling in the seismic zone II I or 
above, shall establish a seismological station in the vicinity of each such dam. 
 
(2) Every owner of specified dam shall collect, compile, process and store data 
referred to in sub-section (1) at a suitable location.‖ 
 
2.55  On the question of reservo ir induced seismicity and the need for establishing 
seismological station in the vicinity of certain type of dams, a nother expert opined as 
follows : 
―Even though the term ‗Reservoir Induced Seismicity‘ is often used by 
seismologists, seismic activity of a  very low magnitude was seen to be 
associated with very few dams in our country. Secondly, association / link 
between creation of storage reservoir and seismicity around them was not 
established for reservoirs such as Koyna dam (1967), Bhatsa dam (1983) & 
Lower Terna dam ( Killari earthquake -1993) occurred in the Maharashtra State. 
In the vicinity of several very large dams constructed during the last century in 
our country, seismic activity was not noticed after impoundment of water in them.  
 
Hence making it obligatory to establish a seismological station in the vicinity of all 
specified dams falling in zone III and at all dams above 30 m . height, appears to 
be unscientific and unwarranted.‖ 
 
 The Ministry in its written comments furnished to the Committee , welcomed the 
suggestion.    

 34 
2.56 The Committee note that the Government ha s accepted the  suggestion 
partly and, therefore, they recommend the Ministry of Water Resources  to modify 
the Clause 34 (1) by adding ‗recording Micro and Strong Motion Earthquak es‘ at 
the end of Clause 34 (1).   The Committee would also urge the Ministry to 
reconsider the concern of experts as to the need for establishment of 
seismological station s in the vicinity of all the specified dams falling in Zone III 
and at all dams above 30 m. height while reformulating the Bill. 
 
(XIII) Clause 37 (1) – Obligation for Comprehensive Dam Safety Evaluation 
 
 
2.57 Clause 37 (1) on Comprehensive Dam Safety Evaluation, reads as under : 
―The State Dam Safety Organisation or the State Dam Safety  Cell, as the case 
may be, or the concerned Non -State Dam Safety Organisation or the Non -State 
Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, shall, at least once in ten years, arrange 
for comprehensive safety evaluation of every specified dam falling under their 
control either through their own engineers or by an independent panel of experts 
for the purpose of determining the conditions of the specified dam and reservoir.  
 
 Provided that the first comprehensive safety evaluation for each existing 
specified dam shall be conducted within five years after the coming into force of 
this Act.‖ 
 
2.58 The Bill provides for Dam Safety Evaluation after a gap of certain period either 
through their own engineers or by an independent panel of experts. 
2.59 In response to the sug gestion of the Committee to remove the word ―either 
through their own engineers or‖ from the Bill, the Ministry in a written reply stated that 
the provision in the Bill concerning the issue has been framed judiciously and as such no 
change may be required in the clause. 

 35 
2.60 The Committee note that the Bill provides for Comprehensive Dam Safety 
Evaluation of each dam by the owner of the dam either through their own 
engineers or by an independent panel of experts.  The Committee feel that any 
Member who is i n any way directly or indirectly connected with the maintenance 
or ownership of the dam at any stage should not be associated with the evaluation 
of the dam safety.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the word ―eith er 
through their own engineer or ‖ b e deleted from the clause . It may also be 
provided that as far as possible the majority of the experts should be in the 
service of State or the Union Government. 
 
XIV Clause 42 (1) – Measures for Safety of Dams located outside the territory of 
India 
 
2.61 Clause 42(1) provides for the m easure to be taken for safety of dams located 
outside the territory of India,  reads as under : 
―Where a dam  is located outside the territory of India and the Central Dam 
Safety Organisation suo motu or on receipt of informa tion from any person or 
organisation or authority or source prima facie is of the opinion that measures 
are required to be taken to ensure safety of such dams and failure of which may 
endanger the life and property of people located in India, it shall in w riting submit 
an intimation thereof to the Central Government indicating therein the likely 
damages which may arise due to failure of such dams and the safety measures 
required to be taken in respect of such dam.‖  
  
2.62 Keeping in view the past experienc e of floods caused in parts of India due to 
failure of dam/barrage located in Nepal, one of the expert suggested that the ‗dam‘ 
referred to at the beginning of this clause should include ―a dam created due to 
landslide/glacial flow of debris, etc.‖   In the view of the experts i t was essential as the 

 36 
other country may not be able to consider the damage/safety of the other country due to 
various reasons. 
2.63 The Ministry while furnishing its comments stated that the suggestion is 
acceptable and can be inclu ded in the Bill.  The Secretary, MoWR during e  vidence 
further elaborated as under : 
―If a dam is being constructed in the neighbouring country, then we have to see 
that it is not going to affect us badly.  Glaciers leave debris causing landslide that 
leads to blockage of water.  Considering these things we are putting this 
amendment.‖ 
 
2.64 The Committee are in agreement with the suggestion which is also 
acceptable to the Ministry for further elaboration of ‗dam‘ safety measures under 
Clause 42 (1) so as to include the dams created in the neighbouring countries due 
to landslide or glacial flow of debris which may endanger the life and property in 
India.  They, therefore, recommend that the necessary modifications be carried 
out accordingly in the Bill.  
2.65 After taking into account the suggestions and considered views of the 
experts, written as well as oral, the Committee recommend consideration of 
certain further additions and alteration in various clauses of the Bill so as to make 
it more broad based and to remove ambiguities as follows : 
(i) In Clause 3 (c), sub clause (vi) be amended to read as "(v) other 
associated structures acting integrally with dam body including the 
reservoir and its rim ." sub-clause (ii) deleted and the subsequent sub -
clauses renumbered accordingly. 
 
(ii) In clause 3(e) the following explanation be added : 
 
"For the purpose of this clause, dam includes barrage, weir and similar 
water impounding structures but excludes :- 

 37 
 
(a) water conveyance structures such as canal , aqueduct and 
navigation channel. 
(b) flow regulation structures such as flood embankment, dike and guide 
bund". 
 
(iii) In clause 3(f) the following explanation be added at the end of the 
sentence : 
  
"and the environment including fauna,  flora and riverine ecology.  
The term Environment may also be defined in the Bill." 
  
(iv)  Clause 3(h) be amended to read as : 
 
―documentation‖ shall mean all permanent records concerning 
investigation, design, construction, operation, performance, maintenance, 
major repair (if any), altera tion (if any), enlargement (if any)  and 
safety of dams and includes design memorandum, construction 
drawings, geological reports, reports of 33 s pecialized studies simulating 
structural and hydraulic response of the dam, changes made in design 
and drawings, quality control records, emergency action plan, operation 
and maintenance manual, instrumentation readings, inspection and 
testing reports, operational reports, and dam safety review reports;" 
 
(v) Clause 3(j) be amended to read as : 
 
―inspection‖ shall mean visual examination of all components of dam and 
its appurtenances and includes examination of non -overflow blocks, 
spillways, abutments, stilling basin, piers, bridge, downstream toe, 
drainage galleries, operation of mechanical systems (including gates 
and its components, drive units, cranes) , interior of outlet conduits, 
instrumentation records and record -keeping arrangements of 
instruments" 
 
(vi) In Clause 8(2)(d) the word s "re –occurrence" may be amended as          
"re-currence". 
 
(vii) Clause 8(3) be amended to read as : 
 
The knowledge and information collected or generated by the National 
Committee on Dam Safety shall be disseminated by the Central Dam 
Safety Organisation to all State Dam Safety Organisations or State Dam 

 38 
Safety Cells, as the case  may be, and Non -State Dam Safety 
Organisations or Non -State Dam Safety Cells, as the case may be, for 
the purposes of  enhancing awareness  and achieving uniform 
standards in dam safety practices. 
 
(viii) Clauses 15 (2), 16 (2), 17 (3), 18 (3), 46 (2) (b) & (c), 47 (2) (a) &  (b)  be 
amended to read as : 
 
The words ‘constitution and functions’ be replaced by ‘organisational 
structure and work procedures’. 
 
(ix) Clauses 16 and 18 be deleted. 
 
 
(x) In Clause 31 (3) (a) the words "in accordance with the"  be added after 
sub-section (2) and before checklist  
 
 
(xi) In Clause 35 (2) the following amendments be incorporated : 
 
"(a) The risk assessment studies must be carried out at suitable interval 
between five and ten years.  It is felt that period of 20 years for  the risk 
assessment studies is too long. 
 
(b) Emergency action plan is very important and therefore, this needs to be 
prepared within two years." 
 
 
(xii) In Clause 37 (3) (b) the following explanation be added : 
 
"Instead of ‗more than 15 meters or storag e capacity more than 60 Mcum‘, it 
may be ‗more than 30 meters or storage capacity more than 60 Mcum‘." 
 
 
 (xiii) Clause 39 (1) be amended to read as : 
  
" The State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case 
may be, shall report the resu lts of the comprehensive safety evaluation 
undertaken under section 37 or 38, directly to the State Committee on Dam 
Safety." 
 
 
(xiv) In Clause 43 necessary provisions be incorporated in th e Bill for the officials, 
workers etc to have rights to enter into the forest and wild life sanctuary area 
for dam maintenance. Many dams are located in the forest area. To carry out 

 39 
dam safety maintenance and rehabilitation measures in the dam site, men, 
materials and machinery are to be taken to the dam site through forest area.  
 
 
(xv) In Clause 47 power to make regulations should rest with  the National 
Committee and not with Central DSO. 
 
 
(xvi) In Clause 48 (1) the restriction of period for two years is not required.  Any 
changes required to be modified in this Act wh ile implementation be carried out 
then and there without any time frame.   
 
 Subject to the aforementioned recommendations and observations, the 
Committee recommend that the Bill be passed. 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                DIP GOGOI,  
02 June, 2011                                                                        Chairman,  
12 Jyaistha, 1933(Saka)                      Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
 
         Annexure - I 
 
LIST OF STATE GOVERNMENTS/EXPERTS/INDIVIDUALS WHO HAVE GIVEN 
SUGGESTIONS/COMMENTS ON ‗THE DAM SAFETY BILL, 2010‘ 
 
 
STATE GOVERNMENT 
 
Government of Gujarat 
Government of Tamil Nadu 
Government of Bihar 
 
EXPERTS AND OTHERS 
 
 Dr. M.A. Chitale, Former Secretary, MoWR 
 Shri C.D. Thatte, Former Secretary, MoWR and former   Chairman, CWC 
Shri M.S. Reddy, Former Secretary, MoWR and former Chairman, CWC 
Shri Z. Hassan, Former Secretary, MoWR and former Chairman, CWC 
Shri A.D. Mohile, Former Chairman, CWC 

 40 
Shri S.K. Das, Former Chairman, CWC 
Shri S.K. Sengupta, Retd. Chief Engineer, Dam Safety Organisation, CWC 
Shri S.C. Sinha, Retd. Chief Engineer 
Dr. R.S. Varshney, Retd. Secretary General, ICID 
Shri M.S. Billore , Former Secretary (Irrigation)  and Advisor, Government of Madhya 
Pradesh 
Shri V.M. Ranade, Former Secretary (Irrigation), Government of Maharashtra 
Dr. B.S. Nadagoudar, Former Director of Extension Education, University of Agricultural 
Sciences, Karnataka 
 
Prof. M. Pandu Ranga Rao, Ph.D. Retd. Professor of Engineering Geology, NIT, AP. 
Shri S.P.Y. Reddy, MP (Lok Sabha) 
Dr. Binoy Kumar Das 
Shri C.S. Parthasarathy 
Shri V.D. Suresh 
Shri S.R. Rengan 
Shri A.K. Balakrishnan 
Shri Raj Kachroo 
 
ANNEXURE – II 
 
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 30 AUGUST 2010 
 
THE DAM SAFETY BILL, 2010 
———— 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
 
———— 
 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Application of Act. 
3. Definitions. 
 
CHAPTER II 
NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON DAM SAFETY 
 
4. Constitution of National Committee. 
5. Tenure of specialists or experts as Members of National Committee. 

 41 
6. Meetings. 
7. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the National Committee. 
8. Functions of National Committee. 
 
CHAPTER III 
CENTRAL DAM SAFETY ORGANISATION 
 
9. Establishment of Central Dam Safety Organisation. 
10. Appointment of employees. 
11. Functions of Central Dam Safety Organisation. 
 
CHAPTER IV 
STATE COMMITTEE ON DAM SAFETY 
 
12. State Committee on Dam Safety. 
13. Functions of State Committee. 
14. Functions of State Committee to be discharged by National Committee in certain cases. 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
STATE DAM SAFETY ORGANISATION, STATE DAM SAFETY CELL, NON-STATE DAM 
SAFETY ORGANISATION AND NON-STATE DAM SAFETY CELL 
 
A. State Dam Safety Organisation 
 
15. Establishment of State Dam Safety Organisation. 
 
B. State Dam Safety Cell 
 
16. Establishment of the State Dam Safety Cell in certain cases. 
 
C. Non-State Dam Safety Organisation 
 
17. Establishment of Non-State Dam Safety Organisation. 
 
D. Non-State Dam Safety Cell 
 
18. Establishment of Non-State Dam Safety Cell. 
 
CHAPTER VI 
DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS IN RELATION TO SAFETY OF DAMS 
 
19. Surveillance and inspection. 
20. Maintenance of Log Books. 
21. Instructions on safety of specified dams. 
22. Funds for maintenance and repairs. 
23. Technical documentation. 
24. Reporting. 

 42 
25. Individual responsible for safety of specified dams to be qualified. 
26. Jurisdiction of State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell and Central Dam  
Safety Organisation. 
27. Cost of investigation to be borne by dam owner. 
28. Construction or operation or alteration of dams. 
29. Initial filling of reservoirs. 
30. Responsibility of dam owner. 
CHAPTER VII 
SAFETY, INSPECTION AND DATA COLLECTION 
 
31. Periodical inspection. 
32. Instrumentations to be installed in every specified dam. 
33. Establishment of hydro-meteorological station. 
34. Installations of seismological station. 
 
CHAPTER VIII 
EMERGENCY ACTION PLAN AND DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
 
35. Obligation for emergency action plan and disaster management. 
36. Assistance to other disaster management authorities. 
 
CHAPTER IX 
COMPREHENSIVE DAM SAFETY EVALUATION 
 
37. Obligation for comprehensive dam safety evaluation. 
38. Compulsory evaluation in certain cases. 
39. Reports of comprehensive evaluation. 
 
CHAPTER X 
MISCELLANEOUS 
 
40. Annual report of safety status of dams. 
41. Safety measures in respect of dams other than specified dams. 
42. Measures of safety of dams located outside territory of India. 
43. Effect of Act on other laws. 
44. Power of Central Government to give directions. 
45. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
46. Power of State Government to make rules. 
47. Power to make regulations. 
48. Power to remove difficulties. 
49. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament and State Legislature. 
 
 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
 
Bill No. 108 of 2010 
 
THE DAM SAFETY BILL, 2010 

 43 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
to provide for proper surveillance, inspection, operation and maintenance of all dams of  certain 
parameters in India to ensure their safe functioning and for matters connected  therewith or 
incidental thereto. 
 
WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for uniform  dam safety procedure which shall  
ensure national investment and benefits by safeguarding human life, livestock and property; 
 
AND WHEREAS Parliament has no power to make laws for the States with respect to 
any of the matters aforesaid except as provided in articles 249 and 250 of the Constitution; 
 
AND WHEREAS in pursuance of clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution, 
resolutions have been passed by all the Houses of Legislatures of the States of Andhra 
Pradesh and West Bengal to the effect that the ma tters aforesaid should be regulated in those 
States by law made by the Parliament; 
 
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
PRELIMINARY 
 
 
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Dam Safety Act, 2010. 
(2) It shall come into force in the States of Andhra Pradesh, 
West Bengal and in all the Union territories, on such date as 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint and in any other  State, which adopts this 
Act under clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution, on the 
date of such adoption; and any reference in this Act to the 
commencement of this Act shall, in relation to any State or 
Union territory, means the date on which this Act comes into 
force in such State or Union territory. 
 
 
 2. The provisions of this Act applies,— 
(a) in the first instance, to the whole of the States of Andhra 
Pradesh, West Bengal and to all the Union territories; and it 
shall also apply to such other State which adopts this Act by 
resolution passed in that behalf under clause (1) of article 
252 of the Constitution; 
(b) to every owner of a specified dam, being public sector 
undertaking or institution or a body owned or controlled by 
the Central Governme nt or the State Government, as the 
Application of 
Act. 
 

 44 
case may be, to which this Act shall apply as per sub -clause 
(a); 
(c) to every owner of a specified dam, being undertaking or 
company or institution or a body other than those owned or 
controlled by the State Government o r the Central 
Government, as the case may be. 
 
 3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) ―alteration of dam‖ means only such alterations or repairs 
as may directly affect the safety of the dam or reservoir; 
(b) ―ann ual report‖ shall mean a report giving therein the 
activities of the organisation or cell concerned and the safety 
status of the specified dams falling under their control or 
jurisdiction during each financial year; 
(c) ―appurtenant work‖ means the structures being,— 
(i) spillways, either in the dam or separate therefrom; 
(ii) reservoir and its rim; 
(iii) low level outlet works and water conduits such as 
tunnels, pipelines 
or penstocks, either through the dam or its abutments or 
reservoir rim; 
(iv) hydro -mechanical equipments including gate, valve, 
hoist, elevators; 
(v) energy dissipation and river training works; and 
(vi) other associated structures acting integrally with dam 
body; 
(d) ―Central Dam Safety Organisation‖ means the 
Organisation established under section 9; 
(e) ―dam‖ means any artificial barrier including appurtenant 
works constructed across rivers or tributaries thereof with a 
view to impound or divert water; 
(f) ―dam failure‖ shall mean such failures in the structures or 
operation of a dam whi ch may lead to uncontrolled release 
of impounded water resulting in downstream flooding 
affecting the life and property of the people; 
(g) ―distress condition‖ shall mean the occurrence or 
potential development of such conditions in the dam or 
appurtenance or its reservoir or reservoir rim, which if left 
unattended to, may impede the safe operation of dam for its 
intended benefits or may pose unacceptable risks to the life 
and property of people downstream; 
(h) ―documentation‖ shall mean all permanent recor ds 
concerning investigation, design, construction, operation, 
performance, maintenance and safety of dams and includes 
design memorandum, construction drawings, geological 
reports, reports of specialised studies simulating structural 
and hydraulic response of the dam, changes made in design 
and drawings, quality control records, emergency action 
Definitions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 45 
plan, operation and maintenance manual, instrumentation 
readings, inspection and testing reports, operational reports, 
and dam safety review reports; 
(i) ―enlargement of dam‖ means any change in the scope of 
an existing dam or reservoir, which raises water storage 
elevation or increases the volume of water impounded by 
the dam; 
(j) ―inspection‖ shall mean visual examination of all 
components of dam and its appurtenan ces and includes 
examination of non -overflow blocks, spillways, abutments, 
stilling basin, piers, bridge, downstream toe, drainage 
galleries, operation of mechanical systems, interior of outlet 
conduits, instrumentation records and record -keeping 
arrangements of instruments; 
(k) ―investigation‖ shall mean detailed examination, analysis 
or scrutiny of a specific problem pertaining to the dam and 
its appurtenances or a part thereof, and includes laboratory 
testing, in situ testing, geological exploration, mod el testing 
and mathematical simulation of the problem; 
(l) ―National Committee‖ means the National Committee on 
Dam Safety 
constituted under section 4; 
(m) ―New specified dam‖ means,— 
(a) a specified dam which is constructed after the 
commencement of this Act; 
(b) a dam not being a specified dam existing on or before 
such 
commencement and whose height is increased or altered or 
modified on or after such commencement so as to fall within 
the definition of specified dam under this Act; 
(n) ―Non-State Dam Safety Cell‖ means the Dam Safety Cell 
established under section 18; 
(o) ―Non -State Dam Safety Organisation‖ means the Dam 
Safety Organisation established under section 17; 
(p) ―notification‖ means a notification published in the Official 
Gazette; 
(q) ―owner o f dam‖ means the Central Government or a 
State Government or public sector undertaking or local 
authority or company and any or all of such persons or 
organisations, who own, control, operate, or maintain a 
specified dam; 
(r) ―prescribed‖ means prescribed by rules made by the 
Central Government or, as the case may be, by the State 
Government under this Act; 
(s) ―public sector undertaking‖ means,— 
(i) a Government company as defined in section 617 of the 
Companies 
Act, 1956; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 of 1956. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 46 
(ii) a corporation (including a c o-operative society) 
established by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act, 
which is owned, controlled or managed by the Government; 
(t) ―regulations‖ means the regulations made by the Central 
Dam Safety Organisation under this Act; 
(u) ―remedial meas ures‖ shall mean such structural or non -
structural measures, which may be required in relation to the 
dam or appurtenance or reservoir or reservoir rim or 
catchment area of reservoir, for the purpose of removing or 
reducing the distress condition of the dam; 
(v) ―Reservoir‖ shall mean any water spread which contains 
impounded water; 
(w) ―specified dam‖ means a large dam which is,— 
(i) above fifteen meters in height, measured from the lowest 
portion of the general foundation area to the crest; or 
(ii) betwee n ten meters to fifteen metres in height and 
satisfies at least one of the following, namely:— 
(A) the length of crest is not less than five hundred metres; 
or 
(B) the capacity of the reservoir formed by the dam is not 
less than 
one million cubic metres; or 
(C) the maximum flood discharge dealt with by the dam is 
not less 
than two thousand cubic metres per second; or 
(D) the dam has specially difficult foundation problems; or 
(E) the dam is of unusual design; 
(x) ―State‖ means the State to which the provisi ons of this 
Act applies in 
accordance with the provisions of sub -section (2) of section 
1; 
(y) ―State Committee‖ means the State Committee on Dam 
Safety constituted under sub-section (1) of section 12; 
(z) ―State Dam Safety Cell‖ means the State Dam Safety  
Cell constituted under section 16; 
(za) ―State Dam Safety Organisation‖ means the State Dam 
Safety Organisation constituted under section 15. 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON DAM SAFETY 
 
Constitution 
of National 
Committee. 
 
4. With effect from such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification, appoint,  there shall be constituted, for 
the purposes of this Act, a National Committee to be known 
as the ―National Committee on Dam Safety‖ consisting of the 
following members, namely:— 
(a) Chairman, Central Water Commission – ex officio, 
 

 47 
Chairperson; 
(b) Member, Design and Research Wing, Central Water 
Commission — ex officio, Vice- Chairperson; 
(c) Member (Hydro), Central Electricity Authority —ex officio, 
Member; 
(d) Commissioner (Projects), Ministry of Water Resource – 
ex officio, Member; 
(e) Director General, Geological Survey of India – ex officio, 
Member; 
(f) Director General, Indian Meteorological  Department – ex 
officio, Member; 
(g) Scientist E, Ministry of Environment and Forests — ex 
officio, Member; 
(h) Engineer -in-Chief or equivalent officer of Irrigation 
Department of States  having specified dams – ex officio, 
Members; 
(i) Engineer -in-Chief o r equivalent Officer of other Dam 
owning Organisations  with specified dams — ex officio, 
Members; 
(j) Specialists or experts in the field of dam safety to be 
nominated by the Central Government—Members; and 
(k) Chief Engineer, Central Dam Safety Organisation, Central 
Water Commission—ex officio, Member Secretary. 
 
 
 5. The tenure of specialists or experts as Members of 
National Committee shall be valid  for a period of three years 
from the date of notification issued under that section. 
 
Tenure of 
specialists or 
experts as 
Members of 
National 
Committee. 
 
 6. (1) The National Committee shall meet at such times and 
places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to 
the transaction of business at its meetings (including  quorum 
at such meetings) as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government: 
Provided that the National Committee shall meet at least 
twice in a year: 
Provided further that the National Committee may invite,— 
(a) the representative of the owner of a specified dam in such 
meetings where his dam is taken up for deliberation; 
(b) such specialists or experts in Dam Safety, as it may 
consider appropriate, for the discharge of its functions. 
(2) The Chairperson or, if for any reason, is unable to attend 
a meeting of the Committee,  the Vice -Chairperson shall 
preside at the meeting. 
(3) The expenditure incurred (including the travelling 
Meetings. 
 

 48 
allowance, dearness allowance  and other incidental 
expenses) to attend the meeting by the Members, referred to 
in clauses 
(a) to ( h) and ( j) of section 4, shall be  borne by their 
concerned controlling authorities. 
(4) The specialists or experts referred to in clause ( i) of 
section 4 and specialists or  experts invitees referred to in 
clause (b) of second proviso to sub -section (1) to attend the  
meetings shall be paid  such fees and allowances as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. 
(5) All questions which come up before any meeting of the 
National Committee shall be decided by a majority of votes of 
the members present and voting, and, in the event of an  
equality of votes, the Chairperson, or in his absence, the 
Vice-Chairperson, shall have a second or casting vote. 
 
Vacancies, 
etc., not to 
invalidate 
proceedings 
of the 
National 
Committee. 
7. No act or proceeding of the National Committee shall be 
invalid merely by reason of— 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in, the constitution of the 
National Committee; or 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a 
Member of the National Committee; or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Nati onal 
Committee not affecting the merits of the case. 
 
 
Functions of 
National 
Committee. 
 
8. (1) The National Committee shall discharge such functions 
as may be necessary to  ensure proper surveillance, 
inspection, operation and maintenance of all specified  dams 
in the country and ensure their safe functioning. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -
section ( 1), the functions of  the National Committee shall 
include,— 
(a) to monitor broadly the functioning of State Dam Safety 
Organisations o r State Dam Safety Cells, as the case may 
be, and Non -State Dam Safety Organisations  or Non -State 
Dam Safety Cells, as the case may be; 
(b) to monitor and evaluate dam safety practices in various 
States and suggest  improvements to bring dam safety 
practices in conformity with latest international  practices 
consistent with Indian conditions; 
(c) to act as a forum for exchange of views on techniques to 
be adopted for  remedial measures to relieve distress 
conditions in dams and appurtenances; 
(d) to analyse th e causes of failures in cases of major dam 
failures and suggest  changes in the plan philosophy, 
specifications, construction, operation and maintenance  
practices in order to avoid re-occurrence of such failures; 
(e) to evolve comprehensive dam safety manag ement 
 

 49 
approach as an integration  of dam safety evaluation, risk 
assessment and risk management; and 
(f) to render advise on any specific matter relating to safety of 
dams which may be referred to it by the Central Government 
or the State Government, as the case may be. 
(3) The knowledge and information collected or generated by 
the National Committee  on Dam Safety shall be 
disseminated by the Central Dam Safety Organisation to all 
State Dam Safety Organisations or State Dam Safety Cells, 
as the case may be, and Non-State Dam 
Safety Organisations or Non -State Dam Safety Cells, as the 
case may be, for the purposes of  achieving uniform 
standards in dam safety practices. 
(4) The Central Dam Safety Organisation shall act as 
Secretariat of the National  Committee f or the purpose of 
discharging its functions under this Act. 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
CENTRAL DAM SAFETY ORGANISATION 
 
Establishment 
of Central 
Dam Safety 
Organisation. 
 
9. The Central Government shall, for the purposes of this Act, 
by notification, establish a separate division under the Ministry 
of Water Resources, in the Central Water Commission,  an 
Organisation to be known as the ―Central Dam Safety 
Organisation‖ to be headed by an  officer not below the rank of 
Chief Engineer. 
 
 
Appointment 
of employees. 
 
10. (1) The Central Government shall, for the purpose of 
enabling the Central Dam  Safety Organisation to perform its 
functions under this Act, provide such number of officers,  and 
other employees as it may consider necessary. 
(2) The functions, powers and terms  and conditions of service 
of the employees  appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
such as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
 
 
Functions of 
Central Dam 
Safety 
Organisation. 
 
11. (1) The Central Dam Safety Organisation shall,— 
(a) provide the state-of-the-art technical and managerial 
assistance to the State Dam Safety Organisations or the State 
Dam Safety Cells, as the case may be, and to the  Non-State 
Dam Safety Organisations or the Non -State Dam Safety Cells, 
as the case may be; 
(b) maintain a national level data -base of all specified dams in 
the country,  including distress conditions, if any, noticed 
therein; 
(c) maintain liaison with the State Dam Safety Organisation or 
the State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, of each State 
 

 50 
and the Non -State Dam Safety Organisation  or Non -State 
Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, of each dam owning 
Organisation for standardisation of dam safety related data 
and practices, and related technical or managerial assistance; 
(d) publish and update from time to time the standardised 
guidelines and checklists  or format or proforma for routine 
inspection and detailed investigations of dams  and 
appurtenances; 
(e) maintain the records of major dam failures in the country; 
(f) examine wheresoever a need is felt, ei ther through its own 
engineers or through  a panel of experts, the cause of any 
major dam failure, and submit its report to the  National 
Committee; 
(g) examine whenever required, either through its own 
engineers or through a  panel of experts, the cause of a ny 
major public safety concern in respect of any  specified dam, 
and issue appropriate instructions on further investigations, 
operational parameters or remedial measures; and 
(h) look into the unresolved points of issue between the State 
Dam Safety  Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the 
case may be, of two States, or between  the State Dam Safety 
Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, of 
a State and the Non -State Dam Safety Organisation or the 
Non-State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, of a owner of 
dam, for a proper solution. 
(2) All decisions of the Central Dam Safety Organisation in 
matters referred to in clause  (h) of sub -section ( 1) shall be 
final and binding. 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
STATE COMMITTEE ON DAM SAFETY 
 
 12. (1) With eff ect from such date as the State Government 
may, by notification appoint, there shall be constituted, for the 
purposes of this Act, a States Committee by the State  
Government to be known as the ―State Committee on Dam 
Safety‖: 
Provided that the States in wh ich the numbers of specified 
dam are twenty or less than  twenty, such State may not 
constitute State Committee under this Act. 
(2) The State Committee on Dam Safety shall consist of a 
Chairperson and such  number of Members as may be 
determined by the State Government. 
(3) The terms and conditions subject to which the 
Chairperson and Members of the  State Committee may be 
appointed and the time, place of the meetings of the State 
State 
Committee 
on Dam 
Safety. 
 

 51 
Committee and procedure in regard to the transaction of 
business at these meetin gs shall be such as  may be 
prescribed by the State Government. 
Functions of 
State 
Committee. 
 
13. (1) The State Committee shall discharge such functions 
as may be necessary to  ensure proper surveillance, 
inspection, operation and maintenance of all specified dams 
in that State and ensure their safe functioning. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -
section (1), the functions of the State Committee shall include 
to,— 
(a) review the work done by the State Da m Safety 
Organisation; 
(b) recommend the appropriate measures to be taken in 
relation to the safety of  specified dam which is under distress 
condition; 
(c) review the progress on measures recommended in 
relation to dam safety; 
(d) establish priorities for investigations undertaken under 
sub-section (2) of section 19; 
(e) in cases where investigations with respect to safety of any 
specified dam in  the State had already been undertaken, to 
order further investigations in relation to  safety of such 
specified d am and assign responsibilities for execution 
including the  use of non -departmental resources, and need 
for the association of independent experts  with next phase of 
such investigations; 
(f) establish priorities among projects requiring remedial 
safety works; and 
(g) keep the State Government informed of its activities and 
recommendations. 
 
 
 14. In States where State Dam Safety Committee are not 
constituted and in all cases of  Central undertakings and 
private entities or bodies, the periodical reviews of t he works 
or progress or prioritisation by the concerned State Dam 
Safety Organisation or State Dam  Safety Cell and the Non -
State Dam Safety Organisation or the Non -State Dam Safety 
Cell shall be undertaken by the National Committee on Dam 
Safety through the Central Dam Safety Organisation. 
 
Functions of 
State 
Committee to 
be 
discharged 
by National 
Committee in 
certain 
cases. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
STATE DAM SAFETY ORGANISATION, STATE DAM SAFETY CELL, NON-STATE DAM 
SAFETY 
ORGANISATION AND NON-STATE DAM SAFETY CELL 

 52 
 
A. State Dam Safety Organisation 
 
 15. (1) Every State, having more than twenty numbers of 
specified dams owned by it,  shall establish in its Water 
Resources Department or Irrigation Department or Public 
Works Department or a department dealing with the ma tter 
relating to water resources, a separate  Organisation, to be 
known as the ―State Dam Safety Organisation‖ headed by an 
officer not below the rank of Chief Engineer or equivalent. 
(2) The constitution and functions of the State Dam Safety 
Organisation shall be such as may be prescribed by the State 
Government. 
(3) The State Dam Safety Organisation shall consist of the 
persons having professional  qualifications and sufficient 
experience in the field of safety of dams preferably from the  
areas of dam -designs, hydro -mechanical engineering , 
hydrology, geo -technical investigation  and instrumentation or 
such other field as the State Government may consider 
appropriate. 
(4) The State Government shall, having regard to the number 
of specified dams in that  State, provide such number of 
officers and employees to the State Dam Safety Organisation  
constituted by it for the efficient and effective functioning of the 
said Organisation. 
(5) The administrative and other expenses of the State Dam 
Safety Organisation shall  be borne by the concerned State 
Government. 
 
Establishment 
of State Dam 
Safety 
Organisation. 
 
 
B. State Dam Safety Cell 
 
Establishment 
of the State 
Dam Safety 
Cell in certain 
cases. 
 
16. (1) Every State, having twenty or less than twenty 
numbers of speci fied dams owned by it, shall establish in its 
Water Resources Department or Irrigation Department or  
Public Works Department or a department dealing with the 
matter relating to water resources,  a separate Cell, to be 
known as the ―State Dam Safety Cell‖ headed by an officer not 
below the rank of Superintendent Engineer or its equivalent. 
(2) The constitution and functions of the State Dam Safety Cell 
shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government. 
(3) The State Dam Safety Cell shall consist of t he persons 
having professional qualifications and sufficient experience in 
the field of safety of dams preferably from the  areas of dam -
designs, hydro -mechanical engineering, hydrology, geo -
technical investigation and instrumentation or such other field 
as the State Government may consider appropriate. 
(4) The State Government shall, having regard to the number 
 

 53 
of dams in that State,  provide such number of officers and 
employees to the State Dam Safety Cell constituted by  it for 
the efficient and effective functioning of the said Cell. 
(5) The administrative and other expenses of the State Dam 
Safety Cell shall be borne  by the concerned State 
Government. 
 
 
C. Non-State Dam Safety Organisation 
 
 17. (1) Every dam owner (other than the Central or State 
Governments) having more  than ten numbers of specified 
dams owned by it, shall establish a body called ―Non -State 
Dam Safety Organisation‖ headed by an officer not below the 
rank of Chief Engineer or its equivalent. 
(2) The Non -State Dam Safety Organisation sha ll consist of 
the persons having  professional qualifications and sufficient 
experience in the field of safety of dams preferably  from the 
areas of dam -designs, hydro -mechanical engineering, 
hydrology, geo -technical investigation and instrumentation or 
such other field as the dam owner may consider 
appropriate. 
(3) In the case of owner of a specified dam, being the public 
sector undertakings or institution or company or a body owned 
or controlled by,— 
(a) the Central Government; or 
(b) the Central Government and the State Government; or 
(c) any undertakings or institution or a body owned or 
controlled by the Central  Government or the State 
Government; or 
(d) entities or bodies not falling in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or 
clause (c) [excluding specified dams referred to in sub -section 
(4)], the constitution and functions of the Non -State Dam 
Safety Organisation shall be such as  may be specified by 
regulations made by the Central Dam Safety Organisation. 
(4) In the case of owner of a specified dam being the public  
sector undertakings or  institution or a body owned or 
controlled by the State Government or the undertakings or  
institution or a body owned or controlled by it or both, the 
constitution and functions of the  Non-State Dam Safety 
Organisation shall be such as may be specified by the State  
Government. 
 
Establishment 
of Non-State 
Dam Safety 
Organisation. 
 
 
D. Non-State Dam Safety Cell 
 
Establishment 
of Non-State 
18. (1) Every owner of a specified dam (other than Central or 
State Governments) , having ten or less than ten number of 
 

 54 
Dam Safety 
Cell. 
 
specified dams owned by it, shall establish a body  called 
―Non-State Dam Safety Cell‖ headed by an officer not below 
the rank of Superintendent Engineer or equivalent. 
(2) The Non -State Dam Safety Cell shall consist of the 
persons having professional  qualifications and sufficient 
experience in the field of safety of dams preferably from the  
areas of dam -designs, hydro -mechanical engineering, 
hydrology, geo -technical investigation  and instrumentation or 
such other field as the dam owner may consider it appropriate. 
 
(3) In the case of owner of a specified dam, being the public 
sector undertakings or  institution or a company or a body 
owned or controlled by,— 
(a) the Central Government; or 
(b) the Central Government and the State Government; or 
(c) any undertakings or institution or a body owned or 
controlled by the Central Government or State Government; or 
(d) entities or bodies not falling in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or 
clause (c) [excluding specified dams referred to in sub-section 
(4)], the constitution and functions of the Non -State Dam 
Safety Cell shall be such as may be  specified by regulations 
made by the Central Dam Safety Organisation. 
(4) In the case of owner of a specified dam being the public 
sector undertaki ngs or  institution or a body owned or 
controlled by the State Government or the undertakings or  
institution or a body owned or controlled by it or both, the 
constitution and functions of  the Non -State Dam Safety Cell 
shall be such as may be specified by the State Government. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER VI 
 
DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS IN RELATION TO SAFETY OF DAMS 
 
 19. (1) Every State Dam Safety Organisation, State Dam 
Safety Cell, Non -State Dam Safety Organisation and Non -
State Dam Safety Cell shall, — 
(a) keep perpetual surveillance; 
(b) carry out routine inspections; 
(c) monitor the operation and maintenance, 
of all specified dams falling under their control to ensure 
continued safety of such specified  dams and take such 
measures as may be necessary to address safety concerns 
that are noticed. 
(2) The State Dam Safety Organisation or the State Dam 
Safety Cell or the Non -State Dam Safety Organisation or 
the Non-State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, shall, 
Surveillance 
and 
inspection. 
 
 

 55 
for the purpose of enabling it to make decisions compatible 
with publ ic safety make or cause to be  made such 
investigations and shall gather or cause to be gathered 
such data as may be  required for proper review and study 
of the various features of the design, construction,  repair 
and enlargement of dams, reservoirs and app urtenances 
under their control. 
 
Maintenance 
of Log Books. 
 
 
20. Every concerned State Dam Safety Organisation or 
State Dam Safety Cell or   Non-State Dam Safety 
Orgainsation or Non -State Dam Safety Cell, shall maintain 
a Log  Book or  Data-base for each specified dam under 
their control recording therein all activities related to  the 
surveillance and inspection and all important events related 
to the dam safety and such  other details as may be 
specified by the Central Dam Safet y Organisation and as 
per the format  or data -base program specified by the 
regulations made by the Central Dam Safety Organisation. 
 
 
Instructions 
on safety of 
specified dams. 
21. (1) Every State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam 
Safety Cell or Non -State Dam Safety Organisation or Non -
State Dam Safety Cell, shall from time to time render its  
advice to the concerned owner of a specified dam on the 
safety measures or the remedial  measures required to be 
taken with respect to any dam. 
(2) Every State and s pecified dam owner shall issue 
appropriate instructions for  implementing the advice or 
guidelines issued by the State Dam Safety Organisation or 
State Dam Safety Cell or Non -State Dam Safety 
Organisation or Non -State Dam Safety Cell, as the  case 
may be. 
(3) It shall be the duty of every State Dam Safety 
Organisation or State Dam Safety  Cell, Non -State Dam 
Safety Organisation or Non -State Dam Safety Cell to 
monitor and ensure  the implementation of the instructions 
issued under sub-section (1). 
 
 
Funds for 
maintenance 
and repairs. 
 
22. All State Governments and other owners of specified 
dam shall earmark sufficient  and specific funds for 
maintenance and repairs of the specified dams and to 
implement the  recommendations of the State Dam Safety 
Organisation or the State Dam Safety Cell, as the 
case may be, and the Non -State Dam Safety Organisation 
or, the Non-State Dam Safety Cell,as the case may be. 
 
 
 23. (1) Every State Government and every owner of 
specified dam shall compile all  technical documentations 
concerning hydrology, dam foundation, structural 
Technical 
documentation. 

 56 
engineering of  dam, watershed upstream of dam, and 
nature or use of land downstream of dam along with  
information on all resources or facilities of economic or 
logistic importance which are likely to  be affect ed due to 
operation of the dam and keep for record in the concerned 
State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell or 
the Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or  Non-State Dam 
Safety Cell, as the case may be. 
(2) The Non -State Dam Safety Organisation or Non -State 
Dam Safety Cell, as the case  may be, shall furnish all such 
information to the Central Dam Safety Organisation and  
concerned State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam 
Safety Cell, as the case may be, as  and when required by 
them. 
(3) Every St ate Government and every owner of specified 
dam shall ensure that the  State Dam Safety Organisation 
or State Dam Safety Cell or Non -State Dam Safety 
Organisation or Non -State Dam Safety Cell, as the case 
may be, have been adequately equipped at all times 
with the state -of-the-art of information technology tools to 
store, retrieve, and distribute the  data related to the dam 
safety and dam performance. 
 
 24. (1) The State Dam Safety Organisation or the State 
Dam Safety Cell, as the c ase may be, shall be responsible 
to, and functionally report to, the highest engineering or 
technical authority of the concerned State Government. 
(2) The Non -State Dam Safety Organisation or the Non -
State Dam Safety Cell, as the  case may be, shall be 
responsible to, and functionally report to, the highest 
engineering or technical officer of the owner of the specified 
dam. 
 
Reporting. 
 
Individual 
responsible 
for safety of 
specified 
dams to be 
qualified. 
 
25. (1) Every individual responsible for safety of s pecified 
dams and all activities  related thereto shall possess such 
qualifications and experience as may be specified by the  
regulations made by the Central Dam Safety Organisation. 
(2) Every individual referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall 
undergo such training programmes and at such intervals as 
may be necessary to make him aware of up -to-date 
standardised dam safety practices. 
 
 
Jurisdiction 
of State Dam 
Safety 
Organisation 
or State Dam 
Safety Cell 
26. (1) Without pr ejudice to the provisions of this Act, all 
specified dams, shall fall  under the jurisdiction of the State 
Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the  
case may be, of the State in which dam is situated in 
matters related to dam inspections, 
analysis of information, reports or recommendations 
 

 57 
and Central 
Dam Safety 
Organisation. 
 
regarding safety status, and remedial  measures to be 
undertaken to improve dam safety; and in all such matters 
full co-operation shall be extended by the concerned Non -
State Dam Safety Organisation or the Non-State 
Dam Safety Cell and the owner of the specified dam. 
(2) The authorised representative of the Central Dam 
Safety Organisation, concerned  State Dam Safety 
Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may 
be, for the purposes  of making any inspe ction or 
investigation necessary for the implementation of the 
provisions of this Act, may enter upon any part of the 
specified dam or its site as and when required and  apply 
such investigation methods, as may be considered 
necessary. 
(3) In case, after ma king inspection or investigation under 
sub-section ( 2), the  representative referred in that sub -
section is of the opinion that certain remedial measures  are 
required to be taken, he shall report such remedial 
measures to the officer -in-charge of  such speci fied dam 
and the Non -State Dam Safety Organisation or Non -State 
Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, and to the concerned 
State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam  Safety Cell, 
as the case may be. 
(4) The Central Dam Safety Organisation and concerned 
State Dam Safety Organisation  or State Dam Safety Cell, 
as the case may be, in cases of dams being found to be 
endangered on account of their age, degeneration, 
degradation, structural or other impediments, shall  suggest 
such remedial measures on such operatio nal parameters 
(including maximum reservoir  level, maximum spillway 
discharge and maximum discharges through other outlets) 
as it may consider necessary. 
(5) Nothing contained in sub -sections ( 1), ( 2), ( 3) and ( 4) 
shall absolve the dam owner  or any other a uthority or 
person from any of his responsibilities or obligations 
entrusted upon him under the provisions of this Act and the 
provisions of sub -sections ( 1), ( 2), ( 3) and ( 4) shall be in 
addition to, and not in derogation of any provisions of this 
Act. 
 
 27. All costs to be incurred by Central Dam Safety 
Organisation or State Dam Safety  Organisation or State 
Dam Safety Cell on any form of investigation agreed by the 
owner or  felt necessary by Central Dam Safety 
Organisation or State Dam Safety Organisati on or State  
Dam Safety Cell, including payments given to the 
consultants and panel of experts, shall be  paid by the 
owner of concerned specified dam. 
Cost of 
investigation 
to be borne 
by dam owner. 
 

 58 
 
 28. (1) All new specified dams shall be investigated, 
designed and constructed by the  organisations recognised 
for the said purpose. 
(2) Every organisation referred to in sub-section (1) shall for 
the purpose of  investigation, design and construction 
employ such qualified, experienced and competent  
engineers, as may be specified by the regulations made by 
the Central Dam Safety Organisation. 
(3) Every organisation referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall 
demonstrate the safety of the  design, operational 
parameters and policies to the Central Government or 
concerned State  Governments or concerned authority to 
approve the design of the dam to be constructed by  such 
organisation. 
(4) The construction of any new specified dam or the 
alteration or enlargement of any  existing specified dam 
shall be taken up only with the  approval of the Competent 
Authority, as may be specified by the Central Government 
or the concerned State Government, as the case may be. 
(5) Every owner of the specified dam shall be responsible 
for operation, maintenance  and safety of the dams owned 
by it.  
(6) Every owner of the specified dam shall ensure that a 
well documented Operation  and Maintenance Manual is 
kept at all times at each of his specified dams and sufficient  
number of trained Operation and Maintenance engineers or 
technical persons are posted at such dams. 
 
Construction 
or operation 
or alteration 
of dams. 
 
 
Initial filling 
of reservoirs. 
 
29. (1) Before initial filling of any reservoir of a specified 
dam, the organization responsible for its design shall draw 
the filling criteria and pr epare an initial filling plan, with  
adequate time for monitoring and evaluating the 
performance of the dam and its appurtenances. 
(2) Before initial filling of the reservoir is taken up, the State 
Dam Safety Organisation  or State Dam Safety Cell or the 
concerned Non -State Dam Safety Organisation or Non -
State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, shall arrange 
for safety inspection of the dam either 
through its own engineers or by an independent panel of 
experts, who shall also examine the  initial filling programme 
and prepare a detailed report in respect thereof. 
(3) The Non -State Dam Safety Organisation or the Non -
State Dam Safety Cell, as the  case may be, shall forward 
the report of inspection or examination referred to in sub -
section 
(2) to the concerned S tate Dam Safety Organisation or 
 

 59 
State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be. 
 
 30. Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to 
absolve an owner of a dam of  the duties, obligations or 
liabilities incidental to the construction, operation, 
maintenance and supervision of the dam or reservoir. 
 
Responsibility 
of dam owner. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER VII 
 
SAFETY, INSPECTION AND DATA COLLECTION 
 
 31. (1) Every owner of a specified dam shall establish 
operational and maintenance set  up for each dam and 
through such set u p, undertake pre-monsoon and post-
monsoon inspections of each of its dams to be done, — 
(i) in the case of specified dams, being of hundred 
meters height or above, by the  concerned Chief 
Engineer; 
(ii) in the case of specified dams, being of thirty meters 
height or above, but less  than hundred meters height, 
by the concerned Superintendent Engineer or higher  
level officer; 
(iii) in the case of specified dams, being of fifteen 
meters height or above, but  less than thirty meters 
height, by the concerned Execu tive Engineer or higher 
level officer; 
(iv) in the case of specified dams, being of ten meters 
height or above, but  less than fifteen meters height, by 
the concerned Assistant Engineer or higher level  
officer. 
(2) Without prejudice to sub -section (1), every owner of 
a specified dam shall undertake  special inspections, of 
each of his dams to be undertaken by the engineers 
referred to in subsection  (1), during and after floods, 
after earthquake, and if any sign of distress or unusual  
behaviour is noticed in t he dam, appurtenance or 
reservoir fringes. 
(3) Every owner of a specified dam shall,— 
(a) carry out all inspections referred to in sub -section 
(1) and sub -section ( 2) as  per checklist or format or 
proforma or guidelines specified by the regulations 
made by the Central Dam Safety Organisation; 
(b) station, at each of his specified dams site 
throughout the monsoon period, such engineer, as may 
be decided, in consultation with the State Dam Safety 
Organisation or the State Dam Safety Cell or the Non -
Periodical 
inspection. 
 

 60 
State Dam Safety Organisation or the Non -State Dam 
Safety Cell, as the case may be, and Chief Engineer -in-
charge of such dams: 
Provided that such engineers shall be required to be 
stationed at their respective  dam sites during entire 
period of emergency following an  earthquake or any 
other natural or manmade hazard that may create 
distress conditions in the dam. 
(c) forward the inspection report referred in sub -section 
(1) and sub -section ( 2) to the State Dam Safety 
Organisation or the State Dam Safety Cell or the No n-
State Dam Safety Organisation or the Non -State Dam 
Safety Cell concerned, which shall  analyse such report 
and submit their comments on the deficiency and 
remedial measures, if any, to the highest engineering or 
technical authority of the owner of specified dam: 
Provided that the Non -State Dam Safety Organisation 
or the Non-State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, 
shall forward the copy of such report and submit their  
comments on the deficiency and remedial measures, if 
any, to the concerned State Dam  Safety Organisation 
or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be. 
 
 32. (1) Every owner of a specified dam shall have a 
minimum number of sets of instrumentations as may be 
specified by the regulations made by the Central Dam 
Safety Organisation at all times for monitoring the 
performance of dam, in respect of all his specified  
dams. 
(2) In case the instrumentation installed is required to 
be replaced, such instrumentation shall be replaced in a 
manner so as to maintain the continuity  of readings 
exhibited in such instrumentations. 
(3) Every owner of the specified dam shall maintain a 
record of readings of the  instrumentation referred to in 
sub-sections (1) and ( 2) and forward such readings, to 
the State Dam Safety Organisation or the State Dam 
Safety Cell or the Non -State Dam Safety  Organisation 
or the Non -State Dam Safety Cell concerned, in the 
form, manner and at such interval specified by them. 
(4) The State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam 
Safety Cell or Non -State Dam  Safety Or ganisation or 
Non-State Dam Safety Cell concerned shall analyse the 
readings referred to in sub-section (3) and wheresoever 
required to submit observations or advice to  the highest 
engineering or technical authority of the owner of dam. 
(5) The Non -State D am Safety Organisation or Non -
State Dam Safety Cell shall also  forward the copy of its 
Instrumentations 
to be installed 
in every 
specified dam. 
 

 61 
observations or advice to the concerned State Dam 
Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the 
case may be. 
 
Establishment 
of hydrometeoro -
logical station. 
 
33. (1) Every owner of specified dam shall establish a 
hydro-meteorological station in  the vicinity of at each 
such dam. 
(2) Every hydro -meteorological station referred to in 
sub-section ( 1) shall be c apable of recording data 
relating to, among other parameters, rainfall, 
atmospheric pressure, maximum  or minimum 
temperature, and humidity, wind speed, wind direction, 
height of waves and reservoir-water temperature. 
(3) Every owner of the specified dam sh all collect, 
compile, process and store data  referred to in sub -
section (2) at suitable central location of such dam. 
 
 
Installations 
of 
seismological 
station. 
 
34. (1) Every owner of a specified dam, in the case of 
specified dam being of thirty  meters height or above or 
specified dam being falling in the seismic zone III or 
above, shall  establish a seismological station in the 
vicinity of each such dam. 
(2) Every owner of specified dam shall collect, compile, 
process and store data referred  to in sub -section (1) at 
a suitable location. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER VIII 
 
EMERGENCY ACTION PLAN AND DISASTER MANAGEMENT 
 
Obligation for 
emergency 
action plan 
and disaster 
management. 
35. (1) Every owner of the specified dam, in respect of each 
specified dam, shall,— 
(a) establish well designed hydro -meteorological network and 
an inflow 
forecasting system; 
(b) establish an emergency flood warning system for the 
probable flood affected areas down stream of the dam; 
(c) test periodically for the aptness of systems referred to at (a) 
and (b) above; 
(d) install such scientific and technical instruments which are 
invented or adopted  after the commencement of this Act for 
the purpose of ensuring the safety of dam and  the life and 
property of people downstream; 
(e) make available the infor mation relating to maximum 
anticipated inflows and  outflows including flood warning and 
an adverse impact of the same, if any, on persons  and 
property towards the upstream or downstream of the dam, to 
 

 62 
the concerned  authorities and also make available such 
information in public domain. 
(2) Every owner of the specified dam, for each of its dam 
shall,— 
(a) carry out risk assessment studies at an interval of twenty 
years or at such  interval as may be specified by the 
regulations made by the Central Dam Safety Organisation; 
(b) in respect of each specified dam existing on or before the 
commencement of  this Act, prepare emergency action plan 
within five years from the date of commencement  of this Act 
and thereafter update such plans at regular intervals; 
(c) in respect of each specified dam which are constructed and 
filled initially after  the commencement of this Act, prepare 
emergency action plan before the initial filling  of the reservoir 
and thereafter update such plans at regular intervals . 
(3) The emergency a ction plan referred to in sub -section ( 2) 
shall,— 
(a) set out the procedures to be followed for the protection of 
persons and property upstream or downstream of the dam in 
the event of an actual or imminent dam  failure or to mitigate 
the effects of the disaster; 
(b) include therein,— 
(i) in advance the type of emergencies which are likely to 
occur in the 
operation of any reservoir; 
(ii) identification of the likely catastrophic flood in the event of 
any failure of the dam, along with probable areas, populat ion, 
structures and installations  likely to be adversely affected due 
to flood water released from the reservoir; 
(iii) warning procedures, inundation maps and advance 
preparations for 
handling efficiently and in the best possible manner the likely 
adverse situations especially to avoid loss of human life; 
(iv) such other matters which may having regard to the 
geographical 
condition, size of the dam and other relevant factors as may 
be necessary 
(4) The Emergency Action Plan referred to in sub -sections (2) 
and (3) shall be put into  action as and when conditions arise 
which are or likely to be hazardous to a dam or potentially  
hazardous to public safety, infrastructure, other property or the 
environment. 
(5) Every owner of the specified dam shall, while prepa ring 
and updating the emergency  action plan, undertake a 
consultation process with all disaster management agencies 
and other concerned departments entrusted with disaster 
management and relief in the area likely  to be affected and 
owners of other dams in the immediate vicinity likely to be 

 63 
affected, so as  to bring transparency and allay any 
unwarranted fear on dam safety issues. 
 
Assistance to 
other disaster 
management 
authorities. 
53 of 2005. 
 
36. Without prejudice to the provisions contained in this Ac t or 
liability of the owner  of the specified dam and other 
organisations and authorities under this Act, every such  
owner, organization and authority shall render necessary co -
operation if so required by the  authorities under the Disaster 
Management Act, 2 005 to meet or mitigate any disaster or  
emergency arising out of the specified dams. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IX 
 
COMPREHENSIVE DAM SAFETY EVALUATION 
 
 37. (1) The State Dam Safety Organisation or the State 
Dam Safety Cell, as the case  may be, or the concerned 
Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or the Non -State Dam 
Safety Cell, as the case may be, shall, at least once in ten 
years, arrange for comprehensive safety  evaluation of 
every specified dam falling under their control either 
through their own engineers or by an independent panel of 
experts for the purpose of determining the conditions of the  
specified dam and reservoir: 
Provided that the first comprehensive safety evaluation for 
each existing specified  dam shall be conducted within five 
years after the coming into force of this Act. 
(2) The exact frequency of comprehensive evaluation shall 
be based on previous  assessments, complexity of 
specified dam, operating history, recently held 
rehabilitation works, dam performance, age of dam and the 
hazard potential of dam. 
(3) The comprehensive safety evaluation shall consists of, 
but not be limited to,— 
(a) review and analysis of available data on the design, 
construction, operation,  maintenance and performance of 
the structure; 
(b) general assessment of hydrologic and hyd raulic 
conditions with mandatory  review of design floods as 
defined in the guidlines issued by the Central Government  
in case of dams which are more than fifteen meters in 
height or whose storage capacities  are more than sixty 
million cubic meter; 
(c) evaluation of the operation, maintenance and inspection 
procedures; 
(d) evaluation of any other conditions which constitute or 
Obligation for 
comprehensive 
dam safety 
evaluation. 
 

 64 
could constitute a hazard to the integrity of the structure. 
 
Compulsory 
evaluation in 
certain cases. 
 
38. The comprehensive evaluation referred to in section 37 
shall be compulsory in the 
case of,— 
(a) major modification to the original structure or design 
criteria; 
(b) discovery of an unusual condition at the dam or 
reservoir rim; and 
(c) an extreme hydrological or seismic event. 
 
 
Reports of 
comprehensive 
evaluation. 
 
39. (1) The State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam 
Safety Cell, as the case may be,  shall report the results of 
the comprehensive safety evaluation undertaken un der 
section 37 or  38, directly to the highest engineering or 
technical authority of concerned State Government. 
(2) The Non -State Dam Safety Organisation or the Non -
State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, shall report the 
results of the comprehensive sa fety evaluation undertaken 
under section 37 or 38, to the highest engineering or 
technical authority of the Organisation 
and to the concerned State Dam Safety Organisation or 
State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be. 
(3) The reports referred to in sub -section ( 1) and sub -
section (2) shall include, but not be limited to,— 
(a) assessment of the condition of the structure based on 
the visual observations  and available data on the design, 
hydrology, construction, operation, maintenance  and 
performance of the structure; 
(b) recommendations for any emergency measures or 
actions, if required, to  assure the immediate safety of the 
structure; 
(c) recommendations for remedial measures and actions 
related to design,  construction, operation, maintenance 
and inspection of the structure, if required; 
(d) recommendations for additional detailed studies, 
investigations and analyses, if required; and 
(e) recommendations for improvements in routine 
maintenance and inspection of dam, if required. 
(4) In case where the comprehe nsive safety evaluation 
undertaken under section 37 or  38, results in 
recommendations for a remedial action, the State Dam 
Safety Organisation or  the State Dam Safety Cell and the 
concerned Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or the Non-
State Dam Safety Cell , as the case may be, shall pursue 
with the concerned authorities or  owner of the specified 
Dam, as the case may be, to ensure that remedial 
measures are carried  out in time, for which the State 
 

 65 
Government or such owner shall provide adequate funds. 
(5) In  case where there are unresolved points of issues 
emerging between an  independent panel of experts 
referred to in section 37 and the owner of the specified 
dams or  concerned authorities, as the case may be, the 
matter shall be referred to the State Dam  Safety 
Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may 
be, and in case, no agreement  is arrived at, the matter 
shall be referred to the Central Dam Safety Organisation 
which shall  give required guidance wherever necessary 
and send their recommendations  to the State  Government 
concerned for their implementation. 
CHAPTER X 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
 
Annual report 
of safety 
status of 
dams. 
 
40. (1) Every Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or the Non -
State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, shall prepare and 
forward the annual report, within three months of the  expiry of 
the preceding financial year, to each of the concerned State 
Dam Safety Organisation 
or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, and to the 
Central Dam Safety Organisation. 
(2) Every State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety 
Cell, as the case may be,  shall prepare annual report, within 
five months of the expiry of the preceding financial year,  of its 
activities and safety status of dams in the State and such 
report shall be forwarded to  the concerned State Government 
for placing it before the concerned State Legislature and to  
the Central Dam Safety Organisation. 
(3) The State Dam Safety Organisation or the State Dam 
Safety Cell, as the case may  be, of each State and the Non -
State Dam Safety  Organisation or the Non -State Dam Safety  
Cell, as the case may be, of each owner of a specified dam 
shall provide to the Central Dam  Safety Organisation, 
documentation of the projects, report of enquiries into failure 
and such other data as required in su ch format or manner as 
it may be specified by the regulations  made by the Central 
Dam Safety Organisation. 
(4) The Central Dam Safety Organisation, shall prepare a 
consolidated annual report of  the dam safety activities in the 
country and submit the same t o the Central Government  
within eight months of the expiry of the preceding financial 
year, and such reports shall be  placed before each House of 
Parliament by the Central Government. 
(5) The Central Dam Safety Organisation shall forward its 
annual report on the safety  status of dams to the National 
Disaster Management Authority and also make available such  
 

 66 
reports in public domain. 
(6) The State Dam Safety Organisation or the State Dam 
Safety Cell, as the case may  be, of each State and Non -State 
Dam Safety  Organisation or Non -State Dam Safety Cell, as  
the case may be, of each owner of a specified dam shall 
forward their annual reports to the 
concerned State Disaster Management Authority and also 
make available such reports in public domain. 
 41. Every owner of the dam other than specified dams shall 
undertake such measures  as may be necessary to ensure 
safety of the dams and shall comply with the instructions and  
guidelines which may be issued by the concerned State 
Governments or the authorities. 
 
Safety 
measures in 
respect of 
dams other 
than 
specified 
dams. 
 
 42. (1) Where a dam is located outside the territory of India 
and the Central Dam Safety  Organisation suo motu or on 
receipt of information from any person or organisation or  
authority or source prima facie is of the opinion that 
measures are required to be taken to  ensure safety of such 
dams and failure of which may endanger the life and property 
of people  located in India, it shall in writing submit an 
intimation thereof to the Central Government  indicating 
therein the likely damages which may arise due to failure of 
such dams and the  safety measures required to be taken in 
respect of such dam. 
(2) The Central Government on receipt of intimation under 
sub-section (1) or otherwise  shall endeavor to  take suitable 
measures to ensure safety of such dams by entering into  
treaty, agreement or convention with any other country or 
countries concerned with the  safety of such dams and lay a 
report in respect of such measures before both the Houses 
of Parliament at the earliest. 
 
Measures of 
safety of 
dams 
located 
outside 
territory of 
India. 
 
 43. The provisions of this Act shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent  therewith contained in 
any other law for the time being in force. 
 
Effect of Act 
on other 
laws. 
 
Power of 
Central 
Government 
to give 
directions. 
 
44. The Central Government may give such directions, as it 
may consider necessary, to  the State Government and 
owner of the specified dams for the effective implementation 
of the provisions of this Act. 
 
 
Power of the 
Central 
Government 
45. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make 
rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the foregoing 
 

 67 
to make rules. 
 
power, such rules may provide  for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:— 
(a) the time and place of the meetings of the National 
Committee and the procedure  to be followed at such 
meetings under sub-section (1) of section 6; 
(b) the fee and allowances paid to the specialists or expert 
Members and   Specialists or expert invitees under sub -
section (4) of section 6; 
(c) the functions, powers and terms and conditions of service 
of the employees  of the Central Dam Safety Organisation 
under sub-section (2) of section 10; 
(d) any other matter which is to be or may be, prescribed or 
in respect of which  provision is to be made by the Central 
Government by rules. 
 
Power of State 
Government 
to make rules. 
 
46. (1) The State Government may, by notification, make 
rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide  for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:— 
(a) the terms and conditions of the Chairperson and 
Members of the State  Committee and the procedur e in 
regard to transaction of business at these meetings of  the 
said Committee under sub-section (3) of section 12; 
(b) the constitution and functions of State Dam Safety 
Organisation under subsection (2) of section 15; 
(c) the constitution and functions o f the State Dam Safety 
Cell under sub-section (2) of section 16; 
(d) any other matter which is to be or may be, prescribed or 
in respect of which  provision is to be made by the State 
Government by rules. 
 
 
 47. (1) The Central Dam Safety Organisation may make 
regulation consistent with this  Act and the rules made there 
under to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such  regulations may provide for all or any 
of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the constitution and functions of the Non -State Dam 
Safety Organisation under sub-section (3) of section 17; 
(b) the constitution and functions of the Non -State Dam 
Safety Cell under subsection (3) of section 18; 
(c) the details pertaining to the maintenance of Log Books by 
the State Dam 
Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell or Non -State 
Dam Safety Organisation or  Non-State Dam Safety Cell 
under section 20; 
(d) the qualifications and experience of the individuals 
Power to 
make 
regulations. 
 

 68 
responsible for  safety of  specified dams under sub -section 
(1) of section 25; 
(e) the qualifications and experience of the engineers 
responsible for investigation,  design and construction of 
specified dams under sub-section (2) of section 28; 
(f) the checklist or format or proforma or guidelines of 
inspections under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 31; 
(g) the minimum number of set of instrumentations to be 
installed in the new  specified dam under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 32; 
(h) the frequency of risk assessment studies to be carried out 
under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 35; 
(i) the format or manner with respect to such other data as 
received under subsection (3) of section 40; and 
(j) any other matter which is to be specified or in respect of 
which provision is to  be made by the Central Dam Safety 
Organisation by regulations. 
 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
 
48. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions 
of this Act, the Central  Government may, by order, published 
in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not  inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be 
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after 
the expiry of  two years  from the date of commencement of 
this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as 
may be after it is made, be laid  before each House of 
Parliament. 
 
 
Rules and 
regulations to 
be laid before 
Parliament 
and State 
Legislature. 
 
49. (1) Every rule and every regulation made under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total  period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in 
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the  
successive sessions aforesaid, both the Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule  or regulation or both 
Houses agree that the rule or regulat ion should not be made, 
the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the  case may be, so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice  to the validity of anything previ ously done 
under that rule or regulation. 
(2) Every rule made by a State Government under this Act 
shall be laid as soon as may  be, after it is made, before the 
State Legislature, where it consists of two Houses, or where  
such legislature consists of one House, before that House. 
 

 69 
 
 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
 
Dams are critical infrastructure constructed with large investments for multi -purpose 
uses such as irrigation, power generation, flood moderation and supply of water for drinking  and 
industrial purposes. An unsafe dam constitutes a hazard to human life, ecology and  public and 
private assets (including crops, houses, buildings, canals and roads). Therefore,  the safety of 
dam is a matter of great concern to the general public and becomes a nation al responsibility to 
take necessary steps to ensure the safety of dams. 
 
2. The Government of India, keeping the importance of safety of dams, constituted a  Standing 
Committee in 1982, under the Chairmanship of Chairman, Central Water Commission, to review 
the existing practices and to evolve unified procedure for safety of dams in India.  The Standing 
Committee in its report dated the 10th July, 1986 has recommended for unified  dam safety 
procedures for all dams in India and the necessary legislation on dam  safety. Initial efforts for 
dam safety legislation were directed towards enactment of appropriate  legislation by respective 
State Governments, and accordingly the State of Bihar enacted the  Dam Safety Act, 2006. 
However, some of the States favoured the idea of a uniform central 
legislation on dam safety. The States of Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal have adopted  
resolutions in their States for an Act of Parliament. 
 
3. In view of the above, it is necessary to enact a law to provide for proper surveillance,  
inspection, operation and maintenance of dams of certain parameters in India to ensure  their 
safe functioning and thereby to protect the persons and property against risks associated  with 
dam failure. In the first instance, the provisions of the proposed l egislation shall apply  to the 
States of Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal and the Union territories, and also to their  public sector 
undertakings and to the public sector undertakings of the Central Government.  It shall also 
apply to such owners of specified dam s other than those owned or controlled  by the Central 
Government or the State Government. However, the provisions of the proposed  legislation shall 
also apply to other States if resolution to that effect is passed by the  Houses of Legislature of 
those States under clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution. 
 
4. The proposed Dam Safety Bill, 2010, inter alia, provides for— 
 
(a) constitution of the National Committee on Dam Safety, consisting of a  Chairperson, eight 
members, specialists or experts in the f ield of dam safety and a  Member-Secretary, to ensure 
proper surveillance, inspection, operation and  maintenance of all specified dams and ensure 
their safe functioning; 
 
(b) establishment of the Central Dam Safety Organisation in the Central Water  Commission to 
provide, inter alia, the technical and managerial assistance to the  State Dam Safety 
Organisations or the State Dam Safety Cells, the Non -State Dam Safety Organisations or the 
Non-State Dam Safety Cells; to settle the unresolved  points of issues betw een the State Dam 
Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell  of two States, or between the State Dam Safety 
Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell of a State and the Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or 
the Non-State Dam Safety Cell, etc.; 

 70 
 
(c) constitution of the State Committee on Dam Safety by the State Governments  having more 
than twenty specified dams, to ensure proper surveillance, inspection,  operation and 
maintenance of all specified dams in that State and to ensure their safe functioning; 
 
(d) est ablishment of the State Dam Safety Organisations in States having more  than twenty 
specified dams to discharge such functions as may be prescribed by the  concerned State 
Government; 
 
(e) establishment of the State Dam Safety Cells in States, having twenty or less than twenty 
number of specified dams, to discharge such functions as may be  prescribed by the concerned 
State Government; 
 
(f) establishment of Non -State Dam Safety Organisations by the dam owners,  (other than the 
Central Government or State Govern ments) having more than ten  specified dams, to discharge 
such functions as may be specified by the Central Dam  Safety Organisation or the State Dam 
Safety Organisation; 
 
(g) establishment of Non -State Dam Safety Cell by the dam owner (other than  the Centra l 
Government or State Governments), having ten or less than ten numbers  of specified dams, to 
discharge such functions as may be specified by the Central  Dam Safety Organisation or the 
State Dam Safety Organisation; 
 
(h) an obligation upon every owner of a specified dam to establish operational and maintenance 
set up for undertaking pre -monsoon and post -monsoon inspections  and special inspections 
during and after floods, earthquakes, etc.; 
(i) an obligation upon the concerned State Dam Safety Organiation, N on-State Dam Safety 
Organisations, State Dam Safety Cell and Non -State Dam Safety Cell to  arrange for 
comprehensive safety evaluation of every specified dam at least once in every ten years; 
 
(j) an obligation upon the Central Dam Safety Organisation to fo rward its annual  report to the 
National Disaster Management Authority and the State Dam Safety  Organisation or State Dam 
Safety Cell, Non -State Dam Safety Organisation or Non -State Dam Safety Cell to forward their 
annual reports on safety status of dams to the concerned State Disaster Management Authority; 
 
(k) empowers the Central Government and the State Governments to make rules  to carry out 
the provisions of the proposed legislation. 
 
5. The Notes on Clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in the Bill. 
 
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                PAWAN 
KUMAR BANSAL 
The 18th August, 2010. 
 

 71 
NOTES ON CLAUSES 
 
Clause 1.—This clause relates to the short title, extent and commencement of the  proposed 
legislation. This clause enables the Central Government to appoint a date by  notification with 
respect to the commencement of the proposed legislation in the States of  Andhra Pradesh, 
West Bengal and in all the Union territories. With respect to any other  State, the proposed 
legislation shall come into force on the date of adoption of the enacted  legislation under clause 
(1) of article 252 of the Constitution. 
 
Clause 2.—This clause relates to application of the proposed legislation. 
 
This clause provides that the provisions of the proposed legislation applies — (a) in the first 
instance, to the whole of the States of Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal and to all the  Union 
territories; and it shall also apply to such other State which adopts the enacted  legislation by 
resolution passed in that behalf under clause (1) of article 252 of the  Constitution; (b) to every 
owner of a specified dam, being public sector undertaking or  institution or a body owned or 
controlled by the Central Government or the State Government;  and (c) to every owner of a 
specified dam, being undertaking or company or institution or a  body other than those owned or 
controlled by the State Government or the Central Government. 
 
Clause 3.— This clause defines certain expressions used in the Bill. 
 
Clause 4.— This clause relates to constitution of the National Committee on Dam Safety. 
 
This clause provides for the constitution of a National Committee to be known as the  "National 
Committee on Dam Safety" on such date as the Central Government may, by  notification, 
appoint and the composition of said Committee is specified in the said clause. 
 
Clause 5.— This clause relates to the tenure of specialists or experts as Members of  the 
National Committee. 
 
This clause provides that tenure of specialists or experts as Members of the National Committee 
shall be valid for a period of three years from the date of issuance of the notification. 
 
Clause 6.— This clause relates to the meetings of the National Committee on Dam Safety. 
 
This clause provides that the National Committee shall meet at such times and places  and shall 
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its  meetings 
(including quorum at such meetings) as may be prescribed by the Central  Government. This 
clause further pro vides that the National Committee may invite such  specialists or experts in 
Dam Safety, as it may consider appropriate, for the discharge of its  functions. This clause also 
contains the provisions relating to the expenditure incurred, the 
fee and allowance s paid to the specialists or experts and the method of deciding of questions  
which come up before any meeting of the National Committee. 
 
Clause 7.— This clause relates to the vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of  the 
National Committee. 

 72 
This clause provides that no act or proceeding of the National Committee shall be invalid merely 
by reason of — (a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the  National Committee; 
or (b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member o f the National Committee; 
or (c) any irregularity in the procedure of the National Committee  not affecting the merits of the 
case. 
 
Clause 8.— This clause relates to the functions of National Committee.  This clause provides 
that the National Committee shal l discharge such functions as  may be necessary to ensure 
proper surveillance, inspection, operation and maintenance of  all specified dams in the country 
and ensure their safe functioning. The functions of the  National Committee shall include, — (a) 
to monitor broadly the functioning of State Dam  Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, 
as the case may be, and Non -State Dam Safety Organisation or Non-State Dam Safety Cell, as 
the case may be; (b) to monitor and evaluate  dam safety practices in various St ates and 
suggest improvements to bring dam safety  practices in conformity with latest international 
practices consistent with Indian conditions;  (c) to act as a forum for exchange of views on 
techniques to be adopted for remedial measures  to relieve distre ss conditions in dams and 
appurtenances; (d) to analyse the causes of failures in cases of major dam failures and suggest 
changes in the plan philosophy,  specifications, construction, operation and maintenance 
practices in order to avoid reoccurrence  of su ch failures; (e) to evolve comprehensive dam 
safety management approach as an integration of dam safety evaluation, risk assessment, and 
risk management; and (f) to  render advise on any specific matter relating to safety of dams 
which may be referred to it  by the Central Government or the State Government. This clause 
further provides that the  knowledge and information gathered or generated by the National 
Committee on Dam Safety  shall be disseminated by the Central Dam Safety Organisation to all 
State Dam Safety Organisations or State Dam Safety Cells, as the case may be, and Non -State 
Dam Safety Organisations or Non -State Dam Safety Cells, as the case may be, for achieving 
uniform standard in dam safety practices. This clause also provides that the Central Dam Safety 
Organisation shall act as Secretariat of the National Committee for the purpose of discharging  
its functions under the proposed legislation. 
 
Clause 9.— This clause relates to the establishment of Central Dam Safety Organisation. 
 
This clause p rovides that the Central Government shall, for the purposes of the proposed  
legislation, by notification, establish a separate division in the Ministry of Water Resources,  in 
the Central Water Commission, an Organisation to be known as the "Central Dam Saf ety 
Organisation" to be headed by an officer not below the rank of Chief Engineer. 
 
Clause 10.— This clause relates to the appointment of employees of the Central Dam  Safety 
Organisation. 
 
This clause provides that the Central Government shall, for the pur pose of enabling the Central 
Dam Safety Organisation to perform its functions under the proposed legislation,  provide such 
number of officers, and other employees as they may consider necessary. This  clause further 
provides that the functions, powers and t erms and conditions of service of the  employees shall 
be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
 
Clause 11.— This clause relates to the functions of Central Dam Safety Organisation.  This 
clause provides that the Central Dam Safety Organisatio n shall, — (a) provide the state-of-the-

 73 
art technical and managerial assistance to the State Dam Safety Organisations  or State Dam 
Safety Cells, as the case may be, and Non -State Dam Safety Organisations or  Non-State Dam 
Safety Cells, as the case may be; (b) maintain a national level data-base of all specified dams in 
the country; ( c) maintain liaison with the State Dam Safety Organisation or  State Dam Safety 
Cell, as the case may be, of each State and the Non-State Dam Safety 
Organisation or Non -State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, of each dam owning    
Organisation for standardisation of dam safety related data and practices, and related technical  
or managerial assistance; ( d) issue and update from time to time the standardised guidelines  
and check-lists or format or proforma for routine inspections as well as detailed investigations  of 
dams and appurtenances; ( e) maintain the records of major dam failures in the country; ( f) 
examine wheresoever a need is felt, either through its own engineers or throu gh a panel of  
experts, the cause of any major dam failure, and submit its report to the National Committee  on 
Dam Safety; and (g) look into unresolved points of issue between the State Dam Safety  
Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, o f two States, or between State  
Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, of a State and the  
Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or Non -State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, of a  
owner of a specified dam, for a proper solution . This clause further provides that all decisions  of 
Central Dam Safety Organisation shall be final and binding.  
 
Clause 12.— This clause relates to the constitution of State Committee on Dam Safety. 
 
This clause provides for the constitution of a State C ommittee to be known as the State  
Committee on Dam Safety on such date as the State Government may, by notification,  
appoints. This clause further provides that the States in which the numbers of specified dam  are 
less than twenty, such State may not const itute State Committee under this Act. This  clause 
also provides that the State Committee on Dam Safety shall consist of a Chairperson  and such 
number of members as may be determined by the State Government. This clause  also provides 
that the provisions rel ating to the terms and conditions subject to which the  Chairperson and 
members of the State Committee may be appointed and the time, place of the  meetings of the 
State Committee shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
 
Clause 13.— This clause relates to the functions of State Committee on Dam Safety. 
 
This clause provides that the State Committee shall discharge such functions as may  be 
necessary to ensure proper surveillance, inspection, operation and maintenance of all  specified 
dams in that State and ensure their safe functioning. This clause further provides  that the 
functions of the State Committee shall include to, —(a) review the work done by the  State Dam 
Safety Organisation; (b) recommend the appropriate measures to be taken in  relation to the 
safety of specified Dam; (c) review the progress on measures recommended in  relation to dam 
safety; (d) establish priorities for investigations undertaken under subsection  (2) of section 19; 
(e) in cases where investigations with respect to safety of any  specified dam in the State had 
already been undertaken, to order further investigations in  relation to safety of such specified 
dam and assign responsibilities for execution including  the use of non -departmental resources, 
and need for the as sociation of independent experts  with next phase of such investigations; (f) 
establish priorities among projects needing remedial  safety works; and (g) keep the State 
Government informed of its activities and recommendations. 
 

 74 
Clause 14.— This clause relat es to the functions of State Committee to be discharged  by 
National Committee in certain cases.  This clause provides that in States where State Dam 
Safety Committee are not 
constituted and in all cases of Central undertakings and private entities or bodies , the periodical 
reviews of the works or progress or prioritisation by the concerned State Dam  Safety 
Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell and Non -State Dam Safety Organisation or  Non-State 
Dam Safety Cell shall be undertaken by the National Committee on Dam Safety through Central 
Dam Safety Organisation.  
 
 
Clause 15.— This clause relates to the establishment of State Dam Safety Organisation.  This 
clause provides that every State having more than twenty numbers of specified  dams owned by 
it shall constitute a body called "State Dam Safety Organisation" headed by  an officer not below 
the rank of Chief Engineer or equivalent. This clause further provides  that the constitution and 
functions of the State Dam Safety Organisation shall be such as may be prescribed by the State 
Government. This clause also provides that the State Dam  Safety Organisation shall consist of 
the persons having professional qualifications and  sufficient experience in the field of safety of 
dams preferably from the areas of dam -designs, hydro-mechanical, hydrology, geo -technical 
investigation and instrumentation or such other  field as the State Government may consider 
appropriate. This clause also provides that the  administrative and other expenses of the State 
Dam Safety Organisation shall be borne by the concerned State Government. 
 
Clause 16.— This clause relates to the establishment of the State Dam Safety Cell in  certain 
cases. 
 
This clause provides that every State having twenty or less than twenty numbers of  specified 
dams owned by it shall establish a body called "State Dam Safety Cell" headed by an officer not 
below the rank of Superintendent Engineer or its equivalent. This clause  further provides that 
the establishment and functions of the State Dam Safety Cell shall be  prescribed by the State 
Government. This clause also provides that the State Dam Safety Cell  shall consist of the 
persons having professional qualifications and sufficient experience in  the field of safety of 
dams preferably from the areas of dam -designs, hydro -mechanical, hydrology, geo -technical 
investigation and instrumentation or such other field as the State  Government may consider 
appropriate. This clause also provides that the administrative and  other expenses of the State 
Dam Safety Cell shall be borne by the concerned State Government.  
 
Clause 17.— This clause relates to the establishment of Non-State Dam Safety Organisations.  
 
This clause provides that every dam owner (other than Central or State Governments)  having 
more than ten numbers of specified dams  owned by it, shall establish a body called  "Non-State 
Dam Safety Organisation" headed by an officer not below the rank of Chief  Engineer or 
equivalent. This clause further provides that the Non -State Dam Safety  Organisation shall 
consist of the persons ha ving professional qualifications and sufficient  experience in the field of 
safety of dams preferably from the areas of dam -designs, hydromechanical,  hydrology, geo -
technical investigation and instrumentation or such other field  as the dam owner may conside r 
appropriate. This clause also provides that in the case of  owner of a specified dam, being the 
undertakings or institution or a company or a body  owned or controlled by the Central 
Government or by the Central Government and State  Government, or any unde rtakings or 

 75 
institution or a body owned or controlled by the Central  Government or the State Government 
and other private entities or bodies, the constitution  and functions of the Non -State Dam Safety 
Organisation shall be specified by regulations  made by the Central Dam Safety Organisation. 
This clause also provide that in the case of  owner of a specified dam being the undertaking or 
an institution or a body owned or controlled  by the State Government or the undertaking or an 
institution or a body owned or  controlled by it or both, the constitution and functions of the Non -
State Dam Safety Organisation shall be such as may be specified by the State Government.  
 
Clause 18.— This clause relates to the establishment of Non-State Dam Safety Cell. 
 
This clause provides that every owner of a specified dam (other than Central or State  
Governments), having ten or less than ten number of specified dams owned by it, shall establish 
a body called "Non -State Dam Safety Cell" headed by an officer not below the rank  of 
Superintendent Engineer or its equivalent. This clause further provides that the Non -State Dam 
Safety Cell shall consist of the persons having professional qualifications and sufficient  
experience in the field of safety of dams preferably from the areas of dam-designs, 
hydromechanical, hydrology, geo-technical investigation and instrumentation or such other field  
as the dam owner may consider appropriate. This clause also provides that in the case of owner 
of a specified dam, being the public sector undertak ings or institution or a body  owned or 
controlled by the Central Government; or by the Central Government and the State  Government 
or any undertakings or institution or a body owned or controlled by the Central  Government or 
State Government and other private entities or bodies, the constitution and functions of the Non-
State Dam Safety Cell shall be such as may be specified by regulations  made by the Central 
Dam Safety Organisation. This clause also provides that in the case of owner of a specified dam 
being the undertaking or institution or a body owned or controlled  by the State Government or 
the undertaking or institution or a body owned or controlled by  it or both, the constitution and 
functions of the Non -State Dam Safety Cell shall be such as  may be s pecified by the State 
Government. 
 
Clause 19 .—This clause relates to the surveillance and inspection. 
 
This clause provides that every State Dam Safety Organisation, State Dam Safety Cell,  Non-
State Dam Safety Organisation and Non -State Dam Safety Cell sh all, — (a) keep perpetual   
surveillance; (b) carry out routine and special inspections; (c) monitor the operation and  
maintenance, of all specified dams falling under their jurisdiction to ensure continued safety  of 
such specified dams and take such steps as may be necessary in this regard. This clause  
further provides that the State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell or Non -State 
Dam Safety Organisation or Non -State Dam Safety Cell shall, for the purpose of enabling  it to 
make decisions compa tible with public safety make or cause to be made such investigations  
and shall gather or cause to be gathered such data as may be required for proper review and  
study of the various features of the design, construction, repair and enlargement of dams,  
reservoirs and appurtenances under their control. 
 
Clause 20.— This clause relates to maintenance of log books. 
 
This clause provides that every concerned State Dam Safety Organisation or State  Dam Safety 
Cell, or Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or Non -State Dam Safety Cell, shall  maintain a log 
book or Data -base for each specified dam recording therein all activities  related to the 

 76 
surveillance and inspection and all important events related to the dam safety  and such other 
details as may be specified by regulations by the Central Dam Safety Organisation. 
 
Clause 21.— This clause relates to the instructions on safety of specified dams. 
 
This clause provides that every State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety  Cell or 
Non-State Dam Safety Organisation  or Non -State Dam Safety Cell shall from time to  time 
render advice to the concerned owner of a specified dam on the safety measures  required to be 
taken with respect to any dam. This clause further provides that it shall be the  duty of every 
State Dam Saf ety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, Non -State Dam Safety  Organisation 
or Non-State Dam Safety Cell to ensure necessary action in monitoring and  implementing the 
instructions. 
 
Clause 22.— This clause relates to the funds for maintenance and repairs. 
 
This clause provides that all State Governments and other owners of specified dam  shall 
earmark sufficient and specific funds for maintenance and repairs of the specified dams  and to 
implement the recommendations of the State Dam Safety Organisation or t he State Dam Safety 
Cell, as the case may be, and the Non -State Dam Safety Organisation or, the Non -State Dam 
Safety Cell, as the case may be. 
 
Clause 23.— This clause relates to the technical documentation. 
 
This clause provides that every State Governmen t and every owner of specified dam  shall 
compile all technical documentations concerning hydrology, dam foundation, structural  
engineering of specified dam, watershed upstream of dam, and nature or use of land  
downstream of dam along with information on al l resources or facilities of economic or  logistic 
importance which are likely to be affected due to operation of the dam, and kept for  record in 
the concerned State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell or the Non -State Dam 
Safety Organisation o r Non -State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be. This clause  further 
provides that the Non -State Dam Safety Organisation or Non -State Dam Safety Cell,  as the 
case may be, shall furnish all such information to the Central Dam Safety Organisation  and 
concerned State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be,  as 
and when required by them. This clause also provides that every State Government and  every 
owner of specified dam shall ensure that the State Dam Safety Organisation or State  Dam 
Safety Cell or Non -State Dam Safety Organisation or Non -State Dam Safety Cell, have  been 
adequately equipped with the state -of-the-art of information technology tools to store,  retrieve 
and distribute the data related to the dam safety and dam performance. 
 
Clause 24.— This clause relates to the reporting of the State Dam Safety Organisation  or the 
State Dam Safety Cell or Non -State Dam Safety Organisation or Non -State Dam Safety   Cell. 
This clause provides that the State Dam Safety Organisation or the  State Dam Safety Cell shall 
be responsible to and functionally report to the highest engineering or technical  authority of the 
concerned State Government. This clause further provides that the Non -State Dam Safety 
Organisation or the Non-State Dam Safety Cell shall be responsible to and functionally report to 
the highest engineering or technical officer of the owner of the specified dam. 
 

 77 
Clause 25.— This clause relates to the individual responsible for safety of specified  dams to be 
qualified. 
 
This claus e provides that every individual responsible for safety of specified dams  and all 
activities related thereto shall possess such qualifications and experience as may be  specified 
by the Central Dam Safety Organisation. This clause further provides that ever y individual shall 
undergo such training programmes and at such intervals as may be specified  by the Central 
Dam Safety Organisation. 
 
Clause 26.— This clause relates to the jurisdiction of the State Dam Safety Organisation  or 
State Dam Safety Cell and Cen tral Dam Safety Organisation.   This clause provides that all 
specified dams, shall fall under the jurisdiction of the  State Dam Safety Organisation or State 
Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, of the State in  which dam is situated in matters related to 
dam inspections, analysis of information, reports 
or recommendations regarding safety status, and remedial measures to be undertaken to  
improve dam safety; and in all such matters full co -operation shall be extended by the  
concerned Non -State Dam Safety Orga nisation or Non -State Dam Safety Cell and the dam  
owner. This clause further provides that the authorised representative of the Central Dam Safety 
Organisation or State Dam Safety Organisation may enter upon any part of the specified dam or 
its site as and  when required. This clause also provides that the Central Dam Safety  
Organisation and concerned State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell in  cases 
of dams being found to be endangered on account of their age, degeneration,  degradation, 
structural or other impediments, shall suggest such remedial measures on   such operational 
parameters as it may consider necessary. 
 
Clause 27.—This clause relates to the cost of investigation to be borne by the dam owner.  
 
This clause provides that all costs t o be incurred by Central Dam Safety Organisation  or State 
Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell on any form of investigation  agreed by the 
owner or felt necessary by Central Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam  Safety Organisation 
or State Dam S afety Cell, including payments given to the consultants  and panel of experts, 
shall be paid by the owner of concerned specified dam. 
 
Clause 28.— This clause relates to the construction or operation or alteration of dams. 
 
This clause provides that all new  specified dams shall be investigated, designed and  
constructed by Organisations recognised by the Government and consisting of such qualified,  
experienced and competent engineers, as may be specified by the Central Dam Safety  
Organisation. This clause further provides that the construction of any new specified dam or  the 
alteration or enlargement of any existing specified dam shall be taken up only with the  approval 
of the Competent Authority, as may be specified by the Central Government or the  concerned 
State Government, as the case may be. This clause also provides that every 
owner of the dam shall be responsible for operation, maintenance and safety of the dams  
owned by it and shall ensure that a documented Operation and Maintenance Manual is kept  at 
all times at each of his dam and sufficient number of trained Operation and Maintenance  
engineers or technical persons are posted at such dams. 
 
Clause 29.— This clause relates to the initial filling of reservoirs. 

 78 
 
This clause provides that before initial filling of any reservoir of a specified dam, the organisation 
responsible for its design shall draw the filling criteria and prepare a initial filling  plan, with 
adequate time for monitoring and evaluating the performance of the dam and its  appurtenances 
as the reservoir is being filled for the first time. This clause further provides  that before the filling 
of the reservoir is taken up, the State Dam Safety Organisation or State  Dam Safety Cell or the 
concerned Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or Non -State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may 
be, shall arrange for safety inspection of the dam either through  its own engineers or by an 
independent panel of experts, who shall also examine the initial filling programme and prepare a 
detailed report in respect there of. This clause also provides  that the Non -State Dam Safety 
Organisation or Non -State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may  be, shall forward the report of 
inspection or examination to the concerned State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety 
Cell. 
 
Clause 30.— This clause relates to the responsibility of dam owner. 
 
This clause provides that nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to absolve   an owner 
of a dam of the duties, obligations or liabilities incidental to the construction,  operation, 
maintenance and supervision of the dam or reservoir. 
 
Clause 31.— This clause relates to periodical inspection. This clause provides that every owner 
of a specified dam shall establish operational  and maintenance set up for each dam and 
through such set up, undertake pre-monsoon and post-monsoon inspections of each of its dams 
to be done,— (i) in the case of specified dams, being of hundred meters height or above, by the 
concerned Chief Engineer; (ii) in the case of  specified dams, being of thirty meters heig ht or 
above, but less than hundred meters height,  by the concerned Superintendent Engineer or 
higher level officer; (iii) in the case of specified  dams, being of fifteen meters height or above, 
but less than thirty meters height, by the  concerned Executive Engineer or higher level officer; 
(iv) in the case of specified dams, being  of ten meters height or above, but less than fifteen 
meters height, by the concerned Assistant  Engineer or higher level officer. This clause further 
provides that every owner of a  specified dam shall undertake special inspections, of each of its 
dam to be undertaken by the Engineers  during and after floods, after earthquake, and if any 
sign of distress or unusual behaviour is  noticed in the dam, appurtenance or reservoir fringes. 
This clause also provides the responsibilities to be fulfilled by every owner of a specified dam for 
the purpose of inspection.  
 
Clause 32.— This clause relates to the instrumentations to be installed in every specified dam. 
 
This clause provides that every owner of a specified dam shall have a minimum number  of sets 
of instrumentations at all times for monitoring the performance of dam in respect of all  its 
specified dams. This clause further provides that in case the instrumentation installed is  
required to be replaced, such instrumentation shall be replaced in such manner so as to  
maintain the continuity of readings exhibited in such instrumentations. This clause also  provides 
that every owner of specified dam shall maintain a record of readings of the  instrumentation and 
forward such readings, to the State Dam Safety Organisation or the  State Dam Safety Cell or 
the Non -State Dam Safety Organisation or the Non -State Dam  Safety Cell concerned, in the 
form, manner and at such interval specified by them and t he State Dam Safety Organisation or 
State Dam Safety Cell or Non -State Dam Safety Organisation  or Non -State Dam Safety Cell 

 79 
concerned shall analyse the readings and wheresoever's  required to submit observations or 
advice to the highest engineering or techn ical authority of the owner of dam. This clause also 
provides that the Non -State Dam Safety Organisation  or Non-State Dam Safety Cell shall also 
forward the copy of its observations or advice to the  concerned State Dam Safety Organisation 
or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be. 
 
Clause 33.— This clause relates to the installations of hydro-meteorological station. 
 
This clause provides that every owner of specified dam shall establish a  hydro-meteorological 
station in the vicinity of at each such dam a nd every hydrometeorological  station shall be 
capable of recording data relating to, among other parameters,  rainfall, atmospheric pressure, 
maximum or minimum temperature, and humidity, wind speed,  wind direction, height of waves 
and reservoir-water temperature. 
 
Clause 34. This clause relates to installations of seismological station. 
 
This clause provides that every owner of a specified dam, in the case of specified dam  being of 
thirty meters height or above or specified dam being falling in the seismic zone III or  above, 
shall establish a seismological station in the vicinity of each such dam. This clause  further 
provides that every owner of specified dam shall collect, compile process and store  data at a 
suitable location. 
 
Clause 35.— This clause relates to the Emergency Action Plan and Disaster Management. 
 
This clause provides that the every owner of the specified dam shall, in respect of in  each 
specified dam, establish, —(a) well designed hydro -meteorological network and an  inflow 
forecasting system ; (b) an emergency flood warning system for the probable flood  affected 
areas downstream of the dam; (c) test periodically for its aptness; (d) instal or adopt  such 
scientific and technical instrument which are invented or adopted after the  commencement of 
this Act for the purpose of ensuring the safety of dam; and (e) to provide  the information relating 
to maximum auticipated inflows and outflows including flood warning  and an adverse impact of 
the same, if any, on persons and property towards the upstream  or downstream of the dam, to 
the concerned authorities and also make available such information  in public domain. This 
clause further provides that every owner of a specified dam, for each  of its dam shall, — (a) 
carry out risk assessment studies at an int erval of twenty years or at  such interval as may be 
specified by the Central Dam Safety Organisation; (b) in respect of  each specified dam existing 
on or before the commencement of this Act prepare emergency  action plan within five years 
from the date of c ommencement of this Act and thereafter  update such plans at regular 
intervals; (c) in respect of each specified dam which are  constructed and filled initially after the 
commencement of this Act, prepare emergency action  plan before the initial filling of t he 
reservoir and thereafter update such plans at regular  intervals. This clause also provides that 
the Emergency Action Plan shall, — (a) set out the procedures to be followed for the protection 
of persons and property upstream or downstream  of the dam in the event of an actual or 
imminent dam failure or to mitigate the effects of the  disaster; (b) include therein, — (i) in 
advance the type of emergencies which are likely to  occur in the operation of any reservoir; (ii) 
identification of the likely catastro phic flood in  the event of any failure of the dam, along with 
probable areas, population, structures and  installations likely to be adversely affected due to 
flood water released from the reservoir;  (iii) warning procedures, inundation maps and advance 

 80 
preparations for handling efficiently and in the best possible manner the likely adverse situations 
especially to avoid loss of  human life; (iv) such other matters which may having regard to the 
geographical condition,  size of the dam and other relevant facto rs may be necessary. This 
clause also provides that  the Emergency Action Plan shall be put into action as and when 
conditions arise which are  or likely to be hazardous to a dam or potentially hazardous to public 
safety, infrastructure, other property or th e environment and every owner of the specified dam 
shall, while preparing  and updating the emergency action plan, undertake a consultation 
process with all disaster  management agencies and other concerned departments entrusted 
with disaster management and relief in the area likely to be affected and owners of other dams 
in the immediate vicinity  likely to be affected so as to bring transparency and allay any 
unwarranted fear on dam safety issues. 
 
Clause 36.— This clause relates to the assistance to other disaster management authorities. 
 
This clause provides that every owner of specified dam, organisations and authorities  under this 
Act shall render assistance if so required by the authorities under the Disaster Management Act, 
2005 to meet any disaster or emergency arising out of the specified dams. 
 
Clause 37.— This clause relates to the obligation for Comprehensive Dam Safety Evaluation. 
 
This clause provides that the State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell  or the 
concerned Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or Non-State Dam Safety Cell, as the  case may 
be, shall, at least once in ten years, arrange for comprehensive safety evaluation of  every 
specified dam falling under them either through their own engineers or by an  independent panel 
of experts for the purpose of determining the conditions of the specified  dam and reservoir. This 
clause further provides that the exact frequency of comprehensive  evaluation shall be based on 
previous assessments, complexity of specified dam, operating 
history, recently held rehabilitation works, dam performance, age of dam and the hazard  
potential of dam. 
 
Clause 38.— This clause relates to the compulsory comprehensive evaluation in certain cases. 
 
This clause provides that the comprehensive evaluation shall be compulsory in the case of,—(a) 
major modification to the original or design criteria; (b) discovery of unusual condition at the dam 
or reservoir rim; and (c) after an extreme hydrological or seismic event. 
 
Clause 39.— This clause relates to the reports of comprehensive evaluation.  
 
This clause provides that the State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell,  as the 
case may be, shall report the results of the comprehensive safety evaluation directly  to the 
highest engineering or technical author ity of concerned State Government similarly  the Non -
State Dam Safety Organisation or Non -State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be,  shall report 
the results of the comprehensive safety evaluation, to the highest engineering or  technical 
authority of the Organisation and to the concerned State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam 
Safety Cell, as the case may be. This clause further provides that the comprehensive evaluation 
reports shall include, but not be limited to —(a) assessment of the  condition of the s tructure 
based on the visual observations and available data on the design,  hydrology, construction, 
operation, maintenance, performance of the structure; (b)  recommendations for any emergency 

 81 
measures or actions, if required, to assure the immediate  safety of the structure; (c) 
recommendations for remedial measures and actions related to  design, construction, operation, 
maintenance and inspection of the structure, if required; (d)  recommendations for additional 
detailed studies, investigations and analyses , if required;  and (e) recommendations for 
improvements in routine maintenance and inspection of dam, if  required. This clause also 
provides that in case where the comprehensive safety evaluation  resulted in recommendations 
for a remedial action, the State  Dam Safety Organisation or  State Dam Safety Cell and the 
concerned Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or Non -State Dam Safety Cell shall pursue with 
the concerned authorities or owner of the specified dam, as  the case may be, to ensure that 
remedial measures are carried out in time, for which the State  Government or such owner shall 
provide adequate funds and in case where there are unresolved  points of issues emerging 
between an independent panel of experts and the owner of the  specified dams or concerned 
authorities, as the case may be, the matter shall be referred to  the State Dam Safety 
Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, and in case,  no agreement is 
arrived at, the matter shall be referred to the Central Dam Safety Organisation  which shall give 
required guidance wherever necessary and send their recommendations to  the State 
Government concerned for their implementation.  
 
Clause 40.— This clause relates to the annual report of safety status of dams. 
 
This clause provides that every  Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or Non -State Dam Safety 
Cell, as the case may be, shall prepare and forward the annual report within three months of the 
expiry of the preceding financial year, to each of the concerned State Dam  Safety Organisation 
or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, and to the Central Dam  Safety Organisation. 
Similarly every State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell  shall prepare annual 
report within six months of the expiry of the preceding financial year of  its activities and safety 
status of dams in the State and such report shall be forwarded to the  concerned State 
Government for placing it before the concerned State Legislature and to the Central Dam Safety 
Organisation. This clause further provides that the State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam 
Safety Cell, as the case may be, of each State and the Non -State Dam Safety Organisation or 
Non-State Dam Safety Cell of each owner of a specified dam  shall provide to Central Dam 
Safety Organisation, documentation of the projects, report of  enquiries into failure and such 
other data as required in such format or manner as it may be  specified by the regulations made 
by the Central Dam Safety Organisation.This clause also  provides that the Central Dam Safety 
Organisation shall prepare a consolidated annual  report of the dam safety activities in the 
country and submit the same to the Central Government.  This clause also provides that the 
Central Dam Safety Organisation shall forward its annual 
report to the National Dis aster Management Authority and also make available such reports   in 
public domain, similarly the State Dam Safety Organisation or the State Dam Safety Cell, as  the 
case may be, of each State and Non -State Dam Safety Organisation or Non -State Dam Safety 
Cell, as the case may be, of each owner of a specified dam shall forward their annual  report to 
the concerned State Disaster Management Audhority and also make available such  reports in 
public domain. 
 
Clause 41.— This clause relates to the safety measures in respect of dams other than specified 
dams. 
 

 82 
This clause provides that every owner of the dam other than specified dams shall  undertake 
such measures as may be necessary to ensure safety of the dams and shall comply  with the 
instructions and guidelines whi ch may be issued by the concerned State  Governments or the 
authorities. 
 
Clause 42.— This clause relates to the measures of safety of dams located outside  territory of 
India. 
 
This clause provides that where a dam is located at outside territory of India a nd the Central 
Dam Safety Organisation suo motu or on receipt of information from any person or  organisation 
or authority or source prima facie is of the opinion that measures are required  to be taken to 
ensure safety of such dams and failure of which woul d may endanger the life  and property 
located in India, it shall in writing submit an intimation thereof to the Central  Government 
indicating therein the likely damages which may arise due to failure of such dam  and the safety 
measures required to be taken in respect of such dam. This clause further  provides that the 
Central Government on receipt of intimation or otherwise shall endeavour  to take suitable 
measures to ensure safety of dams by entering into treaty, agreement or  convention with any 
other country or countries concerned with the safety of such dam and  lay a report in respect of 
such measures before both Houses of Parliament. 
 
Clause 43.— This clause relates to the effect of Act on other laws. 
 
This clause provides that the provisions of this propo sed legislation shall have effect  
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time  being in 
force. 
 
Clause 44.— This clause relates to the power of Central Government to give directions. 
 
This clause provides that the  Central Government may give such directions as it may  consider 
necessary to the State Government and owner of the specified dam for the effective  
implementation of the provisions of this proposed legislation. 
 
Clause 45.— This clause relates to the power of the Central Government to make rules.  
 
This clause confers power upon the Central Government to make rules in respect of  matters 
specified in the said clause. 
 
Clause 46.— This clause relates to the power of the State Government to make rules. 
 
This clause confers the power upon the State Government to make rules in respect of  matters 
specified in the said clause. 
Clause 47.— This clause relates to the power of the Central Dam Safety Organisation  to make 
regulations. 
 
This clause confers power upon the Central Dam Safety Organisation to make  regulations 
consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
 
Clause 48.— This clause relates to the power to remove difficulties. 

 83 
 
This clause empowers the Central Govern ment to remove any difficulty which may  arise in 
giving effect to the provisions of the proposed legislation. 
 
Clause 49.— This clause relates to the rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament  and 
State Legislatures. 
 
This clause provides that the rules made by the Central Government shall be laid  before each 
House of Parliament. Similarly, every rule made by the State Government shall be  laid before 
the State Legislature. 
 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Na tional Committee on Dam Safety  consisting 
of a Chairperson and eight ex officio Members, and other specialists or experts  in the field of 
dam safety as Members and invitees and a Member Secretary. Clause 9 of the  Bill provides for 
establishment of Central Dam Safety Organisation in Central Water  Commission. Clause 10 of 
the Bill provides for the appointment of officers and other employees  of the Central Dam Safety 
Organisation. Clause 40 of the Bill provides to prepare an annual  report on the activities related 
to Dam Safety. The recurring expenditure of rupees fifty lakhs  per annum is anticipated for 
meeting expenses of the National Committee on Dam Safety, Central Dam Safety Organisation, 
expenses relating to fee and allowances for experts and  specialists and for the preparation of 
annual reports, etc., which would be met under the  existing schemes of the Ministry of Water 
Resources. In respect of clauses 9 and 10 of the  Bill, no additional post of officers or staff is 
envisaged presently. 
 
The provisions o f the Bill will not involve any other expenditure of recurring or 
nonrecurring 
nature. 
 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 45 empowers the Central Government to make rules for the purpose of 
carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub -clause (2) specifies  the matters in 
respect of which such rules may be made. These matters, inter alia, include— (a) the times and 
places of the meetings of the National Committee on Dam Safety and the  procedure to be 
followed at such meetings under sub-section (1) of section 6; (b) the fee  and allowances paid to 
the specialists or expert members and specialists or expert invitees  under sub -section (4) of 
section 6; (c) the functions, powers and terms and conditions of 
service of the employees of the Central Dam Safety Organisation under sub -section (2) of  
section 10; (d) any other matter which is to be or may be, prescribed or in respect of which  
provision is to be made by the Central Government by rules.  
 
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 46 empowers the State Government to make rules for the  purpose 
of carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub -clause (2) specifies the matters in 
respect of which such rules may be made. These matters, inter alia,include —(a) the terms and 
conditions of the Chairperson and members of the State Committee  on Dam Safety and the 

 84 
procedure in regard to transaction of business at these meetings of  the said Committee under 
sub-section (3) of section 12; (b) the constitution and functions 
of the State Dam Safety Organisation under sub -section (2) of section 15; (c) the constitution  
and functions of the State Dam Safety Cell under sub -section (2) of section 16; (d) any other  
matter which is to be or may be, prescribed or in respect of which provision is to be made by the 
State Government by rules. 
 
3. Sub -clause (1) of clause 47 empowers the Central Dam Safety Organisation to make  
regulations consistent with the proposed legislation and the rules made thereunder to carry  out 
the purposes of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) specifies the matter in respect of which 
such regulations may be made. These matters, inter alia, include — (a) the  constitution and 
functions of the Non-State Dam Safety Organisation under sub -section (3) of section 17; (b) the 
constitution and functions of the Non-State Dam Safety Cell under sub-section (3) of section 18; 
(c) the details pertaining to the maintenance of log books by 
the State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell or Non -State Dam Safety  
Organisation or Non -State Dam Safety Cell under section 20; (d) the qualifications and  
experience of the individuals responsible for safety of specified dams under sub -section (1) of 
section 25; (e) the qualifications and experience of the engineers responsi ble for investigation, 
design and construction of specified dams under sub -section (2) of section  28; (f) the checklist 
or format or proforma or guidelines of inspections under clause (a) of  sub-section (3) of section 
31; (g) the minimum number of set of instrumentations to be installed in the specified dam under 
sub-section (1) of section 32; (h) the frequency of risk  assessment studies to be carried out 
under clause (a) of sub -section (2) of section 35; (i) the  format or manner with respect to such 
other data as required under sub -section (3) of  section 40; (j) and any other matter which is to 
be specified or in respect of which provision  is to be made by the Central Dam Safety 
Organisation by regulations. 
 
4. Clause 49 provides that every rule made by the  Central Government and every  regulation 
made by the Central Dam Safety Organisation are required to be laid before each  House of 
Parliament and every rule made by the State Government are required to be laid  before each 
House of the State Legislature wher e it consists of two Houses, or where such  Legislature 
consists of one House, before that House. 
 
5. The matters in respect of which rules may be made by the Central Government and  the State 
Government are matters of procedure and administrative details an d it is not  practicable to 
provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is,  therefore, of a normal 
character. 
 

 85 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
A 
 
 
BILL 
 
 
 
to provide for proper surveillance, inspection, operation and maintenance of all dams of 
certain parameters in India to ensure their safe functioning and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
(Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal, Minister of Parliamentary Affairs & Water Resources) 
 
 

 86 
LOK SABHA 
———— 
CORRIGENDA 
 
to  
 
THE DAM SAFETY BILL,2010 
 
(To be / As introduced in Lok Sabha) 
 
1.  Page 1, in the last line, - 
         for "by the Parliament" 
         read "by Parliament" 
2.  Page 4, line 37, - 
         for "Ministry of Water Resource" 
         read "Ministry of Water Resources" 
3.  Page 9, line 6, - 
         for "undertakings" 
         read "undertaking" 
4.  Page 9, line 30, - 
         for "undertakings" 
         read "undertaking" 
5.  Page 9, line 40, - 
         for "undertakings" 
         read "undertaking" 
6.  Page 13, line 6, - 
          for "floods, after earthquake," 
          read "floods, earthquake," 
7.  Page 14, line 3,- 
          for "of at each" 
          read "of each" 
8.  Page 15, line 36, - 
          for "guidlines" 
          read "guidelines" 
9.  Page 18, line 7, -  
          for "regulation" 
          read "regulations" 
 
NEW DELHI; 
 
26 August, 2010 
4 Bhadrapada, 1932 (Saka) 
 

 87 
Annexure – III 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2010-11) HELD ON MONDAY, 04 OCTOBER 2010 
 
 The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1630 hours in Committee Room ‗B‘, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
              Shri Beni Prasad Verma – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi 
3. Shri Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan 
4. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
5. Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
6. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
7. Shri Virender Kashyap 
8. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
9. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy  
10. Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
11.        Shri S.P.Y. Reddy 
12.        Smt. J. Shantha 
              13.       Shri K. Shivkumar alias J.K. Riteesh  
 14.       Dr. P. Venugopal (Tiruvallur) 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
15. Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
16.         Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
17. Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
18. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
19.  Shri Mangala Kisan 
20.  Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
   
SECRETARIAT 
 
  Shri N.K. Sapra   - Additional Secretary 

 88 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
1.       Shri U.N. Panjiar, Secretary 
2.       Shri A.K. Bajaj, Chairman, Central Water Commission 
3.       Shri A.B. Pandya, Commissioner (PR) 
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed  the newly appointed Members to the sitting of 
the Committee.   Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Water Resources to the sitting of the Committee convened to have briefing on ―The Dam Safety 
Bill, 2010‖ by the officials of the Ministry of Water Resources. 
 
2. After the introduction, the Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources gave a briefing on the 
subject and a power point presentation was made on ‗The Dam Safety Bill, 2010‘.  Thereafter, 
Members sought clarifications a nd gave some suggestions on various issues relating to the Bill 
which were replied to by the representatives of the Ministry.   
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
           
  
3. The Committee decided to hold another meeting for clause by clause discussion on the 
Bill.  It was also decided to invite suggestions/views of public through publicity in the print and 
electronic media and also obtain comments of the State Governments.   In the meantime views 
of some experts (as informed by the MoWR) may be obtained by  calling them before the 
Committee.  The Committee then decided to hold next sitting on 26 October  2010 for having 
views of the non-official experts on the Bill. 
 
4. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting were kept for record. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

 89 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES  (2010-11) HELD ON TUESDAY, 26 OCTOBER 2010 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1615 hours in Committee Room ‗C‘, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
              Shri Beni Prasad Verma – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi 
3. Shri Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan 
4. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
5. Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
6. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
7. Shri Virender Kashyap 
8. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
9. Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
10. Shri S.P.Y. Reddy 
11. Shri Arjun Roy 
12.          Smt. J. Shantha 
              13.         Smt. Annu Tandon  
14.          Dr. P. Venugopal (Tiruvallur) 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
15. Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
16.         Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
17. Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
18. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
19.  Shri Mangala Kisan 
20. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
21. Smt. Bimla Kashyap Sood 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri B.S. Dahiya  - Director  

 90 
List of Non-Official witnesses 
  
1. 
 
2. 
Shri M.S. Reddy, Former Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources and 
 former Chairman, Central Water Commission  
Shri S.K. Das, Former Chairman, Central Water Commission 
3. Shri M.S. Billore, Former Secretary (Irrigation) and Advisor, Govt. of Madhya Pradesh  
               
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Standing 
Committee on Water Resources.   
2. ***     ***     *** 
3. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed each of the Non -Official witnesses invited, one-by-
one, to offer their views/comments/suggestions before the Committee on ‗The Dam Safety Bill, 
2010‘.  He drew their attention to the provisions of Direction 55(1) of the Directions by the 
Speaker, Lok Sabha.  The Committee then took oral evidence  of the Non -Official witnesses.   
Thereafter, the Chairman and the members sought certain clarifications in brief on various 
provisions of the Bill and the witnesses responded thereto.    
4. The following main points emerged during the discussion : 
 i) Tenure of specialists/experts in National Committee on Dam Safety 
 ii) Functioning of National Committee on Dam Safety 
 iii) Establishment of National Dam Safety Organisation 
 iv) Definition of Dam – meaning and scope 
 (v) Periodicity of risk assessment studies 
 vi) Safety of Dams including non-State dams 
 vii) Reporting of Dam failures  
5. The Committee then decided to hold next sitting on 03 November, 2010 for having 
some more views of the non-official experts on the Bill. 
The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee have been kept for record. 
The Committee then adjourned 
___________________________________________________________________________ 
**** Minutes in respect of other matters kept separately. 

 91 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES  (2010-11) HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 03 NOVEMBER 2010 
 
The Committee sat from 1200 hours to 1300 hours in Committee Room ‗D‘, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
              Shri Beni Prasad Verma – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi 
3. Shri Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan 
4. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
5. Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
6. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
7. Shri Virender Kashyap 
8. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
9. Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
10. Shri S.P.Y. Reddy 
11. Shri Arjun Roy 
12.        Smt. J. Shantha 
             13.        Smt. Annu Tandon  
14.        Dr. P. Venugopal (Tiruvallur) 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
15. Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
16.         Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
17. Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
18. Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan 
19. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
20. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri B.S. Dahiya  - Director  
  

 92 
List of Non-Official witnesses 
1. 
2. 
Dr. M.A. Chitale, Former Secretary, MoWR and former Chairman, CWC 
Shri V.M. Ranade, Former Secretary (Irrigation), Government of Maharashtra 
3. Shri S.C. Sinha, Retd. Chief Engineer, Government of Bihar 
               
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Standing 
Committee on Water Resources convened to take oral evidence of non-official witnesses on the 
Dam Safety Bill, 2010.   
2. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed each of the Non-Official witnesses one-by-one and 
requested them to offer their views/comments/suggestions on ‗The Dam Safety Bill, 2010‘ 
before the Committee.  He drew their attention to the provisions of Direction 55(1) of the 
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.  The Committee then took oral evidence of the Non -
Official witnesses.   Thereafter, the Chairman an d the members sought certain clarifications on 
various provisions of the Bill.  The witnesses responded to the queries and highlighted the 
inadequacies of the Bill as perceived by them and offered constructive suggestions. 
3. The following main points emerged during the discussion : 
 i) Operation and maintenance of the gates of the dams, 
 ii) Responsibility in case of inter-State dams, 
 iii) Effect of up stream dams on low stream dams, 
 iv) Composition of National Committee on Dam Safety, 
 v) Definition of Specified Dams, 
 vi) The desirability of setting up gauge stations, climatological stations and 
seismological stations at the dams locations, and 
 
 vii) Comprehensive dam safety evaluation and the periodicity of reviews/inspection 
of dams.  
  The verbatim proceedings of the sitting of the Committee have been kept for record. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

 93 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2010-11) HELD ON MONDAY, 27 DECEMBER 2010 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours t o 1645 hours in Room No. 62, First Floor, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
              Shri Beni Prasad Verma – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi 
3. Shri Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan 
4. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
5. Shri Virender Kashyap 
6. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
7.           Shri S.P.Y. Reddy 
8.           Shri Arjun Roy 
              9.          Smt. Annu Tandon 
10.        Dr. P. Venugopal (Tiruvallur) 
11. Shri Sajjan Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
12. Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
13.         Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
14. Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
15. Dr. Ashok S. Ganguley 
16.  Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
17.  Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
18. Smt. Bimla Kashyap Sood  
   
SECRETARIAT 
 
  Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Director 
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
1. Shri Dhruv Vijai Singh, Secretary 
2. Shri A.K. Bajaj, Chairman, Central Water Commission 
3. Dr. B.R. Pillai, Director, (DSR) 
 

 94 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee and 
the representatives of the Ministry of Water Resources and Cent ral Water Commission to the 
sitting of the Committee convened to have oral evidence on ―The Dam Safety Bill, 2010‖. 
2. After introduction, the officials of the Ministry gave clause -by-clause power point 
presentation indicating the suggestions of the expert s/individuals accepted and not accepted by 
the Ministry along with the reasons therefor.  The Members also sought clarifications besides 
offering  suggestions on the following issues relating to the Bill:   
 (i) Effect on environment/ecology; 
(ii) Visual inspection of dams.  
 
(iii) Core Technical Committee (Non political) to be appointed by the National 
Committee for inspection of Dam Safety; 
 
   (iv) BIS standards for dam safety; 
 (v) Penal clause for dam failures to be introduced; and 
 (vi) Problems of the downstream States. 
3. The Secretary, MoWR assured the Committee that due weightage would be given to 
the suggestions made by the Committee while carrying out  the necessary modifications in the 
Bill.  The Chairman also observed that the Committee would m eet again to consider the 
response of the Ministry on their suggestions/observations. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
4. ***     ***     ***
           
5. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting were kept for record. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
 _________________________________________________________________________ 
**** Minutes in respect of other matters kept separately. 
 

 95 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2010-11) HELD ON THURSDAY, 24 MARCH 2011 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1600 hours in Committee Room ‗B‘, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
              Shri Dip Gogoi – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan 
3. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
4. Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
5. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
6. Shri S.P.Y. Reddy 
7.           Shri Arjun Roy 
8.           Smt. J. Shantha 
             9.          Smt. Annu Tandon 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
10. Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
11.         Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
12. Dr. Ashok S. Ganguley 
13. Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan 
14.  Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
15. Shri Ranjitsinh Vijaysinh Mohite-Patil 
16.  Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
17. Smt. Bimla Kashyap Sood  
   
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri B.S. Dahiya  - Director 
3. Smt. Rita Jailkhani  - Additional Director 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
1.  Shri Dhruv Vijai Singh, Secretary 
2.  Shri G. Mohan Kumar, Additional Secretary 

 96 
3.  Shri A.B. Pandya, Commissioner (PR) 
4.  Shri A.K. Bajaj, Chairman, Central Water Commission 
5.  Shri S.P. Kakran, Member (D&R), CWC 
6.  Shri  C.S. Mathur, Chief Engineer (DSO), CWC 
7.  Dr. B.R. Pillai, Director (DSR), CWC  
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW & JUSTICE  
(LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT) 
 
 
1. Dr. G. Narayana Raju, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel 
2. Smt. Sudha Rani Relangi, Deputy Legislative Counsel 
3. Dr. R. Sreenivas, Deputy Legislative Counsel 
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee and 
thereafter the representatives of the Ministry of Water Resources, Central W ater Commission 
and Ministry of Law & Justice (Legislative Department) to the sitting of the Committee convened 
to have further oral evidence on ―The Dam Safety Bill, 2010‖. 
2. After introduction, the Members sought clarifications on various issues related  to the 
subject which were replied to by the representatives of the Ministries.  The points raised and 
discussed during the sitting of the Committee included the following : 
(i) Safety of dams from earthquakes; 
(ii) Provision for penalty clause in case of dam failu re and not obeying provisions 
contained in the Bill; 
 
(iii) Composition of State Dam Safety Organisation;  
(iv) Safety from criminal and terrorist activities;  
(v) Provision for disaster compensation by the State; 
(vi) Periodic examination of existing dams; 
(vii) Creation of Dam Safety and Inspection Authority; and 
(viii) Emergency action plan. 
3. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting were kept for record. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 

 97 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2010-11) HELD ON THURSDAY, 12 MAY 2011 
 
 The Committee sat from 1130 hours to 1200 hours in Committee Room ‗D‘, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
              Shri Dip Gogoi – Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi 
3. Shri Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan 
4. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
5. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
6. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
7. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
8. Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
9.           Shri S.P.Y. Reddy 
10.         Smt. J. Shantha 
11. Smt. Annu Tandon 
12.         Dr. P. Venugopal (Tiruvallur) 
13. Shri Sajjan Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
14.         Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
15. Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
16. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
17. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Secretary 
2. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Director 
  
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened for consideration and adoption of draft Report on ‗The Dam Safety Bill, 2010'. 

 98 
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up the draft Report on ‗The Dam Safety Bill, 2 010' for 
consideration.  After some discussion, the Committee adopted the Report subject to 
suggestions/modification, if any, received from the Members within a week. 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the Report in view of the 
consequential changes, if any, and present the same to the Hon'ble Speaker under Direction 
No.  71 A(1) of Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha.  
4. The Committee proposed to undertake a Study Visit in the month of June, 2011. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
 
 
 
 