 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2012-2013) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2012-2013)  
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Fourteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources} 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
August, 2013/Shravana, 1935 (Saka) 
 
18 

 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
 
(2012-2013) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-2013) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Fourteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 07.08.2013 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 07.08.2013 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2013/Shravana, 1935 (Saka) 

 
WRC NO. 40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2011 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 

 
CONTENTS 
            PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2012-13)…………………     (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………    (iv) 
 
 
CHAPTER I   Report ………………………………………    1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been  19 
accepted by the Government …………………..  
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the    59 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government‟s replies ………………………..  
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of    60 
which replies of the Government have not been  
accepted by the Committee …………………….  
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which   66 
final replies of the Government are still awaited …  
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
  I Details showing reasons for variation and action taken  67  
            by States 
 
  II Status of funds released and the irrigation potential   70 
                          targeted and actually created State-wise and Year-wise  
                          since 1996-97    
 
  III Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee held  71 
                                        on 31.05.2013.   
 
  IV Analysis of action taken by the Government on the   73 
                          Recommendations / Observations contained in the Fourteenth 
                          Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee. 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES (2012-13) 
 
  Shri Dip Gogoi  -  Chairman 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Kameshwar Baitha 
3. Shri Kamlesh Balmiki 
4. Smt. Raj Kumari Chauhan 
5. Dr. Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan 
6. Smt. Shruti Choudhry 
7. Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit 
8.        Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
9. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
10. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
11. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
12.        Shri Kabindra Purkayastha 
             13.        Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao  
14.        Shri S.P.Y. Reddy 
15.         Shri Arjun Roy 
16. Shri Rakesh Sachan 
17. Shri Kalyan Singh 
18.          Shri Murarilal Singh 
19. Dr. P. Venugopal 
20. Shri Sajjan Verma 
21. Vacant 
  
              RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.        Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
23. Smt. Vandana Chavan 
24. Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
25. Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
26. Dr. Ashok S. Ganguly 
27. Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan 
    28. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
           29. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
30. Shri A.V. Swamy 
 31. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.C. Tiwari   - Director 
 3. Smt. Rita Jailkhani  - Additional Director 
 4. Shri G. Guite   - Committee Officer 
5. Smt. Shanta Banerjee Datta - Sr. Committee Assistant 
 
 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Water Resources (201 2-2013) having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present the Eighteenth Report on 
the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the Fourteenth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water Resources (201 1-2012) on 
Demands for Grants (2012-2013) of the Ministry of Water Resources.  
2. The Fourteenth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on 03 May 2012.  The 
replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on            
06 August 2012. 
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and adopted by 
the Committee at their sitting held on 31 May 2013. 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the Fourteenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Annexure-IV. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                       DIP GOGOI, 
24 July, 2013                                         Chairman, 
02 Shravana, 1935 (Saka)                  Standing Committee on Water Resources 
  
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources deals with the action taken 
by the Government on the recommendations / observations contained in their Fourteenth 
Report (15 th Lok Sabha)  on "Demands for Grants (201 2-13)" of the Ministry of Water 
Resources which was presented to Lok Sabha on 03 May 2012. 
2. Action taken notes were received from the Government in respect of all the 31 
observations/recommendations of the Committee which have been categorised as follows:- 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos. 1.35, 1.37, 1.38, 1.40, 2.20, 2.21, 2.22, 2.23, 2.24, 3.26, 3.27, 3.28, 
3.29, 3.30, 3.31, 4.15, 4.16, 4.17, 4.18, 4.19, 4.20, 5.14, 5.15, 5.16 , 
5.17, 6.12 and 6.13                  (Total =27) 
  
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government‟s replies: 
Para Nos. NIL                          (Total - NIL) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in re spect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee:  
Para Nos. 1.36, 1.39, 2.25 and 3.32       (Total = 4) 
  
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the Government 
is still awaited: 
Para No. NIL                          (Total - NIL) 
 

 
3. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of the 
recommendations/observations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A.  Budgetary Allocation 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1.35) 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
4.  The Committee noted that the Budget provision in the Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR) for the year 2012 -13 is Rs.2,067.60 crore.  This figure is 
exclusive of the funds earmarked for Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme and other 
water resources programmes.  There is an increase of Rs.918.27 crore in BE 2012 -13 over RE 
2011-12.    According to the Ministry, the increase in total Budget allocation by Rs.918.27 crore 
was necessitated by the three new schemes, viz. National Water Mission, Irrigation 
Management Programme and Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement Programme (DRIP) taken up 
during the year 2012 -13.  The Committee wonder whether the Ministry would be able to spend  
the increased allocation of Rs. 918.27 crore during 2012 -13 given the fact the RE for 2011 -12 
had to be reduced by Rs.100.00 crore i.e. for BE of Rs.1,249.33 to Rs.1,149.33 crore.  The 
reductions in the allocation at RE stage during 2011 -12 occurred despite the Committee having 
cautioned them in their earlier report to evolve a rational and sound system of budgeting to 
avoid reduction in allocations at RE stage.  The Committee found such reduction as indicative 
of poor pre-Budget planning, lack of effective coordination, monitoring and supervision over the 
subordinate/field offices, organizations, institutes etc.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommended that the Ministry identify the causes responsible for higher estimation at BE 
stage and reduction at RE sta ge and also to ensure that funds allocated are utilized for the 

 
approved purposes within the financial year.  The Committee are optimistic that if the funds 
allocated are fully spent, there would be adequate justification for seeking higher allocations.  
The Committee would like to be apprised of the new measures devised in this behalf. 
5. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
 "The budget allocation of Central Ground Water Board was increased at RE stage in 
2011-12. Therefore, there was no reduction at RE stage.  
 During 2012 -13, Aquifer Mapping and Management has been taken up as major   
component  in addition to procurement of new rigs, strengthening of observation wells, 
spill over work of Demonstrative Artificial Recharge  and explora tion through 
outsourcing. 
 CGWB has already placed the supply order to DGS&D for supply of 8 new drilling rigs 
which are expected to be delivered shortly.  Indent for procurement of 13 more new 
drilling rigs has been placed to DGS&D and during current year (2012-13) funds 
amounting to Rs. 52 crore have been allocated to enable procurement of rigs.  
 All efforts are being made to fully utilize the budget allocation."   
6.  The Committee note that during 2012 -13 the MoWR has taken up Aquifer 
Mapping and Managem ent as major component in addition to procurement of new rigs, 
strengthening of observation wells, spill over work of Demonstrative Artificial Recharge 
and exploration through outsourcing, which accounts for the increased allocation of 
Rs.918.27 crore in B E 2012 -13 over RE 2011 -12.  The Committee hope that the 
Government would ensure speedy completion of all the activities to make full utilization 
of funds.  The Committee reiterate their recommendation for identifying the factors 
responsible for unrealistic  estimation at BE stage and to ensure utilization of funds for 
the approved projects within the financial year. 
 
 
 
 

 
B. Bharat Nirman 
Recommendation (Para No.1.36) 
7.  The Committee noted that irrigation is one of the six components of development of 
rural infrastructure envisaged under Bharat Nirman Programme.  There is a proposal to carry 
the Programme into XII Plan, and the target set is reportedly 10 Mha for XII Plan.  Regarding its 
achievements, the Ministry stated at one place that a total irrigation p otential of 10.8 Mha has 
been created from 2005-06 till date under Bharat Nirman.  The Committee also noted that since 
2007-08 an expenditure of Rs.31792.75 crore has been incurred on achieving the targets of 
irrigation potential.   The Committee also note d that starting from 2005 -06 to 2011 -12, the 
Ministry has been unable to achieve the targets fixed for creation of irrigation potential.   The 
Committee felt that there is an urgent need to delve deeper into the reasons for not achieving 
the targets and de sired that the Ministry set realistic and achievable targets in future.  The 
Committee also desired to know the expenditure incurred in creating irrigation potential per 
million hectare (Mha) so far.  
8. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"Irrigation being a State subject, irrigation projects are planned, executed and funded 
by the State Governments themselves as per their priorities.  It has been observed that 
due to certain bottlenecks like issues related to land acquisition, R&R p roblems, inter-
departmental problems, the projects get delayed and the targets as per the time 
schedule are not achieved in the projects assisted by Government of India through 
AIBP.  It is for the State Governments to set achievable targets and also the M onitoring 
units of CWC are being requested to visit the projects at least twice a year so that the 
actual physical progress may be assessed and the bottlenecks encountered may be 
consulted with the State Governments." 
 
9.  The Committee deplore the reply o f the MoWR for not furnishing the data on 
expenditure incurred so far on creation of irrigation potential per Mha under Bharat 
Nirman.  The Committee had urged the Ministry to delve deeper into the reasons 

 
responsible for not achieving the set targets unde r the Programme and to set realistic 
and achievable targets in this regard in the future.  The Committee are therefore of the  
considered view that while giving approval to irrigation projects submitted by States 
under the Programme, the Ministry should in sist on setting of realistic and achievable 
targets as a pre -condition for inclusion of additional irrigation projects  under Bharat 
Nirman.  The States should also be asked to submit a comprehensive action plan to 
address the issues which could hamper the timely execution of projects under AIBP.  
 
C. Utilisation Certificates  
Recommendation (Para No.1.39) 
 
10. The Committee noted that as on 01.10.2011, there were a large number of Utilisation 
Certificates (UCs) pending pertaining to the Grants released to Institutions (200), Autonomous 
Bodies (8) as well as the State Governments.    The amounts involved in respect of such 
outstanding UCs as on 1.10.2011 were Rs. 3286.67 crore in case of Institutions and 
Autonomous Bodies and Rs.19.49 crore in case of State Governments.  The Committee also 
noted the reply of the Ministry attributing this problem to the difficulty being faced in obtaining 
the UCs from Institutions, Autonomous Bodies and the States.  The Committee observed that 
despite the existence of a Commit tee to examine and monitor the outstanding UCs, a large 
number of UCs involving a huge amount are pending.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommended the Ministry to strictly ensure that there is no further release of grants to 
Institutions, Autonomous Bodies and States in case of failure to get the UCs for grants released 
for the preceding year.  They also desired to be apprised of the particulars of the States who 

 
failed to furnish the UCs and the amount of funds released to each of them for which the UCs 
are outstanding.  The Committee also recommended the Ministry to keep strict vigil on 
implementation of schemes/projects and submission of UCs on time by conducting periodic 
inspections, reviews and strengthening the Committee entrusted with monitoring the 
submission of Utilisation Certificates. 
 
11. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"The position in respect of the pending UCs pertaining to the Grants released  upto 
2009-10 to  the Institutions / autonomous bodies have come down to Rs. 22.17 crores. 
All PAOs are watching receipt of UCs at the time of release of Grants- in- aid. No grants 
are being released without getting the UCs for the grants released for the previous 
years as provisions contained in GFR. 
 
As regards the UCs of State G overnments the concerned SMDs viz CAD, Minor 
Irrigation and Ganga Wing are keeping in touch with the State Governments for 
reconciliation/for speeding up of the UCs. Frequent meetings with concerned SMDs are 
also organized for expediting the UCs from the State Governments." 
 
12. With a view to get updated information on the magnitude of outstanding 
Utilization Certificates (UCs) pending with the States, the Committee had asked the 
Ministry to apprise them about the names of the States which failed to furnis h UCs and  
the amount of funds released to each of them for which UCs were outstanding. The 
Committee are however perturbed to note that the reply of the Ministry is silent on this 
issue.  The Committee deplore the failure of the Ministry to apprise them a bout the 
factual position in the matter.  They, therefore, express their displeasure and reiterate 
that the Ministry should furnish the requisite information without any loss of time so that 
the Committee may have a comprehensive view on the issue of pending UCs. 
 
 

 
D. Unapproved Projects  
Recommendation (Para No.2.21) 
 
13. The Committee noted that the schemes under Plan Sector require investment 
clearance from the Planning Commission for which there is an established procedure.  The 
Committee were informed during examination of Demands for Grants (2010 -11) that in case of 
MMI projects, State Planning Boards are empowered to clear the proposals if inter -State issues 
are not involved.  Despite well -defined guidelines and procedure being in place, the Committee  
were shocked to learn that a large member of Major and Medium Irrigation Projects have been 
under implementation without having necessary approval from the Planning Commission.   As 
per XI Plan document, 90 major, 136 Medium and 74 ERM Projects have been under execution 
without investment clearance from the Planning Commission.  The Committee were informed 
that as per the Report of the Working Group, 327 projects were reportedly ongoing in XI Plan, 
out of which 170 projects including 70 Major, 87 Medium an d 13 ERM are unapproved.  The 
Ministry informed the Committee that no Central assistance is provided to the unapproved 
projects and that it is incumbent on the part of State Governments to take necessary initiative 
to put up comprehensive proposal/DPR of t he unapproved projects for techno -economic 
appraisal before the 'Advisory Committee  on Irrigation, Flood Control and Multi -Purpose 
Projects' of MoWR for their acceptance, followed by investment clearance from the Planning 
Commission.  The Committee, theref ore, recommended that the Minisitry pursue the matter 
with the State Governments to get regularised all the 170 unapproved projects which spillover 
into XII Plan period.  They also recommended that the Ministiry impress upon the State 

 
Governments to accord  priority to unapproved projects for getting them regularised instead of 
taking up new proposals.   
14. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"Central Water Commission has taken up the issue with State Governments.  CWC has 
requested a ll the concerned States on 20.07.2012 to initiate action for getting the 
acceptance of the Advisory Committee and investment clearance from the Planning 
Commission."  
 
15. The Committee note that the Central Water Commission has requested the 
concerned States to initiate action for getting the acceptance of the Advisory Committee 
and investment clearance from the Planning Commission.  However, the Committee feel  
that taking into account the large number of unapproved projects – 70 Major, 87 Medium 
and 13 E RM – it may take considrable time to get all these 170 projects regularised.  
They, therefore, desire the MoWR to take vigorous steps for getting all these 170 
unapproved irrigation projects regularised in a time -bound schedule.   The Commitee 
also desire that updated information about the status of these 170 unapproved projects 
may be obtained from the concerned States and submitted to the Committee.  The 
States may also be cautioned that new proposals for irrigation sector would be 
approved by the Ministr y only after regularization of these unapproved Major, Médium 
and ERM proejcts in the States. 
E. Assessment of irrigation potential under AIBP by NRSA. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.25) 
 
16. The Committee were informed that the work study of assessment of irr igation potential 
creation through mapping of irrigation infrastructures to monitor the progress was assigned to 

 
NRSA, Hyderabad in respect of 53 AIBP assisted projects spread over 18 States during the XI 
Plan.  According to the Ministry, the study was com pleted during 2009-10.  It not only provides 
the potential created but also gives critical gap areas for further effective monitoring.  The 
Committee noted that the NRSC has also been further awarded the work of similar assessment 
in respect of another 50 projects spread over 14 States in second phase during XI Plan which 
is targeted to be completed by October, 2012.   The Committee desired the Ministry to furnish 
the details of the study conducted by NRSC, Hyderabad regarding the potential created and 
the gap areas suggested for further effective monitoring and the corrective steps taken to fill up 
the gaps so suggested.  The Committee expected that the study of another 50 projects will be 
completed within the stipulated time i.e. October, 2012.   
17. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"After receipt of the Reports from NRSC, Hyderabad, these were examined by Central 
Water Commission to find percentage variation in potential creation as per NRSC and 
data furnished by the Project autho rities. It was found that the variation in potential 
creation in respect of 17 projects was more than 15%.  The State Govts./Project 
Authorities of such projects were asked to furnish their views/comments on the 
variation. Out of 17 projects, the action ta ken to fill the gap areas in respect of 9 
projects were received from the State Govts./ Project authorities. The details showing 
reasons for variation and action taken by States are appended in Annexure-1. 
 
In respect of the work related to 50 projects, th e Report have been received for 17 
projects so far from NRSC Hyderabad."  
 
18. The Committee observe that out of 50 projects, assigned to NRSC Hyderabad for 
assessment of irrigation potential creation, report has so far been received in case of 
only 17 projects and in all these projects, variation in potential creation was found to be 
more than 15 percent.  Further, they find that measures have been initiated to fill the gap 
areas only in case of 9 projects by the State Governments/Project authorities.  The  

 
Committee desire the Ministry to vigorously pursue with the State Governments/Project 
authorities so that their comments containing action taken to fill the gap areas in 
respect of the remaining 8 AIBP projects are received expeditiously.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the efforts made by the Ministry to obtain reports from 
NRSC Hyderabad in respect of the remaining projects and also the further follow up 
action taken thereon. 
F. Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies  
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.32) 
 
19. The Committee noted that the Government of India launched a Pilot Scheme for 
Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies as State sector scheme during  X 
Plan which envisaged a Plan outlay of Rs.300.00 crore to be share d by the Centre and States 
in the ratio of 3:1.  The objectives of the Scheme are revival, augmentation and utilisation of 
storage and irrigation potential of water bodies.  Two schemes namely, (i) scheme with external 
assistance with an outlay of Rs.1500 crore, and (ii) scheme with domestic support with an 
outlay of Rs.1250 crore have been approved by the Government in this regard for 
implementation during the XI Plan period.  During the year 2011 -12 (till December, 2011), a 
sum of Rs.288.09 crore had been  released under the Scheme with domestic support, whereas 
a sum of Rs.174.88 crore had been released till December, 2011 under external assistance 
component.   The Committee were informed that a total sum of Rs.808.91 crore had been 
released during 2009 -10, 2010 -11, and 2011 -12 to 12 States, covering 3341 water bodies.  
Further, a proposal for covering 126 more water bodies in Odisha and Madhya Pradesh has 
also been processed for release of funds.  However, the Committee were dismayed to note that 

 
out of 3341 water bodies involving a total project cost of Rs.1350.90 were taken up during the 
same period, only 694 water bodies had been completed, ( i.e. a mere 20.77% achievement).  
Works in the remaining 2647 water bodies are stated to be in progress.  The Comm ittee 
recommended that the Ministry make concerted efforts to complete the remaining 2641 water 
bodies for which work is stated to be in progress.   They also desired that the Ministry should 
apprise them about the thrust areas which have been identified f or achievement during 2012 -
13 as also the fund allocated by the Planning Commission for RRR Scheme and the follow up 
action taken in this regard.  
20. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"Observation made by the Committee has been no ted and follow up action has been 
initiated viz. letter written to the State Government for submission of utilization 
certificate / completion of work etc. under the RRR scheme of Water Bodies.   It is 
further stated that during 2011 -12 a sum of Rs.291.03 crore has been released to 12 
States and a further sum of Rs. 27.54 crore has been released to Government of Bihar 
for undertaking spill over activities under RRR scheme during the year 2012-13.  
 
The Repair, Renovation & Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies Scheme is being funded 
by the Government of India under the State Sector Scheme Accelerated Irrigation 
Benefit Programme (AIBP) and other Water Resources Programme.  During the year 
2012-13, a budgetary provision of Rs. 14,242 crore has been provided for t he above 
scheme which inter-alia includes funds for the RRR of Water Bodies scheme also.  The 
Scheme of RRR of Water Bodies is likely to continue during XII plan period with some 
modification in funding pattern/ scheme features etc. which is being decided 
separately."   
 
21. The Committee note that the reply furnished by the Ministry of Water Resources 
do not give details of the thrust areas identified for achievement during 2012 -13, funds 
allocated by the Planning Commission and further follow up action by  Government.  The 
Committee feel that mere release of funds covering more and more water bodies under 
RRR without having a specific plan for timely completion of revival work will not serve 

 
the basic objective of redeveloping water bodies to augment storag e and irrigation 
potential of water resources in the country. The Committee, therefore, are of the view 
that there is an urgent need that the Ministry in consultation with State Governments 
should prepare a time bound programme for revival of water bodies.   The Committee 
would like to know the time -period by which the remaining 2641 water bodies are 
proposed to be revived.  The Committee also reiterate that the Ministry should furnish 
the details of thrust areas for 2012 -13 specifying priority areas along w ith fund allocated 
by Planning Commission including follow -up action taken by the Government at the 
earliest. 
 
G. River Management activities and works related to Border Areas. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4.16) 
 
22. The Committee noted that a budget provision  of Rs.125.00 crore had been made for 
2012-13 as against Rs.114.00 crore in BE 2011 -12 mainly to provide more funds to Joint 
Project Office for Sapta Kosi Project and Sun Kosi Investigation(JPO -SKSKI), Biratnagar, 
Nepal under 'River Management activities and Works related to Border Areas'.  The Committee 
were apprised that these works were being resumed in view of the enhanced security provided 
by the Government of Nepal.  Noting that these Projects had suffered due to political turmoil 
prevailing over there in the past, the Committee urged the Ministry  to expedite these works in 
view of the improved security scenario within definitive timelines so that  the flood -affected 
people or flood prone areas in North Bihar escape from the fury of recurrent floods a nd the 
devastation caused.   Further, the progress of flood control works be continuously monitored so 

 
that, if necessary, more funds are allocated and the project is not allowed to slow down or 
come to a halt for want of funds.  The Committee would like t o be apprised of the measures 
taken by the Government in this regard.   
23. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"The progress of works of survey, instigation and preparation of DPR of Sapta Kosi 
High Dam are monitored by a Joint Team of Experts (JTE)  having Member (RM), CWC 
as Team Leader of Indian Side. Continuous dialogues are made with Nepalese side for 
security arrangements at the work sites and conducive political atmosphere in Nepal. 
However, due to local resistance in Nepal, p rogress of field activities is slow.  In the last 
meeting of JTE held in June, 2012 at New Delhi, the Indian Side has proposed to stop 
the bilateral allowance to staff of JPO -SKSKI in case works are not resumed by 30 th 
September, 2012 and even closure of J PO-SKSKI in the event of non -creation of 
political consensus in Nepal by 30 th September, 2012. This stand of Indian Side JTE 
has been concurred by the Ministry of Water Resources."     
 
24. The Ministry of Water Resources has not spelt out the nature and r easons for 
"local resistance" and the reasons for slow field activities in Nepal.  The Committee are 
apprehensive that in the absence of mass awareness of benefits of the two projects 
amongst the people, such projects will progress at low pace.   Therefore , the Committee 
feel that there is need to spread awareness of benefits of the two projects among the 
populace by organizing mass awareness programmes to minimize such resistance.  
They also recommend that the Ministry of Water Resources should take up wit h the 
Nepalese side the need for such measures in future meetings, dialogues etc. so that the 
benefits of improved security scenario provided in project sites of Sapta Kosi Project 
and Sun Kosi Investigation may lead to concrete progress in flood control w orks so as 
to mitigate the havoc of recurrent flood devastation in North Bihar.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the progress of these flood -related works within a definite 

 
time-frame.  They would further reiterate their recommendation for conti nuous 
monitoring of the progress of flood control work to ensure that the project is not allowed 
to slow down or come to a halt for want of funds and resistance by locals of those 
places.   
H. Flood Management Programme 
Recommendation (Para No.4.18) 
 
25. The Committee noted that a re -structured Scheme, namely 'Flood Management 
Programme(FMP) amounting to Rs.8,000 crore had been  approved 'in principle' by the 
Cabinet by amalgamating four on -going Schemes of X Plan: (i) Critical anti -erosion works in 
Ganga B asin States – a Centrally Sponsored Scheme(CSS)  (ii) Flood Control Works in 
Brahmaputra Valley States – a State sector Scheme(SS) (iii) Critical anti -erosion works in 
coastal and other than Ganga basin States – a State sector Scheme(SS) and (iv) Improveme nt 
of drainage in the critical areas of the country – a State sector Scheme(SS).  According to the 
Government, a total of 406 flood management works of critical nature from 24 States with a 
total cost of Rs.7,574.80 crore had been included under FMP for pr oviding Central assistance 
to the States.  Surprisingly, only 218 works in 11 States were reported physically completed by 
the respective State Governments as on 31.03.2011.  The Committee were unhappy at the 
slow speed of the works and desired the Ministr y to step up the efforts to pursue the respective 
States for speedy completion of the remaining works.   
 
26. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"The Government of India had launched the Flood Management Programme (FMP) 
during XII P lan for providing assistance to the States for undertaking Flood 
Management and Anti Sea Erosion Works.  During XI Plan, a total of 420 works were 

 
included under the FMP, out of which 252 works have been completed by the end of 
March, 2012 and remaining wo rks are in progress. The physical and financial progress 
of the works is monitored by CWC, GFCC/Brahmaputra Board in their respective 
jurisdiction and timely completion of work is emphasized during inter -action with the 
State Government offices."  
 
27. The Committee observe that  252 of the total 420 works taken up under Flood 
Management Programme (FMP) during XI Plan ha d been completed by March 2012,  but   
168 number of works are yet to be completed , The slow progress in completion of the 
flood management w ork will defy the very purpose of FMP.   In view of the flood havoc 
causing extensive damage year after year, the   Committee desire the Ministry to make 
all-out efforts to accelerate the pace of work  for completion of  the remaining 168 works 
without further delay.  They further reiterate that the Ministry should step up the efforts 
to pursue the respective States for speedy completion of the remaining works in this 
regard. 
 
I. Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme – need for providing correct, 
complete and authentic information. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5.14) 
 
28. The Committee noted that the Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP) was 
launched during 1996-97 to provide loan assistance to the States to help them complete some 
of the incomplete m ajor/medium irrigation projects which    were in                 an advanced 
stage of completion with a view to creating additional irrigation potenti  al  l in the country. Grant 
component has been introduced in the Programme since April, 2010. The Commit tee were 
informed that an amount of Rs. 14242 crore had been allocated for AIBP for the financial year 

 
2012-13 and that a total amount of Rs. 53395.744 crore   of Central assistance had been 
released till date for the Programme.  The Committee's examinatio n had however revealed that 
the performance of AIBP had been very poor.   The maintenance of assets created under AIBP 
was not being accorded due priority, and owing to this, 3 major, 3 medium and 37 minor 
irrigation projects lost their capacity due to sil ting, weed -growth and structural erosion.  The 
Ministry's reply to this sorry state of affairs was that funds to the tune of 1% are kept in the 
detailed project report for maintenance of irrigation projects, and it is the job of State 
Governments to maintain the assets created. The Committee, while recognizing the pivotal role 
of State Governments in maintenance of irrigation assets created under AIBP, were of the 
considered view that much more needs be done by the Union Ministry of Water Resources in 
this regard.  The Committee would like to have a comprehensive status report of funds 
released and the irrigation potential targeted and actually created State -wise and year -wise 
since 1996 -97 and the new measures devised in view of the bottlenecks faced and th e 
experience gained.  
29. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"The construction of irrigation projects involves creation of infrastructure e.g. Head 
works (dams, barrage) and canal network. The State Governments are responsible for 
their operation and maintenance on year to year basis. The funds for maintenance of 
the constructed/completed projects are not provided to States under AIBP. The State 
Government is required to give undertaking in MoU at the time of inclusion of the 
project in AIBP to make provision of funds for the maintenance of the project for 10 
years after its completion.    
 
The Central Government has released Rs. 16,425.48 crores as loan assistance and  
Rs.28,225.47 crores as grant to the States for Major and Medium I rrigation Projects 
under AIBP since 1996 -97 to 2011 -12. Thus, a total amount of Rs. 44,650.95 crores 
has been released as Central Assistance under AIBP to the States. The comprehensive 
Status of funds released and the irrigation potential targeted and actu ally created State-
wise and Year-wise since 1996-97 is given at Annexure-II. 

 
 
The completion of the project and achievement of the potential creation sometimes are 
delayed because of the bottlenecks such as delays in land acquisition, delays in 
implementation of R&R activities and related court cases, insufficient budget allocation 
by state, delays in releasing of funds to the Projects by State Government. The delays 
are caused also due to technical issues related to underground/surface geological 
surprises and short working period due to non-closure of the running canals.  
 
The State Governments are now being requested to complete the land acquisition in 
advance to ensure availability of the land for execution of various components of the 
project. States ha ve also been urged to ensure completion of Rehabilitation & 
Resettlement activities and shifting of PAPs pari passu with construction of headworks. 
Suitable amendments in the guidelines of AIBP are being made by the Ministry of 
Water Resources for addressing these bottlenecks effectively." 
 
30. The Committee were informed during the examination of the Demands for Grants 
(2012-13) of the Ministry that a total of Rs. 53,395.744 crore of Central Assistance (CA) 
under AIBP had been released during 1996 -97 to 20 11-12 (upto 19.03.2012). However, 
subsequently, it was noticed that these figures were not correct.  Accordingly, MoWR 
were requested on 03 August 2012 to furnish the correct and duly authentic figures 
(showing correct total of State-wise and Year-wise figures) and also indicate the reasons 
for variations in the figures.  The Ministry on 07 August 2012 furnished a revised 
statement on the subject showing a total figure of Rs.54,270.533 crore which, however 
reveals a difference of Rs.874.789 crore as compare d to the earlier figure of Rs. 
53,395.744 crore.  On being requested again on 16.08.2012, the MoWR furnished a 
revised information which shows the total figure of Rs.54,350.6875 crore as CA released 
under AIBP during 1996-97 to 2011-12.  There was still a variation of Rs.80.1545 crore as 
against the figure of Rs. 54,270.533 crore received from MoWR on 07.08.2012.  The 
Committee deplore the supply of erroneous and misleading information on AIBP by the 

 
Ministry, and they desire the Ministry to find out the re asons responsible for submission 
of incorrect figures to the committee and also to ensure submission of the authentic 
information and data to the Committee in future. 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No.1.35) 
 
 The Committee note that the Budget provision in the Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR) for the year 2012 -13 is Rs.2067.60 crore.  This figure is 
exclusive of the funds earmarked for Accelerated Irrig ation Benefits Programme and other 
water resources programmes.  There is an increase of Rs.918.27 crore in BE 2012 -13 over RE 
2011-12.    According to the Ministry, the increase in total Budget allocation by Rs.918.27 crore 
was necessitated by the three ne w schemes, viz. National Water Mission, Irrigation 
Management Programme and Dam Rehabilitation & Improvement Programme(DRIP) taken up 
during the year 2012 -13.  The Committee wonder whether the Ministry would be able to spend 
the increased allocation of Rs.  918.27 crore during 2012 -13 given the fact the RE for 2011 -12 
had to be reduced by Rs.100.00 crore i.e. for BE of Rs.1,249.33 to Rs.1,149.33 crore.  The 
reductions in the allocation at RE stage during 2011 -12 occurred despite the Committee having 
cautioned them in their earlier report to evolve a rational and sound system of budgeting to 
avoid reduction in allocations at RE stage.  The Committee find such reduction as indicative of 
poor pre-Budget planning, lack of effective coordination, monitoring and su pervision over the 
subordinate/field offices, organizations, institutes etc.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Ministry identify the causes responsible for higher estimation at BE stage and reduction 
at RE stage and also to ensure that funds al located are utilized for the approved purposes 
within the financial year.  The Committee are optimistic that if the funds allocated are fully 

 
spent, there would be adequate justification for seeking higher allocations.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the new measures devised in this behalf.      
Reply of the Government 
 
 The budget allocation of Central Ground Water Board was increased at RE stage in 
2011-12. Therefore, there was no reduction at RE stage.  
 During 2012 -13, Aquifer Mapping and Mana gement has been taken up as major   
component  in addition to procurement of new rigs, strengthening of observation wells, 
spill over work of Demonstrative Artificial Recharge  and exploration through 
outsourcing. 
 CGWB has already placed the supply order t o DGS&D for supply of 8 new drilling rigs 
which are expected to be delivered shortly.  Indent for procurement of 13 more new 
drilling rigs has been placed to DGS&D and during current year (2012 -13) funds 
amounting to Rs. 52 crore have been allocated to enable procurement of rigs.  
 All efforts are being made to fully utilize the budget allocation." 
  Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No.6 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.1.37) 
 
 The Committee note that the Hydrology Project Ph ase – II is being implemented with 
the assistance of World Bank in 13 States, viz. Andhra Pradesh, Chhatisgarh, Gujarat, Goa, 
Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Puducherry, 
Punjab and Tamil Nadu and 8 Central Agencies  viz. Central Water Commission (CWC), 
Central Ground Water Board (CGWB), National Institute of Hydrology (NIH), Central Water & 

 
Power Research Station (CWPRS), Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), Bhakra Beas 
Management Board (BBMB), India Meteorologica l Department (IMD) and Ministry of Water 
Resources.  The estimated cost of the Project is Rs.631.83 crore with a loan component of 
US$ 104.98 million from the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) for 
which the agreement was signed o n 19 January 2006.  It is further noted that the MoWR is 
seeking an extension of the Project till June 2014, i.e. 2 years after the stipulated date of 
closing, for which the Ministry has submitted a proposal to the Planning Commission.  It is also 
further noted that the World Bank is considering the request made by Department of Economic 
Affairs, Ministry of Finance at the behest of MoWR in this regard, and further that several major 
thrust areas have been identified for XII Plan, viz. (i)  Development of H ydrological Design 
Aids-Surface Water (HDA-SW) software and its utilization by all the States (ii)  Customization of 
Decision Support System- Planning (DSS-P) in 9 states (iii)  Development of Decision Support 
System- Real Time (DSS -RT) in BBMB including i nstallation of Real Time Data Acquisition 
System (RTDAS) (iv)  Establishment of Automatic Water Quality Monitoring Stations (AWQMS) 
by CPCB and  CWC (v)  Establishment of GIS -Based Web Portal and Water Quality Criteria by 
Central Pollution Control Board (C PCB) (vi) Up -gradation of Water Information System Data 
Online Management (WISDOM) software (vii) Up -gradation of Ground Water Estimation and 
Management System (GEMS) software to e-GEMS (viii) Aquifer Mapping in 6 Pilot Study Areas 
by Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) and (ix) Completion of Purpose Driven Studies being 
implemented by various implementing agencies.  The Committee urge the Ministry to pursue 
the matter vigorously with the concerned agencies/ departments/ organizations to secure 
extension of Hydrology Project – II at least till June 2014 so that the pending works of XI Plan 

 
period may be fully executed.  They desire to be apprised of the outcome of the efforts made in 
this regard.  The Committee also desire the Ministry to furnish the findings of the evaluation of 
Hydrology Project to be made by the World Bank after completion of Phase – II of the Project.  
They also desire that the coverage of the Hydrology Project be extended beyond 13 States and 
8 Central Organisations during XII Plan period.  
Reply of the Government 
 
It is to inform that the World Bank has extended the project upto May 31, 2014. The 
Project Coordination Secretariat (PCS), Ministry of Water Resources (MOWR) is closely 
monitoring the pending works of XI Plan period to accomplis h in XII Plan. Moreover, PCS, 
MOWR in consultation with Implementing Agencies has fixed the physical as well as financial 
milestones of the activities to be performed by the Implementing Agencies during FY2012 -13. 
The status of achievement of milestones of  all the Implementing Agencies is being reviewed by 
PCS on regular basis. 
 The Ministry of Water Resources will furnish the findings of the evaluation of Hydrology 
Project-II to be made by the World Bank after completion of the Project. 
 Since the HP -II is being funded by World Bank, extension of project beyond 13 States 
and 8 Central Organizations may require fresh agreement at this juncture with Govt. of India 
and World Bank. Further, the remaining states are the part of Indus, Ganga and Brahmaputra 
Basins. In view of the sensitivity involved in sharing of data, being international rivers, it was not 
considered appropriate to put the data in public domain as part of HP -II. As a result, HP -II is 
being implemented in 13 States and 8 Central Organizations only. 
 

 
Recommendation (Para No.1.38) 
  
The Committee note that Hydrology Project-II was started in the year 2006.  A glance at 
the BE, RE and expenditure incurred since its inception shows that during 2006 -07 against BE 
of Rs.13.61 crore, the expenditure incu rred was Rs.2.07 crore only.  During   2007 -08 against 
the BE of Rs.33 crore, the RE was reduced to Rs.13.60 crore and the expenditure incurred was 
Rs.3.63 crore.  Similarly, the corresponding figures for the years, 2008 -09,2009-10, 2010 -11 
were discouragi ng.  Overall, against aggregate BE from 2006 -07 to 2011 -12 of Rs.261.71 
crore, the actual expenditure was merely Rs.78.02 crore constituting 29.81% of the BE.  The 
Committee are perturbed at the dismal performance as there is reduction at RE stage every 
year.  The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to evolve sound programmes and 
monitoring mechanism to oversee the implementation of the projects and the pace of 
expenditure.  
Reply of the Government 
 
It is to inform that the Project Coordination Secret ariat (PCS), Ministry of Water 
Resources in consultation with Implementing Agencies has fixed the physical as well as 
financial milestones of the activities to be performed by the Implementing Agencies during 
FY2012-13. The status of achievement of milesto nes of all the Implementing Agencies is being 
reviewed by PCS on regular basis to oversee the implementation of the project and the pace of 
expenditure.  
Recommendation (Para No.1.40) 
 The Committee observed that the Ministry has formulated a new scheme cal led River 
Basin Management (RBM) by merging two ongoing schemes, viz. River Basin Organisation 

 
(RBO) and Investigation of Water Resources Development Scheme.  The Scheme also 
includes as its component the restructuring of the Central Water Commission (CWC)  and 
activities of the Brahmaputra Board under specific schemes.   The Committee note that out of 
the total allocation of Rs.200.00 crore for the scheme of RBM for the financial year     2012 -13, 
Rs.100.00 crore stands allocated for Investigation of Water Resources  Development Scheme, 
Rs.10.00 crore for Restructuring of CWC and Rs.90.00 crore for Brahmaputra Board.   The 
Committee note that MoWR had proposed to establish two RBOs for river basins, namely 
Mahanadi and Godavari during XI Plan under the River  Boards Act, 1956 after arriving at 
consensus with the co -basin States.  They also note that all the co -basin States of Mahanadi 
and Godavari have not concurred for establishment of RBOs of the two river basins.  In order to 
expedite the setting up of the said RBOs, and to study the activities required for optimal 
development of a River Basin and the changes required in the existing River Board Act, 1956, 
a Committee under the Chairmanship of Sh. T. S. Doabia (Retd.) High Court Judge, MP and 
J&K  has been s et up by the Ministry.   Further, regarding the restructuring of CWC, it is noted 
that Rs.10.00 crore has been earmarked in the financial year 2012 -13 under which expansion 
of activities and taking up of new activities have been envisaged to address climat e change 
issues and other emerging challenges during the XII Five Year Plan.  The Committee would 
urge the Ministry to initiate necessary steps to ensure that the restructuring process of the 
CWC is completed during the stipulated period of five year, i.e. during XII Plan period so that 
the basin level and climate change issues are addressed in a more comprehensive and 
integrated manner.  The Committee also recommend that the Ministry make vigorous efforts to 
facilitate speedy finalization of the report of the Doabia Committee set up for studying 

 
necessary amendments to the River Board Act, 1956.   Besides, efforts be intensified for 
building consensus among other co -basin States as well to accelerate the pace of formation of 
other RBOs through meetings, sem inars and regular interaction with the State Governments in 
this regard.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.   
Reply of the Government 
 
The restructuring process of Central Water Commission will be completed within 
stipulated period.   Ministry will make vigorous efforts to facilitate speedy finalization of the 
report of the Doabia Committee  set up for studying necessary amendments to the River Board 
Act, 1956.   As per recommendation of the Committee, efforts will b e intensified for building 
consensus among co-basin States.   
Recommendation (Para No.2.20) 
  
The Committee note that the planning, formulation and execution of all Major and 
Medium Irrigation(MMI) projects is carried out by the concerned State Governments  and the 
required funds are allocated in their State Plans.  For the financial year 2011 -12, the Budget 
allocation(Plan) of Rs.273.89 crore for MMI was reduced to Rs.222.85 crore, i.e. a reduction of 
Rs.51.04 crore at RE stage.  The Committee were informed  that the year 2012 being the last 
financial year of XI Five Year Plan, the allocation was reduced by the Department of Economic 
Affairs, Ministry of Finance in consultation with the Ministry of Water Resources as certain 
modifications are being envisaged in this Central Sector schemes during the XII Plan.  The 
Ministry claimed that no schemes/projects have been adversely affected due to reduction at 
Revised Estimate stage and that Regular Expenditure Review Meetings are conducted at 
appropriate levels by c ompetent authorities to accelerate the rate of implementation of various 

 
schemes so as to fully utilise the allocation under the schemes/ projects.  The Committee are of 
the considered view that the frequency of meetings of Expenditure Review Meetings shou ld be 
increased to ensure that regular tab is kept on the implementing agencies under Major and 
Medium Irrigation projects.   They are also of the firm view that proper pre -Budget planning and 
conscientious efforts are needed to foresee the problems so tha t solutions could be found well 
in time to avoid reduction at RE stage. The Committee, therefore, would like the Ministry of 
Water Resources to prepare their RE with due care and diligence and undertake periodic, 
regular review of the offices, institutes, agencies working under them.  They would also like the 
Ministry to undertake a comprehensive review of the working of all subordinate offices under 
MoWR during the XII Plan period.   
Reply of the Government 
 As per recommendation of the Committee, the freq uency of expenditure review 
meetings has been increased.  Proper pre -Budget planning and conscientious efforts are being 
made to avoid reduction of budget at RE stage and the RE will be prepared with due care and 
diligences.  The Ministry will undertake co mprehensive review of the working of all subordinate 
offices under MoWR during the XII Plan period as part of evaluation of various plan schemes of 
Ministry. 
Recommendation (Para No.2.21) 
 The Committee note that the schemes under Plan Sector require inves tment clearance 
from the Planning Commission for which there is an established procedure.  The Committee 
were informed during examination of Demands for Grants (2010 -11) that in case of MMI 
projects, State Planning Boards are empowered to clear the proposa ls if inter-State issues are 

 
not involved.  Despite well -defined guidelines and procedure being in place, the Committee are 
shocked to learn that a large member of Major and Medium Irrigation Projects have been under 
implementation without having necessary  approval from the Planning Commission.   As per XI 
Plan document, 90 major, 136 Medium and 74 ERM Projects have been under execution 
without investment clearance from the Planning Commission.  The Committee were informed 
that as per the Report of the Work ing Group, 327 projects were reportedly ongoing in XI Plan, 
out of which 170 projects including 70 Major, 87 Medium and 13 ERM are unapproved.  The 
Ministry informed the Committee that no Central assistance is provided to the unapproved 
projects and that i t is incumbent on the part of State Governments to take necessary initiative 
to put up comprehensive proposal/DPR of the unapproved projects for techno -economic 
appraisal before the 'Advisory Committee  on Irrigation, Flood Control and Multi -Purpose 
Projects' of MoWR for their acceptance, followed by investment clearance from the Planning 
Commission.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Minisitry pursue the matter with 
the State Governments to get regularised all the 170 unapproved projects which sp illover into 
XII Plan period.  They also recommend that the Ministiry impress upon the State Governments 
to accord priority to unapproved projects for getting them regularised instead of taking up new 
proposals.   
Reply of the Government 
 Central Water Commission has taken up the issue with State Governments.  CWC has 
requested all the concerned States on 20.07.2012 to initiate action for getting the acceptance 
of the Advisory Committee and investment clearance from the Planning Commission.  
 

 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No.15 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.22) 
   
The Committee note that the Government approved the scheme of Development of 
Water Resources Information System (DWRIS) in June 2008 for implementation duri ng the XI 
Plan with a total outlay of Rs.234.30 crore.  The objective of the scheme is to develop 
information system on water resources at the national level. The data for the system will 
emanate mainly from the ongoing activities of the Ministry of Water Resources at their attached 
offices. For gathering regional and related information, the concerned State and Central 
agencies will be provided with regular connectivity.   The processed information will be made 
available to all users through a web enabled system.  The Ministry informed the Committee that 
during XI Plan several physical achievements were made by DWRIS viz. Data bank and Online 
Information System, Rationalization of Minor Irrigation Statistics, Creation of watershed maps 
and Geographic Inform ation System, Hydrological Observations including Snow Hydrology, 
Water Quality Assessment Authority, and that under the thrust proposed in XII Plan, the 
structure of the Scheme has been modified and activities have been regrouped under several 
components which include Data Bank and Information System, Irrigation Census, 
Strengthening of Monitoring Unit  in CWC, Hydrological Observations and Monitoring System 
and Water Quality Assessment Authority and Monitoring System.   The Committee, therefore, 
fervently urge the Ministry to develop and operationalise the DWRIS expeditiously to achieve 
the twin objectives of making the processed information available at the national level for policy 
planning, coordination and monitoring and also to all users through a web-enabled system. 

 
Reply of the Government 
 
Central Water Commission (CWC), Ministry of Water Resources, initiated that project 
„Generation of Database and Implementation of Web enabled Water Resources Information 
System‟ named as India -WRIS in 11 th Plan.  Central Water Commission and ISRO has signed 
and MoU on 3 rd December 2008 to develop web enabled GIS based Water Resources 
Information System for the entire country during XI plan to be completed in 4 years i.e. by 
December 2012.  The first version of websi te of India -WRIS has been launched on 7 th 
December, 2010 in New Delhi by Hon‟ble Minister Water Resources.  The second version 
India-WRIS was launched by Chairman, CWC on World Water Day i.e. 22 nd March, 2012.  The 
URL of the Website www.indi-nrsc.gov.in can be seen for more details.  Further, the 
development of Information System is under progress and all attempts are being made to 
complete the project within the scheduled time i.e. by December 2012. 
Recommendation (Para No.2.23) 
  
The Committee were informed that the first version of website of INDIA WRIS was 
launched on 7 December, 2010 and the development of information system is under progress. 
The second version INDIA WRIS was launched on World Water Day i.e. 22 March, 2012.  The 
full version with complete database of the project would be launched by June, 2014.  The 
Committee hope and expect that the full version will be launched by the stipulated time i.e. 
June, 2014.  
Reply of the Government 
As the project da tabase is too large, it is anticipated that full version with complete 
database of the project would be launched by October, 2013. 

 
Recommendation (Para No.2.24) 
  
The Committee note that in the XI Plan, the target for general monitoring of ongoing 
major/ERM projects was tentatively fixed as 150 projects per year.  However, it has been 
observed that during the year 2007-08, only 66 projects were monitored against the target of 86 
projects.   During 2008-09 the figures were 33 against 65.   During 2009 -10 the figures were 20 
against 58; during 2010 -11 it was 34 against 56 and during 2011 -12 it was 19 against 54(upto 
February, 2012).  The constraints cited, therefore, are stated to be inadequacy of supporting 
technical and secretarial staff, financial and other  related problems.   Similarly, under AIBP 
monitoring there was a target of 300 visits for 150 AIBP projects to be monitored each year 
during XI Plan.  However, it has been observed that during 2007 -08 only 200 projects were 
monitored against the target 27 8, during 2008 -09 only 186 projects were monitored against 
324, during 2009 -10 167 out of 330 were monitored, during 2010 -11 only 192 against 364 
targets were monitored whereas during 2011-12 only 117 against target by 328 (upto February, 
2012) was monitor ed.  The reasons for shortfall are stated to be the expenditure against 
release of first instalment which could not be incurred by the project authorities.  The 
Committee are perturbed over the slow monitoring of the projects and the fact that the project 
authorities failed to incur the expenditure against the release of first instalment and, therefore, 
desire that the Ministry revisit the Scheme and  retailor it suitably to make it successful.  They 
would like to be apprised of the action taken in the matt er.  The Committee also desire the 
Ministry to strengthen the monitoring mechanism in respect of the projects.   
 
 

 
Reply of the Government 
 
AIBP has been reviewed and the MoWR is making suitable amendments in the AIBP 
guidelines to ensure submission of all  the Central Assistance proposals to CWC/MoWR well in 
time so that Central Assistance is released in the beginning of the Financial Year and the 
smooth progress of the construction activities of the project during the financial year can be 
ensured. The str engthening of the supporting technical and secretarial staff is also being 
looked into. This will help in achieving full targets of monitoring visits of the Projects as per 
norms. 
Recommendation (Para No.3.26) 
 
 The Committee observe that Minor Irrigation (MI) schemes are those ground and 
surface water schemes which have a culturable command area (CCA) upto 2,000 hectare 
individually.  Surface water Minor Irrigation Schemes are generally funded from the public 
sector outlay.  Many schemes under Minor Irrigation have been transferred to the States Sector 
and some others have been merged in a new scheme.   A total of Rs.336.80 crore is the 
Budget allocation (Plan) for Minor Irrigation Schemes during 2012 -13 which is Rs.206.40 crore 
more than the allocation mad e for 2011 -12.   The Committee were informed that during 2012 -
13, Aquifer Mapping and Management has been taken up as major component  in addition to 
procurement of new rigs, strengthening of observation wells, spill over work of Demonstrative 
Artificial R echarge  and exploration through outsourcing which necessitated a substantial 
enhancement in Plan allocation during 2012 -13.  The Committee also note that several new 
schemes/projects are proposed to be taken up during 2012 -13 under Ground Water 
Management & Regulation, viz. Aquifer Mapping and Management, Ground Water Regime 

 
Monitoring and Strengthening of Ground Water Observation Well Network, Participatory 
Ground Water Management, Ground Water Resource Assessment and Technical Assistance 
to Govt. Organizations, Preparation of Reports & Information Dissemination and Ground Water 
Regulation/ Awareness/ Workshops.  The Committee hope that the Ministry would make full 
utilization of increased allocation of Rs.336.80 crore during 2012 -13.  They would also like  to 
be apprised of the achievements made in this behalf. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The BE for Ground Water Management & Regulation Scheme for 2012 -13 is Rs. 330 
crore. CGWB is implementing the scheme and progress has been achieved for procurement of 
8 new r igs from DGS&D. The indent for 13 new rigs has also been placed for which funds 
amounting to Rs. 52 crore have been allocated out of Rs. 330 crore. The aquifer mapping has 
been initiated by CGWB in around 54,000 sq.km. area including around 25,000 sq.km. a rea 
through outsourcing through WAPCOS for Rs. 79.2 crore out of Rs. 330 crore. Other 
components are also being taken up and shall be implemented to make full utilization of 
increased allocation during 2012-13.  
Recommendation (Para No.3.27) 
  
The Committee are surprised to note that although the aquifer mapping technology is 
universally known, it is not yet available in the country.   The representative of the Ministry 
testified that the said technology was very restrictive and not available.  Regarding av ailability 
of aquifer map as real time information for the Hydrological Department, Meteorological 
Department and Agriculture Department, the representative of the Ministry stated that by the 
end of XI Plan, a substantial portion of the work will be done.   The Committee are appalled that 

 
there is no sense of urgency on the part of the Ministry to take up this project on and 
apprehend that this will come back year after year as a pilot project or as a water mission.  
Being a matter of largest and highest ur gency in view of the Eastern States being opened up 
for the next Green Revolution, the Committee recommend that this matter be accorded priority 
and earnest consideration.  They would like to be informed of the progress in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
 
Apart from five pilot studies, the aquifer mapping has been initiated in 54,000 sq. km. 
area across the country including northeastern states and priority is being accorded to Over 
Exploited/ Critical/ Poor ground water quality aquifers in 2012-13.  The activity will be enhanced 
after the approval of the scheme in the XII Plan.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.28) 
 The Committee note that the Scheme of Ground Water Management & Regulation was 
launched by the Central Ground Water Board at a cost of Rs.460.0 0 crore during XI Plan with 
the merger of some X Plan schemes.  The Budget allocation for the GWM&R during 2011 -12 
was Rs.117.40 crore, which was increased to Rs.129.00 crore at RE 2011 -12.  The allocation 
for the financial year 2012 -13 has been pegged at Rs.285.99 crore, i.e. an increase of Rs. 
167.60 crore over BE 2011 -12.   The Ministry informed the Committee that the reasons for 
enhancement of Budget allocation in 2012 -13 by Rs.167.60 crore is due to (i) provision kept of 
Rs.70.00 crore for M&E for procurement of new Rigs, machinery and other equipment software 
data etc. aquifer mapping and technological upgradation during 2012 -13, and (ii) provision of 
Rs.144.60 crore under Major Works for outsourcing of exploration activity, spillover of artificial 
recharge projects, construction of piezometers through outsourcing and activities related to 

 
aquifer mapping, participatory Ground Water management.  The Committee hope the Ministry 
would make judicious and optimum utilisation of the increased allocation for the purpose for 
which it was allocated within the given timeline.   
Reply of the Government 
 
CGWB has made substantial progress to procure new rigs and around Rs. 70 crore will 
be booked in the current year. Further, outsourcing of aquifer mapping through WAPCOS has 
also been approved at an estimated cost of Rs. 79.20 crore. The increased allocation will be 
judiciously utilised for the purpose of implementing the component proposed in the scheme.   
Recommendation (Para No.3.29) 
  
The Committee note that dur ing 2007-2012 (upto February 2012),  the performance in 
activities like monitoring of ground water observation wells, geo -physical studies, hydro 
chemical studies, preparation of report/maps, etc. have all been equal to or below targets.    
The Committee f urther note that the Ministry has chalked out physical activities including 
tentative target for XII Plan period in respect of Ground Water Management & Regulation 
scheme, viz. Aquifer Mapping & Management; Monitoring Water Level, Participatory Ground 
Water Management, Ground Water Resource Assessment & Technical Assistance to 
Government Organizations, preparation of Report and Information & Dissemination, and 
Ground Water Regulation/ Awareness/ Workshops.   They desire that the Ministry pursue the 
targets set for XII Plan under GWM&R vigorously so that tangible results are achieved on 
ground water front in the near future. 
 
 

 
Reply of the Government 
 
The targets of the XII Plan under GWM&R scheme will be pursued for achievement to 
realize the tangible results on the ground water front 
Recommendation (Para No.3.30) 
 
 The Committee note that the Central Ground Water Board is a multi -disciplinary 
scientific organisation set up with a mandate to "develop and disseminate technologies, 
monitor and implement nationa l policies for scientific and sustainable development and 
management of India's ground water resources, including their exploration, assessment, 
conservation, augmentation, protection from pollution and distribution, based on principles of 
economic and eco logical efficiency and equity."   The Board has 18 regional offices, each 
headed by a Regional Director, supported by 17 Engineering Divisions and 11 State Unit 
Offices for undertaking various field activities.  The total Budget allocation for CGWB for 201 2-
13 was earmarked at Rs.105.98 crore, which is almost the same amount as earmarked for BE 
2011-12.  The Ministry submitted that the CGWB needs to be adequately reinforced with 
additional scientific, engineering and administrative manpower.   Accordingly, a proposal for the 
restructuring and strengthening of CGWB was prepared and submitted earlier.  The Committee 
also note that restructuring of the Central Ground Water Board aims at horizontal expansion as 
well as vertical extension of the field activities to achieve the desired goals as envisaged in the 
National Water Policy 2002 and report on National Water Mission.  In view of this, it is 
proposed to enhance the activities of CGWB like aquifer mapping and management, 
participatory ground water management etc., for which the revamping of the present 
organisational structure is essential.   The Committee desire that the restructuring process of 

 
CGWB be completed during XII Plan through the concerted efforts of the Ministry and its 
subordinate organisations.   
Reply of the Government 
 
The proposal of restructuring and strengthening of CGWB is already under 
consideration of the Government.  
Recommendation (Para No.3.31) 
 
 The Committee note that with a view to regulating ground water withdrawal by 
industries and infrastructure projects, the Central Ground Water Authority has made provision 
for rainwater harvesting and well metering etc. mandatory.  Noteably, the Government of 
Gujarat has banned construction of new wells in over -exploited and critical category ar eas in 
the State which has contributed significantly in stablising ground water levels and even 
reversing the trend of ground water depletion in Saurashtra region.  The State Government of 
Gujarat has extended strong support to communities to expand this w ork in a participatory 
mode under the Sardar Patel Sahakari Jal Sanchay Yojana involving construction of recharge 
structures  such as chek dams, farm ponds, percolation tanks etc. The Committee recommend 
the GOI popularize the Scheme so that other State/UT  Governments replicate the measures to 
address ground water depletion in different parts of the country.  The Committee further desire 
that all the States be persuaded to enact legislation on the lines of Model Bill already circulated 
for regulation and control of ground water development and management.  
 
 
 

 
Reply of the Government 
 
Under “Sardar Patel Participatory Water Conservation Scheme”,  the Gujarat Govt. is 
providing  80% subsidy (balance 20% is peoples participation) for construction of check dams 
in a participatory mode. 
Under the state sector scheme “Accelerated Artificial Recharge to Groundwater 
Scheme” that has been proposed during XII Plan (2012 -2017) it is proposed for construction of 
rainwater harvesting and artificial recharge structures in Over exploited and Critical Blocks  and 
sensitization of local leaders /PRI / WUA in this regard. Preference would be given for 
construction of artificial recharge and rain water conservation structures in clusters. Priority in 
allocating central funds wou ld be given to states that have enacted their Groundwater Model 
Bill, made rooftop rainwater harvesting mandatory and notified over -exploited areas or taken 
any other action as regulation measure. The Proposed cost of the scheme is Rs 15,000 crores 
with 80 % funding from Central Govt. and 20% cost to be arranged by the respective state 
Govts. The total duration of the scheme would be five years commencing from 2012-13. 
Till date  13 states have enacted the Ground Water Bill/Water Resources Bill on the 
lines of model bill, other 17 states have initiated the action for enactment of legislation. These 
states are being requested for early enactment of model bill.  
Recommendation (Para No.4.15) 
 
 The Committee note that the Plan allocation for Flood Control during 2011-12 was fixed 
at Rs.161.00 crore, which was reduced to Rs.127.00 crore at RE stage and enhanced to 
Rs.193.00 crore for BE 2012 -13.  The reasons for reduction at RE 2011 -12 stage are stated to 
be less expenditure till September, 2011 in respect of grant s-in-aid to State Governments due 

 
to non receipt of UCs and proposals for further release.  The Committee are perturbed to note 
that non receipt of Utilisation Certificates resulted in non release of the funds and hence less 
expenditure was incurred till S eptember, 2011.Apparently, the Ministry has not devised new 
and pragmatic measures to avoid delays in submission of UCs  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government devise better and effective measures in consultation with the 
stakeholders and the Ministry of Finance so that funds are released to the affected or flood 
prone States given the severity of recurring floods.  The Committee would also like to be 
apprised of the particulars of the States who failed to furnish the UCs and the budget 
implications thereof and the amount of losses claimed by them owing to floods during the last 
five years. 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of Standing Committee regarding release of funds to the affected 
or flood prone States has been noted and effo rts would be made to devise better and effective 
measures in consultation with the stakeholders and the Ministry of Finance.  
The State-wise details of outstanding Utilization Certificates on 31-03-2012 in respect of 
grants released during XI Plan under Flood Management Programme are as under:  
S.No. Name of State Outstanding UCs as on 31-03-2012 
No. of UCs Amount involved 
1 Bihar  21 25.41 
2 Haryana 1 46.91 
3 J&K 2 5.20 
4 Karnataka 1 3.80 
5 Orissa 9 10.11 
6 Punjab 3 28.76 

 
7 Goa 1 2.41 
8 Gujarat 1 2.00 
9 Kerala 2 22.43 
10 UP 2 4.02 
11 West Bengal 5 324.82 
 
The losses claimed are intimated to MHA for the purpose of availing relief under NDRF 
which is decided by MHA on the basis of assessment by Inter-Ministerial Teams.   
Recommendation (Para No.4.16) 
 
 The Committee note that a budget provision of Rs.125.00 crore has been made for 
2012-13 as against Rs.114.00 crore in BE 2011 -12 mainly to provide more funds to Joint 
Project Office for Sapta Kosi Project and Sun Kosi Investigation(JPO -SKSKI), Bir atnagar, 
Nepal under 'River Management activities and Works related to Border Areas'.  The Committee 
were apprised that these works are being resumed in view of the enhanced security provided 
by the Government of Nepal.  Noting that these Projects had suff ered due to political turmoil 
prevailing over there in the past, the Committee urge the Ministry  to expedite these works in 
view of the improved security scenario within definitive timelines so that  the flood -affected 
people or flood prone areas in North  Bihar escape from the fury to recurrent floods and the 
devastation caused.   Further, the progress of flood control works be continuously monitored so 
that, if necessary, more funds are allocated and the project is not allowed to slow down or 
come to a halt for want of funds.  The Committee should like to apprised of the measures taken 
by the Government in this behalf.   
 
 

 
Reply of the Government 
 
The progress of works of survey, instigation and preparation of DPR of Sapta Kosi High 
Dam are monitored by a Joint Team of Experts(JTE)  having Member(RM), CWC as Team 
Leader of Indian Side. Continuous dialogues are made with Nepalese side for security 
arrangements at the work sites and conductive political atmosphere in Nepal. However, due to 
local resistance in Nepal, progress of field activities is slow.  In the last meeting of JTE held in 
June, 2012 at New Delhi, the Indian Side has proposed to stop the bilateral allowance to staff 
of JPO-SKSKI in case works are not resumed by 30 th September, 2012 and even clo sure of 
JPO-SKSKI in the event of non -creation of political consensus in Nepal by 30 th September, 
2012. This stand of Indian Side JTE has been concurred by the Ministry of Water Resources.     
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No.24 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4.17) 
  
The Committee also note that a total outlay (Non -Plan) of Rs.3.00 crore has been 
earmarked for 'Emergent Flood Protection Works in Eastern and Western Sectors' during XI 
Plan.  Works were undertaken during XI Plan period by the State Government of Punjab with 
Central Loan Assistance(CLA) provided by the MoWR every year as recommended by  the 
Inter-Ministerial Committee after pre -monsoon and post -monsoon inspection of the river 
reaches in Sutlej and the Ravi in border areas.  The Committee note that the funds for the 
works were released only after receipt of Utilization Certificates (UCs) for funds released in 
earlier years.  The Committee recommend the Ministry to continue to keep a tab on release of 

 
funds under this Scheme and insist on receipt of UCs for each and every CLA released in this 
regard.  In view of the fact that large swathes of the country specially Eastern India are prone to 
the menace of recurring floods, the Committee desire that the allocatio n under this head be 
reviewed during the year in case more funds are required to address the menace of recurrent 
floods in certain areas.  They would also like the Ministry to take every possible step for full 
utilization of funds allocated in this regard.    
Reply of the Government 
 
The release of funds in western sector is already organized. An Inter -Ministerial 
Committee inspects the sites twice a year, pre -monsoon and post-monsoon, to recommend the 
protective measures.  The proposals are framed by Govt.  of Punjab which are examined by 
Central Water Commission (CWC).  On the recommendation of CWC, this Ministry releases the 
CLA to Govt. of Punjab, provided the Utilization Certificate for the last release in furnished by 
the State Government.  
As regards requirements of more funds, especially as Eastern Sector is prone to the 
menace of recurring floods, the following points are brought out: 
(i) The provision of Rs 3.0 Crore as a revolving fund under Non -Plan is intended for 
providing CLA to the concerned state Govt. for works of emergent nature in order to 
avoid the time taken in obtaining the financial sanction.  
(ii) For works which are identified and could be implemented in a planned manner, there is 
a separate plan scheme with Ganga wing for works on Border River s namely ”River 
Management Activities and works related to Border Areas”. This plan scheme provides 

 
90% grant as against the CLA under Non -Plan, and is therefore a better deal for State 
Govts. 
(iii) There has practically been no request for CLA in r/o works of E astern Sector over the 
years except Rs. 107.984 lakh re-imbursed in 2010-11 for works, the first installment for 
which was released in March, 2006.  Even in r/o Western Sector, no request for release 
of CLA was received during 2011-12.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.4.18) 
 
 The Committee note that a re -structured Scheme, namely 'Flood Management 
Programme(FMP) amounting to Rs.8,000 crore has been  approved 'in principle' by the Cabinet 
by amalgamating four on -going Schemes of X Plan: (i) Critical anti -erosion wo rks in Ganga 
Basin States – a Centrally Sponsored Scheme(CSS)  (ii) Flood Control Works in Brahmaputra 
Valley States – a State sector Scheme(SS) (iii) Critical anti -erosion works in coastal and other 
than Ganga basin States – a State sector Scheme(SS) and (iv) Improvement of drainage in the 
critical areas of the country – a State sector Scheme(SS).  According to the Government, a 
total of 406 flood management works of critical nature from 24 States with a total cost of 
Rs.7,574.80 crore have been included u nder FMP for providing Central assistance to the 
States.  Surprisingly, only 218 works in 11 States are reported physically completed by the 
respective State Governments as on 31.03.2011.  The Committee are unhappy at the slow 
speed of the works and desire the Ministry to step up the efforts to pursue the respective States 
for speedy completion of the remaining works.   
 

 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Government of India had launched the Flood Management Programme (FMP) 
during XII Plan for providing assistanc e to the States for undertaking Flood Management and 
Anti Sea Erosion Works.  During XI Plan, a total of 420 works were included under the FMP, 
out of which 252 works have been completed by the end of March, 2012 and remaining works 
are in progress. The ph ysical and financial progress of the works is monitored by CWC, 
GFCC/Brahmaputra Board in their respective jurisdiction and timely completion of work is 
emphasized during inter-action with the State Government offices.  
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No.27 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4.19) 
  
The Committee note that two on -going Schemes of X Plan namely 'Establishment and 
Modernisation of Flood Forecasting Network in India including inflow forecast' and 
'Strengthening and Modernisation of Flood Forecasting and Hydrological Observation Network 
in the Brahmaputra and Barak Basin' of Central Water Commission had been amalgamated 
into a combined Scheme, namely 'Flood Forecasting' during XI Plan.  The Budget allocation for 
the year 2012-13 has been increased by Rs.10 crore over the BE 2011 -12 to take up the works 
of upgradation of existing telemetry system to TDMA system, installation  of real time data 
transmission at around 100 existing stations.  The Committee do hope that  with the increase in 
allocation, though meagre, the target will be achieved within the stipulated timeframe. They 
would like to be apprised of the progress in this regard.  

 
Reply of the Government 
 
The BE for FY: 2012-13 is Rs.48 crore. The objective of the scheme “Flood Forecasting 
during XII Plan is modernization of CWC flood forecasting network through installation of 
automatic data acquisition system and real time data transmission system at existing 219 
hydrological observation and flood forecasting (HO&FF) stations. Further, based on the request 
received from the State Governments. CWC has decided to include 240 additional reservoirs 
under expansion programme which would require to set up 328 new base stations, alongwith 
real time data transmission system network, where data will be utilized for generating forecasts 
at the new additional forecasting system. Thus a total of 787 H &FF stations are proposed to be 
set-up/ modernized by providing automatic data acquisition and real time data transmission 
system to achieve the target, CWC has framed a monthly timeline of the activities. However, 
new works are proposed to be implemented after approval of the plan scheme by competent 
authority.   
Recommendation (Para No.4.20) 
 
 The Committee observe that the Pa gladiya Dam Project, meant for flood moderation to 
benefit an area of 40,000 ha, irrigation to 54,160 ha and incidental power generaion of 3mw, is 
proposed to be built across Pagladiya River at Thalkuchi in Baska District falling under 
Bodoland Territorial District in Assam.  The Union Government had sanctioned the Project in 
January, 2001 at an estimated cost of Rs.542.90 crore for construction by the Brahmaputra 
Board.  Although several preliminary works had been carried out for Pagladiya Project and an 
expenditure of Rs.25.64 crore incurred on it till 27.03.2012, the Committee regret that effective 
implementation of the Project could not be carried out till date.  According to the Ministry, 

 
before the start of implementation of the Project, the work relat ing to Zirat Survey(property 
assessment) of the Project  Affected Families(PAF) for finalising the Resettlement and 
Rehabilitation(R&R) Plan, and Land allotment/acquisition for R&R and project construction 
needed to be carried out but for the resistance fr om a section of the PAF.  The Committee are 
convinced that the Pagladiya Dam Project holds out promise of considerable benefits to the 
people of Assam and that no efforts should be spared to get the Project going in right earnest.   
They also believe that had the benefits, to  accrue from the Pagladiya Dam, been properly 
communicated to the Project Affected Families by the Government, the opposition to the 
Project might not have prolonged.  The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to make 
sustained and vigorous efforts for removing the stalemate without any delay so that the work on 
the Pagladiya Dam Project could be commenced early.   They would also like to be apprised of 
the outcome of steps taken in this regard.     
Reply of the Government 
 
The Paglad iya Dam Project site is situated near Thalkuchi village of Nalbari District, 
Assam. Clause (a) of Section 14 of the „the Brahmaputra Board Act, 1980 (No. 46 of 1980) 
states that „No Multipurpose dam referred to in clause (c) of sub -section (1) of Section 1 3 shall 
be constructed by the Board unless the state Government concerned make available the land 
required for the purpose‟. Altogether, 7510 ha of land is needed for execution of Pagladiya 
Dam Project. Water Resources Department, Government of Assam has p rovided 956 ha of 
land to Brahmaputra Board. The progress of work under the project is held up for want of 
acquisition of remaining land of 6554 ha by Government of Assam. The remaining land to be 

 
acquired, discussed above, forms part of Bodoland Territori al Autonomous District (BTAD) of 
Assam. 
The Secretary, Water Resources Department, Government of Assam has been 
nominated as „Nodal Officer‟ for Pagladiya Dam Project by Water Resources Department, 
Government of Assam through letter No. WR(G)14/97/Pt -361 dated 14th June, 2004. Inspite of 
best efforts on the part of Water Resources Department, Government of Assam, the balance 
land has not yet been acquired and transferred to Brahmaputra Board for resumption of 
suspended activities under the execution of Pagl adiya Dam Project. The matter relating to 
resumption of work of Pagladiya Dam was also discussed during the 6 th meeting of High 
Powered Review Board under the Chairmanship of Hon‟ble Minister(WR), Govt. of the India 
held in January, 2012. The Hon‟ble Chief  Minister of Assam assured that he would like to 
discuss with Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC) to break the deadlock on Pagladiya Project. 
Outcome of such an effort on the part of Government of Assam is still to come. 
As a follow up to above assurance, S ecretary, Water Resources Department, Government of 
Assam has been requested by Brahmaputra Board in May 2012 for an early acquisition of 
balance land needed for execution of Pagladiya Dam Project to enable Brahmaputra Board to 
initiate suspended activitie s under the project. Although, Ministry of Water Resources and 
Brahmaputra Board both are trying hard to take up construction of above dam but the response 
of the State Government is still not favourable.    
Recommendation (Para No.5.14) 
 
 The Committee no te that the Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP) was 
launched during 1996-97 to provide loan assistance to the States to help them complete some 

 
of the incomplete major/medium irrigation projects which were in an advanced stage of 
completion wi th a view to creating additional irrigation potential in the country. Grant 
component has been introduced in the Programme since April, 2010. The Committee were 
informed that an amount of Rs. 14242 crore has been allocated for AIBP for the financial year 
2012-13 and that a total of Rs. 53395.744 crore of Central assistance has been released till 
date for the Programme.  The Committee's examination has however revealed that the 
performance of AIBP has been very poor.   The maintenance of assets created under  AIBP 
was not being accorded due priority, and owing to this, 3 major, 3 medium and 37 minor 
irrigation projects lost their capacity due to silting, weed -growth and structural erosion.  The 
Ministry's reply to this sorry state of affairs is that funds to t he tune of 1% are kept in the 
detailed project report for maintenance of irrigation projects, and it is the job of State 
Governments to maintain the assets created. The Committee, while recognizing the pivotal role 
of State Governments in maintenance of ir rigation assets created under AIBP, are of the 
considered view that much more needs be done by the Union Ministry of Water Resources in 
this regard.  The Committee would like to have a comprehensive status report of funds 
released and the irrigation potent ial targeted and actually created State -wise and year -wise 
since 1996 -97 and the new measures devised in view of the bottlenecks faced and the 
experience gained.  
Reply of the Government 
 
The construction of irrigation projects involves creation of infrast ructure e.g. Head 
works (dams, barrage) and canal network. The State Governments are responsible for their 
operation and maintenance on year to year basis. The funds for maintenance of the 

 
constructed/completed projects are not provided to States under AIB P. The State Government 
is required to give undertaking in MoU at the time of inclusion of the project in AIBP to make 
provision of funds for the maintenance of the project for 10 years after its completion.    
 The Central Government has released Rs. 1642 5.48 crores as loan assistance and Rs. 
28225.47 crores as grant to the States for Major and Medium Irrigation Projects under AIBP 
since 1996-97 to 2011 -12. Thus, a total amount of Rs. 44650.95 crores has been released as 
Central Assistance under AIBP to th e States. The comprehensive Status of funds released and 
the irrigation potential targeted and actually created State -wise and Year-wise since 1996-97 is 
given at Annexure-II. 
 The completion of the project and achievement of the potential creation sometim es are 
delayed because of the bottlenecks such as delays in land acquisition, delays in 
implementation of R&R activities and related court cases, insufficient budget allocation by 
state, delays in releasing of funds to the Projects by State Government. The  delays are caused 
also due to technical issues related to underground/surface geological surprises and short 
working period due to non-closure of the running canals.  
 The State Governments are now being requested to complete the land acquisition in 
advance to ensure availability of the land for execution of various components of the project. 
States have also been urged to ensure completion of Rehabilitation & Resettlement activities 
and shifting of PAPs pari passu with construction of headworks. Suitable amendments in the 
guidelines of AIBP are being made by the Ministry of Water Resources for addressing these 
bottlenecks effectively. 
 

 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No.30 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5.15) 
  
The Committee are unable to accept the reply of the Ministry that the present coverage 
of AIBP is adequate.  The fact that 75 -85% of AIBP grants were released during 2005 -06 to 
2007-08 to just 6 States reveals that there have been disparities in the coverage of fun ds of 
AIBP.  In this connection, the Committee note that the Ministry proposed to introduce certain 
incentives and conditions to be linked with the Central Assistance(CA) under this Programme 
during XII Plan, including a proposal for enhancement of CA from  @ 25% to  @ 90% of the 
cost of the project in areas under Desert Development Programme.  The Committee would like 
to see the tangible outcome of the efforts of the Ministry in due course.  As regards the release 
of funds, the Committee recommend that the Ministry  devise a suitable mechanism to avoid 
issuing of sanctions for release of funds at the fag end of the financial year (last quarter/March).  
They also recommend that the Ministry interact with the State Governments on regular basis 
and impress upon  them for timely submission of proposals for funding under AIBP so as to 
avoid frequent occurrence of March rush every financial year. 
Reply of the Government 
State Governments have been requested time and again to ensure submission of all 
the proposals fo r the Central Assistance to CWC/MoWR well in time for release of funds in 
beginning of the financial year and thus to avoid release of Central Assistance at the fag -end of 
the Financial Year. The timely release of funds will ensure smooth progress of const ruction 
activities without any hindrance of non -availability of funds. These issues are being 

 
appropriately addressed by MoWR by making suitable amendments in the AIBP guidelines in 
the 12th Five Year Plan.  
Recommendation (Para No.5.16) 
 
 The Committee note that the yearly allocation of AIBP funds to the States is reflected in 
the DFG of the MoWR.  Considering the mandate given to the MoWR, the Committee 
recommend that the AIBP budget form an integral part of the DFG of the Ministry of Water 
Resources for better conception, coordination, superintendence and outcome.   
Reply of the Government 
Irrigation being a State subject, the irrigation projects are planned, executed and funded 
by the State Governments as per their priorities. 
 In Detailed Demands for Grants of Ministry of Water Resources, the yearly allocation of 
funds for the schemes operated by the Ministry are reflected. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5.17) 
 
 The Committee observe that the National Projects being implemented with the Central 
Assistance of 90% of the cost of the Project as grant, the Government has in 2008 selected 14 
projects in several States out of which 3 projects, namely Gosikhurd Project of Maharashtra, 
Shahpur Kundi Project of Punjab and Teesta Barrage Project of West Bengal are under 
execution.  The Ministry apprised the Committee that National Projects are basically (i)projects 
involving inter-country rivers and also (ii) large projects with inter -State problems or (iii)projects 
with additional potential of above 2,00,000 ha. and with  no dispute on sharing of river waters.  
Noting that there have been proposals from Odisha State Government for inclusion of Ringali 

 
Project and Subarnarekha Project under the category of National Projects, the Committee urge 
that expeditious action be ini tiated by the Ministry in this regard.    Regarding the total cost of 
Shahpur Kundi Project, the representative of the Ministry was unable to furnish the information 
during evidence.   The Committee, therefore, desire that the requisite information in rega rd to 
Shahpur Kundi Project be gleaned within three months from presentation of this Report and 
placed before the Committee.   
Reply of the Government 
 
New Projects fulfilling the criteria mentioned in the guidelines for implementation of 
national projects could be considered for inclusion as national project on receipt of proposals 
from the State Government in the prescribed format, clearance from Expenditure Finance 
Committee/Project Investment Board and on the recommendation thereupon of a High 
Powered Steering Committee constituted for the purpose of overseeing the entire process of 
selection and implementation of national projects and the approval by the Union Cabinet.  The 
Status of Rengali and Subernarekha Projects is as under; 
Rengali Irrigation Proj ect: The revised cost estimate of Rengali Irrigation Project is not 
approved by TAC/Planning Commission. The State Govt. vide their dated 17.4.2012 conveyed 
its decision for availing assistance from Japanese International Cooperative Agency (JICA) to 
complete the Left Bank Canal of Rengali Irrigation Project. Therefore, the proposal of State 
Govt. for inclusion of Rengali Irrigation Project in the scheme of National Project does not fulfill 
the criteria of additional potential of more than 2 lakh ha. The St ate Govt. has been informed 
accordingly, vide letter dated 4.6.2012. 

 
Subernarekha Project: Proposal from the State of Jharkhand was received for inclusion in the 
scheme of National project. The Govt. of Jharkhand was requested to get the project approved 
from the Planning Commission and submit revised proposal in the prescribed format. The State 
Govt has not submitted the proposal after investment clearance from the Planning 
Commission. The proposals from Odhisha and West Bengal are yet to be received.  
 Regarding Shahpur Kandi Dam Project, its revised cost estimate was accorded 
investment clearance by Planning Commission in February 2010 for Rs 2285.81 crore (at 2008 
PL). An expenditure of Rs.268.48 crores has been incurred upto May 2012. The work of 
Shahpurkandi hydel channel and its head regulator are under progress.  The project envisages 
irrigation benefits of 37,173 ha in J&K and Punjab and power generation of 168 MW.  The 
project is targeted for completion in March, 2015. 
Recommendation (Para No.6.12) 
 
 The Committee note that the North Eastern Region, endowed with a combined water 
resources potential of 586 BCM, has the highest water potential among all the river basins in 
the country.  However, despite some initiatives taken by the Ministry for the dev elopment of the 
water potential of the Region, the Committee in their 8th Report (2011 -22) pointed out that no 
new Major and Medium Irrigation (MMI) Projects had been taken up under AIBP during the last 
five years.  The Committee had, therefore, urged the Ministry to make special efforts to 
encourage and incentivise the State Governments of this Region to submit proposals for MMI 
projects for their own benefits.   Noting that the Ministry has since taken a few initiatives for 
incentivising the States of NE Region to submit proposals for new MMI schemes for creation of 
more irrigation potential, the Committee urge that the Ministry intensify its efforts so that the 

 
State Governments of NER come forward with suitable schemes in this regard.  In addition, the 
implementation of the Scheme for Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of water bodies 
with domestic support is another point that calls for urgent corrective measure in respect of 
NER States.   The Committee are dismayed to note that as against the Budg et provision of 
Rs.684.00 crore for the financial year 2011 -12, and the actual release of funds to the tune of 
Rs.731.40 crore released to various States, no provision has been made in the Budget of 2012 -
13.  Asked to explain, the Ministry submitted that t hey would need Rs.30,000 crore for the RRR 
projects during the XII Plan period and the requirement of funds for the purpose during 2012 -13  
would depend upon the actual allocations of funds by the Planning Commission.  This is 
unfortunate to say the least as RRR of water bodies is a very vital scheme across the country.  
Further, only Meghalaya among the States of NE Region has figured in the list of recipients of 
funds.  The explanation offered by the Ministry in this regard stated that during 2011 -12 while 
proposals from Government of Meghalaya were received in the Ministry as per guidelines of 
the scheme, no proposal from other States in NER was received in the Ministry for funding as 
per the guidelines of RRR scheme.   The Committee are not satisfied wit h the reply of the 
Government.  They believe that given the relative geographical isolation and backwardness of 
the Region, awareness is perhaps lacking among the people of the Region about the 
significance of water bodies like tanks, ponds, etc. as a sour ce of irrigation, fisheries and other 
beneficial purposes due to which proper attention has not been given to water bodies despite 
the huge potential available in NER.  The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to take 
effective steps to raise awareness among the States of NER, and encourage and motivate 
them to submit proposals in this regard.   They hope that concrete results will follow such 

 
efforts and tangible benefits will accrue to the NE States commensurate with the huge water 
resources potential of the region.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the measures 
devised and put in place in this behalf.    
Reply of the Government 
 
The AIBP Guidelines provide for 90% Central Assistance for Major and Medium 
Projects in the NE Region as against 25 % Central Assistance for projects in General Category 
States. Initiative has been taken by CWC by organizing a Workshop for preparation of Detailed 
Project Report (DPR) of Major and Medium Projects and Submission of Proposals for AIBP for 
the State Govt. Officers of NE Region during May 2011 so that they are able to formulate DPR 
of suitable/feasible MMI Projects for obtaining Investment Clearance of the Planning 
Commission and then send the proposals for their inclusion in AIBP.        
 With regard to RRR Scheme, during XI Plan Period, two schemes of RRR of Water 
Bodies were implemented one with domestic support and other with external assistance. In the 
scheme with domestic support 90% of the cost of the project was provided as central 
assistance (grant) t o the North Eastern Region and 10% was to be arranged by the State 
Governments. 
 The Scheme for implementation of RRR of Water Bodies during XII Plan is under 
formulation. The same funding pattern is proposed to be adopted for North Eastern Region. 
Water User Associations and Local Bodies are proposed to be involved for raising awareness.   
 

 
Recommendation (Para No.6.13) 
 
 The Committee further note that among the activities carried out under the 
Brahmaputra Board, 49 Master Plans, out of 57 identified Mat er Plans, have been prepared 
and sent by the Board to the concerned States for necessary implementation.  3 (three) Sub -
basin Master Plans already prepared are awaiting approval of the Board, while another 5 (five) 
Master Plans are already completed and being circulated for comments of the Board Members.  
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Brahmaputra Board take steps to expedite 
completion of the remaining 8 Master Plans which are under different stages of 
completion/approval. Regarding the schemes for Protection of Majuli Island, the Committee 
note that phase I & II of the works were taken up for execution since March, 2009, and that 
35.89% of the physical progress of the work has been achieved upto February, 2012 at a cost 
of Rs.36.78 crore.   The Committee hope and expect the Scheme will be completed by its 
target date of completion, i.e. March, 2014 in order to avoid wasteful time and cost overruns 
and to extend the necessary benefits to the people expeditiously. The Ministry also informed 
the Committee that the Brahmaputra Board had completed Detailed Project Reports(DPRs) for 
5 (five) Multipurpose projects of NE Region, viz. Siang Single State and Subansri Singe 
Stage(Arunachal Pradesh), Tipaimukh Dam Project (Manipur and Mizoram), Bairabi 
Project(Mizoram) and Dibang Project(Arunachal Pradesh).  Siang and Subansri Dam Projects 
have been handed over to the National Hydro Electric Power Corporation(NHPC) while 
Tipaimukh and Bairabi Dam Projects have been handed over to the North East Electric Power 
Corporation(NEEPCO) and the Government  of Mizoram respectively for execution.  The DPR 
for Dibang Project in Arunachal Pradesh was partially completed and handed over to NHPC for 

 
DPR completion and implementation.  The Committee hope that the Brahmaputra 
Board/Ministry would not wash its hands off the 5(five) Projects after their handing over to 
concerned implementing agencies, but would call for status report once in a year to ensure 
their proper implementation.   The Committee would like to be updated on  the status of the 
above stated five Multipurpose Projects of NE Region for which DPRs have been 
completed/partially completed by the Brahmaputra Board.  On the restructuring of Brahmaputra 
Board, the Committee were informed during evidence that the functi oning of the Board has 
come under a lot of criticism, specially from NE States.  The Ministry is, statedly moving a Bill 
to amend the Brahmaputra Board Act so as to make the Board more responsive and better 
functioning.   An allocation of Rs.90.00 crore (a  raise from Rs.56.00 crore allocated in 2011 -12) 
has been made for the Board by the Ministry for 2012 -13.  Further, the Central Government 
has constituted a Nodal Group to look into all aspects regarding restructuring of Brahmaputra 
Board with a wider mand ate as a Basin Level Authority.   The report submitted by the said 
Nodal Group, is statedly under consideration of MoWR.  The Committee desire to see speedy 
completion of the restructuring process of Brahmaputra Board.  However, they see no rationale 
in creating a Nodal Group on restructuring of the Board since the legislative process is already 
underway for amendment of the Brahmaputra Board Act, 1980. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that expeditious and conclusive action be taken by the Government to suitably 
restructure the Brahmaputra Board so as to make it more effective and a better functioning 
body within a definitive timeframe. 

 
Reply of the Government 
 
Out of 57 Master Plan, identified initially, Brahmaputra Board completed 49 Master 
Plans.  Rem aining 8(eight) Master Plans have been prepared and circulated to Brahmaputra 
Board Members for comments.  Prior to their submission to Ministry of Water Resources, 
Government of India, approval of Brahmaputra Board in respect of these Master Plans is 
needed.  As per decision of Board, if no comments are received from states by 31 st July, 2012, 
it will be presumed that states have no comments to offer on the Master Plans and accordingly 
all 8 (eight) Master Plans will be placed before the Board in the next meeting for approval. 
 
 Execution of works on Protection of Majuli Island from flood and erosion under Phase -II 
and Phase-III 
 
Phase-I of Majuli protection work for Rs.56.07 crore was completed at Rs.53.40 crore 
by April, 2011. The physical progress upto 30 .06.2012 under Phase -II and III is 43.06% at the 
expenditure of Rs.49.95 crore.  
   Status Report on implementation off 5(five) Water Resources Projects investigated by 
Brahmaputra Board and currently under execution with other Agencies/State 
Governments 
 
As desired by the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Water Resources, Brahmaputra 
Board, henceforth, will seek annual report on status of implementation of 5 (five) Water 
Resources Projects – Siang Dam Project (single stage), Subansiri  Dam Project (Lower Stage), 
Tipaimukh Dam Project, Bairbi Dam Project and Dibang Dam Project from implementing 
Agencies/ State Governments.  The status of above 5 (five) multipurpose projects will be 
intimated to the Committee.  
 Restructuring of Brahmaputra as a Basin Level Organization/ Authority 

 
 
A draft document outlining the proposed restructuring of the Brahmaputra Board as 
Basin Level Authority has been prepared and circulated to the North Eastern States 
including West Bengal for their views/ comments by 31 st August, 2012.  After receiving the 
views/ comments of the North Eastern State Governments further action for amendment of 
the Brahmaputra Board Act, 1980 would be initiated.  

 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
-  NIL - 

 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Para No.1.36) 
  
The Committee note that irrigation is one of the six components of development of rural 
infrastructure envisaged under Bharat Nirman Programme.  There is a proposal to carry the 
Programme into XII Plan, and the target set is reportedly 10 Mha for XII Plan.  Regarding its 
achievements, the Ministry stated  at one place that a total irrigation potential of 10.8 Mha has 
been created from 2005 -06 till date under Bharat Nirman.  The Committee also note that since 
2007-08 an expenditure of Rs.31792.75 crore has been incurred on achieving the targets of 
irrigation potential.   The Committee also note that starting from 2005 -06 to 2011 -12, the 
Ministry has been unable to achieve the targets fixed for creation of irrigation potential.   The 
Committee feel that there is an urgent need to delve deeper into the reasons  for not achieving 
the targets and desire that the Ministry set realistic and achievable targets in future.  The 
Committee also desire to know the expenditure incurred in creating irrigation potential per 
million hectare(Mha) so far.  
Reply of the Government 
  
Irrigation being a State subject, irrigation projects are planned, executed and funded by 
the State Governments themselves as per their priorities.  It has been observed that due to 
certain bottlenecks like issues related to land acquisition, R&R prob lems, inter -departmental 
problems, the projects get delayed and the targets as per the time schedule are not achieved in 
the projects assisted by Government of India through AIBP.  It is for the State Governments to 

 
set achievable the targets and also the Monitoring units of CWC are being requested to visit the 
projects at least twice a year so that the actual physical progress may be assessed and the 
bottlenecks encountered may be consulted with the State Governments.  
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.1.39) 
 
 The Committee note that as on 01.10.2011, there were a large number of Utilisation 
Certificates (UCs) pending pertaining to the Grants released to Institutions (200), Autonomous 
Bodies (8) as well as the State Governments.    The amounts involved in respect of such 
outstanding UCs as on 1.10.2011 were Rs. 3286.67 crore in case of Institutions and 
Autonomous Bodies and Rs.19.49 crore in case of State Governments.  The Committee also 
note the reply of the Ministry attributing this problem to the difficulty being faced in obtaining the 
UCs from Institutions, Autonomous Bodies and the States.  The Committee observe that 
despite the existence of a Committee to examine and monitor the outs tanding UCs, a large 
number of UCs involving a huge amount are pending.  The Committee, therefore, recommend 
the Ministry to strictly ensure that there is no further release of grants to Institutions, 
Autonomous Bodies and States in case of failure to get the UCs for grants released for the 
preceding year.  They would like to be apprised of the particulars of the States who failed to 
furnish the UCs and the amount of funds released to each of them for which the UCs are 
outstanding.  The Committee also recom mend the Ministry to keep strict vigil on 
implementation of schemes/projects and submission of UCs on time by conducting periodic 

 
inspections, reviews and strengthening the Committee entrusted with monitoring the 
submission of Utilisation Certificates. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The position in respect of the pending UCs pertaining to the Grants released  upto 
2009-10 to  the Institutions / autonomous bodies have come down to Rs.22.17 crores. All PAOs 
are watching receipt of UCs at the time of release of Grants- in- aid. No grants are being 
released without getting the UCs for the grants released for the previous years as provisions 
contained in GFR. 
As regards the UCs of State Governments the concerned SMDs viz CAD, Minor 
Irrigation and Ganga Wing are keeping  in touch with the State Governments for 
reconciliation/for speeding up of the UCs. Frequent meetings with concerned SMDs are also 
organized for expediting the UCs from the State Governments. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.12 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.25) 
  
The Committee were informed that the work study of assessment of irrigation potential 
creation through mapping of irrigation infrastructures to monitor the progress was assigned to 
NRSA, Hyderabad in respect o f 53 AIBP assisted projects spread over 18 States during the XI 
Plan.  According to the Ministry, the study was completed during 2009 -10.  It not only provides 
the potential created but also gives critical gap areas for further effective monitoring.  The 
Committee note that the NSRC has also been further awarded the work of similar assessment 

 
in respect of another 50 projects spread over 14 States in second phase during XI Plan which 
is targeted to be completed by October, 2012.   The Committee desire the M inistry to furnish 
the details of the study conducted by NSRC, Hyderabad regarding the potential created and 
the gap areas suggested for further effective monitoring and the corrective steps taken to fill up 
the gaps so suggested.  The Committee expect tha t the study of another 50 projects will be 
completed within the stipulated time i.e. October, 2012.   
Reply of the Government 
 
After receipt of the Reports from NRSC, Hyderabad, these were examined by Central 
Water Commission to find percentage variation i n potential creation as per NRSC and data 
furnished by the Project authorities. It was found that the variation in potential creation in 
respect of 17 projects was more than 15%.  The State Govts./Project Authorities of such 
projects were asked to furnish their views/comments on the variation. Out of 17 projects, the 
action taken to fill the gap areas in respect of 9 projects were received from the State Govts./ 
Project authorities. The details showing reasons for variation and action taken by States are 
appended in Annexure-1. 
In respect of the work related to 50 projects, the Report have been received for 17 
projects so far from NRSC Hyderabad.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.18 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.32) 
 The Committee note that the Government of India launched a Pilot Scheme for Repair, 
Renovation and Restoration(RRR) of Water Bodies as State sector scheme during  X Plan 

 
which envisaged a Plan outlay of Rs.300.00 crore to be shared by the Centre and States in  the 
ratio of 3:1.  The objectives of the Scheme are revival, augmentation and utilisation of storage 
and irrigation potential of water bodies.  Two schemes namely,  (i) scheme with external 
assistance with an outlay of Rs.1500 crore, and (ii) scheme with domestic support with an 
outlay of Rs.1250 crore have been approved by the Government in this regard for 
implementation during the XI Plan period.  During the year 2011 -12(till December, 2011), a 
sum of Rs.288.09 crore had been released under the Scheme wi th domestic support, whereas 
a sum of Rs.174.88 crore had been released till December, 2011 under external assistance 
component.   The Committee were informed that a total sum of Rs.808.91 crore had been 
released during 2009 -10, 2010 -11, and 2011 -12 to 12 States, covering 3341 water bodies.  
Further, a proposal for covering 126 more water bodies in Odisha and Madhya Pradesh has 
also been processed for release of funds.  However, the Committee are dismayed to note that 
out of 3341 water bodies involving a to tal project cost of Rs.1350.90 taken up during the same 
period, only 694 water bodies have been completed, (i.e. a mere 20.77% achievement).  Works 
in the remaining 2647 water bodies are stated to be in progress.  The Committee recommend 
that the Ministry make concerted efforts to complete the remaining 2641 water bodies for which 
work is stated to be in progress.   They also would like the Ministry to apprise about the thrust 
areas which have been identified for achievement during 2012 -13 as also the fund allocated by 
the Planning Commission for RRR Scheme and the follow up action taken in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
 
Observation made by the Committee has been noted and follow up action has been 
initiated viz. letter written to the State Governmen t for submission of utilization certificate / 

 
completion of work etc. under the RRR scheme of Water Bodies.   It is further stated that during 
2011-12 a sum of Rs.291.03 crore has been released to 12 States and a further sum of Rs. 
27.54 crore has been rel eased to Government of Bihar for undertaking spill over activities 
under RRR scheme during the year 2012-13.  
 The Repair, Renovation & Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies Scheme is being funded 
by the Government of India under the State Sector Scheme Accele rated Irrigation Benefit 
Programe (AIBP) and other Water Resources Programme.  During the year 2012 -13, a 
budgetary provision of Rs. 14,242 crore has been provided for the above scheme which inter -
alia includes funds for the RRR of Water Bodies scheme also .  The Scheme of RRR of Water 
Bodies is likely to continue during XII plan period with some modification in funding pattern/ 
scheme features etc. which is being decided separately.   
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.21 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
-  NIL - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                            DIP GOGOI 
24 July, 2013                                          Chairman,                 
02 Shravana, 1935 (Saka)            Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 

 
Annexure – I 
 
DETAILS SHOWING REASONS FOR VARIATION AND ACTION TAKEN BY STATES  
 
 
S. 
No. Name of the 
Project 
Potential Created 
(03/2007) % Variation Reason for 
variation 
 
Action taken replies 
from State Government 
    
Field 
Reported 
NRSA 
Reported 
     
1 Khowai Irrigation 
Project, Tripura 
9.32 1.115 -88.04 Construction of 
many canals and 
structures are in 
progress. The 
State Government 
has been asked to 
reconcile the 
difference. 
The State Government 
has indicated that the I.P 
created figure is 
erroneously 
incorporated. Some 
discontinuation in the 
canal as seen is 
temporarily connected by 
pipe for conveying water 
at the time of 
requirement. 
2 Dhansiri Project, 
Assam 
18.500 14.588 -21.15 
Due to 
incompletion of 
cross drainage 
works & breaching 
of canals due to 
flood. 
During the last two years, 
majority of the breached 
portion of different canals 
have been restored and 
repairing & 
reconstruction work of 
damaged structures have 
been completed and lost 
potential have been 
restored. New structures 
have also been 
3 Thoubal 
Multipurpose 
Project, Manipur 
      The State 
Government has 
clarified that the IP 
created is in the 
LMC. It has 
submitted that 
since the irrigation 
is being done 
directly from 
outlets of the Left 
main canal through 
field to field 
irrigation, the same 
has not been taken 
into account by the 
satellite 
assessment. This 
is the main reason 
for the variation in 
potential creation. 
The comments of 
the State govt 
have been sent to 
The State Government 
has indicated that growth 
of vegetation like wheats 
and grasses in unlined 
and very small  section 
distributories might have 
made these invisible 
during satellite imaging. 
The vegetation is 
cleaned periodically 
whereever required. The 
gaps due to non-
completion of  some 
portions of canals are 
targetted for completion 
by December, 2010. 

 
NRSA for further 
examination / 
compliance. The 
concerned FU has 
been requested to 
ascertain the facts 
during subsequent 
monitoring visits. 
4 Khuga Project, 
Manipur 
2.0 0 -100.00 The main canal is 
not fully completed 
and distributories 
on Left and Right 
side of canal not 
taken up for 
construction on the 
date of satellite 
data. However, the 
project authorities 
indicated that the 
work on these six 
distributaries have 
been completed 
and potential to the 
extent of 2000 ha 
has been created. 
The State 
Government have 
been requested to 
comply with  the 
observations of 
NRSA at the 
earliest. 
The State Government 
has indicated that growth 
of vegetation like wheats 
and grasses in unlined 
and very small  section 
distributories might have 
made these invisible 
during satellite imaging. 
The vegetation is 
cleaned periodically 
where ever required. The 
gaps due to non-
completion of  some 
portions of canals are 
targetted for completion 
by December, 2010. The 
required flow of water is 
possible even without 
identifiable distributories 
due to considerable level 
difference in some parts 
of command areas due 
to hilly terrain. 
5 Malaprabha 
Irrigation Project, 
Karnataka 
35.026 28.82 -17.72 The difference in 
satellite derived 
assessment and 
field assessment is 
due to the fact that 
the field report has 
taken into 
consideration all of 
the canals which 
are physically 
completed though 
there is no 
hydraulic 
connectivity. 
Discontinuities noticed 
are now completed and 
shortfall in field reported 
potential has since been 
made good.As such, the 
discripencies have since 
been rectified. 
6 Shahnehar 
Project, Himachal 
Pradesh 
5.75 3.98 -30.78 There is no offtake 
connectivity for 
one Distributary to 
the Left Bank 
Canal and hence 
the I.P. created for 
this Distributary is 
treated as nil by 
satellite 
assessment. This 
is the, reason for 
There was no gap in LBC 
Main Canal and 
Distributory as reported 
by NRSC.The field 
reported CCA is based 
on actual coverage 
provided at site and 
difference in CCA 
derived by satellite due 
to any techinical or any 
reason may be corrected 

 
the difference in 
satellite 
assessment  and 
field reported 
assessment. The 
State Government 
is being requested 
to comply with the 
observation of 
NRSA and remove 
the bottleneck at 
the earliest. 
accordingly.  
7 Shivnath 
Diversion (C.), 
Chhattisgarh 
5.04 3.362 -33.29 Variation is due to 
discontinuity 
noticed in the 
satellite data  in 
respect of 
minors.The State 
Government have 
been requested to 
comply with the 
observation of 
NRSA and remove 
the bottleneck at 
the earliest. 
The shortfall in Irrigation 
Potential has been 
corrected by completing 
the gaps in Minors and 
re-modelling of canals.  
8 Teesta Barrage  
Project, West 
Bengal 
143.02 82.198 -42.53 There is variation 
in potential 
creation on 
account of 
methodology 
adopted in 
assessment of 
potential creation.  
The Government 
of West Bengal 
has informed that 
the works on the 
gaps would be 
completed within 
December 2010 
subject to the 
condition that the 
land disputes will 
be cleared by that 
time. 
The State Government 
has replied that there is a 
difference of only 16% in 
IP Creation.  The 
methodology of 
assesment of I.P. 
creation is almost same 
as adopted by NRSC.  
The only difference is 
that the project authority 
has considered separate 
weight factors each for 
main canal and 
distribution system 
depending on their 
respective cost per 
kilometer to calculate the 
IP created. The gaps, 
which were remained 
unexecuted due to land 
disputes, court cases, 
etc., are being rectified 
on priority basis. 
Executions of important 
structures essential for 
increasing the utilization 
of IP are also given top 
most priority. 

 
9 Gundalakamma 
Irrigation Project, 
Andhra Pradesh 
10.536 7.88 -25.21 The difference in 
satellite derived 
assessment and 
field assessment is 
due to some 
pending structures.  
The State 
Government have 
been asked to 
reconcile the 
difference. 
The State Government 
has replied that the 
Hon'ble High Court have 
cleared the land 
acqusition case.   The 
land was handed over 
and the work is under 
progress. A case is 
pending in the Hon'ble 
High Court for acquiring 
balance land.  Hydrolic 
conectivitiy will be 
created shortly soon after 
clearing of the case by 
the Hon'ble High Court. 
10 Sindh Phase-II 
Project, Madhya 
Pradesh 
62.329 45.722 -26.64 The difference in 
satellite derived 
assessment and 
field assessment is 
due to the fact that 
the field report has 
taken into 
consideration 
potential created 
till March 08, 
whereas the 
Satellited 
assessment is till 
March 07. As per 
CWC record, the 
potential created 
till March 07 was 
48.72 thousand 
ha. 
 
11 Bansagar 
Irrigation Project,  
Madhya Pradesh 
47.521 23.005 -51.59 The difference in 
satellite derived 
assessment and 
field assessment is 
due to large 
number of minors 
pending in Sihawal 
and Keoti Canal 
system. 
 
12 Rajghat Irrigation 
Project, Uttar 
Pradesh 
43.562 33.81 -22.386 The variation in 
potential creation 
is  due to  pending 
railway crossing & 
road crossing 
though there is 
physical progress 
in canal 
construction.  
 

 
13 Sarayu Nahar 
Paroyojana, Uttar 
Pradesh 
424.70 220.302 -48.1276195 There are gaps 
and Gonda and 
Khalilabad 
branches.  This is 
due to the exisiting 
gap of 900 mtr at 
chainage of 36.9 
Km  main canal 
causing hydraulic 
discontinuity for 
the other canals 
beyond this 
chainage.There 
are gaps in various 
Minors/Distributari
es also. 
 
14 Sone Modernisa-
tion, Bihar 
860 709.15 -17.54 The variation in 
potential creation 
is either due to 
canals with 
pending I.P. or due 
to I.P. which could 
not be assessed 
for want of field 
data on I.P. 
proposed.  
 
15 Western Kosi 
Project, Bihar 
193.527 49.171 -249% This is mainly due 
to I. P. reported as 
completed even 
though physical 
progress in 
corresponding 
canal network is 
reported as either 
pending or 
incomplete by field 
offices. 
 
16 Kukadi Project, 
Maharashtra 
39.536 33.43 -15.44 The difference in 
satellite derived 
assessment and 
field assessment is 
due to the fact that 
some of the minors 
are shorter in 
length then as 
reported by project 
authorities 
 

 
17 Kansjore Project, 
Jharkhand 
4.499 3.668 -18.47 The variation in 
potential creation 
is due to non-
completion of 
canal length as 
some minors and 
discontinuity in 
some of the canal 
length. The State 
Government is 
being requested to 
comply with the 
observation of 
NRSA and remove 
the bottleneck at 
the earliest. 
 
 
 

 
Annexure – II 
 
 
STATUS OF FUNDS RELEASED AND THE IRRIGATION POTENTIAL TARGETED AND ACTUALLY CREATED STATE-WISE AND YEAR-WISE SINCE 1996-97 
S. 
No State  
CLA 
(Loan)         
Rs crores 
Grant released( From 2004-05 to 2011-12)  Rs Crores Total 
CLA+ CA 
upto 2011-
12 (Rs 
Crores) 
Potential 
creation 
Target for 
AIBP (ha) 
Potential 
Created  
upto 
March-
2011 (ha) 
1996-97 
To  2004-
05 
2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09  2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 
Total  CA  
From 
2004-05 to 
2011-12 
1.  ANDHRA 
PRADESH 930.614 26.264 311.382 816.422 987.769 623.520 1300.728 22.792 256.131 4345.008 5275.622 1616846 575920 
2.  ASSAM 98.052 0.068 12.600 0.000 15.190 83.250 12.004 49.500 46.965 219.576 317.627 162323 125538 
3.  BIHAR 454.901 11.165 16.238 3.230 58.690 74.854 77.913 23.400 0.000 265.490 720.390 684650 587603 
4.  CHHATISGARH 267.328 0.878 7.665 0.000 37.394 42.020 44.847 43.012 22.252 198.067 465.394 213706 153285 
5.  GOA 130.855 0.195 0.000 1.910 32.480 39.230 20.250 20.000 20.250 134.315 265.170 23821 15304 
6.  GUJARAT 4107.172 45.750 339.600 121.889 585.720 258.610 6.080 361.420 0.000 1719.068 5826.240 1829181 576250 
7.  HARYANA 78.030 3.341 6.000 3.170 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 12.511 90.540 200970 109097 
8.  HIMACHAL 
PRADESH 60.108 1.589 16.057 2.220 70.540 81.810 52.860 11.121 82.590 318.787 378.894 37503 16859 
9.  JAMMU & 
KASHMIR 75.794 6.574 24.763 18.247 94.040 95.309 13.674 38.297 61.650 352.553 428.348 106087 56255 
10.  JHARKHAND 77.813 6.386 5.037 1.290 9.224 3.720 0.000 11.240 335.540 372.437 450.249 293786 13077                             
11.  KARNATAKA 2269.010 81.503 140.776 160.373 349.900 442.419 773.471 533.121 452.236 2933.799 5202.808 825642 570051                             
12.  KERALA 123.698 14.832 9.359 16.647 0.000 0.905 3.812 10.017 0.000 55.572 179.270 57466 41088                             
13.  MADHYA 
PRADESH 1866.694 155.010 168.097 25.810 386.200 418.913 585.373 456.189 262.177 2457.769 4324.463 919633 422738                             
14.  MAHARASHTRA 973.882 158.786 267.986 395.221 892.307 1535.760 1395.386 1812.912 1122.682 7581.039 8554.921 1206798 515334                             

 
15.  MANIPUR 102.900 10.350 70.304 138.072 54.180 182.113 0.000 209.497 0.000 664.515 767.415 51994 20940                             
16.  MEGHALAYA 4.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 4.000 4775 0                             
17.  ORISSA 873.161 7.267 147.999 134.105 609.489 705.097 826.243 563.827 614.947 3608.975 4482.136 631693 240850                             
18.  PUNJAB 415.470 0.000 26.317 0.000 13.500 9.540 22.050 140.476 43.630 255.513 670.983 338615 173346                             
19.  RAJASTHAN 1387.427 105.871 90.295 11.600 156.530 178.620 143.407 41.920 3.375 731.618 2119.045 867334 634386                             
20.  TRIPURA 30.920 2.700 16.200 0.940 0.000 22.669 4.860 48.000 0.000 95.368 126.288 24540 15630                             
21.  TAMILNADU 20.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 20.000 0 0                             
22.  UTTAR 
PRADESH 1337.289 42.276 108.105 81.895 150.690 315.473 238.081 432.738 279.844 1649.102 2986.391 2406873 1786701                             
23.  UTTRAKHAND 574.230 10.500 25.023 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 35.523 609.753 270000 0                             
24.  WEST BENGAL 166.133 4.035 0.029 6.700 0.830 22.810 0.914 81.000 102.546 218.864 384.997 551018 124988                             
  Grand Total 16425.477 695.338 1809.829 1939.741 4504.674 5136.641 5521.955 4910.478 3706.813 28225.468 44650.945 13325254 6775240                             
 

 
Annexure – III 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2012-13) HELD ON FRIDAY, 31 MAY 2013 
  
The C ommittee sat from 1500 hours to 1645 hours in Committee Room 'D', Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
              Shri Dip Gogoi – Chairman 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Kamlesh Balmiki 
3. Dr. Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan 
4. Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
5. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
6. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
7. Shri S.P.Y. Reddy 
8. Shri Arjun Roy 
9. Shri Rakesh Sachan 
10. Dr. P. Venugopal 
11. Shri Sajjan Verma  
 
         RAJYA SABHA 
 
12.  Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
13.  Smt. Vandana Chavan 
14.  Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
15.   Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
16.  Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
17.  Shri A.V. Swamy 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R.C. Tiwari   - Director 
 3. Smt. Rita Jailkhani  - Additional Director 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
1. Dr S.K. Sarkar, Secretary, MoWR 
2. Ms. Urvilla Khati, JS (PP), MoWR 

 
3. Shri Pradeep Kumar, Commissioner, MoWR 
4. Shri G. S. Jha, Commissioner, MoWR 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF NARMADA CONTROL AUTHORITY (NCA) 
 
1. Shri Devendra Sharma, Executive Member, NCA 
2. Shri M.A.K.P. Singh, Member (Power), NCA 
3. Shri R. K. Suryavanshi, Member (E &R), NCA 
4. Shri S. K. Haldar, Member (Civil) NCA 
5. Shri Naresh Lall, Secretary, NCA 
6. Shri Mukesh Kumar Chauhan, Chief Engineer, NCA 
7. Dr. Pawan Kumar, Director, NCA 
8. Shri M. K. Sinha, Sr. Jt. Commr. (WR) 
9. Dr. Afroz Ahmed, Director (A&R), NCA 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF SARDAR SAROVAR CONSTRUCTION ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
(SSCAC) 
 
1. Shri R. K. Suryavanshi, Chief Engineer (I/c of SSCAC) 
2. Shri Kushagra Sharma, Assistant Secretary 
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.   
Thereafter, t he Committee took up for  consideration the draft Report  on Action Taken by 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the Fourteenth Report (15th 
Lok Sabha) on " Demands for Grants  (2012-13)" of the Ministry of Water Resources.  After 
deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Report without any modification.  The 
Committee also authorized the Chairman to present the Report during the ensuing Monsoon 
session of the Parliament. 
2. xxxx   xxxx   xxxx    xxxx 
3. xxxx   xxxx   xxxx    xxxx 
 
4. xxxx   xxxx   xxxx    xxxx 
 
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept for record. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
****Minutes in respect of other matters kept separately 

 
Annexure – IV 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTEENTH REPORT 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE  
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations/Observations    31 
 
 
(ii) Recommendation/Observations which have been accepted    
by the Government  
 
Para Nos.  1.35, 1.37, 1.38, 1.40, 2.20, 2.21, 2.22, 2.23, 2.24, 
      3.26, 3.27, 3.28, 3.29, 3.30, 3.31, 4.15, 4.16, 4.17,  
      4.18, 4.19, 4.20, 5.14, 5.15, 5.16, 5.17, 6.12 and 6.13   
 
Total          27 
Percentage         87.00%
   
  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
 
 
Total          00  
Percentage          0 % 
 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies    
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Para Nos. 1.36, 1.39, 2.25 and 3.32 
 
Total          04  
Percentage   13 % 
 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply 
 of the Government Is still awaited 
 
 
Total            00 
Percentage         0% 
 