1 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2009-2010) 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
 
 
INTER LINKING OF RIVERS  
  
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Eleventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources} 
 
 
 
 
THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
April, 2010/, Chaitra 1932 (Saka) 
 
 3 

2 
 
THIRD REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2009-2010) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
 
 
INTER LINKING OF RIVERS  
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Eleventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  20.04.2010 
                                                   Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20.04.2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
April, 2010/Chaitra, 1932 (Saka) 

3 
 
WRC NO. 19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2010 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 

4 
 
CONTENTS 
            PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2009-2010)…………………   (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………  (v) 
 
 
CHAPTER   I   Report …………………………………………  1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been  9 
accepted by the Government …………………..  
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the    21 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government‟s replies ……………………….…..  
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of   23 
which replies of the Government have not been  
accepted by the Committee …………………….  
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  25 
final replies of the Government are still awaited …  
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
  I. Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee   32 
                                    held on 15 March 2010.   
 
  II. Analysis of action taken by the Government on the   34 
                        Recommendations / Observations contained in the Eleventh  
                        Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee………. 
 
 

5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON WATER RESOURCES (2009-2010) 
 
 
  Shri Beni Prasad Verma  -  Chairman 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi 
3. Shri Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan 
4. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
         5. Shri Dip Gogoi 
6.  Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
7. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
8. Shri Virender Kashyap 
9. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
       10.        Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
11.        Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
             12.        Shri S.P.Y. Reddy 
13.        Shri Arjun Roy 
14.        Smt. J. Shantha 
15.        Shri K. Shivkumar alias J.K. Ritheesh 
16.     Smt. Annu Tandon 
17. Dr. P. Venugopal (Tiruvallur) 
18.  Shri Sajjan Verma 
 
              RAJYA SABHA 
 
19.         Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan 
20. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
   21.         Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
           22. Shri Ranjitsinh Vijaysinh Mohite-Patil 
23. Shri Mangala Kisan 
24. Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
25. Dr. Ashok S. Ganguly 
 
     
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
 3. Shri B.S. Dahiya  - Director 
 4. Shri A.K. Yadav  - Committee Officer 
 5. Shri G. Guite   - Sr. Committee Assistant 
 

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
  
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2009 -10) having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Third Report 
on the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 
Eleventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water Resources 
(2008-2009) on „Inter Linking of Rivers‟.  
2. The Eleventh Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on  2 2 October 
2008.  The replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report 
were received on 17 June 2009. 
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and 
adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 15 March 2010. 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the    
recommendations/observations contained in the Eleventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;         BENI PRASAD VERMA, 
12 April, 2010                         Chairman, 
22 Chaitra, 1932 (Saka)        Standing Committee on Water Resources 
  

7 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources deals with the action 
taken by the Government on the rec ommendations / observations contained in their 
Eleventh  Report  on “Inter Linking of Rivers”  which  was  presented  to  Lok  Sabha on 
22 October 2008. 
2. Action Taken notes were received from the Government in respect of all the 14 
recommendations/observations of the Committee which have been categorized as follows : 
(i) Recommendations/observations which have been accepted by the 
Government : 
Para Nos. 1,3,4,9,11,12,13 & 14     (Total = 8) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government‟s replies : 
Para No. 6      (Total =1) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee. 
Para Nos. 7 & 8     (Total = 2) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/observations in resp ect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited. 
Para Nos. 2, 5 &10     (Total = 3) 
 
3. The Committee desire that final replies in respect of the 
recommendations/observations for which only interim replies have been given by the 

8 
 
Government s hould be furnished to the Committee within three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken given by the Government on 
some of the recommendations/observations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
A. Time-bound programme for completion of DPRs of identified links. 
      
Recommendation (Para No.1) 
 
5. The Committee in their earlier Report while recognizing the fact that water is a 
basic human necessity had embarked upon an indepth examination of the scheme of Int er-
Linking of Rivers in the backdrop of the topical interest generated in the subject at various 
public platforms and other fora.  The Committee had noted that the National Perspective 
Plan was formulated in August 1980 which envisaged transfer of water fr om surplus areas 
to deficit areas.  The NPP comprised two components, viz. (i) Peninsular River 
Development; (ii) Himalayan River Development.  The NPP envisaged additional benefit 
of 25 million hectare of irrigation from surface water, 10 million hectare by increased use 
of ground water which would raise the ultimate irrigation potential from the existing level 
of 140 million hectare to 175 million hectare and generate 34,000 MW of power apart from 
the benefits of flood control, navigation, water supply, f isheries, salinity, pollution control , 
etc.  They noted the possible benefits that might accrue as projected under the NPP on the 
one hand and the slow pace of implementation of various projects and the availability of 
water in various reservoirs/rivers on the other and desired the Ministry to undertake a study 
which would assure the availability of water as indicated in NPP in about two to three 
decades from now. 

9 
 
6. The Government in their action taken reply have intimated that the National Water 
Development Agency (NWDA) has completed the Pre -feasibility Report (PFR) level 
studies of 32 links  under NPP.  Out of these, 30 links have been identified for taking up 
further studies at the level of FR and Detailed Project Report.  The availability of water in 
various links in the year 2025 and 2050 A.D. at PFR/FR level has already been assessed.  
However, the water availability assessment will further be firmed up at the time of 
preparing the Detailed Project Reports of various links under NPP, after specific MoU s / 
treaties/water sharing agreements have been signed by the concerned State Governments/ 
neighbouring countries.   They have further stated that the work of preparation of DPR of 
Ken-Betwa link has been completed.  Water availability for this link has be en worked out 
in detail in the DPR.  Further, the work of preparation of DPRs of Par -Tapi-Narmada and 
Damanganga- Pinjal links have also been taken up during January 2009. The detailed water 
availability studies for these links would also be worked out while preparing their DPRs.     
7. The Committee note that the National Water Development Agency (NWDA) 
has completed Pre -feasibility Report (PFR) of 32 links.  Out of these, 30 links have 
been identified for taking up further studies at the level of FR and D etailed Project 
Report under NPP.  The Ministry has assessed the availability of water in various 
links for 2025 and 2050 at PFR/FR level.  However, the water availability assessment 
will be further firmed up at the time of preparing the Detailed Project R eports of 
various links under NPP.  In this connection, the Committee are perturbed to note 
that out of 30 identified links in NPP , the DPR for only one link namely Ken -Betwa 
link has been completed  so far.  The DPRs for two other links, namely, Par -Tapi-
Narmada link and Damanganga-Pinjal link have been taken up only in January  2009.  
The preparation of DPRs for remaining 27 identified links have not been taken up.  

10 
 
The Committee desire the Ministry to draw up a time bound programme for 
completion of the DP Rs of the remaining identified links so that a realistic and firm 
assessment of water availability as indicated in the NPP could be made.  They would 
like to be apprised of the time frame of completion of the DPRs within three months 
of presentation of this Report positively. 
B. Need for Consensus among the States. 
 
   Recommendation (Para No.3) 
8. The Committee had been informed that five links namely Ken -Betwa, Parbati -
Kalisindh-Chambal, Par -Tapi-Narmada, Damanganga -Pinjal and Godavari (Polavaram) -
Krishna (Vijayawada) had been identified as priority links for bringing consensus amongst 
the concerned States to take up the work of preparation of DPRs.  However, it was noticed 
that though all the States had agreed to the ILR programme in principle at various fora, 
problems cropped up when it came to the specifics of the issue of water sharing and other 
related benefits.  They had expressed their unhappiness with the current status/progress of 
the scheme.  They had observed that if the pace of arriving at conse nsus and preparation of 
DPRs was not accelerated the actual implementation of projects under ILR would take 
another 30 to 40 years or more for completion of all the identified 30 links.  The Committee, 
therefore, had desired the Ministry to take urgent and  concerted measures to bring all the 
concerned States on one platform to arrive at consensus in respect of all links at the earliest 
so that work of preparation of DPRs could be initiated. 
9. The Government in their action taken reply while giving the stat us of Ken-Betwa 
link have stated that DPR of the link had been completed by NWDA on 31 December  2008 
and the copy thereof was sent to the State Governments of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya 
Pradesh in February  2009 for their comments which were awaited.  As rega rds the other 

11 
 
two links viz.  Par-Tapi-Narmada link and Damanganga -Pinjal link, the Ministry have 
stated that the work of preparation of DPRs had been started by NWDA during January 
2009 and the DPRs are planned to be completed by December  2011.  In respect of Parbati-
Kalisindh-Chambal link, the matter was being vigorously pursued with the Governments of 
Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan for conveying concurrence on MoU to take up the work of 
preparation of DPR.  For Godavari (Polavaram) – Krishna (Vijayawada) li nk, techno -
economic and investment clearance has been given.  It has also been stated that action to 
identify few more links to be taken up as priority links had been initiated for taking up the 
matter with the concerned States for building consensus on ta king up work of preparation 
of their DPRs also. 
10. The Committee note that of the five priority links identified, the DPR for Ken -
Betwa link was completed by NWDA on 31  December 2008 but comments of the 
concerned States of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh  on the subject were still 
awaited.  The Committee desire the Ministry to pursue the matter vigorously to 
ensure that the actual work on Ken -Betwa link is initiated at the earliest.  The 
Committee also desire that the work of preparation of DPRs of Par -Tapi-Narmada 
Link and Damanganga -Pinjal link which was initiated in January  2009 may be 
completed expeditiously.  The matter regarding the other two links viz. Parbati-
Kalisindh-Chambal link and Godavari (Polavaram) – Krishna (Vijayawada) link 
should be pursue d at the highest level with the concerned State Governments with a 
view to bring about consensus among the concerned States for finalizing the DPRs.   

12 
 
 
C. Preparation of FRs of intra-state links.   
 
Recommendation (Para No.4) 
11. The Committee noted that the Ministry had, in June 2005, conveyed approval to all 
the States to identify intra -State links for preparation of pre -feasibility / feasibility reports 
of those links by NWDA.  Many States had come forward in this regard.  They expressed 
their happiness that the States of Bihar, Maharashtra, Jharkhand and Tamil Nadu had also 
submitted their proposals for study by NWDA.  The Committee had, therefore, desired the 
Ministry to render full assistance and support to concerned State Governments in 
preparation of DPRs of Intra-State links. 
12. The Government in their action taken reply have stated that NWDA was 
undertaking preparation of pre -feasibility/feasibility reports of 20 Intra-State links 
suggested by Maharashtra, Gujarat, Orissa and Jharkhand.  NWDA has planned to 
complete Feasibility Reports of 18 Intra-State links during the XI Five Year Plan.  The cost 
of preparation of these pre -feasibility and Feasibility Reports is borne by the Central 
Government.  They have also stated that the Government of India has launched Accelerated 
Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP) for providing central assistance to the irrigation and 
multi-purpose water resources projects of the States.   
13. The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry have received 20 proposals 
of Intra-State links from the States of Maharashtra, Gujarat, Orissa and Jharkhand 
and that NWDA has planned to complete Feasibility Reports of 18 Intra-State links 
during the XI Five Year Plan.  As the cost of preparation of these pre -feasibility and 
feasibility reports would be borne by the Central Government , the Committee desire 
the Government to highlight this fact among other States to encourage them to come 
forward with proposals for preparation of FRs for Intra-State links to boost the ILR 

13 
 
programme i n the country.  The  Committee would like to be apprised of further 
progress made in this regard. 
 D. Funding of ILR Programme. 
 
   Recommendation (Para Nos.7&8) 
14. The Committee, while noting that the Task Force on ILR consulted National 
Council of Applie d Economic Research (NCAER) and ICICI to assess the economic 
impact of the ILR programme and for suggesting funding options of the programme 
respectively, had observed that the Government proposed to establish the Irrigation and 
Water Resources Finance Corporation (IWRFC) which was mandated to mobilize very 
large resources required to fund major and medium irrigation projects.  According to 
the revised Report of NCAER submitted to the Ministry in April  2008, the ILR 
programme would result in substantial inc rease in per capita income of agriculture -
dependent as well as non -agriculture dependent households in rural and urban areas.  
The Committee, therefore, desired the Ministry to include not only the projects / links 
under ILR as National Projects but also a sk the IWRFC to raise funds by way of issue 
of bonds or other suitable instruments to fund projects under ILR.   For this purpose, 
they desired that initially IWRFC could raise funds for Ken -Betwa Link for which the 
DPR was likely to be available by the end of December 2008. 
15. The Government in their replies have stated that the Government of India have 
decided to take up some projects as national projects based on certain criteria which 
includes river interlinking projects.  The Central assistance to these projects would be 90% 
of the project costs of irrigation and drinking water component of the project.   According 
to them at present Ken -Betwa link project, whose DPR has been prepared had been 
included in the list of National Projects. Similarly the de cision for considering the funding 

14 
 
for other projects under ILR will be taken at an appropriate time after the preparation of 
their DPRs. 
16. The Committee note that the Ken -Betwa link project has been included in the 
list of ‘National Projects’ and the Government has decided to take some more projects 
as ‘National Projects’ based on certain criteria.  The decision for considering the 
funding of other projects under ILR will be taken up at an appropriate time after the 
preparation of DPRs.  However, the Com mittee are constrained to observe that the 
reply of Government is silent about the establishment of Irrigation and Water 
Resources Finance Corporation (IWRFC) and raising of funds by it for projects 
under ILR  despite the announcement made by the Finance Mi nister in his Budget 
speech (2008 -09) to set up such a corporation .  They would, therefore, like to be 
informed of the status of proposed establishment of IWRFC and its role in funding 
the projects under ILR.  The Committee also reiterate their earlier rec ommendation 
that the Government should ask the IWRFC to raise funds through issue of bonds or 
other suitable instruments for the projects under ILR so that the benefits expected 
from the ILR programme accrue at the earliest.    
 
 
 

15 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No.1) 
 
The Committee while recognizing the fact that water is a basic human necessity 
have embarked upon an indepth examination of the concept/scheme of Inter -Linking of 
Rivers in the backdrop of the topical interest generated in the subject at various public 
platforms and other fora.  This led to the resurrection of the project earlier mooted by some 
experts in the water resources sector.  The Committee noted that the long d istance transfer 
of water by way of Inter -Linking of River basins was not a new idea and has been a topic 
debated actively in the country for quite sometime.  They further note that a note on 
National Water Grid was earlier prepared by the then Central Wat er and Power 
Commission in 1972.  Further, apart from the CWC this concept of inter -basin water 
transfer was also proposed by Dr. K. L. Rao in 1972 titled, „National Water Grid‟ and later 
in 1977 as „Garland Canal‟ by Captain Dastur which attracted conside rable attention.  
While Dr. Rao‟s proposal envisaged transfer of Ganga water to Cauveri through Ganga – 
Cauveri Link partially by lift and partially by gravity, the proposal of Captain Dastur 
sought to store water of all tributaries / rivulets in canals at  a constant elevation and their 
utilization through Himalayan and Central / Southern Garland Canals involving transfer of 
water in both the directions.  According to the Ministry these schemes were examined by a 
Group of Experts and were not found feasible  either technically or economically.  The 
proposal of Dr. Rao, however, had components similar to the proposals later made under 
the National Perspective Plan (NPP).  The National Perspective Plan was formulated in 
August 1980 which envisaged transfer of w ater from surplus areas to deficit areas.  The 
NPP comprises two components, viz. (i) Peninsular River Development; (ii) Himalayan 
River Development.  The NPP envisaged additional benefit of 25 million hectare of 
irrigation from surface water, 10 million h ectare by increased use of ground water which 
would raise the ultimate irrigation potential from the existing level of 140 million hectare 
to 175 million hectare and generate 34,000 MW of power apart from the benefits of flood 

16 
 
control, navigation, water supply, fisheries, salinity, pollution control etc.  While noting the 
possible benefits that might accrue as projected under the NPP on one hand and the slow 
pace of implementation of various projects and the availability of water in various 
reservoirs / riv ers due to the effects of global warming, etc. on the other, the Committee 
desire the Ministry to undertake a study which would assure the availability of water as 
indicated in NPP in about two to three decades from now.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Nati onal Water Development Agency (NWDA) under the  Ministry of Water 
Resources (MoWR) and Central Water Commission (CWC)  formulated a National 
Perspective Plan (NPP) for Water Resources Development in 1980 envisaging interbasin 
transfer of water from surplus  basins to deficit  basins/areas.  NPP comprises of   two 
components, viz (i) Himalayan rivers development and (ii) Peninsular rivers development 
component.  National Water Development Agency  (NWDA)  was set up in 1982 as a 
registered Society under MoWR to carry out detailed studies  of NPP.       
 
NWDA has completed the Pre-feasibility report (PFR) level studies of 32 links under NPP. 
Out of these, 30 links have been identified for taking up further studies at the level of    
Feasibility Report (FR) and D etailed Project Report . The availability of water in various 
links in the year 2025 and 2050 AD at PFR / FR level has already been assessed after 
considering all the existing, ongoing and anticipated future water requirements for various 
needs viz. Irriga tion, domestic  and  industrial, hydropower generation, salinity control, 
committed downstream releases for the environment  and  ecological purposes etc.  
The Inter-linking proposals under NPP would give additional benefits of 25 million ha. of 
irrigation from surface water, 10 million ha. by increased use of ground water and 
generation of 34 thousand MW of power apart from the  incidental benefits of flood 
moderation, navigation, water supply, salinity and  pollution control etc.  
However, the water avail ability assessment will further be firmed up at the time of 
preparing the Detailed Project Reports of various links under NPP, after specific MOUs / 
treaties / water sharing agreements have been signed by the concerned State Governments / 
neighbouring countries. 

17 
 
The work of preparation of DPR of Ken -Betwa link has been completed.  Water 
availability for this link has been worked out in detail in the DPR.  Further the work of 
prepration of DPRs of Par -Tapi-Narmada and Damanganga -Pinjal links have also been 
taken up during Jan.,2009.  Further, the work of preparation of DPRs of Par -Tapi-Narmada 
and Damanganga- Pinjal links have also been taken up during January, 2009. The detailed 
water availability studies for these links would also be worked out while prepar ing their 
DPRs.     
 
Recommendation (Para No.3) 
 
The Committee further observe that all the reports prepared by NWDA are circulated to the 
concerned States Governments.  The State Government officials are also invited to all the 
meetings of AGM of NWDA Soc iety, Governing Body, Technical Advisory Committee 
etc.  Efforts are also made through the Consensus Group to convince the State 
Governments about the feasibility of the proposals and for arriving at consensus regarding 
sharing of surplus water and prepara tion of DPRs.  The NCMP of the UPA Government of 
2004 envisaged a comprehensive assessment of feasibility of the links starting with the 
Southern rivers in a fully consultative manner.  Thereupon, five links namely Ken – Betwa, 
Parbati – Kalisindh – Chambal, Par – Tapi – Narmada, Damanganga – Pinjal and Godavari 
(Polavaram) – Krishna (Vijayawada) were identified as priority links for bringing 
consensus amongst the concerned States to take up the work of preparation of DPRS.  
However, only one Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) for Ken – Betwa link was 
signed and DPR of this link is likely to be completed by the end of 2008.  The Secretary, 
Ministry of Water Resources, stated during evidence that Gujarat and Maharashtra 
Governments have informally agreed to gi ve concurrence for Par – Tapi – Narmada link 
and, Damanganga – Pinjal link for which MoU between the concerned States is likely to be 
signed soon.  The concurrence of Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan Government has not yet 
been received for the Parbati – Kalisindh – Chambal link.  It is disheartening to further note 
that though all the States had agreed to the ILR Programme in principle at various fora, 
problems crop up when it comes to the specifics of the issue of water sharing and other 
related benefits.  Th e Committee are unhappy with the current status / progress of such a 
huge Scheme which would benefit the nation and the people in many respects.  They are of 

18 
 
the considered view that if the pace of arriving at consensus, preparation of DPRs etc. is 
not accelerated the actual implementation of projects under ILR would take another 30 – 40 
years or more for completion of all the identified 30 links.  It is needless to highlight the 
cascading effect of all this on the project cost and other related issues.  Th e Committee, 
therefore, desire the Ministry to take urgent and concerted measures to bring all the 
concerned States on one platform to arrive at the consensus in respect of all links at the 
earliest so that work of preparation of DPRs of various links could be initiated. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As per the National Common Minimum Programme of the UPA Government, the 
Interlinking of Rivers programme is to be pursued with the consensus and cooperation of 
the States in a fully consultative manner. Therefore, the ILR programme is being pursued 
with focus on peninsular component Five links namely (i) Ken -Betwa  link (ii) Par -Tapi-
Narmada Link (iii) Damanganga -Pinjal link (iv) Parbati -Kalisindh-Chambal link (v) 
Godavari(Polavaram) – Krishna(Vijayawada) link under  peninsular component have been 
identified as priority links for building consensus among the concerned States for taking up 
their DPRs. The status of these links is given below 
(i) Ken – Betwa link 
DPR of Ken -Betwa link has been completed by NWDA on 31.12.200 8 and copy of the 
same has been sent to the concerned States of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh in 
February,2009 for their comments which are awaited. States have been requested in 
April,2009 to expedite their comments. 
(ii) Par – Tapi- Narmada (P-T-N) link 
(iii)  Damanganga – Pinjal (D-P) link 
 Par-Tapi-Narmada (P -T-N) and Damanganga -Pinjal(D-P) pertains to the States of  
Maharashtra & Gujarat. The work of preparation of DPRs of these links has been started by 
NWDA during January, 2009 after receiving the concurrenc e of the concerned states.  
These DPRs are planned to be completed by December, 2011. 

19 
 
(iv)  Parbati – Kalisindh – Chambal Link(Rajasthan & MP) 
The matter is being vigorously pursued with the Governments  of   Madhya Pradesh 
and Rajasthan for conveying conc urrence on MoU to take up the work of preparation of 
DPR of Parbati-Kalisindh-Chambal link.  
In this regard, Hon‟ble Minister (WR) has written D.O. letters to the Chief 
Ministers of Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan to finalize the draft MOU and convey their 
concurrence for the preparation of DPR of the Parbati -Kalisindh-Chambal link project on 
9th January 2007 and 28 th August 2007. Secretary (WR) also wrote  D.O. letters to the 
Chief Secretaries to the Governments of  Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan respectively  to 
expedite the same on 6 th February 2007 and  26 th October 2007.   Hon‟ble Chief Minister, 
Govt. of Madhya Pradesh vide letter dated 12.10.2007 informed that bilateral discussions 
are being held for arriving at consensus.   
Further, Secretary (WR) had aga in written D.O. letters to the Chief Secretaries of 
Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan on 19th March, 2008  to expedite the concurrence on the 
draft MOU.  Hon‟ble Minister (WR) on 16th April, 2008 again requested Chief Ministers of 
both the States to expedite the concurrence of MoU. 
The matter was discussed in the  Annual General  meeting of NWDA Society taken 
by Hon‟ble Minister (WR)  on 9.7.2008 , wherein  Principal Secretary Government of 
Madhya Pradesh informed that they were in constant and continuous dialog ue with  the 
concerned senior officers of the Government of Rajasthan and issues  will  being resolved 
bilaterally. 
Further, Hon‟ble Minister (WR)  requested the Chief Ministers of Rajasthan and 
Madhya Pradesh vide DO letter dated 16.7.2008 to convey their concurrence early. 
 The matter was also discussed in the  52 nd  General  Body meeting on 19.12.2008,  
wherein  Principal Secretary (WR), Govt. of Madhya Pradesh informed that technical 
issues related to this proposal have been finalized with another alter native (Total 5 
alternatives). He also informed that as new Cabinet was   formed in both the States, final 
decision was likely to be taken very soon.   
(v) Godavari (Polavaram) – Krishna (Vijayawada) link. 
  This link was discussed in the „Consensus Group‟  meeting held on 13.5.2005.  The 
States of Chattisgarh and Orissa raised the issues of submergence under the Polavaram 

20 
 
project. Hon‟ble Chief Minister(WR) also held meeting with the Chief ministers /ministers 
of the concerned states on 4.10.2006 to resolve the issue.  
Meanwhile, Central Water Commission completed the appraisal of the Polavaram 
project. Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) of MoWR considered the same during its 
meeting held on 21.1.09 and gave techno -economic clearance to this Project. The Pla nning 
Commission has also given the investment clearance for the above project.  NWDA has 
been requested to take further necessary action in view of the above. 
The action to identify few more links to be taken up as priority links has also been initiated 
for taking up the matter with the concerned states for building consensus on taking up work 
of preparation of their DPRs also. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4) 
 
The Committee are given to understand that the Ministry, in June 2005, 
conveyed to all the States of approval to identify intra-State links for preparation of pre-
feasibility / feasibility reports of those links by NWDA.   They are happy to note that 
many States have come forward in this regard.  The States of Bihar, Maharashtra, 
Jharkhand and Tamil Nadu have also submitted their proposals for study by NWDA.  
The Bihar Government has already undertaken the work of preparation of DPRs of 
some of the intra -State link through consultancy service providers.  The Committee 
desire the Ministry to render full ass istance and support in all respects to concerned 
State Governments in preparation of DPRs of Intra – State links as these links in their 
opinion could be implemented by the State Governments without any interference / 
objections from other States.  Further , their completion would take lesser time 
comparatively and the benefits will also accrue to people at the earliest as the cost of 
preparation of DPRs is to be borne by the Central Government and the projects could 
be taken up for completion under AIBP. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 

21 
 
NWDA is undertaking preparation of prefeasibility / feasibility reports of Intra – state links 
suggested by various States. So far 20 proposals in this regard have been received 
(Maharashtra-15 Gujarat -1, Orissa -1, Jharkhand -3). NWD A has planned to complete 
feasibility reports of 18 intra state links during the XI five year plan under the Central Plan 
scheme “Investigation of Water Resources Development Schemes  “. The cost of 
preparation of these prefeasibility & feasibility reports is borne by the Central Government. 
Full technical assistance to the concerned willing State Governments for the preparation of 
DPRs would be provided by NWDA.  Further, t he Government of India has launched 
Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme(AIBP) f or providing central assistance to the 
irrigation/multi-purpose water resources projects of the States.  Assistance under AIBP is 
provided by MoWR, if such projects including intra -state linking project  are  approved by 
the Technical Advisory Committee of  MoWR after due appraisal by the CWC and 
investment clearance is given  by the Planning Commission.   
 
Recommendation (Para No.9) 
 
The Committee note that according to the present day Constitutional division of 
subjects between the Union and the States, th e subject „Water‟ falls both under the 
Union and the State Lists.  It may pointed out that while Entry 56 of the Union List in 
the Seventh Schedule in accordance with Article 246 empowers the Central 
Government to make law to regulate and develop inter -State rivers and river valleys to 
the extent to which such regulation and development under the control of the Union is 
declared by the Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest, Entry 17 of the 
State List of Seventh Schedule empowers the State s to make laws to regulate and 
develop water for  irrigation etc. subject to the provisions of Entry 56 of the Union List.  
Apart from the above, Article 254 (1) provides that inconsistency between laws made 
by Parliament and laws made by the legislatures of States either in respect of subject on 
which Parliament is competent to enact laws or to any provision of existing law on 

22 
 
matters enumerated in the Concurrent List, then the law made by Parliament shall 
prevail on the law made by Legislature of the Stat e to that extent of repugnancy be 
void.  The Committee, however, are constrained to observe that the Central 
Government has not so far made any laws under provisions of Entry 56 of Union List 
under Seventh Schedule though there have been  several instances  of disputes among 
the States an the issue of water, disregarding the verdicts of tribunals resulting in 
avoidable delays etc. in execution of projects.  Given this backdrop of the things as 
existing, the Committee invited Memorandum from experts / individ uals on the subject 
of Inter Linking of Rivers wherein, the Committee observe that a majority of the 
individuals and experts have opined that the subject „Water‟ either needs to be brought 
under the Concurrent List or the Union need to enact laws under the provisions of Entry 
56 of the Union List under the Seventh Schedule. 
Reply of the Government 
The details of Entry -56 , Entry 17 and article 254(1) of the constitution are given at 
Annexure-I.  The work of ILR is  being  pursued in fully consultative manne r at present.  
Therefore, a consensus group has been constituted under the Chairmanship of Chairman, 
CWC to bring consensus among the concerned States in this regard.   
As the implementation of Interlinking project requires the  cooperation of the state 
governments at all levels, such as Survey and  Investigation works, water sharing 
agreement, Land acquisition, Rehabilitation, construction etc.,   it  may be   appropriate to 
carry forward the programme in consultative manner. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.11) 
 

23 
 
Considering the importance of Inter Linking of Rivers and the interest shown by 
various quarters in the subject, the Committee invited Memoranda from individuals / 
experts / NGOs, etc. some of whom were also invited to depose before the Committee 
and give their views / opinions.  After hearing the views / opinions of the experts on the 
subject, the Committee have come to the conclusion that a majority of them are in 
favour of the ILR programme.  Some of them, however, have opined that before 
implementing projects under the ILR programme, the people should be made aware of 
the facts and the benefits accruing from the programme.  The Committee note that the 
Government have through the electronic and print media disseminated information on 
the website of NWDA a bout the ILR programme and according to Government the 
response of the public has been positive so far, though there are some people and 
groups who have apprehensions about the rehabilitation of the displaced people, the 
resettlement and the environmental issues.  To address these issues, the Government 
constituted a Committee of environmentalists, social scientists and other experts on ILR 
with a view to make it a consultative process.  The Committee chaired by Secretary, 
Water Resources had the Secretarie s of Ministries of Social Justice and Empowerment, 
Environment and Forests, eminent engineers, sociologists and environmentalists as 
Members of the Committee.  The Committee advise the Government on various 
environmental socio – economic and other technical aspects at the stage of preparing of 
DPRs of each link of ILR project.  For the present, the Committee hope that all the 
apprehensions would be addressed to at the time of preparation of DPR of the Ken – 
Betwa Link which according to them should serve as  model for preparation of DPRs of 
all other links. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The DPR of Ken – Betwa link has been completed and the environmental 
impact and socio – economic studies are being carried out as per the terms of reference 
approved by Ministry of  Environment & Forests. The concerns of the local people / 
experts / individuals / NGOs are being taken into consideration in the Detailed Project 
Report stage through public hearings in the project area and are being addressed 
appropriately.  
 

24 
 
Recommendation (Para No.12) 
 
The Committee note that from among the individuals / experts / NGOs called 
for submission of Memoranda, some of them have given proposals / schemes as 
alternatives to the links under ILR programme claiming those to be more cost – 
effective and addressing the environmental and other issues more effectively than the 
projects under ILR programme.  The Ministry have informed that these proposals were 
discussed by an Independent Group of Experts constituted by the Task Force with the 
persons wh o gave the proposals.  Those persons were also given an opportunity to 
present their studies.  The Independent Group of Experts which included CWC, NWDA 
and other organizations assessed these proposals and concluded that all the proposals 
were without detailed analysis, technically unsound, incomplete and hence could not be 
pursued in their present form. Therefore, these alternative proposals could not be 
considered alternatives to the links under ILR programme. While not disagreeing with 
the conclusion of the Independent Group of Experts comprising technical experts who 
found these proposals to be unsound, the Committee are of the view that those who 
have given these proposals are considered experts in the field of water management, 
etc. and if not all, som e of the points / ideas / views contained in these proposals could 
definitely be of value and use while formulating the DPRs of the links under the ILR 
programme.  The Committee, therefore, desire that while finalizing DPRs of various 
links the concerned a uthorities may have a re -look at some of the suggestions with an 
open mind.  These are likely to give some better ideas for improvement in the ILR 
programme.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As desired by the Committee, the views / ideas / points of the various individuals / 
experts / NGOs will be taken into consideration while preparing DPRs of such links.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.13) 
 

25 
 
The Committee on Water Resources visited a number of States and held 
informal discussions with the officials of the State Gover nments on the subject of ILR 
programme and sought their views thereon.  The views of the State Governments so 
obtained can be summarized into two categories, one where most of the States give 
preference to smaller and intra – State Links and the second cat egory, where the States 
are not satisfied with the benefit would accrue from the links under ILR programme.  
The Committee are happy to note that almost all States agree to the ILR programme in 
principle and the only apprehension related to inequitable dis tribution of water / 
benefits out of the programme.  The Committee appreciate the stand taken by the 
Government of Bihar in identifying a number of intra -State river links and the 
engagement of the services of consultancy firms for preparation of DPRs of some of the 
intra – State Links.  The Committee note the view of the Orissa Government regarding 
absence of legal framework on Inter Linking of Rivers at the Central level.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to take all necessary and appropriate  steps to 
address the apprehensions of the States as well as make efforts to implement the 
suggestions of the State Governments both at the stage of preparation of DPR as well as 
its implementation thereafter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry has taken a  note of the suggestions of the concerned States and would 
make efforts to implement the suggestions of these State Governments both at the stage 
of preparation of DPR as well as its implementation. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.14) 
 
All said and done, the Comm ittee are of the considered opinion that delaying 
the ILR programme on one or the other pretext any further would only result in delay in 
accrual of benefits of the programme viz. growth of agricultural production, 
employment generation and resultant slowi ng down of the economy.  The Committee 
are highly optimistic of the success of the ILR programme provided all concerned 
including CWC, NWDA, the State Governments and all concerned Ministries of 

26 
 
Government of India work in tandem in a spirited, homogenous and harmonious way 
with the ultimate aim of enhancing national good as the end object.  The Committee, 
therefore, urge one and all to work in union to achieve the successful implementation of 
the identified links under ILR programme in the shortest possibl e time in a cost 
effective way.  The hope Government would give due consideration to the 
recommendations of the Committee on various issues expressed in this Report and 
implement the ILR programme in an earnest manner.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recomm endations of the committee are noted for appropriate follow up 
action.  
 
 
 

27 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT‟S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6) 
The Committee note that a Task Force under the Chairmanship of Shri Suresh 
P. Prabhu, then MP, Lok Sabha was constituted by Government of India in December 
2002.  As per the terms of reference, the TF on ILR was to provide guidance on norms 
of appraisal of individual projects with regar d to economic viability, socio -economic 
and environmental impacts, preparation of resettlement plans, prioritize different 
project components for preparation of DPRs and their implementation etc.  Further 
more, to facilitate its working, the Task Force for med 10 different Working Groups on 
technical, financial, legal and other such aspects.  Besides, 7 Study Group were also 
formed for various other studies as also to allay apprehensions of public at large on 
matters relating to ILR.  The Task Force submitte d two Action Plans before it was 
wound up by Government of India in December, 2004.  The Action Plan – I submitted 
in April 2003 gave an outline of the time schedule for completion of FRs, DPRs, 
estimated costs, implementation schedule, concrete benefits o f the project etc.  The 
Action Plan – II which suggested alternative options for funding and execution of the 
project and methods for cost recovery etc. was submitted in April 2004.  Further, the 
Task Force assigned the work of designing suitable organizat ional structure for 
implementation of Inter Linking of Rivers Programme to IIM, Ahmedabad which 
submitted its report in January 2007. The IIMA suggested two tier institutional / 
organizational set up for Inter Linking of Rivers alongwith a Council – National River 
Water Development Council to act as an apex body of the proposed set up.  The 
National Authority for Inter Linking of Rivers has been proposed as the first tier and 
the regional or branch offices or subsidiary offices as „Link Instrument‟ are to b e the 
second tier of this organizational set up.  The Committee, however, regret to observe 
that the Ministry has not been able to implement any of the recommendations of IIMA 
regarding setting up either of NAILR or NRDWC on the ground that as none of the 
links of NPP is under implementation stage, the Government of India would act on this 
suggestion at an appropriate time. For the present, however,   the Commissioner (PR), 

28 
 
in the Ministry of Water Resources as head of the Special Cell is carrying out the 
residual works of TF – ILR.  The Committee desire the Ministry to set up institutional / 
organizational set up suggested by IIMA at the earliest as the DPR work of the Ken – 
Betwa link is scheduled to be completed by December 2008 so that all requisite 
institutional framework to implement the link are in place well in advance to enable 
timely completion of the project.  
Reply of the Government 
 
On the basis of report from IIM -Ahmedabad, a two tier institutional/organizational 
setup has been suggested by the Task Force for the implementation of the programme on 
Interlinking of Rivers (ILR) along with a Council – “National River Water Development 
Council (NRWDC)” to act as the apex body of the proposed setup. The National Authority 
for Interlinking of Rivers (N AILR) is proposed as the first tier of the proposed two tier 
organizational structure and the regional or branch offices or subsidiaries would act as 
“Link Instrument” and are proposed as the second tier of the organizational setup. 
As various link proposa ls are expected to be taken up in phases after consensus of 
concerned state governments, a separate institutional/organizational authority for its 
implementation may not be required at present. 
At present, DPR of Ken-Betwa link has been completed.  DPR has  been  sent to the 
concerned States for their suggestions/ comments and  concurrence along with the 
organizational structure for implementing the Ken -Betwa link project.  The Govt. of M.P. 
has informed that the requisite comments will be sent after the wit hdrawal of the code of 
conduct of Lok Sabha.  The response from the Govt of U.P. is awaited. 

29 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE: 
 
Recommendation (Para No.7) 
The Co mmittee observe that the National Council of Applied Economic 
Research (NCAER) was consulted by the Task Force on ILR to assess the economic 
impact of the ILR programme.  NCAER had, on the basis of the NWDA study, 
estimated that ILR programme would cost ar ound  Rs.4.44 lakh crore i.e. 21 to 22% 
lesser than the rough estimate of Rs.5.60 lakh crore projected earlier.  The completion 
time for the programme has been assessed to be 35 to 40 years.   NCAER was, 
however, of the view that use of modern and remote s ensing techniques could help in 
completion of the programme in 25 years.  The Ministry, in this regard opined that the 
exact cost of projects and completion time would be available only after DPRs of 
various links are ready.  Further, the NCAER in their re vised Report submitted to the 
Ministry in April 2008 observed that the ILR programme would result in 7.49% 
increase in per capita income of rural households and 13.2% increase of agricultural 
dependent households in rural areas.  As regards, non -agricultural dependent 
households, the per capita income is expected to go up by 4.8% in rural areas and 9.8% 
in urban areas as compared to the base line.  
 The Committee also observe that ICICI was consulted by the Task Force for 
suggesting funding options for the ILR programme.  ICICI proposed that funding be 
partly through public, public private and private inputs.  For the present, DPR of only 
one line, i.e. Ken – Betwa Link is in progress and has been included in the list of 
National Projects for which 90% funds  would be provided by the Government of India 
and the remaining 10% would be borne by the Governments of Uttar Pradesh and 
Madhya Pradesh jointly.  The Ministry at this stage indicated that there are no plans to 
put any cess / user charges for funding the ILR programme.  
 
Reply of the Government 
No reply is required. 
 

30 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.8) 
The Committee further observe that the Government propose to establish the 
Irrigation and Water Resources Finance Corporation with an initial capital of Rs.100 
crores contributed by the Central Government with the State Governments and other 
financial institutions being invited to participate in the equity as announced by the 
Finance Minister in his Budget Speech of 2008 -2009.  This Corporation is mandated to 
mobilize very large resources required to fund major and medium irrigation projects.  
The Committee desire the Ministry to include not only the projects / links under ILR as 
National Projects but also ask the IWRFC to raise funds by way of issue of bonds or 
other suitable instruments to fund projects under ILR.  To begin with the IWRFC could 
raise funds for the Ken – Betwa Link for which the DPR is likely to be available by end 
of December 2008.  The Committee are of the opinion that the benefits / growth 
indicators assessed by NCAER would fructify only when the ILR programme is fully 
implemented.  They are of the firm opinion that the above measures when taken would 
encourage all the State Governments to come forward to earnestly take up 
implementation of various link projects under the ILR programme.  
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Government of India has decided to take up some projects as national projects 
based on certain criteria which includes river interlinking projects.  The central assistance 
to these project s would be 90% of the project costs of irrigation and drinking water 
component of the project.   At present Ken -Betwa link project, whose DPR has been  
prepared  has been included in the list of National Projects. Similarly the decision for 
considering the funding for other projects under ILR will be taken at an appropriate time 
after the preparation of their DPRs. 
 

31 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2) 
 
The Committee observe that National Water Development Agency (NWDA) was set up 
in 1982 as an autonomous Society under the Ministry of Water Resources to study the 
feasibility of the Peninsular Component of NPP.  Further, in 1990 – 1991 the NWDA 
resolved to ta ke up the studies of Himalayan Component also and in June 2006, the 
NWDA approved modifications in the functions of NWDA to include Detailed Project 
Reports (DPRs) of link projects and pre -feasibility / feasibility report of intra -basin 
links as proposed b y States.  The Governing Body of the NWDA Society under the 
chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources controls the affairs and funds 
of the Society.  The Governing Body had constituted a Technical Advisory Committee 
(TAC) of NWDA under the cha irmanship of Chairman, Central Water Commission for 
examination and scrutiny of various technical proposals framed by the Agency.  A 
Consensus Group was constituted in 2002 under the Chairmanship of Chairman, 
Central Water Commission with Director General,  NWDA as Member -Secretary in 
order to discuss and expedite the process of arriving at a consensus among the States 
regarding sharing of water in surplus river basin / sub – basin with deficit basins and to 
assist the States in arriving at an agreement rega rding sharing of waters, cost and 
benefit to the beneficiary States and other related issues.  The Committee further note 
that NWDA after various studies identified 30 links under NPP of which Feasibility 
reports in respect of 14 links under the Peninsular  Component and 2 links (Indian 
Portion) under Himalayan Component  have been completed.  Surveys and 
investigations for the other links are under various stages.  FR of two peninsular links, 
viz. Bedti – Varda and Netravati – Hemavati link are yet to be co mpleted and are 
pending for want of concurrence of the Government of Karnataka.  

32 
 
Reply of the Government 
The status of Bedti – Varada and Netravati – Hemavati links are as under: 
(i)  Bedti – Varada link:  Government of Karnataka had conveyed their concur rence 
for preparation of FR in August 2005. However there is local opposition against any project 
including Bedti – Varada link project which may change environment / ecology of the area 
/ their district. In order to address the concerns of the local peopl e, NWDA in consultation 
with NGOs / general public has proposed to carry out study of eco – system of Bedti basin 
with special reference to Uttar Kannada district.  Terms  of Reference of the study have 
been prepared by NWDA and have been sent to the NGO ( Bedti Aghana shinikolla, 
Samarakshana Samiti) for their suggestions/comments on 28.8.2008. They have suggested 
that the integrated environmental study for entire uttar Kannada district should be done by 
the Govt. of Karnataka and have proposed the TOR for the same.  NWDA has referred the 
matter to the Govt. of Karnataka during February, 2009.  Response is awaited. Matter is 
been pursued by NWDA with them. 
 
(ii) Netravati – Hemavati link: The  Govt. of Karnataka is yet to give its concurrence 
for preparation of feasibility report of Netravati – Hemavati link by NWDA.  They have 
conveyed that the decision in this regard would be  conveyed  after decision of the  
Cauvery Water Dispute tribunal as the above proposal involves diversion to cavery basin 
and utiliza tion of water  in Cauvery basin is under consideration tribunal. The Cauvery 
Water Dispute Tribunal gave its report and decision under Section 5(2) of the ISRWD Act, 
1956 on 5.2.2007. The Central Government and the State Governments sought explanation 
and guidance from the Tribunal under Section 5(3) of the Act. Meanwhile, party states 
have challenged the report and decision dated 05.02.2007 given by the CWDT before the 
Hon‟ble Supreme Court through Special leave petitions(SLPs) and the SLPs are yet to be 
disposed off by the Hon‟ble Court. Thus, the matter is now subjudice. Therefore, the 
Survey & Investigations for preparation of Feasibility Report (FR) of this link project 
would be started after the matter is disposed off by Supreme Court and the tribunal and the  
concurrence is given by the Govt. of Karnataka. 
 

33 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5) 
 
From the perusal of various links under the ILR programme, it is observed that 
out of the 30 identified links, 14 links fall under Himalayan Component.  Of these, the 
Committee observe that initial reaches of seven water transfer links and their storages 
lie in the neighbouring countries of Nepal and Bhutan.  Further, to carry out surveys 
and investigations in these countries their permission is essential.  The Committee 
understand that MEA in September, 2005 indicated that owing to the prevailing 
political situation in Nepal, it was advisable for us to take up the Peninsular Component 
to start with.  Although NWDA has completed FRs of Indian portions of some links, 
they are still incomplete in the absence of FRs of portions of links under the jurisdiction 
of neighbouring countries.  The Survey & Investigation works for preparation of FRs of 
five links which lie in Indian portions has been completed by NWDA and further action 
is being taken on them.  Though the Committee are aware of the limitations / problems 
encountered by NWDA at this juncture, they desire the Government of India to discuss 
the issue  threadbare with Nepal at the highest political and executive level so t hat they 
can appreciate the benefits accruing from these links to them as well.  The Committee 
hope this would go a long way in not only improving our bilateral ties and place them 
on a more firm footing but also help us avert the calamitous situations in future of the 
kind that we are now facing in North Bihar as a result of breach in embankment of river 
Kosi in Nepal.  
Reply of the Government 
 
MOWR, Govt. of India has been approaching Ministry of External Affairs for 
seeking permission from neighboring co untries for carrying out survey & investigation 
works in their territories. Secretary (WR) vide DO dated 13.5.2008 requested the Ministry 
of External Affairs to take up the matter with the Governments of Nepal and  Bhutan to 
hold initial technical level di scussion with officials of Nepal and  Bhutan for carrying out 
surveys and  investigations of the Himalayan links in their territory. 
MEA vide letter dated 9.6.2008  informed  that “Due to political instability and sensitivities 
in Nepal, it has not been po ssible to survey, investigate or collect data in Nepal. MEA 
further informed that  “In Bhutan, a multi -purpose project on Sankosh has been under 

34 
 
discussion,  but the project has not progressed because of environmental concerns.  The 
Royal Government of Bhutan has recently indicated an interest in reviving this project and 
we hope to accelerate consideration leading to early implementation of this project.”   It is 
also mentioned in the letter that MEA shall keep MoWR  informed should   further 
developments in  our bilateral discussions with either Nepal or Bhutan make movement 
possible on this issue .   
Sarda-Yamuna link in Himalayan component depends on the construction of Pancheshwar 
dam in Nepal.  A Joint Project Office (JPO) established in 1999 by the two g overnments 
has completed the field investigations, except some confirmatory geo -physical tests 
required on the Nepal bank at Rupaligad (alternative) site for re-regulating structure.  Some 
contentious issues, like (i) apportionment of cost between power and irrigation and between 
India and Nepal; (ii) installation capacity and unit size and assessment of power benefits; 
and (iii) water availability downstream of Pancheshwar, etc. are pending for final decision 
with the Government of Nepal.   During its  3rd meeting held from 29 th September, 2008 to 
1st October, 2008 at Kathmandu (Nepal), Joint Committee on Water Resources (JCWR)  
decided to set up Pancheshwar Development Authority (PDA) for the development, 
execution and operation of Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project.  Draft Terms of 
Reference(ToR) of PDA were exchanged during the 4 th meeting of JCWR held on 12 -13th 
March, 2009 at New Delhi and it was agreed to discuss it further in the next meeting of 
JCWR and finalise it. 
Kosi-Mechi and  Kosi -Ghaghra links in  the Himalayan component depends upon 
Sapta-Kosi dam in Nepal.   To carry out the field investigations of  Sapta Kosi High Dam 
Multipurpose Project and  Sunkosi cum Diversion Scheme in Nepal territory jointly, a Joint 
Project Office (JPO -SI) was set up at B iratnagar in Nepal during August‟ 2004 for the 
preparation of a Detailed Project Report. The JPO was   expected   to complete the works 
by February‟2007.  However, because of political instability and frequent strikes / bandhs, 
the field investigations got  delayed.  8 th meeting of India - Nepal Joint Team of Experts 
(JTE) on Sapta Kosi High Dam Multipurpose Project and Sun Kosi Storage -cum-Diversion 
Scheme was held from 15 th to 17 th December, 2008 at New Delhi. During the meeting, 
Nepalese side assured that the Government of Nepal has taken necessary security measures 
for the resumption of field investigation works, which are suspended and accordingly JTE 
instructed JPO -SKSKI to resume the field activities. After 3 rd meeting of JCWR held in 

35 
 
Kathmandu, the tenure of JPO-SKSKI has been extended upto June, 2010 to complete field 
investigation and preparation of DPR at a revised cost of Rs. 74.86 crore.  During 4th 
meeting of JCWR held on 12 th  to 13 th  March, 2009 at New Delhi, the Indian side 
reiterated   its re quest to the Napalese side to provide security at all sites so that 
investigation may be resumed immediately to complete the work by June, 2010.  Nepalese 
side conveyed that the Govt. of Nepal was making all possible efforts to ensure that the 
work would resume at the earliest at Sapt Kosi project area.  The works at Sapt Kosi dam 
site are still not resumed. 
Meanwhile, a  meeting was taken by Principal Secretary to Prime Minister on 
24.7.2008 in respect of   updation of DPR of Sankosh HE project. The work of  updation of 
DPR of Sankosh project has been assigned to Tehri Hydro Development Corporation and 
the work has been started by them.  Further, a meeting was taken by Secretary, MoEF on 
5.8.2008 where matter of clearance from MoEF for taking up Survey and  I nvestigation  of 
component of this project and Manas -Sankosh-Tista link were discussed .  MoEF suggested 
the procedure in this regard and further action is being taken by THDC and CWC.   
Further, Secretary (WR) on 18th March, 2009  requested Foreign Secretary for taking 
up the issue of Manas dam also with the Government of Bhutan along with Sankosh project.   
Secretary(WR) also convened a meeting on 20.5.2009 with the officials of MEA and MOEF 
for taking up the issue with the Govt. of Bhutan in respect of M anas Dam.  Joint Secretary 
(N), MEA informed that it would be appropriate to take up this matter with Government of 
Bhutan after preparation of DPR of Sankosh project at an appropriate time. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
   (Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.10) 
 
It may be pertinent to note here that one of the experts while deposing before 
the Committee had expressed „unless the Union empowers itself with powers to force 
solutions, ….. the States are unlikely to solv e the problems among themselves in a sure 
way ….. That there are enough provisions in the Constitution to enact legislation under 

36 
 
Entry 56 and if Union Legislature passes one or more acts and empowers the Union in 
various things, which inter alia  include d ecisions about studying the basins and in a 
quasi judicial way to decide these powers that may help in putting the water sector back 
in order and that or today is missing‟.  The Committee, however, regret to observe that 
despite several cases of dispute am ong the States, the Government has preferred to 
pursue the ILR programme only in a consultative manner through the „Consensus 
Group‟ formed for the purpose.  The Consensus Group further failed to bring about any 
radical shift in the thought process of the States.  
The Committee are also unhappy to take note of the submission made by the 
Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources during evidence that though making laws under 
Entry 56 would be legally valid, the Government for the moment does not have any 
proposal to that effect or to declare implementation of ILR programme to be expedient 
in the public interest there under.  They are further disheartened to note of the 
Secretary‟s submission that unless it comes as a recommendation from the Centre – 
State Relations Commission  such a proposal cannot be considered.  Since the Centre – 
State Relations Commission may take some more time in giving its recommendations, 
the Committee would suggest that instead of waiting for a recommendation by the 
Commission to that ef fect, Government should obtain the opinion / advice of the 
Ministry of Law as to the interpretation of the provisions of Entry 56 in the Union List 
vis-à-vis Entry 17 of the State List.  The Committee are of the considered opinion that 
with the creation of  a National Authority for Inter Linking of Rivers as recommended 
by the Task Force on ILR, the setting up of the IWRFC as also inclusion of the Ken – 
Betwa link under the concept of „National Projects‟ the enactment of laws under Entry 
56 of the Union List  would be a logical sequence and would go a long way in 
accelerating the pace of implementation of projects under ILR programme.  They 
would like to be apprised of the opinion of the Law Ministry obtained by Government 
in this regard at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The reply in respect of creation of a National Authority for Inter -Linking of 
Rivers has been Para 6  and  8. In respect of seeking   opinion of Ministry of Law and 

37 
 
Justice (MOLJ), the detailed note in this regard is being referred to them separately and 
their opinion would be communicated on receipt of the same from them. 
 
Updated Reply of the Government  
 
The matter was referred to MoLJ and they have requested to place on record the 
views/comments of Centre -State Relation Commission‟ so that the matter could be 
examined in its proper perspective.  The report of the Commission on Centre-State Relation 
is yet to be received.  Therefore, the opinion of MoLJ would be communicated to Lok 
Sabha Secretariat after the Report of the said Commis sion is received and examined  by 
Ministry of Law and Justice.   
[Letter No. 2/14/2008 -BM(Pt.)/1781 dated 9 th October, 2009 of MoWR                
(BM Division)] 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                      BENI PRASAD VERMA, 
12 April, 2010                                      Chairman, 
22 Chaitra, 1932 (Saka)        Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 

38 
 
APPENDIX- I 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2009-10) HELD ON MONDAY, 15 MARCH 2010 
 
The Committee sat from 1510 hours t o 1610 hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Beni Prasad Verma – Chairman 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
5. Shri Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan 
6. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
7. Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
5. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
6. Shri Arjun Roy 
 
                    RAJYA SABHA 
 
7. Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan 
8. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
9. Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
10. Shri Ranjitsinh Vijaysinh Mohite Patil 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri B.S. Dahiya  - Director 
 
 

39 
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee. 
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the Memorandum No.2 and the Draft 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the R ecommendations/Observations contained in 
their Eleventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Inter-Linking of Rivers’.  After some discussion, 
the Committee  in  principle, adopted  the  Report subject  to  the  observation  that  the  whole  
issue  of Inter - Linking of Rivers would appear to be  a mock exercise if earnest and tangible 
action is not taken within a definite time frame to implement the projects found feasible.  The 
Members also desired that briefing on the status of 18 Intra -State links of river s should be 
organized expeditiously when the representatives of concerned State Governments are also 
present to respond to the clarifications that might be sought by the Members.  
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to have the above draft Report finalized on the 
basis of factual verification from the Ministry of Water Resources and to present the same to both 
the Houses of Parliament during the current session of Parliament. 
4. ***   ***   ***   *** 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________________________________________________________________ 
**** Minutes in respect of other matters kept separately. 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
APPENDIX II 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ELEVENTH 
REPORT (FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE  
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations/Observations   14 
 
(ii) Recommendation/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
 
Para Nos. 1, 3, 4, 9, 11, 12, 13 & 14 
Total         8 
Percentage        57.14% 
   
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
 
Para No. 6 
 
Total           1   
Percentage          7.14% 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the 
 Committee 
 
Para No. 7 & 8   
 
Total         2  
Percentage 14.29% 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
Para Nos. 2, 5 & 10 
  
Total           3 
Percentage         21.43% 
 
 
 
 