 
1 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
                                            (2013-2014) 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-14) 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Seventeenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources} 
 
 
 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 
 
20 

 
2 
 
TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
 
(2013-2014) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-14) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Seventeenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17.12.2013 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17.12.2013 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka) 

 
3 
 
WRC No. 42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2011 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 

 
4 
 
CONTENTS 
            PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2013-2014)…………………   (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………   (v) 
 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………   1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have   41 
been accepted by the Government …………  
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the    93 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of  
the Government’s replies ……………………..  
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of    97 
which replies of the Government have not been  
accepted by the Committee …………………….  
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which   108 
final replies of the Government are still awaited …  
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
  I. Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Committee held on  109 
                                        10.12.2013.   
 
  II. Analysis of action taken by the Government on the   112 
                          Recommendations/Observations contained in the Seventeenth 
                          Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES (2013-2014) 
 
  Shri Dip Gogoi  -  Chairman 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Kameshwar Baitha 
3. Shri Kamlesh Balmiki 
4. Smt. Raj Kumari Chauhan 
5. Dr. Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan 
6. Smt. Shruti Choudhry 
7.        Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
8. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
9. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
10. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
       11.        Shri Kabindra Purkayastha 
12.       Shri Konakalla Narayana Rao  
             13.        Shri Arjun Ray 
14.        Shri S.P.Y. Reddy  
15.         Shri Rakesh Sachan 
16. Shri Kalyan Singh 
17. Shri Murarilal Singh** 
18.         Shri D.K. Suresh* 
19. Dr. P. Venugopal 
20. Shri Sajjan Verma 
21. Vacant 
  
              RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.        Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
23. Smt. Vandana Chavan 
24. Shri Anil Madhav Dave  
25. Dr. Ashok S. Ganguly  
26. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
27. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
    28. Shri A.V. Swamy 
           29. Smt. Wansuk Syiem 
30. Vacant 
 31. Vacant 
 
* Nominated w.e.f. 09.09.2013 
** Expired on 04.12.2013 

 
6 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Pawan Kumar  - Director 
 3. Smt. Rita Jailkhani  - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Shanta Banerjee Datta - Sr. Committee Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
7 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committ ee on Water Resources (201 3-2014) having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present the Twentieth Report on 
the Action Taken by Go vernment on the recommendations/observations contained in the Seventeenth 
Report (Fifte enth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water Resources (201 2-2013) on 
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Water Resources.  
2. The Seventeenth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on 29 April, 2013.  
The replies of the Gover nment to all the recommendations /observations contained in the Report were 
received on 20 August, 2013. 
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and adopted by 
the Committee at their sitting held on 10 December, 2013. 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations 
contained in the Seventeenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                       DIP GOGOI, 
16 December, 2013                                        Chairman, 
 25 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)                  Standing Committee on Water Resources 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
8 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
  
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources deals with the action taken 
by the Government on the recommendations / observations contained in their Seventeenth 
Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on "Demands for Grants (2013 -14)" of th e Ministry of Water 
Resources which was presented to Lok Sabha on 29 April 2013. 
2. Action taken notes were received from the Government in respect of all the 44 
recommendations/observations of the Committee which have been categorised as follows: - 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 
Para Nos. 1.41, 1.42, 1.43, 1.44, 1.45, 1.46, 1.47, 1.48, 1.49, 1.50, 1.52, 1.53, 
2.57, 2.58, 2.59, 2.60, 2.61, 2.63, 2.64, 2.65, 2.66, 3.26, 3.27, 3.28, 3.29, 4.29, 
4.30, 4.31, 4.32, 4.33, 5.7, 6.39, 6.40, 6.41, 6.43, 6.44 and 6.45  (Total =37)  
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies:  
 
Para Nos. 2.62 and 4.28            (Total=2)   
   
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in res pect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee:  
 
Para Nos. 3.25, 4.27, 6.38 and 6.42                      (Total=4)  
     
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the Government 
is still awaited: 
 
Para No. 1.51                   (Total -1) 

 
9 
 
3. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of the 
recommendations/observations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A.  Budgetary Allocations 
 
Recommendation (Para No.1.42 ) 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
4. The Committee observed that the total budget allocation for 2012 -13 was Rs. 2067.60 
crore which was substantially reduced by Rs. 831.15 crore to the level of Rs.1236.45 crore at 
RE stage.  According to the Ministry, the reason for this reduction at RE stage was due to non -
approval of EFC (Expenditure Finance Committee) in respect of the new plan schemes and 
new components in the ongoing scheme.  The Committee were not convinced with the 
explanation given by the Ministry for substantial reduction of Budget Estimates (BE) at RE 
stage as it reflected that the Ministry was either too unrealistic while making budgetary 
projections or too idle to make all out efforts to persuade the authorities fo r obtaining all 
requisite approvals in time for completion of the projects for which budgetary allocations were 
initially made and thus it was a serious reflection on the functioning of the Ministry.  The 
Committee felt that the Ministry, in either case, had to revamp its budget making processes and 
fine-tune its style of functioning so that the budgetary projections were made on realistic and 
sound considerations and the funds allocated were fully utilized during the year.  The 
Committee desired the Ministry to initiate necessary steps in this regard and also to ensure that 
at least now the matter should be processed with all seriousness to obtain EFC approval well in 
time in respect of all projects where such approval is necessary.  The Committee desired t o be 
apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry in this regard. 

 
10 
 
5. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"MoWR is pursuing with the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance in respect 
of approval of EFC. This is also being monitored periodically in the MoWR." 
 
6. The Committee note with concern that the approval of Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC) for new plan schemes and new components in the ongoing schemes is 
still awaited. They find that the Ministry of Water Resources is pursuing with the 
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance for approval of EFC.  The Committee feel 
that this is a clear reflection of the unplanned manner in which schemes are being 
formulated and taken up for implementation by the Ministry. The Com mittee would 
therefore, urge the Ministry to take the issue of non approval of schemes / programmes 
by EFC seriously and initiate measures to get approvals in time so as not to hamper 
their implementation and also ensure economic utilisation of resources. 
 
B. River Basin Management 
 
Recommendation (Para No.1.47) 
 
7.  The Committee observed that the Ministry of Water Resources had set up a 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Justice T.S. Doabia to study the activities required for 
optimal development of a ri ver basin and changes required in the existing River Boards Act, 
1956 for achievement of the same and the report was submitted in this regard on 06.11.2012.   
As informed, the consultation with the State Governments on the said Report was being 
initiated.  The Committee desired to be apprised of the details of the Doabia Committee Report 
and also urged the Ministry to speedily complete the process of consultation with the State 

 
11 
 
Governments on the subject with a view to implementing the recommendations given  in the 
Report at the earliest so that the issues and problems related to water basin management and 
development could be addressed in a result-oriented manner in a fixed time frame.   
8. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"The broa d recommendations in the report submitted by Justice Doabia Committee to 
Ministry of Water Resources for Amendment of the River Boards Act, 1956 are as 
follows: 
 
The committee proposes establishment of River Basin Authority for regulation and 
development o f water of an inter -State river basin or any specified part thereof and 
further makes it clear that different Authorities shall be established for different inter -State 
river basin. It also proposes provision for space for creation of a separate River Basi n 
Authority for a sub- basin within an inter-State river basin. 
 
The report also proposes a two -tier structure for a River Basin Authority. Every River 
Basin Authority shall have to consist of an upper layer being a Governing Council and a 
lower layer bein g the Executive Board charged with the technical and implementation 
powers for the Council decisions to succeed. The Governing Council has extensive 
membership and representation including Chief Ministers of the co -basin States, the 
Minister in charge of W ater Resources, one Member of Parliament, one Member of the 
State Legislature, two representatives of District Panchayat, the Chief Secretary to the 
State Government, one representative from the Water User Associations, one 
representative from the Urban Lo cal Bodies / Municipalities and at least five experts 
including eminent citizens. Likewise the Executive Board has also been given an 
extensive membership base under the Bill. 
 
A legal foundation for a River Basin Master Plan for inter –State river basins c an help 
achieve the protection, improvement and sustainable use of the water environment 
across the basin. Such a river basin master plan can be the singular guidance tool and 
basis for the River Basin Authorities to perform their powers and functions under the Act.  
 
The formulation and implementation of the river basin master plan can potentially make 
all water use and land uses in the inter -State basin compatible with the principles of 
integrated river basin management. 
 
It also provides that a River Bas in Authority shall ensure that a River Basin Master Plan 
is produced for the inter -State river basin under its jurisdiction. It further makes clear that 
the River Basin Master Plan shall be coordinated with the plans for national economic 
and social develo pment, the general plans for land use and general urban plans and 

 
12 
 
plans for environmental protection, and at the same time the needs of various regions 
and industries shall be taken into consideration." 
 
9. The Committee observe that the Committee headed b y Justice T. S. Doabia, 
constituted to study the activities required for optimal development of a river basin and 
changes required in the existing River Boards Act, 1956 has made several important 
recommendations for integrated development of inter -State r iver basins, such as 
establishment of River Basin Authority having a two layer structure viz. Governing 
Council and Executive Board, a legal foundation for River Basin Master Plan which will 
be implemented in conjunction with the plans for national economi c and social 
development, the general plans for land use and general urban plans and plans for 
environmental protection and the needs of various regions and industries. However, the 
Ministry has not furnished any reply with regard to the period by which co nsultation in 
this regard with State Governments will be over.  Further, there is no specific time 
period fixed for implementation of these recommendations.  The Committee would 
therefore, again urge the Ministry to speed up the process of consultation and  fix a time 
frame by which these recommendations will be implemented so as to finalise the 
required amendments to the existing River Boards Act, 1956 which will facilitate 
development of river basins in the country in a holistic manner. 
Recommendation (Para No.1.48) 
 
10. The Committee observed that restructuring of Central Water Commission had been 
proposed to expand its activities in the field and reorient the set up at Headquarters to address 
the emerging challenges in the water sector such as, need to ad dress the likely impact of 

 
13 
 
climate change, need for holistic planning and development of water resources considering 
river basin as a unit; and effective co -ordination among planners at one hand and stakeholders 
at the other.  The Committee, in their 14 th Report on Demands for Grants (2012 -13), had 
recommended for the restructuring of Central Water Commission (CWC) to be accomplished 
within XII Plan period as stipulated.  The Committee had been informed that the proposal for 
restructuring of CWC was under p rocess of approval and would be implemented during XII 
Plan.   The Committee hoped that the changes proposed in the restructured CWC would 
address the issues in a more comprehensive and integrated manner and the new set up would 
effectively deal with the a ctivities related to water resources development & management, data 
collection, preparation of integrated basin plans, techno -economic appraisal of water resources 
projects, looking after water management and flood management aspects, dam safety 
monitoring and inter -State issues, etc.  The Committee hoped that all the processes and 
formalities involved in the restructuring of CWC would be completed by the Ministry at the 
earliest and a new revamped set up of CWC would come into existence very soon which wou ld 
become a catalyst for effective and efficient management of river basin and water resources.  
11. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"The proposal of Restructuring of CWC was kept as one of the components in the River 
Basin Manag ement in the Plan Scheme of Ministry. EFC meeting to consider the 
aforesaid proposal was held on 9 th April, 2013 and Ministry of Finance sent its 
observation, vide its UO No. 10(2)/PF -II/2012/M/o Finance/Department of Expenditure 
dated 9th April, 2013 wherein it has been decided that the same should be deleted from 
the EFC proposal and same may be dealt separately.  The proposal of restructuring of 
CWC is currently under consideration in DoPT and Ministry of Finance."  
 
12. The Committee observe that propos al of restructuring of Central Water 
Commission (CWC) was kept as one of the components of the River Basin Management 

 
14 
 
in the Plan Scheme of the Ministry of Water Resources which was to be considered in 
EFC meeting.  However, Department of Expenditure, Mini stry of Finance has suggested 
for separate consideration of this proposal by EFC.  At present this issue is being 
considered by DoPT and the Ministry of Finance.  The Committee desire the Ministry of 
Water Resources to vigorously pursue the issue with DoPT  and the Ministry of Finance 
so as to ensure that the required approval of EFC is attained at the earliest and as 
envisaged, the process of restructuring of CWC is completed during XII Five Year Plan. 
 
C. Bharat Nirman 
 
Recommendation (Para No.1.49) 
 
13.  The Committee observed that irrigation is one of the six components for development 
of rural infrastructure under Bharat Nirman.  The irrigation component of Bharat Nirman aimed 
at creation of irrigation potential of 10 million hectare (Mha.) during four y ears i.e. from 2005-06 
to 2008-09.  The target for achieving this objective was proposed to be met through completion 
of ongoing Major and Medium Irrigation projects, Extension, Renovation and Modernization 
(ERM) of Major and Medium Irrigation projects, su rface water minor Irrigation projects and 
ground water minor Irrigation projects.  Emphasis was also laid on repair, renovation and 
restoration of water bodies.  The Committee’s examination of year -wise achievements vis-à-vis 
the targets fixed revealed tha t actual irrigation potential created consistently lagged behind the 
targets set in each year during 2005 -06 to 2008 -09.  The actual achievement under Bharat 
Nirman was only 1.69 Mha. against the target of 1.90 Mha. during 2005 -06.   The figures in 
respect of the years 2006 -07, 2007-08, 2008-09 were 1.96 Mha. against 2.40 Mha., 1.73 Mha. 

 
15 
 
against 2.85 Mha., and 1.93 Mha. against 2.85 Mha. respectively.   The total irrigation potential 
created from  2005 -06 to 2008 -09 was 7.31 Mha. against the target of 10.00  Mha. leaving a 
shortfall of 2.69 Mha. during the period.   Taking a serious view of the consistently less 
achievement than the target fixed in each year from the year 2005 -06 to 2008 -09, the 
Committee recommended the Ministry to evaluate the scheme to fin d out the reasons for such 
shortfall so that these findings could be used by the Ministry for formulation of better policies 
and effective execution of other projects in future.  The Committee also desired to know the 
total expenditure incurred on Bharat N irman from its inception and the response received from 
the States about project -wise gap between the actual irrigation potential created and the target 
set for each year.   
14. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"Projects under Bha rat Nirman are executed by the State Governments. Ministry is 
providing Central Assistance under Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP), 
Command Area Development & Water Management (CAD&WM) and Repair, 
Renovation & Restoration (RRR) of Irrigation projects to the State Governments.  In 
addition, the State Governments are utilizing their own resources as well for the 
execution of water resources projects aimed at achievement of irrigation potential. The 
Central Assistance released by the Ministry to the State Governments under Bharat 
Nirman in respect of the above said schemes since inception are as under: 
 
Rs in Cr. 
Year AIBP CAD&WM RRR 
From 2005-06 to  
2012-13 
53,646.5167 2,707.8386 852.289 
 
Also the individual State Governments are pursued to furnish the specific reason, if any, 
for the non-achievement of creation of irrigation potential and also they are being 
insisted to stick on to the set targets." 
 

 
16 
 
15. The Committee observe that projects under Bharat Nirman are executed by the 
State Governmen ts. Irrigation projects under this scheme are financed by Central 
Assistance provided under Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP), Command 
Area Development & Water Management (CAD&WM) and Repair, Renovation and 
Rehabilitation (RRR) and also by ow n resources of the State Governments.  The 
Committee find that the reply mention only the features of the scheme while reasons for 
not fulfilling the targets under the scheme have not been furnished.  This shows that 
either targets are not realistic or Sta tes are not adequately pursued to achieve the 
targets.  The Committee would therefore, reiterate that the Ministry should evaluate the 
Bharat Nirman scheme to find out the reasons for shortfall in achieving the targets so 
that these could be used for formu lation of better policies and effective execution of 
other ongoing and future projects. They further recommend the Ministry to consider 
penal measures, such as, not sanctioning further funds to States which failed to achieve 
the targets without any plausib le reasons.  They would also like to be apprised at the 
earliest of the response received from the States about project -wise gap between the 
actual irrigation potential created and the target set for each year. 
 
D.  Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies 
 
Recommendation (Para No.1.52) 
 
16.  The Committee observed that the Planning Commission allocated Rs. 6235 crore for 
RRR which was much less than Rs. 30,000 crore proposed by the Ministry.  The reason for 
such substantially reduced alloca tion was stated to be the resource crunch and the overall cut 

 
17 
 
in the Budget by the Union Government.  The Ministry had, however, informed the Committee 
that considering the performance of States under the scheme of RRR, the Planning 
Commission would be app roached for higher allocation under RRR during mid -term appraisal 
of the Scheme to be carried out by Planning Commission.  The Committee observed that 
Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies is a critically important area and 
substantial reduction in the budgetary allocation would adversely affect the different activities 
under this scheme.  The Committee, therefore, desired the Ministry to persuade the Planning 
Commission with a well-conceived proposal for enhancement of allocation under RRR.   
17. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"The scheme depends on the performance of the States.  This Ministry will approach 
the Planning Commission for the appraisal based on the performance of the States 
regarding RRR of Water Bodies Schemes for enhanced allocation for the scheme.  
Also, the States will be requested to take up the work of water bodies on fast track 
basis." 
 
18. The Committee find that Planning Commission has reduced allocation for Repair, 
Renovation and Restorat ion (RRR) of Water Bodies scheme substantially to Rs. 6,235 
crore as against Rs. 30,000 crore proposed by the Ministry, due to scarcity of funds and 
overall cut in the Budget by the Union Government. They also note that based on the 
performance of the States regarding RRR of Water Bodies the Ministry will approach the 
Planning Commission, during mid -term appraisal, for enhanced allocation for the 
scheme. The Committee would like to know the assessment / evaluation of performance 
of States by the Ministry an d also the basis on which the Ministry had approached 
Planning Commission for allocation of Rs. 30,000 crore.  The Committee feel that an 
objective evaluation of performance of State Governments will enable realistic 

 
18 
 
projections of required funds by the Mi nistry and strengthen its case for enhanced 
allocation of funds by Planning Commission. 
E. Utilisation Certificate 
 
Recommendation (Para No.1.53) 
 
19.  The Committee’s examination had revealed that outstanding Utilisation Certificate in 
respect of institut ions and autonomous bodies as on 31.12.2012 were 305 with the amount 
involved Rs. 26,181.22 lakh.  The Committee were apprised that  monitoring of pending 
Utilisation Certificates was being done by the Ministry by organising periodical review meetings 
with SMDs/institutions and other grantees.  The Committee had recommended in their 8th 
Report on Demand for Grants   (2011 -12) to the Ministry to consider the feasibility of imposing 
some penalties on the authorities showing lackadaisical approach towards fund  management 
and utilisation and also to keep strict vigil on the implementation of scheme and timely 
submission of UCs by way of inspection, periodic reviews, etc.  The Committee took serious 
view of the pendency of large number of Utilisation Certificates  and reitérated their 
recommendation for obtaining UCs from the concerned organisations/departments with 
constant monitoring and also exploring the desirability of imposing penalties on defaulters.  The 
Committee desired to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.     
20. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"All the grantee institutions/autonomous bodies have been informed about the strict 
adherence to the provisions of GFR for emphasizing the production of UCs for further 
release of Grant in Aid. PAOs are also watching the receipt of UCs at the time of 
release of Grant in Aid and no grants are being released without getting the UCs for the 
grant released in previous year. 
 

 
19 
 
As regards the UCs of State Government, the concerned W ings are keeping in touch 
with the State Governments for reconciliation and providing of UCs. Frequent meetings 
with concerned Wings are also organized for expediting the UCs from the State 
Governments.  Release of Central assistance to the State Governmen ts is made based 
on the submission of UCs." 
 
21. The Committee note with concern that 305 Utilisation Certificates (UCs) involving 
an amount of Rs. 26,181.22 lakh were pending in respect of institutions and autonomous 
bodies as on 31.12.2012. They also not e that Ministry has taken steps for strict 
adherence to the provisions of General Financial Rules (GFR) along with release of 
further grants after submission of UCs for earlier grants. Regarding UCs of State 
Governments, concerned wings of the Ministry lia ison with State Governments and 
organise frequent meetings for reconciliation and providing UCs.  However, the reply 
furnished by the Ministry does not indicate provision of any penal measure 
(taken/proposed to be taken) against authorities showing lackada isical approach 
towards fund management and utilisation as recommended by the Committee. They 
would therefore, again recommend the Ministry to explore the imposition of penal 
measures for more effective utilisation of funds and desire that the Committee be  
apprised of the details of the measures initiated/proposed in this regard. 
F. Budgetary Allocation – Major and Medium Irrigation (MMI) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.57) 
22.  The Committee observed that Irrigation projects with a Cultivable Command Area 
(CCA) between 2000 hectares and 10,000 hectares were classified as Medium Irrigation 
projects and those irrigation projects with CCA of more than 10,000 hectares were classified as 
Major Irrigation projects.  The planning, formulation and execution of all Major  and Medium 

 
20 
 
Irrigation (MMI) are carried out by the concerned State Governments and the required funds 
are allocated out of their State Plan. The Ministry of Water Resources provides technical know -
how to the State Governments through its subsidiary organi zations and statutory bodies like 
Central Water Commission (CWC), Central Soil and Materials Research Station (CSMRS), 
Central Water and Power Research Station (CWPRS), National Water Development Agency 
(NWDA) etc.  The Committee’s examination of the budge tary proposals revealed that the 
budgetary allocation in Plan section for 2012 -13 was Rs. 773.19 crore and which was reduced 
to Rs. 206.82 crore at RE stage. The budget allocation (Plan) for 2013 -14 had been kept at  
Rs. 643.53 crore.   The Committee were unhappy to note that the  reason for reduction at BE 
2012-13 had been stated to be the curtailment of amount by the Ministry of Finance due to low 
expenditure upto September, 2012 on account of non approval of EFC.  The Committee were 
pained to observe that it was sheer failure of the Ministry to get approval of EFC in time in such 
important areas which ultimately resulted in curtailment of funds.  Surprisingly, the Ministry had 
denied any adverse impact on schemes and projects of the Ministry due to reduce d allocation 
at RE stage.  The Committee needed to be explained as to how all the activities for which 
budgetary projections of Rs. 773.19 crore were made at BE stage could be completed by the 
Ministry with the reduced allocation of Rs.206.82 crore.   The Committee further observed that 
reduction of allocation at RE stage in respect of MMI projects showed poor monitoring and 
control and lack of effective pre -planning and, therefore, recommended the Ministry to strictly 
assess the requirements of all project s/schemes before projecting the budgetary requirements 
at BE stage and also minutely monitor the flow of expenditure throughout the year with a well 
defined systematic monitoring mechanism for effective utilization of the allocated funds.  The 

 
21 
 
Committee expected that the allocation made for 2013 -14 would be utilized fully by the Ministry 
by constant monitoring and control.   
23. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"The monitoring of the expenditure incurred under the various schemes i s monitored in 
the Ministry at senior levels on regular basis.  All efforts are being taken by the Ministry 
for the timely approval of EFCs to void the curtailment of expenditure in the RE stage."  
24. The Committee had noted that due to low expenditure upt o September, 2012 on 
account of non approval of Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC), the budgetary 
allocation for Major and Medium Irrigation in Plan Section for 2012 -13 amounting to 
Rs.773.19 crore, was reduced to Rs. 206.82 core at RE stage.  The Committ ee had further 
noted the view of the Ministry that reduced allocation would have no adverse impact on 
schemes and projects.  In the action taken reply furnished by the Ministry, no 
clarification has been provided as to how the reduction of funds will have no impact on 
implementation of the projects.  The Committee feel that the attitude of the Ministry 
reflects non seriousness and casual approach and lack of realistic planning and proper 
implementation of the projects.  The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to be 
more pragmatic, efficient and forthright in making projections for budgetary allocations 
and also utilization thereof. 
 The Committee note that monitoring of the expenditure incurred under the 
various schemes is done at senior levels in the Ministry on regular basis and efforts are 
being made to get timely approval of EFC to avoid curtailment of expenditure at RE 
stage.  However, there is no mention of frequency of such reviews and effectiveness 
thereof.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate t he need to establish a well defined 

 
22 
 
systematic monitoring mechanism for effective utilization of allocated funds.  The 
Committee also desire the Ministry to furnish the details of the total amount utilized as 
on date under the head during the current financial year. 
 
G. Water Quality Monitoring 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.61) 
 
25. The Committee observed that a number of agencies were operating Water Quality 
Monitoring networks in the country and there was no uniform procedure for sampling, analysis, 
data sto rage and reporting.  To address this problem, Water Quality Assessment Authority 
(WQAA) was constituted in May 2001 and Uniform Protocol on Water Quality Monitoring 
(UPWQM) order was notified in 2005.  The UPWQM stipulated that its monitoring agencies 
would process the analytical data and report the data after validation to the data centre at the 
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) which would store the data and disseminate through 
website or electronic mail to various users on demand.  The Committee des ired the Ministry to 
ensure that the monitoring agencies and CPCB work in close coordination so that efforts made 
by them for water quality monitoring in the country produced desired results for the end users.  
Taking into account the fact that the UPWQM w as being proposed to be revised during 2013 -
14, in view of the existing pollution aspects/parameters and their distribution in surface and 
ground water, the Committee recommended the Ministry to keep constant monitoring in the 
matter and ensure speedy comp letion of revision of UPWQM.  They desired to be apprised of 
action taken in the matter. 
 

 
23 
 
26. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"The issues of (i) revision of Uniform Protocol on Water Quality Monitoring (UPWQM) 
and (ii) sharing of  water quality data by various agencies and submission to Central 
Pollution Control Board (CPCB) will be placed before Water Quality Assessment 
Authority (WQAA)." 
 
27. The Committee find from the reply that the position regarding issues of revision 
of Uniform Protocol on Water Quality Monitoring (UPWQM) Order and sharing of data on 
water quality by various agencies and submission to CPCB continues to be same as 
informed to them earlier as these are yet to be considered by Water Quality Assessment 
Authority (WQAA).  They would, therefore, like to know the time period by which these 
issues will be considered by WQAA.  The Committee desire the Ministry to take 
measures to facilitate speedy implementation of revised UPWQM and sharing of water 
quality data among various agencies. 
 
H. National Water Policy 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.63) 
 
28. The Committee in their first report on Demand for Grants (2009 -10) had urged the 
Ministry to review the National Water Policy taking into consideration various suggestions give n 
by the State Governments and other stakeholders and also eminent climatologists keeping in 
view the looming threat of climate change and the grave scarcity of water in future.  The 
Committee were informed that the National Water Policy 2012 had been adop ted by the 
National Water Council on 28.12.2012.  The Committee while appreciating the efforts made by 
the Ministry for bringing out the National Water Policy 2012, recommended that the National 

 
24 
 
Water Policy 2012 should be presented in Parliament so that i t could get a broader perspective 
of dissemination of policy details among lawmakers, academicians, scientists, intellectuals and 
other stakeholders.      
29. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"The National Water Policy (2012) and River Basin Atlas of India are being circulated 
amongst all Members of the Parliament by the Hon’ble Minister for Water Resources." 
 
30. The Committee note that National Water Policy (2012) and River Basin Atlas of 
India are being circulated among all Memb ers of Parliament.  However, in the action 
taken reply, there is no information on widespread publicity of the National Water Policy 
(2012) among academicians, scientists, intellectuals, lawmakers at State level and other 
stakeholders.  The Committee, ther efore, recommend that the details of National Water 
Policy (2012) should be widely publicized in print, audio and electronic media. 
 
I. National Bureau of Water Use Efficiency 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.64) 
 
31.  The Committee observed that the Ministry of  Water Resources had proposed to 
establish National Bureau of Water Use Efficiency (NBWUE) under Section 3 (3) of 
Environment (Protection) Act 1986 which would have the overall responsibility of water use 
efficiency across various sectors, namely, irrigati on, drinking water supply, power generation 
and industry in the whole country.  The NBWUE would function as an autonomous authority 
under the administrative control of MoWR whose proposed activity would include preparation of 
detailed project reports for taking up benchmarking and/or demonstrative projects for water use 

 
25 
 
efficiency, publicity/promotion of water use efficiency measures, conjunctive use of water, 
incentivization of industries, farmers, local bodies, action plan for coping with flood and 
baseline studies for water use efficiency, etc.  It was also informed that the NBWUE was 
envisaged to be operational in 2013 -14 subject to approval of EFC. The Committee hoped that 
the National Bureau of Water Use Efficiency would be operationalised in 2013 -14 and would 
bring qualitative changes by bringing high degree of efficiency in water use.    
32. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"The National Action Plan for Climate Change (NAPCC) had stipulated that the National 
Water Mission sho uld develop a framework to optimize water use by increasing water 
use efficiency by 20 per cent through regulatory mechanisms. Efforts are being made to 
secure the approval of EFC of National Water Mission (NWM) and to set up, National 
Bureau of Water Use Efficiency (NBWUE) under Section 3(3) of Environment 
(Protection) Act 1986 during the financial year 2013 -14 for implementation of various 
strategies/goals for improvement in Water Use Efficiency in the areas of irrigation, 
drinking water supply, power gen eration and industry as per best practices/standards. 
The NBWUE would implement strategies for increasing water use efficiency in general. 
 
It is stated that the draft EFC memo for implementation of National Water Mission and 
setting up of National Bureau of Water Use Efficiency was prepared by the MoWR and 
circulated to various Ministries / Departments of Govt. of India for their comments. After 
receiving the comments from Ministry of Finance and other Ministries, the EFC 
proposal (Rs. 1,390 Crore) was forwarded to Planning Commission in the month of July 
2012. The proposal was sent to Ministry of Finance on 17.12.2012 after incorporating 
replies to the comments of the Planning Commission (PAMD), dated: 14.11.2012. 
 
As decided in the EFC meeting for (HRD Ca pacity Building) held on 18.01.2013 under 
the Chairmanship of Secretary, Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, National Water 
Mission component of Rs.100 crore has been deleted from the current proposal of HRD 
Capacity Building and incorporated in the EFC of N WM. Accordingly the proposal was 
revised to Rs. 1,490 crore. As advised by IFD, MoWR, the revised EFC was placed 
before the High Level Steering Committee Meeting (HLSC) and Advisory Board to take 
the approval of the committee/board before the EFC Memo is s ent to the Ministry of 
Finance. 
 
The High level Steering Committee Meeting held on 22.03.2013 chaired by Secretary 
(WR) agreed in principle to the proposal for the XII Five Year Plan amounting to        

 
26 
 
Rs. 1,490 crore. Advisory Board chaired by Hon’ble Mi nister (Water Resources) has 
also approved the proposal in its meeting held on 02.05.2013. The appraisal process of 
the scheme National Water Mission is now completed." 
 
33. The Committee had been informed that the National Bureau of Water Use 
Efficiency (NBWUE) was envisaged to be operational in 2013 -14 subject to approval of 
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC).  In the Action Taken reply, the Ministry has inter-
alia stated that the revised EFC of National Water Mission has since been cleared by 
High Level  Steering Committee and Advisory Board. The Ministry has also stated that 
the appraisal process of the scheme National Water Mission is now completed.  
However, the reply lacks any information on setting up of NBWUE during 2013 -14. The 
Committee hope that NBWUE will be functional soon in the current year i.e. 2013-14 and 
bring higher efficiency in water use. They would like to know the progress in this regard. 
 
J.  Dam Safety 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.66) 
 
34. The Committee observed that a six year project  called 'Dam Rehabilitation and 
Improvement Project' (DRIP) was launched in 2011 with the assistance from the World Bank.  
The Project became effective from 18 April, 2012 and would be  implemented in 4 States, 
namely, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and Tam il Nadu.  About 223 large dams in the four 
participating States requiring substantial need for rehabilitation and improvements would be 
included in the Project.   The Committee observed that the total estimated cost of DRIP was 
Rs.2,100.00 crore out of whic h Rs.1,487.23 crore was for the four participating States and 

 
27 
 
Rs.132.00 crore for Central Water Commission and a provision of Rs.480.24 crore had been 
kept as an unallocated resources for similar work for additional States which might join the 
project later stage.   The Committee expected that dam safety measures would be taken up 
seriously by all concerned and the National Commission on Dam Safety would play an effective 
role in this regard.  Further, the Committee noted that on the basis of the observatio n and 
recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Water Resources on The Dam 
Safety Bill, 2010 tabled before the Parliament on 30 August, 2010, a modified Dam Safety Bill 
was ready and would be placed before the Parliament shortly.   The Com mittee desired that all 
pending issues/concerns raised by the States be addressed and, thereafter, the Dam Safety 
Bill might be introduced in the Parliament for enactment expeditiously. 
35. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"In the  Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement Project (DRIP) already under 
implementation, in addition to the existing four States, five new States/organisations are 
expected to join DRIP shortly as per details below and as agreed by the World Bank: 
 
State/Entity No. of Dams proposed 
under DRIP 
Allocated share 
(Rs. crore) 
DVC  1 34.13 
Karnataka  27 276.75 
Punjab  12 27.38 
UJVNL  5 46.74 
Uttar Pradesh  1 95 
Total  46 480 
 
The implementation of DRIP is being monitored by a Technical Committee under 
Chairmanship of Member (D&R), CWC. A National Level Steering Committee (NLSC) 
has also been constituted for overall guidance of the project implementation. 
 
Action has been initiated by the MoWR for expeditious enactment of the modified Dam 
Safety Bill."  
 

 
28 
 
36. The Comm ittee find that legislation on the Dam Safety which was examined by 
them and Report was submitted in 2010 is yet to be enacted.  In April 2013, the 
Committee were informed by the Ministry that it had worked out on the 
recommendations of the Committee and r evised the Draft Bill which was going to the 
Cabinet.  The Action Taken Reply of the Ministry is not specific about the further 
progress in this regard.  The Committee reiterate the need for expeditious enactment of 
this very important legislation.  
K. Budgetary Allocation (Minor Irrigation) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.25) 
37.  The Committee observed that Minor Irrigation (MI) schemes are those ground and 
surface water schemes which have a Cultivable Command Area (CCA) up to 2,000 hectares 
individually.  The  budgetary allocations for Minor Irrigation at BE stage for the year 2013 -14 
had been kept at Rs. 324.02 crore in Plan section and Rs.134.31 crore in non -Plan section.  
The Committee noted that the Plan allocation of Rs. 384.81 crore for Minor Irrigation d uring 
2012-13 was reduced to Rs. 207.93 crore at RE stage.  The reasons stated by the Ministry for 
this reduction was that all the planned activities under the Scheme could not be taken up and 
the appraisal of EFC, Ministry of Finance had also not been com pleted.   The Committee 
observed that the fact that non approval of EFC had led to substantial reduction in budgetary 
allocation at RE stage was really deplorable as it adversely affected many sectoral schemes.  
The Committee, therefore, recommended that t he Ministry must take concrete steps at the 
earliest to obviate this problem which affects allocation and utilization of funds in many sectors 
of water resource schemes/projects. The Committee also desired the Ministry to furnish the 

 
29 
 
detailed information indicating the physical targets fixed for creation of irrigation potential under 
minor irrigation for 11 th Plan ending March, 2012 and also the achievements made in this 
regard during that period.  Considering the relative importance of Minor Irrigation Pro jects, the 
Committee desired to know the particulars of the schemes and projects with external 
assistance being proposed under minor irrigation during XII Plan period.   
38. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"The appraisal process of the scheme Ground Water Management & Regulation is 
complete and the process has started seeking the approval of CCEA.  Steps like 
advance planning, regular monitoring and enhanced delegation of administrative & 
financial powers etc. will be taken to avo id reduction in budgetary allocation at RE 
stage."  
39. The Committee note that the Ministry has initiated the process of approval of 
scheme of Ground Water Management and Regulation from Cabinet Committee on 
Economic Affairs (CCEA). Further, steps such as  advance planning, regular monitoring 
enhanced delegation of administrative and financial powers will be taken by the Ministry 
to avoid reduction in budgetary allocation at RE stage. However, the Committee take 
serious view of the fact that the Ministry ha s failed to provide information on 
achievements vis-à-vis physical targets fixed for creation of irrigation potential under 
Minor Irrigation for XI Plan ending March, 2012.  Further, Ministry has also not provided 
the particulars of the schemes and project s with external assistance being proposed 
under Minor Irrigation during XII Plan period.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate and 
recommend the Ministry to furnish the desired information on Minor Irrigation and also 

 
30 
 
apprise them about its achievements dur ing XI Plan under this Head without further 
delay. 
 
L. Aquifer Mapping 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.27) 
40.  The Committee observed that Aquifer Mapping is one programme among the major 
activities proposed during XII Plan under Ground Water Management and Re gulation.  The 
outcome of the Aquifer Mapping would include identification of areas feasible for ground water 
development, ground water regulation, rainwater harvesting and artificial recharge, yield 
potential, depth & design of wells, water logged areas a nd quality problem areas etc.  9.25 lakh 
sq. km. area had been proposed to be covered under Aquifer Mapping in XII Plan period which 
would involve activities like data collection, compilation, data gap analysis and preparation of 
aquifer maps and managemen t plan.  Aquifer mapping with latest scientific inputs was to be 
taken up on 1:50000 scale and the mappable area of about 23.4 lakh sq. km. in the country 
was likely to be completed by the end of XIII Plan. The aquifer -wise water management plan, 
likely to be completed by the end of XIII Plan period, will incorporate participatory approach in 
which the end-users like farmers, various other stakeholders will be involved in the programme.  
The Committee hoped that the target fixed for the Acquifer Mapping wou ld be successfully 
achieved by the Ministry and its benefit would reach to all the stakeholders.  The results of such 
survey, State-wise, must be given wide publicity for the benefit of the people. 
 
 

 
31 
 
41. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"The target of Aquifer Mapping has been revised as 8.89 lakh sq. km. (Earlier 9.25 lakh 
sq. km.) in view of reduction in allocation / expenditure in 2012 -13 and reduction of BE 
in 2013 -14 mainly due to non -appraisal of the scheme by the EFC. The Aqu ifer 
Mapping will also provide the aquifer management plan to benefit the end users. The 
aquifer management plans are proposed to be implemented through participatory 
ground water management programme with the involvement of community and other 
stake holders. The results of aquifer mapping will be given wide publicity for the benefit 
of people."  
 
42. The Committee observe that the target fixed under the programme of Aquifer 
Mapping had to be lowered because of non appraisal of this programme by EFC.  As 
also observed by the Committee in preceding paragraphs, they express their 
displeasure over the fact that several schemes / programmes had to be revised / could 
not be completed for want of requisite approval of EFC.   The Committee are of the view 
that modi fication / revision of schemes / programmes due to non completion of 
administrative procedure reflects poorly on the part of the functioning of the Ministry.  
The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to take immediate corrective action in this 
regard.  They also expect that proposed Aquifer Mapping with latest scientific inputs 
and aquifer-wise water management plan, involving end users, will be completed by the 
end of XII Five Year Plan as envisaged.  The Committee desire to be apprised of the 
progress in this regard. 
 
M. Central Ground Water Board 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.29) 
43.  The Committee observed that the Central Ground Water Board (CGWB),under the 
Ministry of Water Resources is a multi -disciplinary, scientific organisation whose mandate is 

 
32 
 
mainly related to sustainable development and management of India’s ground water resources.   
The Committee’s examination of the budgetary proposals revealed that  a budgetary allocation 
of Rs. 275.00 crore in the Plan section for Central Ground Water Board  (CGWB) for 2013 -14 
had been made which was less than the BE of Rs. 318 crore of the previous year 2012 -13.  
The Committee desired to know the reasons for reduction of budgetary allocation in Plan 
section for the current financial year compared to BE of pr evious year 2012 -13 and also the 
details of the projects / schemes, which could be adversely affected due to the reduced 
allocation.  The assessment of groundwater resources was carried out jointly by Central 
Ground Water Board and respective State Governm ents.  The Committee recommended that 
after making State -wise actual assessment of availability of groundwater, the Central Ground 
Water Board should frame a broad parameter on scientific lines which could earmark the 
usable quantity of groundwater by each  stakeholders.  The Committee had been informed that 
a proposal prepared for restructuring and strengthening the CGWB was under benchmarking 
study and the final restructuring proposal was likely to be submitted by the end of July, 2013.  
The Committee expe cted that the restructuring process of Central Ground Water Board would 
be completed within the prescribed time limit which would in turn strengthen the Board to carry 
out its activities in a more efficient and effective manner.    
44. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"Against the BE allocation of Rs. 318 crore in the financial year 2012 -13, only               
Rs. 118.23 crore could be utilized due to non finalization of EFC memo. Budgetary 
allocation for the financial year 2013 -14 has been kept as Rs. 275 crore. The activities 
to be affected due to reduced BE in 2013 -14: Data Gap Analysis will be carried out in 
2.0 lakh sq. km. from earlier target of 6.25 lakh sq. km. and Data Generation will be 
carried out in 0.54 lakh sq. km. fro m earlier target of 0.90 lakh sq. km. for Aquifer 

 
33 
 
Mapping Programme. The activities of Participatory Ground Water Management 
Programme would also get delayed. The provision for procurement of equipments has 
been reduced from Rs. 93 crore to Rs 86 crore. 
 
In reference to ground water resource assessment as per the prevailing practice, 
dynamic ground water resources are assessed jointly by CGWB and State Ground 
Water Departments following the GEC -97 methodology. The assessment units are 
block/taluka/ mandal/firka (village)/watershed etc. Following the GEC -97 methodology, 
allocation of ground water for various sectors/stakeholders such as domestic, industrial 
and irrigation uses are made on the basis of parameters such as population, 
dependency on ground water and the existing draft for irrigation etc.  
 
As regard to restructuring process of Central Ground Water Board (CGWB), the revised 
proposal for restructuring of CGWB is under process." 
 
45. The Committee note that budgetary allocation for Central Ground Wat er Board 
(CGWB) could not be fully utilised due to non finalisation of EFC Memo, which resulted 
in shrinking of funds for Data Gap Analysis and Data Generation activities. Now Data 
Gap Analysis can be done only in 2.0 lakh sq. km area as against 6.25 lakh sq. km. 
targeted earlier and Data Generation target also has to be scaled down to 0.54 lakh sq. 
km as against 0.90 lakh sq. km. targeted for Aquifer Mapping Programme. Further, 
activities under Participatory Ground Water Management Programme will be delaye d 
and procurement of equipments has also been reduced from Rs. 9.3 crore to Rs. 8.6 
crore. They also notice that the revised proposal for restructuring of CGWB is under 
process. They are given to understand that final proposal for restructuring could not b e 
submitted by July, 2013 as earlier envisaged. 
46. The Committee express deep anguish over the sorry state of affairs in the 
Ministry regarding their repeated failure in getting approval of schemes / programmes 
by EFC in time. They would, therefore, stron gly recommend the Ministry to revamp their 

 
34 
 
functioning and take corrective action, as also recommended earlier in preceding 
paragraphs. They would like to be apprised of the measures taken in this regard. They 
would further recommend that proposal for rest ructuring process of CGWB must be 
formulated without any further delay to enable CGWB to function more efficiently.  The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the reasons for such delay.  
 
N. Flood Control 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4.27) 
 
47.  The Committee observed that under Flood Control, a Budget allocation of Rs. 277.00 
crore was made during 2012 -13 which was reduced to Rs. 147.25 crore at RE stage.  Citing 
the reason for reduction of allocation at RE stage, the Ministry had informed that the Plan  
allocation was reduced during 2012 -13 due to non -taking up of new components of the 
schemes pending their approval.  The Committee were dismayed to see the apathy of the 
Ministry in getting the Scheme approved before seeking financial allocation for 2012 -13.   
Surprisingly, the Plan allocation in BE 2013 -14 had been increased by Rs. 117.45 crore over 
BE 2012-13 not on the basis of concrete approval of the Scheme beforehand but only on the 
expectations of subsequent approval of the Scheme.  The Committee wo uld like the Ministry to 
exercise judicious and effective pre -budget planning so that unutilisation of funds is avoided in 
future.  It hardly needs any emphasis that timely approval of the Scheme will help 
execution/completion of the projects/schemes in ti me.   The Committee observed that flood 
forecasting is a very vital input for timely and effective disaster management to save precious 
human lives, livestocks and property.  The Committee, therefore, desired that all activities 

 
35 
 
under flood forecasting sho uld be effectively undertaken by prudent utilization of the allocated 
funds during the year 2013-14.     
48. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"The activity of flood forecasting is performed by Central Water Commission (CWC) 
which has been advised to prepare an implementable work plan for financial year  
2013-14." 
 
49. The Committee observe that Central Water Commission (CWC) has been advised 
to prepare an implementable work plan for Flood Control for the year 2013 -14. They find 
that instead of pre -budget planning, the Ministry is again functioning on the basis of 
chalking out plans after the allocations are made, which runs the risk of getting revised / 
not implemented due to paucity of time and thereby getting allocations reduced a t RE 
stage. The Committee would, therefore, again emphasise the need for judicious and 
effective pre-budget planning. They would also like to be apprised of the utilisation of 
funds under Flood Control Programme as allocated, till date. 
 
O. Brahmaputra Board – Flood and Anti-Erosion Works 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6.38) 
 
50. The Committee observed that annual floods had brought untold miseries and damages 
in the North Eastern Region (NER) which led to maximum losses to the tune of Rs. 753.03 
crore in Assam (2002), Rs. 505.57 crore in Arunachal Pradesh (2004), Rs. 210.34 crore in 
Meghalaya (2004), Rs. 51.81 crore in Manipur (1986), Rs.19.30 crore in Mizoram (1997),      

 
36 
 
Rs.19.55 crore in Nagaland (1993) and Rs.80.05 crore in Tripura (1993).  The damages 
caused in terms of affected area and population and loss of human lives as furnished by the 
Ministry were also considerable.  In this regard, the Committee noted that the Brahmaputra 
Board was constituted in 1980 with the objective of planning and integrated im plementation of 
measures for control of floods and bank erosion in Brahmaputra and for matters connected 
therewith.  The efforts of Brahmaputra Board resulted in preparation of 57 Master Plans 
covering main stems of Brahmaputra river and Barak, tributaries  of Brahmaputra and Barak 
rivers and Majuli Island out of which 49 Master Plans had been circulated among the 
concerned Water Resources Departments of States and others for implementation of 
recommendations of Master Plans.  The Committee also noted that a  total amount of Rs. 
234.40 crore had been incurred up -to February 2013 on Flood Control and Anti -Erosion Works 
by the Brahmaputra Board.  The Committee observed that there was no uniformity of coverage 
of period in the data furnished by the Ministry regar ding flood damage in NE Region and, 
therefore, the Committee urged the Ministry to ensure that the updated year -wise data and 
information regarding annual floods havoc in different States of the North Eastern Region 
falling under the jurisdiction of Brahma putra Board were compiled and submitted to the 
Committee.  The Committee also desired that the balance works pertaining to 4 Drainage 
Development Schemes (DDS) - Barbhag, Amjur, Jengrai and Jakaichuk should be completed 
within a specified timeframe.  The C ommittee desired the Ministry to vigorously pursue with the 
Brahmaputra Board for taking up two new erosion control schemes namely, protection of 
Mankachar, Kalair-Alga and Maslabari area for controlling erosion of river Brahmaputra both of 
which were loca ted on international border with Bangladesh.  Also noting that the North 

 
37 
 
Eastern Region of the country being in downstream of Brahmaputra river, faces a lot of 
problem, the Committee, therefore, strongly felt that there was an urgent need for scientific 
assessment of the erosion problem and for devising suitable mechanism to address the same.  
The Committee further urged the Ministry to pursue with the States and Brahmaputra Board for 
taking up construction of storage reservoirs on Brahmaputra river and its  tributaries so that 
amelioration from annual flood and erosion damage may be achieved in the North East Region.  
The Committee desired to be apprised of further action taken on the above points at the 
earliest. 
51. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"UUppddaatteedd  yyeeaarr  wwiissee  ddaattaa  aanndd  iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn  oonn  aannnnuuaall  fflloooodd  hhaavvoocc  iinn  ddiiffffeerreenntt  
ssttaatteess  ooff  NNoorrtthh  EEaasstteerrnn  RReeggiioonn  ffaalllliinngg  uunnddeerr  tthhee  jjuurriissddiiccttiioonn  ooff    BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  
BBooaarrdd::--  
  
NNiinnee  SSttaatteess  --AArruunnaacchhaall  PPrraaddeesshh,,  AAssssaamm,,  MMaanniippuurr,,  MMeegghhaallaayyaa,,  MMiizzoorraamm,,  NNaaggaallaanndd,,  
TTrriippuurraa  ooff  NNoorrtthh  EEaasstteerrnn  RReeggiioonn  --  SSiikkkkiimm  aanndd  nnoorrtthheerrnn  ppaarrtt  ooff  WWeesstt  BBeennggaall  aarree  ffaalllliinngg  
uunnddeerr  tthhee  jjuurriissddiiccttiioonn  ooff  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd..  PPrreesseennttllyy,,  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd  ddooeess  nnoott  
hhaavvee  yyeeaarr  wwiissee  ddaattaa  aanndd  iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn  oonn  fflloooodd  hhaavvoocc  iinn  rreessppeecctt  ooff  aabboovvee  SSttaatteess  rreeaaddiillyy  
aavvaaiillaabbllee  aass  ddeessiirreedd  bbyy  tthhee  CCoommmmiitttteeee..    
  
UUnnddeerrttaakkiinngg  bbaallaannccee  wwoorrkkss  bbeelloonnggiinngg  ttoo  44((ffoouurr))  DDrraaiinnaaggee  DDeevveellooppmmeenntt  SScchheemmeess  
((DDDDSS))::--  
  
BBoorrbbhhaagg  DDrraaiinnaaggee  DDeevveellooppmmeenntt  SScchheemmee,,  AAmmjjuurr  DDrraaiinnaaggee  DDeevveellooppmmeenntt  SScchheemmee,,  
JJeennggrraaii  DDrraaiinnaaggee  DDeevveellooppmmeenntt  SScchheemmee  aanndd  JJaakkaaiicchhuukk  DDrraaiinnaaggee  DDeevveellooppmmeenntt  
SScchheemmee  aarree  ccuurrrreennttllyy  uunnddeerrwwaayy  iinn  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd..  TThhee  ssttaattuuss  iinn  bbrriieeff  iinn  rreessppeecctt  ooff  
aabboovvee  sscchheemmeess  aarree  ffuurrnniisshheedd  hheerreeuunnddeerr  ––  
  
BBaarrbbhhaagg  DDrraaiinnaaggee  DDeevveellooppmmeenntt  SScchheemmee  
  
CCeennttrraall  WWaatteerr  CCoommmmiissssiioonn  tthhrroouugghh  lleetttteerr  ddaatteedd  1133..0033..22000000  rreeccoommmmeennddeedd  tthhee  sscchheemmee  
ffoorr  RRss..77..2233  ccrroorree  ffoorr  aacccceeppttaannccee  bbyy  PPllaannnniinngg  CCoommmmiissssiioonn..  TThhee  ‘‘AAddmmiinniissttrraattiivvee  
AApppprroovvaall  aanndd  EExxppeennddiittuurree  SSaannccttiioonn’’  ooff  ccoommppeetteenntt  aauutthhoorriittyy  ttoo  tthhee  sscchheemmee  ffoorr  aann  
aammoouunntt  ooff  RRss..77..2233  ccrroorree  wwaass  ccoonnvveeyyeedd  tthhrroouugghh  lleetttteerr  ddaatteedd  1155..0011..0044  bbyy  MMiinniissttrryy  ooff  
WWaatteerr  RReessoouurrcceess  ffoorr  eexxeeccuuttiioonn  dduurriinngg  XX  FFiivvee  YYeeaarr  PPllaann..  HHoowweevveerr  tthhee  pprroovviissiioonn  uunnddeerr  

 
38 
 
tthhiiss  sscchheemmee  wwaass  bbrroouugghhtt  ddoowwnn  ttoo  RRss..55..00  ccrroorree  ffoorr  XX  FFiivvee  YYeeaarr  PPllaann  tthhrroouugghh  lleetttteerr  ddaatteedd  
0011..0022..22000066  oonn  tthhee  aassssuummppttiioonn  tthhaatt  tthhee  BBaarrbbhhaagg  DDDDSS  sscchheemmee  wwiillll  ssppiillll  oovveerr  ttoo  XXII  ppllaann..  
DDuurriinngg  eexxeeccuuttiioonn,,  tthhee  eessttiimmaattee  wwaass  rreevviisseedd  ttoo  RRss..1111..7700  ccrroorree  iinn  FFeebbrruuaarryy,,  22001100  oonn  
aaccccoouunntt  ooff  cchhaannggee  iinn  sslluuiiccee  ddeessiiggnn..    AAggaaiinn,,  oonn  aaccccoouunntt  ooff  ccoosstt  oovveerrrruunn  aanndd  ttiimmee  oovveerrrruunn  
tthhee  eessttiimmaattee  hhaadd  ttoo  bbee  rreevviisseedd  ttoo  RRss..  1144..8800  ccrroorree  iinn  JJuunnee,,  22001122..    
TThhee  wwoorrkk  bbaassiiccaallllyy  ccoommpprriisseess  ooff  ((aa))  RRaaiissiinngg  aanndd  ssttrreennggtthheenniinngg  ooff  eexxiissttiinngg  eemmbbaannkkmmeenntt  
((bb))  RRee--sseeccttiioonniinngg  aanndd  rree--ggrraaddiinngg  ooff  SSuutthhaajjaann  CChhaannnneell  aanndd  ((cc))  CCoonnssttrruuccttiioonn  ooff  sslluuiiccee  
rreegguullaattoorr..  AA  ttoottaall  eexxppeennddiittuurree  ooff  RRss..55..0066  ccrroorree  iiss  iinnccuurrrreedd  uuppttoo  JJuullyy,,  22001133..    FFiirrsstt  ttwwoo  
ccoommppoonneennttss  ooff  tthhee  sscchheemmee  aarree  ccoommpplleetteedd..  TThhee  rreemmaaiinniinngg  wwoorrkk  iiss  ccoonnssttrruuccttiioonn  ooff  sslluuiiccee  
aanndd  tthhee  pprrooggrreessss  ooff  wwoorrkk  iiss  77..55  ppeerr  cceenntt  uupp  ttoo  3311sstt  JJuullyy,,  22001133..  
  
AAmmjjuurr  DDrraaiinnaaggee  DDeevveellooppmmeenntt  SScchheemmee  
  
TTeecchhnnoo--eeccoonnoommiicc  cclleeaarraannccee  ooff  tthhee  sscchheemmee  ffoorr  aann  aammoouunntt  ooff  RRss..1144..1155  ccrroorree  wwaass  
rreecceeiivveedd  iinn  JJaannuuaarryy,,  22000066..  TThhee  eexxeeccuuttiioonn  ooff  AAmmjjuurr  DDDDSS  wwaass  ttaakkeenn  uupp  iinn  tthhee  yyeeaarr  22000066--
0077..  OOuutt  ooff  tthhee  ttwwoo  ccoommppoonneennttss  ((ii..ee..  sslluuiiccee  rreegguullaattoorr  aanndd  eemmbbaannkkmmeenntt)),,  tthhee  wwoorrkk  ffoorr  
‘‘RRaaiissiinngg  aanndd  SSttrreennggtthheenniinngg’’  ooff  eexxiissttiinngg  eemmbbaannkkmmeenntt  wwaass  ttaakkeenn  uupp  ffiirrsstt..  AA  ttoottaall  ooff  33,,667755  
mm  ooff  RRaaiissiinngg  aanndd  ssttrreennggtthheenniinngg  ooff  eemmbbaannkkmmeenntt  hhaass  bbeeeenn  ccoommpplleetteedd  oouutt  ooff  55,,007755  mm..  
PPrroocceessss  ooff  llaanndd  aaccqquuiissiittiioonn  ffoorr  ccoonnssttrruuccttiioonn  ooff  nneeww  eemmbbaannkkmmeenntt  ooff  772200  mm..,,  tthhee  sslluuiiccee  
rreegguullaattoorr  aanndd  tthhee  rreemmaaiinniinngg  ppaarrtt  ooff  ‘‘RRaaiissiinngg  aanndd  ssttrreennggtthheenniinngg’’  ooff  11440000  mm..  ooff  
eemmbbaannkkmmeenntt  iiss  ggooiinngg  oonn..  TThhee  CCWWCC  ddeessiiggnn  wwiinngg  hhaass  ssuubbmmiitttteedd  ppaarrtt  ooff  tthhee  ddeessiiggnn  
ddrraawwiinnggss  tthhrroouugghh  lleetttteerr  ddaatteedd  2255tthh  JJuullyy  22001133  aanndd  rreevviisseedd  DDPPRR  iiss  uunnddeerr  pprreeppaarraattiioonn  
bbaasseedd  oonn  tthhee  ddrraawwiinnggss  aanndd  ssppeecciiffiiccaattiioonnss  rreecceeiivveedd  ffrroomm  CCeennttrraall  WWaatteerr  CCoommmmiissssiioonn..  
AA  ttoottaall  eexxppeennddiittuurree  ooff  RRss..  1122..3344  ccrroorree  hhaass  bbeeeenn  iinnccuurrrreedd  ttiillll  JJuullyy,,  22001133,,  aaggaaiinnsstt  tthhee  
ssaannccttiioonneedd  ccoosstt  ooff  RRss..  1144..1155  ccrroorree  aanndd  3333..66  ppeerr  cceenntt  pphhyyssiiccaall  pprrooggrreessss  hhaass  bbeeeenn  
aacchhiieevveedd  ttiillll  JJuullyy,,  22001133..  FFuurrtthheerr  pprrooggrreessss  ooff  wwoorrkk  iiss  hheelldd  uupp  oonn  aaccccoouunntt  ooff  ddeellaayy  iinn  
ffiinnaalliizzaattiioonn  ooff  llaanndd  aaccqquuiissiittiioonn  bbyy  SSttaattee  GGoovvtt..  aanndd  ddeellaayy  iinn  rreevviissiioonn  ooff  tthhee  eessttiimmaattee  ffoorr  
tthhee  sscchheemmee  bbyy  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd..  
JJeennggrraaii  DDrraaiinnaaggee  DDeevveellooppmmeenntt  SScchheemmee  
  
TTeecchhnnoo--eeccoonnoommiicc  cclleeaarraannccee  ooff  JJeennggrraaii  DDDDSS  wwaass  rreecceeiivveedd  iinn  tthhee  yyeeaarr  11999988..  TThhee  ttwwoo  
ccoommppoonneennttss  ooff  tthhee  sscchheemmee  aarree  ((ii))  RRaaiissiinngg  aanndd  ssttrreennggtthheenniinngg  ooff  eemmbbaannkkmmeenntt  ffoorr  aa  
lleennggtthh  ooff  22660000  mm..  aanndd  ((iiii))  CCoonnssttrruuccttiioonn  ooff  sslluuiiccee  bbeettwweeeenn  1188tthh  aanndd  1199tthh  kkmm  ooppeenniinngg  ooff  
PPGGJJHH  ddyykkee..  TThhee  pphhyyssiiccaall  pprrooggrreessss  ooff  wwoorrkk  uunnddeerr  JJeennggrraaii  DDDDSS  iiss  2277  ppeerr  cceenntt  aatt  tthhee  
ttoottaall  eexxppeennddiittuurree  ooff  RRss..11..0044  ccrroorree  aaggaaiinnsstt  tthhee  ssaannccttiioonneedd  aammoouunntt  ooff  RRss..11..4499  ccrroorree..  TThhiiss  
wwoorrkk  ppeerrttaaiinnss  ttoo  rraaiissiinngg  aanndd  ssttrreennggtthheenniinngg  ooff  eemmbbaannkkmmeenntt  ffoorr  aa  lleennggtthh  ooff  22660000  mm..    
  
BBaasseedd  oonn  ddeettaaiilleedd  ddeessiiggnn  ooff  tthhee  sslluuiiccee,,  aa  rreevviisseedd  eessttiimmaattee  aammoouunnttiinngg  ttoo  RRss..  55..2233  ccrroorree  
wwaass  ssuubbmmiitttteedd  ttoo  CCWWCC  iinn  MMaarrcchh,,  22001100..  SSoommee  oobbsseerrvvaattiioonnss  oonn  tthhee  rreevviisseedd  eessttiimmaattee  

 
39 
 
rraaiisseedd  bbyy  CCWWCC  hhaavvee  ssuubbsseeqquueennttllyy  bbeeeenn  ccoommpplliieedd  aanndd  tthhee  mmooddiiffiieedd  DDPPRR  wwaass  
ssuubbmmiitttteedd  ttoo  CCWWCC  iinn  MMaarrcchh,,  22001133..  FFuurrtthheerr  oobbsseerrvvaattiioonnss  wweerree  rreecceeiivveedd  ffrroomm  CCWWCC  
tthhrroouugghh  lleetttteerr  ddaatteedd  2266..44..22001133..  TThhee  rreepplliieess  ttoo  tthhoossee  oobbsseerrvvaattiioonnss  hhaavvee  aallssoo  bbeeeenn  
ssuubbmmiitttteedd  ttoo  rreeggiioonnaall  OOffffiiccee  ooff  GGuuwwaahhaattii  oonn  0077..0088..22001133..  TThhee  wwoorrkk  iiss  eexxppeecctteedd  ttoo  bbee  
ccoommpplleetteedd  wwiitthhiinn  tthhee  yyeeaarr  ooff  ssaannccttiioonn  ooff  rreevviisseedd  ccoosstt..  
  
JJaakkaaiicchhuukk  DDrraaiinnaaggee  DDeevveellooppmmeenntt  SScchheemmee  
  
CCeennttrraall  WWaatteerr  CCoommmmiissssiioonn  rreeccoommmmeennddeedd  tthhee  sscchheemmee  ffoorr  aann  aammoouunntt  ooff  229966  llaakkhh  
tthhrroouugghh  lleetttteerr  ddaatteedd  2211..0077..11999988..  MMiinniissttrryy  ooff  WWaatteerr  RReessoouurrcceess  aaccccoorrddeedd  aapppprroovvaall  ffoorr  aann  
aammoouunntt  RRss..1100  llaakkhh  iinn  XX  FFiivvee  YYeeaarr  PPllaann  ffoorr  uunnddeerrttaakkiinngg  eexxeeccuuttiioonn  ooff  tthhiiss  sscchheemmee  bbyy  
BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd  tthhrroouugghh  lleetttteerr  ddaatteedd  0022..0022..22000066..  AAggaaiinn,,  MMooWWRR  ccoonnvveeyyeedd  
AAddmmiinniissttrraattiivvee  AApppprroovvaall  ffoorr  aann  aammoouunntt  ooff  RRss..  229966  llaakkhh  ffoorr  eexxeeccuuttiioonn  dduurriinngg  tthhee  XXII  FFiivvee  
YYeeaarr  PPllaann  tthhrroouugghh  lleetttteerr  ddaatteedd  3311..1122..22000088..  
TThhee  mmaaiinn  ccoommppoonneennttss  ooff  tthhee  sscchheemmee  aarree  ––  ((aa))  RR//SS  ooff  eexxiissttiinngg  eemmbbaannkkmmeenntt  oonn  lleefftt  bbaannkk  
ooff  MMiittaanngg  rriivveerr  ffoorr  aa  lleennggtthh  11997755  kkmm  aanndd  ((bb))  CCoonnssttrruuccttiioonn  ooff  sslluuiiccee  aatt  KKhhaarrkkhhaarriijjaann..  AA  
ttoottaall  eexxppeennddiittuurree  ooff  RRss..114411  llaakkhh  iiss  iinnccuurrrreedd  uuppttoo  JJuullyy,,  22001133..    TThhee  ffiirrsstt  ccoommppoonneenntt  iiss  
ccoommpplleetteedd..  BBuutt  dduuee  ttoo  oobbjjeeccttiioonn  ooff  llooccaall  ppeeooppllee  rreeggaarrddiinngg  nnoonn--eexxiisstteennccee  ooff  oovveerrffllooww  
sseeccttiioonn,,  tthhee  sslluuiiccee  wwoorrkk  hhaadd  ttoo  bbee  ssuussppeennddeedd  iinn  MMaarrcchh,,  22001100..  TThhee  DDeessiiggnn  aanndd  
DDrraawwiinnggss  ooff  aaddddiittiioonnaall  oovveerrffllooww  sseeccttiioonn  hhaavvee  ccoommpplleetteedd  iinn  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd..  TThhee  
bbaallaannccee  wwoorrkk  iiss  ppllaannnneedd  ttoo  bbee  ttaakkeenn  uupp  iinn  tthhee  nneexxtt  wwoorrkkiinngg  sseeaassoonn..  
PPrrootteeccttiioonn  ooff  MMaannkkaacchhaarr--KKaallaaiirr--AAllggaa  aanndd  MMaassaallaabbaarrii  ffrroomm  eerroossiioonn  ooff  
BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  rriivveerr  iinn  HHaattssiinnggiimmaarrii  SSuubb--ddiivviissiioonn  ooff  DDhhuubbrrii  ddiissttrriicctt,,  AAssssaamm::--  
  
TThhee  SScchheemmee,,  aatt  tthhee  eessttiimmaatteedd  ccoosstt  ooff  RRss..2233..7799  ccrroorree  hhaass  bbeeeenn  aapppprraaiisseedd  aanndd  
rreeccoommmmeennddeedd  ttoo  MMiinniissttrryy  ooff  WWaatteerr  RReessoouurrcceess  ffoorr  cceennttrraall  ffuunnddiinngg  bbyy  CCeennttrraall  WWaatteerr  
CCoommmmiissssiioonn  tthhrroouugghh  lleetttteerr  NNoo::  99//99//BBBB--DDhhuubbrrii//22001122--FFMMPP//66--77  ddaatteedd  33rrdd  JJaannuuaarryy  22001133..  
TThhee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  ooff  AAssssaamm  hhaass  ccoommpplleetteedd  aallll  nneecceessssaarryy  ffoorrmmaalliittiieess  aass  ssttaatteedd  bbeellooww  ffoorr  
iimmpplleemmeennttaattiioonn  ooff  tthhee  sscchheemmee  bbyy  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd  ––  
  
NNoo  oobbjjeeccttiioonn  cceerrttiiffiiccaattee  ffoorr  uunnddeerrttaakkiinngg  tthhee  AAnnttii--eerroossiioonn  sscchheemmee  bbyy  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd  
  
PPrroovviissiioonnss  ooff  llaanndd  rreeqquuiirreedd  ffoorr  ddeevveellooppmmeenntt  ooff  tthhee  pprroojjeecctt  ffrreeee  ooff  ccoosstt  bbyy  SSttaattee  
GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  ttoo  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd  aanndd  
  
UUnnddeerrttaakkiinngg  ppoosstt  pprroojjeecctt  mmaaiinntteennaannccee  ooff  tthhee  sscchheemmee  ffrroomm  tthhee  ddaattee  ddeecciiddeedd  bbyy  
BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd  
  
TThhee  ‘‘AAddmmiinniissttrraattiivvee  AApppprroovvaall  aanndd  EExxppeennddiittuurree  SSaannccttiioonn’’  ffoorr  iimmpplleemmeennttaattiioonn  ooff  tthhee  
sscchheemmee  dduurriinngg  XXII  FFiivvee  YYeeaarr  PPllaann  wwaass  aaccccoorrddeedd  bbyy  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  ooff  IInnddiiaa..  OOnn  aaccccoouunntt  ooff  
nnoonn--ccoommpplleettiioonn  ooff  tteecchhnnoo--eeccoonnoommiicc  aapppprraaiissaall  ooff  tthhee  sscchheemmee  aanndd  nnoonn--aavvaaiillaabbiilliittyy  ooff  

 
40 
 
ccoonnffiirrmmaattiioonn  bbyy  tthhee  SSttaattee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  ffoorr  pprroovviiddiinngg  llaanndd  nneeeeddeedd  ffoorr  eexxeeccuuttiioonn  ooff  tthhee  
sscchheemmee  ffrreeee  ooff  ccoosstt  ttoo  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd,,  tthhee  sscchheemmee  ccoouulldd  nnoott  bbee  ttaakkeenn  uupp  ffoorr  
eexxeeccuuttiioonn  dduurriinngg  tthhee  XXII  FFiivvee  YYeeaarr  PPllaann..  
  
IItt  iiss  lleeaarrnntt  tthhaatt  aann  aammoouunntt  ooff  RRss..1122..6633  ccrroorree  eexxiissttss  iinn  tthhee  XXIIII  FFiivvee  YYeeaarr  PPllaann  pprrooppoossaall  ooff  
BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd,,  uunnddeerr  ccoonnssiiddeerraattiioonn  iinn  tthhee  MMiinniissttrryy  ooff  WWaatteerr  RReessoouurrcceess,,  ffoorr  
iimmpplleemmeennttaattiioonn  ooff  sscchheemmee  oonn  MMaannkkaacchhaarr--KKaallaaiirr--AAllggaa  iinn  HHaattssiinnggiimmaarrii  SSuubb--ddiivviissiioonn  ooff  
DDhhuubbrrii  ddiissttrriicctt,,  AAssssaamm..  AAss  ssttaatteedd  aabboovvee  aann  aammoouunntt  ooff  RRss..2233..7799  ccrroorree  wwiillll  bbee  nneeeeddeedd  ffoorr  
uunnddeerrttaakkiinngg  eexxeeccuuttiioonn  ooff  tthhee  sscchheemmee  bbyy  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd..  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd  
ssuubbmmiitttteedd  aa  RReevviisseedd  EEFFCC  MMeemmoorraanndduumm  ffoorr  XXIIII  FFiivvee  YYeeaarr  PPllaann  tthhrroouugghh  tthhiiss  ooffffiiccee  lleetttteerr  
NNoo::  BBBB//99222288//VVooll--IIII//1133//2211  ddaatteedd  2222nndd  AApprriill,,  22001133  wwiitthh  aaddeeqquuaattee  pprroovviissiioonn  ooff  RRss..2233..7799  
ccrroorree  ffoorr  iimmpplleemmeennttaattiioonn  ooff  tthhee  sscchheemmee..  AA  pprrooppoossaall  ooff  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd  ffoorr  
aaccccoorrddiinngg  ssaannccttiioonn  ffoorr  eexxeeccuuttiioonn  ooff  tthhee  sscchheemmee  bbyy  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd  aatt  tthhee  ccoosstt  ooff  
RRss..2233..7799  iiss  uunnddeerr  pprroocceessssiinngg  iinn  MMiinniissttrryy  ooff  WWaatteerr  RReessoouurrcceess..  
  
 Protection of Masalabari International Border Area of Dhubri District from 
Erosion of River Brahmaputra:-  
TThhee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  ooff  AAssssaamm  ffuurrnniisshheedd  ’’NNoo  OObbjjeeccttiioonn’’  ffoorr  iimmpplleemmeennttaattiioonn  ooff  tthhee  sscchheemmee  
bbyy  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd..  CCoommpplleettiioonn  ooff  rreemmaaiinniinngg  ttwwoo  ffoorrmmaalliittiieess  ––  ((aa))  pprroovviiddiinngg  llaanndd  
nneeeeddeedd  ffoorr  ddeevveellooppmmeenntt  ooff  tthhee  sscchheemmee  ttoo  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd  ffrreeee  ooff  ccoosstt  bbyy  tthhee  SSttaattee  
GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  aanndd  ((bb))  UUnnddeerrttaakkiinngg  ppoosstt--sscchheemmee  mmaaiinntteennaannccee  ooff  tthhee  sscchheemmee  iiss  uunnddeerr  
pprroocceessssiinngg  iinn  tthhee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  ooff  AAssssaamm..  NNeecceessssaarryy  pprroovviissiioonn  ffoorr  iimmpplleemmeennttaattiioonn  ooff  tthhee  
sscchheemmee  dduurriinngg  tthhee  XXIIII  FFiivvee  YYeeaarr  PPllaann  hhaass  bbeeeenn  pprrooppoosseedd  bbyy  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd  iinn  tthhee  
EEFFCC  MMeemmoorraanndduumm  ooff  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd  ffoorr  XXIIII  FFiivvee  YYeeaarr  PPllaann..  TThhee  rreevviisseedd  pprrooppoossaall  
aatt  eessttiimmaatteedd  ccoosstt  ooff  RRss..44..6644  ccrroorree  ffoorr  iimmpplleemmeennttaattiioonn  ooff  ““Protection of Masalabari 
International Border Area of Dhubri District from Erosion of River Brahmaputra”  has 
been submitted to Central  Water Commission for techno -economic appraisal ..  HHeerree  iitt  
mmaayy  bbee  rreelleevvaanntt  ttoo  ssttaattee  tthhaatt  tthhiiss  sscchheemmee  ffoorrmmss  ppaarrtt  ooff  tthhee  aapppprroovveedd  EEFFCC  
MMeemmoorraanndduumm  ooff  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd  ffoorr  tthhee  XXII  FFiivvee  YYeeaarr  PPllaann..  OOnn  aaccccoouunntt  ooff  nnoonn--
ccoommpplleettiioonn  ooff  nneecceessssaarryy  ffoorrmmaalliittiieess  bbyy  tthhee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  ooff  AAssssaamm,,  tthhee  sscchheemmee  ccoouulldd  
nnoott  bbee  ttaakkeenn  uupp  ffoorr  iimmpplleemmeennttaattiioonn..  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  hhaass  ppllaannnneedd  ttoo  ttaakkee  uupp  
iimmpplleemmeennttaattiioonn  ooff  tthhee  sscchheemmee  dduurriinngg  tthhee  nneexxtt  wwoorrkkiinngg  sseeaassoonn..  
 
52. The Committee observe that nine States viz. Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, 
Manipur, Meghalay a, Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura of North -Eastern region, Sikkim and 
northern parts of West Bengal are covered under the jurisdiction of Brahmaputra Board. 
They are surprised to note that year -wise data on extent of flood and damages in the 

 
41 
 
areas under the ju risdiction of Brahmaputra Board is not being compiled. Further, they 
observe that the replies furnished by the Ministry provide details of the progress of 
completing balance works pertaining to four Drainage Development schemes. The 
Committee also note tha t two new erosion control schemes viz. protection of 
Manakchar, Kalair Alga and Maslabari Area which are located on international border 
with Bangladesh has not been taken up for implementation due to non completion of 
formalities by the State Government o f Assam. They further observe that no reply has 
been furnished with regard to construction of storage reservoirs on Brahmaputra and its 
tributaries as recommended by them. 
53. The Committee are of the view that though flood management schemes are 
implemented by State Governments and therefore extent of flood damage is assessed 
by respective State Governments, the Brahmaputra Board should collect and maintain a 
centralised database on flood havoc which will help it in planning and taking integrated 
implementation of flood management measures. The Committee would, therefore, again 
recommend the Ministry to compile the relevant statistics pertaining to flood in these 
States to enable formulation of better policies and programmes for flood management. 
They also urge the Ministry to furnish the data after its compilation at the earliest. 
Regarding balance work pertaining to four drainage development schemes, the 
Committee find that no specific period has been prescribed to achieve completion of 
balance works, as r ecommended by them. They therefore, again desire that all work in 
respect of four drainage development schemes should be completed in a time bound 
manner to minimise time and cost overruns. Further, with regard to erosion control 

 
42 
 
schemes located on India B angladesh Border, the Committee would urge the Ministry to 
pursue the State Government of Assam to complete the formalities such as techno -
economic appraisal, acquisition of land etc., so that the schemes could be taken up for 
implementation without furthe r delay. They would again emphasise the construction of 
storage reservoirs on the river Brahmaputra and its tributaries to help minimise flood 
havoc and erosion. They also recommend the Ministry to impress upon the State 
Governments and Brahmaputra Board t o start the process of reservoir construction 
urgently and furnish them the details in this regard at the earliest. 
P. Ground Water Assessment and Development in North East Region 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6.42) 
 
54. The Committee observed that the Central  Ground Water Board (CGWB) is conducting 
scientific and technical studies for ground water assessment, development and management in 
the North-East (NE) region.  The Committee noted that a Budget allocation of Rs.30.00 crore 
was made for Central Ground Wat er Board (CGWB) in 2012 -13 for North Eastern Region.  
However, the actual expenditure of Budget allocation upto December, 2012 was shown to be 
only Rs.6.49 crore.   The Budget allocation for the year 2013 -14 had been kept at Rs.40.00 
crore.  The fact that only Rs.6.49 crore out of a total Budget allocation of Rs.30.00 crore had 
been incurred by December, 2012 by CGWB revealed that the progress in implementation of 
the Schemes on ground water assessment and development in the North Eastern Region had 
been fa r from satisfactory.  Noting that aquifer mapping and management programme had 
been taken up for implementation during XII Plan and that some progress had been made on 

 
43 
 
rain water harvesting as two States viz. Nagaland and Tripura taking steps for mandatory  rain 
water harvesting in their States, the Committee desired the Ministry and Central Ground Water 
Board to intensify measures for ground water assessment, development and management in 
the North Eastern States so that tangible results could be achieved o n the ground water front in 
the near future.  They desired to be apprised of further progress made in this regard.  
 
55. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"On ground water assessment & development aspects, the activities in the Nort h East 
have been planned as per the available manpower, available drilling rigs and related 
infrastructures.  As per EFC during XII Plan, Aquifer mapping has been proposed for 
15,827 sq. km. out of 8.89 lakh sq. km. in North Eastern Region including Sikkim  due to 
limited priority areas." 
 
56. The Committee note that the Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) is entrusted 
with scientific and technical studies for ground water assessment, development and 
management in the North East region. On being informed by th e Ministry that upto 
December 2012, CGWB could spend only Rs. 6.49 crore against the budgetary provision 
of Rs. 30 crore for undertaking these activities in the North East, the Committee had 
desired the Ministry and CGWB to intensify measures in this regar d so that tangible 
results could be achieved.  The Committee observe that as per EFC, during XII Plan, 
Aquifer Mapping has been proposed for 15,827 sq. km. area out of 8.89 lakh sq. km. area 
in North Eastern Region including Sikkim due to limited priority areas. 
57. The Committee feel that the Ministry/CGWB has not taken seriously their view 
about the need to intensify measures for ground water assessment, development and 
management in the North Eastern States and reiterate that efforts in this regard shoul d 

 
44 
 
be toned up.  The Committee would also desire the Ministry to furnish, year -wise, details 
of utilization of funds for assessment, development and management of ground water in 
the North East Region of the country till date. 
 
Q. Proposed Dams on Brahmaputra River by China 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6.44) 
 
58. The Committee note that the Government informed the Parliament on 4 March, 2013 
that three more hydropower projects on the mainstream of the Brahmaputra river in the Tibet 
Autonomous Region had been ap proved for implementation by the Chinese authority.  
Dispelling the concern of the Committee about the likely adverse impact due to the proposed 
dams on the flow volume of water of Brahmaputra river, the Ministry has stated that since these 
projects are co nsidered to be Run of the River (RoR) hydroelectric projects, any significant 
change on the quantity of flow of water of Brahmaputra river is not expected. The Committee 
have also been informed that India has conveyed its views and concerns to the Chinese 
authorities including at the highest levels of the Government of the People's Republic of China 
urging China to ensure that the interest of downstream States is not harmed by any activities in 
upstream areas. The Government also further informed that it is  keeping a constant watch on 
all developments in the region bearing on India's interest and taking necessary measures to 
protect them while at the same time admitting that the flow volume of Brahmaputra river using 
satellite imageries is not presently bein g monitored.   Mindful of the paramount need for 
ensuring the flow volume of the Brahmaputra river for the economic sustainability of entire 

 
45 
 
North East region, the Committee hope that Government would spare no efforts for achieving 
the same. The Committee therefore urge the Government to intensify its vigil on the proposed 
activity of China on the Brahmaputra river.  The Committee would like to be apprised of further 
development in the matter. 
59. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"Government of India is utilizing all the latest technologies available to monitor the flow 
volume of Brahmaputra river regularly. Besides, the Government of India keeps a 
constant watch on all developments in China having bearing on India’s interest and 
takes necessary measures to protect them." 
 
60. The Committee notice that all the latest available technologies are being used to 
monitor the flow volume of Brahmaputra river. However, the Ministry, has not 
specifically mentioned the various techniques being  adopted for monitoring the same. 
The Committee are of the view that modern scientific techniques such as remote 
sensing should be widely used to keep a constant vigil on the activities being taken up 
on the upstream of Brahmaputra river, to avert any nega tive impact on the interests of 
downstream States. They would like to be apprised of the measures being taken in this 
regard. 
R. Optimum Utilisation of Brahmaputra Water 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6.45) 
61. The Committee observed that substantial water of Br ahmaputra river flowed in the Bay 
of Bengal as it could not be stored due to lack of reservoirs. The Committee noted that the 
approved Master Plan of Brahmaputra Main Stem had identified storage reservoirs on all major 
tributaries with multiple benefits. T hese Projects, on implementation, would utilise the water of 

 
46 
 
Brahmaputra to a large extent and accordingly contribute significantly in economic prosperity of 
the region in particular.  The Committee recommended the Ministry to prepare a detailed 
execution plan for construction of storage reservoirs on the all major tributaries of Brahmaputra 
river as had been identified by the Brahmaputra Board and to ensure its completion in a fixed 
time frame so that optimal usage of Brahmaputra River water could bring pr osperity in the 
North Eastern Region.  The Committee also desired the Ministry to explore the possibility of 
utilization of Brahmaputra water in other areas of the country through ‘River Linking Projects’.  
62. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"An important common recommendation of main stem and sub -basin Master Plans of 
Brahmaputra and Barak river system, formulated by Brahmaputra Board is 
development of a storage projects in the upper reaches. Brahmaputra Board has been 
making req uests to riparian States of Brahmaputra and Barak river system for 
undertaking implementation of recommendations of Master Plans on priority basis. 
Brahmaputra Board is conducting workshop on implementation of recommendations of 
Master Plans in all the North Eastern States. 
 
Utilization of surplus water of Brahmaputra river in other water deficient region through 
interlinking is being examined by National Water Development Authority." 
 
63. The Committee note that Brahmaputra Board has formulated Master Plan s for 
Brahmaputra main stem and sub -basin and Barak river system.  In these plans, there is 
a common recommendation for development of storage projects in the upper reaches of 
these rivers.  The Board has been making constant efforts with riparian States t o 
implement the recommendations of Master Plans on priority.  Further National Water 
Development Authority (NWDA) is examining the issue of interlinking to make available 
surplus water of Brahmaputra for water deficient region.  However, from the replies i t is 

 
47 
 
not clear that whether the Ministry has prepared any detailed execution plan to 
construct/develop reservoirs in a time bound manner as recommended by the 
Committee.  They would, therefore, reiterate that keeping in view the multiple benefits of 
storage reservoirs, the work of their construction must be carried out on priority basis in 
a time bound manner and a detailed execution plan must be accordingly prepared.  The 
Committee would like to know the progress in this regard at the earliest. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 

 
48 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No.1.41) 
 
 The Committee observe that water is a scarce natural resource and the Ministry of 
Water Resources is responsible for overall management of  water in the country.  The total 
Budget Estimates (BE) of the Ministry for the year 2013 -14 is Rs.2102.65 crore comprising 
Plan allocation of Rs.1512 crore and Non -Plan allocation of Rs.590.65 crore.  The Committee’s 
examination of the budgetary proposals of the Ministry reveals that there is a marginal increase 
of only 1.7  per cent  in the allocation for current financial year over the BE of previous year 
2012-13 while there was an increase of 65.49  per cent in the BE of year 2012 -13 over the BE 
of 2011-12.  This marginal increase too is to meet the expenses towards increase in salary and 
enhanced DA of the employees and not for any additional expenditure in Plan section.  
Surprisingly, the plan allocation of Rs.1512 crore for 2013 -14 is exactly at the level of BE of the 
previous year 2012 -13 which indicates that the Ministry has not planned for enhanced capital 
outlay during the current financial year.  The reason advanced by the Ministry for static 
allocation in Plan section is that such allocation is done  by the Planning Commission after 
taking into consideration the availability of resources.  The Committee apprehend that static 
allocation in Plan section may affect the important projects in infrastructure development, 
capacity building and sectoral proje cts of water resources and, therefore, urge the Ministry to 
take up the matter with Planning Commission for enhancement of allocation at mid -term 
appraisal stage.  Further, from the analysis of actual expenditure incurred in the Plan section by 

 
49 
 
the Ministry during the past years, the Committee observe that the actual expenditure has been 
consistently much less than the BE projected in the budgetary proposals in the Demand for 
Grants.  Continuous trend of unspent balances in the Plan section during the past years clearly 
demonstrate unrealistic budgetary projections by the Ministry in each subsequent year ignoring 
the vital inputs of actual requirement of funds under different heads of the Plan section.  The 
Committee also feel that huge unspent balances in t he Plan section is a clear indication that 
the Ministry had not been able to mobilize their resources and mechanism to complete the 
works in different projects/schemes in time for which budgetary allocations were demanded in 
the Demand for Grants and thus the desired results in the areas of capacity building, 
infrastructure development, execution of projects and implementation of schemes in time 
remained a distant dream.  The Committee express their displeasure over this trend and 
recommend that every effor t should be made for realistic projection of budgetary proposals 
under different heads in the Plan section taking into account not only the past trend of 
expenditure but also all other factors affecting the actual disbursement of funds under different 
heads which would not only avoid unutilisation of substantial funds but also help completion of 
projects in time.  The Committee hope that the budgetary allocations under Plan section of the 
grant will be fully utilized by the Ministry at least during the year  2013-14 with vigorous 
monitoring and even disbursement of funds throughout the year.   
 
 
 

 
50 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR) is preparing a scheme wise work plan to 
facilitate the monitoring of budgetary expenditure as well as adhere to time schedules 
stipulated for expenditure. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.1.42) 
 
 The Committee observe that the total budget allocation for 2012 -13 was Rs.2067.60 
crore which was substantially reduced by Rs. 831.15 crore to the level of Rs.1236.45 cro re at 
RE stage.  According to the Ministry, the reason for this reduction at RE stage was due to non -
approval of EFC (Expenditure Finance Committee) in respect of the new plan schemes and 
new components in the ongoing scheme.  The Committee are not convinc ed with the 
explanation given by the Ministry for substantial reduction of Budget Estimates (BE) at RE 
stage as it reflects that the Ministry was either too unrealistic while making budgetary 
projections or too idle to make all out efforts to persuade the authorities for obtaining all 
requisite approvals in time for completion of the projects for which budgetary allocations were 
initially made and thus it is a serious reflection on the functioning of the Ministry.  The 
Committee feel that the Ministry, in e ither case, has to revamp its budget making processes 
and fine-tune its style of functioning so that the budgetary projections are made on realistic and 
sound considerations and the funds allocated are fully utilized during the year.  The Committee 
desire the Ministry to initiate necessary steps in this regard and also to ensure that at least now 
the matter should be processed with all seriousness to obtain EFC approval well in time in 

 
51 
 
respect of all projects where such approvals are necessary.  The Committ ee would like to be 
apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
MoWR is pursuing with the Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance in respect of 
approval of EFCs. This is also being monitored periodically in the MoWR. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 6 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.1.43) 
 
 Committee’s examination further reveals that the Ministry of Finance has issued 
instructions to be complied with by all Ministries / D epartments for avoiding March rush in 
expenditure.  The Committee observe that half yearly review of physical and financial progress 
regarding review of expenditure performance is being carried out by the Planning Commission 
and that regular meetings with Senior Officers of the Ministry and concerned organizations are 
being held by the Secretary (WR) in the matter.  The Committee desire that the frequency of 
such meetings should be increased so that the better outcome is achieved in this regard and 
also eve n flow of expenditure is maintained throughout the year.    The Committee, while 
emphasizing that the expenditure should be incurred strictly in conformity with the instructions 
of the Ministry of Finance, would urge the Ministry to streamline its procedur e to achieve the 
desired results in this regard.   
 

 
52 
 
Reply of the Government 
All the PAO’s have reminded the DDO’s/CDDO’s under their control for not preferring 
the bills collectively in the end of the financial year to maintain the expenditure ceiling in 
compliance of the guidelines of Ministry of Finance. A close watch on budget vs expenditure is 
being kept with the help of COMPACT programmer in the PAO’s. Reconciliation with the 
DDO’s/CDDO’s has been done regularly. Meetings with the concerned DDO’s of th e 
Department are also conducted time to time to avoid rush of Expenditure in the month of 
March.    
Recommendation (Para No.1.44) 
 
The Committee’s examination of the Outcome Budget 2013 -14 of the Ministry reveals 
that this document contains, among other th ings, the performance of the Ministry in different 
areas / projects / schemes during the previous year 2012 -13.  As the name suggests, this 
document is basically meant to indicate the overall performance including results achieved vis -
a-vis the physical an d financial targets set in various areas of the Department during the 
previous year.  The Committee are, therefore, of the opinion that being a document indicating 
the performance of the previous year, it would be appropriate to correctly title it by indic ating 
the previous year in its title instead of the current year, e.g., Outcome Budget 2012 -13 with 
reference to the budgetary proposals of the year 2013 -14. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry, should take necessary step, if necessary, i n consultation with the 
Ministry of Finance to title this document appropriately in future to avoid any misunderstanding.  
 

 
53 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Finance has been requested to take necessary action in this regard.  
Recommendation (Para No.1.45) 
 
 The Committee further observe that the “Outcome Budget” document of the Ministry 
contains only sketchy picture and does not contain the full details of the projects.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Outcome Budget, in future, should be  prepared as a 
comprehensive annual document indicating clearly all the works executed, physical, as well as, 
financial targets fixed, results achieved, funds allocated and expenses incurred on each 
Project/Scheme of the Ministry during the year. 
Reply of the Government 
Necessary action will be taken at the time of preparation of Outcome Budget 2014-15 
and subsequent Outcome Budget. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.1.46) 
 
 The Committee observe that a newly named scheme called ‘River Basin Management 
(RBM)’ has bee n formulated by merging two new ongoing schemes, namely, River Basin 
Organisation (RBO) and Investigation of Water Resources Development Scheme.  The 
Committee’s examination of the budgetary proposals reveals that budgetary provision for 
Rs.200.00 crore ha s been made for the River Basin Management Scheme for the year 2013 -
14.  The budget estimate for 2012 -13 had also been kept at Rs.200.00 crore which was, 

 
54 
 
however, subsequently reduced to Rs.134.08 crore at RE stage  and the actual expenditure till 
December, 2012 was only Rs.109.22 crore.  The reasons behind reduction of Budget allocation 
at RE stage by Rs.65.92 crore, as stated by the Ministry, was the pendency of approval of 
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC), Ministry of Finance in respect of the plan sc heme with 
new components in the ongoing schemes.  The Committee are pained to note that the 
reduction of allocation at RE stage in 2012 -13 under this head has occurred due to pendency 
of approval of EFC.  The Committee feel that it reflects the slackness o n the part of the Ministry 
with regard to execution of important water projects of the country which could not be 
undertaken only because some formalities were not completed in time.  The Committee are of 
the considered view that the Ministry should have p ursued the matter more vigorously with the 
concerned authorities for seeking requisite approvals in time which could have resulted in 
timely start / completion of the projects as well as full utilisation of the funds.  The Committee 
desire that sincere eff orts be made by the Ministry for getting requisite approvals from the 
concerned authorities in time in the year 2013 -14 and also furnish the full details in this regard 
to the Committee.  
Reply of the Government 
EFC memo for RBM Plan Scheme amounting to Rs . 1389.19 crore was prepared and 
circulated in Jun, 2012 to concerned Ministries for their views/comments.  EFC meeting to 
consider the aforesaid proposal was held on 9 th April, 2013 and M/o Finance sent its 
observation, vide its UO No. 10(2)/PF-II/2012/M/o Finance/Deptt. of Expenditure dated 9th April, 
2013, and requested MoWR to revise the EFC proposal.  Therefore, the EFC proposal has 

 
55 
 
been revised by MoWR in light of the observations conveyed by M/o Finance, vide their letter 
dated 9 th April, 2013.   The  revised proposal of EFC on River Basin Management, a Plan 
Scheme of MoWR, having a financial outlay of Rs 1026.08 crore consisting of two components 
i.e. Brahmaputra Board and IWRD Scheme has been processed for consideration by EFC. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.1.47) 
 
 The Committee observe that the Ministry of Water Resources had set up a Committee 
under the Chairmanship of Justice T.S. Doabia to study the activities required for optimal 
development of a river basin and changes required in the existing River Boards Act, 1956 for 
achievement of the same and the report was submitted in this regard on 06.11.2012.   As 
informed, the consultation with the State Governments on the said Report is being initiated.  
The Committee would like to be apprised of the detail s of the Doabia Committee Report and 
also urge the Ministry to speedily complete the process of consultation with the State 
Governments on the subject with a view to implementing the recommendations given in the 
Report at the earliest so that the issues an d problems related to water basin management and 
development could be addressed in a result-oriented manner in a fixed time frame.   
Reply of the Government 
 The broad recommendations in the report submitted by Justice Doabia Committee to 
Ministry of Water Resources for Amendment of the River Board Act, 1956 are as follows: 
 The committee proposes establishment of River Basin Authority for regulation and 
development of water of an inter-state river basin or any specified part thereof and further 

 
56 
 
makes it clea r that different Authorities shall be established for different inter -state river 
basin. It also proposes provision for space for creation of a separate River Basin 
Authority for a sub- basin within an inter-State river basin. 
 The report also proposes a tw o-tier structure for a River Basin Authority. Every River 
Basin Authority shall have to consist of an upper layer being a Governing Council and a 
lower layer being the Executive Board charged with the technical and implementation 
powers for the Council dec isions to succeed. The Governing Council has extensive 
membership and representation including Chief Ministers of the co -basin States, The 
Minister in charge of Water Resources, One Member of Parliament, One Member of the 
State Legislature, Two representat ives of District Panchayat, the Chief Secretary to the 
State Government, One representative from the Water User Associations, One 
representative from the Urban Local Bodies / Municipalities and least five experts 
including eminent citizens. Likewise the Ex ecutive Board has also been given an 
extensive membership base under the Bill. 
 A legal foundation for a River Basin Master Plan for inter –State river basins can help 
achieve the protection, improvement and sustainable use of the water environment 
across the basin. Such a river basin master plan can be the singular guidance tool and 
basis for the River Basin Authorities to perform their powers and functions under the Act.  
 The formulation and implementation of the river basin master plan can potentially make  
all water use and land uses in the inter -State basin compatible with the principles of 
integrated river basin management. 

 
57 
 
 It also provides that a River Basin Authority shall ensure that a River Basin Master Plan 
is produced for the inter -state river basin under its jurisdiction. It further makes clear that 
the River Basin Master Plan shall be coordinated with the plans for national economic 
and social development, the general plans for land use and general urban plans and 
plans for environmental protection , and at the same time the needs of various regions 
and industries shall be taken into consideration. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No.9 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.1.48) 
 
 The Committee observe that restructuring of Central Water Commission has been 
proposed to expand its activities in the field and reorient the setup at Headquarters to address 
the emerging challenges in the water sector such as, need to address the likely impact of 
climate change, need for holisti c planning and development of water resources considering 
river basin as a unit; and effective co -ordination among planners at one hand and stakeholders 
at the other.  The Committee, in their 14 th Report on Demands for Grants (2012 -13), had 
recommended for the restructuring of Central Water Commission (CWC) to be accomplished 
within XII Plan period as stipulated.  The Committee have been informed that the proposal for 
restructuring of CWC is under process of approval and would be implemented during XII Plan .   
The Committee hope that the changes proposed in the restructured CWC will address the 
issues in a more comprehensive and integrated manner and the new set  up will effectively deal 
with the activities related to water resources development & management,  data collection, 

 
58 
 
preparation of integrated basin plans, techno -economic appraisal of water resources projects, 
looking after water management and flood management aspects, dam safety monitoring and 
inter-State issues, etc.  The Committee hope that all the  processes and formalities involved in 
the restructuring of CWC will be completed by the Ministry at the earliest and a new revamped 
set up of CWC will come into existence very soon which would become a catalyst for effective 
and efficient management of river basin and water resources.  
Reply of the Government 
The proposal of Restructuring of CWC was kept as one of the components in the River 
Basin Management in the Plan Scheme of Ministry. EFC meeting to consider the aforesaid 
proposal was held on 9 th April, 2013 and M/o Finance sent its observation, vide its UO No. 
10(2)/PF-II/2012/M/o Finance/Department of Expenditure dated 9 th April, 2013 wherein it has 
been decided that the same should be deleted from the EFC proposal and same may be dealt 
separately.  The proposal of restructuring of CWC is currently under consideration in DoPT and 
Ministry of Finance.  
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.1.49) 
 
 The Committee observe that irrigation is one of the six components for development of 
rural infrastructure under Bharat Nirman.  The irrigation component of Bharat Nirman aimed at 
creation of irrigation potential of 10 million hectare (Mha.) during four years i.e. from 2005-06 to 
2008-09.  The target for achieving this objectives was proposed to be met through completion 

 
59 
 
of ongoing Major and Medium Irrigation projects, Extension, Renovation and Modernization 
(ERM) of Major and Medium Irrigation projects, surface water minor Irrigation projects and 
ground water minor Irrigation projects.  Emphasis was also laid on repair, renovation and 
restoration of water bodies.  The Committee’s examination of year -wise achievements vis-à-vis 
the targets fixed reveals that actual irrigation potential created c onsistently lagged behind the 
targets set in each year during 2005 -06 to 2008 -09.  The actual achievement under Bharat 
Nirman was only 1.69 Mha. against the target of 1.90 Mha. during 2005 -06.   The figures in 
respect of the years 2006 -07, 2007-08, 2008-09 are 1.96 Mha. against 2.40 Mha., 1.73 Mha. 
against 2.85 Mha., and 1.93 Mha. against 2.85 Mha. respectively.   The total irrigation potential 
created from  2005 -06 to 2008 -09 was 7.31 Mha. against the target of 10.00 Mha. leaving a 
shortfall of 2.69 Mha. d uring the period.   Taking a serious view of the consistently less 
achievement than the target fixed in each year from the year 2005 -06 to 2008 -09, the 
Committee recommend the Ministry to evaluate the scheme to find out the reasons for such 
shortfall so th at these findings could be used by the Ministry for formulation of better policies 
and effective execution of other projects in future.  The Committee also desire to know the total 
expenditure incurred on Bharat Nirman from its inception and the response r eceived from the 
States about project-wise gap between the actual irrigation potential created and the target set 
for each year.   
Reply of the Government 
Projects under Bharat Nirman are executed by the State Governments. Ministry is 
providing Central Ass istance under Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP), 

 
60 
 
Command Area Development & Water Management (CAD&WM) and Repair, Renovation & 
Rehabilitation (RRR) of Irrigation projects to the State Governments.  In addition, the State 
Governments are utili zing their own resources as well for the execution of water resources 
projects aimed at achievement of Irrigation Potential. The central Assistance released by the 
Ministry to the State Governments under Bharat Nirman in respect of the above said schemes 
since inception are as under; 
Rs in crore 
Year AIBP CAD&WM RRR 
From 2005-06 to 2012-13 53646.5167 2707.8386 852.289 
 
 Also the individual states Governments are pursued to furnish the specific reason, if 
any, for the non -achievement of creation of irrigat ion potential and also they are being insisted 
to stick on to the set targets. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.1.50) 
 The Committee observe that the Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP) was 
launched in 1996 -97 to provide loan assistance to the States to help them complete some of 
the incomplete major/medium Irrigation projects which were in an advanced stage of 
completion with a view to creating additional irrigation pote ntial in the country.  A Budgetary 
allocation of Rs.14,242.00 crore was made by the Ministry of Finance for AIBP for  2012 -13.   
The Committee has been informed that budgetary allocation for AIBP for the year 2013 -14 has 
been kept at Rs.16,580 crore.  The Committee observe that outlay for AIBP during XI Plan was 

 
61 
 
fixed at Rs.39,850 crore out of which the actual Plan expenditure was Rs.32,610.61 crore and 
the XII Plan outlay for AIBP has been fixed at Rs.47,050 crore.    The Committee note that as 
per the gui delines, a comprehensive physical and financial monitoring of Major and Medium 
projects is to be carried out by CWC/MoWR and Ministry of Statistic and Programme 
Implementation.  The Committee were informed that CWC had already carried out physical and 
financial monitoring of Major and Medium Projects as per AIBP guidelines since 1996 -97 but 
there may be some shortfall towards the number of visits depending upon the availability of 
funds. The Committee reiterate the necessity of comprehensive physical and fi nancial 
monitoring of the projects under AIBP and urge the Ministry to use latest techniques including 
remote sensing to monitor the progress of work.  The Committee desire that the Ministry should 
keep a strict vigil on fund utilization by the States on A IBP projects and rigorously insist on 
timely submission of Utilisation Certificates (UCs) on funds released for AIBP Projects as 
prescribed in the relevant guidelines in order to ensure that funds allocated for the Scheme are 
optimally utilised by the Stat es narrowing the gap between the targets set and result achieved 
and also between the actual expenditure vis-à-vis Plan outlay during XII Plan.   
 
Reply of the Government 
The outlay finalised by this Ministry for 2013 -14 is Rs.10,000 crore for AIBP includi ng 
National Projects.  It is mentioned that outlay of Rs.16,580 crore for 2013 -14 also includes 
allocation of 840 crore for RRR of Water Bodies, Rs 2,800 crore for CAD and Rs.1 ,900 crore 
for Flood Management Programme (FMP) and Rs.1040 crore for Ground Water Scheme. 

 
62 
 
 The observations of the Committee for comprehensive physical and financial progress 
and monitoring of the projects under AIBP using latest techniques like remote sensing is noted 
for compliance.  However, Ministry has already taken up monitorin g of 103 projects in two 
phases through NRSC.  Ministry is strictly insisting on timely submission of Utilisation 
Certificates of funds released for AIBP projects as per relevant guidelines and next installment 
is released based on submitted Utilisation Ce rtificates only.  As far as planned allocation is 
concerned, State Governments are being sensitized continuously for timely submission of 
projects and thereupon timely release of funds to State Governments.  The scrutiny and 
release procedure is also being  simplified.  The AIBP scheme is under restructuring in the XII 
Plan so as to streamline the procedures involved in release of central assistance to the States.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.1.52) 
 
 The Committee observe that the Planning Commission allocated R s.6235 crore for 
RRR which was much less than Rs.30,000 crore proposed by the Ministry.  The reason for 
such substantially reduced allocation is stated to be the resource crunch and the overall cut in 
the Budget by the Union Government.  The Ministry has, however, informed the Committee that 
considering the performance of States under the scheme of RRR, the Planning Commission 
will be approached for higher allocation under RRR during mid -term appraisal of the Scheme to 
be carried out by Planning Commission.   The Committee observe that Repair, Renovation and 
Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies is a critically important area and substantial reduction in the 
Budgetary allocation will adversely affect the different activities under this scheme.  The 

 
63 
 
Committee, the refore, desire the Ministry to persuade the Planning Commission with a well -
conceived proposal for enhancement of allocation under RRR.   
 
Reply of the Government 
The scheme depends on the performance of the states.  This Ministry will approach the 
Planning Commission for the appraisal based on the performance of the States regarding RRR 
of Water Bodies Schemes for enhanced allocation for the scheme.  Also, the States will be 
requested to take up the work of water bodies on fast track basis. 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 18 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.1.53) 
 
 The Committee’s examination has revealed that outstanding Utilisation Certificate in 
respect of institutions and autonomous bodies as on 31.12.2012 were 305 with the amount 
involved Rs.26181.22 lakh.  The Committee were apprised that  monitoring of pending 
Utilisation Certificates was being done by the Ministry by organising periodical review meetings 
with SMDs/institutions and other grantees.  The Committee h ad recommended in their 8th 
Report on Demand for Grants   (2011 -12) to the Ministry to consider the feasibility of imposing 
some penalties on the authorities showing lackadiasical approach towards fund management 
and utilisation and also to keep strict vig il on the implementation of scheme and timely 
submission of UCs by way of inspection, periodic reviews, etc.  The Committee take serious 
view of the pendency of large number of Utilisation Certificates and reitérate their 
recommendation for obtaining UCs f rom the concerned organisations/departments with 

 
64 
 
constant monitoring and also exploring the desirability of imposing penalties on defaulters.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.     
 
 
Reply of the Government 
All the  grantee institutions/Autonomous bodies have been informed about the strict 
adherence to the provisions of GFR for emphasizing the production of UCs for further release 
of Grant in Aid. PAOs are also watching the receipt of UCs at the time of release of Gr ant in Aid 
and no grants are being released without getting the UCs for the grant released in previous 
year. 
As regards the UCs of state Government the concerned Wings are keeping in touch 
with the state governments for reconciliation and providing of UCs.  Frequent meetings with 
concerned Wings are also organized for expediting the UCs from the state governments.  
Release of Central assistance to the State Governments is made based on the submission of 
UCs. 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 21 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.57) 
 The Committee observe that Irrigation projects with a Cultivable Command Area (CCA) 
between 2000 hectares and 10000 hectares are classified as Medium Irrigation projects and 
those irrigation pr ojects with CCA of more than 10000 hectares are classified as Major 
Irrigation projects.  The planning, formulation and execution of all Major and Medium Irrigation 
(MMI) are carried out by the concerned State Governments and the required funds are 

 
65 
 
allocated out of their State Plan. The Ministry of Water Resources provides technical know -how 
to the State Governments through its subsidiary organizations and statutory bodies like Central 
Water Commission (CWC), Central Soil and Materials Research Station (CSM RS), Central 
Water and Power Research Station (CWPRS), National Water Development Agency (NWDA) 
etc.  The Committee’s examination of the budgetary proposals reveals that the budgetary 
allocation in Plan section for 2012 -13 was Rs.773.19 crore and which was  reduced to 
Rs.206.82 crore at RE stage. The budget allocation (Plan) for 2013 -14 has been kept at 
Rs.643.53 crore.   The Committee are unhappy to note that the  reason for reduction at BE 
2012-13 has been stated to be the curtailment of amount by the Mini stry of Finance due to low 
expenditure upto September, 2012 on account of non approval of EFC.  The Committee are 
pained to observe that it was sheer failure of the Ministry to get approval of EFC in time in such 
important areas which ultimately resulted i n curtailment of funds.  Surprisingly, the Ministry has 
denied any adverse impact on schemes and projects of the Ministry due to reduced allocation 
at RE stage.  The Committee need to be explained as to how all the activities for which 
budgetary projections of Rs.773.19 crore were made at BE stage could be completed by the 
Ministry with the reduced allocation of Rs.206.82 crore.   The Committee further observe that 
reduction of allocation at RE stage in respect of MMI projects shows poor monitoring and 
control and lack of effective pre -planning and, therefore, recommend the Ministry to strictly 
assess the requirements of all projects/schemes before projecting the budgetary requirements 
at BE stage and also minutely monitor the flow of expenditure throughout the year with a well 
defined systematic monitoring mechanism for effective utilization of the allocated funds.  The 

 
66 
 
Committee expect that the allocation made for 2013 -14 will be utilized fully by the Ministry by 
constant monitoring and control.   
Reply of the Government 
The monitoring of the expenditure incurred under the various schemes is monitored in 
the Ministry at senior levels on regular basis.  All efforts are being taken by the Ministry for the 
timely approval of EFCs to void the curtailment of expenditure in the RE stage. 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 24 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.58) 
 
 The Committee observe that under Command Area Development and Water 
Management (CAD&WM) programme, financial assistan ce is being provided to the State 
Governments on 50:50 basis for construction activities and 75:25 basis for carrying out training 
programmes for field functionaries/farmers, monitoring, evaluation, adaptive trials and 
demonstrations. The Committee note that initially 60 Major and Medium Irrigation projects were 
taken up under the then CAD programme covering CCA of about 15.00 million hectares and as 
of now 211 projects have been completed and 150 projects are ongoing.  An area of 20.149 
million hectares ha ve been covered since inception of the Scheme till March, 2012.  The 
physical target set during the XI Plan has been achieved but the performance during the 2012 -
13 is likely to be adversely affected due to lack of Cabinet approval of continuation of the 
Scheme.  The Committee appreciate the performance and the results achieved in CAD&WM 

 
67 
 
programme and urge the Ministry to take up the matter expeditiously for getting Cabinet 
approval to avoid any adverse impact on the programme.  With regard to the effective  
monitoring and evaluation, the Committee would recommend the Ministry to use latest 
technologies such as mobile tracking, GIS techniques, online web based monitoring, etc. to 
achieve the desired result.   
Reply of the Government 
An area of 0.30 Million he ctares (Mha) (tentative) has been covered under CADWM 
programme during the year 2012 -13, against an average of about 0.4 Mha. per annum.  
Cabinet approval of continuation of the scheme is underway.   
 Web based monitoring system has already been introduced  for monitoring of CAD&WM 
programme.  Mobile tracking and GIS technique are also proposed to be explored. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.59) 
 
 The Committee note that the Government approved the Scheme of Development of 
Water Resources Information System (DWRI S) in June, 2008 for implementation during the XI 
Plan with a total outlay of Rs.234.50 crore.  The objective of the Scheme is to develop a water 
resources information system and make it fully operational at the earliest.  The Committee 
observe that a MoU for development of digital database and web enabled water resources 
information system had been signed between CWC and ISRO in 2008 -09.  The website 
www.india-wris.nrsc.gov.in was launched on 07.12.2010 and t he second version was launched 
on 22.03.2012. The Committee have been informed that full version with complete database of 
the project is likely to be launched by October, 2013.  The Committee while appreciating the 

 
68 
 
efforts made for creating such a compreh ensive databank, recommend that the availability of 
vital information in the databank should be popularized through electronic and print media to 
make the public aware of existence of such database so that the inputs available in the 
database could be gain fully utilised by all concerned.  The Committee also recommend for 
realistic budgetary planning for this project so that neither the activities are held up due to lack 
of funds nor additional funds are unnecessarily locked in the project.  The Committee al so 
desire that monitoring of glacial lakes / water bodies started on the basis of the report 
submitted by NRSC on the “Inventory of Glacial Lakes/Water Bodies in the Himalayan Region 
of Indian River Basins” should be effectively continued and analysed for its beneficial use in the 
programmes/objectives to be undertaken in future.    
 
Reply of the Government 
For the purposes of popularizing the availability of vital information in the databank it 
has already been planned under the scheme to organize the Stat e wise workshops to create 
awareness among the stake holders as well as the public at large for full utilization of the 
available database. No additional funds are required at any stage for these activities. 
The Report on “Inventory of Glacial Lakes/Water Bodies in the Himalayan Region of 
Indian River Basins” has already been submitted by NRSC covering Indus, Ganga and 
Brahmaputra basins. Monitoring of Glacial Lakes/Water Bodies has started thereafter on 
monthly basis during Monsoon period. Monthly reports on “Monitoring of Glacial Lakes/water 
bodies in the Himalayan Region of Indian River Basins” for the months June - October, 2011 
and June- October 2012 have been completed. 

 
69 
 
The proposal for continuing ‘Monitoring of Glacial Lakes/water bodies in the Himalay an 
Region of Indian River Basins’ has been included in EFC Memo of DWRIS for  XII  Plan.  
Appraisal process is now completed. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.60) 
 
The Committee note that collection of hydrological data of various river basins in the 
country is a  pre-requisite for an accurate assessment of water resources, planning of their 
optimum utilization for their comprehensive development of the basins/forecasting flood events 
and for settling inter -State water disputes.  They also note that due to inadequa cy of 
Hydrological Observations (HO) sites/stations, there is need to strengthen the network of HO 
sites as per World Meteorological Organisation (WMO) guidelines.  As informed to the 
Committee, the Ministry is planning to strengthen the network of HO site s by expansion from 
the existing 933 sites to 2850, setting up 917 new sites and upgrading 386 existing sites during 
XII Plan.  The Committee, taking into account the fact that collection of hydrological data is vital 
for accurate assessment of water resou rces and its planning, urge the Ministry to complete the 
process of strengthening the network of Hydrological Observation sites within the scheduled 
timeframe.   
Reply of the Government 
At present CWC is operating a network of 954 hydrological observation stations 
(including 76 exclusive meteorological observation stations) in different river basins of the 
country to collect (i) Water Level (gauge), (ii) Discharge, (iii) Water Quality and (iv) Silt besides 
(v) Selected Meteorological parameters including sn ow observations at 27 key stations. The 

 
70 
 
data being so collected are put in various uses viz. planning and development of water 
resources projects, climate change studies, water availability studies, flood/inflow forecasting 
solving of International & Inter -State issues, Morphological studies, Inland waterway 
development, Reservoir siltation studies, Research related activities, etc. 
The Working Group on “Water Data Base Development and Management” constituted 
by Planning Commission for 12 th Plan has assesse d that present Hydrological observation 
network is insufficient and recommended for strengthening the Hydrological Observation 
Network for achieving above various goals.  
 
Accordingly, the proposal for additional sites as well as up gradation of existing s ites 
has been included in the proposals of DWRIS of EFC for consideration of the EFC.  Appraisal 
process is now completed. 
Recommendation (Para No.2.61) 
 
 The Committee observed that presently a number of agencies are operating Water 
Quality Monitoring net works in the country and there is no uniform procedure for sampling, 
analysis, data storage and reporting.  To address this problem, Water Quality Assessment 
Authority (WQAA) was constituted in May 2001 and Uniform Protocol on Water Quality 
Monitoring (UPWQM) order was notified in 2005.  The UPWQM stipulates that its monitoring 
agencies shall process the analytical data and report the data after validation to the data centre 
at the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) which shall store the data and dissem inate 
through website or electronic mail to various users on demand.  The Committee desire the 
Ministry to ensure that the monitoring agencies and CPCB work in close coordination so that 

 
71 
 
efforts made by them for water quality monitoring in the country prod uces desired results for 
the end users.  Taking into account the fact that the UPWQM is being proposed to be revised 
during 2013 -14, in view of the present pollution aspects/parameters and their distribution in 
surface and ground water, the Committee recom mend the Ministry to keep constant monitoring 
in the matter and ensure speedy completion of revision of UPWQM.  They would like to be 
apprised of action taken in the matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The issues of (i) revision of Uniform Protocol on Water Q uality Monitoring (UPWQM) 
and (ii) sharing of water quality data by various agencies and submission to Central Pollution 
Control Board (CPCB) will be placed before Water Quality Assessment Authority (WQAA).  
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 27 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.63) 
 
 The Committee in their first report on Demand for Grants (2009 -10) had urged the 
Ministry to review the National Water Policy taking into consideration various suggestions given 
by the Stat e Governments and other stakeholders and also eminent climatologists keeping in 
view the looming threat of climate change and the grave scarcity of water in future.  The 
Committee were informed that the National Water Policy 2012 had been adopted by the 
National Water Council on 28.12.2012.  The Committee while appreciating the efforts made by 
the ministry for bringing out the National Water Policy 2012, would recommend that the 

 
72 
 
National Water Policy 2012 should be presented in Parliament so that it could g et a broader 
perspective of dissemination of policy details among lawmakers, academicians, scientists, 
intellectuals and other stakeholders.      
Reply of the Government 
The National Water Policy (2012) and River Basin Atlas of India are being circulated 
amongst all members of the Parliament by the Hon’ble Minister for Water Resources.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 30 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.64) 
 
 The Committee observe that the Ministry of Water Resources has proposed to establish 
National Bureau of Water Use Efficiency (NBWUE) under Section 3 (3) of Environment 
(Protection) Act 1986 which will have the overall responsibility of water use efficiency across 
various sectors, namely, irrigation, drinking water  supply, power generation and industry in the 
whole country.  The NBWUE will function as an autonomous authority under the administrative 
control of MoWR whose proposed activity would include preparation of detailed project reports 
for taking up benchmarki ng and/or demonstrative projects for water use efficiency,  
publicity/promotion of water use efficiency measures, conjunctive use of water, incentivization 
of industries, farmers, local bodies, action plan for coping with flood and baseline studies for 
water use efficiency, etc.  It is also informed that the NBWUE is envisaged to be operational in 
2013-14 subject to approval of EFC. The Committee hope that the National Bureau of Water 

 
73 
 
Use Efficiency will be operationalised in 2013 -14 and will bring qualitat ive changes by bringing 
high degree of efficiency in water use.    
Reply of the Government 
The National Action Plan for Climate Change (NAPCC) had stipulated that the National 
Water Mission should develop a framework to optimize water use by increasing wat er use 
efficiency by 20 per cent through regulatory mechanisms. Efforts are being made to secure the 
approval of EFC of National Water Mission (NWM) and to set up NBWUE under Section 3(3) of 
Environment (Protection) Act 1986 during the financial year 2013 -14for implementation of 
various strategies/goals for improvement in Water Use Efficiency in the areas of irrigation, 
drinking water supply, power generation and industry as per best practices/standards. The 
NBWUE would implement strategies for increasing water use efficiency in general. 
It is stated that the Draft EFC memo for implementation of National Water Mission and 
setting up of National Bureau of Water Use Efficiency (NBWUE) was prepared by the MoWR 
and circulated to various Ministries / Departments of Govt. of India for their comments. After 
receiving the comments from Ministry of Finance and other Ministries the EFC proposal (Rs. 
1390 crore) was forwarded to Planning Commission in the month of July 2012. The proposal 
was sent to MOF on 17.12.2012 af ter incorporating replies to the comments of the Planning 
Commission (PAMD), dated: 14.11.2012. 
As decided in the EFC meeting for (HRD Capacity Building) held on 18.01.2013 under 
the Chairmanship of Secretary Expenditure MoF, National Water Mission compone nt of Rs.100 
crore has been deleted from the current proposal of HRD Capacity Building and incorporated in 
the EFC of NWM. Accordingly the proposal was revised to Rs.1490 crore. As advised by IFD, 

 
74 
 
MoWR the revised EFC was placed before the High level Steer ing Committee Meeting (HLSC) 
and Advisory Board to take the approval of the committee/board before the EFC Memo is sent 
to the Ministry of Finance. 
The High level Steering Committee Meeting held on 22.03.2013 chaired by Secretary 
(WR) agreed in principle t o the proposal for the XII five year plan amounting to Rs.1490 crore. 
Advisory Board chaired by Hon’ble Minister (Water Resources) has also approved the proposal 
in its meeting held on 02.05.2013. The appraisal process of the scheme National Water 
Mission is now completed.  
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 33 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.65) 
 
 The Committee note that as per the National Register of Large Dams maintained by 
Central Water Commission, presently there are 5125 large dams in India and out of these 4728 
are completed and 397 dams are under construction.  About 10.11  per cent of these dams are 
said to be more than 50 years old and 2.66  per cent are more than 100 years old.  Surprisingly, 
the Ministry has no specific scheme to ensure renovation of large dams over 50/100 years old, 
as all dams carry a certain risk to its failure due to unpredicatable nature of floods, seismicity 
and gradual deterioration due to normal wear and tear and weathering overtime.   The 
Committee were apprised that while the responsibility for maintenance of dams lies with dam 
owners, a high level Committee namely, National Committee on Dam Safety has been 
constituted by the Government of India, which advises the State Governments and  Dam 

 
75 
 
Owners on various aspects of dam maintenance and safety.  The Committee desire that apart 
from the power to issue advisory to State Governments and Dam Owners on various aspects of 
dam maintenance and safety, the National Committee on Dam Safety be en trusted with 
adequate authority and supervisory power including regular monitoring of large dams which are 
over 50 year old or have been assessed to be carrying the risk of failure.  The Committee are 
further surprised that  no study has been conducted to q uantify the risk of dams in India.  The 
Committee are of the firm opinion that a proper assessment about the safety standards of 
dams in the country is a pre -requisite before undertaking any activities on dam improvement, 
maintenance and safety.  The Commi ttee, therefore, urge the Ministry to undertake this task at 
the earliest to ensure that the dams in the country are protected from possible dam break or 
failure.   
Reply of the Government 
Govt. of India through National Committee on Dam Safety (NCDS) has taken a number 
of steps to improve the safety status of dams in the country including those which are 50/100 
years old.  Govt. of India is also in the process of enacting legislation on dam safety to provide 
for proper surveillance, inspection, operation a nd maintenance of all large dams to ensure their 
safe functioning, and thereby protect persons and property against risks associated with dam 
failures. The said legislation intends to empower the NCDS with authority to monitor all dam 
safety related activi ties in the country and frame appropriate regulations in this regard. The 
proposed Dam Safety Bill also mandates carrying out risk assessment studies for each Large 
Dam by the concerned dam owner. The Bill also provides for periodical comprehensive dam 

 
76 
 
safety evaluation, institutional strengthening and preparation of emergency action plan for each 
large dam in the country.  
Recommendation (Para No.2.66) 
 
 The Committee further observe that a six year project called 'Dam Rehabilitation and 
Improvement Project' (DRIP) was launched in 2011 with the assistance from the World Bank.  
The Project became effective from 18 April, 2012 and would be  implemented in 4 States, 
namely, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and Tamil Nadu.  About 223 large dams in the four 
participating States requiring substantial need for rehabilitation and improvements would be 
included in the Project.   The Committee observe that the total estimated cost of DRIP is 
Rs.2,100.00 crore out of which Rs.1,487.23 crore is for the four participating St ates and 
Rs.132.00 crore for Central Water Commission and a provision of Rs.480.24 crore has been 
kept as an unallocated resources for similar work for additional States which may join the 
project later stage.   The Committee expect that dam safety measure s will be taken up 
seriously by all concerned and the National Commission on Dam Safety will play an effective 
role in this regard.  Further, the Committee note that on the basis of the observation and 
recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committe e on Water Resources on The Dam 
Safety Bill, 2010 tabled before the Parliament on 30 August, 2010, a modified Dam Safety Bill 
is ready and will be placed before the Parliament shortly.   The Committee desire that all 
pending issues/concerns raised by the S tates be addressed and, thereafter, the Dam Safety 
Bill may be introduced in the Parliament for enactment expeditiously. 
 

 
77 
 
Reply of the Government 
In the Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement Project (DRIP) already under 
implementation, in addition to the exis ting four states, five new states/organisations are 
expected to join DRIP shortly as per details below and as agreed by the World Bank: 
State/Entity No. of Dams Proposed 
under DRIP 
Allocated Share 
(Rs. crore) 
DVC  1 34.13 
Karnataka  27 276.75 
Punjab  12 27.38 
UJVNL  5 46.74 
Uttar Pradesh  1 95 
Total  46 480 
 
The implementation of DRIP is being monitored by a Technical Committee under 
Chairmanship of Member (D&R), CWC. A National Level Steering Committee (NLSC) has also 
been constituted for overall guidance of the project implementation. 
 Action has been initiated by the MoWR for expeditious enactment of the modified Dam 
Safety Bill.  
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 36 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.26) 
 The Committee note that the Scheme of Ground Water Management and Regulation 
(GWM&R) was launched with the merger of some X Plan schemes at a cost of Rs.460.00 crore 
for implementation by the Central Ground Water Board during XI Plan.  The Committee’s 
examination reveals that a budgetary allocation of Rs.318.00 crore was made for 2012 -13 
which was reduced to Rs.180.00 crore at Revised estimate stage. The Committee are 

 
78 
 
surprised to find that the reason for such reduction in this Head also is the non -completion of 
EFC appraisal.  While expressing their displeasure for failure of the Ministry in getting the EFC 
appraisal completed in time, the Committee recommend that all necessary steps must be 
initiated by the Ministry immediately to get such appraisals completed i n time to avoid 
recurrence of such events in future.  The Committee further observe that the budgetary 
allocation for BE 2013 -14 has been kept at Rs.275.00 crore with the expectation that early 
approval of EFC proposal would be made by Ministry of Finance.  The Committee hope that the 
Ministry will make its endeavour to get the EFC appraisal completed early so that all activities 
are undertaken in time and funds are also utilized optimally during the year.   
Reply of the Government 
EFC appraisal is now compl eted and Ministry of Water Resources has sought the 
approval of CCEA for the scheme Ground Water Management and Regulation. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.27) 
 The Committee observe that Aquifer Mapping is one programme among the major 
activities proposed duri ng XII Plan under Ground Water Management and Regulation.  The 
outcome of the Aquifer Mapping would include identification of areas feasible for ground water 
development, ground water regulation, rainwater harvesting and artificial recharge, yield 
potential, depth & design of wells, water logged areas and quality problem areas etc.  9.25 lakh 
sq. km. area has been proposed to be covered under Aquifer Mapping in XII Plan period which 
will involve activities like data collection, compilation, data gap analysi s and preparation of 
aquifer maps and management plan.  Aquifer mapping with latest scientific inputs is to be taken 

 
79 
 
up on 1:50000 scale and the mappable area of about 23.4 lakh sq. km. in the country is likely to 
be completed by the end of XIII Plan. The aquifer-wise water management plan, likely to be 
completed by the end of XIII Plan period, will incorporate participatory approach in which the 
end-users like farmers, various other stakeholders will be involved in the programme.  The 
Committee hope that t he target fixed for the Acquifer Mapping will be successfully achieved by 
the Ministry and its benefit will reach to all the stakeholders.  The results of such survey, State -
wise, must be given wide publicity for the benefit of the people. 
Reply of the Government 
The target of Aquifer Mapping has been revised as 8.89 lakh sq. km. (Earlier 9.25 lakh 
sq. km.) in view of reduction in allocation / expenditure in 2012 -13 and reduction of BE in 2013-
14 mainly due to non -appraisal of the scheme by the EFC. The Aqu ifer mapping will also 
provide the aquifer management plan to benefit the end users. The aquifer management plans 
are proposed to be implemented through participatory ground water management programme 
with the involvement of community and other stake holde rs. The results of aquifer mapping will 
be given wide publicity for the benefit of people.  
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 42  of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.28) 
 The Committee observe that the Central Ground Wate r Authority (CGWA) has been 
constituted under Section 3(3) of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 to regulate and control 
development and management of ground water resources in the country.  The CGWA is 

 
80 
 
regulating ground water withdrawal through notifi cation of over -exploited/critical areas.  It has 
notified 82 over -exploited/critical areas in the country.  Further, for the enforcement of the 
regulatory directions issued under Section 5 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, 
concerned Deputy Commiss ioners/District Collectors have been authorized to take necessary 
action in case of violation of directives of CGWA in the notified areas.  As informed to 
Committee, the authority had received 60 complaints of violation of its directive in notified areas 
during the last 5 years while 851 violations had been noticed by the enforcement teams 
constituted by Deputy Commissioner of Gurgaon, Haryana and in these cases, action like 
sealing of tube wells, seizure of drilling equipments had been done by the authoriz ed officers.  
The Committee recommend that in view of the trend of alarming depletion of ground water level 
in the country, the CGWA should take vigorous steps for enforcement of regulatory directions 
issued in the matter.   
Reply of the Government 
i) As o n date, total 162 areas have been notified by Central Ground Water Authority in the 
country.  The list is given below:  
 
S. No. STATE/UT NO. OF BLOCKS/MANDALS 
1. Andhra Pradesh 7 
2. Diu 1 
3. Gujarat 4 
4. Haryana 17 
5. Karnataka 22 
6. Madhya Pradesh 7 
7. NCT, Delhi 3 
8. Punducherry UT 1 
9. Punjab 45 
10. Rajasthan 35 

 
81 
 
11. Tamil Nadu 18 
12. Uttar Pradesh 1 
13. West  Bengal 1 
 Total 162 
 
ii) For enforcement of regulatory directions, Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) in 
exercise of powers under  section 4 of Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 has 
appointed Officer -in-Charge of revenue district (District Collectors/ Deputy 
Commissioners/ District Magistrates) as Authorized Officers to take up various 
regulatory measures in Notified Areas. CGWA has  further issued directions to the 
Authorized Officer(s) under Section 5 of Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 to ensure 
that no person/organization/industry will take any scheme/project in the notified area 
without prior specific approval of the CGWA.  In non-notified areas, CGWA has directed 
all State Pollution Control Boards to setup monitoring mechanism to verify actual 
requirement and withdrawal of ground water including implementation of artificial 
recharge measures for the Industries to whom No Object ion Certificate (NOC) for 
ground water withdrawal has been accorded.  In addition, random inspections by the 
Central Ground Water Board are carried out to check that the industries/projects using 
ground water are complying with the conditions laid down in the NOC granted to such 
industries by CGWA. NOC is renewed after checking of compliance of conditions in 
NOC issued. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.29) 
 The Committee observe that the Central Ground Water Board (CGWB),under the 
Ministry of Water Resources is a  multi-disciplinary, scientific organisation whose mandate is 
mainly related to sustainable development and management of India’s ground water resources.   
The Committee’s examination of the budgetary proposals reveals that  a budgetary allocation 
of Rs.275.00 crore in the Plan section for Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) for 2013 -14 

 
82 
 
has been made which is less than the BE of Rs.318 crore of the previous year 2012 -13.  The 
Committee would like to know the reasons for reduction of budgetary allocation in Pl an section 
for the current financial year compared to BE of previous year 2012 -13 and also the details of 
the projects / schemes, which could be adversely affected due to the reduced allocation.  The 
assessment of groundwater resources is carried out joint ly by Central Ground Water Board and 
respective State governments.  The Committee recommend that after making State -wise actual 
assessment of availability of groundwater, the Central Ground Water Board should frame a 
broad parameter on scientific lines whi ch could earmark the usable quantity of groundwater by 
each stakeholders.  The Committee have been informed that a proposal prepared for 
restructuring and strengthening the CGWB is under benchmarking study  and the final 
restructuring proposal is likely to be submitted by the end of July, 2013.  The Committee expect 
that the restructuring process of Central Ground Water Board will be completed within the 
prescribed time limit which will in turn strengthen the Board to carry out its activities in a more 
efficient and effective manner.    
Reply of the Government 
Against the BE allocation of Rs. 318 crore in the financial year 2012 -13 only Rs. 118.23 
crore could be utilized due to non finalization of EFC Memo. Budgetary allocation for the 
financial year 2013 -14 has been kept as Rs.275  crore.  The activities to be affected due to 
reduced BE in 2013 -14: Data Gap Analysis will be carried out in 2.0 lakh sq. km. from earlier 
target of 6.25 lakh sq. km. and Data Generation will be carried out in 0.54 lakh sq. km. from 
earlier target of 0.90 lakh sq. km for Aquifer mapping Programme. The activities of Participatory 

 
83 
 
ground Water management programme would also get delayed. The provision for procurement 
of equipments has been reduced from Rs. 93 crore to Rs 86 crore. 
In reference to ground water resource assessment as per the prevailing practice, 
dynamic ground water resources are assessed jointly by CGWB and State Ground Water 
Departments following the GEC -97 methodology. The assessment units are block/taluka/ 
mandal/firka (village)/watershed etc. Following the GEC -97 methodology, allocation of ground 
water for various sectors/stakeholders such as domestic, industrial and irrigation uses are 
made on the basis of parameters such as population, dependency on ground water an d the 
existing draft for irrigation etc.  
As regard to restructuring process of Central Ground Water Board (CGWB), the revised 
proposal for restructuring of CGWB is under process. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para Nos. 45 & 46 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4.29) 
 The Committee observe that the floods occur in some parts of the country from the 
rivers flowing from Nepal and the rivers flowing from Bhutan also have substantial impact on 
the region.  As informed by the Minis try, the Government of India is funding the maintenance of 
flood protections works of Kosi and Gandak projects on Nepal side which are undertaken every 
year by Bihar and UP and it has been decided to set up a Pancheshwar Development Authority 
to sort out t he outstanding bilateral issues related to Pancheshwar Multi -purpose Project and 
undertake its construction.  The field investigations for Sapta Kosi High Dam are in progress.  

 
84 
 
With regard to Bhutan, the Committee have been apprised that a Joint Group of E xperts 
between the two countries is looking after flood management aspect related to the waters 
coming from Bhutan in the downstream areas.  The Committee observe that the mechanism to 
contain the probability of floods from the rivers flowing from Nepal an d Bhutan need to be 
strengthened by taking all necessary measures in this regard.  The Committee would like to 
know the further steps taken by the Ministry in the matter.   
 
Reply of the Government 
Besides, the continuous endeavor being made by MoWR about construction of large 
storages in Nepal through bilateral platform, the hydro -meteorological data of 57 stations 
located in Nepal is received in India; which is utilized in flood forecasting on Indian side. 
Similarly, the hydrological data of 35 stations l ocated in Bhutan is received in India and it is 
used in flood forecasting. The Government of India is also providing central assistance to the 
Ganga and Brahmaputra -Basin states under Flood Management Programme which has 
enhanced the capability of these st ates in management of floods. In addition to above, the 
MoWR has been continuously pursuing implementation of Flood Plain Zoning Bill in these 
states and also invited suggestions of all states for effective implementation of Flood Plain 
Zoning Bill. 
Recommendation (Para No.4.30) 
 
 The Committee observe that the Government of India launched a Flood Management 
Programme (FMP) under State Sector of Central Plan during XI Plan for providing Central 
Assistance (CA) to the State Governments for taking up works re lated to river management, 

 
85 
 
flood control, anti-erosion, drainage development, flood proofing works, restoration of damaged 
flood management works and anti-sea erosion. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Water Resources has proposed continuation of Flo od Management 
Programme during XII Plan with an outlay of Rs. 10,000 crore and with same funding pattern 
as in XI Plan. MoWR is processing the above scheme for approval of Cabinet.  Rs.1900 crore 
has been earmarked for Flood Management Programme during 201 3-14 by the Ministry of 
Finance.  
Recommendation (Para No.4.31) 
 
 The Committee observe that during XI Plan, a total of 420 works were approved out of 
which 252 works had been completed till March, 2012 and central assistance of Rs.3,566 crore 
(including Rs..89.79 crore for spilled over works of X Plan) was released. The completed works 
resulted in restoration of 17.004 lakh hectare of the old and 2.589 lakh hectare of the new flood 
affected area.  Further , central assistance of Rs.138.21 crore had been rel eased during 2012 -
13 till 20.03.2013 for on -going works only.  The Committee desire that all activities under flood 
management programmes should be taken with right earnest and adequate budgetary 
provisions should be made in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Water Resources has proposed continuation of Flood Management 
Programme during XII Plan with an outlay of Rs. 10,000 crore and with same funding pattern 

 
86 
 
as in XI Plan. MoWR is processing the above scheme for approval of Cabinet.  Rs. 1900 crore 
has been earmarked for Flood Management Programme during 2013 -14 by the Ministry of 
Finance.  
Recommendation (Para No.4.32) 
 
 The Committee observe that for implementation of the Flood Plain Zoning approach in 
the country, a model draft bill for  flood plain zoning legislation was circulated by the Union 
Government in 1975 to all the States.   However, only the States of Manipur and Rajasthan 
have enacted the legislation but the demarcation of flood zones/enforcement is yet to be done.   
The Committee are pleased to note that the Government of India have included a provision in 
the Flood Management Programme for according priority to the projects of those States which 
have implement Flood Plain Zoning Act.  The Committee appreciate the initiative t aken by the 
Government for according priority to the projects of those States who implemented the Flood 
Plain Zoning Bill.  The Committee, however, desire the Government to vigorously pursue the 
matter with all other States to fall in line and enact the necessary legislation at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The MoWR has requested all the States/ UTs for implementation of Flood Plain Zoning 
Bill and also, in case, the States feel to have some provisions revised, the states have been 
requested to sen d their views in order to ensure that concerns of States are duly addressed 
and flood Plain Zoning is done by states at the earliest.  
 

 
87 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4.33) 
 
 The Committee observe that a Scheme titled 'Project for Reconstruction, Remodelling 
and Improvement of Embankments in Sunderban and adjoining areas in the districts of North 
and South Parganas damaged by severe cyclone AILA' formulated by Irrigation and Waterways 
Directorate (I&WD) Government of West Bengal, was cleared at an estimated cost o f 
Rs.5,032.00 crore by the Ganga Flood Control Commission on 21.01.2010 and approved by 
the Advisory Committee of the Ministry.  First Phase of the Scheme with an estimated cost of 
Rs.1,339.50 crore has been included for providing Central Assistance under the State Sector 
Scheme 'Flood Management Programme'.  This phase involves acquisition of 5,996 acres of 
land.   As informed by the Ministry, the land acquisition under phase -I has been completed and 
the works have been awarded and commenced in November, 2 012.  The Government of India 
has already released the Central assistance of Rs. 525.75 crore to the Government of West 
Bengal for above project out of which an expenditure of Rs. 370 crore has been reportedly 
incurred.  The Committee appreciate the effort s made for the reconstruction, remodeling and 
improvement of embankment of Sunderbans and adjoining areas and desire the Government 
to continuously monitor the various activities being undertaken under this Project for its timely 
completion with effective results.   
Reply of the Government 
The Ganga Flood Control Commission is regularly monitoring the activities undertaken 
by Govt. of West Bengal under the project for reconstruction, Remodeling and improvement of 

 
88 
 
Embankments in Sundarban and adjoining areas  in the districts of North and South Parganas 
damaged by severe cyclone AILA.  
Recommendation (Para No.5.7) 
 The Committee note that Farakka Barrage Project (FBP) was commissioned in 1975 for 
preservation and maintenance of the Kolkata Port and increasing the navigation depth of the 
Bhagirathi-Hoogly waterway.  The main objective of the Project is operation and maintenance 
of Farakka Barrage and associated structures including taking up anti -erosion measures for 
safety of barrage.   A total Budgetary alloca tion of Rs.75.00 crore was made in 2012 -13 which 
was increased to Rs.100.00 crore at RE stage.  The Budgetary allocation for 2013 -14 has been 
kept at Rs.150.00 crore which represents an increase of 50  per cent for the current financial 
year as compared to BE of 2012 -13.  Explaining the reason for increasing the Plan allocation 
by 50 per cent for 2013-14, the Ministry stated that the requirement of funds in 2012 -13 was 
Rs.125.00 crore against which only Rs.75.00 crore was allocated in BE which was not at all  
sufficient for making payment of works executed with the approval of Ministry of Finance.  
Hence, liability of more than Rs.40.00 crore created during 2012 -13 also needs to be cleared 
during 2013 -14.  Further, the gates of Farakka Barrage being more than 40 years old, their 
replacement is essential for the safety of the barrage. The work of repair of gates has been 
undertaken and the same is in progress.  The Committee also note that the evaluation of anti - 
erosion works was carried out by Farakka Barrage Project during X Plan through D.J. 
Research & Consultancy Pvt. Ltd.  (DJRC), Bhubaneswar which concluded that (a) Anti -
Erosion works of Farakka Barrage Project have been largely successful in reducing erosion (b) 

 
89 
 
Socio-economic impact of anti -erosion works  has been positive (c) Technology used is 
appropriate and cost effective; and (d) Better planning/scheduling and adequate number of site 
supervisors personnel needs to be taken up to upkeep for future interventions.  The Farakka 
Barrage Project is an exclu sively Central Govt. Project. As informed to the Committee, the 
project is instrumental in meeting out the international obligation of sharing of water in Ganga 
and also Ministry of Shipping and Transport installation is dependent on water in the feeder 
canal in addition to various power projects, drinking water schemes etc.  The Committee desire 
that the Ministry should take necessary steps to ensure full utilization of the increased budget 
allocation of Rs.150.00 crore made for the Farakka Barrage Project  during 2013 -14.  The 
Committee appreciate the concern of the Ministry that due to old age, the gates of Farakka 
Barrage need urgent replacement for which works are in progress and that the Project is 
instrumental in meeting out the international obligatio n of sharing of water in Ganga and also 
that the Ministry of Shipping and Transport installation is dependent on water in the feeder 
canal in addition to various power projects, drinking water schemes etc.  The Committee, 
therefore, would like the Ministry  to carry out necessary works pertaining to maintenance, 
repair and replacement of the gates and other structures of the Farakka Barrage so as to 
increase the usefulness and longevity of the Farakka Barrage.  They would also expect speedy 
completion of eva luation of works carried out by the Farakka Barrage Project during XI Plan 
which is stated to be under progress. 
 
 

 
90 
 
Reply of the Government 
MoWR has planned to carryout necessary works pertaining to maintenance, repair & 
replacement of the gates and other s tructures of Farakka Barrage so as to increase the 
usefulness and longevity of the Farakka Barrage and works are progressing as per Plan. This 
will also ensure full utilization of the increased budget allocation of Rs. 150 crore during 2013 -
14. 
 The perfor mance evaluation of works carried out by FBP during XI Plan is under 
progress and efforts are being made for its speedy completion in coordinated manner in 
MoWR. 
Recommendation (Para No.6.39) 
 
6.39 The Committee observe that DPRs for 5 Multipurpose project s in the North -Eastern 
Region, viz. Siang Single Stage, Subansiri Single Stage in Arunachal Pradesh, Tipaimukh in 
Manipur and Mizoram, Pagladiya in Assam and Bairabi in Mizoram have been completed and 
these projects have been handed over to various organis ations/agencies/State Governments 
for execution.  The Committee desire for close monitoring of these projects to ensure its 
completion within the stipulated period of time.  The Committee would also like to be apprised 
of the status of the projects after a scertaining the same from the State Governments / 
executing agencies.   
Reply of the Government 
 Brahmaputra Board has been regularly requesting the agencies entrusted with the 
implementation of above multipurpose projects except Pagladiya Dam Project in A ssam, for 

 
91 
 
submission of status on execution of the project. Status on development of above projects, as 
provided by the Developers is tabulated below :- 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Project River Implementing 
Agency 
Status 
1 Subansiri 
Lower 
Subansiri  NHPC Limited 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Activities under the project are suspended 
since 16 th December 2011 on account of 
objection of Krishak Mukti Sangram Samiti 
(KMSS) and 26 other groups. The 
agitation is also supported by all Assam 
Students Union (AASU). 
2 Subansiri 
Middle 
The project was handed over to M/s Jindal 
Power Limited on 04.02.2011. 
3 Subansiri 
Upper 
MoP’s decision for handing over of 
Subansiri Upper to respective IPP is 
awaited. 
4 Siang Middle 
(Siyom) 
 
 
Siang 
The project has been handed over to M/s 
Reliance Energy Limited (REL) on 
24.04.2008. 
5 Siang Lower The project has been handed over to M/s 
Jai Prakash Associates Ltd. (JAL) on 
31.03.2009. 
6 Siang Upper Government of Arunachal Pradesh allotted 
the project to M/s NTPC in February 2009 
for preparation of PFR.  
7 Dibang 
Multipurpose 
Project 
Dibang Process is on to obtain environment 
clearance and to conduct public hearing. 
8 Tipaimukh 
Multipurpose 
Project 
Barak  The project has not only International 
implication with Bangladesh, it  also 

 
92 
 
requires Forest/ Environment clearance. 
9 Pagladiya 
Dam Project 
Pagladiya Brahmaputra 
Board 
Constitution of project is held up due to 
land acquisition problem and Zirat Survey.   
10 Bhairbi Hydel 
Project 
Dhales 
wari 
Govt. of 
Mizoram 
The Government of Mizoram has allotted 
the Bhairbi dam Project for execution to 
M/S Sikaria Power limited Kolkata on 
10.08.2012, it has been intimated by 
Government of Mizoram that the Bhairbi 
Project will be completed within 7 years. 
    
Recommendation (Para No.6.40) 
 
 The Committee observe tha t the Pagladiya Dam Project (Assam) across Pagladiya 
River at Thalkuchi in Baska District, Assam was cleared by the Central Government for 
implementation by Brahmaputra Board.  The project was taken up by the Board in January 
2001 at an estimated cost of R s.542.90 crore.  The Committee were apprised that due to 
various factors, the work of the dam has been held up and the project was dropped from the XII 
Plan.  The Committee also note that the Brahmaputra Board has been making efforts at 
exploring alternati ve site but without success. The Committee  urge that the Ministry to 
continue consultation with the Government of Assam, Brahmaputra Board and Bodoland 
Territorial Council to remove the bottlenecks and find out workable solution so that the project 
could  see the light of the day in the foreseeable future.  
Reply of the Government 
Progress in Pagladiya Dam Project, Assam is constrained for want of acquisition and 
transfer of balance lands of 6554 ha. by Govt. of Assam to Brahmaputra Board. There have 

 
93 
 
been concerted efforts by Govt. of Assam and Brahmaputra Board for acquisition and transfer 
of additional lands needed for development of Pagladiya Dam Project to Brahmaputra Board.  
The Chief Secretary, Government of Assam took a meeting with Senior Officials o f 
Brahmaputra Board, Principal Secretary, Bodoland Territorial Council and Secretary, Water 
Resources Department, Government of Assam on 23.10.2009 to discuss the issue of 
acquisition and transfer of balance lands for development of Pagladiya Dam Project, to  
Brahmaputra Board. As per decision taken in the above meeting, an alternate site was 
proposed near Indo -Bhutan Border near Chowki. Reservoir submergence area with the dam 
site at the proposed location extends well inside Bhutan Territory, affecting the  local population 
of Bhutan. It was felt that due to adverse impacts in Bhutan, Brahmaputra Board was advised 
to explore possibility for shifting of dam axis in the upstream with a view to minimize loss of 
fertile agricultural lands and immovable propertie s falling in the reservoir area, confining the 
submergence within Indian Territory. Outcomes of such studies undertaken by Brahmaputra 
Board are asunder:- 
1. Bhabar Zone comes under the reservoir area. Bhabar Zone is geologically unsuitable 
and susceptible to water leakage. Reservoir water loss due to leakage is considered high. 
2. Population density upto 10 km upstream of Thalkuchi is relatively less. With shifting of 
dam axis upstream, even to the extent to 10 km, reduction in number of project affected 
persons and their immovable properties is not tangible. 
3. Shifting dam axis beyond 10 km in upstream to Thalkuchi penetrates international 
border with Bhutan. 

 
94 
 
4. Shifting dam axis upstream from Thalkuchi drastically reduces envisaged benefits from 
the project. 
 The above exercise proved futile. No suitable substitute in the upstream for the present 
dam axis could be identified.  
Regular requests were made by Brahmaputra Board to Water Resources Department, 
Government of Assam for conducting Zirat Survey, ac quiring and transferring remaining land 
needed for commission of Pagladiya Dam Project. 
With no immediate solution in sight, Brahmaputra Board in its meeting held on 2 nd June 
2011 decided to close all field formatives, set up under Pagladiya Dam Project an d to relocate 
all regular employees under the Project. 
In the 55 th meeting of Brahmaputra Board held at Itanagar on 16 th June 2012, 
Brahmaputra Board   was advised to arrange a meeting with Water Resources Department, 
Government of Assam urgently and decid e the issue by the 31 st July 2012. Government of 
Assam took up the issue vigorously with Bodoland Territorial Council, Kokrajhar. 
Finally, Brahmaputra Board has received a letter dated 22 nd November, 2012 from 
Secretary, Bodoland Territorial Council, Kokrajhar that Bodoland Territorial Council has favored 
for initiating mitigating measures for control of flood on three upstream tributaries - Pagladiya, 
Motonga and Kalanadi in precedence for construction of Dam at Thalkuchi. Further, Bodoland 
Territorial Council has also observed that construction of Pagladiya Dam Project in Bodoland 
Territorial Council will not benefit to Bodoland Territorial Council but to Nalbari District. 
Water Resources Department, Government of Assam, on receipt of above 
communication from Bodoland Territorial Council requested Brahmaputra Board to undertake 

 
95 
 
studies from mitigation measures for control of flood on three stream - Pagladiya, Motonga and 
Kalanadi and formulate a proposal. 
The issue was also discussed in the 56 th meeting of Br ahmaputra Board held on 22nd 
March 2013 at Agartala. In view of development discussed above, participants in the meeting 
were in agreement with the proposal of Brahmaputra Board for return of 956 ha of lands to 
Government of Assam and withdrawal of personn el engaged for protection of 956 ha of lands 
from unauthorized encroachment. The representative of Water Resources Department, 
Government of Assam has intimated that a meeting with Bodoland Territorial Council would be 
organized to sort out the issues shortly.   
 
Recommendation (Para No.6.41) 
 
 The Committee observed that the Ministry of Water Resources, on acceptance of the 
request of the Government of Assam had assigned protection of Majuli Island from flood and 
erosion to the Brahmaputra Board.  The Boar d initiated measures for protection since January 
2004 and target date of the completion of Phase -II and Phase -III works is March, 2014.  The 
Committee are happy to know that due to the regular implementation of anti -erosion/bank 
protection measures, the total area of Majuli island has increased to 522.73 sq.km in February, 
2013 compared to 502 sq.km in 2004.  The total expenditure incurred till March, 2013 works 
out to Rs.129.41 crore.  The Committee would recommend the Ministry to continue to keep a 
vigil on the protection works being carried out in Majuli Island and ensure that the target set for 
completion of Phase-II and III works is achieved in March, 2014.  The Committee would like to 
be informed of the progress made in this regard. 

 
96 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
  All works, envisaged under Phase-II and Phase-III of scheme titled 'Protection of Majuli 
Island from flood and erosion', are in progress and are expected to be completed within one 
year. The Physical Progress and expenditure incurred up to June, 2 013 was 62.16 per cent 
and Rs.76.27 crore respectively. The Standing Committee of Experts on protection of Majuli 
Island from flood and erosion constituted by MoWR under Chairmanship of Member (River 
Management), Central Water Commission, New Delhi is moni toring the execution of works of 
Majuli Island.  
Recommendation (Para No.6.43) 
 
 The Committee note that the Ministry proposes to constitute a basin level authority 
named North Eastern Water Resources Authority (NEWRA) for overall development of Water 
Resources in the North Eastern Region.  The Authority will be a developmental and 
promotional body for comprehensive water resources development which will accelerate the 
economic development of North Eastern Region.  The Committee also note that the Authority  
will be an autonomous entity and coordinate the activities of various Central, State and other 
concerned organisations operating in Water Resources and related sectors.  As regards  the 
delay in constitution of NEWRA, the Committee have been informed that  the delay is due to the 
fact that consensus has not been arrived amongst the States of  North Eastern Region due to 
reservations of the State of Arunachal Pradesh for which the Ministry has taken up some 
measures.  The Committee observe that NEWRA once be comes operational, will created a 
great prospect for economic transformation of the entire North Eastern Region especially in 

 
97 
 
Water Resources related spheres viz. effective flood control, electricity generation, better 
irrigation facility, and infrastructu re development.    The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Ministry should persuade Arunachal Pradesh for arriving at early consensus in the matter to 
speed up the process of constitution of NEWRA including formulation of guidelines for this 
Authority.   
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Water Resources is constantly persuading Arunachal Pradesh for arriving at 
a consensus, to speed up the process of constitution of NEWRA including formulation of 
guidelines for this Authority. 
Recommendation (Para No.6.44) 
 
 The Committee note that the Government informed the Parliament on 4 March, 2013 
that three more hydropower projects on the mainstream of the Brahmaputra river in the Tibet 
Autonomous Region had been approved for implementation by the Chinese autho rity.  
Dispelling the concern of the Committee about the likely adverse impact due to the proposed 
dams on the flow volume of water of Brahmaputra river, the Ministry has stated that since these 
projects are considered to be Run of the River (RoR) hydroele ctric projects, any significant 
change on the quantity of flow of water of Brahmaputra river is not expected. The Committee 
have also been informed that India has conveyed its views and concerns to the Chinese 
authorities including at the highest levels of  the Government of the People's Republic of China 
urging China to ensure that the interest of downstream States is not harmed by any activities in 
upstream areas. The Government also further informed that it is keeping a constant watch on 

 
98 
 
all developments in the region bearing on India's interest and taking necessary measures to 
protect them while at the same time admitting that the flow volume of Brahmaputra river using 
satellite imageries is not presently being monitored.   Mindful of the paramount need f or 
ensuring the flow volume of the Brahmaputra river for the economic sustainability of entire 
North East region, the Committee hope that Government would spare no efforts for achieving 
the same. The Committee therefore urge the Government to intensify its  vigil on the proposed 
activity of China on the Brahmaputra river.  The Committee would like to be apprised of further 
development in the matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Government of India is utilizing all the latest technologies available to monitor the  flow 
volume of Brahmaputra River regularly. Besides that, Government of India keeps a constant 
watch on all developments in China having bearing on India’s interest and takes necessary 
measures to protect them. 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 60 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6.45) 
 The Committee observe that substantial water of Brahmaputra river flows in the Bay of 
Bengal as it could not be stored due to lack of reservoirs. The Committee note that the 
approved Master Plan of Brahmaputra Main Stem has identified storage reservoirs on all major 
tributaries with multiple benefits. These Projects, on implementation, will utilise the water of 
Brahmaputra to a large extent and accordingly contribute significantly in econo mic prosperity of 

 
99 
 
the region in particular.  The Committee recommend the Ministry to prepare a detailed 
execution plan for construction of storage reservoirs on the all major tributaries of Brahmaputra 
river as have been identified by the Brahmaputra Board  and ensure its completion in a fixed 
time frame so that optimal usage of Brahmaputra River water could bring prosperity in the 
North Eastern Region.  The Committee also desire the Ministry to explore the possibility of 
utilization of Brahmaputra water in other areas of the country through ‘River Linking Projects’. 
Reply of the Government 
An important common recommendation of main stem and Sub -basin Master Plans of 
Brahmaputra and Barak river system, formulated by Brahmaputra Board is development of a 
storage projects in the upper reaches. Brahmaputra Board has been making requests to 
riparian states of Brahmaputra and Barak river system for undertaking implementation of 
recommendations of Master Plans on priority basis. Brahmaputra Board is conducting 
workshop on implementation of recommendations of Master Plans in all the North Eastern 
States. 
 Utilization of surplus water of Brahmaputra river in other water deficient region through 
interlinking is being examined by National Water Development Authority. 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 63 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 

 
100 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.62) 
 
 The Committee observe d that the Union Cabinet on 06 April, 2011 approved the 
National Water Mission (NWM) document.  The main objective of the National Water Mission is 
conservation of water minimizing wastage and encouraging its more equitable distribution both 
across and wit hin States through integrated water resources development and management.  
The Committee was surprised to note that BE of Rs.200.00 crore allocated for National Water 
Mission in 2012-13 was reduced to the bare minimum of  Rs.0.25 crore at RE stage for the sole 
reason that the EFC for National Water Mission was not approved.  The Committee express 
their serious concern over such state of affairs and trust that at least from now onwards the 
ministry will be vigilant in obtaining the necessary approvals in tim e.  The Committee observe 
that the allocation for BE 2013 -14 has been kept at Rs.110.00 crore.  The Committee trust that 
the budgetary allocations for 2013 -14 will be fully utilized by the Ministry by getting all requisite 
approvals in time which would fac ilitate achieving the goals of National Water Mission 
successfully.   
Reply of the Government 
 In this regard it is stated that the Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR) has set up the 
National Water Mission (NWM).  For the XII plan, an EFC Memo on NWM has be en prepared.  
On the advice of Ministry of Finance, the memorandum was revised, the revised EFC was 

 
101 
 
placed before the High Level Steering Committee (HLSC) at its meeting held on 22.03.2013 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary, MoWR having representatives of  various Central/State 
Governments.  The HLSC had agreed to the EFC proposal for XII Plan.  Subsequently the EFC 
proposal was placed before the Advisory Board in its meeting held on 02.05.2013 under the 
chairmanship of Minister  (WR) which endorsed the prop osal.  Now the appraisal process for 
the scheme National Water Mission is completed. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4.28) 
 
 According to National Water Policy 2002, out of 40 million hectare of the flood prone 
area in the country, on an average floods affect an area around 7.5 million hectare per year.  
The Committee observe that during the year 2011, floods affected an area of 1.895 million 
hectare, a population of 15.973 million, caused damage to crops worth Rs.1,393.847 crore,  
damaged houses worth Rs.410.475 crore and damaged the public utilities worth Rs.6,053.570 
crore besides causing loss of 1761 human lives and 35,982 cattle.  The Committee also note 
that the heavy losses due to floods have been reported in the basins of Brahmaputra, Ganga, 
Mahanadi and Kr ishna rivers.  A Committee under the chairman of Ganga Flood Control 
Commission (GFCC) in 2006 had identified 39 districts in five States as flood prone but basin -
wise identification was not made by this Committee.  The Ministry had in July 2012 constitute d 
an Expert Committee headed by Chairman, CWC for scientific assessment of flood prone area 
in the country and the work is stated to be in progress.  The Committee further note that the 
National Water Policy 2002 had envisaged that there should a Master Pl an for flood control and 
management of each flood prone basin.  Accordingly, Brahmaputra Board has prepared 57 

 
102 
 
Master Plans for NE States and GFCC has prepared 23 Master Plans for Ganga basin States 
but surprisingly similar Master Plans have not been prepa red in respect of Mahanadi and 
Krishna basins which are also flood prone basins of the country.  The Committee desire the 
Ministry to undertake works for preparing Master Plans in the remaining basins also at the 
earliest and inform them about the progress  made in this regard.   Taking cognizance of the 
fact that floods cause havoc leading to loss of precious human lives and properties, the 
Committee feel that it is imperative that multipronged strategy including flood forecasting and 
flood management progr amme is devised to protect the life and property in vulnerable areas.  
The Committee would like to know the steps taken by the Ministry in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
The activity of preparing master Plans in remaining basins other than Ganga Bas in and 
NE-Region is proposed to be undertaken on re -structuring of CWC. However, CWC is being 
asked to Plan the work in phased manner. 
In order to have a multipronged strategy including flood forecasting and flood 
management programme, the MoWR has taken following steps:  
(i) Flood Management Programme in XII Plan has been proposed to complete ongoing 
/spill over works of XI plan, taking up new works in critical areas and also to undertake projects 
for catchment area treatment to reduce run-off water and silt-load.  
(ii) CWC has already installed Automatic Data Acquisition System (DAS) at 440 stations 
besides setting up of three Earth Receiving Stations (ERS) at Jaipur, Burla and New Delhi; and 

 
103 
 
establishment of 21 modeling centres for computerised data analy sis and flood forecast 
formulation using State –of-the-art mathematical models. During XII Plan, CWC has planned to 
complete modernizing its remaining network and set up Automatic DAS at 240 new reservoirs. 
(iii) MoWR has in XII Plan, proposed to get river /bathymetric survey done and Digital 
Elevation Maps prepared for 2,00,000 sq/Km. of flood affected area in UP, Bihar and West 
Bengal. This activity would enable CWC to undertake the task of inundation forecasting in 
consultation and close co-ordination with these states. 
 

 
104 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.25) 
 The Committee observe that Minor Irrigation (MI) schemes are those ground and 
surface water schemes which have a Cultivable Command Area (CCA) up to 2000 hectares 
individually.  The budgetary allocations for Minor Irrigation at BE stage for the year 2013 -14 
have been kept at Rs.324.02 crore in Plan section and Rs.134.31 crore in non -Plan section.  
The Committee note that the Plan allocation of Rs.384.81 crore for Minor Irrigation during 
2012-13 was reduced to Rs.207.93 crore at RE stage.  The reasons stated by the Ministry for 
this reduction was that all the planned activities under t he Scheme could not be taken up and 
the appraisal of EFC, Ministry of Finance had also not been completed.   The Committee 
observe that the fact that non approval of EFC has led to substantial reduction in budgetary 
allocation at RE stage is really deplora ble as it adversely affects many sectoral schemes.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry must take concrete steps at the earliest to 
obviate this problem which affects allocation and utilization of funds in many sectors of water 
resource s chemes/projects. The Committee also desire the Ministry to furnish the detailed 
information indicating the physical targets fixed for creation of irrigation potential under minor 
irrigation for 11 th Plan ending March, 2012 and also the achievements made in  this regard 
during that period.  Considering the relative importance of Minor Irrigation Projects, the 
Committee desire to know the particulars of the schemes and projects with external assistance 
being proposed under minor irrigation during 12th Plan period.   

 
105 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The appraisal process of the scheme Ground Water Management & Regulation is 
complete and the process has started seeking the approval of CCEA.  Steps like advance 
planning, regular monitoring and enhanced delegation of admin istrative & financial powers etc. 
will be taken to avoid reduction in budgetary allocation at RE stage.  
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 39 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4.27) 
The Committee observe that under Flood Control, a Budget allocation of Rs.277.00 
crore was made during 2012-13 which was reduced to Rs.147.25 crore at RE stage.  Citing the 
reason for reduction of allocation at RE stage, the Ministry has informed that the Plan allocation 
was reduced during 2012-13 due to non-taking up of new components of the schemes pending 
their approval.  The Committee are dismayed to see the apathy of the Ministry in getting the 
Scheme approved before seeking financial allocation for 2012 -13.  Surprisingly, the Plan 
allocation in BE 2013 -14 has been increased by Rs.117.45 crore over BE 2012 -13 not on the 
basis of concrete approval of the Scheme beforehand but only on the expectations of 
subsequent approval of the Scheme.  The Committee would like the Ministry to exercise 
judicious and effective pre-budget planning so that unutilisation of funds is avoided in future.  It 
hardly needs any emphasis that timely approval of the Scheme will help execution/completion 
of the projects/Scheme in time.   The Committee observe that Flood Forecasting is a very vital 
input for timely and effective disaster management to save precious human lives, livestocks 

 
106 
 
and property.  The Committee, therefore, desire that all activities under flood forecasting should 
be effectively undertaken by prudent utilization of the allocated funds during the year 2013-14.     
Reply of the Government 
The activity of flood forecasting is performed by Central Water Commission (CWC) 
which has been advised to prepare an implementable work plan for Financial Year 2013-14. 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 49 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6.38) 
 
 The Committee observe that annual floods have brought untold miseries and damages 
in the North Eastern Region (NER) which led to maximum losses to the tune of Rs.753.03 crore 
in Assam (2002), Rs.505.57 crore in Arunachal Pradesh (2004), Rs.210.34 crore in Meghalaya 
(2004), Rs. 51.81 crore in Manipur (1986), Rs.19.30 crore in Mizoram (1997), Rs.19.55 crore in 
Nagaland (1993) and Rs.80.05 crore in Tripura (1993).  The damages caused in terms of 
affected area and population and loss of human lives as furnished by the Ministry are also 
considerable.   In this regard, the Committee note that the Brahmaputra Board was constituted 
in 1980 with the obj ective of planning and integrated implementation of measures for control of 
floods and bank erosion in Brahmaputra and for matters connected therewith.  The efforts of 
Brahmaputra Board resulted in preparation of 57 Master Plans covering main stem of 
Brahmaputra river and Barak, tributaries of Brahmaputra and Barak rivers and Majuli Island out 
of which 49 Master Plans have been circulated among the concerned Water Resources 

 
107 
 
Departments of States and others for implementation of recommendations of Master Pla ns.  
The Committee also note that a total amount of Rs. 234.40 crore has been incurred up -to 
February 2013 on Flood Control and Anti -Erosion Works by the Brahmaputra Board.  The 
Committee observe that there is no uniformity of coverage of period in the data furnished by the 
Ministry regarding flood damage in NE Region and, therefore, the Committee urge the Ministry 
to ensure that the updated year -wise data and information regarding annual floods havoc in 
different States of the North Eastern Region falling under the jurisdiction of Brahmaputra Board 
are compiled and submitted to the Committee.  The Committee also desire that the balance 
works pertaining to 4 Drainage Development Schemes (DDS) - Barbhag, Amjur, Jengrai and 
Jakaichuk should be completed within  a specified timeframe.  The Committee would like the 
Ministry to vigorously pursue with  the Brahmaputra Board for taking up two new erosion 
control schemes namely, protection of Mankachar, Kalair -Alga and Maslabari area for 
controlling erosion of river B rahmaputra both of which are located on international border with 
Bangladesh.  Also noting that the North Eastern Region of the country being in downstream of 
Brahmaputra river, faces a lot of problem, the Committee, therefore, strongly feel that there is 
an urgent need for scientific assessment of the erosion problem and for devising suitable 
mechanism to address the same.  The Committee further urge the Ministry to pursue with the 
States and Brahmaputra Board for taking up construction of storage reservoi rs on Brahmaputra 
river and its tributaries so that amelioration from annual flood and erosion damage may be 
achieved in the North East Region.  The Committee would like to be apprised of further action 
taken on the above points at the earliest. 

 
108 
 
Reply of the Government 
  UUppddaatteedd  yyeeaarr  wwiissee  ddaattaa  aanndd  iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn  oonn  aannnnuuaall  fflloooodd  hhaavvoocc  iinn  ddiiffffeerreenntt  ssttaatteess  ooff  
NNoorrtthh  EEaasstteerrnn  RReeggiioonn  ffaalllliinngg  uunnddeerr  tthhee  jjuurriissddiiccttiioonn  ooff    BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd::  
  
NNiinnee  ssttaatteess  --AArruunnaacchhaall  PPrraaddeesshh,,  AAssssaamm,,  MMaanniippuurr,,  MMeegghhaallaayyaa,,  MMiizzoorraamm,,  NNaaggaallaanndd,,  
TTrriippuurraa  ooff  NNoorrtthh  EEaasstteerrnn  RReeggiioonn  --  SSiikkkkiimm  aanndd  nnoorrtthheerrnn  ppaarrtt  ooff  WWeesstt  BBeennggaall  aarree  ffaalllliinngg  uunnddeerr  tthhee  
jjuurriissddiiccttiioonn  ooff  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd..  PPrreesseennttllyy,,  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd  ddooeess  nnoott  hhaavvee  yyeeaarr  wwiissee  ddaattaa  
aanndd  iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn  oonn  fflloooodd  hhaavvoocc  iinn  rreessppeecctt  ooff  aabboovvee  ssttaatteess  rreeaaddiillyy  aavvaaiillaabbllee  aass  ddeessiirreedd  bbyy  tthhee  
CCoommmmiitttteeee..    
  
  UUnnddeerrttaakkiinngg  bbaallaannccee  wwoorrkkss  bbeelloonnggiinngg  ttoo  44((ffoouurr))  DDrraaiinnaaggee  DDeevveellooppmmeenntt  SScchheemmeess::  
BBoorrbbhhaagg  DDrraaiinnaaggee  DDeevveellooppmmeenntt  SScchheemmee,,  AAmmjjuurr  DDrraaiinnaaggee  DDeevveellooppmmeenntt  SScchheemmee,,  JJeennggrraaii  
DDrraaiinnaaggee  DDeevveellooppmmeenntt  SScchheemmee  aanndd  JJaakkaaiicchhuukk  DDrraaiinnaaggee  DDeevveellooppmmeenntt  SScchheemmee  aarree  ccuurrrreennttllyy  
uunnddeerrwwaayy  iinn  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd..  TThhee  SSttaattuuss  iinn  bbrriieeff  iinn  rreessppeecctt  ooff  aabboovvee  sscchheemmeess  aarree  ffuurrnniisshheedd  
hheerreeuunnddeerr  ––  
  
BBaarrbbhhaagg  DDrraaiinnaaggee  DDeevveellooppmmeenntt  SScchheemmee  
  
CCeennttrraall  WWaatteerr  CCoommmmiissssiioonn  tthhrroouugghh  lleetttteerr  ddaatteedd  1133..0033..22000000  rreeccoommmmeennddeedd  tthhee  sscchheemmee  
ffoorr  RRss..77..2233  ccrroorree  ffoorr  aacccceeppttaannccee  bbyy  ppllaannnniinngg  ccoommmmiissssiioonn..  TThhee  ‘‘AAddmmiinniissttrraattiivvee  AApppprroovvaall  aanndd  
EExxppeennddiittuurree  SSaannccttiioonn’’  ooff  ccoommppeetteenntt  aauutthhoorriittyy  ttoo  tthhee  sscchheemmee  ffoorr  aann  aammoouunntt  ooff  RRss..77..2233  ccrroorree  
wwaass  ccoonnvveeyyeedd  tthhrroouugghh  lleetttteerr  ddaatteedd  1155..0011..0044  bbyy  MMiinniissttrryy  ooff  WWaatteerr  RReessoouurrcceess  ffoorr  eexxeeccuuttiioonn  
dduurriinngg  XX  FFiivvee  YYeeaarr  PPllaann..  HHoowweevveerr  tthhee  pprroovviissiioonn  uunnddeerr  tthhiiss  sscchheemmee  wwaass  bbrroouugghhtt  ddoowwnn  ttoo  RRss..55..00  
ccrroorree  ffoorr  XX  FFiivvee  YYeeaarr  PPllaann  tthhrroouugghh  lleetttteerr  ddaatteedd  0011..0022..22000066  oonn  tthhee  aassssuummppttiioonn  tthhaatt  tthhee  BBaarrbbhhaagg  
DDDDSS  sscchheemmee  wwiillll  ssppiillll  oovveerr  ttoo  XXII  ppllaann..  DDuurriinngg  eexxeeccuuttiioonn,,  tthhee  eessttiimmaattee  wwaass  rreevviisseedd  ttoo  RRss..1111..7700  

 
109 
 
ccrroorree  iinn  FFeebbrruuaarryy  22001100  oonn  aaccccoouunntt  ooff  cchhaannggee  iinn  sslluuiiccee  ddeessiiggnn..    AAggaaiinn,,  oonn  aaccccoouunntt  ooff  ccoosstt  
oovveerrrruunn  aanndd  ttiimmee  oovveerrrruunn  tthhee  eessttiimmaattee  hhaadd  ttoo  bbee  rreevviisseedd  ttoo  RRss..  1144..8800  ccrroorree  iinn  JJuunnee  22001122..    
TThhee  wwoorrkk  bbaassiiccaallllyy  ccoommpprriisseess  ooff  ((aa))  RRaaiissiinngg  aanndd  ssttrreennggtthheenniinngg  ooff  eexxiissttiinngg  eemmbbaannkkmmeenntt  
((bb))  RRee--sseeccttiioonniinngg  aanndd  rree--ggrraaddiinngg  ooff  SSuutthhaajjaann  CChhaannnneell  aanndd  ((cc))  CCoonnssttrruuccttiioonn  ooff  sslluuiiccee  rreegguullaattoorr..  
AA  ttoottaall  eexxppeennddiittuurree  ooff  RRss..55..0066  ccrroorree  iiss  iinnccuurrrreedd  uuppttoo  JJuullyy  22001133..    FFiirrsstt  ttwwoo  ccoommppoonneennttss  ooff  tthhee  
sscchheemmee  aarree  ccoommpplleetteedd..  TThhee  rreemmaaiinniinngg  wwoorrkk  iiss  ccoonnssttrruuccttiioonn  ooff  sslluuiiccee  aanndd  tthhee  pprrooggrreessss  ooff  wwoorrkk  
iiss  77..55  ppeerr  cceenntt  uupp  ttoo  3311sstt  JJuullyy,,  22001133..  
AAmmjjuurr  DDrraaiinnaaggee  DDeevveellooppmmeenntt  SScchheemmee  
  
TTeecchhnnoo--eeccoonnoommiicc  cclleeaarraannccee  ooff  tthhee  sscchheemmee  ffoorr  aann  aammoouunntt  ooff  RRss..1144..1155  ccrroorree  wwaass  
rreecceeiivveedd  iinn  JJaannuuaarryy,,  22000066..  TThhee  eexxeeccuuttiioonn  ooff  AAmmjjuurr  DDDDSS  wwaass  ttaakkeenn  uupp  iinn  tthhee  yyeeaarr  22000066--0077..  OOuutt  
ooff  tthhee  ttwwoo  ccoommppoonneennttss  ((ii..ee..  sslluuiiccee  rreegguullaattoorr  aanndd  eemmbbaannkkmmeenntt)),,  tthhee  wwoorrkk  ffoorr  ‘‘RRaaiissiinngg  aanndd  
SSttrreennggtthheenniinngg’’  ooff  eexxiissttiinngg  eemmbbaannkkmmeenntt  wwaass  ttaakkeenn  uupp  ffiirrsstt..  AA  ttoottaall  ooff  33667755  mm  ooff  RRaaiissiinngg  aanndd  
ssttrreennggtthheenniinngg  ooff  eemmbbaannkkmmeenntt  hhaass  bbeeeenn  ccoommpplleetteedd  oouutt  ooff  55007755mm..  PPrroocceessss  ooff  llaanndd  aaccqquuiissiittiioonn  
ffoorr  ccoonnssttrruuccttiioonn  ooff  nneeww  eemmbbaannkkmmeenntt  ooff  772200mm,,  tthhee  sslluuiiccee  rreegguullaattoorr  aanndd  tthhee  rreemmaaiinniinngg  ppaarrtt  ooff  
‘‘RRaaiissiinngg  aanndd  ssttrreennggtthheenniinngg’’  ooff  11440000mm  ooff  eemmbbaannkkmmeenntt  iiss  ggooiinngg  oonn..  TThhee  CCWWCC  ddeessiiggnn  wwiinngg  hhaass  
ssuubbmmiitttteedd  ppaarrtt  ooff  tthhee  ddeessiiggnn  ddrraawwiinnggss  tthhrroouugghh  lleetttteerr  ddaatteedd  2255tthh  JJuullyy  22001133  aanndd  rreevviisseedd  DDPPRR  iiss  
uunnddeerr  pprreeppaarraattiioonn  bbaasseedd  oonn  tthhee  ddrraawwiinnggss  aanndd  ssppeecciiffiiccaattiioonnss  rreecceeiivveedd  ffrroomm  CCeennttrraall  WWaatteerr  
CCoommmmiissssiioonn..  
AA  ttoottaall  eexxppeennddiittuurree  ooff  RRss..1122..3344  ccrroorree  hhaass  bbeeeenn  iinnccuurrrreedd  ttiillll  JJuullyy  22001133,,  aaggaaiinnsstt  tthhee  
ssaannccttiioonneedd  ccoosstt  ooff  RRss..1144..1155  ccrroorree  aanndd  3333..66  ppeerr  cceenntt  pphhyyssiiccaall  pprrooggrreessss  hhaass  bbeeeenn  aacchhiieevveedd  ttiillll  

 
110 
 
JJuullyy  22001133..  FFuurrtthheerr  pprrooggrreessss  ooff  wwoorrkk  iiss  hheelldd  uupp  oonn  aaccccoouunntt  ooff  ddeellaayy  iinn  ffiinnaalliizzaattiioonn  ooff  llaanndd  
aaccqquuiissiittiioonn  bbyy  SSttaattee  GGoovvtt..  aanndd  ddeellaayy  iinn  rreevviissiioonn  ooff  tthhee  eessttiimmaattee  ffoorr  tthhee  sscchheemmee  bbyy  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  
BBooaarrdd..  
JJeennggrraaii  DDrraaiinnaaggee  DDeevveellooppmmeenntt  SScchheemmee  
  
TTeecchhnnoo--eeccoonnoommiicc  cclleeaarraannccee  ooff  JJeennggrraaii  DDDDSS  wwaass  rreecceeiivveedd  iinn  tthhee  yyeeaarr  11999988..  TThhee  ttwwoo  
ccoommppoonneennttss  ooff  tthhee  sscchheemmee  aarree  ((ii))  RRaaiissiinngg  aanndd  ssttrreennggtthheenniinngg  ooff  eemmbbaannkkmmeenntt  ffoorr  aa  lleennggtthh  ooff  
22660000mm  aanndd  ((iiii))  CCoonnssttrruuccttiioonn  ooff  sslluuiiccee  bbeettwweeeenn  1188tthh  aanndd  1199tthh  kkmm  ooppeenniinngg  ooff  PPGGJJHH  ddyykkee..  TThhee  
pphhyyssiiccaall  pprrooggrreessss  ooff  wwoorrkk  uunnddeerr  JJeennggrraaii  DDDDSS  iiss  2277  ppeerr  cceenntt  aatt  tthhee  ttoottaall  eexxppeennddiittuurree  ooff  RRss..11..0044  
ccrroorree  aaggaaiinnsstt  tthhee  ssaannccttiioonneedd  aammoouunntt  ooff  RRss..11..4499  ccrroorree..  TThhiiss  wwoorrkk  ppeerrttaaiinnss  ttoo  RRaaiissiinngg  aanndd  
ssttrreennggtthheenniinngg  ooff  eemmbbaannkkmmeenntt  ffoorr  aa  lleennggtthh  ooff  22660000mm..    
BBaasseedd  oonn  ddeettaaiilleedd  ddeessiiggnn  ooff  tthhee  sslluuiiccee,,  aa  rreevviisseedd  eessttiimmaattee  aammoouunnttiinngg  ttoo  RRss..55..2233  ccrroorree  
wwaass  ssuubbmmiitttteedd  ttoo  CCWWCC  iinn  MMaarrcchh  22001100..  SSoommee  oobbsseerrvvaattiioonnss  oonn  tthhee  rreevviisseedd  eessttiimmaattee  rraaiisseedd  bbyy  
CCWWCC  hhaavvee  ssuubbsseeqquueennttllyy  bbeeeenn  ccoommpplliieedd  aanndd  tthhee  mmooddiiffiieedd  DDPPRR  wwaass  ssuubbmmiitttteedd  ttoo  CCWWCC  iinn  
MMaarrcchh,,  22001133..  FFuurrtthheerr  oobbsseerrvvaattiioonnss  wweerree  rreecceeiivveedd  ffrroomm  CCWWCC  tthhrroouugghh  lleetttteerr  ddaatteedd  2266..44..22001133..  
TThhee  rreepplliieess  ttoo  tthhoossee  oobbsseerrvvaattiioonnss  hhaavvee  aallssoo  bbeeeenn  ssuubbmmiitttteedd  ttoo  rreeggiioonnaall  OOffffiiccee  ooff  GGuuwwaahhaattii  oonn  
0077..0088..22001133..  TThhee  wwoorrkk  iiss  eexxppeecctteedd  ttoo  bbee  ccoommpplleetteedd  wwiitthhiinn  tthhee  yyeeaarr  ooff  ssaannccttiioonn  ooff  rreevviisseedd  ccoosstt  ..  
JJaakkaaiicchhuukk  DDrraaiinnaaggee  DDeevveellooppmmeenntt  SScchheemmee  
  
CCeennttrraall  WWaatteerr  CCoommmmiissssiioonn  rreeccoommmmeennddeedd  tthhee  sscchheemmee  ffoorr  aann  aammoouunntt  ooff  RRss..  229966  llaakkhh  
tthhrroouugghh  lleetttteerr  ddaatteedd  2211..0077..11999988..  MMiinniissttrryy  ooff  WWaatteerr  RReessoouurrcceess  aaccccoorrddeedd  aapppprroovvaall  ffoorr  aann  aammoouunntt  
RRss..1100  llaakkhh  iinn  XX  FFiivvee  YYeeaarr  PPllaann  ffoorr  uunnddeerrttaakkiinngg  eexxeeccuuttiioonn  ooff  tthhiiss  sscchheemmee  bbyy  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd  

 
111 
 
tthhrroouugghh  lleetttteerr  ddaatteedd  0022..0022..22000066..  AAggaaiinn,,  MMooWWRR  ccoonnvveeyyeedd  AAddmmiinniissttrraattiivvee  AApppprroovvaall  ffoorr  aann  
aammoouunntt  ooff  RRss..229966  llaakkhh  ffoorr  eexxeeccuuttiioonn  dduurriinngg  tthhee  XXII  FFiivvee  YYeeaarr  tthhrroouugghh  lleetttteerr  ddaatteedd  3311..1122..22000088..  
TThhee  mmaaiinn  ccoommppoonneennttss  ooff  tthhee  sscchheemmee  aarree  ––  ((aa))  RR//SS  ooff  eexxiissttiinngg  eemmbbaannkkmmeenntt  oonn  lleefftt  bbaannkk  
ooff  MMiittaanngg  rriivveerr  ffoorr  aa  lleennggtthh  11997755  kkmm  aanndd  ((bb))  CCoonnssttrruuccttiioonn  ooff  sslluuiiccee  aatt  KKhhaarrkkhhaarriijjaann..  AA  ttoottaall  
eexxppeennddiittuurree  ooff  RRss..114411  llaakkhh  iiss  iinnccuurrrreedd  uuppttoo  JJuullyy  22001133..    TThhee  ffiirrsstt  ccoommppoonneenntt  iiss  ccoommpplleetteedd..  BBuutt  
dduuee  ttoo  oobbjjeeccttiioonn  ooff  llooccaall  ppeeooppllee  rreeggaarrddiinngg  nnoonn--eexxiisstteennccee  ooff  oovveerrffllooww  sseeccttiioonn,,  tthhee  sslluuiiccee  wwoorrkk  
hhaadd  ttoo  bbee  ssuussppeennddeedd  iinn  MMaarrcchh,,  22001100..  TThhee  DDeessiiggnn  aanndd  DDrraawwiinnggss  ooff  aaddddiittiioonnaall  oovveerrffllooww  sseeccttiioonn  
hhaavvee  ccoommpplleetteedd  iinn  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd..  TThhee  bbaallaannccee  wwoorrkk  iiss  ppllaannnneedd  ttoo  bbee  ttaakkeenn  uupp  iinn  tthhee  nneexxtt  
wwoorrkkiinngg  sseeaassoonn..  
PPrrootteeccttiioonn  ooff  MMaannkkaacchhaarrKKaallaaiirr--AAllggaa  aanndd  MMaassaallaabbaarriiffrroomm  eerroossiioonn  ooff  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  rriivveerr  iinn  
HHaattssiinnggiimmaarrii  SSuubb--ddiivviissiioonn  ooff  DDhhuubbrrii  ddiissttrriicctt,,  AAssssaamm::  
  
TThhee  SScchheemmee,,  aatt  tthhee  eessttiimmaatteedd  ccoosstt  ooff  RRss..2233..7799  ccrroorree  hhaass  bbeeeenn  aapppprraaiisseedd  aanndd  
rreeccoommmmeennddeedd  ttoo  MMiinniissttrryy  ooff  WWaatteerr  RReessoouurrcceess  ffoorr  cceennttrraall  ffuunnddiinngg  bbyy  CCeennttrraall  WWaatteerr  CCoommmmiissssiioonn  
tthhrroouugghh  lleetttteerr  NNoo::  99//99//BBBB--DDhhuubbrrii//22001122--FFMMPP//66--77  ddaatteedd  33rrdd  JJaannuuaarryy  22001133..  TThhee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  ooff  
AAssssaamm  hhaass  ccoommpplleetteedd  aallll  nneecceessssaarryy  ffoorrmmaalliittiieess  aass  ssttaatteedd  bbeellooww  ffoorr  iimmpplleemmeennttaattiioonn  ooff  tthhee  
sscchheemmee  bbyy  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd  ––  
  NNoo  oobbjjeeccttiioonn  cceerrttiiffiiccaattee  ffoorr  uunnddeerrttaakkiinngg  tthhee  AAnnttii--eerroossiioonn  sscchheemmee  bbyy  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd  
  PPrroovviissiioonnss  ooff  llaanndd  rreeqquuiirreedd  ffoorr  ddeevveellooppmmeenntt  ooff  tthhee  pprroojjeecctt  ffrreeee  ooff  ccoosstt  bbyy  SSttaattee  
GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  ttoo  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd  aanndd  
  UUnnddeerrttaakkiinngg  ppoosstt  pprroojjeecctt  mmaaiinntteennaannccee  ooff  tthhee  sscchheemmee  ffrroomm  tthhee  ddaattee  ddeecciiddeedd  bbyy  
BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd  

 
112 
 
TThhee  ‘‘AAddmmiinniissttrraattiivvee  AApppprroovvaall  aanndd  EExxppeennddiittuurree  SSaannccttiioonn’’  ffoorr  iimmpplleemmeennttaattiioonn  ooff  tthhee  
sscchheemmee  dduurriinngg  XXII  FFiivvee  YYeeaarr  PPllaann  wwaass  aaccccoorrddeedd  bbyy  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  ooff  IInnddiiaa..  OOnn  aaccccoouunntt  ooff  nnoonn--
ccoommpplleettiioonn  ooff  tteecchhnnoo--eeccoonnoommiicc  aapppprraaiissaall  ooff  tthhee  sscchheemmee  aanndd  nnoonn--aavvaaiillaabbiilliittyy  ooff  ccoonnffiirrmmaattiioonn  bbyy  
tthhee  SSttaattee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  ffoorr  pprroovviiddiinngg  llaanndd  nneeeeddeedd  ffoorr  eexxeeccuuttiioonn  ooff  tthhee  sscchheemmee  ffrreeee  ooff  ccoosstt  ttoo  
BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd,,  tthhee  sscchheemmee  ccoouulldd  nnoott  bbee  ttaakkeenn  uupp  ffoorr  eexxeeccuuttiioonn  dduurriinngg  tthhee  XXII  FFiivvee  YYeeaarr  
PPllaann..  
IItt  iiss  lleeaarrnntt  tthhaatt  aann  aammoouunntt  ooff  RRss..1122..6633  ccrroorree  eexxiissttss  iinn  tthhee  XXIIII  FFiivvee  YYeeaarr  PPllaann  PPrrooppoossaall  ooff  
BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd,,  uunnddeerr  ccoonnssiiddeerraattiioonn  iinn  tthhee  MMiinniissttrryy  ooff  WWaatteerr  RReessoouurrcceess,,  ffoorr  
iimmpplleemmeennttaattiioonn  ooff  sscchheemmee  oonn  MMaannkkaacchhaarr  KKaallaaiirr--AAllggaa  iinn  HHaattssiinnggiimmaarrii  SSuubb--ddiivviissiioonn  ooff  DDhhuubbrrii  
ddiissttrriicctt,,  AAssssaamm..  AAss  ssttaatteedd  aabboovvee  aann  aammoouunntt  ooff  RRss..2233..7799  ccrroorree  wwiillll  bbee  nneeeeddeedd  ffoorr  uunnddeerrttaakkiinngg  
eexxeeccuuttiioonn  ooff  tthhee  sscchheemmee  bbyy  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd..  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd  ssuubbmmiitttteedd  aa  RReevviisseedd  EEFFCC  
MMeemmoorraanndduumm  ffoorr  XXIIII  FFiivvee  YYeeaarr  PPllaann  tthhrroouugghh  tthhiiss  ooffffiiccee  lleetttteerr  NNoo::  BBBB//99222288//VVooll--IIII//1133//2211  ddaatteedd  
2222nndd  AApprriill,,  22001133  wwiitthh  aaddeeqquuaattee  pprroovviissiioonn  ooff  RRss..2233..7799  ccrroorree  ffoorr  iimmpplleemmeennttaattiioonn  ooff  tthhee  sscchheemmee..  AA  
pprrooppoossaall  ooff  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd  ffoorr  aaccccoorrddiinngg  ssaannccttiioonn  ffoorr  eexxeeccuuttiioonn  ooff  tthhee  sscchheemmee  bbyy  
BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd  aatt  tthhee  ccoosstt  ooff  RRss..2233..7799  iiss  uunnddeerr  pprroocceessssiinngg  iinn  MMiinniissttrryy  ooff  WWaatteerr  RReessoouurrcceess..  
 Protection of Masalabari International Border Area of Dhubri District from 
Erosion of River Brahmaputra:  
TThhee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  ooff  AAssssaamm  ffuurrnniisshheedd  ’’NNoo  OObbjjeeccttiioonn’’  ffoorr  iimmpplleemmeennttaattiioonn  ooff  tthhee  sscchheemmee  
bbyy  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd..  CCoommpplleettiioonn  ooff  rreemmaaiinniinngg  ttwwoo  ffoorrmmaalliittiieess  ––  ((aa))  pprroovviiddiinngg  llaanndd  nneeeeddeedd  ffoorr  
ddeevveellooppmmeenntt  ooff  tthhee  sscchheemmee  ttoo  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd  ffrreeee  ooff  ccoosstt  bbyy  tthhee  SSttaattee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  aanndd  
((bb))  UUnnddeerrttaakkiinngg  ppoosstt--sscchheemmee  mmaaiinntteennaannccee  ooff  tthhee  sscchheemmee  iiss  uunnddeerr  pprroocceessssiinngg  iinn  tthhee  
GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  ooff  AAssssaamm..  NNeecceessssaarryy  pprroovviissiioonn  ffoorr  iimmpplleemmeennttaattiioonn  ooff  tthhee  sscchheemmee  dduurriinngg  tthhee  XXIIII  

 
113 
 
FFiivvee  YYeeaarr  PPllaann  hhaass  bbeeeenn  pprrooppoosseedd  bbyy  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd  iinn  tthhee  EEFFCC  MMeemmoorraanndduumm  ooff  
BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd  ffoorr  XXIIII  FFiivvee  YYeeaarr  PPllaann..  TThhee  rreevviisseedd  pprrooppoossaall  aatt  eessttiimmaatteedd  ccoosstt  ooff  RRss..44..6644  
ccrroorree  ffoorr  iimmpplleemmeennttaattiioonn  ooff  ““Protection of Masalabari International Border Area of Dhubri 
District from Erosion of River Brahmaputra”  has been submitted to Central Water Commission 
for techno-economic appraisal ..  HHeerree  iitt  mmaayy  bbee  rreelleevvaanntt  ttoo  ssttaattee  tthhaatt  tthhiiss  sscchheemmee  ffoorrmmss  ppaarrtt  ooff  
tthhee  aapppprroovveedd  EEFFCC  MMeemmoorraanndduumm  ooff  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  BBooaarrdd  ffoorr  tthhee  XXII  FFiivvee  YYeeaarr  PPllaann..  OOnn  aaccccoouunntt  
ooff  nnoonn--ccoommpplleettiioonn  ooff  nneecceessssaarryy  ffoorrmmaalliittiieess  bbyy  tthhee  GGoovveerrnnmmeenntt  ooff  AAssssaamm,,  tthhee  sscchheemmee  ccoouulldd  nnoott  
bbee  ttaakkeenn  uupp  ffoorr  iimmpplleemmeennttaattiioonn..  BBrraahhmmaappuuttrraa  hhaass  ppllaannnneedd  ttoo  ttaakkee  uupp  iimmpplleemmeennttaattiioonn  ooff  tthhee  
sscchheemmee  dduurriinngg  tthhee  nneexxtt  wwoorrkkiinngg  sseeaassoonn..  
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para Nos. 52 & 53  of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6.42) 
 
 The Committee observ e that the Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) is conducting 
scientific and technical studies for ground water assessment, development and management in 
the North-East (NE) region.  The Committee note that a Budget allocation of Rs.30.00 crore 
was made for C entral Ground Water Board (CGWB) in 2012 -13 for North Eastern Region.  
However, the actual expenditure of Budget allocation upto December, 2012 was shown to be 
only Rs.6.49 crore.   The Budget allocation for the year 2013 -14 has been kept at Rs.40.00 
crore.  The fact that only Rs.6.49 crore out of a total Budget allocation of Rs.30.00 crore has 
been incurred by December, 2012 by CGWB reveals that the progress in implementation of the 
Schemes on ground water assessment and development in the North Eastern Re gion has 

 
114 
 
been far from satisfactory.  Noting that aquifer mapping and management programme has 
been taken up for implementation during XII Plan and that some progress has been made on 
rain water harvesting as two States viz. Nagaland and Tripura taking ste ps for mandatory rain 
water harvesting in their States, the Committee desire the Ministry and Central Ground Water 
Board to intensify measures for ground water assessment, development and management in 
the North Eastern States so that tangible results could be achieved on the ground water front in 
the near future.  They would like to be apprised of further progress made in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
On ground water assessment & development aspects the activities in the North East 
have been planned  as per the available manpower, available drilling rigs and related 
infrastructures.  As per EFC during 12 th plan Aquifer mapping has been proposed for 15827 
Sq.km out of 8.89 lakh Sq.km in North Eastern Regions including Sikkim due to limited priority 
areas. 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para Nos. 56 & 57 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 
115 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Para No.1.51) 
 The Committee note that the shortcomings in the implementation of AIBP are generally 
addressed during monitoring visits by the CWC field offices, and various bottlenecks which 
affect the implementation of AIBP are brought to the notice of implementing agencies and 
others concerned.  State Governments are supposed to submit Action Taken Report resolving 
bottlenecks reported by CWC.  As regards new measures devised to clear the bottlenecks, t he 
Committee have been informed that a condition has been added in the MoU to be signed by  
the State Government to ensure that operation and maintenance of the project shall be made 
for ten years after completion of the project under AIBP and adequate funds shall be provided 
on this count.  This condition has been incorporated in the MoU during  2011-12  and its impact 
is being assessed on the operation and maintenance of the projects under AIBP.  The 
Committee appreciate the initiative taken in this regard and would like to be apprised of the 
outcome of the new measures devised by the Ministry. 
Reply of the Government 
 
State-wise funds allocated for O&M of AIBP funded projects will be collected for 5 years 
and the outcome along with appraisal initiatives will be intimated to the Committee. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                            DIP GOGOI 
16 December, 2013                                                   Chairman,                 
25 Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)            Standing Committee on Water Resources 

 
116 
 
APPENDIX -  I 
[Vide Para 3 of the Introduction] 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2013-2014) HELD ON TUESDAY, 10 DECEMBER 2013 
  
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1550 hours in Committee Room 'B', Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Dip Gogoi – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Dr. Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan 
12. Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
13. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
14. Shri Kabindra Purkayastha 
15. Shri Arjun Ray 
16. Shri S.P.Y. Reddy 
17. Shri D.K. Suresh 
18. Dr. P. Venugopal 
19. Shri Sajjan Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Dr. Ashok S. Ganguly  
12. Shri Palvai Govardhan Reddy 
    13. Smt. Wansuk Syiem 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Devender Singh   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Pawan Kumar   - Director 
3. Smt. Rita Jailkhani    - Additional Director 

 
117 
 
  
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.  
xxxx   xxxx   xxxx    xxxx  
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the draft Reports on (i)  Action 
Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Sixteenth 
Report (15 th Lok Sabha) on 'Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies' which was 
presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 27.11.2012 and (ii) Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained  in  the  Seventeenth  Report  
(15th Lok Sabha)  on 'Demands for Grants (2013-14)' of the Ministry of Water Resources  which 
was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 29.04.2013 .  After deliberation s, the 
Committee adopted the above two draft Reports subject to amendment suggested by Members 
of the Committee in r espect of Recommendation contained in Para 35 of the Draft Report on 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the 
Sixteenth Report on 'Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies'.  The suggested 
amendments (as shown in the italics and also underlined) have been carried out in Para No. 35 
of the Draft Report, and which is reproduced below : 
"The Committee note that the impact assessment of the completed water bodies under 
the scheme of RRR is proposed to be carr ied out by/through independent agencies.  
However, the reply is silent about the status of independent agencies, their particulars, 
etc., which Government propose to engage for this purpose.  It is also silent about any 
time frame by which they will be ass igned this work.  The Committee are of the firm 
opinion that, it is also of utmost importance to rope in the services of State s agencies in 
works of impact assessment of the completed water bodies under the scheme of RRR, 
and they, therefore, urge the Gove rnment to take necessary steps in this regard .  The 

 
118 
 
Committee would also further  like to be apprised about the status, particulars of 
independent agencies, their functions, period by which they will be appointed, and 
submit report(s) etc. at the earliest. 
3. xxxx   xxxx   xxxx     
4. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the said two Reports in 
the light of verbal and consequential changes and also to present the same to both the 
Houses of Parliament.  
The Committee then adjourned 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xxxx Minutes in respect of other matters kept separately 

 
119 
 
APPENDIX - II 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTEENTH 
REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE  
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations/Observations    44 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted    
by the Government  
 
Para Nos.  1.41, 1.42, 1.43, 1.44, 1.45, 1.46, 1.47, 1.48, 1.49, 1.50,  
1.52, 1.53, 2.57, 2.58, 2.59, 2.60, 2.61, 2.63, 2.64, 2.65, 2.66, 3.26,  
3.27, 3.28, 3.29, 4.29, 4.30, 4.31, 4.32, 4.33, 5.7, 6.39, 6.40, 6.41,  
6.43, 6.44 and 6.45 
   
Total          37 
Percentage         84.09% 
  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Para Nos.  2.62 and 4.28 
 
Total          02  
Percentage          4.55 % 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies    
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Para Nos.  3.25, 4.27, 6.38 and 6.42 
 
Total          04  
Percentage   9.09 % 
 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply 
 of the Government is still awaited 
 
 Para No. 1.51  
 
 Total            01 
Percentage         2.27% 