 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
                                (2011-2012) 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
 
 
AUGMENTATION OF DEPLETED GROUND WATER LEVEL, SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT, 
CONSERVATION, MANAGEMENT, USE OF GROUND WATER AND PREVENTION OF 
WATER POLLUTION 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Tenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources} 
 
 
 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
March, 2012/ Bhadrapada,1933 (Saka) 
12 

 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2011-2012) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
 
 
AUGMENTATION OF DEPLETED GROUND WATER LEVEL, SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT, 
CONSERVATION, MANAGEMENT, USE OF GROUND WATER AND PREVENTION OF  
WATER POLLUTION 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Tenth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  27.03.2012 
        Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.03.2012 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March, 2012 /Bhadrapada, 1933 (Saka) 

 
WRC NO. 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2011 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 

 
CONTENTS 
            PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2011-12)…………………     (ii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………    (iii) 
 
 
CHAPTER- I   Report …………………………………………   1 
 
CHAPTER- II  Recommendations/Observations which have been  22 
accepted by the Government …………………..  
 
CHAPTER- III  Recommendations/Observations which the    71 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government‟s replies ………………………..  
 
CHAPTER- IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of    72 
which replies of the Government have not been  
accepted by the Committee …………………….    
  
CHAPTER- V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final  74 
 replies of the Government are still awaited 
    
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
  I. Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the Committee       75           
                                   held on 29.02.2012.   
 
  II. Analysis of action taken by the Government on the   77 
                          Recommendations / Observations contained in the Tenth 
                          Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee………. 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES (2011-12) 
 
  Shri Dip Gogoi  -  Chairman 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi 
3. Shri Pulin Bihari Baske 
4. Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
5. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
6. Shri Virender Kashyap 
7.        Shri Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan. 
8. Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
9. Shri Nityananda Pradhan 
       10.        Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
11.        Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
             12.        Shri S.P.Y. Reddy  
13.        Shri Arjun Roy 
14.        Shri Jagadanand Singh 
15. Shri Murarilal Singh 
16.        Shri N. Chaluvaraya Swamy 
17.        Smt. Annu Tandon 
18.        Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
19.        Dr. P. Venugopal 
20.        Shri Sajjan Singh Verma 
21. Shri Kuldeep Bishnoi 
 
              RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.        Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
23. Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
24.         Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
25. Dr. Ashok S. Ganguly 
26. Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan 
27. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
28.  Shri Mangala Kisan  
    29. Shri Ranjitsinh Vijaysinh Mohite-Patil 
           30. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
 31. Smt. Bimla Kashyap Sood 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri B.S. Dahiya  - Director 
 3. Smt. Rita Jailkhani  - Additional Director 
 4. Shri G. Guite   - Committee Officer 
5. Shri Samresh Kumar Parcha - Sr. Committee Assistant 
   
 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2011 -2012) having been 
authorised by the Committee, do present on their behalf the Twelfth Report to Parliament on 
the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/obs ervations contained in the Tenth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water Resources (2010 -2011) on 
"Augmentation of Depleted Ground Water Level, Sustainable Development, Conservation, 
Management, Use of Ground Water and Prevention of Water Pollution".  
2. The Tenth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on 30 th August, 2011.  
The replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were 
received on 13th December, 2011. 
3. The replies of the Governme nt were examined and the Report was considered and 
adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 29th February, 2012. 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the    
recommendations/observations contained in the Tenth Report (Fifteenth L ok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;              DIP GOGOI, 
13 March, 2012                                            Chairman,           
23 Phalguna, 1933 (Saka)      Standing Committee on Water Resources 
  
 
 
(iii) 
 

 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources deals with the action taken 
by the Government on the recommendations / observations contained in their Tenth Report 
(15th Lok Sabha) on "Augmentation of Depleted Ground Water Level, Sus tainable 
Development, Conservation, Management, Use of Ground Water and Prevention of Water 
Pollution" which was presented to Lok Sabha on 30 August 2011. 
2. Action taken notes were received from the Government in respect of all the 23 
recommendations/observations of the Committee which have been categorised as follows:- 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,  (Total - 22)
      17, 18, 19, 20, 21 and 22       
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government‟s replies: 
Nil                      (Total -NIL) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee:  
Para Nos. 23        (Total -01) 
 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the Government 
is still awaited: 
Nil                 (Total - NIL) 
 

 
3. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on som e of the 
recommendations/observations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A.  Management of ground water depletion. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
4. The Committee noted that the country  possesses an estimated 1,123 billion cubic 
meters (bcm) of utilizable water per year.  Unfortunately, the share of replenishable ground 
water is only 433 bcm and only 58 per cent of the total replenishable ground water is being 
utilized for various purposes.  Over 80 per cent of India‟s rural domestic water requirement and 
about 50 per cent of its urban and industrial water needs are being met from ground water 
sources.  In addition, approximately 45 per cent of created irrigation potential in the country is 
through exploitation of ground water resources.  However, the development of ground water in 
different areas of the country is highly uneven.  The Committee had noted with grave concern 
the alarming trends in the last few decades of indiscriminate explo itation of ground water 
resources for domestic, irrigation and industrial uses and also due to vast urbanization which 
have resulted in depletion of limited ground water resources in certain parts of India.  They had 
also noted that as per the analysis mad e by the Ministry on ground water levels during May, 
2009, as compared with the mean water levels of the previous decade (May 1999 -May 2008), 
ground water levels had shown a decline in about 55 per cent of observation wells during the 
period.  Further, fall in water level of more than 2 meters on long term basis has been observed 
in areas like parts of Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat, Eastern Rajasthan, Haryana, 
Punjab and eastern Maharashtra.  Taking note of the indiscriminate over exploitation of g round 

 
water and alarming fall in the water table particularly in certain areas, the Committee had 
strongly urged the Government for immediate and comprehensive ground water resource 
planning, development and management on a long term basis.  The exploitati on of ground 
water resources be so regulated as not to exceed the recharging capacities of the underground 
aquifers in particular aquifer zones and ground water recharge projects be developed and 
effectively implemented by the Government for improving both  the quality and quantity of 
scarce ground water resource. 
5. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"In order to have aquifer wise planning for ground water resource development and 
management it is proposed to take up aquifer mapping to delineate the aquifers as unit 
for water management in the country through integration of geologic, geophysical, 
hydrogeologic, hydrologic, and water quality data during XII Plan. This will help in 
comprehensive planning and development of the ground wa ter resources of the 
country. It is also envisaged to develop a web based Aquifer Information and 
Management System (AIMS) on GIS platform for sustainable management of ground 
water resources. This would involve preparation of layered thematic maps using  
1:50,000 scale digital data, Paper maps / remote sensing data / Satellite data as per 
NRIS code.  
To facilitate regulation of ground water development by States/ UT Governments, 
Ministry of Water Resources has already circulated the Model Bill to regulate and 
control the development of ground water. So far, States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Goa, 
Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal and UTs of Chandigarh, Dadra & 

 
Nagar Haveli, Lakshadweep and Puducherry have enacted ground water legislation.  
Another 19 states and UTs have initiated the action for enactment of legislation on the 
lines of Model Bill. Central Ground Water Authority constituted under Section 3(3) of the 
Environment (Protection) act of 1986 has notified 82 areas in the country for reg ulation 
of ground water development.  
Government of Gujarat through a resolution vide reference No. GWR/1095/6/1.1/Ja -1 
dated 19.9.2001 has constituted Gujarat Ground Water Authority under the 
administrative control of Narmada and Water Resources Authority  for systematic 
administration of ground water management, its development, control and regulation.  
Government of NCT, Delhi vide Order No. F8(348)/EA/Env/09  dated 31.3.2009 has 
notified all the districts of NCT, Delhi for regulation of ground water development."   
6. The Committee note the Government propose (i) to take up aquifer mapping to 
delineate the aquifers as unit for water management in the country through integration 
of geologic, geophysical, hydrogeologic, hydrologic, and water quality data du ring XII 
Plan; (ii) to develop a web -based Aquifer Information and Management (AIMS) on GIS 
platform for sustainable management of ground water resources through preparation of 
layered thematic maps using 1:50,000 scale digital data, paper maps/remote sens ing 
data/Satellite data as per NRIS code.  
The Committee would like the Ministry to expeditiously complete the exercise for 
'aquifer mapping' within the scheduled period of XII Plan and also concretise the 
proposed development of web-based AIMS on GIS platform.  

 
7. The Committee further note the Ministry's reply that apart from the States of 
Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal and 
UTs of Chandigarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Lakshadweep and Puducherry which had 
enacted ground water legislation, another 19 States and UTs had initiated the action for 
enactment of legislation on the lines of Model Bill and that CGWB has notified 82 areas 
in the country for regulation of ground water development. Further, the Committee have 
also noted that the State of Gujarat has constituted state Ground Water Authority and 
the Government of NCT Delhi had, on 31.3.2009, notified all the districts of NCT Delhi for 
regulation of ground water development.  The Committee, while applauding these efforts 
made by different States/UTs and CGWB towards prevention of ground water depletion, 
urge the Ministry to prod the remaining 19 States/UTs to complete the enactment of 
legislation on the lines of Model Bill.  Additionally, these States/UTs may also be 
financially incentivized specially the States having water scarcity areas.  Noting the 
Ministry's reply that the Government of Gujarat has banned construction of new wells in 
Over-exploited and Critical category areas in the State, the Committee strongl y 
recommend that the example of Gujarat be held out to those States/UTs as model for 
dealing with problems of ground water in areas having similar problems. While 
acknowledging the fact that 'Water' is a State subject, the Committee recommend that 
the Mini stry offer enhanced Central assistance to make States/UTs adopt innovative 
methods and techniques of ground water recharge and management, including 
enactment of 'Ground Water Code' as already done in the State of Arizona, USA.  The 
Committee also reiterat e their earlier recommendation regarding innovative methods 

 
adopted by Oman for sustainable ground water management and, therefore, urge the 
Government for circulating Model Code to States/UTs on this vital issue, viz. mandatory 
registration of all wells, maintaining of national well inventory and well metering, so that 
the issue of ground water depletion is dealt with all seriousness by all the States/UTs of 
the country.  They would like to be apprised of progress made in this regard at the 
earliest.  
 
B. Need for tackling the problem of untreated effluent discharged from industrial units. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
8. The Committee observed that in some parts of the country, especially eastern Uttar 
Pradesh polluted water from sugar factories and distil leries greatly affected the quality of 
ground water to the extent that it gives a reddish colour to the water.  However, no case of 
punishment awarded to water polluters or environmental offenders in the country had been 
brought to the notice of the Committee.  The Committee had, therefore,  recommended that the 
Government pull up its socks and attempt to get existing pollution control laws enforced strictly 
by concerned bodies such as Central Pollution Control Board, Central Ground Water Authority 
and by t he State Governments.   They had also desired the Government to tone up the 
functioning of these bodies by calling for biennial reports on the status of pollution levels of 
rivers and water bodies located all over the country, and also by insisting on regu lar inspection 
of factories, including tanneries located in high -pollution areas/ zones like Kanpur in Uttar 
Pradesh by the Central Pollution Control Board and District Collectors and submission of their 

 
findings to CGWA at least twice a year.  The Committ ee had also desired that they be informed 
of the steps taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
9. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"CGWA had requested all the Regional Directors for inspection of industries to whom 
NOCs have been pr ovided by forming multi disciplinary groups. Process has been 
initiated by the Regional Offices. 
WQAA has taken up special studies involving NIH, CGWB and CWC jointly to study 
contamination of surface and ground water by Simbhaoli Sugar Mills and distiller ies 
in U.P. Directives have been issued to CPCB for initiation of punitive action. CPCB 
issued directives to Simbhaoli Sugar Mills under Section 5 of Environment 
Protection Act, 1986 for compliance. As per the directives of WQAA, Central Ground 
Water Board  has taken up special studies on ground water pollution around 
Breweries and Distilleries in all over India. A project „Study of Water Quality of the 
Existing Water Bodies of Meerut District on GIS Platform‟ has been initiated with full 
financial support f rom WQAA by Janhit Foundation, Meerut. Under this project water 
quality of 653 water bodies of Meerut district are being studied including pesticides. 
Directives have been issued to Central Ground Water Board for preparation of detailed 
reports on contamination of ground water in 88 Industrial clusters of India."  
10. The Committee note that the CGWA had requested all the Regional Directors for 
inspection of industries issued NOCs for forming multi -disciplinary groups and that the 
Regional Offices, CGWA hav e initiated the process in the matter. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the reports of inspection of industries already initiated by Regional 

 
Offices of CGWA. The Committee have also noted that Water Quality Assessment 
Authority (WQAA) had taken up special studies involving NIH, CGWB and CWC jointly to 
study contamination of surface and ground water caused by Simbhaoli Sugar Mills and 
distilleries in Uttar Pradesh. Directives had been issued to CPCB for initiation of punitive 
action and, accordingly, CPCB had issued directives to that concerned sugar mill under 
Section 5 of Environment Protection Act, 1986 for compliance. The Committee also 
observe that a project called 'Study of Water Quality of the Existing Water Bodies of 
Meerut District on GIS Platform' had been initiated by Janhit Foundation, Meerut with full 
financial support from WQAA under which water quality of 653 water bodies of Meerut 
district are being studied including pesticides. The Committee desire to be apprised of 
the outcome of t he study carried out by Janhit Foundation, Meerut of 653 water bodies 
of Meerut. They ardently hope that violators of pollution control laws, including the 
above stated factories in Uttar Pradesh are reined in under relevant laws at the earliest, 
so that w ater polluters/environmental offenders in the country are effectively deterred 
from causing grievous harm to the quality of ground water.     Noting that directives had 
been issued to CGWB for preparation of detailed reports on contamination of ground 
water in 88 industrial clusters of India, the Committee also desire to see early 
completion of compilation of detailed reports by CGWB in this regard . They would like 
to be appeised of the details of this report at the earliest.  
     
 
 

 
C.    Need to complete WRIS project in time. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
11.   The Committee had noted that the Government has taken up a new Plan Scheme 
called Development of Water Resources Information System (WRIS) in the Eleventh Plan for 
developing information system on water resources at the national level.  The first phase of 
WRIS was inaugurated by the Ministry of Water Resources on 7 December 2010 and the 
project is scheduled to be completed by December 2012.  The Committee had desired that the 
WRIS be completed by th e scheduled date positively.  The Committee had further noted that 
the CGWB has developed a „Web -enabled Ground Water Information System (WEGWIS) in 
collaboration with NIC, which aims at providing a unified internet -based access to water related 
information (spatial/ non spatial) for policy planning and management.  The Committee 
recognized the potential value of WEGWIS for effective management of our precious ground 
water resources, and desired the Ministry to get the data and information on this system 
updated regularly so that the policy -makers, decision -makers, and the public at large benefit 
from this advanced modern web-enabled information system. 
12. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"The Web enabled Ground Water Information S ystem (GWIS) has been developed by 
CGWB in collaboration with National Informatics Centre (NIC) to provide users web 
based access to groundwater related information for policy planning and management. 
Various thematic layers related to ground water have al so been placed at the website. 
Ground water level and water quality data for last five years have been posted at the 

 
website so that any user may access the data. The data is being updated  regularly at 
the website. 
Water Quality Division, Ministry of Wate r Resources is providing secretariat services to 
Water Quality Assessment Authority. For the dissemination of Information and for the 
creation of a database for direct utilisation by the end user/public a MIS based Website 
has been designed. Some of the sa lient features are,  Compliance with Government 
“Guidelines for Indian Government Websites”, Accessible Website Structure via Internet 
Explorer, Mozila Firefox and other browser with support to Mobile Phones and will be 
Disabled friendly, Website designing with a better User Interface, Dynamic Content 
Management System Feature, Bilingual Management Module Development (Hindi & 
English), Water Quality Assessment Information Management Module, 
Reports/Publication Management Module with Content Integration." 
13. The Committee, while noting the reply of the Government that the ground water 
level and water quality data posted on WEGWIS for the last 5 years is being regularly 
updated, are perturbed that the reply is studiously silent on the Committee's 
recommendation relating to timely completion of WRIS project. This speaks volume 
about the importance attached to such a vital matter by the Ministry.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that the project be 
completed according t o its scheduled date, viz. December, 2012. They would like to be 
informed of further action in the matter.  
 

 
D.  Need for additional efforts on artificial recharge to ground water/rainwater harvesting 
schemes. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
14.   The Commi ttee had noted that apart from artificial recharge to ground water, rain 
water harvesting is another great potential method of augmentation of ground water resources.  
The Committee had also noted that the Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) has directed  
all States having „over -exploited‟ areas to promote / adopt rain water harvesting, and that as a 
result of which 18 States and 4 Union Territories (UTs) have amended building by -laws for 
making rain water harvesting mandatory.  Similarly, the Committee we re also pleased to note 
that the CGWA directions for adoption of roof top water harvesting system to Group Housing 
Societies, Institutes, Hotels, Industries, Farm Houses, etc. in the notified areas of Delhi, 
Faridabad, Gurgaon, Ghaziabad and other areas of  NCT Delhi having water table 8 meters 
below ground surface, has received encouraging responses, and that the Delhi Jal Board in 
NCT Delhi is providing assistance of 50 per cent of the cost uptoRs. 1 lakh to Group Housing 
Societies, RWAs, Charitable Instit utions, etc. to motivate them to opt for rain water harvesting.  
It is noted that financial assistance has been approved in 206 cases and that a total of 299 
training programmes have so far been conducted for capacity building of stakeholders in 
designing of rain water harvesting structures to augment ground water in different terrains and 
hydrological conditions.  The Committee had desired that the Government explore the 
possibility of making rain water harvesting mandatory in all the buildings of the Gove rnment – 
Central as well the States, wherein their Ministries/ Departments, etc. are located.  They had 

 
felt that if more attractive incentives are offered for rain water harvesting, achievement of the 
desired objectives may not be far off. 
15. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"For promoting Rain Water Harvesting/adoption of Artificial Recharge to Ground Water 
in the country (except in the water logged areas), Central Ground Water Authority has 
issued  directions for implementation  of rain water harvesting and ground water 
recharge for arresting rainfall runoff occurring along all National Highways, State 
Highways, and other major roads by Central Road Research Institute, National 
Highways Authority of India, Central Public Works De partment, State Public Works 
Departments; along rail tracks and other establishments of Indian Railways, in the 
Stadia by Sports Authority of India, Board of Control for Cricket in India, Departments of 
sports and Youth Affairs and in the Airports by Airpo rt Authority of India, Ministry of Civil 
Aviation.The Authority has also directed the Chief Secretaries/ Administrators of all the 
States/ Union Territories and Ministry of Urban Development  to  take necessary action 
to adopt rain water harvesting/ artifi cial recharge on all the Government buildings. 
Ministry of Water Resources have also instituted Ground Water Augmentation Awards 
& National Water Award which are aimed at encouraging Non -Governmental 
Organizations (NGOs)/ Gram Panchayats/ Urban Local Bodie s/ Institutions/ Corporate 
Sector and Individuals for adopting innovative practices of ground water augmentation 
by rainwater harvesting and artificial recharge, promoting water use efficiency, recycling 
& re-use of water and creating awareness  through people's participation.  In total, there 
are 20 Ground Water Augmentation Awards for six categories consisting of Rs. 1 lakh 

 
and a plaque with citation and one National Water Award  consisting of a cash award of 
Rs. 10 lakh and a  plaque with citation."  
16.  The Committee note the reply of the Ministry that CGWA had issued directions 
for implementation of rain water harvesting and ground water recharge for arresting 
rainfall runoff occurring along National Highways, State Highways, and other major 
roads by Central Road Research Institute, National Highways Authority of India, CPWD, 
State Public Works Departments; along rail tracks and other establishments of Indian 
Railways; in the stadia by SAI, BCCI, Departments of Sports and Youth Affairs; and in 
the airpo rts by Airport Authority of India, Ministry of Civil Aviation. The Committee 
reiterate their recommendation contained in their 10th Report that the Government make 
rain water harvesting mandatory in all Government buildings and organizations part of 
the State.  They are of the considered view that office buildings/premises belonging to 
State Governments also be covered under the directions, and that necessary steps be 
initiated by the Ministry in this regard. Besides, the Committee would also like to 
reiterate that the MOWR keep effective tab on  enforcement of rain water harvesting laws 
in those 18 States by calling for biennial reports of progress made by various offices, 
authorities, organizations and institutions falling under State Governments. Addition ally, 
they are also of the view that the remainder States may be persuaded to take up similar 
measures, first by enactment of mandatory rain water harvesting laws and secondly, by 
proper enforcement of these laws. The Committee desire that financial incent ives in the 
form of enhanced Central Grants be offered to States/UTs which have demonstrated 
comparatively better performances in regard to implementation of schemes/laws on 

 
ground water recharge and rain water harvesting to stimulate a sense of urgency am ong 
the States, in addition to the system of cash awards, citation, etc. presently put in place 
by the Ministry.  Taking note the reach of the media, both print and electronic, concerted 
efforts be made by the Government to heighten public awareness to bui ld a national 
movement for effective and futuristic water augmentation and water management 
throughout the country.  
 
E.   Need to invoke people's participation in augmentation of ground water.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 21) 
 
17. The Committee were in thei r earlier report pleased to note that the Government  had in 
2007 instituted two annual awards, namely „Ground Water Augmentation Awards‟ (Bhoomijal 
Samvardhan Puruskar) and „National Water Award‟ carrying cash awards of Rs. 1 lakh and Rs. 
10 lakh respecti vely to encourage the NGOs/Gram Panchayats/Urban Local Bodies (for 
population upto 1 lakh)/ institutions/ Corporate Sector and individuals for adopting innovative 
practices of ground water augmentation by rain water harvesting and creating awareness in the  
target areas.  Besides the Ministry‟s proposal to use IT Kiosks installed in big villages to 
propagate information on ground water in local language with pictorial depiction and also plans 
to make available the expertise of scientists deployed in district s for teaming up with district 
magistrates and panchayats in its drive to have effective water conservation, development, 
augmentation and exploitation. The Committee had also noted that the Ministry plans to deal 
with the problem of shortage of scientific  manpower at district levels.  The Committee hoped 

 
that the efforts of the Ministry to encourage the local bodies etc. and to create awareness 
among the target areas will fructify soon.  They liked to be apprised of the positive outcome of 
the steps initia ted by the CGWB for mass awareness campaigns throughout the country by 
involving Central/ State/NGOs, Voluntary Organizations/ RWAs, educational institutions, 
industries and individuals as also the impact of all other connected efforts. 
18. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"The Mass Awareness and Training Programmes conducted and other efforts made by 
Central Ground water Board have received positive response from the Central/State 
Government Organisations, NGOs/ Voluntary Organisa tions, RWAs, educational 
institutions etc. Many State Governments/ NGOs/ VOs/ RWAs have undertaken actions 
for adoption of rainwater harvesting and artificial recharge."   
19.  The Committee note that the Mass Awareness and Training programmes 
conducted and other efforts made by CGWB had reportedly elicited positive responses 
from the Central/State Government organizations, NGOs/voluntary organizations, RWA, 
educational institutions, etc. However, considering the serious scenario obtaining on 
the ground wat er front in India at present, the Committee believe that efforts made by 
various groups and organizations, including educational institutions, NGOs, RWA and 
local bodies need to be streamlined and better channelized, so that these synchronise 
with the sche mes/programmes of the Central/State governments, to produce the 
intended results.  For this, it is imperative that the Ministry pursue the State 
Governments to keep tab on efforts made by various groups and organizations, 
including educational institutions , NGOs, RWA and local bodies within their respective 

 
jurisdictions, so that targets are set and the results achieved thereon be compiled and 
made available to respective State Governments at least on annual basis. It is also 
possible that better results ma y be achieved in this regard if cash incentives are 
provided to educational institutions, NGOs, RWA and local bodies by State 
Governments. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry pull up its socks and 
make all-out and vigorous efforts to keep ta b on all connected efforts of various groups 
and organizations, including educational institutions, NGOs, RWA and local bodies 
within their respective jurisdictions to achieve tangible  results on the ground water 
front.  
 
 
F.   Need to build national cons ensus to bring water either in the Union List or in the 
Concurrent List.   
 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
 
20. The Committee had urged the Government to initiate steps in the right earnest to strive 
to build national consensus to bring water either in the U nion List or in the Concurrent List after 
due consultation with the State governments so that a comprehensive national plan of action is 
evolved for water conservation, development, exploitation and equitable distribution in the 
larger and long term nation al interest.  The Committee had recommended that  the draft 
proposal in this regard be initiated by the Ministry expeditiously. 
21. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"The Cabinet Secretariat constituted a Committee on Allocation of Natural Resources 
(CANR) under the chairmanship of Shri Ashok Chawla vide order dated 31 st January 

 
2011.  The Committee submitted its report on 31 st May 2011.  The committee inter -alia 
recommended as follows:- 
The Committee sees an urgent need to have a co mprehensive national legislation on 
water.  This can be done either through bringing water under the Concurrent List and 
then framing the appropriate legislation; or by obtaining consensus from a majority of 
the States that such a “framework law” is necess ary and desirable as a Union 
enactment. The legal options in this regard need to be examined by the Ministry of 
Water Resources.  The national legislation should clarify a common position on a 
number of issues, e.g., need to consider all water resources as  conjunctive, unified 
whole; water as a common property resource; principles of allocations and pricing and 
so on.  The framework legislation should recognize that pollution also leads to 
conjunctive use of water, which makes the resources unusable for other purposes”. 
The recommendations of CANR have been referred to a Group of Ministers. 
It is further stated that Ministry of Water Resources has established National Water 
Mission Secretariat to achieve goals & Strategies identified under National Water 
Mission.  
Two of the five goals of the National Water Mission are: 
i) Promotion of citizen and State actions for water conservation, augmentation 
and preservation. 
ii) Focused attention to vulnerable areas including over exploited area.  
 

 
The strategies for achievin g the above Goals as stipulated in the Mission Document of 
National Water Mission are as follows: 
Goal: Promotion of citizen and State actions for water conservation, 
augmentation and preservation 
 
 Empowerment and involvement of Panchayati Raj Institutions , urban local 
bodies, Water Users‟ Association and primary stake holders in management of 
water resources with focus on water conservation, augmentation and 
preservation 
 Promote participatory irrigation management 
 Sensitization of elected representatives o f over-exploited areas on dimensions 
of the problems and to orient investment under  MNREGP toward water 
conservation. 
 Provide incentives for water neutral and water positive technologies. 
 Encourage participation of NGOs in various activities related to wa ter resources 
management, particularly in planning, capacity building and mass awareness. 
 Involve and encourage corporate sector/industries to take up, support and 
promoted water conservation, augmentation and preservation within the 
industry and as part as corporate social responsibility.   
Goal: Focused attention to vulnerable areas including over-exploited areas 
 Expeditious implementation of water resources projects particularly the 
multipurpose projects with carry over storages benefitting drought prone  and 
rain deficit areas. 
 Promotion of traditional system of water conservation. 

 
 Physical sustainability of groundwater resources. 
 Intensive programme for ground water recharge in over -0exploited, critical and 
semi-critical areas. 
 Conservation and preservation of wetland. 
 Intensive programme for addressing the quality aspects of drinking water  
 Systematic approach for coping with floods."  
22. The Committee note that the Cabinet Secretariat constituted a Committee on 
Allocation of Natural Resources (CANR) un der the chairmanship of Shri Ashok Chawla 
vide order dated 31 st January 2011.  The Committee submitted its report on 31 st May 
2011 which, among others, has spelt out an urgent need to have a comprehensive 
national legislation on water, either through bring ing water under the Concurrent List 
and then framing the appropriate legislation; or by obtaining consensus from a majority 
of the States that such a “framework law” is necessary and desirable as a Union 
enactment and the legal options in this regard need to be examined by the Ministry of 
Water Resources.  The recommendations of CANR have also reportedly been referred to 
a Group of Ministers. The Committee further note that Ministry of Water Resources has 
established National Water Mission Secretariat to ac hieve goals & Strategies identified 
under National Water Mission.   The Committee expect and hope that the Ministry take 
follow up action in the matter in right earnest, including exploring the required legal 
option as recommended by the CANR in its report dated 31st May, 2011 so that the stage 
set for enactment of a comprehensive national legislation on water in the near future. 

 
The Committee also desire to be apprised of further action taken by the Ministry in this 
regard.  
 
G.   Need to collect data of the major river systems of the country.  
  
Recommendation (Para No.23) 
23. Keeping in view the apprehension of diversion of waters of some international rivers by 
the riparian country, the Committee had urged the Government to furnish complete data of the 
major river systems of the country, indicating the volume of water in each river system at the 
point where the river enters India and the volume at the point where it falls into the sea or it 
flows into the territory of adjoining country, and also the volum e of water diverted or utilized for 
irrigation purposes within the country, river-system wise for the last ten years.  
24. The Ministry, in its action taken note replied as under :  
"On Brahmaputra and its tributaries originating in China viz. Siang, Suban siri and Lohit, 
data collection near Indo -Tibet border has started in late2006. As such, average 
estimate of volume of water at the points where these streams enter India have been 
estimated on the basis of the rainfall -runoff data being collected at vario us project sites 
in Arunachal Pradesh using hydrological methods as follows:- 
Name of River Monsoon Non Monsoon Total 
Siang 56.12 21.98 78.10 BCM 
Subansiri 12.85 4.82 17.67BCM 
Lohit 20.77 10.29 31.06BCM 
 

 
The volume of water at the point where river Bra hmaputra enters into Bangaladesh has 
been estimated on the basis of data observation at Dhubri as 629.05BCM in monsoon 
and 188.03BCMin Non -monsoon).  An Index map indicating the above information is 
enclosed." 
25. The Committee observe that the reply of th e Ministry is silent regarding the data 
on other major river systems of the country.  They further note that even while 
information/data pertaining to the Brahmaputra and its tributaries has been provided by 
the Ministry, the period pertaining to the above  stated information/data has not been 
specified. The Committee deprecate the half -baked reply furnished by the Ministry. 
Convinced that compilation of complete data of major rivers in the country is an 
essential tool for planning and judicious management a nd utilization of water, the 
Committee reiterate that the Government consider the desirability of compiling  
complete data of the major river systems of the country at the earliest, indicating the 
volume of water in each river system at the point where the  river enters India and the 
volume at the point where it falls into the sea or it flows into the territory of adjoining 
country, and also the volume of water diverted or utilized for irrigation purposes within 
the country, river-system wise. 
 
  
 

 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No.1) 
The Committee, while recognizing the fact that water is a scarce and valuable resource, note 
that the country possesses an estimated 1,123 billion cubic m eters (bcm) of utilizable water per year.  
Unfortunately, the share of replenishable ground water is only 433 bcm and only 58 per cent of the total 
replenishable ground water is being utilized for various purposes.  Over 80 per cent of India‟s rural 
domestic water requirement and about 50 per cent of its urban and industrial water needs are being 
met from ground water sources.  In addition, approximately 45 per cent of created irrigation potential in 
the country is through exploitation of ground water resou rces.  However, the development of ground 
water in different areas of the country is highly uneven.  While ground water exploitation is very high in 
western, north western and southern parts of the country covering the States of Rajasthan, Haryana, 
Punjab, Western Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu, the level of 
ground water exploitation in States like eastern Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, most parts of 
Orissa and entire North -East is very low.  The Committee also note t hat the sub -optimal development 
of ground water in Assam (North East), Bihar, West Bengal and parts of Uttar Pradesh as compared to 
Haryana, Punjab and Western Uttar Pradesh is attributed to availability of surface water resources, 
coupled with socio -economic factors like fragmented land holdings, lack of adequate infrastructural 
facilities and financial condition of majority of farmers.  However, the Ministry quoting the Report „Food 
Security, Water and Energy Nexus‟ of the National Rainfed Area Authority,  Ministry of Agriculture, find 
that „puddle rice cultivation is the main culprit of excessive exploitation of ground water in north -west 
India and hence decline in ground water table”.  The Committee note with grave concern the alarming 
trends in the last few decades of indiscriminate exploitation of ground water resources for domestic, 

 
irrigation and industrial uses and also due to vast urbanization which have resulted in depletion of level 
of limited ground water resources in certain parts of India.  They  also note that as per the analysis 
made by the Ministry on ground water levels during May, 2009, as compared with the mean water 
levels of the previous decade (May 1999 -May 2008), ground water levels have shown a decline in 
about 55 per cent of observatio n wells during the period.  Further, fall in water level of more than 2 
meters on long term basis has been observed in areas like parts of Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, 
Gujarat, Eastern Rajasthan, Haryana, Punjab and eastern Maharashtra.  According to the  Report of 
Central Ground Water Board, as on March, 2004, against availability of ground water of 0.28 bcm, 
withdrawal for irrigation, domestic and industrial use is being made annually to the tune of 0.48 bcm in 
NCT Delhi.  Out of 9 zones in Delhi, only 2  are safe zones, while the remaining 7 were reported to be 
over-exploited ones in terms of ground water development.  Observations made by CGWA on 197 
wells in regard to changes in the past 10 years, i.e. between January 2000 and January 2009, 
reportedly reveals that ground water levels registered a fall in 143 wells as against rise noticed in only 
54 wells.  Fortunately, ground water which occurs in a variety of geological formations across the 
country, is a replenishable resource.  Rainfall is the princip al source of recharge to ground water 
followed by canals, irrigated fields and water bodies as other sources of recharge.  Taking note of the 
indiscriminate over exploitation of ground water and alarming fall in the water table particularly in 
certain areas, the Committee strongly urge the Government for immediate and comprehensive ground 
water resource planning, development and management on a long term basis.  The exploitation of 
ground water resources be so regulated as not to exceed the recharging capac ities of the underground 
aquifers in particular aquifer zones and ground water recharge projects be developed and effectively 
implemented by the Government for improving both the quality and quantity of scarce ground water 
resource. 

 
Reply of the Government 
In order to have aquifer wise planning for ground water resource development and 
management it is proposed to take up aquifer mapping to delineate the aquifers as unit for water 
management in the country through integration of geologic, geophysical, hydro geologic, hydrologic, 
and water quality data during XII Plan. This will help in comprehensive planning and development of 
the ground water resources of the country. It is also envisaged to develop a web based Aquifer 
Information and Management System (AIMS ) on GIS platform for sustainable management of ground 
water resources. This would involve preparation of layered thematic maps using  1:50,000 scale digital 
data, Paper maps / remote sensing data / Satellite data as per NRIS code.  
To facilitate regulatio n of ground water development by States/ UT Governments, Ministry of Water 
Resources has already circulated the Model Bill to regulate and control the development of ground 
water. So far, States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Tami l Nadu, West 
Bengal and UTs of Chandigarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Lakshadweep and Puducherry have enacted 
ground water legislation.  Another 19 states and UTs have initiated the action for enactment of 
legislation on the lines of Model Bill. Central Ground Water Authority constituted under Section 3(3) of 
the Environment (Protection) act of 1986 has notified 82 areas in the country for regulation of ground 
water development.  
Government of Gujarat through a resolution vide reference No. GWR/1095/6/1.1/Ja -1 dated 19.9.2001 
has constituted Gujarat Ground Water Authority under the administrative control of Narmada and Water 
Resources Authority for systematic administration of ground water management, its development, 
control and regulation.  Government of NCT, D elhi vide Order No. F8(348)/EA/Env/09 dated 31.3.2009 
has notified all the districts of NCT, Delhi for regulation of ground water development.   
Comments of the Committee 

 
   (Please see Para No. 6 and 7 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
The Committee further observe that withdrawal of ground water in excess of natural recharge 
capacity has caused decline in ground water table in some parts of the country, as also did other 
contributory factors such as (i) increasing demand of ground water for agriculture, industrial and 
drinking purposes, (ii) change in cropping pattern and growing of paddy and cash crops that consume 
large quantities of water, (iii) flat rate/free electricity to farmers for extracting water in certain States (iv) 
rapid pace of urbanization resulting in reduced natural recharge to aquifers and (v) scanty rainfall in 
arid and semi -arid regions.  Noting that the exploitation of water being a State subject under the 
constitutional set -up, the Committee call upon the Minis try to induce all the States to adopt an 
appropriate and uniform regulatory mechanism to curb wasteful, excessive withdrawal of ground water 
by water-users such as farmers, industries, etc.  The Committee would also like to caution that flat rate/ 
free ele ctricity granted by some State Governments for extracting ground water will lead to 
indiscriminate exploitation and water scarcity in the long run.  The Committee also recommend that 
ground water exploitation be regulated judiciously by involvement of loca l bodies like panchayats and 
Water User Associations (WUAs) and the need for building strong public awareness for water 
harvesting, conservation and sustainable exploitation. 
Reply of the Government 
 
A Model Bill to regulate and control development of grou nd water has been circulated to 
States/ UT Governments by the Ministry of Water Resources to facilitate enactment of suitable ground 
water legislation.  So far, States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Tamil 
Nadu, West Bengal and UTs  of Chandigarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Lakshadweep and Puducherry 

 
have enacted ground water legislation.  Another 19 states and UTs have initiated the action for 
enactment of legislation on the lines of Model Bill. 
 
Central Ground Water Authority, constitut ed under Section 3 (3) of the Environment (Protection) Act, 
1986 to regulate and control development and management of ground water resources in the country, 
has been conferred with the following powers:  
(i) Exercise of powers under section 5 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 for issuing directions and 
taking such measures in respect of all the matters referred to in sub-section(2) of section 3 of the said 
Act. 
(ii) To resort to penal provisions contained in sections 15 to 21 of the said Act. 
(iii) To regulate an d control, management and development of ground water in the country and to issue 
necessary regulatory directions for the purpose. 
(iv) Exercise of powers under section 4 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 for the appointment of 
officers. 
Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) has requested  the Chief Secretaries/Adinistrators of 
States/UTs  for formation of  district level committees involving local authorities for evaluation of project 
proposals seeking clearance for ground water withdrawal for new/ expansion industries. 
Central Ground Water Authority is also carrying out IEC activities in the country which include Mass 
Awareness Programmes, Water Management Trainings, Jalyatras and distribution of 
brochure/pamphlets etc., for creating awareness about con servation of water. In these activities rural 
population is also involved including Panchayats and Water User Associations. From the year 2010 -11 
Ministry of water resources is also conducting painting competition for the students of 4 th, 5 th and 6 th 
Standards to make them aware about need for water conservation.  
 

 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
The Committee are seriously concerned that India‟s initial National Communication to United 
Nations Framework and Convention on Climate Change (NATCOM, 2004)) submitted by the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests projects a very gloomy future scenario about the impact of climate change on 
water availability in country.  The report has predicted that climate change is likely to adversely affect 
the water balance in diffe rent parts of India due to changes in precipitation and evapotranspiration and 
rising sea levels, leading to increased saline intrusion into coastal and island aquifers.  Increased 
frequency and severity of floods is expected to affect ground water quality  in alluvial aquifers, while 
increased rainfall intensity may lead to higher runoff and the possibility of reduced recharge.  Fully 
aware of the threat posed by the reality of global climate change, the Committee desire the Ministry to 
devise a long term a ction plan in consultation with other associated Ministries such as Agriculture, 
Environment and Forests, Industry and Commerce and Science and Technology to meet this challenge 
so that its adverse affect on the country‟s water resources is minimized to th e extent possible.  The 
Committee also recommend that the Government explore application of water saving techniques, viz. 
rotational cropping system, drip and sprinkler irrigation and ground water recharge method in areas 
where traditional canal irrigation  holds sway, so that the country‟s limited ground water resources do 
not go waste. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A Comprehensive Mission Document has been prepared under National Water Mission to 
meet the challenges of Climate Change on ground Water. Various g oals and strategies have been 
identified in groundwater domain to achieve the Mission Goals. The Mission aims to place a 
comprehensive water database in the public domain, promote citizen and state action for water 

 
conservation. In this regard Central Grou nd Water has already placed ground water level and ground 
water quality data in public domain. All Regional Directors of CGWB have been advised to contact the 
implementation agencies for Artificial Recharge schemes as well as State Government Department 
dealing with MGNREGA activities to sensitize the panchayats on water conservation measure of 
construction of recharge structures. Further, under the scheme of CGWB "Groundwater Management & 
Regulation" during XI Plan, 82 schemes covering Over -exploited areas have been sanctioned and fund 
released for implementation of artificial recharge schemes.  
Ministry of Water Resources is implementing Farmers Participatory Action Research Programme 
(FPARP), under which improved irrigation methods like  micro irrigation techniques (Sprinkler/ Drip 
irrigation), improvements of water use efficiency through suitable crop rotations, multiple cropping and 
water harvesting technologies (low cost micro rain water harvesting structure i.e. jalkund, storage 
tanks, percolation tanks, check dams, recharging wells etc.) are being demonstrated to the farmers  to 
promote water saving techniques at the users end.  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
The Committee are concerned to note the sea water ingress into fresh water aquifers in 
coastal areas in Gujarat, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Orissa is causing severe constraints 
in ground water development.  The Committee observe that some models of artificial recharge and 
ground water management have been successfully employed outside India. For example, in Arizon a 
(U.S.A.), the problem of over -exploitation and falling water levels is addressed by law that mandates 
balancing abstraction with recharge, and Ground water Code (1980) has been enacted to meet this 
challenge.  Similarly, Oman  has adopted a successful strategy for sustainable ground water 
management which include obligatory registration of all wells, introduction of well permits, national well 

 
inventory, well metering, improving irrigation techniques, public awareness campaigns  for water 
conservation, etc. on demand side, while the supply side measures include large recharge dams.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to explore earnestly the viability of replicating such 
models of artificial recharge/ ground water  management in India so that positive and tangible 
improvements are made on ground water front in the near future.  The Committee also calls upon the 
Ministry to be on the look out always as to what measures have been initiated in this direction. 
 
Reply of the Government 
„Water‟ being a state subject, necessary measures for regulation of ground water development 
and promotion/ implementation of artificial recharge measures are to be undertaken by the State 
Governments. However, Central Ground Water Authorit y has made installation of meters on ground 
water abstraction structures mandatory for all the projects (Industrial/Infrastructure/Mining etc.) which 
are seeking NOC from CGWA for ground water abstraction. As per the guidelines of issuance of NOC 
by Centra l Ground Water Authority, ground water recharge is an essential component to be 
incorporated in to the project proposal before abstraction of additional ground water. 
The Model Bill circulated by Government of India provides for regulation of ground water development 
as well as implementation of artificial recharge measures to address the problem of over -exploitation 
and falling water levels. The Bill has a provision for setting up of State Ground Water Authority, 
notification of areas for regulation, regis tration of wells, permits for new wells, issuing directions to 
various State Departments or individuals for construction of rain water harvesting structures, promotion 
of rain water harvesting and artificial recharge through public awareness campaigns etc.  
Government of Gujarat has banned construction of new wells in Over -exploited and Critical category 
areas in the state. Government of Gujarat has also adopted an aggressive recharge strategy that has 
contributed significantly in stabilizing the ground wat er levels and even reversing the trend of ground 

 
water depletion in Saurashtra region. The State Govt. has extended strong support to communities to 
expand this work in a participatory mode under the Sardar Patel SahakariJalSanchayYojana. Recharge 
structures constructed under the scheme include check dams,  boribandhs, farm ponds, percolation 
tanks etc. Other State/ UT Governments need to replicate these measures.  
Ministry of Drinking water and Sanitation has been encouraging the states which have coastal 
areas to adapt suitable groundwater recharge measures, and groundwater protection measures under 
sustainability component of NRDWP, in order to restrict the sea water ingression.  Further Pilot projects 
on sustainability of Drinking water sources in ten di fferent states in over exploited/critical blocks have 
been taken up by the Ministry.  These pilot projects shall aim at development of models for supply side 
as well as demand side management including crop pattern management, groundwater management 
and se lf regulation by Panchyati raj institutions and village populace themselves.  Based on their 
results, and experiences, these models will be up scaled to different water stressed regions in the 
country for implementation Drinking water sustainability plans. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
The Committee note that the quality of ground water resources in the country is another crucial 
aspect that demands earnest consideration and stringent monitoring on a continual basis.  The Central 
Ground Water Board (CGWB) m onitors the quality and level of ground water through a network of 
15,640 observation wells (Piezometers) in addition to the efforts of the State Ground Water 
Organizations.  Empirical observations show the presence of fluoride in ground water in excess of  
maximum permissible limit of 1.5 mg/l as prescribed by the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) in as 
many as 227 districts of the country.  The situation in respect of other harmful chemical constituents 
like arsenic, nitrate, iron and  also inherent salinit y (electrical conductance) which are collectively 

 
termed geogenic contaminants is reportedly alarming in certain agricultural belts.  The Committee note 
that there are 1,79,999 habitations in the country having water problems associated with fluoride, 
arsenic, iron, salinity and nitrate.  Fluoride is present in 33,363, arsenic in 9,504, iron in 11,872, salinity 
in 32,689 and nitrate in 2,571 habitations of the country.  This is over and above the hazard posed by 
anthropogenic/ man -made contaminants such as manganese, lead, chromium, cadmium, etc. in 
ground water in some parts of the country, resulting from mining activities or seepage from untreated 
industrial wastes.  Further, the growing construction of septic tanks for want of sewer lines in the 
countryside has become another possible source of sub-soil contamination.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that appropriate action be initiated to deal with the situation.  The Committee are shocked 
to learn that some industries in the name of aquifer recharge,  made structure for aquifer recharge, but 
actually ended up discharging the polluted water to the aquifer below the ground.  They are also deeply 
dismayed that the Ministry of Environment and Forests have no schemes to tackle this problem of 
ground water c ontamination.  The Committee, therefore, urge the Government to bring out a 
comprehensive national plan after due consultation with the concerned Ministries for containing the 
alarming trend of ground water contamination in the country so as to ensure supp ly of safe drinking 
water for the present as well as future generation.  They would also like to be apprised of the action 
taken by the Government in this matter at the earliest.  The Committee would also like to know the 
break-up of contaminated habitations indicating the nature of contamination state-wise. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The date quoted in Recommendation no.5 is from the IMIS  of the Ministry of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation as on 01.04.2009.  Updated data giving the state wise break up of habit ations with 
contaminated groundwater is placed below. 

 
As on 01.04.2011, out of 16,64,186 habitations in the country, as reported by the states on the IMIS  of 
Ministry of Drinking water and sanitation, 7.27% i.e. 121046 are quality affected habitations, ou t of 
which i.e. 23107 (1.388%) are Fluoride affected, 5339 (0.320%) are Arsenic affected, 64220 (3.86%) 
are Iron affected, 24522 (1.47%) are salinity affected, and 3866 (0.232% are Motrate affected. 
No of Quality Affected Habitations as on 01.04.2011 
S.No. State Contamination Wise Number of Habitations 
  Total Fluoride Arsenic Iron  Salinit
y  
Nitrate 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
1. Andaman & Nicobar 0 0 0 0 0 0 
2 Andhra Pradesh 585 
 
459 0 0 126 0 
3 Arunachal Pradesh 0 0 0 0 0 0 
4 Assam 18683 192 2089 16402 0 0 
5 Bihar 18427 3338 1111 13978 0 0 
6 Chandigarh 0 0 0 0 0 0 
7 Chhattisgarh 7845 188 0 7534 123 0 
8 Dadra & Nagar Haveli 0 0 0 0 0 0 
9 Daman & Diu 0 0 0 0 0 0 
10 Goa 0 0 0 0 0 0 
11 Gujarat 323 111 0 0 65 147 
12 Haryana       
13 Himachal Pradesh 0 0 0 0 0 0 

 
14 Jammu & Kashmir 26 2 0 1 23 0 
15 Jharkhand 808 93 5 709 0 1 
16 Karnataka 7599 3114 42 1813 861 1769 
17 Kerala 969 109 0 623 191 46 
18 Lakshadweep 0 0 0 0 0 0 
19 Madhya Pradesh 2917 2651 0 4 261 1 
20 Maharashtra 2696 860 1 1 591 482 
76221 Manipur 4 0 0 4 0 0 
22 Meghalaya 102 0 0 102 0 0 
23 Mizoram 0 0 0 0 0 0 
24 Nagaland 166 0 0 166 0 0 
25 Orissa 14810 475 0 13190 1117 28 
26 Pondicherry 0 0 0 0 0 0 
27 Punjab 55 22 0 2 31 0 
28 Rajasthan 31698 10319 8 54 20211 1106 
29 Sikkim 0 0 0 0 0 0 
30 Tamil Nadu 509 3 0 428 75 3 
31 Tripura 6196 0 0 6196 0 0 
32 Uttar Pradesh 1038 204 331 53 449 1 
33 Uttarakhand 14 1 0 11 0 2 
34 West Bengal 5546 939 1752 2351 504 0 
 Total 121046 23107 5339 64220 24522 3866 
 

 
Under NRDWP (National Rural Drinking Water Program), administered by Ministry of Drinking Water 
and Sanitation, up to 65% of the funds allocated to the states are provided for vicarage of partially 
covered and quality affected habitations.  Further, 20 % funds are allocated for sustainability  measures 
which are also used by the state water supply agencies for insitu dilution of geogenic contamination by 
groundwater recharge. 
Under the NRDWP, the National Rural Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance is implemented 
through which states are to test water quality of all drinking water sources in rural areas, once a year fr 
Chemical contamination and twice a year for bacteriological contamination. 
Under the program 693 District level laboratories, 840 Sub District level laboratories have been set  up.  
Testing for 5 chemical contaminates i.e. Fluoride, Arsenic, Nitrate, Iron, and salinity and two types of 
Bacteriogical contaminations i. E -Coli and Total Colliform are carried out in these laboratories.  During 
the financial year 2010 -11, 856048 sour ces were tested with the testing of 1047792 samples for 
Chemical and bacteriological contamination.  During the current year, 326437 sources have been 
tested with testing of 373159 samples, as reported by the states, till 13.10.2011. 
Regarding the concern for sub soil water contamination due to toilets, Ministry of Drinking Water and 
Sanitation would like to submit that under TSC (Total Sanitation Campaign), on site sanitation practices 
or decentralized sanitation systems are promoted taking into considerat ion all aspects like cost of 
sewerage transport and treatment.  TSC also has the flexibility of implementation with respect to a 
menu of technology options so as to ensure that effluents can be disposed of to the environment 
without causing any harm or used for useful purposes such as being used in agriculture. 
The technologies promoted under TSC like use of high slope Pans, awareness about lesser 
consumption of water for flushing, and use of suitably designed seats to reduce the hydraulic load, 
lessen the chances of Groundwater pollution. 

 
TSC also has a provision for upto 10% of the project funds earmarked for tackling Black and Grey 
water in a Rural Environment friendly manner.   
CGWA had requested all the Regional Directors for inspection of Industries to  whom NOCs have been 
provided by forming multi disciplinary groups. In eight Regions  multi disciplinary groups have been 
formed.  
Further, Under the directives of WQAA, reports on Ground Water and Surface Water pollution hotspots 
were prepared and uploade d to WQAA website for public use. Central Ground Water Board has 
prepared the report on Ground Water Quality of Shallow Aquifers identifying the pollution hotspots of 
ground water. Similarly, CWC has prepared surface water pollution hotspots for intensive monitoring of 
these sites. Apart from these, Working groups constituted by WQAA have prepared reports on various 
aspects of assessment and monitoring of pollution in surface water and ground water. Few of the 
important reports prepared by different organization under the directives of WQAA are: 
 Contamination of Ground Water by Sewage   
 Approach paper on Ground Water Quality issues in Andaman & Nicobar and   Lakshadweep 
Islands 
 Mitigation and Remedy of Ground Water Arsenic Menace in India 
In addition, process is on to study and finalize reports on: 
 Ground Water Quality Issues in Indian Himalayan Region 
 Report on Baseline Ground Water Quality in NCT, Delhi 
Apart from these, Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation is being pursued to link the village wise 
water quality data available with them with the WQAA web site. A mission document on National 
Groundwater Quality Mission (NGWQM) has been prepared and discussed in the 8 th Meeting of 
WQAA. The mission document has been circulated to various government organi zations for their 

 
comments. WQAA has taken up matter with MoEF to empower it for notifying water quality standards 
for various uses. The decision of MoEF is awaited.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that Governme nt of India evolve expeditiously 
some innovative mechanism to keep tab on the efforts of State Governments as well as concerned 
Central Pollution Control agencies to ensure a harmonious and effective coordination among them in 
order to tackle the problem o f water pollution and depletion lock, stock and barrel within a speedy time 
frame. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 WQAA in its first meeting has recommended to constitute the WQRC at state level for 
preparation of state level management plans for improving the water quality. Again in its sixth meeting, 
WQRC‟s have been reconstituted to make them more effective. So far WQRC‟s have been 
reconstituted in states of Kerala, Mizoram, Maharashtra, Goa, Orissa, West Bengal, Sikkim, Arunachal 
Pradesh, H.P., Bihar, Chatti shgarh and Haryana. Considering the importance of scientific planning in 
talking the issues of water quality, A National Level Workshop on Water Quality Management Plan 
(WQMP) by CPCB under the directives of WQAA  was organized in December, 2008. The guide lines 
for preparation of State Level Water Quality Management Plans were framed and circulated to all the 
State governments for preparation of WQMP‟s in their respective states. Only on state (Goa) has 
submitted the Plan till date. All other states are bei ng pursued for preparation of WQMP‟s so that the 
water quality issues.   

 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
The Committee note that a major factor causing pollution to the rivers in India is the discharge 
of untreated sewage in the rivers. However, reportedly th e capacity to generate sewage treatment in 
the country is only 30 per cent and the remainder 70 per cent sewage is discharge untreated.  The 
Committee note that the measures relating to reducing pollution of rivers/ water bodies in the country 
are being ta ken by the concerned State Governments with some support by the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests.  Distressingly, the Central Sector Schemes like Jawaharlal Nehru National 
Urban Renewal Mission (JHNURM) and Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Sm all and 
Medium Towns as well as State Sector Schemes, run by municipalities have failed to deliver despite 
huge investments being made in them due to many problems including operational and maintenance 
issues, problems in power supply, etc.  The Committee are of the considered view that environment is 
part of every Ministry and that pollution of rivers / water bodies also involves convergence of activities 
of several Ministries such as Water Resources, Environment and Forests, Agriculture and still others.  
The Committee, therefore, underline the need for greater interaction and sharing of knowledge and 
data among the Ministries of Water Resources, Agriculture, Environment and Forests and others in a 
continuous process.  The Committee ardently hope and expect that the process of exchange of data on 
ground water resources and the coordination of activities among the Ministries concerned will continue 
and lead to tangible outcomes in redressing the problem of water pollution through their sustained, 
innovative and integrated efforts.  The Committee also note that the Ministries of Environment and 
Forests and Water Resources have collectively set up a convergence mechanism in the form of an 
authority called ‘Water Quality Assessment Authority’ for which efforts a re being made to get 
investments under UN Environment Programme and other agencies.  The Committee hope that the 
efforts for concretizing ‘Water Quality Assessment Authority’ would bear fruits and results would 

 
become visible on the water quality monitorin g front in the near future.  The Committee desire to have 
updated information as to the remedial action taken in the matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
A “Water Quality Assessment Authority (WQAA)” has been established under Environmental 
Protection Act.  Th e powers and functions of WQAA include the powers to issue necessary directions 
to various government/local bodies/non-governmental agencies to standardize water quality monitoring 
methods, ensure proper treatment of wastewater to restore the water quality  of surface and ground 
waters, take up R&D activities related to water quality management and promote recycling and reuse of 
treated wastewater.  The Authority has its secretariat in the Ministry of Water Resources. 
Main Achievements of WOAA during last Two Years 
 A Working Group has also been constituted by WQAA to deal with issues relating to 
Minimum Environemntal Flows in riverine systems. A sub-committee on has been constituted 
to analyse the recommendations on the minimum flow prepared by working group under the chairmanship 
of member (RM), CWC and also to interact with state governments on Minimum Environmental Flows.  
 A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has been signed on 17 th March, 2011 between WQAA, Govt. of 
India & WHO in the area of Water Quality Monitoring and Assessment activities.   
 State Level Water Quality Review Committees (WQRC) have been re -constituted so far in 9 
states as per information received in the Secretariat, WQAA. The remaining states are being 
persuaded to re-constitute WQRC. 
 A number of Training programmes were conducted by CWC and CGWB under the guidance of 
WQAA on various aspects of Water Quality Assessment and Management.  
 A one-day Workshop was organized by the CGWB under the aegis of the WQAA on Radon contamination 

 
of groundwater and application of isotopes in groundwater studies on 26 -03-2010 at Bangalore. Several 
scientists from various reputed institutes viz, BARC, NGRI, IISC, Bangalore and other institutions 
participated in the workshop. The deliberation of Workshop have been published in the form of a book 
and uploaded in WQAA web site.  
 Financial assistance has been given to University of Delhi for organizing “International Workshop 
on Sustainability and Water Quality” on 17 -20th January, 2011. This workshop was hosted b y the 
Global Innovation Imperatives (GII) a collaborative venture between the American Chemical 
Society (ACS) and the Society of Chemical Industry (SCI).  
 A project on preparation of status report on base line ground water quality of NCT, Delhi has 
been completed in collaboration with NEERI. This is one of the important projects to establish the 
status of ground water quality and is useful for establishment of future monitoring network in 
NCT, Delhi.  
 Financial support has been given to Genentech Foundation , 811 Vishwadeep Tower, District 
Centre, Janakpuri, New Delhi for organizing 11 th Global Environment Conference & Awards 
programme on 11, 12 &13 th December, 2010.  Recommendation of the workshop are placed on 
WQAA website.  
 A project „Study of Water Quality of the Existing Water Bodies of Meerut District on GIS Platform‟ 
has been initiated with full financial support from WQAA by Janhit Foundation, Meerut. Under this 
project water quality of 653 water bodies are being studied including pesticides.  
 Financial assistance has been given to Green Institute of Research & Development and Delhi 
Technological University, Delhi towards organising of a National seminar on Sustainable and 
Innovative Solutions for Water Woes on 28.03.2011. 
 A Task force for up gradation & accreditation of WQ laboratories constituted for processing 
of up gradation of labs.  

 
 Special studies have been initiated by NIH, CGWB and CWC jointly to contamination of 
surface and ground water by Simbhaoli Sugar Mills and distilleries in U.P. Directive s have 
been issued to CPCB for initiation of punitive action. CPCB issued necessary directives to 
Simbhaoli Sugar Mills for compliance.  
 Action has been initiated to prepare reports on Baseline groundwater Quality in NCR region 
by WAPCOS under financial sup port by WQAA.  
 A Working Group constituted under Member (SAM), CGWB to prepare „Groundwater Quality 
Issues in Himalayan Regions‟ has submitted its Report.  
 WQAA has taken up matter with MoEF to empower it for notifying water quality standards for various 
uses. The decision of MoEF is awaited. 
 A base line survey on surface water quality in Ganga Basin is also being carried out by CWC under the 
guidance of WQAA.   
 An independent  web portal of the Authority  having  web address http://wqaa.gov.in/ has been 
created  and the following reports /publications has been uploaded on the web portal 
 Following reports /publications has been uploaded on the web portal      
http: / wqaa.gov.in/  
 Uniform Protocol on Water Quality Monitoring  
 Report of Working Group to Advise WQAA on the Minimum Flows in the Rivers 
 MoU signed between WQAA and World Health Organisation (WHO) 
 List of Laboratories (Level I to Level-III) in CWC   
 Status of Water Quality in India-2009 of CPCB, MoEF, Government of India.  
 Basin wise Water Quality stations in Central Water Commission   
 Water Quality parameters analysed by CWC   

 
 River Water Quality Status 
 Surface Water Quality status and remedial measures taken to improve the quality of Surface 
Water 
 Contamination of Ground Water by Sewage   
 Approach paper on Ground Water Quality issues in Andaman & Nicobar and   Lakshadweep 
Islands 
 Mitigation and Remedy of Ground Water Arsenic Menace in India 
 Recommendation of 11th Annual Greentech Environment Global Conference 2010 
 Guidelines for preparation of Water Quality Management Plan (WQMP) & Recommendations of 
CPCB workshop on WQMP 
 Report on Groundwater Quality in Jai Bheem Nagar, Meerut, U.P. 
 Workshop Volume on "Radon Contamination in Groundwater and application of Isotopes in 
Groundwater Studies" 
 Ground Water Quality in Bathinda, Mansa & Patiala District of Punjab 
 Water Quality Standards for various uses of Water 
 Ground Water Quality in Shallow aquifers of India 

 
Recommendation (Para No.8) 
 
The Committee observe that in some par ts of the country, especially eastern Uttar Pradesh 
polluted water from sugar factories and distilleries greatly affected the quality of ground water to the 
extent that it gives a reddish colour to the water.  However, no case of punishment awarded to wate r 
polluters or environmental offenders in the country has been brought to the notice of the Committee.  
According to the Ministry, the main responsibility for implementation of the Environment (Protection) 
Act, 1986 is of the State Pollution Control Boards .  Admittedly, the State Pollution Control Boards have 
not been able to perform their jobs for various reasons.  Further, role of the Central Pollution Control 
Board is only to give technical advice and overall guidance to the State Pollution Control Board s.  The 
representative of Ministry of Environment and Forests informed the Committee that their role in 
prevention of pollution by industries is confined only to the giving of environmental clearance for new 
industries, viz. before a new industry or an inf rastructural project is established, environmental 
clearance is given by the Ministry of Environment and Forests.   The Committee note that Section 10 of 
the Environment (Protection)  Act, 1986 provides that any person Empowered by the Union 
Government sha ll have the right to entry  and inspection, at all reasonable times with necessary 
assistance, to check infiltration of pollutants.  Further, the Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) has 
also advised all the States to get the polluting industries inspecte d through District Collectors on a 
regular basis and submit a report to them.  The Committee are, therefore, optimistic that, given the 
sense of commitment and credibility of inspecting officers, there is good scope even under the present 
arrangement for t he Union Government to curb industrial pollution.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Government to pull up its socks and attempt to get existing pollution control laws 
enforced strictly by concerned bodies such as Central Pollution Control Board, Ce ntral Ground Water 
Authority and by the State Governments. 

 
They also desire the Government to tone up the functioning of these bodies by calling for 
biennial reports on the status of pollution levels of rivers and water bodies located all over the country,  
and also by insisting on regular inspection of factories, including tanneries located in high -pollution 
areas/ zones like Kanpur in Uttar Pradesh by the Central Pollution Control Board and District Collectors 
and submission of their findings to CGWA at le ast twice a year.  The Committee would like to be 
informed of the steps taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
CGWA had requested all the Regional Directors for inspection of industries to whom NOCs 
have been provided by forming mu lti disciplinary groups. Process has been initiated by the Regional 
Offices. 
WQAA has taken up special studies involving NIH, CGWB and CWC jointly to study 
contamination of surface and ground water by Simbhaoli Sugar Mills and distilleries in U.P. 
Directiv es have been issued to CPCB for initiation of punitive action. CPCB issued directives to 
Simbhaoli Sugar Mills under Section 5 of Environment Protection Act, 1986 for compliance. As per 
the directives of WQAA, Central Ground Water Board has taken up specia l studies on ground 
water pollution around Breweries and Distilleries in all over India. A project „Study of Water Quality 
of the Existing Water Bodies of Meerut District on GIS Platform‟ has been initiated with full financial 
support from WQAA by Janhit Foundation, Meerut. Under this project water quality of 653 water bodies 
of Meerut district are being studied including pesticides. Directives have been issued to Central Ground 
Water Board for preparation of detailed reports on contamination of ground wate r in 88 Industrial 
clusters of India.  
 
Comments of the Committee 

 
   (Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.9) 
 
The Committee note that the Government has taken up a new Plan Scheme called 
Development of Water Resourc es Information System (WRIS) in the Eleventh Plan for developing 
information system on water resources at the national level.  The first phase of WRIS was inaugurated 
by the Ministry of Water Resources on 7 December 2010 and the project is scheduled to be completed 
by December 2012.  The Committee desire the WRIS be completed by the scheduled date positively.  
The Committee further note that the CGWB has developed a ‘Web -enabled Ground Water Information 
System (WEGWIS) in collaboration with NIC, which aims at providing a unified internet -based access 
to water related information (spatial/ non spatial) for policy planning and management.  The Committee 
recognize the potential value of WEGWIS for effective management of our precious ground water 
resources, and desire the Ministry to get the data and information on this system updated regularly so 
that the policy -makers, decision -makers, and the public at large benefit from this advanced modern 
web-enabled information system. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Web enabled  Ground Water Information System (GWIS) has been developed by CGWB in 
collaboration with National Informatics Centre (NIC) to provide users web based access to groundwater 
related information for policy planning and management. Various thematic layers rela ted to ground 
water have also been placed at the website. Ground water level and water quality data for last five 
years have been posted at the website so that any user may access the data. The data is being 
updated  regularly at the website. 

 
Water Quality Division, Ministry of Water Resources is providing secretariat services to Water 
Quality Assessment Authority. For the dissemination of Information and for the creation of a database 
for direct utilisation by the end user/public a MIS based Website has be en designed. Some of the 
salient features are,  Compliance with Government “Guidelines for Indian Government Websites”, 
Accessible Website Structure via Internet Explorer, Mozila Firefox and other browser with support to 
Mobile Phones and will be Disabled f riendly, Website designing with a better User Interface, Dynamic 
Content Management System Feature, Bilingual Management Module Development (Hindi & English), 
Water Quality Assessment Information Management Module, Reports/Publication Management Module 
with Content Integration. 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 
Recommendation (Para No.10) 
 
The Committee observe that the Government has put into use satellite data generated by 
ISRO/NRSA for various studies relat ed to ground water, including identification of areas suitable for 
ground water development and artificial recharge and that the findings of various studies are being 
shared with user agencies/stakeholders on a regular basis. The remote sensing data are re portedly 
being used in these works related to ground water: (i) preparing hydrogeomorphological maps whereby 
geomorphic units are delineated and their hydrogeological characteristics are studied and ground water 
potentiality and development prospects are a ssessed, (ii) demarcating lineaments in hard work area, 
which include identification of focused area for geophysical and detailed hydrogeological study and to 
pinpoint suitable sites for drilling. (iii) delineation of water logged areas in surface water ba sed canal 
command areas taken up for conjunctive use (surface and ground water) studies, (iv) locating suitable 
areas for artificial recharge sites and (v) study of vulnerable areas of geogenic or arsenic 
contamination. The Committee recommend that the Min istry evolve an institutional mechanism to 
channelize the regular flow of remote sensing data to user agencies/stakeholders and apprise the 
Committee of the feedback received from user agencies/stakeholders within six months of the  
presentation of the report. 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Ministry of Drinking water Supply and Sanitation has been concerned over the Groundwater 
conditions in the country, as most of the Rural Water supply schemes in a large part of the country are 
groundwater based. The monitor ing of groundwater as well as advanced information on various 
groundwater components has become important for sustainability of these schemes as well. In order to 
support the state departments involved in Rural Drinking waters supply, by way of hydro -scientific 

 
information and groundwater data management, hydro -geomorphological maps for various regions are 
being prepared by National Remote Sensing Centre Hyderabad, and are being provided by Ministry of 
Drinking water and Sanitation to State departments/boar ds dealing with Rural Drinking Water Supply 
for better management of Drinking water sources, and locating new sources with the help of these 
HGM maps. 
These maps shall guide the state departments to identify targets for groundwater abstraction, 
groundwater recharge, and rainwater harvesting. Source sustainability, evaluation of existing sources 
and development of new/alternative sources as well as multi source systems shall also be facilitated by 
these maps. 
Till Oct 2011 out of 4839 maps required for the c ountry 3928 have been prepared and handed over to 
the states.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
GIS application is very useful in identification of point source of pollut ions from industries, urban 
polluted areas and non -point pollution sources like pesticides/fertilizers pollution from intense 
agricultural activity areas, selections of sites for Sewage disposal for pollution abatement in polluted 
rivers, mapping of potent ial hotspots and environmental hazards. Land degradation maps can also be 
prepared using remote sensing data where saline ground water areas and poor water quality areas 
may be demarcated. Apart from this, remote sensing is also very useful in demarcation of stretches 
where water is highly polluted in different rivers of the country. National Remote Sensing Centre, 
Hyderabad is being pursued to take up projects for assessment of water quality and mapping of 
pollution hotspots using remote sensing data.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.11) 
 
The Committee note that a high -level Task Force under the chairmanship of Member, CWC 
has been appointed to study the entire hydrological pattern of the country, and its recommendations 

 
are to be submitted shortly. The Committee would like to be apprised of the main highlights of the 
report of this Task Force as and when it is received by the Ministry. 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
A working Group for „Assessment of Surplus monsoon runoff and recharge potential of aquifers in 
India‟, was constituted having Shri A.K. Ganju, Member (CWC), Dr. S.C. Dhiman, Member(SML), 
CGWB and representatives from CW&PRS, NIH, MoEF, IMD, GSI and Inland Waterways Authority of 
India as its members. Summary of the report is as below:- 
Detailed analysis of  data of river flows at the terminal sites of major rivers draining into the sea 
indicates that, the total annual runoff being lost to the sea is about 1183.48 BCM of which the monsoon 
runoff is 984.60 BCM which is about 83.2% of total. 
After deducting the  committee flows and storages totaling to about 172 BCM, the balance surplus 
annual runoff is about 1011 BCM, out of which 776.40 BCM is the contribution from the Ganga -
Brahamaputra and Meghna Basin.  Remaining 234.60 BCM of flow is going to the sea from o ther 
basins. 
The recharge potential of aquifers has been worked out based on the post monsoon water level. A total 
of about 25.95 lakh sq.km of area is available in different parts of the country where aquifer recharge 
can be taken up depending upon the av ailability of source water in timeand space.  The volume of 
water required to fill the unsaturated zone of aquifer up to 3 meter below ground level works out to be 
about 1240 BCM. 
Pilot study carried out for Brahmani basis indicates that about 17 BCM of th e annual runoff is flowing in 
to the sea as observed at the terminal gauging point.  

 
Recharging the de -saturated aquifer upto 3 meters below ground level will require only 0.3 BCM of 
water for sub -surface storage.  This clearly indicates that there is need  of detailed study at watershed 
level to assess the availability of surplus water as well as recharge potential of underlying aquifers. 
The availability of monsoon runoff is however, not uniform in all the basins, resulting in surplus and 
deficit of monsoo n runoff vis -avis the water required to recharge the vadose zone.  There is ample 
scope for filling the existing water bodies and creation of small surface storage to harness the surplus 
runoff.  
The sub -surface storages created would be free from environm ental hazards and inter -state 
controversies, since the surface structures created for recharge would be of small dimensions. 
The monsoon runoff conserved in sub -surface reservoir may improve the non monsoon flows in the 
rivers and enhance the base flows, r esulting in improvement of eco -system of the riverine tract, and 
ensure sustainability of river based lift irrigation schemes.  
In the coastal tract, the increased sub -surface fresh water outflow would ameliorate the situation, 
arising out of sea water ingress.  The sea water/fresh water interface would be displaced sea ward. 
This report presents a conceptual framework for utilization of surplus monsoon runoff in the country, 
and delineates priority areas to be taken up for artificial recharge at the first stage.  This is to be 
followed by preparation of experimental schemes or pilot projects in select water sheds in the country, 
which will lead to preparation of operational schemes. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.12) 
 
The Committee also note that geophysical stud ies have been conducted by CGWB in several 
parts of the States of the country to support and supplement ground water management studies, 
ground water exploration and other related works.  Upto 31 March, 2009 geophysical logging of 86 
boreholes had been conducted by the CGWB in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, 
Haryana, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal having consolidated 

 
geological formations.  The Committee observe such geophysical studies provide vita l inputs for 
ground water management studies, selection of sites for drilling of bore/ tube wells, identification of 
areas suitable for construction of artificial recharge structure and for demarcation of areas having saline 
ground water, either inherent, or due to saline water ingress.  Noting the significance of such studies for 
monitoring, management, utilization and preservation of ground water in the country, the Committee 
earnestly urge the Ministry to extend geophysical studies to the remaining State s wherever possibilities 
exist.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the follow -up action taken by the Ministry in the 
matter in course of time.  
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Geophysical logging studies in 100  and 90 boreholes were conducted during 2 009-10 and 
2010-11 respectively in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West 
Bengal. Geophysical is need based and is associated with   Ground Water Exploration Programme in 
the country.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.13) 
 
The Committee recognize artificial recharge to ground water as a key method for conservation 
and management of ground water.  This technique is being employed (i) to enhanc e sustainable yield 
in areas affected by depleted aquifer due to over -exploitation; (ii) for conservation and storage of 
excess surface water for future; and (iii) to improve the quality of existing ground water through dilution.  
The Committee note that t he CGWB is carrying out demonstrative artificial recharge studies in high 
water demand areas with over exploited/ critical storage of ground water development, and that 
demonstrative projects on artificial recharge to ground water have been implemented by the CGWB 

 
during 2006 -09 under the ongoing Central Sector Scheme called „Ground Water Management & 
Regulation‟ in 8 identified areas of the States of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh and 
Tamil Nadu.  As of March, 2010 out of 200 artificial recharge  structures approved for implementation 
under the scheme at a cost of Rs. 5.607 crores, 194 structures had been completed.  The remaining 6 
structures in the State of Karnataka are reportedly in progress.  The Committee also note that the 
CGWB has set a ta rget of 75 demonstrative artificial recharge projects for implementation apart from 
the above States at a total cost of Rs. 100 crore under the same scheme during the 11 th Plan, and for 
which 14 projects were said to have been sanctioned for 8 States.  The  Committee feel that the 
Government should extend the Scheme to other areas facing critical ground water levels, such as 
Bundelkhand region of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh.  The Committee also expect the CGWB to 
meet its goal for completion of 75 demon strative artificial recharge projects during the 11 th Plan.  The 
Committee would like to be informed of the progress made in this matter at the earliest.  Also, the 
status of six projects already in progress be intimated to the Committee.  
 
Reply of the Government  
 
The scheme has been extended to other States facing critical ground water levels including the 
Bundelkhand region of Uttar Pradesh. A scheme for “Artificial Recharge to Ground Water & Water 
Conservation in Mauranipur Block, District Jhansi” has been taken up in the Bundelkhand region for 
construction of 32 check dams. Regarding the achievement of the target of 75 Demonstrative Artificial 
Recharge Projects, this is to submit that a total of 82 demonstrative Artificial Recharge Projects for 
construction of 1475 recharge structures are being implemented in 20 states. More projects are being 
received from various states & at present about 10 projects are under scrutiny. The remaining six 
recharge structures, which were under progress in Karnataka, have been completed.   
 

 
 
Recommendation (Para No.14) 
 
The Committee note that the Government has launched a State Sector Scheme of artificial 
recharge of ground water through dug wells in over exploited, critical and semi critical assessment units 
of 7 States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat and Madhya 
Pradesh during the 11th Plan.  The scheme was to be implemented in 1,180 blocks of these States in a 
time span of three years from 2007 -2010 with the objective to facil itate improvement in ground water 
situation in the affected areas, increase the sustainability of wells during lean period, improve quality of 
ground water and community involvement in water resources management in the affected areas.  The 
average cost of recharge structure per well was Rs. 4,000 for a total of 4.45 million dug wells and Rs. 
1,536.75 crore were sanctioned for the scheme by the Ministry of Finance.  The Committee learned 
from the Ministry that physical and financial status of this State Sect or Scheme is being monitored on 
monthly basis in terms of number of beneficiaries identified, opening of bank account, release of 
subsidy in their bank accounts and construction of dug well recharge structure by the beneficiaries.  
They also note that a to tal of 7,72,249 beneficiaries were issued subsidy and an amount of Rs. 303.39 
crore had been released against which Rs. 274.13 crore have been utilized in respect of the Scheme 
upto 31.05.2011.  The Committee note that this scheme has been implemented main ly in areas 
predominantly underlain by consolidated rocks viz. Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka, 
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh since about 80 per cent of these ground water 
stressed areas (over -exploited, critical and semi -critical) are located in these States where rapid 
decline of ground water levels have been noticed on long -term basis.  The Committee recommend 
financial as well as physical targets achieved under the Scheme. 
 
 
Reply of the Government  

 
 
The dug well recharge sche me was implemented during the period 2007 -2010. As per 
information received from NABARD, an amount of Rs. 303.39 crore including subsidy of Rs. 283.519 
crore to 7,74,261 beneficiaries was released in six States excluding Andhra Pradesh. As on August, 
2011, subsidy of Rs. 260.921 crore has been utilized by 7,13,042 beneficiaries. A total of 1,07,249 
structures have been completed so far. The scheme could not be implemented in Andhra Pradesh as 
the Nodal agency designated by the State Government had expressed  its inability to implement the 
scheme.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.15) 
 
The Committee note that apart from artificial recharge to ground water, rain water harvesting is 
another great potential method of augmentation of ground water resources.  This techniqu e involves 
collection of rainfall either for direct use for drinking, domestic, irrigation or diversion to underground 
aquifers through suitable techniques of artificial recharge for augmenting the ground water reservoir.  
The Committee also note that the Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) has directed all States 
having „over-exploited‟ areas to promote / adopt rain water harvesting, and that as a result of which 18 
States and 4 Union Territories (UTs) have amended building by -laws for making rain water harvesting 
mandatory.  Similarly, the Committee are also pleased to note that the CGWA directions for adoption of 
roof top water harvesting system to Group Housing Societies, Institutes, Hotels, Industries, Farm 
Houses, etc. in the notified areas of Delhi,  Faridabad, Gurgaon, Ghaziabad and other areas of NCT 
Delhi having water table 8 meters below ground surface, has received encouraging responses, and 
that the Delhi Jal Board in NCT Delhi is providing assistance of 50 per cent of the cost uptoRs. 1 lakh 
to Group Housing Societies, RWAs, Charitable Institutions, etc. to motivate them to opt for rain water 
harvesting.  It is noted that financial assistance has been approved in 206 cases and that a total of 299 

 
training programmes have so far been conducted fo r capacity building of stakeholders in designing of 
rain water harvesting structures to augment ground water in different terrains and hydrological 
conditions.  During their study visit to the Central Leather Research Institute (CLRI), Chennai in June, 
2011, the Committee were informed that the CLRI has become self -sufficient in water supply after they 
resorted to rain water harvesting.  The Committee believe that while such promotional efforts for rain 
water harvesting by the Ministry and cognate agencies are indeed laudable, more emphasis is needed 
to enforce mandatory rain water harvesting laws in those 18 States and 4 UTs which have already 
opted for them.  The remainder States may also be persuaded to take similar measures.  The 
Committee are also of the view that the Government should explore the possibility of making rain water 
harvesting mandatory in all the buildings of the Government – Central as well the States, wherein their 
Ministries/ Departments, etc. are located.  They further feel that if mor e attractive incentives are offered 
for rain water harvesting, achievement of the desired objectives may not be far off. 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
For promoting Rain Water Harvesting/adoption of Artificial Recharge to Ground Water in the 
country (except in the water logged areas), Central Ground Water Authority has issued  directions for 
implementation of rain water harvesting and ground water recharge for arresting rainfall runoff 
occurring along all National Highways, State Highways, and other major roa ds by Central Road 
Research Institute, National Highways Authority of India, Central Public Works Department, State 
Public Works Departments; along rail tracks and other establishments of Indian Railways, in the Stadia 
by Sports Authority of India, Board o f Control for Cricket in India, Departments of sports and Youth 
Affairs and in the Airports by Airport Authority of India, Ministry of Civil Aviation.The Authority has also 
directed the Chief Secretaries/ Administrators of all the States/ Union Territories  and Ministry of Urban 

 
Development  to  take necessary action to adopt rain water harvesting/ artificial recharge on all the 
Government buildings. Ministry of Water Resources have also instituted Ground Water Augmentation 
Awards & National Water Award whic h are aimed at encouraging Non -Governmental Organizations 
(NGOs)/ Gram Panchayats/ Urban Local Bodies/ Institutions/ Corporate Sector and Individuals for 
adopting innovative practices of ground water augmentation by rainwater harvesting and artificial 
recharge, promoting water use efficiency, recycling & re -use of water and creating awareness  through 
people's participation.  In total, there are 20 Ground Water Augmentation Awards  for six categories 
consisting of Rs. 1 lakh and a plaque with citation and o ne National Water Award  consisting of a cash 
award of Rs. 10 lakh and a  plaque with citation.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.16) 
 
The Committee note that under Section 5 of the  Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, the 
CGWA has been given powers to give directions, and that courts of local jurisdiction are empowered to 
take cognizance of offences of non -compliance of such directions under section 15 of the Act.  It is, 
therefore, imperative that directions issued by CGWA to local bodies like Delhi Development Authority 
(DDA), Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD), New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC), Resident Welfare 
Associations (RWAs), etc. are complied with and all cases of non - compliance dealt with in accordance 
with the law.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry take appropriate and prompt 
steps to ensure better compliance to directions issued by the CGWA in the matter. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 

 
 
The ground water regulation in NCT, Delhi is being done by Delhi Government as per Gazette 
Notification dated 18.05.2010 issued by the Office of Lieutenant Governor. Representative of CGWB is 
a member in the Advisory Committee. 
The Chief Secretary, Government of Delhi h as been requested to issue direction to the Chairmen of all 
the District Advisory Committees to promote ground water recharge measures on large scale to control 
further decline of water levels. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.17) 
 
The Committee observe that incr ease in water use efficiency in agriculture can greatly reduce 
withdrawal of ground water and thus help preventing decline in ground water table.  In this behalf, the 
Committee note that the Ministry has sanctioned 5,000 demonstrations under Farmers Partic ipatory 
Action Research Programme (FPARP) through 60 identified institutes in 25 States/UTs across the 
country at a cost of Rs. 24.4685 crore in the year 2007 -08.  As resorted, 91.8 per cent of 5,000 
demonstrations had been completed by the end of Kharif 2 009, and 398 demonstrations were either 
completed or nearing completion during Rabi 2009 -10, and evaluation of the programme has been 
initiated by external agencies for assessing the final outcome of the programme.  The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Minis try to make more vigorous efforts to ensure completion of the remaining 
demonstrations under FPARP and also seek to complete evaluation process of the programme by 
external agencies, which is in place presently.  They would like to be apprised of concrete action taken 
by the Ministry in the matter. 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 

 
A total of 4912 demonstration under Farmers Participatory Action Research Programme have been 
completed in the first phase with an expenditure of Rs 17.64 Crore . The  evaluation proces s of the 
FPARP 1st phase programme is under progress by the identified external agency. 
The Programme has been extended by launching the 2 nd phase of FPARP through involvement of 31 institutes 
under which 2921 demonstrations have been approved and an amoun t of Rs 14.31 Crore has been sanctioned 
and released to the implementing institutes in the year 2011. A total of 153 demonstrations were taken up during 
the Rabi and summer seasons. Around 668 demos are being taken up during the Kharif 2011 season. The 
concurrent evaluation of the 2 nd phase has also been takenup by the agency and inception report has been 
submitted by the agency. 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.18) 
 
The Committee were apprised that several works related to water conservation have been 
carried ou t under MNREG Scheme, viz. water conservation and water harvesting, drought proofing 
including forestation and tree plantation, irrigation canals including micro and minor irrigation works, 
provision of irrigation facility to lands belonging to SCs/STs or to beneficiaries of land reforms or of 
Indira Awas Yojana of the Government of India.  The Committee further note the Ministry‟s reply that 
water conservation works undertaken in the MNREGS by construction of water harvesting and artificial 
recharge struct ures like check dams, village ponds, minor irrigation works, renovation of traditional 
water conservation structures, etc. are beneficial for recharging and conserving the ground water as 
per local requirements and that the augmentation of recharged water will lead to stabilization/ rising of 
water levels in the area.  The Committee are of the unanimous but considered view that focused 
attention be given by Ministry to works related to water conservation under MNREGS so that water 
conservation, including gr ound water conservation and management becomes a collective movement 

 
of the people all over the country.  The Government also needs to review periodically the impact of 
such works on the level of ground water, its conservation availability and the quality of water.  The 
Committee also desire the Ministry to explore the possibility of adopting models of ground water 
management already practiced abroad, namely mandatory registration of wells, introduction of well 
permits, national well inventory, well meterin g, etc. in the works taken up under MNREG Scheme to 
promote their use among the people at large. 
 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
The model bill circulated by the Government has a provision for mandatory registration of wells and 
issue of permits. Central Ground Water Authority examines proposals for issuing NOC for withdrawal of 
ground water for new/ expansion industries/ projects falling in over-exploited/ critical/ semi -critical. As 
per guidelines framed for the purpose, industries/ projects to whom NOC is is sued have to install 
meters and monitor quantum of ground water withdrawal.  
All Regional Directors of CGWB have been advised to contact the implementation agencies for Artificial 
Recharge schemes as well as State Government Department dealing with MGNREGA  activities to 
sensitize the panchayats on water conservation measure of construction of recharge structures. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.19) 
 
The Committee note that the Government launched in the year 2005 a pilot scheme called “national 
Project for Repair, Renovation & Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies directly linked to Agriculture” with 
a estimated cost of Rs. 300 crore to be shared by the Centre and the States in ration of 3:1.  The 
objectives of the scheme were to restore and augment storage capacities of water bodies, and to 
recover and extend their lost irrigation potential.  The Ministry informed the Committee that a total of 
1,098 schemes with an estimated amount of Rs. 299.91 crore have been approved, works of 1,054 

 
water bodies completed, works in 13 water bodies have been dropped while work was in progress in 31 
water bodies in the State of Maharashtra due to late approval.  The evaluation reports received from 
Water Technology Centre, Bhubaneswar, Water and Land Management and Research Institute, 
Hyderabad and Centre for Water Resources Development and Management, Kozhikode, Kerala 
reportedly indicated considerable increase in storage capacities of water bodies as well as increase in 
agricultural productivity in their command areas.  The Committee desire the Ministry to intimate the 
reasons for dropping f the works in 13 water bodies and the status of 31 ongoing works in Maharashtra.  
Besides, the Committee are given to understand that another programme for rejuvenation of water 
bodies was launched by the Government in 2009 with t he assistance of  World Bank and that projects 
have been taken up in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Orissa, with the first instalment 
being released to the States of Karnataka and Orissa. The Committee earnestly desire the Ministry to 
extend this World Bank aided programme for repair, renovation and restoration of water bodies to other 
remaining States particularly perennial drought prone States such as Rajasthan, Gujarat and Madhya 
Pradesh to increase wider coverage of the programme.  
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Pilot scheme launched in 2005 with an objective to increase the storage capacity and irrigation 
potential of water bodies,. Central share of Rs.197.30crore released under the scheme for taking up 
1098 water bodies in 26 districts of 15 states. Works completed in 1085waterbodies including 31 water 
bodies in Maharashtra. Works in 13 water bodies were dropped due to administrative reasons. 
Under the scheme of RRR of water bodies with external assistance World B ank Loan Agreement has 
been signed with Tamil Nadu for Rs. 2182 crore to restore 5763 water bodies having a CCA of 4 lakh 
hectares, with Andhra Pradesh for Rs.835 crore for restoration 3000 water bodies with a CCA of 2.5 
lakh hectares, with Karnataka for R s.268.78 crore for restoration 1224 water bodies with CCA of 0.52 

 
lakh and with Orissa for Rs. 448 crore for restoration of 900 water bodies having CCA of 1.2 lakh 
hectares. 
For obtaining World bank assistance the State Governments are required to pose the ir project proposal 
to the World Bank through Department of Economic Affairs as per stipulated procedure. The State 
Government were requested to intimate their expression of interest under the scheme of RRR of water 
bodies with External assistance. While t he State Government of Odhisa, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh 
and Tamil Nadu have undertaken activities under RRR scheme with External assistance, there was 
little response from other states for the scheme with external assistance and instead the state 
Government of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh etc expressed their interest for funding under the scheme 
with domestic support. Accordingly, the proposal received from these State were processed for release 
under the scheme of RRR of water bodies with domestic support.  
Under the scheme of RRR of Water bodies with Domestic Support a total of Rs.653.43 crore has since 
been released to Odisha, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh (Bundelkhand), Madhya 
Pradesh (Bundelkhand),Madhya Pradesh (Bundelkhand), Meghalaya (Umaim Lake), Maharashtra, 
Gujarat, Chhattisgarh and Haryana.   
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.20) 
 
The Committee regret to learn from  MoE&F that the system of prosecution has achieved little success 
as far as criminal prosecution of environmental offenders is  concerned, and further that nobody has 
been given imprisonment till date on this account.  According to the MoE&F, it is constitution National 
Environment Protection Authority in which they are planning to insert a provision for economic penalty 
against polluters of environment including rivers/water bodies have been shielded behind the protection 
cover of the lengthy and time consuming judicial process, the Committee recommend the Government 

 
to expedite the formation National Environment Protection Authority which will hopefully impose penalty 
on offending industrialist, polluters etc.  The Committee would like to be informed of the progress made 
in this regard.   
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Ministry of Environment & Forest has not yet sent Action Taken Rep ort in respect of above 
recommendation.  ATR shall be sent immediately after receipt of the same from Ministry of 
Environment & Forest    
 
Recommendation (Para No.21) 
 
The Committee are pleased to note that the Government  has in 2007 instituted two annual  
awards, namely „Ground Water Augmentation Awards‟ (Bhoomijal Samvardhan Puruskar) and 
„National Water Award‟ carrying cash awards of Rs. 1 lakh and Rs. 10 lakh respectively to encourage 
the NGOs/Gram Panchayats/Urban Local Bodies (for population upto 1 la kh)/ institutions/ Corporate 
Sector and individuals for adopting innovative practices of ground water augmentation by rain water 
harvesting and creating awareness in the target areas.  Besides the Ministry‟s proposal to use IT 
Kiosks installed in big villa ge to propagate information on ground water in local language with pictorial 
depiction and also plans to make available the expertise of scientists deployed in districts for teaming 
up with district magistrates and panchayats in its drive to have effective  water conservation, 
development, augmentation and exploitation, the Committee also note that the Ministry plans to deal 
with the problem of shortage of scientific manpower at district levels.  The Committee hope that the 
efforts of the Ministry to encoura ge the local bodies etc. and to create awareness among the target 
areas will fructify soon.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the positive outcome of the steps 
initiated by the CGWB for mass awareness campaigns throughout the country by involving  Central/ 

 
State/NGOs, Voluntary Organizations/ RWAs, educational institutions, industries and individuals as 
also the impact of all other connected efforts. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
Mass Awareness and Training Programmes conducted and other efforts made by Central 
Ground water Board have received positive response from the Central/State Government 
Organisations, NGOs/ Voluntary Organisations, RWAs, educational institutions etc. Many State 
Governments/ NGOs/ VOs/ RWAs  have undertaken actions for adoption of  rainwater harvesting and 
artificial recharge.   
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.22) 
 
The Committee would urge the Government to initiate steps in the right earnest to strive to 
build national consensus to bring water either in the Union List or in the Concurrent List after due 
consultation with the State government so that a comprehensive national plan of action is evolved for 
water conservation, development, exploitation and equ itable distribution in the larger and long term 
national interest.  The Committee recommend that  the draft proposal in this regard may be initiated by 
the Ministry expeditiously. 
Reply of the Government  
 
The Cabinet Secretariat constituted a Committee on Allocation of Natural Resources (CANR) 
under the chairmanship of Shri Ashok Chawla vide order dated 31 st January 2011.  The Committee 
submitted its report on 31st May 2011.  The committee inter-alia recommended as follows:- 

 
“The Committee sees an urgent ne ed to have a comprehensive national legislation on water.  This can 
be either done through bringing water under the Concurrent List and then farming the appropriate 
legislation; or by obtaining consensus from a majority of the States that such a “framework  law” is 
necessary and desirable as a Union enactment. The legal options in this regard need to be examined 
by the Ministry of Water Resources.  The national legislation should clarify a common position on a 
number of issues, e.g., need to consider all wat er resources as conjunctive, unified whole; water as a 
common property resource; principles of allocations ad pricing and so on.  The framework legislation 
should recognize that pollution also leads to conjunctive use of water, which makes the resources 
unusable for other purposes”. 
The recommendations of CANR have been referred to a Group of Ministers. 
It is further stated that Ministry of Water Resources has established National Water Mission 
Secretariat to achieve goals & Strategies identified under National Water Mission.  
Two of the five goals of the National Water Mission are: 
iii) Promotion of citizen and State actions for water conservation, augmentation and 
preservation. 
iv) Focused attention to vulnerable areas including over exploited area.  
The strategies for achieving the above Goals as stipulated in the Mission Document of National Water 
Mission are as follows: 
Goal: Promotion of citizen and State actions for water conservation, augmentation and 
preservation 
 Empowerment and involvement of Panchyati Raj I nstitutions, urban local bodies, Water Users‟ 
Association and primary stake holders in management of water resources with focus on water 
conservation, augmentation and preservation 

 
 Promote participatory irrigation management 
 Sensitization of elected representatives of over-exploited areas on dimensions of the problems 
and to orient investment under  MNREGP toward water conservation. 
 Provide incentives for water neutral and water positive technologies. 
 Encourage participation of NGOs in various activities re latd to water resources management, 
particularly in planning, capacity building and mass awareness. 
 Involve and encourage corporate sector/industries to take up, support and promoted water 
conservation, augmentation and preservation within the industry and  as part as corporate 
social responsibility.   
Goal: Focused attention to vulnerable areas including over-exploited areas 
 Expeditious implementation of water resources projects particularly the multipurpose projects 
with carry over storages benefitting drought prone and rain deficit areas. 
 Promotion of traditional system of water conservation. 
 Physical sustainability of groundwater resources. 
 Intensive programme for ground water recharge in over -0exploited, critical and semi -critical 
areas. 
 Conservation and preservation of wetland. 
 Intensive programme for addressing the quality aspects of drinking water  
 Systematic approach for coping with floods.  
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
-  NIL - 

 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 23) 
 
Keeping in view the apprehension of diversion of waters of some international rivers by the 
riparian country, the Committee urge the Government to furnish complete date of the major river 
systems of the country, indicating the volume of water  in each river system at the point where the river 
enters India and the volume at the point where it falls into the sea or the flows into the territory of 
adjoining country, and also the volume of water diverted or utilized for irrigation purposes within t he 
country, river-system wise for the last ten years.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
On Brahmaputra and its tributaries originating in China viz. Siang, Subansiri and Lohit, data 
collection near indo -Tibet brooder has started in late2006. As such, average esti mate of volume 
ofwater at the points where these streams enter India have been estimated on the basis of the rainfall -
runoff data being collected at various project sites in Arunachal Pradesh using hydrological methods as 
follows:- 
Name of River Monsoon  Non Monsoon Total 
Siang 56.12 21.98 78.10 BCM 

 
Subansiri 12.85 4.82 17.67BCM 
Lohit 20.77 10.29 31.06BCM 
 
The volume of water at the point where river Brahmaputra enters into Bangaladesh has been estimated 
on the basis of data observation at Dhubri as 629 .05BCM in monsoon and 188.03BCMin Non -
monsoon).  An Index map indicating the above information is enclosed.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No.25 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 

 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-  NIL - 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                            DIP GOGOI 
  March, 2012                                         Chairman,                 
  Phalguna, 1933 (Saka)            Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 

 
APPENDIX – I 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2011-12) HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 29 FEBRUARY 2012 
  
The Committee sat from 1130 hours to 1220 hours in Committee Room No.53, First 
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Dip Gogoi – Chairman 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.         Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi 
3.         Shri Pulin Bihari Baske 
4.         Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
5.         Shri Haribhau Jawale 
6.         Shri Virender Kashyap 
7.       Shri Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan. 
8.       Shri Mangani Lal Mandal 
9.       Shri Nityananda Pradhan 
       10.       Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
             11.      Shri S.P.Y. Reddy  
12.        Shri Arjun Roy 
13.        Smt. Annu Tandon 
14.        Shri Bhisma Shankar alias Kushal Tiwari 
15.        Dr. P. Venugopal 
16.        Shri Sajjan Singh Verma 
  
              RAJYA SABHA 
 
17.       Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder  
18. Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
19.       Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
20. Dr. Ashok S. Ganguly 
21. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
 22. Smt. Bimla Kashyap Sood 
 
              

 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.  Shri Devender Singh  -  Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri B.S. Dahiya  -  Director 
3.  Smt. Rita Jailkhani  -  Additional Director 
        
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitt ing of the Committee convened 
for consideration and adoption of draft Report on the subject " Consideration and adoption of draft 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the 
Tenth Report (15th Lok Sabha) on "Augmentation of Depleted Ground Water Level, Sustainable 
Development, Conservation, Management, Use of Ground Water and Prevention of Water Pollution." 
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up the draft Report for consideration.  After some discussion, 
the Co mmittee adopted the Report with minor amendments/modifications as suggested by the 
Members.  The Members also deliberated on several issues including the need for time -bound 
completion of projects under the scheme of Inter -Linking of Rivers, need to popula rize modern system 
of irrigation like drip and sprinkler system, and monitoring the flow volume of major river systems in the 
country with the help of satellite data.  They decided to hold another sitting of the Committee during the 
Budget session to discuss such and related issues. 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the Report in view of the minor 
consequential changes as suggested by the Members and present the same to Parliament in the 
ensuing Budget session.  
 
The Committee then adjourned 

 
APPENDIX II 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TENTH REPORT 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE  
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations/Observations   23 
 
 
(ii) Recommendation/Observations which have been    
accepted by the Government  
 
Para Nos.  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,  
 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21 and 22 
 
Total         22 
Percentage        95.65% 
  
  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
 
NIL 
 
Total         00  
Percentage         0 % 
 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Para Nos. 23 
 
Total         01  
Percentage 4.35 % 
 
 
 