 
1 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
                                (2009-2010) 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2009-2010)  
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources} 
 
 
 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
August, 2010/Shravana, 1932 (Saka) 
5 

 
2 
 
 
FIFTH REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
 
(2009-2010) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2009-2010) 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  20.08.2010 
                                                   Laid in Rajya Sabha on   20.08.2010 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2010/Shravana, 1932 (Saka) 

 
3 
 
WRC NO. 21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2010 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 

 
4 
 
CONTENTS 
           PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2009-10)…………………  (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………… (v) 
 
 
CHAPTER I   Report ………………………………………… 1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been  
accepted by the Government ……..…………….. 9 
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the    
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government’s replies …………………….…….. 27 
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of   
which replies of the Government have not been  
accepted by the Committee ……………………. 35 
 
CHAPTER V  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
final replies of the Government are still awaited ….   38 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
  I. Minutes of the Sixteenth Sitting of the Committee  
                                    held on 17.08.2010   
 
  II. Analysis of action taken by the Government on the  
                        Observations/Recommendations contained in the First 
                        Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee………. 
 
 
 
 

 
5 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES (2009-2010) 
  
 
  Shri Beni Prasad Verma  -  Chairman 
 
          MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi 
3. Shri Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan 
4. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
         5. Shri Dip Gogoi 
6.  Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
7. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
8. Shri Virender Kashyap 
9. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
       10.        Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
11.        Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
             12.        Shri S.P.Y. Reddy 
13.        Shri Arjun Roy 
14.        Smt. J. Shantha 
15.        Shri K. Shivkumar alias J.K. Ritheesh 
16.     Smt. Annu Tandon 
17. Dr. P. Venugopal (Tiruvallur) 
18.  Shri Sajjan Verma 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
19.         Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan 
20. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
   21.         Shri Ranjitsinh Vijaysinh Mohite-Patil 
             22. Shri Mangala Kisan 
23. Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
24.   Dr. Ashok S. Ganguly 
 
 
SECRETARIAT   
1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Director 
4. Shri A.K. Yadav   - Committee Officer 
 
     
   

 
6 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2009 -2010) having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Fifth Report on the 
Action Taken by Government on the observations/reco mmendations contained in the First Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water Resources (2009 -2010) on “Demands for 
Grants (2009-10)” of the Ministry of Water Resources.  
2. The First Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on 10 December 2009.  The 
replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 7 May, 
2010. 
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and adopted by 
the Committee at their sitting held on 17 August 2010. 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/ recommendations 
contained in the First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;           BENI PRASAD VERMA, 
17 August, 2010                              Chairman, 
26 Shravana, 1932 (Saka)             Standing Committee on Water Resources 
  
 
 
 

 
7 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources deals with the action taken 
by the Government on the recommendations / observations contained in their First Report (15th 
Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2009-2010) of the Ministry of Water Resources which was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 10 December 2009. 
2. Action taken notes were received from the Gove rnment in respect of all the 20 
recommendations/observations of the Committee which have been categorised as follows: - 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos. 2 .39, 2.40, 2.44, 2.45, 2.47, 2.48, 3.14, 3.15, 3.16, 4.11, 5.14, 6.7,  
and 6.8               (Total - 13) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government‟s replies: 
Para Nos. 2.42, 2.46, 4.10, 5.13 and 5.15              
   (Total -5) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee:  
Para Nos.2.41 and 2.43      (Total - 02) 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
(Total - Nil) 
 
3. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of the 
recommendations/observations in the succeeding paragraphs. 

 
8 
 
 
A.    Need for judicious utilization of funds. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.40) 
 
4. The Committee had noted that the actual plan expenditure during 2007 -08 was to the 
extent of 86% which dropped to 73% during 2008 -09.  The Ministry had informed that the 
expenditure could not be incurred as per the targets in respect of the schemes , viz. Ground 
Water Management and Regulation, Hydrology Project and R&D. There have been slight 
shortfalls in some of the schemes also.  The Committee , therefore, had desired the Ministry to 
give greater and focused attention while assessing the actual requirement of funds during a 
particular year so that the funds allocated are utilized judiciously and optimally. 
5. The Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR) in its action taken reply ha s intimated that 
the instructions of the Committee have been noted for compliance and necessary directions 
issued to all organizations under the Ministry of Water Resources. 
6. The Committee while noting a drop in Plan expenditure from 86% in 2007 -08 to 
73% in 2008-2009 had desired proper assessment of requirement of funds so as to avoid 
idle parking of allocated  funds.  The Ministry’s response that necessary instructions 
have been issued to the concerned organizations  is casual.   The Committee hope that 
the Ministry would ensure by close and constant monitoring that its instructions are 
scrupulously followed by its various executing agencies and field formations to ensure 
full utilization of allotted funds. 
 
B.    Utilization Certificates(UCs) 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.41) 
 
7. The Committee had noted that as on 1 April 2009, 43 Utilisation Certificates(UCs) wort h 
Rs. 2.22 crore from 65 institutions and Autonomous Bodies and also 21 UCs worth Rs. 38.38 
crore from 25 State Governments were outstanding.  Due to constant efforts made by the 

 
9 
 
Ministry the number of outstanding UCs as on 31 July 2009 in respect of grant s released upto 
31 March 2007 had come down to 28 for institutions and Autonomous Bodies.  However , it 
remained at 21 in respect of State Governments reportedly due to non -reconciliation of 
accounts of the implementing agencies of the States.  The Committe e, therefore, had desired 
that Ministry should not allow the States and particularly the autonomous bodies working under 
them to delay submission of UCs and recommended that some timeframe for submission of 
UCs should be set besides introducing penalty cla use to ward off such delays.  The States 
should also be asked periodically for reconciliation of accounts of the implementing agencies of 
the States. 
 
8. The Government in reply submitted that the status of outstanding UCs as on 
31.10.2009 in respect of Gr ants released upto 31.03.2007 to Institutions/Autonomous Bodies 
and State Government is as given below: 
Status as on Institutions/Autonomous Bodies States / UTs 
 No. of UCs Amount (Rs in Crore) No. of UCs Amount(Rs. in crore) 
01.04.2008 87 5.17 47 68.56 
30.09.2008 65 2.92 26 51.57 
01.04.2009 43 2.22 21 38.38 
31.07.2009 28 1.63 21 38.38 
01.10.2009 28 1.63 14 36.79 
 
 It has been stated that strict watch is being kept on receipt of UCs at the time of release 
of Grant-in-Aid.  No grants are being release d without getting the UCs for the grants released 
for the previous year. 
  
As regards the UCs of State Governments, the concerned division s of this Ministry, viz. 
CAD / Minor Irrigation / Ganga Wings are monitoring the same regularly. 
 
9. The Committee in their Report had desired the Ministry not to allow to delay in 
submission of UCs by the States and autonomous bodies and had recommended to set 
a timeframe for submission of UCs in addition to the introduction of a penalty clause to 

 
10 
 
avoid such delays.   Th e Ministry, while furnishing status of outstanding UCs ha s stated 
that a strict watch was being kept on receipt of UCs at the time of release of grant-in-aid.   
The Ministry, however, preferred to remain studiously silent on fixing of timeframe and 
introducing a penalty clause in case of delays.  The Committee deprecate such a 
perfunctory approach of the Ministry in tackling serious issues like inordinate delays in 
submission of UCs and therefore,  reiterate their earlier recommendation to fix a time 
frame for submission of UCs and to introduce a penalty clause to ward off delays. 
 
C.    Review of National Water Policy. 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.43) 
 
10. The Committee had noted that in order to address the possible threat posed by climate 
change, the Prime M inister announced the National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) 
on 30 June 2008 which envisages eight National Missions including the National Water Mission 
(NWM).  The Ministry of Water Resources has prepared the draft Mission document and 
submitted for consideration by Prime Minister‟s Council on Climate Change.  NWM‟s objectives 
are „Conservation of water, minimizing wastage and ensuring equal distribution across and 
within States‟.  Also, one of the goals of the NWM is to increase the efficiency of  water use.  
The Committee  had further note d that in view of the strategies proposed, the revisiting of 
National Water Policy  would be undertaken in consultation with the stakeholders particularly 
the State Governments.  It was likely to be discussed in th e thirteenth meeting of „National 
Water Board.‟  The Committee had expected the Ministry of Water Resources to review the 
National Water Policy and take note of the various suggestions given by the State 
Governments, and other stakeholders and eminent clim atologists keeping in view the looming 
threat of climate change and the grave scarcity of water in future. 
 
11. The Government in action taken reply stated that t he 13 th Meeting of National Water 
Board was held on 18 September 2009.  One of the items of Agenda for the meeting was 
“Review of National Water Policy – 2002“.  Suggestions have been received from various State 

 
11 
 
Governments. The participants also made valuable suggestions.  It is proposed to organize 
consultation workshops and seek views from vario us stakeholders including specialists, 
academicians and civil society also on the National Water Policy.  
12. The Committee in their report while keeping in view the looming threat of climate 
change and grave scarcity of water in future had expected the Mi nistry to review the 
National Water Policy and take note of the suggestions given by various stakeholders.  
The Ministry has stated that they proposed to hold consultation workshop and seek 
views from various stakeholders on National Water Policy.  However , the casual 
approach of the Ministry is too apparent since no time frame has been set for holding 
such a workshop.  The Committee are not convinced with the reply of the Ministry and 
reiterate their earlier recommendation to review the National Water Poli cy without any 
further loss of time. 
 
D.    Utilization of irrigation potential  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.16) 
 
13. The Committee had noted that the ultimate irrigation potential is 140 Mha whereas 34 
Mha is yet to be created.  Under MMI the ultimate irr igation potential is 54.465 Mha out of 
which 42.277 Mha has been created upto the end of Tenth Plan.  The target for XI Plan is 9.0 
Mha.  The Committee  had also noted that the targets were not achieved in the past in  spite of 
the assistance given under AIB P.  The Committee had further noted that against the irrigation 
potential created to the extent of 42.277 Mha, the utilization of irrigation potential was 34.42 
Mha upto X Plan, i.e. 81% of the created potential has been utilized.  The Committee were 
perturbed to note that despite providing assistance under AIBP, the targets set for creation of 
irrigation potential were yet to be achieved.  The Committee  had desired the Ministry to look 
into the causes of the underutilization and take appropriate and effect ive steps to increase the 
utilisation of irrigation potential. 
  

 
12 
 
14. The Ministry in reply stated that t he ultimate irrigation potential is estimated to be about 
140 million hectare out of which about 102.7 million hectare of irrigation potential was repor ted 
to be created by the end of X Plan.  As per the information provided by the State Governments, 
total irrigation potential created up to March 2009 is about 106.4 Million hectare.  Thus about 
33.6 million hectare remains to be created. 
  
 The ultimate i rrigation potential under major & medium irrigation projects has been 
estimated to be about 58.5 million hectare out of which about 42.35 million hectare of creation 
of irrigation potential has been reported by States up to the end of X Plan.  However, the  
corresponding irrigation potential utilization is about 34.42 million hectare. 
  
 Ministry of Water Resources awarded studies to Indian Institute of Management (IIMs) 
Ahmedabad, Bangal uru, Kolkatta and Lucknow to examine the various issues related to the 
gap between irrigation potential created and utilised and for suggesting measures for reducing 
the gap.  In the reports submitted by IIMs, several reasons have been identified for the gap 
between irrigation potential created and irrigation potential utilis ed and some of the important 
reasons are as under: 
i. Lack of proper operation and maintenance 
ii. Incomplete distribution system 
iii. Non-completion of command area development 
iv. Changes from the initially designed cropping pattern 
v. Diversion of irrigable land for other purposes. 
 
 The report of the studies carried out by IIMs was circulated to all the State 
Governments and other stakeholders.  With a view to further deliberate on the findings of the 
studies and recommendations made by IIMs and the suggestions received f rom the State 
Governments and other stakeholders, a workshop was organised by the Ministry of Water 
Resources on 17  March 2009 at New Delhi.  The findings of the studies and the important 

 
13 
 
points which emerged during the deliberations at the workshop have b een forwarded to the 
State Governments for necessary actions. 
 
15. The Committee had noted with concern that despite the assistance provided 
under AIBP, the targets fixed for creation of irrigation potential were not achieved and 
had recommended to look in to the causes of under utilisation of irrigation potential and 
take effective steps to increase the utilisation thereof.  The Ministry while giving the 
status of irrigation potential has stated that the findings of the studies undertaken by 
IIMs and the im portant points  which emerged during the workshop held on 17 March 
2009 have been forwarded to the State Governments for necessary action.  The 
Committee desire that the action taken by the State Governments thereon be furnished 
to them. 
 
E.    Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6.7) 
 
16. The Committee had noted that a pilot project for Repair, Renovation and Restoration of 
Water Bodies was launched in January 2005 in 26 districts of 15 States to augment and restore  
the capacity of water bodies and expand their irrigation potential.  These projects cover 1,098 
water bodies with total original culturable command area of 1.72 lakh ha.  An additional 
irrigation potential of 0.78 lakh ha. was targeted under the Scheme.  However, only 966 water 
bodies could be  restored in 15 States.  The Committee had regretted  that the pace of 
restoration of water bodies was rather slow as only 966 Water Bodies could be restored against 
a small target of 1,098 water bodies.  The Committee , therefore, recommend ed that the 
Ministry make concerted efforts to restore expeditiously the remaining 116 water bodies for 
which the work was in progress. 
 
17. The Ministry in action taken replies furnished that t he activities in respect of pilot 
scheme were undertaken in the year 2005 and were to be completed by the end of X five year 

 
14 
 
plan period. However, the spill over activities are being continued in some States. The State 
Governments were being pursued vigorously for early completion of project act ivities.  
Presently, works have been completed in 1033 water bodies and works in 17 water bodies 
have been dropped. It has been further stated that works have been completed in 12 States out 
of 15 States.  AP, Maharashtra & Gujarat  are the States where works are yet to be completed.  
In the latest communication dated 6 January 2010, addressed to the State governments they 
have been requested to complete all activities under the scheme and arrange furnishing the 
report to the Ministry immediately. 
18. The Committee had in their report, regretted the slow pace of restoration of water 
bodies and recommended to make concerted efforts to restore expeditiously the 116 
water bodies.  The Ministry has stated that out of a total of 1 ,098 water bodies 1033 have 
since been restored and the restoration work was still continuing in the States of Andhra 
Pradesh, Maharashtra and Gujarat.  The work on 17 water bodies has been dropped.  
The Committee regret to note that even in the extended per iod the targeted work has not 
been completed.  The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry to impress upon the 
State Government s to complete the pending projects of restoration of water bodies at 
the earliest.  The Committee would also like to be informed of the reasons for dropping 
of the restoration work in 17 water bodies. 
 

 
15 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.39) 
 
 The Committee observe that the Budgetary provisions shown in the Demands for 
Grants (2009 -10) are Rs.1,029.54 crore excluding the funds earmarked for Accelerated 
Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP) and other water resources programmes.  There is no 
change in the Plan side which remains at Rs. 612 crore as it was during 2008 -09 at B.E. Stage.  
The Demand shows an overall increase of Rs. 123.21 crore over the corresponding figure of 
BE 2008 -09.  The allocation was reduced under Plan head by 7.03% during 2008 -09 at RE 
stage as compared to BE 2008 -09.  Whereas on the Non -plan side expenditure was raise d by 
19.39%, i.e. from Rs. 290.57 crore to Rs. 346.70 crore, in capital section, plan allocation at Rs. 
84.00 crore shows a reduction of Rs. 25.00 crore, i.e. 22.93% as compared to Rs. 109.00 crore 
in BE 2008 -09.  According to Ministry, the allocations for  various activities under the schemes 
to be supported from the Revenue Head have been made as per the projected requirements.  
However, the main reason for enhancement of Non -plan allocations is additional expenditure 
due to increase in salary, increment o f staff, increase in DA, etc.  The reduction in Plan 
allocation at RE stage in 2008 -09 has mainly due to delay in negotiations with World Bank 
assisted scheme „Hydrology Project‟ and also because of non procurement of some equipment 
required under Groundwa ter Management and Regulation.  The reduction of allocation under 
Capital Section (Plan) from Rs.109 crore to Rs. 94.40 crore at RE stage in 2008 -09 is primarily 
for meeting the requirement in „Farakka Barrage Project‟ and „Infrastructure Development‟ 
which could not be utilized.  The Plan (Revenue) allocation for 2009 -10 has been increased 
primarily for meeting the enhanced requirement for the schemes, viz. Development of Water 
Resource Infrastructure System, Investigation of Water Resources Development an d River 
Management & works in Border Rivers.  The Committee desire that while assessment of 

 
16 
 
requirement is considered, a token allocation should be made where the procurement / scheme 
has not been finalized to avoid major changes at RE stage and also to av oid huge savings at 
the end of the year.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The instructions of the Committee have been noted for compliance.  Due care has been 
taken in finalization of BE 2010 -11 after making proper assessment of the requirement for the 
remaining period.  Necessary directions haven been issued to all organizations under Ministry 
of Water Resources. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.40) 
 
 The Committee further note that the actual plan expenditure during 2007 -08 was to the 
extent of 86% which dropped to 73% during 2008 -09.  The Ministry informed the Committee 
that the expenditure could not be incurred as per the targets in respect of the schemes „Ground 
Water Management and Regulation, Hydrology Project and R&D.‟ There have been slight 
shortfalls in some of the schemes also.  The Committee desire the Ministry to give greater and 
focused attention while assessing the actual requirement of funds during a particular year so 
that the funds allocated are utilized judiciously and optimally. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The instructions of the Committee have been noted for compliance and necessary 
directions have been issued to all organizations under the Ministry of Water Resources.  
Comments of the Committee 
 
   (Please see Para No.6 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 

 
17 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.44) 
 
 The Committee also note that the Ministry of Water Resources has set up professorial 
Chairs, one each in IITs Roorkee, Kanpur, Kharagpur and Guwahati and NITs Srinagar and 
Patna, to carry out studies in water resources with s pecial emphasis on assessment of the 
effect of Climate Change on water resources systems.  A sum of Rs.1.00 crore towards 
endowment has been provided for each of the professorial Chair.  The Committee would like to 
be informed of the status of studies so conducted.  
 
Reply of the Government 
   The Professorial Chairs have since been filled up at IIT Kanpur, Kharagpur and 
Guwahati. Matter is being pursued with other institutions. Following studies have been 
completed: 
 Preliminary Consolidated Report on Effec t of Climate change on Water Resources has 
been prepared jointly by CWC and NIH. 
 Impact of climate change on flow characteristics of selected sub basin [Beas basin up 
to Pandoh dam and Bhagirathi basin up to (Tehri Dam)]. 
 Study of the performance of the op eration of reservoir (Pandoh and Tehri) for various 
scenarios of the flow characteristics. 
Further, the following studies have been undertaken through the Professorial Chairs: 
 Study on the impact of climate change on water resources on stream flow, erosion , 
sediment transport etc of River Teesta. The study is in the advanced stages of 
completion. 
 
 Water quality modelling for the Ganga basin with emphasis on integrated surface and 
subsurface flows. The work is in progress. 
 

 
18 
 
 A major issue in estimating the ef fect of climate change on water resources is the 
uncertainty in downscaling the Global Climate Change Model results to a scale enough 
for basin hydrological modelling. Work on analysis of various statistical tools for this 
purpose to develop the most suitable one for the Ganga Basin is in progress. 
 
 Study on the effect of sea–level rise on the coastal aquifer is in progress. 
 
 Review of hydraulic design standard for Brahmaputra Basin. The study covers need for 
changing design discharge, high flood level, low  flood level, scouring etc duly 
considering the impact of climate change on water resources. The study is in progress.  
 
 Statistical Analysis of stream flow series of Brahmaputra River and    evaluation of the 
severity of drought and flood condition. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.45) 
 
 Irrigation is one of the six components for development of rural infrastructure under 
Bharat Nirman.  The Committee note that under Bharat Nirman irrigation potential created 
during the last four years, i.e. from 2005-06 to 2008 -09 is 7.12 Mha against the target of 10 
Mha.  According to the Ministry of Water Resources the remaining target is proposed to be 
achieved during the next two years, i.e. 2009-10 and 2010 -11.  The shortfall in achieving the 
target is attributed to tardy la nd acquisition process by States and delay in clearance of project 
by the Ministry of Environment & Forests.  The Committee feel that due to lack of proper 
communication and coordination between different Departments and implementing agencies 
the stipulated targets could not be attained by the Ministry.  Therefore, they desire the Ministry 
of Water Resources to make concerted and sustained efforts to overcome delays in clearance 
of projects.  The Committee are optimistic that with prior inter -Ministerial an d inter -
Governmental consultations, foresight  and strict monitoring the implementation of projects 

 
19 
 
would be completed within the stipulated time and funds.  The Committee expect the progress 
report in this regard to be submitted to them periodically. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Water Resources is making concerted efforts for clearance of projects 
by the TAC as early as possible. The process started sometime at the beginning of the XI Plan.  
During 24.5.2002 to 17.11.2006 in a per iod of about four and half years, only 9 meetings of the 
TAC were held. However since 2.3.2007 till date in a period of about 3 years, 14 meetings of 
the TAC are already held. Apart from it, the number of projects being cleared are much more 
than the number cleared in earlier TAC meetings.  
 
 The numbers of projects cleared during 24.5.2002 to 17.11.2006 were 81 and during 
the period 2.3.2007 till date, the numbers of projects cleared are 182.  Thus annual rate of 
clearance of project has increased about 3. 3 times.  These figures includes revised cost 
estimates and flood protection schemes also. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.47) 
 
 The Committee note that as compared to U.S. where the gross water allocation for use 
in irrigation is 3 feet per ha., it is 4.8 feet of the gross irrigated area in our country.  The overuse 
reflects a low irrigation efficiency of about 25% to 35% in most irrigation systems with efficiency 
of 40% to 45% in some exceptional cases.  The primary reason identified is the poor 
infrastructure of irrigation systems including canals, drainage, field channels, etc.  The 
Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM) has proved very useful in maintenance of village 
level distribution channels through Water Users Associations (WUAs).  Fourteen States ha ve 
so far enacted the PIM Legislation.  The Ministry of Water Resources has been periodically 
pursuing the matter with the State Governments through different channels.  The Committee 
are happy to note that the number of WUAs has increased to 56,934.  Thes e WUAs help in 
maintaining the field channels of irrigation system and reduce the workload of Government 

 
20 
 
machinery.  However, the Committee desire that WUAs should be given more powers and 
funds so that they can maintain the irrigation infrastructure with greater ease and efficiency.  
They also desire the Ministry of Water Resources to pursue the matter of enactment of PIM 
Legislation at the highest level in those State Governments which are yet to enact such a 
legislation.  
 
Reply of the Government 
There is an urgent need to evolve suitable strategy for equitable and optimal utilization 
of irrigation water through community participation. The Ministry of Water Resources since 
1985 has been encouraging farmer‟s participation in water distribution and managem ent of 
tertiary system in the projects under CADP. Guidelines were issued in 1987 by MoWR for 
farmer‟s participation in water management primarily for projects under CADP which cover all 
aspects like past experience of PIM in India and abroad, objectives o f PIM, area of operation of 
farmers, their duties and responsibilities, training and monitoring. Recognizing the need to 
provide legal backup to farmer‟s organization/PIM, the MoWR suggested amendments to the 
existing irrigation acts and recommended the sa me through a Model Bill to the States for 
guidance for incorporation in their State Irrigation Acts. Since water is a State subject, 
Government of India cannot enact any law to make it mandatory for the States to enact PIM 
acts, unless subject of water is included in the concurrent list. The issue of enactment of PIM 
Act was discussed with the State Principal Secretaries / Secretaries, Water Resources 
Departments during the 13th meeting of National Water Board of National Water Resources 
Council held on 18t h September 2009 and they have been requested to expedite such 
enactments.  
 
 So far, 15 States namely Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu and 
Uttar Pradesh have enacted Irrigation Acts for involving farmers in the management of irrigation 
systems. Legislation for Participatory Irrigation Management is under process of enactment in 
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and Meghalaya. Further, Participator y Irrigation 

 
21 
 
Management bill is under formulation in the States of Haryana, Nagaland, Uttarakhand and 
West Bengal.  Already, 56934 Water Users Associations (WUAs) have been formed in the 
country covering an area of 13.54 M. ha as per information received f rom State Governments. 
Presently, a functional grant of Rs. 1000/- per hectare in the ratio of Rs.450: Rs.450: Rs.100 as 
Centre: State: Farmers contribution is being given under CADWM Programme to encourage 
farmers to form Water Users Associations.  
 
 As per the Model Bill of Ministry of Water Resources, WUAs will be supplied water on 
volumetric basis at a rate prescribed by the respective State Governments in consultation with 
the WUAs of the area from time to time. WUAs will have powers to levy and collec t water 
charges either on volumetric or area basis to cover their various expenditures including 
administrative cost. Model Bill has suggested to provide crop freedom to the WUAs in the 
concerned area, right of membership, recycling of water as well as pen alizing powers in the 
form of stopping the supply of water and imposition of penalty. State Governments in their 
respective PIM Acts have included financial sustainability and empowerment of WUAs suitable 
to their local needs. State like Andhra Pradesh has  made provision of 100% plough back of 
water tax to the WUAs. In addition, State Governments are being advised from time to time by 
Ministry of Water Resources to undertake various capacity building activities for WUAs.  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.48) 
 
2.48 The Committee also note that the Government has launched Farmers‟ Participatory 
Action Research Programme under which plots of 5,000 farmers were selected in different 
parts of the country and the demonstrative schemes were executed with the help of agri cultural 
universities/institutes and other institutions.  The demonstrations were given to show how by 
using less quantity of water more results can be achieved.  National Water Mission (NWM) also 
emphasised on increasing efficiency in water use in all sec tors.  Regrettably, the Ministry does 
not have any programme to promote water use efficiency directly, contending that all the 
schemes are implemented by State Governments though under Command Area Development 

 
22 
 
Programme and ERM programme, water use efficie ncy is being promoted indirectly by MoWR.  
The Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry of Water Resources to play a greater proactive 
role in close concert and coordination with the Agriculture ministry to encourage micro irrigation 
system which will hel p in utilizing the available water and irrigation infrastructure optimally with 
a view to serve more people/areas.   
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Farmers Participatory Action Research Programme (FPARP) was initiated as a 
follow up of the 1 st meeting of Ar tificial Recharge of Ground Water Advisory Council.  So far 
demonstration of technologies in 4590 out of 5000 projects has been completed.  It is planned 
to further expand the program. 
The programs related to micro irrigation are implemented by Ministry of  Agriculture.  
However, the irrigation projects for extension, renovation and modernization (ERM) help in 
improving the efficiency which are supported by Ministry of Water Resources under 
Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP).  One of the object ives of “Command Area 
Development and Water Management (CAD & WM)” program is to improve the water use 
efficiency.  The CAD & WM programme also provides for financial assistance for development 
of infrastructure to facilitate use of sprinkler/drip irrigati on systems i.e. for construction of stilling 
tanks, pump houses and laying of conveyance pipes up to farmer‟s fields.  The cost norms as 
fixed for On -Farm Development Works i.e. 50% of actual expenditure subject to maximum of 
Rs.11,000/- per ha as central assistance in Special category States and projects located in 
difficult areas and Rs.7500/ - per ha central assistance for States/areas other than mentioned 
above is also applicable for development of infrastructure to facilitate use of sprinkler and drip 
irrigation system.  One of the identified goal of National Water Mission envisaged under 
National Action Plan on Climate Change is “increasing water use efficiency by 20%”.  Ministry 
of Agriculture and Ministry of Water Resources have worked closely in prep aration of draft 
Mission Document of National Water Mission. 

 
23 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.14) 
 
3.14 The Budget allocation (Plan) for Major & Medium Irrigation for the year 2008 -09 was 
Rs. 209.90 crore which was reduced to Rs.186.78 crore at RE stage.  The re ason for reduction 
at RE 2008-09 stage was mainly in two schemes i.e. Hydrology Project where delay took place 
in negotiations in respect of World Bank assisted schemes and Research and Development 
where allocation was reduced by Rs.10.00 crore in view of delay in completion of some specific 
activities related to geomorphological studies and Farmers Participatory Action Research 
Programme.  The Committee are inclined to believe that had the Ministry done intensive 
monitoring of the physical and financial ta rgets for each of the schemes there would have been 
optimal utilization of the allocated funds within the prescribed time period.  The increase in 
allocation for 2009 -10 by Rs.9.30 crore is primarily for the scheme “Development of Water 
Resources Information System‟ as per the actual requirement.  The Committee are perturbed 
to note that allocations were reduced during 2008 -09 at RE stage due to delay in Hydrology 
project and R&D as they feel that delay not only affects the growth but also leads to increase  in 
the cost of the work.  The Committee, therefore, desire that Ministry should take concrete steps 
to avoid delays on their part particularly in projects like R&D so vital in the implementation of 
the project/scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The budget requirement for Hydrology Project II was reduced from Rs.44 crores to 
Rs.25.51 crores mainly due to delay in appointment of consultants. However, the project cost 
and duration has not changed. During the Mid -Term Review of the Project in October 2009, the 
World Bank has expressed satisfaction over the progress made during 2009 -10. The project is 
being effectively monitored and is expected to achieve its objectives within stipulated cost and 
time. 
 

 
24 
 
 Budget Estimate (BE) for the Research & Development plan sc heme was Rs.60 crores 
during 2008-09, which was reduced to Rs.50 crores at RE stage. BE was reduced at RE stage 
mainly because of delay in award of works related to morphological studies and sedimentation 
studies. Following actions have been taken for achi evement of physical and financial targets 
under some of the components: 
 All the Indian National Committees have been requested to expedite the examination 
and appraisal of research proposal. 
 The Indian National Committees have been reconstituted during Sep tember 2008 and 
the frequency of meetings of Indian National Committees (INCs) has been increased 
from minimum one meeting to two meetings in a year in the newly reconstituted all 5 
INCs. 
 The progress is being closely monitored. 
  
Recommendation (Para No.3.15) 
 
3.15 The Committee note that 477 on -going projects (166 Major, 222 Medium and 89 ERM) 
have spilled over to XI Plan.  Also 309 new projects (78 Major, 145 Medium and 86 ERM) were 
proposed to be taken up during the XI Plan.  Out of 477 projects 26 Majo r, Medium and ERM 
projects have been completed and 39 new Major / Medium projects have been taken up under 
AIBP so far.  Keeping in view the pace of completion of projects, and the past trends, the 
Committee are apprehensive whether the projects so selecte d would be completed within the 
scheduled timeframe. The Committee were informed that the information on other projects 
taken up by the State Governments will be collected and submitted as soon as possible.  The 
Committee desire the Ministry to take immedi ate steps to increase the pace of implementation 
of projects so that the farmers reap the benefits of the irrigation potential created. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of Water Resources is of the view that states should focus on completion 
of the o ngoing projects so that huge investment made in the ongoing projects by the state 

 
25 
 
governments could yield intended benefits from them. In order to encourage state governments 
to complete ongoing irrigation projects, Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programm e (AIBP) has 
been started since 1996. The Central Assistance under the AIBP has increased rapidly during 
the XI Plan. While total releases under AIBP during 1996 -97 till 2006 -07 in 10 years was 
Rs.21740 crore resulting in annual average releases of Rs.2174  crore, the releases made 
during 2007-08 and 2008 -09 were Rs.13044 crore giving average annual release of Rs.6522 
crore.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.3.16) 
 
The Committee note that the ultimate irrigation potential is 140 Mha whereas 34 Mha is 
yet to be creat ed.  Under MMI the ultimate irrigation potential is 54.465 Mha out of which 
42.277 Mha has been created upto the end of Tenth Plan.  The target for XI Plan is 9.0 Mha.  
The Committee note that the targets were not achieved in the past inspite of the assist ance 
given under AIBP.  According to the Ministry, bottlenecks in the implementation of the projects 
have been brought to the knowledge of the concerned authorities for taking necessary action 
for early completion of the projects.  The Committee further no te that against the irrigation 
potential created to the extent of 42.277 Mha, the utilization of irrigation potential was 34.42 
Mha upto X Plan, i.e. 81% of the created potential has been utilized.  The Ministry is providing 
assistance under CADWM programm e to increase the utilization of created potential.  The 
Committee are perturbed to note that despite providing assistance under AIBP, the targets set 
for creation of irrigation potential are yet to be achieved.  The Committee desire the Ministry to 
look into the causes of the underutilization and take appropriate and effective steps to increase 
the utilisation of irrigation potential. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The ultimate irrigation potential is estimated to be about 140 million hectare out of 
which about 102.7 million hectare of irrigation potential was reported to be created by the end 
of X Plan.  As per the information provided by the State Governments, total irrigation potential 

 
26 
 
created up to March 2009 is about 106.4 Million hectare.  Thus about 33.6  million hectare 
remains to be created. 
  
 The ultimate irrigation potential under major & medium irrigation projects has been 
estimated to be about 58.5 million hectare out of which about 42.35 million hectare of creation 
of irrigation potential has been reported by States up to the end of X Plan.  However, the 
corresponding irrigation potential utilization is about 34.42 million hectare. 
  
 Ministry of Water Resources awarded studies to Indian Institute of Management (IIMs) 
Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Kolkatta and Luckhnow to examine the various issues related to the 
gap between irrigation potential created and utilised and for suggesting measures for reducing 
the gap.  In the reports submitted by IIMs, several reasons have been identified for the gap 
between irrigation potential created and irrigation potential utilised and some of the important 
reasons are as under: 
i. Lack of proper operation and maintenance 
ii. Incomplete distribution system 
iii. Non-completion of command area development 
iv. Changes from the initially designed cropping pattern 
v. Diversion of irrigable land for other purposes. 
 
 The report of the studies carried out by IIMs was circulated to all the State 
Governments and other stakeholders.  With a view to further deliberate on the findings of the 
studies and r ecommendations made by IIMs and the suggestions received from the State 
Governments and other stakeholders, a workshop was organised by Ministry of Water 
Resources on 17 th March 2009 at Delhi.  The findings of the studies and the important points 
which eme rged during the deliberations at the workshop have been forwarded to the State 
Governments for necessary actions. 
 

 
27 
 
 In this regard, it is submitted that a total of 18.68 million hectare of command area has 
since been covered under CAD&WM.  Further, the all ocation for the scheme of CAD&WM has 
been enhanced from Rs 400 crore during 2009 -10 to Rs 499 crore during 2010 -11.  Ministry of 
Water Resources provides assistance to extension, renovation and modernisation (ERM) of 
major and medium irrigation projects un der Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP) 
as per approved guidelines.  Further, scheme for “Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) 
of water bodies” has been approved by the Government of India under which assistance is 
provided to States for restoration of water bodies as per approved guidelines.  The allocation of 
the scheme “RRR of water bodies” has been enhanced from Rs 399 crore during 2009 -10 to 
Rs 600 crore in 2010-11. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
   (Please see Para No.15 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4.11) 
 
4.11 The Scheme of Ground Water Management and Regulation was launched at a cost of 
Rs.460 crore for implementation by the Central Ground Water Board during the XI Plan.  The 
allocation for BE 2008-09 was Rs.95.00 crore and Rs.84.29 crore at RE stage and for 2009 -10 
it is Rs.70.00 crore.  The demonstrative projects on Artificial Recharge to Ground Water and 
Rain Water Harvesting have been proposed to be taken up at a cost of Rs.100 crore with total 
funding by Ce ntral Government.  The States of Kerala, West Bengal, Punjab, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Orissa, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Karnataka have taken 
interest in the Scheme and submitted proposal for setting up demonstrative projects.  Some 
basic exercises for identification of project sites have been taken up so far and DPRs are being 
prepared where CGWB is helping the States.  A total of 75 artificial recharge projects 
consisting of 1,300 structures are proposed for construction during XI Plan wher eas 475 
structures in 7 States have been approved by State level Committees. The proposals for 
construction of 317 structures at an estimated cost of Rs.1,070 lakh are being examined by 

 
28 
 
CGWB.  The Government has taken several steps to encourage recharge of Ground Water and 
Rain Water Harvesting.  The Committee at this point of time expect the Ministry to implement 
these projects at the earliest so that the benefit in the form of increase in ground water level 
becomes visible so that other States are encoura ged to adopt these measures which in turn 
would considerably ward off the threat of climate change.  The Committee hope that the work 
of examination of the proposals for construction of 317 structures be completed expeditiously 
but within a definitive timeframe. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Central Ground Water Board  has taken up demonstrative artificial recharge 
projects in priority areas such as over -exploited I critical, urban and semi urban areas showing 
decline in ground water levels and areas affected by problems of water quality during XI Plan. 
During the years 2008 -09 and 2009 -10, thirteen demonstrative artificial recharge project 
proposals with 507 recharge structures were prepared in close coordination with state 
government agencies and Rs.  12.50  Crores released out of approved cost of Rs.  20.75 
Crores to state government agencies for undertaking civil works in 8  states viz. Andhra 
Pradesh, Arunachal, Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Punjab, Tamil Nadu , Uttar Pradesh and 
West Bengal.  The construction of Civil Works in respect of approved projects are expected to 
be completed by 31.03.2011.  
 
CGWB is actively involved in  implementation of Demonstrative Artificial Recharge 
Projects and construction of recharge structures  expected to be completed within the 
specified period.  
Recommendation (Para No.5.14) 
 
 The Committee note that Ganga Flood Control Commission and Brahmaputra Board 
prepare the master plans for management of flood in the respective river basins.  Also flood 
management centre of NIH at Patna and Guwahati also undertake studies. Assistance is also 
provided to academic/research institutions in this regard to promote R & D activities in flood 

 
29 
 
management.  Under the Flood Forecasting Scheme, the Central Water Commission maintains 
a network of hydr ological observation sites along the major river systems in the country and 
issue level forecast for 147 towns / cities and inflow forecast for 28 major reservoirs during 
flood seasons.  The satellite based communication system has also been set-up in seven major 
river basins of the country.  The Committee are happy to note that efforts are being made to 
modernize the flood forecasting activities particularly the communication systems during XI 
Plan.  They expect the Ministry to make vigorous efforts to mod ernize the flood forecasting, 
instant information sharing with States concerned and also undertake R & D activities for flood 
management to minimize the devastation and the resultant human agonies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Central Water Commission under Mi nistry of Water Resources has undertaken 
modernization of its flood forecasting network by providing sensor -based equipment at 235 
stations during XI plan period for collection of hydrological data, satellite -based 
telecommunication system for quick transm ission of flood data and adopting state -of-the-art 
mathematical models for flood forecast formulation.  All efforts are being made to complete the 
modernisation works during the XI Plan period. 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6.7) 
 
6.7 The Committee note that a pilot project for Repair, Renovation and Restoration of 
Water Bodies was launched in January 2005 in 26 districts of 15 States to augment and restore 
the capacity of water bodies and expand their irrigation potential.  These projects cover 1,098 
water bodi es with total original culturable command area of 1.72 lakh ha.  An additional 
irrigation potential of 0.78 lakh ha. was targeted under the Scheme.  So far 966 water bodies 
have been restored in 15 States.  The Committee regret to note that the pace of res toration of 
water bodies is rather slow as 966 Water Bodies have been restored so far against a small 
target of 1,098 water bodies.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry make 

 
30 
 
concerted efforts to restore expeditiously the remaining 116 wat er bodies for which the work is 
in progress. 
Reply of the Government 
The activities in respect of pilot scheme were undertaken in the year 2005 and were to 
be completed by the end of X five year plan period. However, the spill over activities are being 
continued in some states. The state Governments were being pursued vigorously for early 
completion of project activities.  A number of communications have been sent to the state 
governments in this regard and officials from the Ministry also visit the states to ensure early 
completion of project activities. Presently, works have been completed in 1033 water bodies 
and works in 17 water bodies have been dropped. It is further stated that out of 15 states works 
have been completed in 12 states and they are yet t o be completed in the state of AP,  
Maharashtra & Gujarat. In the latest communication dated 6 th January, 2010, addressed to the 
state governments of AP, Maharahstra and Gujarat, the state governments have been 
requested to complete all activities under th e scheme and arrange furnishing the report to the 
Ministry immediately.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
   (Please see Para No.24 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6.8) 
 
6.8 The Committee note that the Government with a view to expand the p roject, approved 
two schemes one with external assistance, i.e. from World Bank and another with domestic 
support for implementation during XI Plan.  The scheme envisages comprehensive 
improvement of selected tank systems, catchment area of tank commands, increase in storage 
capacity of water bodies, ground water recharge, increased agriculture and availability of 
drinking water.  With external assistance, 23,000 water bodies have been targeted whereas 
agreements have been signed with the World Bank to cove r 10,887 additional water bodies.  
The works have been completed in respect of 602 water bodies.  Under the domestic support, 
one lakh water bodies are covered where 11 States have shown interest covering 8,908 water 

 
31 
 
bodies.  According to the Ministry, the  State Governments have been requested to explore the 
possibility of submission of more projects for approval under World Bank Scheme.  It is 
surprising to note that under the scheme with external assistance against a target of 23,000 
Water Bodies, agreeme nts have been signed with the World Bank to cover only 10,887 Water 
Bodies and the work has been completed in 602 Water Bodies only.  In the case of the scheme 
under domestic support against 1 lakh Water Bodies, 11 States have shown interest in 8,908 
Water Bodies only.  Considering the immense benefits that will accrue to the nation, the 
Committee desire the Ministry to take up the matter at the highest level with the remaining 
State Governments to come forward with their projects under the Scheme with Worl d Bank 
assistance and also the scheme with domestic support.   
 The Committee hope and expect that the project preparation work for the West Bengal 
project will be completed by the scheduled date, i.e. 30 June 2010. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Government of India approved two schemes for repair, renovation and restoration of 
water bodies (RRR of Water Bodies) (i) one with external assistance with an outlay of Rs. 1500 
crore   and (ii) the other with domestic support with an outlay of Rs. 1250 crore for 
implementation during XI Plan Period. Under the scheme covered by external assistance, the 
GoI provides assistance to the extent of 25% and borrows necessary funds as loan from World 
Bank while 75% State share is borrowed from the World Bank by Concerned State.  Under the 
scheme with domestic support funding is in the ratio of 90:10 (Centre:State) for special 
category States (NE States including Sikkim, HP, Uttarakhand, J&K and undivided Koraput, 
Bolangir and Kalahandi (KBK) districts of Orissa) and drought prone /naxal affected/ tribal areas 
of non special category States and in the ratio of 25:75 (Centre: State) for other areas of non -
special category States. These schemes were approved during the end of financial year 2008 -
09. Public water bodies are covered und er the scheme. A budget provision of Rs. 399 crore 
has been kept during 2009 -10 for the schemes of RRR of water bodies with domestic 
support/external assistance. The scheme of RRR of water bodies includes the comprehensive 

 
32 
 
improvement of water bodies, catc hment area treatment, command area development and 
capacity building of stakeholders, increased availability of drinking water. The guidelines for the 
scheme of RRR of water bodies with domestic support/external assistance have already been 
circulated to the State Government. 
   
Steps have already been taken for implementation of scheme of RRR of water bodies 
both with external assistance and domestic support and proposals have been called from the 
State Governments. A number of meeting, video conferences e tc. have also been arranged 
with the state Govts. to facilitate the project preparation work. A number of communications 
have been sent to the State Govts. to ensure that project proposals are received from the State 
Govts. without any delay.  The official s of the Ministry are also continuously interacting with the 
State Governments.   
 
Under the scheme of RRR of Water Bodies with external assistance World Bank Loan 
Agreement has been signed with Tamil Nadu for Rs. 2182 crore to restore 5763 water bodies 
having a CCA of 4 lakh hectares, with Andhra Pradesh for Rs. 835 crore for restoration of 3000 
water bodies with a CCA of 2.5 lakh hectares, with Karnataka for Rs. 268.78 crore for 
restoration of 1224 water bodies with CCA of 0.52 lakh hectare and with Oriss a for Rs.448 
crore for restoration of 900 water bodies having CCA of 1.2 lakh hectares. Tamil Nadu Govt. 
has taken up works in 50 water bodies in 2007 -08, 1103 water bodies in 2008 -09 and 1009 
water bodies in 2009 -10 and works have been completed in 1617 w ater bodies covering CCA 
of 86868 hectare.  Works have been commenced in 1500 water bodies in Andhra Pradesh 
during 2009 -10 under the scheme.  Besides, administrative approval has been accorded for 
1160 water bodies. Orissa and Karnataka Governments have t aken up works in 67 water 
bodies and 1160 water bodies respectively during 2009 -10.  In so far as World Bank assisted 
West Bengal project is concerned, it is stated that project preparation activities in West Bengal 
is expected to be completed by 30 th June 2010.   The Government of West Bengal is being 
pursued for completion of project preparation work under the scheme as per the schedule.  
 
 

 
33 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.42) 
 
 The Committee note that the Government have declared 14 Projects as „National 
Projects‟ and the irrigation benefit from these projects is estimated to be about 21 lakh ha. 
apart from additional benefits and availabilit y of drinking water.  The Government has also 
made provision of Rs. 1,800 crore for National Projects out of Rs. 8,000 crore allocation made 
for AIBP during 2009 -10.  The Government of Andhra Pradesh submitted proposals for 
Polavaram and J. Chokkarao Lift Irrigation Scheme.  Proposals of Karhar, Bansagar, ERM of 
Sharda Sahayak Canal, Saryu Nahar, Baghar and Rajghat projects have been submitted by 
Government of Uttar Pradesh.  The Governments of Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh and Orissa are 
also in the process of g iving some proposals for inclusion in the list of National Projects.  The 
Committee further note that since the cost of the Saryu Nahar Project has increased manifold, 
the State Government is required to get the revised cost approved from the TAC and obtai n 
revised investment clearance from Planning Commission before any further action could be 
taken.  The Committee find that the whole process of inclusion of the projects of State 
Government in the list of National Projects is exceedingly time consuming and  far from 
encouraging to the State Governments.  The Committee, therefore, desire that Ministry should 
streamline the whole process and encourage the States about the scheme of National Projects 
so that they come forward with such more proposals. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Union Cabinet approved the Scheme of National Projects with the stipulation that 
mode of financing be worked out in consultation with the Planning Commission and Ministry of 
Finance. The guidelines of the scheme of National Projects hav e been finalized in consultation 
with the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance. 

 
34 
 
 
Inclusion of more numbers of projects in the scheme of National Projects would 
primarily depend on the availability of resources so as to meet funding requirement of al l the 
ongoing national projects to ensure their timely completion. At present, the funds to the national 
projects are being earmarked from the funds allocated under the Accelerated Irrigation Benefits 
Programme (AIBP).   
 As far as streamlining of process for inclusion of more number of projects in the 
scheme of National Projects is concerned, it may be stated here that total allocation in XI Plan 
for National Project is of Rs. 7000 crore.  After meeting the fund requirement of already 
approved National Pro jects during the XI Plan, very limited amount remains available for 
including new projects in the scheme.  Further, even for projects to be funded under normal 
AIBP, techno-economic clearance for the Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) of Ministry of 
Water Resources and investment clearance from Planning Commission is required to be 
obtained by the state government. After getting the investment clearance, as per the scheme 
approved by the Cabinet, the proposal for inclusion of a new project as National Proje ct is to be 
cleared by Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) and then by the Union Cabinet.   Efforts are 
made to expedite the whole process.  However, in view of availability of limited resources for 
new projects in XI Plan, it is proposed that further stre amlining of the process may be 
considered in XII Plan.  
Recommendation (Para No.2.46) 
 
 The Committee note that according to a recent Study conducted by American 
researchers and published in on -line edition of the Journal Nature dated 12 August 2009, 
human consumption caused a decline of 109 cubic km in the amount of ground water beneath 
northern India since 2002.  The findings of the Study are similar to that conducted by the 
Central Ground Water Board related to identification of over exploited blocks (30 5) in this 
region.  The Government have taken steps to rationalize use of ground water for various uses 
which include (i) Model Bill circulated to States/UTs for enactment of suitable legislation; (ii) 
Constitution of Central Ground Water Authority; and (i ii) 43 areas of the country notified by 
CGWA for regulation of Ground Water development and management by concerned DCs/DMs.  

 
35 
 
The Committee observe that law on the pattern of the Model Bill has been enacted so far only 
in 11 States.  The Committee hardly n eed to emphasise the importance and urgency for proper 
and efficient use of Ground Water considering the fast receding underground water table.  They 
would, therefore, like the Ministry of Water Resources to chalk out an innovative and attractive 
strategy so that the remainder States also enact the model legislation.  The Committee would 
also like to be apprised of the specific initiatives made in this direction and the concrete 
outcome thereof.   
 
Reply of the Government 
The Central Government through Cent ral Ground Water Authority has been monitoring 
the progress of enactment of legislation by the States/Union Territories on the lines of the 
model bill for regulation and control of ground water development circulated by the Ministry of 
Water Resources. 
 Apart from 11 States/Union Territories who have enacted legislation, 18 States/Union 
Territories are in the process of enactment of legislation. Government of Punjab is of the view 
that recourse to Ground water legislation needs to be given reconsideration. 4 States namely 
Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Nagaland and Tripura have stated that in view of the ground 
water development being quite low, it is not necessary to enact such a legislation. The State 
Government of Sikkim is of view that requirement of drinki ng water supply for the people is 
being done by exploiting the various streams. Therefore, enactment of legislation on control 
and extraction of ground water in the State of Sikkim is not felt necessary. 
  
The issue of enactment of legislation by the State s was raised during the recently 
concluded Chief Secretaries‟ Conference in Delhi. It was empathized that the Chief Secretaries 
may undertake the periodical review of the status of the enactment to speed up the process.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
36 
 
Recommendation (Para No.4.10) 
 
 The Committee note that the allocation for 2008 -09 for Minor Irrigation Schemes (Plan) 
was Rs.104.10 crore which was reduced to 89.70 crore i.e. Rs.14.40 crore less and during 
2009-10 it has been further reduced to Rs.76 crore.  It was stated that the al location was 
revised due to non procurement of drilling rigs, ban on procurement of vehicles, non -creation of 
sanctioned posts at Rajiv Gandhi NGTRI and non finalization of land and building plan under 
infrastructure development.  The allocation during 200 9-10 has been reduced due to 
rescheduling of the purchase of deep drilling rigs and the equipment and non -creation of 
sanctioned posts at RGNGTRI.  The Committee feel that the reduced allocations at RE 2008 -
09 stage and further reduction at BE 2009 -10 stag e reflects poor planning and slackness in 
procurement of equipments.  The Committee desire the Ministry to take prompt action to avoid 
delays and streamline the process of procurement of equipment. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(i)    A provision of Rs. 30.00  crore was made in the BE 2008-09  for  procurement of 
material and equipments including   two 1000 m Direct Rotary Heavy Duty drilling  rigs by 
CGWB. Global Tenders were floated and procurement of the rigs could not be made as 
there was only single bid and no competition of tenders.  As a result the provision had to 
be reduced. 
 
(ii)      In B .E. 2009-10 allocation of Rs . 1.00 crore was made  which was 
revised to Rs . 1.13 crore at the R .E. stage. Necessary action to procure 
one 1000 mt deep drilling rig through DGS &D has been initiated by the 
CGWB. An indent  for procurement of  one Direct Rotary Heavy Duty rig was 
placed with DGS&D on 5th January, 2010 along with the specifications. Expression of 
Interest (EOI) was also floated through DAVP and docume nt uploaded on CG WB 

 
37 
 
website for the construction of 1000 m deep wells. However, no response was 
received.    
In addition to this, request for approval to procure 6 DTH rigs of 300 m depth capacity 
and 2 Environmental rigs of 100 m depth capacity on replacement basis throug h DGS&D is 
also under consideration in  the Ministry.   Procurement of these items will be 
completed during 2010-11 and 2011 -12 as the lead time taken by DGS &D is 
nearly one and a half year .  Thus, the Ministry has taken concrete steps in 
this direction.  
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5.13) 
 
5.13 The Committee note that under the „Flood Control‟ Programme, various schemes are 
covered which include Flood Forecasting, River Management Activities and Water Works 
related to Border Areas.  The allocation under Plan h ead was Rs. 211 crore in 2008 -09 which 
was reduced to Rs. 197.84 crore due to delay in procurement of telemetry equipments required 
for modernization of flood forecasting system and also slow progress of investigation works of 
Sapta Kosi High Dam Project a nd anti-erosion works undertaken by Brahmaputra Board.  The 
allocation was increased to Rs. 234.80 crore for 2009 -10, i.e. an increase of Rs. 23.80 crore.  
Also under River Management activities Rs. 199.30 crore have been allocated.  The increase, 
according to Ministry, is due to Grants -in-aid provided to Government of Bihar for closure of 
breach in Eastern Afflux Bund of Kosi Barrage in August 2008, and also to Government of 
West Bengal, Tripura and Jammu & Kashmir for river bank protection.  The grant -in-aid to the J 
& K Government would be released shortly to undertake bank protection works in Jammu 
sector for protection of security check posts and other strategic installations.  The Committee 
are dismayed that the allocation for 2008 -09 was reduced for such an important programme for 
want of proper foresight, planning and administrative action.  The Committee also desire that 
the grant -in-aid to J & K Government be released expeditiously so that vital works are 
undertaken and executed without further delay.   
 

 
38 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Under the Plan Scheme “Flood Forecasting”, a budget provision of Rs.23.00 crore was 
made in the year 2008 -09, out of which an expenditure of Rs.13.32 crore only could be 
incurred; as first phase of installation of telemetry e quipment in various basins of India could 
not commence due to changes in specifications of telemetry equipment considered necessary 
due to developments in data transmission technology.  However, the tenders for installation of 
222 telemetry stations in var ious basins, setting up of one Earth Receiving Stations and 10 
Modelling Centres have been finalized in the financial year 2009-10. 
 
Under the Plan Scheme “River Management Activities & Works related to Border 
Areas”, an expenditure of Rs.176.65 crore was incurred against the budget outlay of Rs.160 
crore in the financial year 2008-09. 
 
As regards release of grant -in-aid to J&K Government under “River Management 
Activities and Works Related to Border Areas” scheme, it is mentioned that Secretary, Public 
Works Department (I&FC), Government of J&K has been requested repeatedly vide MOWR 
letters dated 7.9.09, 30.9.09 and 19.01.2010 to send the work plan and make necessary 
budgetary provision in the State budget for  undertaking bank protection works for securit y 
check posts during the financial year 2009 -10 so that central assistance could be released to 
the State Government.  However, there was no response from State Government till date.  
 
However, during the Financial Year 2009-10, Central assistance amounting to Rs.41.18 
crore has been released to the Government of Jammu & Kashmir under  “Flood Management 
Programme”, a state sector scheme on funding pattern of 90 (Central share): 10 (State share) 
for 19 on-going flood protection works in the State.   
 
 

 
39 
 
Recommendation (Para No.5.15) 
 
 The Committee note that the problem of floods in the States of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar 
are recurring in nature and primarily due to the rivers flowing from Nepal.  These floods can be 
managed only by constructing dams / reservoirs on the rivers inside Nepal and not in the Indian 
territory due to topographical reasons.  The Committee, therefore, expect the Ministry of Water 
Resources to make all out and concerted efforts to pursue the Government of Nepal through 
diplomatic channels and also at the highest level in the Government so that the Government of 
Nepal in a spirit of mutual benefit and long term gain agree to the construction of dams.  
Needless to say such dams would be the monuments of our enduring relationship and give a 
new stimulus and fillip to the deep and long -abiding friendly relations between the peoples of 
India and Nepal. 
 
Reply of the Government  
It is mentioned that a 3 -tier bilateral mechanism consisting of (i) Indo -Nepal Joint 
Ministerial Level Commission on Wa ter Resources (JMCWR) headed by concerned Ministers 
of India and Nepal, (ii) Indo -Nepal Joint Committee on Water Resources (JCWR) headed by 
concerned Secretaries of India and Nepal and (iii) Joint Standing Technical Committee (JSTC) 
headed by Chairman, Gan ga Flood Control Commission (GFCC) from India, already exist to 
discuss all issues related to development of water resources, flood control, etc. between India 
and Nepal.  Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project on river Sarda (Mahakali in Nepal), Sapta Kosi 
High Dam Project on river Kosi (Sapta Kosi in Nepal), West Rapti (Naumure) Multipurpose 
Project on river Rapti (West Rapti in Nepal) are under discussion with the Government of 
Nepal.  It has been agreed to set up Pancheshwar Development Authority (PDA) for th e 
development, execution and operation of Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project.  Composition and 
Terms of Reference of PDA have also been finalized. Further, t o carry out the field 
investigations of  Sapta Kosi High Dam Multipurpose Project  and Sunkosi cum Dive rsion 
Scheme in Nepal territory jointly, a Joint Project Office (JPO-SKSKI) was set up at Biratnagar in 
Nepal during August‟ 2004 for preparation of a Detailed Project Report (DPR). It was to 
complete the works by February 2007.  However, because of politi cal instability and frequent 

 
40 
 
strikes / bandhs, the field investigations are delayed. Field works of Sapta Kosi High Dam 
Multipurpose Project continues to be suspended. Tenure of JPO has been extended to June, 
2010 to complete the works. During the 5th meeting of JCWR held on 20-22 November, 2009 at 
Pokhra (Nepal), Nepalese side informed that despite best efforts put in by Government of 
Nepal to resume field investigation works suspended since May, 2007, the work environment 
has not improved to recommence th e drilling and drift works at Sapta Kosi Dam sites. JCWR 
agreed that in case the work cannot be resumed by March 31 st, 2010, JPO personnel may be 
redeployed to effectively utilize their services or the strength may be downsized. The works at 
Saptakosi dam site have still not resumed. 
 
 

 
41 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE: 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.41) 
 
 The Committee note that as on 1 April 2009, 43 Utilisation Cer tificates(UCs) worth Rs. 
2.22 crore from 65 institutions and Autonomous Bodies and also 21 UCs worth Rs. 38.38 crore 
from 25 State Governments were outstanding.  According to the Ministry, due to their constant 
efforts the number of outstanding UCs as on 3 1 July 2009 in respect of grant released upto 31 
March 2007 had come down to 28 for institutions and Autonomous Bodies.  However it 
remained at 21 in respect of State Governments which is stated to be due to non -reconciliation 
of accounts of the implementi ng agencies of the States.  The Committee, therefore, desire that 
the Ministry should not allow the States and particularly the autonomous bodies working under 
them to delay submission of UCs and recommend that the Ministry of Water Resources should 
set some timeframe for submission of UCs besides introducing penalty clause to ward off such 
delays.  The States should also be asked periodically for reconciliation of accounts of the 
implementing agencies of the States. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The status of outstanding UCs as on 31.10.2009 in respect of Grants released upto 31.03.2007 
to Institutions/Autonomous Bodies and State Government is as given below: 
Status as on Institutions/Autonomous Bodies States / UTs 
 No. of UCs Amount (Rs in Crore) No. of UCs Amount(Rs. in crore) 
01.04.2008 87 5.17 47 68.56 
30.09.2008 65 2.92 26 51.57 
01.04.2009 43 2.22 21 38.38 
31.07.2009 28 1.63 21 38.38 
01.10.2009 28 1.63 14 36.79 
 

 
42 
 
 It is stated that strict watch is being kept on receipt of UCs at the time of release of 
Grant-in-Aid.  No grants are being released without getting the UCs for the grants released for 
the previous year. 
  
As regards, the UCs of State Governments, the concerned division of this Ministry viz. 
CAD / Minor Irrigation / Ganga Wings are monitoring regularly. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
   (Please see Para No.9 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2.43) 
 
 The Committee note that in order to address the possible threat posed by climate 
change, the Prime Minister announced the Nationa l Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) 
on 30 June 2008 which envisages eight National Missions including the National Water Mission 
(NWM).  The Ministry of Water Resources has prepared the draft Mission document and 
submitted for consideration by Prime Mi nister‟s Council on Climate Change.  NWM‟s objectives 
are „Conservation of water, minimizing wastage and ensuring equal distribution across and 
within States‟.  Also, one of the goals of the NWM is to increase the efficiency of water use.  
The Committee fu rther note that in view of the strategies proposed, the revisiting of National 
Water Policy will be undertaken in consultation with the stakeholders particularly the State 
Governments.  It is likely to be discussed in the thirteenth meeting of „National Wa ter Board.‟  
The Committee expect the Ministry of Water Resources to review the National Water Policy 
and take note of the various suggestions given by the State Governments, and other 
stakeholders and eminent climatologists keeping in view the looming thr eat of climate change 
and the grave scarcity of water in future. 

 
43 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The 13 th Meeting of National Water Board was held on 18th September 2009.  One of 
the Agendas for the meeting was “Review of National Water Policy – 2002“.  Suggestions have 
been received from various State Governments. The participants also made valuable 
suggestions.  It is proposed to organize consultation workshops and seek views from various 
stake holders including specialists, academicians and civil society als o on the National Water 
Policy.  
Comments of the Committee 
 
   (Please see Para No.12 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 

 
44 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-  NIL - 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                 BENI PRASAD VERMA 
17 August, 2010                               Chairman, 
26 Shravana, 1932 (Saka)          Standing Committee on Water Resources 

 
45 
 
APPENDIX – I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2009-10) HELD ON TUESDAY, 17 AUGUST 2010 
  
The Committee sat from 1530 hours to 1600 hours in Committee Room No. „63‟, First Floor, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Beni Prasad Verrma – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2.        Shri Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan 
3.        Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
         4. Shri Dip Gogoi 
5. Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
             6.          Shri S.P.Y. Reddy 
7.          Smt. J. Shantha 
8.          Smt. Annu Tandon 
9.          Shri Sajjan Verma 
 
                   RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
11.   Dr. Ashok S. Ganguly 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Director 
3. Smt. Rita Jailkhani  - Additional Director 
  
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.   
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration Memorandum No.2 and the Draft 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in their First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2009 -10) of the Ministry of 

 
46 
 
Water Resources.  After some discussion, the Committee adopted the Report without any 
amendment/modification. 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to have the above draft Action Taken 
Report finalized on the basis of factual verification from the Ministry of Water Resources and to 
present the same to both the Houses of Parliament. 
The Committee then adjourned 
 

 
47 
 
APPENDIX II 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
  
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE           
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIRST REPORT 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE  
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations/Observations   20 
 
(ii) Recommendation/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government  
 
Para Nos. 2.39, 2.40, 2.44, 2.45, 2.47, 2.48, 3.14, 3.15, 3.16,  
     4.11,  5.14, 6.7 and 6.8 
 
Total         13 
Percentage        65%  
  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
 
Para No. 2.42, 2.46, 4.10, 5.13 and 5.15  
 
Total           05   
Percentage         25 % 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the 
 Committee 
 
Para No. 2.41 and 2.43 
 
Total         02  
Percentage 10 % 
 
(v) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which  
 final replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
Para Nos. Nil 
  
Total           Nil 
Percentage         0% 