 
1 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
                                (2010-2011) 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
 
 
WORKING OF BRAHMAPUTRA BOARD 
 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources} 
 
 
 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
August, 2011/ Bhadrapada,1933 (Saka) 
9 

 
2 
 
 
NINTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2010-2011) 
 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
 
 
WORKING OF BRAHMAPUTRA BOARD 
 
 
[Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources] 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30.08.2011 
        Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30.08.2011 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2011 /Bhadrapada, 1933 (Saka) 

 
3 
 
WRC NO. 28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2011 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 

 
4 
 
CONTENTS 
            PAGE 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2010-11)…………………     (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………    (iv) 
 
 
CHAPTER I   Report …………………………………………   1 
 
CHAPTER II  Recommendations/Observations which have been  10 
accepted by the Government …………………..  
 
CHAPTER III  Recommendations/Observations which the    24 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government‟s replies ………………………..  
 
CHAPTER IV  Recommendations/Observations in respect of    32 
which replies of the Government have not been  
accepted by the Committee …………………….  
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
  I. Minutes of the Fourteenth Sitting of the Committee      35           
                                   held on 11.08.2011.   
 
  II. Analysis of action taken by the Government on the   38 
                          Recommendations / Observations contained in the Fourth 
                          Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee………. 

 
5 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES (2010-11) 
 
  Shri Dip Gogoi  -  Chairman 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi 
3. Shri Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan 
4. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
5. Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
6. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
7. Shri Virender Kashyap 
8. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
       9.          Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
10.        Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
             11.        Shri S.P.Y. Reddy  
12.        Shri Arjun Roy 
13.        Smt. J. Shantha 
14.        Shri K. Shivkumar alias J.K. Ritheesh 
15.     Smt. Annu Tandon 
16. Dr. P. Venugopal (Tiruvallur) 
17.  Shri Sajjan Verma 
18. Vacant 
19. Vacant 
20. Vacant 
21. Vacant 
 
              RAJYA SABHA 
 
22.        Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
23. Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
24.         Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
25. Dr. Ashok S. Ganguly 
26. Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan 
27. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
28.  Shri Mangala Kisan  
    29. Shri Ranjitsinh Vijaysinh Mohite-Patil 
           30. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
 31. Smt. Bimla Kashyap Sood 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Secretary 
2. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
 3. Shri B.S. Dahiya  - Director 
 4. Smt. Rita Jailkhani  - Additional Director 
5. Smt. B. Visala   - Deputy Secretary 
6. Shri G. Guite   - Committee Officer  
7. Shri Samresh Kumar Parcha - Sr. Committee Assistant 
 
 

 
6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2010 -2011) having been 
authorised by the Commit tee, present on their behalf the Ninth Report to Parliament on the 
Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the Fourth 
Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water Resources (2010 -2011) on 
"Working of Brahmaputra Board".  
2. The Fourth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on 05 August 2010.  
The replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were 
received on 25 April 2011. 
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and 
adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 11 August 2011. 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the    
recommendations/observations contained in the Fourth Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of  the 
Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;              DIP GOGOI, 
29 August, 2011                                      Chairman,           
07 Bhadrapada, 1933 (Saka)     Standing Committee on Water Resources 
  
 
 

 
7 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources deals with the action taken 
by the Government on the recommendations / observations contained in their Fourth Report 
(15th Lok Sabha) on 'Working of Brahmaputra Board' which was presented to Lok Sabha on         
05 August 2010. 
2. Action taken notes were received from the Government in respect of all the 16 
recommendations/observations of the Committee which have been categorised as follows: - 
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
Para Nos. 1, 4, 6, 11, 13, 14, 15 and 16        (Total - 08) 
 
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government‟s replies: 
Para Nos. 2, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 12              
 (Total -06) 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee:  
Para Nos. 3 and 5       (Total -02) 
 
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the Government 
is still awaited: 
Nil                 (Total - NIL) 
 
3. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of the 
recommendations/observations in the succeeding paragraphs. 

 
8 
 
 
A.    Need to expedite amendment to the Brahmaputra Board Act, 1980. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
4. The Committee had noted that the Ministry initiated a proposal for restructuring of the 
Brahmaputra Board in October 2004 which would also have addressed the problem of staff 
shortage. Another aim of restructuring was, statedly, to redefine and widen the objective of the 
Board so as to include integrated water resources development involving irrigation, flood 
management, generation of hydropower, etc. A bill was to be introduce d in the Parliament 
during the Monsoon Session 2009 seeking amendment of the existing Brahmaputra Board Act, 
1980.   The Committee were surprised to note that the proposal to restructure the Board 
mooted in October 2004, is yet to take first step in its le gislative journey.   The Committee, 
therefore, while reiterating the recommendation made by them in their 9 th Report presented to 
Parliament on 22 April 2008, had earnestly expressed  the hope that the Ministry would be able 
to introduce the Bill at least in the Monsoon Session of Parliament, 2010.   
5. The Ministry, in its action taken reply , has stated that the Bill is yet to be introduced in 
the Parliament. It has been added that t he Draft Cabinet Note was prepared and circulated to 
concerned Ministries and the State Governments.  Based on the comments received , "the note 
is being modified before sending the same to the Ministry of Law & Justice and thereafter the 
approval of the Cabinet will be obtained."   
6. The Committee, while noting the inordinate d elay in introducing the Bill seeking 
amendment to the Brahmaputra Board Act, 1980, had expressed the hope that the 
Ministry would be able to introduce the Bill at least in the Monsoon Session of 

 
9 
 
Parliament, 2010.  The Ministry, in its action taken reply, h as stated that on the basis of 
comments received from the concerned Ministries and the State Governments, the Draft 
Cabinet Note is being modified before sending the same to the Ministry of Law & Justice 
and thereafter the approval of the Cabinet will be o btained.   The Committee are 
constrained to note that the proposal for restructuring the Brahmaputra Board  which 
was initiated way back in 2004, has not so far made much headway even after a lapse of 
about six years. The Committee, therefore, while reiter ating their earlier 
recommendations desire  the Ministry to introduce the said Bill in the Parliament without 
any further delay.    
 
B.    Need for Expeditious redressal of grievances of the employees of the Brahmaputra 
Board. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
7. While observing  that a sound grievance redressal mechanism for its employees is a 
sine qua non for the effective fu nctioning of any organization, the Committee  had desired the 
Ministry/Brahmaputra Board to set up the same.  
8. The Ministry , in its acti on taken reply , has stated that e arlier the Under Secretary of 
Brahmaputra Board was designated as a Grievances Officer and he was dealing with 
grievances related matters in the Brahmaputra Board.  With a view to further strengthen and 
improve the grievanc es redressal mechanism in the Brahmaputra Board, the Secretary to the 
Brahmaputra Board has now been designated as a Grievances Officer of Brahmaputra Board. 
The grievances expressed by the Board‟s employees are duly examined and recommended for 

 
10 
 
redressal within the ambit of rules & regulations. The meeting between the Board‟s 
management and representatives of different association /unions are also held from time to 
time to chalk out action for collective redressal of genuine grievances, the latest being on  4th 
January, 2011 with the Stenographers Association of Brahmaputra Board.  
9.     The Committee had desire d the Ministry/Brahmaputra Board to set up a 
grievance redressal mechanism so that the genuine grievances of the employees are 
resolved amicably. In  its reply, the Ministry has stated  that  the Secretary to the 
Brahmaputra Board has since been designated as a  'Grievances Officer' of the Board in 
an effort to strengthen and improve the grievances redressal mechanism in  the 
Brahmaputra Board.  The Min istry has also stated that meetings between the Board's  
Management and representatives of different association/unions are also held from time 
to time to chalk out action for collective redressal of grievances.    The Committee, while 
appreciating the effor ts made by the Ministry in this regard, desire that the meetings 
between the Board's management and representatives of various employee 
associations/unions be held more frequently for speedy and effective redressal  of  
grievances and motivation of the employees, in the interest of smooth functioning of the 
Brahmaputra Board. 
C.    Need to augment the earnings of NEHARI. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
10.  While observing that North Eastern Hydraulic and Allied Research Institute ( NEHARI) 
manages its affairs  with the f unds provided by the Government and i t also generates fund by 

 
11 
 
providing services to different agencies, the Committee noted that the earnings of NEHARI had 
drastically declined from Rs.49.78 lakh in 2002 -03 t o Rs.6.70 lakh only in 2008 -09 and  as 
against the  required staff strength of 45, only 29 were then in place .  The Committee had 
recommended that MoWR/Brahmaputra Board need to expedite the process of providing 
adequate staff to NEHARI at the e arliest and  NEHARI should also take steps to mo bilise the 
available resources to increase their income.  
11. The Ministry, in its action taken reply , has stated that the proposal for strengthening of 
NEHARI alongwith the restructuring of non restructuring posts of the Brahmaputra Board is 
proposed in t he restructuring of Brahmaputra Board and will be taken up separately with the 
Ministry of Finance after amendment of Brahmaputra Board Act for its restructuring.    
12. The Committee, while pointing out that the shortage of staff is bound to hamper 
the smooth functioning of NEHARI,  had recommended that MoWR/Brahmaputra Board 
need to expedite the process of providing adequate staff to NEHARI at the earliest.  The 
Committee had further recommended that NEHARI should also take steps to mobilise 
the available resources to increase its income. The Ministry, in its reply, has stated that 
the proposal for strengthening of the NEHARI alongwith the restructuring of posts of the 
Brahmaputra Board is proposed in the restructuring of Brahmaputra Board after 
amendment of Brahmaputra Board Act.   The Committee, however, note that  the reply of 
the Ministry is silent on the steps taken by NEHARI for mobilizing  the available 
resources to augment its funds/earnings .   The Committee desire the Ministry to 
ascertain the reaso ns for a drastic reduction in the earnings and apprise them of the 
steps taken by NEHARI to mo bilize the available  resources to augment its earnings.  

 
12 
 
Since shortage of staff is bound to adversely affect the smooth functioning of NEHA RI, 
the Committee are of the considered view that vigorous efforts be made to fill up the 
vacant posts in NEHARI.  R eiterating their recommendation that the Ministry expedite 
the process of providing adequate staff to NEHARI  and take urgent steps to augment its 
earnings, the Committee desire to be kept apprised of the position in the matter. 
 
D.   Brahmaputra Board should endeavour to raise its own resources. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
13.   Considering the importance and the necessity of effective monitoring mechanism, the 
Committee expect ed the Board to evolve suitable procedural guidelines and time schedule 
regarding administrative approval, technical sanction and tendering process so that the 
allocated funds are utilized within the stipulated time and in the prescribed man ner.  The 
Committee also expected t he Board to endeavour to raise its own resources to  mop up its 
fluctuating income. 
14. The Ministry, in its action taken reply , has stated that as advised by the Parliamentary 
Standing Committee, a mechanism is being deve loped within the Board to avoid delay in 
according  „Administrative Approval‟, „Technical sanction‟ & Tendering Process. In this regard, 
a dedicated unit headed by a Superintending Engineer shall carry out tendering works for the 
consideration of the tende r committee of the level of Chief Engineer (I&W) and above. The 
Deputy Chief Engineer would also look after the quality control aspect of the proje cts being 
constructed by the Board.  

 
13 
 
15. The Committee expected the Board to evolve suitable procedural guide lines and 
time schedule regarding administrative approval, technical sanction and tendering 
process, so that the allocated funds are utilized within the stipulated time and in the 
prescribed manner.  The Committee had also expected the Board to endeavour t o raise 
its own resources to mop up its fluctuating income.  In its reply, th e Ministry has stated 
that a me chanism is being developed within the Brahmaputra Board to avoid delay in 
according admini strative approval, technical sanction and tendering process . The 
Committee urge the Ministry to expedite the mechanism being developed so as to 
achieve the fixed targets and avoid any delays.  The Committee are, however, distressed 
to note that the Ministry has preferred to remain silent regarding  the efforts made by the 
Brahmaputra Board to raise its own resources to mop up  its fluctuating income.    The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Board should 
endeavour to raise its own resources to mop up its fluctuating income.   The Committee 
be kept apprised of the position in the matter.  
 
E.   Protection of Majuli Island.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
16. The Committee had expressed the hope that implementation of the suggestions of the 
Experts Committee would be completed at the ea rliest so that the people of Majuli Island are 
not exposed to recurrent nightmare of floods year after year.  They had also desired to see that 
works for Phase -II & III are completed by the scheduled target of 2011 -2012.  The Committee 
further desired to b e apprised of the recommendation of the Committee of Experts and the 
action taken to implement them. 

 
14 
 
17. The Ministry , in its action taken reply , has stated that Phase-I work of protection of 
Majuli Island is nearing completion. Phase -II & III has been und ertaken in line with the 
recommendation of the Standing Committee. The Committee after examining all the aspect s of 
the scheme and field condition after field visit from 16 to 19 June 2008 recommended only 5 
(five) spurs to be constructed and after study o f their efficacy, the balance spurs should be 
constructed. The schedule date of completion of the initial 5 spurs is September 2011. 
Considering the construction of spurs to take at least 2 years including collection time of 
boulders, their transportation to site etc. there is no possibility of construction of t he remaining 
spurs by March  2012. However, the 5(five) nos. of spurs already taken for construction would 
be completed by March 2012. 
18. The Committee had expressed the hope that implementation of t he suggestions 
of the Experts Committee would be completed at the earliest and they had also 
recommended that the works for Phase -II & III be completed by the scheduled target of 
2011-2012.   The Ministry, in its action taken reply, has stated that the work of Phase-I for 
protection of Majuli Island is nearing completion and  Phase -II & III has been undertaken.   
The Committee are dismayed to note that Phase -I of the work f or protection of Majuli 
Island which was to be completed by the end of Xth Plan has n ot yet been completed , 
with just about one year left for the end of even the XIth Plan also.   The Committee feel  
that the work s for Phase -II and Phase -III of the Scheme which are scheduled for 
completion by 2011 -2012 are also not likely to meet the targe t.   The Committee take a 
serious view of the inordinate delay in completion of these works and desire that the 
works for Phase I, II and III are expeditiously  completed.  The Committee call upon the 

 
15 
 
Ministry to effectively implement the suggestions of the  Experts Committee for 
protection of Majuli Island from recurrent floods and erosion problems  so that the 
sufferings of the people of the Island could be mitigated.  The Committee also desire to 
be kept apprised of the status in the matter.       
 
 
 
 

 
16 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No.1) 
The Committee note that the North East region is endowed with a huge water potential, 
being drained by two main river systems – the Brahmaputra and t he Barak.  The Brahmaputra 
is braided and unstable in its entire reach in the Assam Valley except for a few places.  Due to 
heavy deposition of silt, the river has frequently changed its course, giving rise to braiding and 
meandering pattern in the alignme nt of the river system.  This problem was compounded 
further by earthquake shocks of moderate severe intensity that visited the region from time to 
time. The Barak is the second largest river in the region.  The Brahmaputra and the Barak 
rivers have been causing recurrent annual floods in the North Eastern part of the country.  The 
Brahmaputra Board was, therefore, constituted in 1980 under The Brahmaputra Board Act (Act 
of 1980) with the objective of planning and integrated implementation of measures for c ontrol of 
floods and bank erosion in Brahmaputra and Barak Valley and to deal with matters connected 
therewith.  Other functions entrusted to the Board include preparation of detailed project reports 
(DPRs) and estimates of projects in the Master Plans app roved by the Union Government; and 
construction of multipurpose dams and other works in Master Plans.  The Board started 
functioning in January 1982 with its headquarters at Guwahati, Assam.  Subsequently, parts of 
all other North Eastern States and West B engal were also added to the jurisdiction of the 
Board.  The Committee note that the Board has carried out detailed planning and 
documentation of the water resources in the North Eastern Region and related problems and 
potentials.  The Board has prepared 4 4 Master Plans which, after approval of the Union 
Government, have been sent to the States for implementation.  In addition, seven Master Plans 
are under different stages of preparation while six are under survey and investigation.  The 
Committee also note  that all the Master Plans have been partially implemented.  The reason 
cited by the Ministry for partial implementation is that water being a State subject, the flood 
control, anti -erosion and flood proofing works are planned, implemented and funded by th e 

 
17 
 
State Governments according to their own priorities.  Implementation of Master Plans is, 
therefore, mainly to be carried out by the concerned States.  It is also noted that the 
Brahmaputra Board had stipulated the XI Five Year Plan as the time frame for completing all 
the remaining Master Plans.  In fact, the DPRs for some identified projects have been taken up 
in consultation with the State Governments in respect of multi -purpose projects and drainage 
development schemes. The Committee note that since the regulation and development of Inter-
State rivers and river valleys figures in the Union List, they recommend that the Government 
should take necessary legal and administrative measures for proper planning, implementation 
and funding of flood control, ant i erosion and flood proofing works in all the riparian States of 
Brahmaputra.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of the measures being taken by 
the Brahmaputra Board to ensure that the targets fixed for completion of the remaining Master 
Plans in the XI Plan are achieved.   
Reply of the Government 
In regard to the Committee‟s recommendation that Government should take necessary 
legal and administrative measures for proper planning, implementation and funding of flood 
control, anti erosion and flood proofing works in all the riparian States of Brahmaputra. 
 It is stated that in order to provide assistance to the State Governments, a plan scheme, 
namely, “Flood Management Programme (FMP)” under State Sector has been approved by the 
Government of Ind ia at a total cost of Rs.8000 crores during XI plan to provide central 
assistance to the State Governments to undertake the flood management and anti erosion 
works including anti-sea erosion, drainage development, flood proofing works, etc. in the critical  
reaches.  During XI Plan, a total of 166 flood management and anti erosion schemes of North 
Eastern States including Sikkim and West Bengal (North Bengal) amounting to Rs.1153.07 
crore with central assistance component of Rs.1034.43 crore have been includ ed under FMP 
and central assistance amounting to Rs.570.62 crore towards 166 schemes has been released 
upto 23.02.2011.  In addition to this Brahmaputra Board is also executing some of floods and 
anti-erosion schemes in critical reaches of Brahmaputra.   

 
18 
 
 It is also stated that as per the Section 13 (1) (d) of the Brahmaputra Board Act (No.46 
of 1980), the Board shall prepare, in consultation with State Government concerned, a phased 
programme for the construction by the State Governments of all dams and ot her projects 
proposed in the Master Plans approved by the Central Government other than those referred to 
in Clause 13(1) (c) i.e. construct, with the approval of the Central Government, multipurpose 
dams and works connected therewith proposed in the Maste r Plan as approved by the Central 
Government and maintain and operate such dams and works.  
 Accordingly, the Brahmaputra Board has been interacting with respect State 
Governments and other agencies regarding status of implementation of the recommendations  
made in the approved Master Plans.  In this regard, a meeting was convened by the 
Chairman, Brahmaputra Board on 25.07.2009 at  Guwahati to discuss the status of 
implementation of the Master Plans prepared by the Board and the meeting was attended by 
the representatives of  Sate Governments of Assam, Nagaland, Manipur, Meghalaya, 
Mizoram, West Bengal, Central Water Commission, India Meteorological Department and 
officials of Brahmaputra Board.  Further, all the concerned States/ agencies have been 
requested from time to time to intimate the Brahmaputra Board regarding updated status of 
implementation of the recommendations made in the approved Master Plans.  Besides, the 
State Governments were requested to propose schemes, for funding by the Government of 
India under FMP, which have been recommended for implementation in the approved Master 
Plans prepared by the Board.     
To ensure that targets fixed for completion of remaining Master Plans within XI Plan are 
achieved, the following measures have been taken up by Brahmaputra Board. 
(i) Out of the total of 57 Master Plans, 44 are approved by the Government of India. 
(ii) Out of remaining 13, three Master Plans completed and in the process of approval by 
Board/ Ministry of Water Resources. 
 
(iii) Out of balance 10 Master Pla ns, relevant data have been collected and analyses have 
been done in respect of 4 Nos. of Master Plans and these are under preparation.  In 

 
19 
 
respect of remaining 6 Master Plans, communication with respective departments/ 
agencies has been made and data coll ection process has already been started.  
Compilation and analysis of collected data are also under progress.  The balance 10 
Master Plans are targeted to be completed by March, 2012. 
As such, all 57 Master Plans are expected to be completed by end of XI Plan.  
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
The Committee note that the employees of the Brahmaputra Board have certain 
grievances relating to their promotional avenues and pension.  According to the Board, 
employees are given due opportunities to air their grievan ces in the meetings with the officials 
of the Board and representatives of different Associations/Unions.  It was also explained that 
the Assured Career Progression (ACP) Scheme introduced by the Government has also 
motivated the employees to a certain ext ent. Further, the Committee were apprised that the 
Board has taken some steps such as training of employees in office automation and other 
technical matters like computer aided design, drawings, data management, etc. to improve 
their skills.  Undoubtedly, the employees of Brahmaputra Board have some genuine grievances 
particularly these related to service conditions and promotional avenues which need to be 
addressed to expeditiously by the Ministry.  The Committee are of the considered view that a 
sound gri evance redressal mechanism for its employees is a sine-qua-non for the effective 
functioning of any organization.  They, therefore, desire the Ministry/Brahmaputra Board to set 
up a grievance redressal mechanism so that the genuine grievances of the employ ees are 
resolved amicably and the employees are motivated to contribute their best for the smooth 
functioning of the Brahmaputra Board.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Earlier the Under Secretary of Brahmaputra Board was designated as a Grievances 
Officer and he was dealing with grievances related matters in the Brahmaputra Board.  With a 
view to further strengthen and improve the grievances redressal mechanism in the 

 
20 
 
Brahmaputra Board, the Secretary to the Brahmaputra Board has now been designated as a 
Grievances Officer of Brahmaputra Board. The grievances expressed by the Board‟s 
employees are duly examined and recommended for redressal within the ambit of rules & 
regulations. The meeting between the Board‟s management and representatives of different 
association /unions are also held from time to time to chalk out action for collective redressal of 
genuine grievances, the latest being on 4 th January, 2011 with the Stenographer Association of 
Brahmaputra Board.  
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.6) 
 The Committee note that the Board is not facing any shortage of funds to carry into 
execution its assigned mandate.  Apart from Grants -in-aid received from MoWR, the Board 
also receives funds from other Government agencies towards „deposit works‟ i.e. works 
assigned by other organizations to the Board on payment basis.  It is noticed that from 2005 -06 
to 2008 -09, the Board received meager and fluctuating income on account of deposit works 
rendered to 17 organisations/ individuals.  In addition, its earnings include interest on loans and 
advances paid to employees, guest house rent, tender fee, rent of building, laboratory testing 
charges and license fee recovery.  As regards the achievement of target s, the representatives 
of the Ministry stated that the Board should have proper mechanism for optimal utilization of 
allocated funds and monitoring the progress of works so that the targets fixed are achieved 
within the stipulated time.  Considering the importance and the necessity of effective monitoring 
mechanism, the Committee ardently hope and expect the Board to evolve suitable procedural 
guidelines and time schedule regarding administrative approval, technical sanction and 
tendering process so that th e allocated funds are utilized within the stipulated time and in the 
prescribed manner.  The Board should also endeavour to raise its own resources to mop up its 
fluctuating income. 
 
 

 
21 
 
Reply of the Government 
As advised by the Parliamentary Standing Committee, a mechanism is being developed 
within the Board to avoid delay in according  „Administrative Approval‟, „Technical sanction‟ & 
Tendering Process. In this regard, a dedicated unit headed by a Superintending Engineer shall 
carry out tendering works for t he consideration of the tender committee of the level of Chief 
Engineer (I&W) and above. The Deputy Chief Engineer would also look after the quality control 
aspect of the projects being constructed by Board.  
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No.11) 
During their visit to Majuli Island, several representations were received by the 
Committee pertaining to the problem of annual flood and erosion havoc in East Barpeta District 
of Assam, inclu ding the region from Bahari Satra to Pazarbhanga and the urgent measures 
needed for rehabilitation of the affected families.  The Committee are optimistic that a 
permanent solution for annual flood and erosion problem at Barpeta District of Assam is 
feasible, and must be put in place expeditiously.  The Committee would like to be apprised to 
the action taken by the Board in regard to detailed field survey and studies for hammering out 
an effective long term solution to annual flood and erosion havoc in Barpeta District of Assam. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The erosion problem of Bohari area in East Barpeta District is being tackled by Water 
Resources Department, Assam. The Govt. of Assam has not entrusted the scheme to 
Brahmaputra Board. In this regard, State  Govt. has informed that at present two schemes as 
stated below are under execution by them. 
(1) Immediate measure to protect Bohari & its adjoining area from the erosion of river 
Brahmaputra for 2008-09- Rs. 22.36 crore. 

 
22 
 
(2) Raising/Strengthening (R/S) to Brahmaputra dyke from Bohari to Baghbor & construction of 
retirement at Belortari and Chesra including anti -erosion measures of different area under 
Bahani, Pazarbhanga, Chesra & Baghbor to protect erosion of river Brahmaputra.  
In addition to the above, o ne major work costing Rs. 67.90 crore is under process for 
execution.  The scheme was recommended by 45 th Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) of 
Water Resources Department, Assam. The scheme will protect an area of about 15000 bighas 
of land. 
Recommendation (Para No.13) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry has approved 148 schemes for flood management in 
the North Eastern States at an estimated cost of Rs.948.84 crore.  The Board has also chalked 
out a long term strategy for Flood Management and Erosion Con trol in Brahmaputra River.  
The Board has also prepared a concept Note on Bank stabilization on river Brahmaputra and 
forwarded it to IITs, CWC, CWPRS, Government of Assam etc.  The modalities are also being 
worked out for carrying out mathematical model s tudies to ascertain the feasibility of the 
proposed channelization of the river Brahmaputra.  Though the representative of the Board in 
his oral testimony before the Committee described complete immunity from perennial floods as 
„utopian‟, the Committee are optimistic that with the speedy implementation of various structural 
and non-structural measures planned by the Board, the problem of recurrent floods and land 
erosion can be contained to a great extent and resultant human misery mitigated substantially.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The schemes undertaken by the State Governments under Flood Management 
Programme (FMP) and anti erosion works taken by Brahmaputra Board will reduce the 
problems of flood and erosion in the North Eastern Region after their comple tion.  During the XI 
Plan total 166 number of schemes with estimated cost Rs. 1153.07 crore has been included 
under Flood Management Programme for North Eastern Region and North Bengal as on 
23.02.2011.  

 
23 
 
Recommendation (Para No.14) 
The Committee observe th at China reportedly propose to construct a dam on the 
upstream of Brahmaputra inside the territory under its suzerainty.  The Committee were 
informed that this issue was raised several times with China but each time China denied the 
media reports but conceded that there exists an MoU under which China is required to provide 
flood season data on river Brahmaputra to facilitate better flood management by India.  In the 
absence of an international treaty or convention between India and China, the issue of 
construction of dam and diversion of waters of Brahmaputra by China was taken up through the 
Ministry of External Affairs which only met denial by China.  However, according to subsequent 
media reports, China has conceded construction of dam but denied diversi on of water of 
Brahmaputra.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the matter be taken up at the 
highest level with China through diplomatic channels to clear the misgivings of the people of 
India in this behalf.  
Reply of the Government 
The matter has been taken up by Ministry of External Affairs and MEA informed that 
“During External Affairs Minister‟s visit to China in April, 2010, the Chinese Foreign Minister 
Yang Jiechi said that Zangmu hydropower station, whose construction is yet to start, is smal l 
with its main function being generation of power and not water supply.  This power station will 
not have an adverse impact on the downstream area”. 
Further, the matter was also raised during the India -China Strategic Diaolgue held 
between Foreign Secreta ry and the Chinese Vice Foreign Minister on 16 November 2010, 
during which the Chinese side conveyed that the Zangmu power “station has very small 
capacity and does not divert river from the mainstream.  It will not reduce flow to the lower 
reaches.  It will also not have an impact on the environment.  During construction and operation 
of the station, we will ensure that we will carry out sound management so that it does not 
negatively impact on the downstream.”   
The matter was also discussed during the vi sit of Chinese Premier Wen to India in 
December, 2010.  He said that on trans -border rivers China will proceed from scientific studies, 

 
24 
 
taking into account the interests of both upper and lower reaches.  Government keeps a 
constant watch on all developments in this regard. 
 
Recommendation (Para No.15) 
To a query of the Committee, it was stated that the flow of water in Brahmaputra river 
when it enters India, as per a survey conducted by the Central Water Commission (CWC), is 78 
Billion Cubic Meter (BCM).  T he Committee were also informed that the CWC has established 
a site of the near Indo-China Border to observe the flow of water in the Brahmaputra river.  The 
Committee observed that in spite of the substantial expenditure on the Brahmaputra Board 
since its inception over the last three decades, there has been little achievement in the field of 
erosion control, irrigation and hydro -power in the region.  The Committee note that on being 
sought information about position of erosion control, increase in area of  irrigation and in 
hydropower in the region from the period when Brahmaputra Board was established, the 
representatives of the Ministry assured the Committee that the relevant information will be 
made available to the Committee.  Regretably, the desired in formation is yet to be furnished to 
the Committee.  The inability of the Board to compile, maintain and supply such vital statistics 
speaks volumes about the functioning of the Board . They, therefore, desire that the requisite 
information be compiled and furnished to the Committee without further loss of time. 
  
Reply of the Government 
The Brahmaputra Board was constituted in 1980 by an Act of Parliament (Act 46 of 
1980 called “The Brahmaputra Board Act”) with the objective of planning and integrated 
implementation of measures for control of floods and bank erosion in Brahmaputra and Barak 
Valley and for matters connected therewith. As per Section 13(1) (d) of the Brahmaputra Board 
Act, the Board shall prepare, in consultation with State Government concerned , a phased 
programme for the construction by the State Governments of all dams and other projects 
proposed in the Master Plans approved by the Central Government other than those referred to 
in Clause 13(1) (c). So far 44 Master Plans prepared by Brahmaput ra Board are approved by 
the Government of India Out of the total 57 identified Master Plans. 

 
25 
 
The Master Plans prepared by Brahmaputra Board have been utilized by the user 
States of the North Eastern Region as a Data base. These have immensely helped the S tate 
Govts. In identifying, formulating and executing the flood management and erosion control 
scheme. Also, the survey & investigation carried out and Detailed Project Report (DPR) 
prepared for Multipurpose Projects by Brahmaputra Board has provided the r eadymade basic 
inputs for preparation of bankable DPRs and to initiate process for their execution by the 
different implementing agency. As such, the works carried out by the Board in the form of 
survey & investigation and preparation of Master Plans have immensely helped and contributed 
in the flood management and anti erosion works carried out by the States. The improvements 
achieved through these works carried out by different N.E. States under above head are as 
below:- 
 Flood Management & Erosion control: 
 As per publication “A review of flood management measures in Assam” of Water 
Resources Department,  Assam 2006: 
Name of work Flood 
management 
measures 
performed in 
Assam up to 
1980 
Flood management 
measures 
performed in 
Assam up-to 2006 
Flood managemen t 
measures 
performed in 
Assam since 
creation of 
Brahmaputra Board  
up-to 2006 
1. Embankment 
Constructed 
4176.00Km 4465.00 Km 289.00 Km 
2. Area benefitted from 
flood 
13.98 Lakh Ha. 16.49 Lakh Ha. 2.51.00  Lakh Ha. 
3. Drainage channel 
constructed 
772.00 Km 857.00 Km 85.00 Km 
4. Nos. of Village/town 
protection works 
67 Nos. 704 Nos. 637 Nos. 
As per “Report of the Task Force for flood management/ erosion control-2004” 
 

 
26 
 
Name of work Flood 
management 
measure 
performed in NE 
Region up to 1980 
Flood 
management 
measures 
performed in NE 
Region up-to 2004 
Flood management 
measures performed in 
NE Region since creation 
of Brahmaputra Board  
up-to 2004 
1. Embankment 
Constructed 
4286.64 Km 5222.00 Km 935.36 Km 
2. Area benefitted 
from flood 
14.00 Lakh Ha. 18.00  Lakh Ha. 4.00  Lakh Ha. 
3. Drainage 
channel 
constructed 
772.00 Km 997.00 Km 225.00  Km 
4. Nos. of 
Village/town 
protection 
works 
 67 Nos. 719 Nos.  652 Nos. 
 
A. Hydro-power -Development: 
Name of work Hydropower 
developed in NE 
Region since 
inception up -to 
1980 
Hydropower 
developed in  NE 
Region since 
inception up-to1st  
July’2005 
Hydropower developed in 
NE Region since creation 
of Brahmaputra Board  
up-to1st  July’2005 
Gross Hydro -
power -Developed 
125.00 MW( 60% 
load factor) 
1202.50 MW( 60% 
load factor) 
1077.70 MW( 60% load 
factor) 
Source : CEA website 
The benefit achieved on taking up of Flood Management, Drainage Development and 
Anti Erosion Schemes by Brahmaputra Board are stated below: 
Sl.No. Name of scheme Date of 
completion 
Area 
benefited 
in Ha.  
Remarks 
1. Protection of Majuli  Island from 
flood & erosion Phase-I 
Jan/2011 40,000 80% of total area of 
Majuli main island 
    2.  Harrang Drainage Development 
Scheme 
Jan/2011          11,850  

 
27 
 
 
   3.  Protection of Kushia Bill, 
Durgajan & Nagrihan area 
March/2008              150  
4. Protection works in Nagrijuli 
area 
            March/2010 40,289  
 Total   92,289  
 
The Brahmaputra Board has been interacting with respective State Governments and 
other agencies regarding status of implementation of the recommendations made in the 
approved Master Plans. They have also been requested from time to time to intimate the 
Brahmaputra Board regarding updated status of implementation of the recommendations made 
in the approved Master Plans. However, due response is yet to be received from th e State 
Governments.   
In addition to the schemes executed by Brahmaputra Board as stated above, Board is 
also acting as nodal department in respect of NE States for scrutinizing, recommending and 
monitoring of Flood Management  & Anti Erosion Schemes bein g executed by the States with 
Central Assistance under Flood Management Programme. The number of schemes executed 
by the eight North Eastern States during XI Plan period & area benefited by these schemes are 
shown below:- 
 
Sl.No. 
 
 
 
State No. of 
scheme 
sanctioned  
 
 
No. of 
scheme 
completed 
upto 
Feb/11 
Area benefited 
by completed 
schemes (lakh 
Ha) 
 
Area restored 
by completed 
schemes (lakh 
Ha.) 
1 
2 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
11  9 0.55 0 
2 Assam 85 50 1.007 1.871 
3 Manipur 22 12 0.28 0 
4 Meghalaya 0 0 0 0 
5 Mizoram 2 0 0 0 
6 Nagaland 5 3 0.003 0 
7 Sikkim 24 16 0.179 0 
8 Tripura 11 0 0 0 
 
Total 
160 90 2.019 1.871 
 

 
28 
 
Recommendation (Para No.16) 
The Committee note that the works of Brahmaputra Board are monitored by the MoWR 
and also by the High Powered Review Boa rd under the Chairmanship of Minister of Water 
Resources and Chief Ministers of North Eastern States as Members.  The Brahmaputra Board 
does not have manpower to collect data regarding mathematical modeling of Brahmaputra 
Basin.  The Board has, therefore, approached CWPRS, Pune for the purpose while contact has 
been established with the IIT, Guwahati in this behalf.  The work will be assigned after 
receiving the detailed work plan from the said institutes.  As regards the cost of the work, the 
Board has req uested CWPRS, Pune to estimate the probable cost for the same.  The 
Committee desire that the evaluation studies being carried out by Assam Engineering College 
and IIT Guwahati of the schemes of Brahmaputra Board be completed in a time bound manner 
for the speedy evaluation of the schemes of the Board.  CWPRS, Pune may also be asked to 
estimate the probable cost of the project at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
Regarding the evaluation study, it is stated that Assam Engineering College (AEC), 
Guwahati have submitted the evaluation reports in respect of four master plans prepared 
during the 10 th Plan.  AEC has stated that master plans are useful documents and mostly 
followed by the implementing agencies. They have also recommended that master plans may 
be regularly updated due to change in morphology of river and implanted status. The 
recommendations of AEC Guwahati have been accepted by the Ministry of Water Resources 
and suggested to Brahmaputra Board that the suggestions made in the Evaluation Report may 
be taken care of by the Board. 
Regarding the evaluation study of works of Dhola Hatighuli Phase -I & Phase-II, it is stated that 
draft report is submitted by IIT, Guwahati to Brahmaputra Board and Brahmaputra Board has 
examined the reports and submitted  observations to IIT, Guwahati.  The IIT, Guwahati will 
submit the final report shortly.  
 The Brahmaputra Board has prepared a proposal for mathematical model study of 
Brahmaputra River with an estimated cost of Rs.2.52 crore in consultation with the IIT 

 
29 
 
Guwahati and proposal is under examination in Central Water Commission, after receiving the 
clearance from Central Water Commission the work will be awarded. 

 
30 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Para No.2) 
 
The Committee observes that the Brahmaputra Board has a sanctioned staff strength of 
626, out of which 245 are technical and the remaining 381 non -technical posts.  The Ministry 
reported that 38 posts – 13 technical and 25 non -technical – are lying vacant.  Admittedly, the 
actual staff strength of 588 is inadequate considering the enormity of the mandate assigned to 
the Board.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Government must take immediate 
measures to provide adequate manpower to Brahmaputra Board by way of regular recruitment, 
deputation or on contractual basis keeping in view the short term and long term requirements of 
the Board. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Due to abolition of one post, the p resent sanctioned staff strength of the Brahmaputra 
Board is 625 only of which 245 are technical and remaining 380 non -technical posts.   
Presently, a total 575 posts are filled up.  10 technical posts and 40 non -technical posts are 
lying vacant.  From the se three posts have gone under deemed abolition category and 
proposal for their revival is under processing in this Ministry. Presently one post of Chairman of 
Brahmaputra Board has been filled up with additional charge.   Ministry of Water Resources 
has initiated necessary steps for filling of the statutory posts (4 numbers) including Chairman.    
The Brahmaputra Board has initiated steps for filling up 43 non statutory posts.   For three 
posts (1 Junior Engineer  and  2,  Assistant Engineer) the appointme nt orders have already 
been issued.  Out of remaining 40 posts, 29 posts are to be filled up by direct recruitment and 
11 posts by promotion.  The Brahmaputra Board has initiated the process to hold the 
Departmental Promotion Committee (DPC) for filling up  the posts by promotion.  For the 

 
31 
 
remaining posts, the revised recruitment rules of Brahmaputra Board incorporating latest 
guidelines of Department of Personnel & Training (DoPT) and recommendation of 6 th Pay 
Commission is under process in this Ministry.  
 
Recommendation (Para No.7) 
 
 The Committee note that the Board has taken up 14 multipurpose projects in 
Brahmaputra and Barak Basin and in the south flowing river in Meghalaya for survey, 
investigation and preparation of DPRs.  The number of projects for which DPRs have been 
completed are five viz. Siang Single Stage & Subansiri Single Stage in Arunachal Pradesh, 
Tipaimukh in Manipur and Mizoram, Pagladiya in Assam and Bairabi in Mizoram.  The Siang 
and Subansiri Dam Projects have been handed over to the N ational Hydro Electric Power 
Corporation (NHPC) for implementation, while Tipaimukh and Bairabi Dam Projects have been 
handed over to the North East Electric Power Corporation (NEEPCO) and the Government of 
Mizoram respectively.  The Pagladiya Dam Project is under execution by the Board.  The 
Ministry claimed that they keep a tab on the pace of execution of works by calling for the 
implementation status.  The Committee regret to observe that though DPRs have been 
prepared by the Brahmaputra Board for five p rojects, these projects are still languishing for 
want of implementation by the States for one reason or the other.  The Committee hope that 
the Board will make genuine efforts in clearing the bottlenecks in the implementation of these 
five projects and pu rsue vigorously with the State Governments to ensure that these are 
completed without any further time and cost overruns.  The Committee would like to be 
informed of the latest position in the matter.   
Reply of the Government 
Detailed Project Report of th e under mentioned projects were completed by the Board 
and handed over to different agencies/organizations and State Government for execution as 
per direction of Govt. of India and request of Mizoram Government. The status of projects is as 
below:- 

 
32 
 
1. Dihang (Siang) Dam Project: - The project is handed over to NHPC as per direction of 
Govt. of India.  As the project is submerging villages in the Arunachal Pradesh, the 
project was not taken up.  Now, the Govt. of Arunachal Pradesh has carried out the pre -
feasibility studies from National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC) by avoiding the 
submergence of villages in Arunachal Pradesh.  Feasibility Report prepared by NTPC for 
Siang Upper Stage -I(6000 MW) and Stage -II(3750 MW) by avoiding submergence of 
important towns of Tuting, Yingkiong.  The Project is yet to be allotted for implementation 
by Govt. of Arunachal Pradesh. It is also informed that Siang Upper Project is declared as 
a National Project. 
2. Subansiri Dam Project: The project is handed over to NHPC by Brahmap utra Board and 
presently it is under implementation by NHPC as Subansiri Lower Project for 2000 MW 
and likely to commissioned by the year 2012-14.   
3. Tipaimukh Dam Project: - The project is handed over to NEEPCO.  Thereafter Ministry of 
Power has decided th at Tipaimukh (1500 MW) project shall be executed as a Joint 
Venture among NHPC, Sutlej Jal Vidyut Nigam Ltd. (SJVNL) and Government of Manipur 
with share holding of 69%, 26% and 5% respectively.  Techno -economic clearance (TEC) 
was accorded by CEA on 02.7. 2003.  Environment clearance was accorded on 
24.10.2010.   The forest clearance for the project is in process.  The MoU for functioning 
of Joint Venture for implementation of the project has been signed among the partners on 
26.4.2010  
4. Bairabi Dam Project: - The project is handed over to Mizoram Govt. and project is yet to 
be implemented by the State Government.  
5. Pagladiya Dam Project: The project is under execution by Brahmaputra Board.  However, 
no progress was made due to non-completion of Zirat Survey and land acquisition.   
After handing over of these projects to the different implementing 
Organisation/Agencies and State Government, it is beyond the control of Brahmaputra Board 
as they are under administrative control of different Ministries of Governmen t of India and state 
government. However, the Board has been offering all possible supports to complete the DPRs 
and technical clearance of these projects. 

 
33 
 
Recommendation (Para No.8) 
 The Committee note that the Brahmaputra Board had identified 41 potentia l drainage 
congested areas in the North Eastern Region in the Master Plans of which two DDSs have 
been suspended.  DPRs for 20 schemes out of the 39 Drainage Development Schemes (DDS) 
have been prepared and 11 of them already implemented by the Board excep t a few where 
some difficulty is being faced.  19 other DDS are under various stages of investigations and 
DPR preparation.  The Committee are given to understand that after the DPRs have been 
prepared by the Board, they are handed over to concerned Depart ments/ agencies/ State 
Governments.  Reportedly, the Board sometimes faces delay in execution because of tardy 
land acquisition process but the Board keeps a watch by calling for the status of 
implementation by the States.  The committee hope that the Boar d will exercise their good 
influence with the State Governments to avoid any delay in land acquisition process which may 
consequently result in delay in completion of projects. 
Reply of the Government 
The Board has been utilizing its good relation with Sta tes for acquisition of land for 
execution of various DDS. However, in some cases Viz. Kailashahar DDS in Tripura, Singla 
DDS in Barak valley & Joysagar DDS in Nagaon District of Assam (Brahmaputra Valley), there 
was strong opposition to the projects by the  people of the respective area and the State 
administration could not proceed with the land acquisition process. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
The Committee observe that since 1999 -2000, the Board has taken up various 
construction projects for drainage dev elopment and prevention of erosion and flood control. 
The major components include Pagladiya Dam Project, construction of Drainage Development 
Schemes (DDSs), anti -erosion and flood control schemes at various places in Assam, and 
protection of Majuli Islan d from erosion. The Pagladiya Dam being constructed across 
Pagladiya river at Thalkuchi, Baksa District, Assam, has a proposed height of 25 m. and 21 km. 
long earth dam with a spillway. Sanctioned by the Government of India in January 2001 at an 

 
34 
 
estimated cost of Rs. 542.90 crore, the Projects is expected to being flood moderation benefit 
to 40,000 ha., irrigation benefit to 54,160 ha., and incidental power generation of 3 MW. Till 
now, works carried out pertaining to this Project include pre -construction survey, investigations, 
studies, design, drainage, etc.; taking possession of land (956 ha.) for resettlement and 
rehabilitation purpose, construction of project roads, offices, etc. However, the Committee 
regret to note that the works for Pagladiya Dam Pro ject are presently held up due to non -
completion of Zirat Survey and land acquisition. To resolve these issues, a discussion in 
January 2009 between the officials of the Board and Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC) was 
held. The Committee note that the BTC  suggested the possibility of finding an alternative 
project site way upstream of the present site. Subsequent to a meeting convened by Secretary, 
MoWR in February 2009, Chief Secretary, Assam had a meeting on 23.10.2009 with officials of 
Brahmaputra Board  and BTC wherein it was decided that the Board should take up 
investigations for alternate project location near the Assam -Bhutan border, and subsequently, it 
has carried out reconnaissance and topographic survey in this regard.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire the Ministry to make vigorous and intelligent efforts to resolve all the 
bottlenecks impeding the construction of Pagladiya Dam.  They would like to be apprised of 
action taken in the matter by the Ministry.   
Reply of the Government 
This Ministry h as requested the Brahmaputra Board to explore the possibility of 
alternative project location without affecting the Bhutan territory and keeping the submergence 
within Indian territory.  As per studies carried out by Brahmaputra Board there is no other 
suitable alternative site available in the upstream of present location (at Thalkuchi).  The Board 
has opined that the present site is the best suitable location for a multi -purpose project with 
benefits of flood moderation, irrigation and power to the desired extent.  
The above views of the Brahmaputra Board have been conveyed to the State 
Government of Assam on 27 th December, 2010 with the request to offer the views of the State 
Government in the matter.   On getting the response of the State Government, thi s Ministry will 
formulate the final opinion about the alternative project location.  

 
35 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
The Committee observes that the Board took up the task of the protection of Majuli 
Island from flood and erosion on the request made by the G overnment of Assam in November 
1999.  The Board prepared the DPR for protection of Majuli Island and submitted to the CWC in 
August 2000, which was revised and approved by CWC in August 2003 with an estimated cost 
of Rs.86.56 crore to be taken up in three phases.  Due to the gravity of erosion problem, and as 
the Government sanction for Phase -I works was anticipated to take some time, the Board took 
up several immediate measures from January 2004 and February 2005 to provide relief to the 
people at an expen diture of Rs.5.92 crore.  The immediate measures were followed by the 
regular flood and erosion protection works under Phase -I in March 2005 as per DPR.  The 
Phase-I was to be completed by the end of X Plan.  However, due to non -availability of 
construction materials, transport bottlenecks, non -performance of some contractors, the work 
programme was re -scheduled for completion by March 2009.  Phase -II & Phase -III of the 
Scheme estimating Rs.116.02 crore, have also been cleared by CWC in November, 2008, and 
tender preparation for works have already been started.  The works are scheduled to be 
completed by 2011-12. 
 Though there appeared to be a degree of success in the efforts of Brahmaputra Board 
and the resultant mitigation of erosion and flood in several p laces of Majuli Island, the 
Committee note that the flood and erosion problem in the Island is far from being contained as 
the Island was ravaged by the floods during the monsoon season in 2008.  The apparent cause 
of the flood was the breaches that occurr ed at Brahmaputra dyke and on other embankments 
at Majuli Island.  The seriousness of the erosion and the ravages of floods prompted the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources of Parliament to make an on -the-spot visit to Majuli 
Island during 2009.  The Committee note that a Standing Committee of Experts was constituted 
by the Government of India in 2007 which reviews and suggests measures for protection of 
Majuli Island.  The Experts Committee had visited the Island five times from January 2008 to 
April 2010 and recommended several works to be taken up by the Brahmaputra Board as well 
as the Government of Assam.  The Committee hope that implementation of the suggestions of 
the Experts Committee would be completed at the earliest so that the people of Majuli Island 

 
36 
 
are not exposed to recurrent nightmare of floods year after year.  They also desire to see that 
works for Phase -II & III are completed by the scheduled target of 2011 -2012.  The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the recommendation of the Commit tee of Experts and the action 
taken to implement them. 
Reply of the Government 
Phase-I work of protection of Majuli Island is nearing completion. Phase -II & III has 
been undertaken in line with the recommendation of the Standing Committee. The Committee 
after examining all the aspect of the scheme and field condition after field visit from 16 to 19 th 
June 2008 recommended only 5 (five) spurs to be constructed and after study on the efficacy of 
these 5 nos. of spurs, the balance spurs should be constructed. The schedule date of 
completion of the initial 5 spurs is September, 2011. Considering the construction of spurs to 
take at least 2 years including collection time of boulders, their transportation to site etc., there 
is no possibility of construction of t he remaining spurs within March, 2012. However, the 5(five) 
nos. of spurs already taken for construction would be completed by March, 2012. 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No.18 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
The re presentatives of the NGOs/ resident welfare association complained to the 
Committee during their field visit about the limited time period available for work i.e. 2-3 months 
to carry out for the erosion control and flood control works due to long time span  of floods, 
delay in release of funds, delay in payment to contractors, etc.  The Committee are not happy 
with this situation and desire that the Board should plan the works and sanction and release of 
funds in such a way that the limited available time is  utilized by carrying out the maximum work 
possible. 

 
37 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Board is not doing any work in the East Barpeta District of Assam including the 
region from Bahari Satra to Bazabhaga. Perhaps complain pertains to works carried out by 
other department.  
However, in respect of schemes being executed by Board, all efforts are indeed made 
to complete the official formalities by the Board well before the start of the working season.  
 

 
38 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry had initiated a proposal for restructuring of the 
Brahmaputra Board in October 2004 which would also have addressed the pr oblem of staff 
shortage. Another aim of restructuring is, statedly, to redefine and widen the objective of the 
Board so as to include integrated water resources development involving irrigation, flood 
management, generation of hydropower, etc. The draft Ca binet note prepared by the MoWR in 
this regard had been reportedly circulated to all concerned Ministries and the State 
Governments. Based on such inter-ministerial and inter-governmental consultation, a bill was to 
be introduced in the Parliament during t he Monsoon Session 2009 seeking amendment of the 
existing Brahmaputra Board Act, 1980. The Committee are surprised to note that the proposal 
to restructure the Board mooted in October 2004, is yet to take first step in its legislative 
journey.  The Ministr y has not furnished any cogent reason for such an inordinate delay.  The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate the recommendation made by them in their 9 th Report 
presented to Parliament on 22 April, 2008 and hope earnestly that the Ministry would be able to 
introduce the Bill at least in the Monsoon Session of Parliament, 2010.   
 
Reply of the Government 
The Bill is yet to be introduced in the Parliament. The status is as below: - 
The Draft Cabinet Note was prepared and circulated to concerned Ministries and the  
State Governments .  Based on the comments received the note is being modified before 
sending the same the Ministry of  Law & Justice thereafter the approval of the Cabinet will be 
obtained.   

 
39 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No.6 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
  
 The Committee note that the North Eastern Hydraulic and Allied Research Institute 
(NEHARI) was established under the Brahmaputra Board at Rudreshwara (North Guwahati) as 
per the Assam Accord and operationalis ed during 1996 at a cost of Rs.14 Crore.  Its main 
functions are material testing, carrying out model studies, etc.  It is assisted by the Central 
Water & Power Research Station (CWPRS), Pune and Central Soil & Materials Research 
Station (CS&MRS), New Delh i.  The Committee were informed that the Institute has 
successfully completed model studies of (i) Jiadhal River, (ii) River Brahmaputra from Porvita to 
South Salmara, (iii) Majuli Island, and (iv) Kameng River.  It is observed that NEHARI manages 
its affa irs with the funds provided by the Government.  It also generates fund by providing 
services to different agencies.  It has, however, been observed that its earning had drastically 
declined from Rs.49.78 lakh in 2002 -03 to Rs.6.70 lakh only in 2008.09.  It  is also noted that in 
place of required staff strength of 45, only 29 are in place at present.  The Committee had 
recommended earlier (9 th Report/14th Lok Sabha) for filling up of posts by reviving the deemed 
abolished posts. According to the Ministry the  posts required for strengthening of NEHARI are 
being worked out.  Since shortage of staff is bound to hamper the smooth functioning of 
NEHARI, the Committee recommend that MoWR/Brahmaputra Board need to expedite the 
process of providing adequate staff to NEHARI at the earliest.  NEHARI should also take steps 
to mobilise the available resources to increase their income.   
 
Reply of the Government 
The proposal for strengthening of NEHARI alongwith the restructuring of non 
restructuring posts of the Brahmaput ra Board is proposed in the restructuring of Brahmaputra 

 
40 
 
Board and will be taken up separately with the Ministry of Finance after amendment of 
Brahmaputra Board Act for its restructuring.    
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                            DIP GOGOI 
29 August, 2011                                         Chairman,  
07 Bhadrapada, 1933 (Saka)            Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 

 
41 
 
APPENDIX – I 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2010-11) HELD ON THURSDAY, 11 AUGUST 2011 
  
The Committee sat from 1530 hours to 1620 hours in Main Committee Room, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  
Shri Dip Gogoi – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
5. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi 
6. Shri Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan 
7. Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
8. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
9. Shri Virender Kashyap 
10. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
8. Shri S.P.Y. Reddy 
9.  Shri Arjun Roy 
10. Smt. Annu Tandon 
11. Shri Sajjan Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Dr. Ashok S. Ganguly 
             13. Shri Ranjitsinh Vijaysinh Mohite-Patil 
 14. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
 15. Smt. Bimla Kashyap Sood 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri N.K. Sapra  - Secretary 
2. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Director 
 

 
42 
 
  
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee .  
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration (i) Memorandum No. 2 regarding Action 
Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations c ontained in the Fourth Report 
(15th Lok Sabha) on "Working of Brahmaputra Board"; and (ii) and draft Report on "Depletion of 
Ground Water Level". 
2. After some discussion, the Committee adopted the above mentioned two Reports with 
certain amendments/modifications made during deliberations  in the recommendation portions 
on Draft Report on 'Depletion of Ground Water Level' .  These amendments/modifications 
include the following points: 
(i) To incorporate the Committee's concern on the growing construction of septi c 
tanks in the country side as another possible source of sub -soil contamination 
and the need for appropriate action in this regard; 
(ii) To incorporate information on contaminated habitations indicating the nature of 
contamination of water S tate-wise/UTwise, g iving total number of such 
habitations in the country; 
(iii) To incorporate tanneries in the list of factories/industries located in high 
pollution zones which need to be regularly inspected by the Central Pollution 
Control Board (CPCB) and the District Collectors; 
(iv) To extend the Scheme  of demonstrative artificial recharge projects taken up by 
CGWB during the Eleventh Plan to other areas including Bundelkhand region of 
UP and Madhya Pradesh; 
(v) To recommend to the Government to explore the possibility of making rain  
water harvesting mandatory for all Departments of Government – Central as 
well as State;  
(vi) To incorporate perennial drought prone States , such as Rajasthan, Gujarat and 
Madhya Pradesh in the list of projects undertaken by the Government of India 
under pilot scheme in 2005 in respect of National Project for Repair, Renovation 
and Restoration of Water Bodies (RRR);  

 
43 
 
(vii) To urge the Government to furnish the complete data of the major 
national/international river s of the country  regarding their water volume of the  
flow, utilization for irrigation purpose and volume at the point of entry to India or 
at point of entry to other country or the sea for the last ten years; and 
(viii) To change the title of the report to 'Augmentation of Depleted Ground Water Level, 
Sustainable Development, Conservation, Management, Use of Ground Water and 
Prevention of Water Pollution'. 
 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize both the above 
mentioned Reports in view of the consequential changes after incorporating the above 
mentioned suggestions made by the Members in the draft Report on "Depletion of 
Ground Water Level" and changes arising out of factual verification and to present the 
same to both the Houses of Parliament in the current Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 

 
44 
 
APPENDIX II 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTH REPORT 
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE  
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations/Observations   16 
 
 
(ii) Recommendation/Observations which have been    
accepted by the Government  
 
Para Nos. 1, 4, 6, 11, 13, 14, 15 and 16     
 
Total         08 
Percentage        50.00% 
  
  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee 
do not desire to pursue in view of the Government‟s replies  
 
Para Nos. 2, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 12 
 
Total         06  
Percentage         37.5 % 
 
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Para Nos. 3 and 5 
 
Total         02  
Percentage 12.5 % 
 
 
 