 
4 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURES 
(2009-2010) 
                 
         
FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
                 
         
                 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
          
         
WORKING OF BRAHMAPUTRA BOARD 
         
         
         
FOURTH REPORT 
  
 
         
            
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
AUGUST, 2010/SRAVANA, 1932 (Saka) 
         

 2 
 
FOURTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2009-2010) 
          
(FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
                 
         
WORKING OF BRAHMAPUTRA BOARD 
  
         
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  05.08.2010 
     
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   05.08.2010 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
         
AUGUST, 2010/SRAVANA, 1932 (Saka) 

 3 
 
WRC No.  20 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
         
  © 2008 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha  (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by  
 
 

 4 
 
  Page No.(s) 
 
 CONTENTS   
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2009-2010)  
 
ABBREVIATIONS  
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
 
(iii) 
 
(v) 
 
(vii) 
PART – I 
 
REPORT 
Chapter –I Introductory 
 
1 
Chapter – II Organisational set up  
 
5 
 Manpower requirement 
Restructuring of the Board 
Grievances redressal mechanism  
NEHARI 
 
5 
6 
8 
9 
 
Chapter – III Budget of the Board 12 
 Availability of Funds 
Utilization of Funds 
 
12 
13 
Chapter – IV
  
Functions/activities  
 
14 
 (i) Master Plans 
(ii) DPRs of Multipurpose Projects and Drainage congested areas 
(iii) Construction Activities 
     (a)   Pagladiya Dam Project 
     (b)  Construction of Drainage Development Schemes 
     (c)  Anti-erosion & Flood Control Schemes 
     (d)  Protection of Majuli Island 
(iv) Visit of Parliamentary Standing Committee on Water Resources  
      To Majuli Island 
(v) Standing Committee of Experts 
(vi) Flood Management Programme 
(vii) Other issues 
      (a) Issue of proposed dam on Brahmaputra river by China. 
      (b) Flow of water in Brahmaputra river 
      (c) Impact of work done by Brahmaputra Board on Irrigation and   
           Hydropower in the region. 
 
14 
15 
16 
 
 
 
 
26 
 
27 
31 
33 
   
 

 5 
PART – II 
 
        
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS  39 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
Appendix-I Fund received by the Brahmaputra Board for deposit 
works.                
 
 
52 
Appendix-II List of functions assigned to the Board.      
 
                                         
53 
Appendix-III List of Master Plan approved by Central Government and 
under various  stages of modification/preparation. 
 
 
54 
Appendix-IV  
 
Notes on the Problem of flood, erosion of Barpeta District  of 
Assam.                
 
 
56 
Appendix-V Minutes of t he sittings of the Committee held on the 
subject   “Working of Brahmaputra Board” on 09.06.2008, 
13.03.2009, 27.10.2009 and 22.06.2010. 
 
      
 
60 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 6 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES (2009-2010) 
  
 
  Shri Beni Prasad Verma  -  Chairman 
 
          MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi 
3. Shri Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan 
4. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
         5. Shri Dip Gogoi 
6.  Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
7. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
8. Shri Virender Kashyap 
9. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
       10.        Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy 
11.        Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
             12.        Shri S.P.Y. Reddy 
13.        Shri Arjun Roy 
14.        Smt. J. Shantha 
15.        Shri K. Shivkumar alias J.K. Ritheesh 
16.     Smt. Annu Tandon 
17. Dr. P. Venugopal (Tiruvallur) 
18.  Shri Sajjan Verma 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
19.         Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan 
20. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
   21.         Shri Ranjitsinh Vijaysinh Mohite-Patil 
             22. Shri Mangala Kisan 
23. Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
24.   Dr. Ashok S. Ganguly 
 
 
SECRETARIAT   
1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Director 
4. Shri A.K. Yadav   - Committee Officer 
5. Shri G. Guite   - Committee Officer  
     
   

 7 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
BCM   -  Billion Cubic Meters 
 
BTC   -  Bodoland Territorial Council 
 
BTAD   -  Bodoland Territorial Autonomous Districts 
 
CWPRS  -  Central Water & Power Research Station 
 
CWC   -  Central Water Commission 
 
CS&MRS  -  Central Soils & Material Research Station  
 
DPR   -  Detailed Project Report 
 
IMEG   -  Inter-Ministerial Expert Group 
 
MW   -  Mega watts 
 
Mha   -  Million Hectares 
 
NEHARI  -  North Eastern Hydraulic & Allied Research 
Institute 
 
NEEPCO  -  North East Power Corporation 
 
NHPC   -  National Hydro Electric Power Corporation 
 
NRSC   -  National Remote Sensing Centre 
  
TAC   -  Technical Advisory Committee  
 
 

 8 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2009 -2010) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present th is Fourth Report 
on “Working of Brahmaputra Board.” 
2. The Committee (2008-2009) took up the subject “Working of Brahmaputra Board” for 
a detailed and indepth study.  The Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of 
the Ministry  of  Water  Resou rces, Central Water Commission  and Brahmaputra Board on 
various aspects of the subject at their sittings held on 09.06.2008, 13.03.2009 and 
27.10.2009   
3. The Committee at their sitting held on 22 June 2010 considered and adopted the 
Report.   
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry of Water 
Resources, Central Water Commission and Brahmaputra Board who appeared before the 
Committee and placed their considered views. They also wish to thank the Ministry for 
furnishing the requisite material on the points raised by the Committee in connection with the 
examination of the subject. 
5. The Committee would like to place on record their sense of deep appreciation for the 
invaluable assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached 
to the Committee. 
  
 
NEW DELHI                              BENI PRASAD VERMA, 
22 July, 2010                                               Chairman,    
31 Asadha, 1932(Saka)                         Standing Committee on Water Resources 

 9 
 PART-I  
REPORT 
CHAPTER-I 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
 
 The Brahmaputra Board was constituted in 1980 by an Act of Parliament (Act 46 of 
1980) called “ The Brahmaputra Board Act”  with the objective of planning and integrated 
implementation of measures for control of floods and bank erosion in Brahmaputra and 
Barak Valley and for matters connected therewith.  It started functioning since 11 January 
1982 with headquarters at Guwahati, Assam.  The jurisdiction of the Board includes the 
Brahmaputra and Barak Valleys and rivers of Tripura.  As initially notified under the Act, the 
States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam and Meghalaya, parts of the States of Manipur, 
Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura were added in the jurisdiction.  Subsequently, with the 
declaration of Sikkim as part of the North-Eastern Region, the jurisdiction has been extended 
in June 2006 to include Sikkim and North Bengal (part of West Bengal) falling within the 
Brahmaputra Basin and the remaining parts of Tripura, Manipur, Mizoram and Nagaland as 
approved by the High Powered Review Board. 
1.2 The North -East Region is endowed with a huge water potential, being drained by 
two main river systems – the Brahmaputra and the Barak.  The river Brahmaputra, one of 
the largest rivers of the world with a specif ic yield of 85 ha.m./sq. km., which is next only to 
Amazon (87 ha.m./sq. km.) , originates from Kanglung Kang glacier east of Manas - Sarovar 
at an elevation of 5,150 m .  It traverses 1,625 km. in Tibet (China) under the name of 
Tsangpo, and enters India in Arunachal Pradesh as Siang/Dihang and joins with Lohit river 
at Pasighat where it is called Brahmaputra.  After it traverses 918 km. in India mainly 
Arunachal Pradesh and Assam, it empties into the Bay of Bengal in Bangladesh.  The river is 
braided and uns table in its entire reach in the Assam valley except for a few places.  The 

 10 
instability of the river is attributed to high sediment charge, steep slope and transverse 
gradient.  Due to heavy deposition of silt, the river has frequently changed its course, giving 
rise to braiding and meandering pattern in the alignment of the river system.  The world‟s 
largest river island „Majuli‟ in upper Assam lies in the river.  The problems associated with 
Brahmaputra river is compounded by the fact that the entire area  is in seismic zone and 
receives earthquake shocks of moderate to severe intensity from time to time.  Next to the 
Brahmaputra, the Barak is the second largest river system in North Eastern Region.  
Originating in Manipur hills, the Barak emerges into the plains near Lakhipur, Assam.  It 
bifurcates into two streams (the Surma and the Kushiyara) near Indo -Bangla border and 
enters Bangladesh.  The Barak has a total length of 900 km., out of which 564 km. lies within 
India. 
1.3 The Brahmaputra and the Barak, w ith their numerous tributaries (22 in Tibet & 39 in 
India for the Brahmaputra and 10 for the Barak) constitute a vast river system, with a total 
drainage area of 2,36,136 sq. km. (1,94,413 sq. km. for the Brahmaputra and 41,723 sq. km. 
for the Barak) in In dia alone.  Their total annual yield is 524 Billion Cubic Meter ( BCM) (494 
BCM for the Brahmaputra and 30 BCM for the Barak), which constitutes about 33% of India‟s 
total surface water potential.  Besides, 31.0 BCM of water flows annually through the rivers in 
Tripura, Manipur and Mizoram, to which may be added 33 BCM of replenis hable ground 
water resources of the region.  Thus, the water resource potential of the North Eastern 
Region is enormous.  The identified hydropower potential in N.E. Region as per t he 
assessment made by the Central Electricity Authority (C.E.A.) is 35,383 MW at 60% Load 
Factor as on 01.12.2006, out of which the present development is only 1 ,095 MW with 
another 2,934 MW under development.  In respect of irrigation development, the tot al 

 11 
irrigation potential of N.E. Region is 4.316 Mha. out of which only 35% of irrigation potential 
has been created so far. 
1.4 The National Water Policy 2002 formulated by MoWR, Government of India lays 
down the br oad outlines for proper water resources p lanning in the country which is 
reproduced as follows :- 
“Water resources development and management will have to be planned for a 
hydrological unit such as drainage basin as a whole or for a sub -basin, multi -
sectorally, taking into account surface and gro und water for sustainable use 
incorporating quantity and quality aspects as well as environmental considerations.  
All individual development projects and proposals should be formulated and 
considered within the framework of such an overall plan keeping in  view the existing 
agreements/awards for a basin or a sub -basin so that the best possible combination 
of options can be selected and sustained.” 
 
1.5 Further, the National Water Policy 2002 also lays down principles on flood control 
and management to be fo llowed in the country.  According to it, there should be a master 
plan for flood control and management for each flood prone basin.  Adequate flood -cushion 
should be provided in water storage projects, wherever feasible, to facilitate better flood 
management.  In highly flood prone areas, flood control should be given ove rriding 
consideration even at the cost of sacrificing some irrigation or power benefits. 
1.6 As per estimate of the Ministry of Water Resources, Government of India, out of         
40 milli on ha. of flood prone area in the country, on an average, flood affects an area of 
around 7.5 million ha. per year.  The North -Eastern Region, drained by the Brahmaputra and 
the Barak rivers has been one such area facing recurrent annual flood problem in India. 
1.7 The Committee‟s examination of the subject , „Working of Brahmaputra Board‟ inter 
alia included the review of organizational set -up of the Brahmaputra Board (including its 
manpower requirement, issue s of restructuring of the Board, Grievances redr essal 
mechanism, North Eastern Hydraulic & Allied Research Institute ), Budget (including funds 
availability and their utilization), functions or activities of the Board (including projects 

 12 
undertaken, Master Plans and Construction Activities), issue of mon itoring of the activities of 
the Board, and other related aspects including the views of the Ministry have been dealt with 
in the succeeding Chapters of this Report. 

 13 
CHAPTER-II 
ORGANISATIONAL SET UP 
 
 The Brahmaputra Board consists of 4 fulltime Members c omprising the Chairman, 
Vice-Chairman, General Manager, Financial Adviser and 17 part time Members representing 
7 States of the North Eastern Region, North Eastern Council, concerned Ministries of 
Government of India namely Water Resources, Finance, Agricu lture, Power, Surface 
Transport and Organisations of Government of India namely Central Water Commission, 
Central Electricity Authority, India Meteorological Department and Geological Survey of 
India. 
Manpower requirement 
2.2 The Brahmaputra Board has a st aff strength of 626 regular posts.  Out of these, 245 
posts are technical while the remaining 381 are non-technical.  The details of the staff 
strength of Brahmaputra Board is given in the table as follows: 
Group Technical Non-Technical Total 
A 73 8 81 
B 80 26 106 
C 92 191 283 
D 0 156 156 
Total 245 381 626 
 
2.3 The Committee desired to know the actual strength against the sanctioned strength 
of the Board and whether it was sufficient to handle the work load of the Board.  The 
Committee w ere informed t hat as on January 2009 as against the sanctioned strength of 
626, the workforce was only 588  not sufficient to handle the works in the extended 
jurisdiction in West Bengal and Sikkim.  38 posts were lying vacant – 13 technical and 25 

 14 
non-technical.  For filling up the posts, the vacancies have been advertised and applications 
invited.  The Ministry of Water Resources has also initiated a proposal for restructuring of the 
Brahmaputra Board in order to overcome the problem of staff shortage faced by the Board. 
2.4 The representative of the Ministry , in reply to a query of the Committee , stated that 
since they were taking up with earnestness the restructuring of Brahmaputra Board, they 
would make their full endeavour so that the Cabinet approve s some more posts  including 
technical posts .  He further stated that more posts need to be created to ensure that the 
Brahmaputra Board‟s functioning comes up to the expectations of the people of Assam and 
the North-East. 
 
Restructuring of the Board 
2.5 The restructuring of the Brahmaputra Board is being done to redefine and widen the 
objective of the Board to include integrated water resources development involving irrigation, 
flood management, generation of hydropower, etc.  It would also lead to restructuring of the 
staff strength of the Board.  The proposal for restructuring of Brahmaputra Board was 
initiated during October 2004 and framed by the Ministry of Water Resources in consultation 
with the Brahmaputra Board.  The Committee in the ir 9th Report on Demands for Gran ts 
(2008-2009) had desired the Ministry to resolve the issue involved in the amendments 
without further loss of time and introduce amendment Bill for restructuring of Brahmaputra 
Board in Parliament at the earliest.  Subsequently, the Ministry had replied that efforts are 
being made to resolve the issues with the Ministry of Law at the earliest.  Keeping in view the 
reply of the Ministry of Water Resources, the Committee in their 10 th Action Taken Report 
again called upon the Ministry to expedite the finali sation of the draft amendment of 
Brahmaputra Board Act , 1980 after expeditiously rounding of the consultation process with 
the Ministry of Law and introduce the amending Bill in the Parliament at an early date.   

 15 
2.6 In this regard, d uring evidence on the subject in October 2009 , the representatives 
of the Ministry of Water Resources informed the Committee as follows :- 
“In order to make the Board more effective in its functioning, it has been proposed to 
restructure the Board and strengthen it by bringing out the amendments in the 
existing Act.  For this purpose, a draft Cabinet Note has been prepared in the 
Ministry of Water Resources and has been circulated to the concerned Ministries 
and State Governments.” 
 
2.7 The Ministry in a subsequent written reply to the Committee interalia submitted that 
subsequently the approval of the Cabinet would be sought on the Note.  After the approval of 
the Cabinet a Bill would be brought before the Parliament for amendment of the 
Brahmaputra Board Act , 1980.  The reply f urther stated that all efforts were being made to 
expedite amendment to the Act and the Bill would be ready for introduction in Parliament 
during the Monsoon Session, 200 9 of the Parliament.  The bill is yet to be introduced in the 
Parliament. 
2.8 During t he visit of the Committee to Majuli Island and Guwahati, one of the 
suggestions given by the officials of Government of Assam for improvement in the working of 
the Board was to convert the Brahmaputra Board into a „Society‟ which may be chaired by 
the Minister of Water Resources.  The Chairman, Brahmaputra Board may be made CEO of 
the Society and all the seven States of North -East may be given representation in the 
Society.  It was further suggested that t he Society be given full powers to review the workin g 
and monitoring of the works.  The Committee was also informed that such a Society, would 
be able to convene its meetings at any time within a short notice and no State would be able 
to go against the decision taken by the Society as all the States would be having their 
representatives in the Society. 
2.9 Regarding the suggestions given by officials of Government of Assam, the Ministry 
in a post evidence reply stated as under: 

 16 
“Brahmaputra Board has informed that during the visit of the Standing Committee of 
Parliament on Water Resources, some officials of Government of Assam have 
suggested for setting up of a Society.  This suggestion was not given earlier.  
Moreover, no written communication or recommendation from the Government of 
Assam has been received in the Ministry of Water Resources so far.” 
 
2.10 On being asked the difference between „Society‟ and the „Board‟ set -up, the Ministry 
inter alia further submitted as under : 
“The Government of Assam has not submitted the proposed set -up so far.  
Therefore, it is not possible to explain the difference in the two set-ups.” 
 
2.11 On the question whether converting the „Board‟ into a Society would help in 
improvement of working and decision making process and power, the Ministry stated : 
“The Society is set -up under Society Act by an executive order, as an autonomous 
organisation under Government of India.  The Brahmaputra Board has however 
been set up as a Statutory Body under an Act of Parliament.  It is felt that the 
present set up do es not require change t o „society‟ set up as it would not help in 
improvement of decision making process and power.”  
 
Grievances redressal mechanism 
2.12 The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Water Resources visited Guwahati and 
Majuli Island during 1 -5 February 2009 to see t he erosion control work being undertaken by 
Brahmaputra Board at various places.  The representatives of the Brahmaputra Board 
Employees Union while interacting with the Committee represented that they should be 
covered under the pre -revised pension scheme  of Government of India.  They also pointed 
out lack of promotional avenues in the Board.   
2.13 The Committee during the evidence inquired whether the Ministry of Water 
Resources/Brahmaputra Board were aware of such grievances of the employees, what steps 
have been taken to resolve the problems of the employees of Brahmaputra Board, and how 
the workforce of the Board have been kept motivated to perform optimally in the absence of 
promotional avenues.  The Ministry in their post -evidence reply stated that the employees 
are given due opportunities /chance to air their grievances.  Joint meetings with the officials 

 17 
of Brahmaputra Board and representatives of different Association s/Unions are held to 
resolve the problems.  The Ministry also further stated that the Assured Career Progression 
(ACP) scheme introduced by the Government has motivated the employees to a certain 
extent. 
2.14 Regarding the efforts made by the Board for updating skills of employees to meet 
technological challenges, the Ministry of Water Resources in its reply stated that the 
Brahmaputra Board ha s taken various steps for training of the employees in office 
automation and other technical matters like computer aided design, drawings, data 
management, etc.  More than 100 employees of the Boar d have been trained in computer 
related matters so far. 
North Eastern Hydraulic and Allied Research Institute (NEHARI) 
2.15 The North Eastern Hydraulic and Allied Research Institute (NEHARI) was 
established under Brahmaputra Board at Rudreshwar (North Guwa hati) as per the Assam 
Accord, and operationalised during 1996 at a total cost of Rs.14 crore.  The main functions of 
NEHARI are material testing, carrying out model studies , etc.  Facilities such as Hydraulic 
Laboratory with model trays and flumes and Lab oratories for testing soil, concrete, other 
construction materials and foundation rock exist in the Institute.  There is a working 
arrangement for coordination with the Central Water & Power Research Station (CWPRS), 
Pune and Central Soil & Material Resear ch Station (CSMRS), New Delhi.  Th ree model 
studies and testing of several soil, rock and concrete samples have already been carried out 
in NEHARI for various organizations/project authorities in the North East Region viz. North 
East Electric Power Corpora tion, Central Water Commission, North Eastern Council and 
National Hydro Power Corporation and State Governments of Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya 
and Mizoram.  The model studies of Majuli for long term solution of flood problem of Majuli 

 18 
Island and Jiabharali river at Chokighat for construction  of a bridge at the National highway 
(NH) 52 have been completed at NEHARI.  So far, NEHARI has completed physical model 
studies of (i) Jiadhal River (ii) River Brahmaputra from Porvita to South Salmara (iii) Majuli 
Island and (iv) Kameng River. 
2.16 In reply to a query of the Committee , Government stated that NEHARI is able to 
manage its affairs smoothly with the funds provided by the Government.  It has also been 
generating funds by providing its services to different age ncies. T he details of funds 
generated by NEHARI are given below: 
Period Amount (Rs. in lakhs) 
Upto March, 2002 119.78 
2002-2003  49.78 
2003-2004  16.21 
2004-2005 78.70 
2005-2006 11.30 
2006-2007 17.81 
2007-2008 16.64 
2008-2009 6.70 
 
  
2.17 The NEHA RI is presently being run by a skeleton staff of 29 redeployed from the 
existing strength of the Brahmaputra Board.  For the smooth functioning of the NEHARI, at 
least 45 posts are required in the first phase.  Although the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Water Resources in their Ninth Report, had recommended for revival of 
deemed abolished posts and filling up of vacant posts at NEHARI on an urgent basis, the 
proposal for creation of even these 45 posts is still under consideration in the Ministry.  It  is 
also stated that the Ministry of Finance had observed, in this regard, that the issue of overall 
restructuring of Brahmaputra Board should be settled in the first place. 

 19 
 
2.18 Regarding filling up of the vacant posts in NEHARI and whether NEHARI is cov ered 
in the restructuring process of the Brahmaputra Board, the Ministry in a written note stated : 
“Being the part of Brahmaputra Board, there are no separate posts sanctioned for 
NEHARI and NEHARI is being run by Brahmaputra Board staff through internal 
deployment.  However, the posts required for further strengthening of NEHARI are 
being worked out/finalized by the Government of India as part of restructuring of the 
Board.  The pr ocess is likely to take about a year after which action would be taken 
to frame recruitment rules and fill up the posts.” 
 
2.19 On the question how NEHARI was disposing its assigned task satisfactorily and in a 
time bound manner in the absence of proper staff strength, the Ministry has in a note 
interalia stated : 
“…. NEHARI is p resently run by deploying the staff from the existing strength of the 
Brahmaputra Board.  In the matters involving high technical inputs, it consults 
CWPRS, Pune.”  
 
 

 20 
CHAPTER-III 
BUDGET OF THE BOARD 
 
Availability of Funds 
 
 The budgetary position of Brahm aputra Board including income and expenditure 
incurred during the last four years are as below : 
(Figures in Rs. crore) 
Sl.No. Year Expenditure RE Income 
1. 2005-06 36.41 50.76 0.72 
2. 2006-07 39.33 33.27 0.98 
3. 2007-08 39.49 33.85 0.75 
4. 2008-09 68.31 
 
92.1965 1.15 
5. 2009-10 (upto Dec.2009) 37.70 48.56 0.18 
 
3.2 In reply to a query of the Committee, the Ministry informed  that the budgetary 
allocations made to the Board are sufficient to meet the expenses.  Apart from Grants -in-aid 
received from Mi nistry of Water Resources, the Board has also received funds from other 
Government agencies towards deposit works.  Deposit works are the works assigned on 
payment basis by other organizations to Brahmaputra Board.  Details of funds received 
against deposi t works by the Brahmaputra Board during the last three years are given at 
Appendix- I. 
3.3 Apart from budgetary funds and „deposit works‟, other items/services under which 
the Brahmaputra Board is earning income include the following : 
1. Interest on loans and advances paid to employees; 
2. Guest House Rent; 
3. Tender Fee; 
4. Rent of Building; 
5. Laboratory Testing charges; 
6. Staff Bus fare; 

 21 
7. Electricity & Water charges; 
8. License fee recovery. 
 
Utilisation of Funds 
3.4 Asked what measures could be suggested for optimum utilization of the funds by 
Brahmaputra Board, the Ministry of Water Resources in a reply submitted as under : 
“To ensure optimum utilization of the funds provided in the annual budget, 
Brahmaputra Board is to evolve a system for timely action for according 
administrative approval, technical sanction of the schemes/projects, tendering 
process, awarding of contract , etc.  In addition, Brahmaputra Board should have 
proper monitoring system/progress of work so as to accomplish the achievement of 
the target fixed for the purpose.” 
 
3.5 When the Committee asked the Ministry about delays in sanction of works/funds for 
Schemes of Brahmaputra Board, the Ministry replied as follows : 
 
“The proposals received from the Brahmaputra Board are expeditiously examined in 
the Ministry and requisite sanction of works/funds is conveyed as per the established 
procedures.  Adequate funds have been released to the Brahmaputra Board and 
there is no shortage of funds with Brahmaputra Board for carrying out sanctioned 
works/schemes.” 
 
3.6 Asked about the procedure for getting sanction for the schemes in Brahmaputra  
Board and possible improvements for existing maximum time for execution of works, the 
Ministry stated as follows : 
 
“For execution of schemes within the approved EFC provision, the schemes are 
required to be techno -economically cleared by the CWC/TAC of Ministry of Water 
Resources as the case may be.  Expenditure sanction is to be accorded by 
Government of India. Restructuring of the Board which is already under the way, will 
help in improvement of the working of the Board.” 
 

 22 
CHAPTER-IV 
   FUNCTIONS / ACTIVITIES 
The main function of the Brahmaputra Board as per the Act is survey and 
investigations in the Brahmaputra Valley and preparation of Master Plans for the control of 
flood and bank erosion and improvement of drainage giving importance to the development 
and utilization of water resources of the Brahmaputra Valley for irrigation, hydropower, 
navigation and other beneficial purposes.  Other functions include (i) Preparation of  Detailed 
Project Reports (DPRs) and estimates of projects proposed in the Master Plans as approved 
by the Central Government; and (ii) Construction of Multipurpose Dams and other works 
proposed in the Master Plans as approved by the Central Government.  The details of 
statutory functions assigned to the Brahmaputra Board by the Brahmaputra Board Act, 198 0 
is given at Appendix-II. Since inception the Board has carried out detailed planning and 
documentation of the water resources of the North Eastern Region  and the related problems 
and potentials, which includes survey and investigations, preparation of Master Plans , 
Detailed Project Reports , etc.  Since 1999 -2000, the Board has also taken up various 
projects, construction work in the areas of drainage devel opment and erosion and flood 
control.  There has been no addition/deletion to the functions of the Brahmaputra Board so 
far. 
(i) Master Plans 
4.2 The Brahmaputra Board has prepared 4 4 Master Plans as approved by the 
Government and sent to the States for ne cessary action and implementation.  Besides the 
44 Master Plans, seven are under various stages of preparation, and six under survey and 
investigation.  The list of Master Plans approved by the Board, under  preparation,  and  
under survey and investigation is given at Appendix-III. 

 23 
4.3 On being asked about the number of Master Plans which have not been 
implemented and the reasons thereof, the Ministry of Water Resources in a post evidence 
reply stated : 
“All the Master Plan(s) have been partially implement ed.  Implementation is mainly 
to be carried out by the concerned States.  Water being a State subject, the flood 
control, anti-erosion and flood proofing works are planned, implemented and funded 
by the State Governments as per their own priorities.” 
 
4.4 To a further query on whether the Board had drawn any time frame for completion of 
DPRs of the remaining Master Plans, the Ministry inter alia replied in the affirmative.  They 
further stated as follows : 
“All the remaining Master Plans are targeted for co mpletion during XI Five Year 
Plan.  The time required for making the DPRs ranges from six months (for anti -
erosion works) to five years (for multi -purpose projects).  The DPRs for some 
identified projects have been taken up in consultation with the State G overnments in 
respect of multi-purpose projects and drainage development schemes.  These DPRs 
are scheduled to be completed by the end of XI Five Year Plan.  As far as the DPRs 
of remaining schemes which find place in the Master Plans are concerned, it 
depends on the priority accorded by the concerned State Governments.” 
 
(ii) DPRs for Multi-purpose Projects & drainage congested areas 
4.5 The Brahmaputra Board has so far taken up 14 projects for the purpose of Survey, 
Investigation and preparation of DPR s.  DPRs have been completed for five projects, viz. 
Siang Single Stage & Subansiri Single Stage in Arunachal Pradesh, Tipaimukh in Manipur 
and Mizoram, Pagladiya in Assam and Bairabi in Mizoram.  The Pagladiya Dam Project is 
under execution by the Board.  Siang and Subansiri Dam Projects have been handed over to 
the National Hydro Electric Power Corporation (NHPC) for execution.  Tipaimukh and Bairabi 
Dam projects have been handed over to the North East Electric Power Corporation 
(NEEPCO) and the Government o f Mizoram respectively.  DPR for Dibang Project in 
Arunachal Pradesh was partially completed and handed over to NHPC for DPR completion 
and implementation.   DPR for 7 projects, namely Noa-Dehing & Jiadhal in Arunachal 

 24 
Pradesh, Kulsi & Kiling in Assam and Meghalaya and Simsang, Kynshi Stage -I &  Kynshi 
Stage – II in Meghalaya, are in various shapes of investigation/preparation.  
4.6 Asked whether the Board keep s track of Plans/DPRs prepared by it and handed 
them over to State Governments/other agencies, the Ministry in a post evidence reply 
informed that after the Plans/DPRs prepared by the Board are handed over to 
Departments/agencies/State Governments, the Board has to keep a tab by calling for the 
status of implementation by the States. 
(iii) Construction Activities 
4.7 Since 1999-2000, the Brahmaputra Board has taken up various project construction 
works also in the areas of drainage and erosion and flood control.  In construction activities, 
the major components are as follows : 
(a) Pagladiya Dam Project, Assam 
 This is a major project meant for flood moderation to benefit an area of 40,000 ha., 
irrigation benefit to 54,160 ha. and incidental power generation of 3 MW being executed by 
Brahmaputra Board across Pagladiya river at Thalkuchi in Baksa District which falls under 
Bodoland Territorial Autonomous Districts (BTAD) in Assam.  The proposed  dam  is 25 m.  
high  and  21  Km.  long   earth  dam  with  a  spillway.   The Government of India had 
sanctioned the project in January 2001 at an estimated cost o f Rs. 542.90 crore for 
construction by Brahmaputra Board.  Till now, works carried out pertaining to this project 
include pre -construction survey; investigations, studies, design, drawings etc.; taking 
possession of land (956 ha.) for resettlement & rehabi litation (R&R) purpose; construction of 
project roads, offices etc; preparation of technical specifications & tender document; and pre-
qualification of contractors for main works.   Out of Rs.250 crore earmarked for Pagladiya 

 25 
Project during 10th Plan, only Rs.18.13 crore had been incurred.  The amount earmarked for 
11th Plan for Pagladiya work is Rs.500 crore. 
4.8 The works for Pagladiya Dam Project are held up due to non -completion of Zirat 
Survey and delay in land acquisition by the State Government.  The Ministry has stated that 
the Government of Assam has informed that since all the revenue and land matter having 
been transferred to Bodoland Territorial Council (BTC), the Board should take up the matter 
of Zirat Survey with BTC.  Subsequently, a discussio n between the Chairman and other 
officials of Brahmaputra Board was held on 12.01.2009 at Kokrajhar, Assam with  Dy. Chief 
Executive Member & other officials of BTC wherein the details related with the project were 
explained and the need for taking up of Zirat Survey expeditiously was impressed upon.  The 
Ministry also informed that the BTC suggested the possibility of finding an alternative project 
site way upstream of the present dam site.  Another meeting was convened by Secretary, 
Ministry of Water Reso urces on 12.02.2009 wherein it was decided that Chief Secretary, 
Assam would meet BTC officials at the earliest to persuade them for construction of 
Pagladiya Dam Project at the present location, even while the Brahmaputra Board would 
simultaneously carry out preliminary studies about the alternate dam sites upstream of the 
existing site. 
4.9  When asked about the outcome of the proposed meeting, i t was stated that the 
proposed meeting between the Chief Secretary, Assam and the BTC officials ha d not taken 
place till  then.  The proposed meeting was subsequently taken by the Chief Secretary, 
Government of Assam on 23.10.2009 in which Brahmaputra Board and Bodoland Territorial 
Council officials were present.  It was decided that the Board should take up investi gations 
for alternative project location near the Assam -Bhutan border in view of socio -political 
problem in the present dam site location.  The Brahmaputra Board has carried out 

 26 
reconnaissance survey and initiated topographic survey upto the Indo -Bhutan border area to 
explore the location of alternative dam site. 
 
4.10 Regarding acquisition of land prior to the start of the construction of the dam, the 
Ministry in a post evidence reply stated: 
“Yes sir, the Government of Assam agreed to provide the required  land prior to the 
start of the construction of the dam.” 
 
4.11 Asked why the extent of submergence due to Pagladiya Dam Project had not been 
assessed at the time of finalizing/approval of the DPR of the project resulting in avoidable 
delay, the Ministry in a post evidence reply stated : 
“The extent of submergence area was assessed based on the topographical map as 
required for preparation of DPR of project.  But detailed Zirat Survey is done during 
the implementation of the project.” 
 
4.12 When the Committ ee asked whether the estimated cost and anticipated date of 
completion for the Pagladiya Dam Project have been revised by the Brahmaputra Board in 
view of the delays plaguing the Project and the latest hurdles about the dam site, the Ministry 
stated that new estimate will be made once alternative studies are completed. 
(b) Construction of Drainage Development Schemes (DDS) 
 
4.13 The Brahmaputra Board has identified 41 Drainage Development Schemes (DDS) in 
the country of which 2 DDS have been suspended.  Out of the remaining 39 Schemes, nine 
were taken up for execution during the Tenth Plan.  These are (i) Harang (Rs.30.49 crore) (ii) 
Barbhag (Rs.7.23 crore) (iii) Jengrai (Rs.1.49 crore) (iv) Jakaich uk (Rs.2.96 crore)      (v) 
East of Barpeta (Rs.1.34 crore)  (vi) Joysagar (Rs.2.13 crore) (vii) Kailashahar         (Rs. 4.18 
crore) (viii) Singla (Rs.3.54 crore) and (ix) Amjur (Rs.14.15 crore).  Out of the remaining 3 0 
Schemes, 2 schemes viz. Rudrasagar and Demow have been technically cleared by CWC 

 27 
and DPRs have been handed over to State Governments.   Rest are under various stages of 
modification, preparation and investigation. 
4.14 On the status of 39 DDS, identified by the Board, the Chairman Brahmaputra Board, 
testified as follows : 
“Out of 39, only nine have  been sanctioned by CWC during the Tenth Plan.  Out of 
39 which have been identified, 20 DPRs have been made, 19 are nearing 
completion.  Out of the 20 which have been prepared, 11 were cleared by the CWC 
and most of them we have already implemented except  a couple where we had 
difficulty.  As regards others there have been some complaints, like in respect of 8 
numbers where we are modifying and sending to CWC.  CWC is already examining 
one.  We are a little behind in respect of the 19 which are left over.  That is lagging 
otherwise, in respect of 20, we have more or less done.” 
 
4.15 The status of 9 Drainage Development Schemes (DDS) was clarified by the Ministry 
in a post evidence reply as follows : 
“Of 9 schemes taken up for execution during Tenth Plan wo rk programme for 7 
drainage schemes have been continued.  Two schemes viz. Kailashahar Drainage 
Development Scheme and Joysagar Drainage Development Scheme could not be 
continued due to problem of acquisition of land.  The physical progress of execution 
of 7 (Seven) Drainage Development Schemes continued during Eleventh Plan are 
as follows : 
 
  Harang   : 96% 
  Barbhag  : 26% 
  Jengrai  : 30% 
  Jakaichuk : 12% 
  Singla  : 3% 
East of Barpeta : 3% 
Amjur : Land for execution is being made available by the 
State Government (of) Assam.” 
   
   
4.16 The Committee pointed out that works of some of the Drainage Development 
Schemes were affected due to delay in handing over of land by the State Government of 
Assam and asked what steps the Brahmaputra Board had taken t o persuade the State 
Government to hand over the land.  The reply of the Ministry to this query is as follows :- 
“The Brahmaputra Board is continuously pursuing the matter with the State 
Government of Assam.  The fie ld office of Brahmaputra Board are conti nuously co-

 28 
ordinating with local authority of District Administration for speedy disposal of land 
acquisition works.” 
 
4.17 Asked about the plan of  the Ministry to complete the 30 drainage scheme s during 
the Eleventh Plan period, the Ministry stated inter-alia as follows : 
“During Eleventh Plan, preparation of DPR for 20 (twenty) numbers of drainage 
development schemes are targeted to be completed, out of which 2 (two) DDs have 
been completed so far.” 
 
4.18 When asked about the amount of expenditure incurre d on drainage development 
scheme during the Eleventh Plan, the Ministry stated as under : 
“The amount of expenditure incurred during Eleventh Plan for survey, investigation 
and preparation of Detailed Project Report of Drainage Development Scheme is 
Rs.44.00 lakhs till October, 2009.” 
 
4.19 In reply to a written question whether the  Board faced any problem while dealing 
with the State Governments, the Ministry stated : 
“Brahmaputra Board has taken up these projects only with Central funding.  
Sometimes, there is a delay by the State Government in providing the land required 
for the project.” 
 
(c) Anti-erosion and Flood Control Schemes 
 
4.20 The Brahmaputra Board has undertaken Avulsion of Brahmaputra river at Dholla -
Hathighuli in three phases of which two ph ases were completed by July 2004.  The third 
phase was completed in 2007 -08.  The amount of expenditure incurred for the three phases 
are Rs.10.47 crore, Rs.4.95 crore and Rs.8.47 crore respectively for the first, second and 
third phases.  The works in these three phases were able to divert back the Dibang and Lohit 
rivers to their original course and erosion was reduced.  The DPR for fourth phase of this 
scheme is under submission to CWC for techno -economic clearances, and Rs.23.19 crore 
has been earmarked for this fourth phase. 
4.21 The representative of the Board during evidence accepted the fact and inter-alia 
further stated as under : 

 29 
“As rightly pointed out, we are now doing this within this November.  Actually we 
start off all these work orders in Oct ober.  From the past year we have been doing 
like that.  We try to give all the work orders in October or November.  The work may 
start early or late; it depends upon the capability of the contractor to whom the work 
has been awarded.  What happens is, if there is a particular couple of contractors 
who are not able to pick up the work in the time, then there are difficulties.  But, we 
have not faced too much problems; that is the washing away as you have indicated - 
we have not faced it.  The feeling is Febr uary would be the end of the working 
season; but we are a ble to work up to May.  Most of the works we are able to 
complete.  But the financial year headache comes up; that finishes in March and 
then the payments will have to be done in the next financial y ear.  So, there is a 
small delay in that.  Otherwise, we close the project once the payments are made 
and once the physical achievements is done.” 
  
4.22 Asked about the probable cost and date of completion work of Phase IV of Avulsion 
of Brahmaputra river at Dholla-Hathighulli, the Ministry in a post evidence reply stated : 
“DPR for Phase IV amounting to Rs.53.29 crore was prepared by the Board and 
submitted to CWC for techno -economic clearance (TAC).  The TAC has given 
clearance to undertake works for an amount of Rs. 23 crores within the approved 
EFC.  Additional works are to be taken up based on recommendations of the  
Standing Committee of Experts on erosion of Majuli.  Tender documents for a part of 
work amounting to Rs. 7.00 crore of Phase IV have been  proposed and will be 
floated.  The work for Phase IV will be carried out as per guidelines of the Expert 
Committee and is likely to be completed by March, 2011.” 
 
4.23 To a query of the Committee whether the Phase IV work would be able to control the 
avulsion at Dholla-Hathiguli completely leaving no chance for avulsion in future, the Ministry 
inter alia further replied : 
“The estimate has been framed as per present morphology of the river configuration.  
As such, the scheme should be able to control avuls ion at Dholla -Hathiguli 
completely subject to the condition that there is no drastic change in the river 
configuration.” 
 
4.24 The Brahmaputra Board has also undertaken anti-erosion works to protect Kushiabil 
& Durgajan Village at Dimapur of Dhansiri(s).  Phase I for protection of Kushiabil & Durgajan 
village has been completed for Rs. 0.85 crore, while Phase II for protection of Mao colony, 
Kuki village & Assam Rifles Transit Camp (Rs. 1.80 crore) is also completed.  Further, anti -
erosion works at Nagrijuli, Rangia town and Mukamua /Borbhag area from flood and erosion 

 30 
of Puthimari river, Assam were undertaken in March 2007 at an estimated cost of Rs. 4.89 
crore and already completed by February 2009. 
4.25 On being asked to provide the present status of anti -erosion works on river 
Dhansiri(s), the Ministry informed the Committee as follows : 
“It is being implemented by the Assam Government.  It was to be completed long 
back but now they have sent a new proposal for completing this project in 2013.  
They have sought another three year extension.  For this project, the Central 
Assistance is to the extent of 90 per cent that is provided by the Central 
Government.” 
 
4.26 To queries on the total cost of anti -erosion works at Nagrijuli, Rangia town and 
Mukamua/Borbhag area recently executed by Brahmaputra Board, the Ministry inter alia  
stated : 
“The sanctioned amount of Nagrijuli protection work is Rs.489.00 lakh and the work 
is completed within the sanctioned amount.” 
 
4.27 To a query whether the anti-erosion works on Puthimari river has been able to check 
erosion at Nagrijuli, Rangia town and Mukamua/Borbhag area, the Ministry replied : 
“Yes, the anti-erosion works carried out at Nagrijuli have performed satisfactorily.” 
 
(d) Protection of Majuli Island 
 
4.28 Majuli is the world‟s largest riverine island located in the upper reaches of the 
Brahmaputra river.  The island extends to a length of about 8 Km. along the east -west and 
about 10 -15 Km. along north -south direction. It has a population of about 1.53 lakh (2001 
census).  It is also the nerve centre of Vaishnavite culture developed during the unique 
Vaishnava Satra system founded by the great saint, Sri Sankaradeva in the 15th century. 
4.29 The existence of this island was threatened by severe bank erosion which 
aggravated  during  the  earthquake of 1950  that  rocked  the  North  East  region.  Due to  
severe flood and erosion in the river island, the work of protection at Majuli was taken up by 
the Brahmaputra Board in 2004.  Prior to 2004, the Government of Ass am had been carrying 

 31 
out the flood and erosion control work at Majuli since 1953.    They constructed nearly 111 
km. of embankment, 48 km of retirement embankment, construction of dowel bund and 4 
check dams, 3 Timber dampeners  and also undertook  strengthening of check dam & pro -
siltation measures in the form of bamboo cribs and bamboo porcupines as anti -erosion 
works up to the year 2003. 
4.30 In December 1996, the Flood Control Department of Assam posed the problem to 
Brahmaputra Board with a request to pr epare a Master Plan as well as to carry out hydraulic 
model studies to suggest suitable anti -erosion measures.  The Government of Assam 
requested the Central Government in November 1999 to take up the protection of Majuli 
Island through Brahmaputra Board.  Accordingly, the Brahmaputra Board took up field 
survey and investigation for preparation of Master Plan for the Majuli Island and completed 
the Master Plan in March 2000. The Brahmaputra Board prepared the Detailed Project 
Report for protection of Majuli  Island from flood and erosion and submitted to the CWC in 
August 2000.  The DPR as subsequently revised was based on the suggestions made by the 
technical teams after site visits and techno -economically cleared by CWC in August  2003 at 
an estimated cost of Rs.86.56 crore to be taken up in three phases as below : 
 Phase I  - Rs.41.28 crore 
 Phase II - Rs.18.28 crore 
 Phase III - Rs.27.00 crore 
 
4.31 Keeping in view the gravity of erosion, and as the Government sanction for Phase I 
works was anticipated to t ake sometime, the Brahmaputra Board took up some protection 
works as immediate measures to provide relief to the people.  The works included the 
following : 
(i) Closure of 20 nos. of breaches on Malual-Malapindha dyke and PWD road; 
(ii) Raising and strengthening of  5.55 km. embankment from Kamalarighat to 
Kharkharijan; and 

 32 
(iii) Construction of RCC porcupine permeable screens/spurs/dampeners at 
various locations. 
 
These works were started during January 2004 and completed in February 2005 at 
an expenditure of Rs. 5.92 crore. 
4.32 The immediate works were followed by the regular flood and erosion protection 
works under Phase I, which started in March 2005 as per DPR.  The scheme is under 
execution and 92 .50% of works have been completed.  The scheme was originally targeted 
for completion by the end of X Plan.  However, due to the constraint of construction 
materials, transportation bottlenecks, non -performance of some contractors, the work 
programme was re-scheduled.  The scheme has now been revised at Rs. 56.07 crore .  The 
main works carried out under Phase I are as follows : 
(i) Raising and strengthening of 25.52 Km. of embankment : completed. 
(ii) Raising and strengthening of another 64.56 Km. embankment/road in 
progress : 90% of the works completed. 
(iii) 3 nos. of breach closing on Puh uwara-Gormur-Jengrai-Halidhibari (PGJH) 
road : completed. 
(iv) Anti-erosion measures in the form of RCC porcupine 
screens/spurs/dampeners in erosion prone reaches are completed. 
(v) Construction and repair of nose portion of land -spurs at Sonowal Kachari 
and Kandulimari in progress and targeted for completion by March 2009. 
(vi) Physical model study completed. 
 
 
4.33 For protection of Majuli Island, the Brahmaputra Board has so far received funds 
amounting to Rs.53.00 crore and has utilized Rs. 51.54 crore upto December 2008.   
4.34 In regard to a question regarding the extent of success achieved as a result of 
protection work, the Committee were informed that the works carried out by the Brahmaputra 
Board has been able to check the flood and erosion at most of the places .  They have 
provided considerable relief to the Island from flood and erosion.  The people harvested Sali 
paddy after a long gap of 20 years in lower Majuli.  Erosion has been mitigated in severely 
affected reaches.  The villagers who deserted the village s of Salmara and Kordoiguri 

 33 
returned due to mitigation of erosion.  It is also stated by the Ministry that the erosion 
problem has been contained except in a reach of about 2.5 km. at Bessamara and 0.5 km. in 
the reach downstream of Bengenauti. 
4.35 Despite the claims of the Ministry on anti -erosion and flood protection works at 
Majuli Island, during the flood of 2008, due to breach in Brahmaputra dyke at Matmora, a 
large discharge of water entered to the north of Majuli, flooding the entire area several kms. 
to the north of Majuli.  On 25 July 2008 due to 2 breaches on Puhumara -Gormur-Jengrai-
Halidhibari (PGJH) PWD Road -cum-embankment, the flood waters entered into Majuli area 
and submerged almost the entire island.  These two breaches gradually widened to about 
350 m. and 250 m. and the entire Majuli was under grip of flood during the remaining 
monsoon period.  The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Water Resources made an on -
the-spot visit to Majuli Island in February 2009 to get first -hand knowledge of t he problem of 
flood and erosion there. 
4.36 When the Committee asked the reasons for occurrence of breaches at Brahmaputra 
dyke and on another embankments at Majuli Island, the Ministry in their post evidence reply 
stated that the breaches in Brahmaputra d yke have occurred mainly due to erosion while the 
breaches on another embankments at Majuli Island were due to over topping.  Asked further 
whether such instances in the flood and erosion protection works of the Brahmaputra Board 
or Assam Government be avoided in future, the Ministry inter alia stated: 
“Brahmaputra is a very complex river as the morphology of the river keeps on 
changing and therefore, it is difficult to say with certainty that such instances would 
be avoided in future.  However, efforts wou ld be made to reduce such instances in 
future to the extent possible.” 
 
4.37 The Majuli Island was recently in the news for inclusion in the list of World Heritage 
sites.  When the Committee asked whether the Board has received any proposal in this 
regard from the United Nations, the Ministry gave a post evidence reply as follows: 

 34 
 “Brahmaputra Board has not received any proposal from the United Nations”. 
(iv)Visit of Parliamentary Standing Committee on Water Resources to Majuli Island 
4.38 During the visit of this Committee, representations were submitted to the Committee 
by several individuals/bodies, one of which pertain to protection of South -East Barpeta 
District of Assam, including region from Bahari Satra to Pazarbhanga from annual flood and 
erosion havoc and the measures for rehabilitation of erosion affected families.   The issue 
was also discussed by the Committee during the meeting with officials of Brahmaputra 
Board. 
4.39  Asked to furnish the magnitude of the problem of flood, erosion and rehabil itation 
problem as well as remedial measures taken by Government of Assam/Ministry of Water 
Resources in respect of Barpeta District of Assam, the Ministry submitted a point wise reply 
furnished by the State Government of Assam which is reproduced at Appendix-IV. 
4.40 To a query whether a permanent solution can be found for annual flood and erosion 
havoc at Barpeta District of Assam and the suggested measures for the same, the Ministry 
stated: 
 “Suitable measures for permanent solution can be worked out aft er detailed field  
 survey and studies of the area.” 
 
4.41 The Ministry also submitted that the following works have been taken up by 
Government of Assam for permanent solution to annual flood and erosion problem at 
Barpeta District of Assam: 
 “For permanent solution of the problem, proposals sanctioned are: 
(i) Flood Management Programme:  Raising & strengthening of Brahmaputra 
dyke from Bahari to Baghbar and construction of retirement at Betortari and 
Chesra including A/E measures at different area around Bab ari, 
Pazarbhanga, Chesra and Baghbar from the erosion of river Brahmaputra 
for Rs. 7.45 crore. 
 

 35 
(ii) Under CRF: Immediate measures to protect Fulbari, Bhogarper and its 
adjoining area from the erosion of river Brahmaputra for 2008 -2009 
(including breach closing) CRF for Rs. 22.36 crores. 
 
  In addition to above, proposal for one new scheme “Protection of Fulbari,    
  Bhogarper, Pazarbhanga and its adjoining area from the erosion of    
  Brahmaputra(construction of land spur at ch. 44.30 km, 44.65 km,   
  45,00 km and 45.35 km.) amounting to Rs. 67.90 crore is  recommended   
  in the 45th Technical Advisory Committee, preparation  of detailed   
  estimate is under process.” 
 
 
(v) Standing Committee of Experts  
4.42 There is a Standing Committee of Experts constit uted by the Government of India in 
December 2007, consisting of experts in the field of river engineering from the Government 
organizations, an expert of international repute and local representatives to review and 
suggest measures for protection of Majuli  Island. The Standing Committee of Experts visited 
the Majuli Island five times, i.e. January 2008, June 2008, November 2008, May 2009 and 
April 2010.   During their first meeting (January 2008), Expert Committee recommended 
several measures amounting to Rs.5.00 crore (approx.) to be completed prior to monsoon of 
2008 to be executed by Brahmaputra Board.  It also recommended the works to be executed 
by Government of Assam.  The Brahmaputra Board completed the works recommended by 
the Experts Committee.  During the second meeting of the Standing Committee of Experts in 
June 2008, the Committee inspected the works executed by the Brahmaputra Board and 
provided the guidance regarding construction technique to be adopted.  Guidance was also 
provided to the Board for the works to be taken up in Phase II & III.  The Standing Committee 
of Experts visited the Island for the third time from 30 November 2008 to 1 December 2008, 
and recommended that 5 Boulder Spurs may be taken up immediately.  The Committee also 
observed decrease in flow along Summoimari channel which is hugging Majuli Island from 
Dakhinpat to Kamalabari and attributed this fact to the screens laid at Aphalamukh and 

 36 
Dakhinpat by Brahmaputra Board.  The Committee also recommended laying of porcupine at 
several locations and strengthening of the existing works.  In view of the request made by 
the Deputy Commissioner, Jorhat, the Committee further recommended plugging of the two 
breaches that occurred during flood in 2008 near Samahiaati and Borbeel on PGPH  Road-
cum-embankment. 
4.43 The Government of Assam was not executing anti -erosion works since 2004.  
However, the Standing Committee of Experts during its first meeting held in January 2008 
suggested some emergent works to be carried out by the State Gover nment of Assam in 
addition to works allotted to Brahmaputra Board.  Subsequently, during the meeting 
convened by Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources with Chief Secretary, Government of 
Assam and Chairman, Brahmaputra Board on 15.05.2008, the need of car rying out anti -
erosion works on Majuli Island on the part of Assam Government was emphasized.  It was 
also agreed that the State Government should prepare a suitable scheme with proper 
justification for funding under “Flood Management Programme” and provid e for the State 
share, i.e. 10% of the estimated cost.  This was agreed to by the Chief Secretary, 
Government of Assam.  The State Government of Assam constructed RCC porcupine 
screens at  4 places as recommended by the Experts Committee in the reach from 
Summoimari Check Dam to Potia Channel (up stream of Bengenauti) at the cost of Rs.2.82 
crore during 2008.  It also undertook the dredging of a small channel through Inland 
Waterways Authority of India during 2007-2008, which resulted in the diversion of part flow of 
the channel away from the bank.  Further, the Government of Assam has taken up the 
Raising & Strengthening of dyke along left bank of Subansiri from 10 to 21 miles under Flood 
Management Programme at the cost of Rs.7.43 crore. 

 37 
4.44 Based on the m odel studies carried out by Brahmaputra Board, DPR for Phase II & 
III of anti -erosion and flood protection programme on Majuli Island was cleared by CWC at 
an estimate of Rs.116.02 crore in November 2008.  The works under Phase s II & III mainly 
include the following: 
(i) Construction of 10 Nos. of impermeable boulder spurs from Salmora to 
Kamalbari. 
(ii) Construction of RCC porcupine screens/dampeners/spurs etc. at various 
specified locations. 
(iii) Bank revetment of 500 m. on left bank of Kherkhutiasuti near Jengrai. 
(iv) Construction of Raised Platform along left bank of Malual -Malapindha at 
Chelekhpathali. 
(v) Construction of sluice on Malual-Malapindha dyke. 
 
4.45 For taking up the protection works under Phase II and Phase III cleared by the TAC 
for Rs.115.03 crore, the t ender preparation for Phase II & III works have been started by 
Brahmaputra Board and the works are scheduled to be completed by 2011 -2012.  It was 
stated that the erosion at Majuli Island would be further contained after execution of the 
balance works of Phase I and the proposed works under Phase II & III. 
4.46 When asked the areas likely to be protected from erosion in Phase II & III, the 
Ministry in a reply stated : 
“The reach from Tekeliphuta to Ukhalchuk (90.00 km.) on Northern bank of 
Brahmaputra  and Jengrai to Milithiniali on the southern bank of river Kharkhatia Suti 
will be protected from erosion.” 
 
4.47 To the query whether Majuli Island would be protected from erosion completely after 
completion of the two phases, and what further works/factors needed to be taken up to 
achieve this objective, the Ministry replied: 
“River training & anti-erosion works are continuing process for protection of an area.  
After completion of Phase s II & III, the acuteness of problem of Majuli Island will be 
significantly red uced.  However, anti -erosion measures as per future river 
morphology & requirement have to be continued.” 
 

 38 
4.48 The office of Brahmaputra Board is located in Guwahati.  There is no site office or 
branch office at Majuli Island to keep constant vigil of the  anti-erosion works there.  The 
Ministry were asked if they felt the need for one office at the island for continuous monitoring 
of the work being done by the Board.  In response thereto, the Ministry replied : 
“Yes, it is necessary.  Therefore, two Sub -Divisions are already there and one 
Division is also placed in the Island.” 
 
4.49 The Ministry also inter alia  stated that coordination between different agencies 
during work execution at the Island is maintained by seeking the help of District 
Administration, whenever required. 
4.50 When asked to respond to the criticism made by some agencies / individuals about 
lack of efforts of Government for protection of a heritage place like Majuli Island, the Ministry 
in a note stated : 
“Most of the criticisms made by  various agencies/individuals about lack of efforts by 
Government on protection of Majuli Island are not based on hard facts.  In fact, the 
Government of India, Government of Assam and Brahmaputra Board are working in 
coordination for effective implementation of the project for protection of Majuli Island 
from floods and erosion.” 
 
 
4.51 During their study visit to Majuli Island several NGOs/Residents Welfare 
Associations shared their problems with the Committee.  The Committee were informed that 
major delays occur in getting the sanction which reduces the period available for execution of 
work to 2 -3 months.  The time available for carrying out the work is normally November to 
April.  However, the sanction comes in January or February.  Therefore, very litt le time is 
available for works as the flood season starts in April.  Asked to comment on delays in 
sanction of works/funds for Schemes of Brahmaputra Board, the Ministry in a post evidence 
reply stated : 
“The proposals received from the Brahmaputra Board a re expeditiously examined in 
the Ministry and requisite sanction of works/funds is conveyed as per the established 

 39 
procedures.  Adequate funds have been released to the Brahmaputra Board and 
there is no shortage of funds with Brahmaputra Board for carrying  out sanctioned 
works/schemes.” 
  
(v) Flood Management Programme 
 4.52 The Government of India in November 2007 approved the Cabinet note for 
implementation of „Flood Management Programme‟ a State Sector Scheme under Central 
Plan to provide Central assistance of Rs.8,000 crore during XI Plan period.  148 Schemes of 
the States of Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Sikkim, Mizoram, Tripura and West 
Bengal under the jurisdiction of Brahmaputra Board estimated at Rs.948.84 crore have been 
cleared and Rs.148.67  crore released so far.  The amount released was meant for new 
schemes as well as ongoing schemes.  To the question as to what role Brahmaputra Board 
would play in execution of the said State Sector Schemes, the Ministry in a reply stated that 
the Board coordinates with the States and recommends the schemes to the Ministry.  The 
Board also monitors the progress of such schemes and recommends release of fund s 
against the schemes. 
 
4.53 The Brahmaputra Board also has chalked out a long term strategy for Flood  
Management and Erosion Control in Brahmaputra river basin.  When asked for detailed 
information about the long term strategy and by when it was likely to be implemented, the 
Ministry stated as follows : 
“Long term strategy was identified by Brahmaputra Board in the Master Plans, which 
included construction of reservoirs in the upstream for flood storage.  However, 
upstream States have objection due to submergence of their land and displacement 
of their population.  Another long term approach is to control Brahmaputra river by 
constricting its width for creating a defined river channel.  Board has already taken 
some initial steps towards study of such a scheme.” 
 
4.54 When asked about the appropriate period for implementation of the long term plan, 
the Ministry stated : 

 40 
“In addition to structural measures, the long term plan includes non -structural 
measures like watershed management involving multidisciplinary activities and as 
such appropriate period of implementation can only be ascertained after firming up  
the detailed schemes.” 
 
4.55 An area of 1 ,000 sq. km. in the North East Region ha s been provided protection 
from low and medium flood since 1982 as a result of the flood protection efforts of 
Brahmaputra Board.  As reported by the State Government of Assa m, the flood prone area 
of about 10 ,000 sq. km. still remains to be made safe from annual floods of Brahmaputra 
river, out of the total flood prone area of 24 ,380 sq. km.  When asked as to whether the 
perennial flood problem in North East Region could be c ontrolled, and the efforts needed in 
this regard, the Ministry stated as follows : 
“Complete immunity from the perennial floods is utopian in concept and 
economically not viable.  However the flood can be managed with the help of 
judicious mix of structura l as well as non -structural measures and the damage 
caused every year by the floods can be minimized in the North East Region.  The 
Master Plan prepared by Brahmaputra Board has suggested structural as well as 
non-structural measures, which requires to be implemented.  In the Master Plan it 
has been concluded that the flood in Brahmaputra and Barak valley can be 
effectively controlled by constructing reservoirs on the upper catchments of the 
tributaries of Brahmaputra and on Barak.  The short term measures like 
embankment, anti-erosion etc. are also to be constructed at selected location.  The 
non-structural measures like Flood Plane Zoning, Flood Forecasting, Flood Proofing, 
Flood Insurance etc. would also need to be implemented to minimize the flood 
damage.” 
 
4.56 The Committee asked the Ministry of Water Resources to give opinion on declaring 
Brahmaputra as a „National River‟ as was done recently by  the Government in case of the 
Ganga river and whether it would help in implementation of various flood and e rosion control 
programmes by the Brahmaputra Board.  In reply, the Ministry stated as follows : 
“Invoking the provision of entry 56 of the Union List, it has already been declared 
that it is expedient in the public interest that the Central Government shou ld take 
under its control the regulation and development of the inter -state Brahmaputra 
River Valley to the extent provided in the Brahmaputra Act 1980.  Regarding Ganga 
river it is to mention here that the Central Government vide Ministry of Environment 
and Forest notification dated 20.02.2009 has constituted „National Ganga River 
Basin Authority‟ having authority for planning, financing, monitoring and coordinating 

 41 
for strengthening the collective efforts of the Central and the State Governments for 
effective abatement of pollution and conservation of river Ganga.  The authority does 
not have any role in the flood matters.” 
 
4.57 As part of its long term measures to tackle river bank erosion problem, the 
Brahmaputra Board has already prepared a Concept Not e on Bank Stabilization of river 
Brahmaputra and forwarded the above to CWC; CWPRS; WRD, Government of Assam; 
WRDTC, IIT Roorkee; Civil Engineering Department of IIT Guwahati; Assam Engineering 
College; Jorhat Engineering College; and NIT Silchar.  The Rep ort has been modified as per 
the suggestions/observations of the experts/organizations.  Modalities are being worked out 
for carrying out mathematical model studies in collaboration with IIT Guwahati to ascertain 
the feasibility of the proposed channelizat ion of river Brahmaputra so that a long term 
solution of flood/erosion problem of the Brahmaputra Valley can be concretized and 
executed. 
(vi) Other issues 
(a) Issue of proposed dam on upstream of the Brahmaputra river by China 
4.58 There have been reports in newspapers in recent years stating that China proposed 
to construct a dam on the upstream of the Brahmaputra river inside its territory.  As per news 
report, the proposed dam was planned to  generate 540 MW of electricity.    It is said to be 
built at a place called Zangmu, and the project is to be completed by December 2015.  It was 
reported that China‟s plan to build the dam is to divert the waters of the Yarlung Tsangpo (as 
the Brahmaputra is called there) from Tibet to irrigate the Xinjiang and Gantsu portions of the 
Gobi desert. It was also further reported that the subject of China‟s plans to build dam on the 
Brahmaputra was raised with China several times, but each time China denied of any such 
activity.  When clarifications were sought by the Membe rs during the sitting of the 
Committee, the representative of the MoWR stated that the issue was raised during the visit 

 42 
of the President of China to India                           in 2006, by the media persons.  In 
response, China  had stated that they were not constructing any such dam and if they did so 
then being a responsible country, the effect on downstream reaches will be kept in mind. 
4.59 The Committee desired to know whether any international law exists which deals 
with the international water d isputes.  The representatives of the Ministry of Water 
Resources replied in the negative. 
4.60 When the Committee asked the Ministry as to whether any agreement has been 
made between India and China on sharing the waters of the Brahmaputra, the Ministry 
stated as follows : 
“With China, there is no agreement on sharing of water s of Brahmaputra.  But there 
is an MoU with China under which China provi des flood season data on river 
Brahmaputra as well as river Sutlej which helps India in better flood management .  
But there is no agreement on water sharing.” 
 
4.61 Asked further by the Committee as to whether any discussion has taken place about 
the reported construction of dam and diversion of the waters of the Brahmaputra river, the 
representatives of the Ministry replied as follows :  
 “This issue of construction of dam and diversion of water of Brahmaputra river by 
 China was taken up with China through the Ministry of External Affairs and the 
 Ministry of External Affairs informed us that the Government of Chi na said that 
 they have no major programme for diversion of water Brahmaputra and they also 
 said that if they take up any such project, they will consider the concerns of the 
 downstream States.” 
 
4.62 The Committee also asked for the comments of the Mini stry on certain reports in the 
media regarding construction of dam on Brahmaputra River by China.  In their latest 
communication dated 17 May 2010 , the Ministry of Water Resources has stated that during 
the External Affairs Minister‟s visit to China on 7  April 2010, the Chinese Authorities 
conveyed that Zangmu is a small hydropower station for generation of power and not for 
water storage.  It would have no impact downstream. 

 43 
4.63 Regarding the protection of Indian interests, the Ministry has further stated  that an 
Inter-Ministerial Expert Group (IMEG) under the Chairmanship of Joint Secretary (EA), 
Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) monitors the developments in China regarding activities in 
Brahmaputra basin.  The specialized agencies are monitoring Chinese  activities on 
diversion/control of Trans National Rivers flowing from Tibet to India.  No instance of water 
diversion activities on Brahmaputra River by China has been observed so far by the IMEG. 
4.64 As regards the impact on downstream areas on the Indian side, the Ministry has 
stated that in case of any diversion of Brahmaputra water to some adjacent basin by China, 
the flow in Indian territory will reduce to the extent of diversion and there will be effect on 
power generation and other uses.  In case t he water is discharged back into the main river 
the reduction in flow may be negligible. 
(b) Flow of water in the Brahmaputra River 
4.65 The Committee also desired to know the quantum of water in Brahmaputra River 
when it enter s Indian territory and also w hen it enter s Bangladesh.  The Committee w ere 
informed that the Central Water Commission (CWC) has conducted studies and according to 
the studies the flow is 78 BCM when it enters India and 629 BCM when it enters Bangladesh 
border.  The Increase is because  of contribution of Indian rivers.   The CWC has also 
established a site on Indo-China Border to observe the flow of Water there. 
(c) Impact of works done by Brahmaputra Board on irrigation and hydropower in the region 
  
4.66 The Brahmaputra Board has been in existence for the last 30 years.  The Committee 
desired to know the position of erosion control increase in area of irrigation and also in 
hydropower in the region in comparison to the  period when Brahmaputra Board was 
established.  The representatives  of the Ministry of Water Resources and Brahmaputra 

 44 
Board assured that the relevant information will be collected and provided to the Committee.   
However, the requisite information is yet to be submitted by the Board. 

 45 
CHAPTER-V 
MONITORING 
 
 The work of Br ahmaputra Board is monitored by the Union Ministry of Water 
Resources.  Also there is a High Powered Review Board under the Chairmanship of the 
Minister of Water Resources and the Chief Ministers of seven States of North Eastern 
Region as Members of the Re view Board.  The High Powered Review Board had held 5 
meeting and its last meeting was held in 2005 when it recommended the following : 
(i) Revamping of Brahmaputra Board. 
(ii) Extension of jurisdiction of Brahmaputra Board. 
(iii) Appointment of full time Chairman. 
(iv) Filling up of statutory posts. 
 
5.2 To implement the above recommendations of the High Powered Review Board, the  
Ministry has initiated a proposal for restructuring of Brahmaputra Board which is under 
finalization. The jurisdiction of Brahmaputra Board has been  extended to Sikkim, areas of 
West Bengal falling within Brahmaputra Basin and the left out portion of Nagaland, Manipur, 
Tripura and Mizoram.  Besides the Central Government has already appointed a full time 
Chairman in the Brahmaputra Board, and that out  of seven statutory posts, four have been 
filled. 
5.3 Asked why an independent agency has not been appointed to monitor the working of 
Brahmaputra Board, the Ministry in a post evidence reply inter-alia stated : 
“The Board entrusted the evaluation studies to assess the usefulness of the 
investment made in preparation of 4 (four) Master Plans prepared by Brahmaputra 
Board in the Tenth Plan to Assam Engineering College.  The evaluation of Phase -I 
and Phase-II works of Dholla-Hathigulli have been entrusted to IIT Guwahati.” 
 
5.4 Further, the Committee were informed that the Board is going to have collaboration 
with the institutes to see whether they ca n do a mathematical modeling for the whole 
Brahmaputra Basin and then identify areas which could be critical in  future considering the 
temporal changes and special changes.  However, the Board does not have the data 

 46 
required for that study.  The Board does not have manpower to collect these data and further 
expertise is required for mode lling which CWPRS and IIT Ro orkie have.  Asked whether 
work of mathematical modelling of Brahmaputra river has been given to any expert institution 
and approximate expenditure likely to be incurred for conducting such studies, the Ministry 
stated : 
“The Board has approached the CWPRS , Pune in the matter and side by side, IIT 
Guwahati is being contacted.  The work will be assigned after receiving the detailed 
work plan by the Institutes.  CWPRS has been requested to work out a probable 
cost estimate for the work.” 
  
   
  

 47 
PART II 
 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
1. The Committee note that the North East region is endowed with a huge water 
potential, being drained by two main river systems – the Brahmaputra and the Barak.   
The Brahmaputra is braided and unstable in its entire reach in  the Assam Valley 
except for a few places. Due to heavy deposition of silt, the river has frequently 
changed its course, giving rise to braiding and meandering pattern in the alignment of 
the river system. This problem was compounded further by earthquake shocks of 
moderate to severe intensity that visited the region from time to time. The Barak is the 
second largest river in the region.  The Brahmaputra and the Barak rivers have been 
causing recurrent annual floods in the North Eastern part of the country.   The 
Brahmaputra Board was, therefore, constituted in 1980 under The Brahmaputra Board 
Act (Act 46 of 1980) with the objective of planning and integrated implementation of 
measures for control of floods and bank erosion in Brahmaputra and Barak valley and  
to deal with matters connected therewith.  Other functions entrusted to the Board 
include preparation of detailed project reports (DPRs) and estimates of projects in the 
Master Plans approved by the Union Government; and construction of multipurpose 
dams and other works in Master Plans.  The Board started functioning in January 1982 
with its headquarters at Guwahati, Assam.  Subsequently, parts of all other North 
Eastern States and West Bengal  were also added to the jurisdiction of the Board.  The 
Committee note  that the Board has carried out detailed planning and documentation 
of the  water resources in the North Eastern Region and related problems  and 
potentials. The Board has prepared 4 4 Master Plans  which, after  approval of the 
Union Government,  h ave been sent to the States for implementation.  In addition, 

 48 
seven Master Plans are under different stages of preparation while six are under 
survey and investigation.  The Committee also note that all the Master Plans have 
been partially implemented.  Th e reason cited by the Ministry for partial 
implementation is that water being a State subject, the flood control, anti -erosion and 
flood proofing works are planned, implemented and funded by the State Governments 
according to their own priorities.  Impleme ntation of Master Plans is, therefore, mainly 
to be carried out by the concerned States.  It is also noted that the Brahmaputra Board 
had stipulated the XI Five Year Plan as the time frame for completing all the remaining 
Master Plans.  In fact, the DPRs f or some identified projects have been taken up in 
consultation with the State Governments in respect of multi -purpose projects and 
drainage development schemes.  The Committee note that since the regulation and 
development of inter -State rivers and river v alleys figures in the Union List, they 
recommend that the Government should take necessary legal and administrative 
measures for proper planning, implementation and funding of flood control, anti 
erosion and flood proofing works in all the riparian States of Brahmaputra.  The 
Committee would also like to be apprised of the measures being taken by the 
Brahmaputra Board to ensure that the targets fixed for completion of the remaining 
Master Plans in the XI Plan are achieved. 
2. The Committee observe that the Brahmaputra Board has a sanctioned staff 
strength of 626, out of which 245 are technical and the remaining 381 non -technical 
posts.  The Ministry reported that 38 posts – 13 technical and 25 non -technical - are 
lying vacant.  Admittedly, the actual staff s trength of 588 is inadequate considering 
the enormity of the mandate assigned to the Board.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Government must take immediate measures to provide adequate 

 49 
manpower to Brahmaputra Board by way of regular recruitmen t, deputation or on 
contractual basis keeping in view the short term and long term requirements of the 
Board. 
3. The Committee note that the Ministry had initiated a proposal for restructuring 
of the Brahmaputra Board in October 2004 which would also have addressed the 
problem of staff shortage.   Another aim of restructuring is, statedly, to redefine and 
widen the objective of the Board so as to include integrated water resources 
development involving irrigation, flood management, generation of hydropower,  etc.   
The draft Cabinet note prepared by the MoWR in this regard had been reportedly 
circulated to all concerned Ministries and the State Governments.  Based on such 
inter-ministerial and inter -governmental consultation, a bill was to be introduced in 
the Parliament during the Monsoon Session 2009 seeking amendment of the existing 
Brahmaputra Board Act, 1980.   The Committee are surprised to note that the proposal 
to restructure the Board mooted in October 2004, is yet to take first step in its 
legislative journey.  The Ministry has not furnished any cogent reason for such an 
inordinate delay.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate the recommendation made by 
them in their 9 th Report presented to Parliament on 22 April 2008 and hope earnestly 
that the Ministry would be able to introduce the Bill at least in the Monsoon Session of 
Parliament, 2010.  
4. The Committee note that the employees of the Brahmaputra Board have 
certain grievances relating to their promotional avenues and pension.  According to 
the Board , employees are given due opportunities to air their grievances in the 
meetings with the officials of the Board and representatives of different 
Associations/Unions.  It was also explained that the Assured Career Progression 

 50 
(ACP) Scheme introduced by the Government has also motivated the employees to a 
certain extent.  Further, the Committee were apprised that the Board has taken some 
steps such as training of employees in office automation and other technical matters 
like computer aided design, drawings, data management, etc. to improve their skills.  
Undoubtedly, the employees of Brahmaputra Board have some genuine grievances 
particularly these related to service conditions and promotional avenues which need 
to be addressed to expeditiously by the Ministr y.  The Committee are of the 
considered view that a sound grievance redressal mechanism for its employees is a 
sine-qua-non  for the effective functioning of any organization.  They, therefore, desire 
the Ministry/Brahmaputra Board to set up a grievance re dressal mechanism so that 
the genuine grievances of the employees are resolved amicably and the employees 
are motivated to contribute their best for the smooth functioning of the Brahmaputra 
Board. 
5.  The Committee note that the North Eastern Hydraulic an d Allied Research 
Institute (NEHARI) was established under the Brahmaputra Board at Rudreshwara 
(North Guwahati) as per the Assam Accord and operationalised during 1996 at a cost 
of Rs.14 crore.  Its main functions are material testing, carrying out model studies, etc.  
It is assisted by the Central Water & Power Research Station (CWPRS), Pune and 
Central Soil & Materials Research Station (CS&MRS), New Delhi.  The Committee were 
informed that the Institute has successfully completed model studies of (i) Jia dhal 
River, (ii) River Brahmaputra from Porvita to South Salmara,   (iii) Majuli Island, and 
(iv) Kameng River.  It is observed that NEHARI manages its affairs with the funds 
provided by the Government.  It also generates fund by providing services to diff erent 
agencies.  It has, however, been observed that Its earning had drastically declined 

 51 
from Rs.49.78 lakh in 2002-03 to Rs.6.70 lakh only in          2008-09.  It is also noted that 
in place of required staff strength of 45, only 29 are in place at pres ent.   The 
Committee had recommended earlier (9 th Report/14th Lok Sabha) for filling up of posts 
by reviving the deemed abolished posts.  According to the Ministry the posts required 
for strengthening of NEHARI are being worked out.  Since shortage of staf f is bound 
to hamper the smooth functioning of NEHARI, the Committee recommend that 
MoWR/Brahmaputra Board need to expedite the process of providing adequate staff 
to NEHARI at the earliest.  NEHARI should also take steps to moblise the available 
resources to increase their income. 
6. The Committee note that the Board is not facing any shortage of funds to 
carry into execution its assigned mandate.  Apart from Grants -in-aid received from 
MoWR, the Board also receives funds from other Government agencies tow ards 
‘deposit works’ i.e. works assigned by other organizations to the Board on payment 
basis.  It is noticed that from 2005 -06 to 2008 -09, the Board received meagre and 
fluctuating income on account of deposit works rendered to 17 
organisations/individuals.  In addition, its earnings include interest on loans and 
advances paid to employees, guest house rent, tender fee, rent of building, laboratory 
testing charges and license fee recovery.  As regards the achievement of targets, the 
representatives of the Ministry stated that the Board should have proper mechanism 
for optimal utilization of allocated funds and monitoring the progress of works so that 
the targets fixed are achieved within the stipulated time.   Considering the importance 
and the necessity of  effective monitoring mechanism, the Committee ardently hope 
and expect the Board to evolve suitable procedural guidelines and time schedule 
regarding administrative approval, technical sanction and tendering process so that 

 52 
the allocated funds are utilize d within the stipulated time and in the prescribed 
manner.  The Board should also endeavour to raise its own resources to mop up its 
fluctuating income. 
7. The Committee note that the Board has taken up 14 multipurpose projects in 
Brahmaputra and Barak Bas in and in the south flowing river in Meghalaya for survey, 
investigation and preparation of DPRs.  The number of projects for which DPRs have 
been completed are five viz. Siang Single Stage & Subansiri Single Stage in Arunachal 
Pradesh, Tipaimukh in Manipu r and Mizoram, Pagladiya in Assam and Bairabi in 
Mizoram.  The Siang and Subansiri Dam Projects have been handed over to the 
National Hydro Electric Power Corporation (NHPC) for implementation, while 
Tipaimukh and Bairabi Dam Projects have been handed over to the North East Electric 
Power Corporation (NEEPCO) and the Government of Mizoram respectively.  The 
Pagladiya Dam Project is under execution by the Board.  The Ministry claimed that 
they keep a tab on the pace of execution of works by calling for the i mplementation 
status.  The Committee regret to observe that though DPRs have been prepared by the 
Brahmaputra Board for five projects, these projects are still languishing for want of 
implementation by the States for one reason or the other.  The Committee  hope that 
the Board will make genuine efforts in clearing the bottlenecks in the implementation 
of these five projects and pursue vigorously with the State Governments to ensure 
that these are completed without any further time and cost overruns.  The Com mittee 
would like to be informed of the latest position in the matter. 
8. The Committee note that the Brahmaputra Board had identified 41 potential 
drainage congested areas in the North Eastern Region in the Master plans of which 
two DDSs have been suspend ed.  DPRs for 20 schemes out of the 39 Drainage 

 53 
Development Schemes (DDS) have been prepared and 11 of them already 
implemented by the Board except a few where some difficulty is being faced. 19 other 
DDS are under various stages of investigations and DPR preparation.  The Committee 
are given to understand that after the DPRs have been prepared by the Board, they are 
handed over to concerned Departments/agencies/State Governments.  Reportedly, the 
Board sometimes faces delay in execution because of tardy la nd acquisition process 
but the Board keeps a watch by calling for the status of implementation by the States.  
The Committee hope that the Board will exercise their good influence with the State 
Governments to avoid any delay in land acquisition process wh ich may consequently 
result in delay in completion of projects. 
9. The Committee observe that since 1999 -2000, the Board has taken up various 
construction projects for drainage development and prevention of erosion and flood 
control.  The major components include Pagladiya Dam Project, construction of 
Drainage Development Schemes (DDS s), anti -erosion and flood control schemes at 
various places in Assam, and protection of Majuli Island from erosion.  The Pagladiya 
Dam being constructed across Pagladiya river  at Thalkuchi, Baksa District, Assam, 
has a proposed height of 25 m. and 21 km. long earth dam with a spillway.  Sanctioned 
by the Government of India in January 2001 at an estimated cost of Rs. 542.90 crore, 
the Project is expected to bring flood moderati on benefit to 40,000 ha., irrigation 
benefit to 54,160 ha., and incidental power generation of 3 MW.  Till now, works 
carried out pertaining to this Project include pre -construction survey; investigations, 
studies, design, drainage, etc.; taking possession  of land (956 ha.) for resettlement 
and rehabilitation purpose, construction of project roads, offices, etc.  However, the 
Committee regret to note that the works for Pagladiya Dam Project are presently held 

 54 
up due to non -completion of Zirat Survey and lan d acquisition.  To resolve these 
issues, a discussion in January 2009 between the officials of the Board and Bodoland 
Territorial Council (BTC) was held.  The Committee note that the BTC suggested the 
possibility of finding an alternative project site way upstream of the present site.  
Subsequent to a meeting convened by Secretary, MoWR in  February 2009, Chief 
Secretary, Assam had a meeting on 23.10.2009 with officials of Brahmaputra Board 
and  BTC wherein it was decided that the  Board should take up inve stigations for 
alternate project location near the Assam -Bhutan border, and subsequently, it has 
carried out reconnaissance and  topographic survey in this regard.   The Committee, 
therefore, desire the Ministry to make vigorous and intelligent efforts to r esolve all the 
bottlenecks impeding the construction of Pagladiya Dam.  They would like to be 
apprised of action taken in the matter by the Ministry. 
10. The Committee observe that the Board took up the task of the protection of 
Majuli Island from flood an d erosion on the request made by the Government of 
Assam in November 1999.  The Board prepared the DPR for protection of Majuli Island 
and submitted to the CWC in August 2000 which was  revised and approved by CWC 
in August 2003 with an estimated cost of R s.86.56 crore to be taken up in three 
phases.  Due to the gravity of erosion problem, and as the Government sanction for 
Phase-I works was anticipated to take some time, the Board took up several 
immediate measures from January 2004 and February 2005 to pr ovide relief to the 
people at an expenditure of Rs.5.92 crore.  The immediate measures were followed by 
the regular flood and erosion protection works under Phase I in March 2005 as per 
DPR.  The Phase I was to be completed by the end of X Plan.  However, due to non -
availability of construction materials, transport bottlenecks, non-performance of some 

 55 
contractors, the work programme was re -scheduled for completion by March 2009.  
Phase II & Phase III of the Scheme estimating Rs.116.02 crore, have also been cleared 
by CWC in November, 2008, and tender preparation for works have already been 
started.  The works are scheduled to be completed by  2011-12.   
  
Though there appeared to be a degree of success in the efforts of 
Brahmaputra Board and the resultant mitigation of erosion and flood in several places 
of Majuli Island, the Committee note that the flood and erosion problem  in the Island 
is far from being contained as the Island was ravaged by the floods during the 
monsoon season in 2008.  The apparent caus e of the flood was the breaches that 
occurred at Brahmaputra dyke and on other embankments at Majuli Island.  The 
seriousness of the erosion and the ravages of floods  prompted the Standing 
Committee on Water Resources of Parliament to make an on -the-spot visit to Majuli 
Island during 2009.  The Committee note that a Standing Committee of Experts was 
constituted by the Government of India in 2007 which reviews and suggests measures 
for protection of Majuli Island.  The Experts Committee had visited the Islan d five 
times from January 2008 to April 2010 and recommended several works to be taken up 
by the Brahmaputra Board as well as the Government of Assam.  The Committee hope 
that implementation of the suggestions of the Experts Committee would be completed 
at the earliest so that the people of Majuli Island are not exposed to recurrent 
nightmare of floods year after year.  They also desire to see that works for Phase II & 
III are completed by the scheduled target of 2011 -2012. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the recommendation  of the Committee of Experts and the action taken 
to implement them. 

 56 
11. During their visit to Majuli Island, several representations were received by the 
Committee pertaining to the problem of annual flood and erosion havoc in  East 
Barpeta District of Assam, including the region from Bahari Satra to Pazarbhanga and 
the urgent measures needed for rehabilitation of the affected families.   The 
Committee are optimistic that a permanent solution for annual flood and erosion 
problem at Barpeta District of Assam is feasible, and must be put in place 
expeditiously.   The Committee would like to be apprised to the action taken by the 
Board in regard to detailed field survey and studies for hammering out an effective 
long term solution to annual flood and erosion havoc in Barpeta District of Assam. 
12. The representatives of the NGOs/resident welfare association complained to 
the Committee during their field visit about the limited time period available for work 
i.e. 2-3 months to carry out for the erosion control and flood control works due to long 
time span of floods, delay in release of funds , delay in payment to contractors , etc.   
The Committee are not happy with this situation and desire that the Board should plan 
the works and sanct ion and release of funds in such a way that the limited available 
time is utilized by carrying out the maximum work possible.   
13. The Committee note that the Ministry has approved 148 schemes for flood 
management in the North Eastern States at an estimat ed cost of Rs.948.84 crore.  The 
Board has also chalked out a long term strategy for Flood Management and Erosion 
Control in Brahmaputra river.  The Board has also prepared a concept Note on Bank 
stabilization on river Brahmaputra and forwarded it to IITs,  CWC, CWPRS, 
Government of Assam, etc.  The modalities are also being worked out for carrying out 
mathematical model studies to ascertain the feasibility of the proposed channelization 
of the river Brahmaputra.  Though the representative of the Board in hi s oral 

 57 
testimony before the Committee described complete immunity from perennial floods 
as ‘utopian’, the Committee are optimistic that with the speedy implementation of 
various structural and non -structural measures planned by the Board, the problem of 
recurrent floods and land erosion can be contained to a great extent and resultant 
human misery mitigated substantially.   
14. The Committee observe that China reportedly proposes to construct a dam on 
the upstream of Brahmaputra inside the territory under i ts suzerainty. The Committee 
were informed that this issue was raised several times with China but each time China 
denied the media reports but conceded that there exists an MoU under which China is 
required to provide flood season data on river Brahmaputr a to facilitate better flood 
management by India.   In the absence of an international treaty or convention 
between India and China, the issue of construction of dam and diversion of waters of 
Brahmaputra by China was taken up through the Ministry of Exter nal Affairs which 
only met denial by China.  However, according to subsequent media reports, China 
has conceded construction of dam but denied diversion of water of Brahmaputra.   
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the matter be taken up at the highe st level 
with China through diplomatic channels to clear the misgivings of the people of India 
in this behalf. 
15. To a query of the Committee, it was stated that the flow of water in 
Brahmaputra  river when it enters India, as per a survey conducted by th e Central 
Water Commission (CWC), is 78 Billion Cubic Meter (BCM).  The Committee were also 
informed that the CWC has established a site of the near Indo -China Border to 
observe the flow of water in the Brahmaputra river.  The Committee observed that in 
spite of the substantial expenditure on the Brahmaputra Board since its inception 

 58 
over the last three decades, there has been little achievement in the field of erosion 
control, irrigation and hydro -power in the region.  The Committee note that on being 
sought information about position of erosion control, increase in area of irrigation and 
in hydropower in the region from the period when Brahmaputra Board was 
established, the representatives of the Ministry assured the Committee that the 
relevant information will be made available to the Committee.  Regretably, the desired 
information is yet to be furnished to the Committee.  The inability of the Board to 
compile, maintain and supply such vital statistics speaks volumes about the 
functioning of the Board.  Th ey, therefore, desire that the requisite information be 
compiled and furnished to the Committee without further loss of time. 
16. The Committee note that the works of Brahmaputra Board are monitored by 
the MoWR and also by the High Powered Review Board und er the Chairmanship of 
Minister of Water Resources and Chief Ministers of North Eastern States as Members.  
The Brahmaputra Board does not have manpower to collect data regarding 
mathematical modeling of Brahmaputra basin.    The Board has, therefore, 
approached CWPRS, Pune for the purpose while contact has been established with 
the IIT, Guwahati in this behalf.  The work will be assigned after receiving the detailed 
work plan from the said institutes.  As regards the cost of the work, the Board has 
requested CWPRS, Pune to estimate the probable cost for the same.  The Committee 
desire that the  evaluation studies being carried out by Assam Engineering College 
and IIT Guwahati of the schemes of Brahmaputra Board be completed in a time bound 
manner for the spe edy evaluation of the schemes of the Board.  CWPRS, Pune may 
also be asked to estimate the probable cost of the project at the earliest. 
 

 59 
 
NEW DELHI                                BENI PRASAD VERMA,  
22 July, 2010                                                                           Chairman,  
31 Asadha, 1932(Saka)                        Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
 

 60 
APPENDIX- I 
(Para 3.2) 
FUND RECEIVED BY BRAHMAPUTRA BOARD FOR DEPOSIT WORKS 
 
Sl. No. Name of Agency Particulars of Work Fund received 
during 
2005-2006 
(in Rs.) 
Fund received 
during 
2006-2007 
(in Rs.) 
Fund received 
during  
2007-2008 
(in Rs.) 
Fund received 
during  
2008-2009 
(in Rs.) 
1.  NHPC Ltd., 
Arunachal Pradesh 
Construction Material Testing 
of Middle Siang Project 
1,70,000 -- -- -- 
2.  NHPC Ltd., 
Arunachal Pradesh 
Testing of Coarse & Fine 
Aggregates of Dibang M.P. 
Project 
6,33,415 -- -- -- 
3.  NHPC Ltd., 
Arunachal Pradesh 
Construction Material Testing 
of Lower Siang Project 
63,149 -- -- -- 
4.  NHPC Ltd., 
Arunachal Pradesh 
Laboratory Testing Work -- -- -- 3,93,300 
5.  NHPC Ltd., 
Arunachal Pradesh 
Laboratory Testing Work -- -- -- 2,76,865 
6.  North-Eastern 
Council, Shillong 
Investigation Work -- -- -- 1,00,00,000 
7.  North Eastern 
Council, Shillong 
Survey & Investigation of 
Kynshi (Jadukata) Stag e-II, 
M.P. Project 
-- 60,00,000 1,00,00,000 -- 
8.  L&T Ltd. Testing of Geo -Mechanical 
properties of Sand Stone for 
Subansiri H.E. Project 
68,570 -- -- -- 
9.  M/s AKD 
Construction &  
Suppliers 
Testing of Sand for Majuli 
Model 
-- 7,986 -- -- 
10.  M/s AKD 
Construction & 
Suppliers 
Testing of Sand for Jia -
Bharali Model 
--  -- -- 
11.  Mr. Tapan Bora,  
Contractor 
Testing of Sand for Jia -
Bharali Model 
-- 2,662 -- -- 
12.  CWC, Itanagar, 
Arunachal Pradesh 
Construction Material Testing 
of Micro Hydel Project of 
Tawang District 
-- 5,75,491 -- -- 
13.  CWC, Itanagar,  
Arunachal Pradesh 
Construction Material Testing 
of Kundill Irrigation Project 
-- -- 4,69,985 -- 
14.  CWC, Itanagar,  
Arunachal Pradesh 
Foundation Soil Testing of 
Kundill Irrigation Project 
-- -- 6,35,947 -- 
15.  CWC, Itanagar,  
Arunachal Pradesh 
Construction Material Testing 
of Nyukcharangchu H.E. 
Project 
-- -- 1,10,963 -- 
16.  M/s Lloyd Insulation 
(I) Ltd. 
Cube Testing of Hanger 
No. II 
-- -- 24,908 -- 
17.  Mr. P. Buragohain Private Job -- -- 958 -- 
 Year-wise Total  9,35,134 65,88,801 1,12,42,761 1,06,70,165 
 
 

 61 
APPENDIX- II 
(Para 4.1) 
 
LIST OF FUNCTIONS ASSIGNED TO THE BRAHMAPUTRA BOARD  
 
The main functions of Brahmaputra Board stipulated in the Act are :- 
 
(i) To carry out survey and investigations in Brahmaputra Valley and to prepare Master 
Plan for the control of floods, bank erosion and improvement of drainage in the 
Brahmaputra Valley and activities connected therewith. 
 
(ii) To prepare the Master Plan in parts with reference to different areas of the 
Brahmaputra Valley or with reference t o different matters relating to such areas and 
may as often as it considers necessary so to do, revise the Master Plan or any part 
thereof. 
 
(iii) To prepare Master Plan for development and utilization of water resources of the 
Brahmaputra Valley for irrigation,  hydropower, navigation and other beneficial 
purposes. 
 
(iv) To submit Master Plan / revised Master Plan to the Central Government after 
consultation with the State Governments concerned and approve the same subject 
to such modifications as it may deem fit. 
 
(v) To prepare detailed project report and estimates in respect of the dams and other 
projects in the Master Plan as approved by the Central Government and indicate in 
each case the cost attributable to different purposes or uses. 
 
(vi) To draw up standards and speci fications for constructions, operation and 
maintenance of such dams and other projects. 
 
(vii) To construct with the approval of the Central Government, multipurpose dams and 
works connected therewith as proposed in the Master Plan approved by the Central 
Government and maintain and operate such dams and works. 
 
(viii) To prepare in consultation with State Government concerned, a phased programme 
for construction by the State Government of all dams and other projects proposed in 
the Master Plan as approved by the Central Government other than those referred in 
(vii) above. 
 
(ix) The Board may maintain and operate any dam or project for so long as it deems 
necessary to do so. 
 
(x) To perform such other functions as are supplemental, incidental or consequential to 
the functions specified above. 
 
 
 

 62 
APPENDIX- III 
(Para 4.2) 
LIST OF MASTER PLAN APPROVED BY CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  
 
Sl. No. Name of Basin/Sub-Basin 
 
Status 
A. Main River  
1. Brahmaputra Main Stem – Master Plan Part - I  
2. Barak & its tributaries - Master Plan Part - II   
B. Tributaries  
1. Buridehing  
2. Dikhow  
3. Dhansiri  
4. Kopili Kolong  
5. Puthimari  
6. Ranganadi  
7. Gumti  
8. Pagladiya  
9. Noa-nadi  
10. Dikrong  
11. Muhuri  
12. Jia-Bharali  
13. Manu  
14. Champamati  
15. Disang Approved by Government of 
India.   
16. Jinary  
17. Na-Noi  
18. Juri  
19. Burima  
20. Dhalai  
21. Jiadhal  
22. Bharalu  
23. Lohit  
24. Majuli Island (Special Case)  
25. Khowai  
26. Ghiladhari  
27. Jinjiram  
28. Dhaleswari  
29. Moridhal  
30. Jhanji  
31. Subansiri  
32. Gaurang  
33. Haora  
34. Gabharu  
35. Gadadhar  
36. Bhogdoi  

 63 
37. Belsiri  
38. Kulsi-Deosila  
39. Depota  
40. Dhansiri (North)  
41. Barnadi  
42. Buroi  
 
1. Beki-Manas-Aie  
2. Brahmajan  
3. Tipkai  
4. Bargang Under Preparation 
5. Sankosh  
6. Dudhnol-Krishnal  
7. Tangani  
1. Simsang  
2. Kynshi  
3. Um-n-got Under Survey Investigation 
4. Tista  
5. Jaldhaka  
6. Torsa, Kalijani & Raidak  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 

 64 
 
APPENDIX-IV 
(Para 4.39) 
 
NOTES ON THE PROBLEM OF FLOOD, EROSION OF BARPETA 
DISTRICT OF ASSAM 
 
14 (i) The Brahmaputra dyke was constructed from 1954 to 1959 from Adabari to Baghbar 
hills in phases for length of 70.35 Km. to protect a vast area of homestead and cultivated 
land on the right bank of river Brahmaputra from chronic flood devastatio n from time to time 
since 1960.  The Brahmaputra started eroding its right bank at downstream of Bahari by 
Northern swing.  The progress of erosion got aggravated and the dyke from Bahari to 
Baghbar had to be retired on many occasions.  The B/dyke from 36 Km. to 71.35 Km. falls 
under the jurisdiction of Barpeta W.R. Division. 
 The entire 5.643 Km. length of B/dyke from Kurkarjan to Bahari is in a dilapidated 
condition with inadequate section all through due to non-maintenance of the dyke over a long 
period due to paucity of fund.  It was observed during successive floods of last years that the 
dyke could not resist onslaught of flood after tough battle with flood fury with man and 
materials in various reaches.  The entire B/dyke from Kukrajan to Bahari cover ing as many 
as two reaches is in urgent need of bank protection works for the safety of the dyke as well 
as large homestead and cultivable land situated behind it.  As such  raising and 
strengthening of the entire length of the dyke along with A/E measures is urgently necessary. 
 Due to dilapidated condition with inadequate section of the whole dyke due to active 
bank erosion, the reaches as mentioned above are badly threatened causing danger to the 
nearby homestead and cultivable land in addition to making  entire situation grave.  This has 
warranted taking up raising and strengthening work along with anti-erosion works. 
 The dyke is the only way of communication link of these villages so implementation 
of the scheme is of paramount importance.  The Barpeta District is the worst flood affected 
district in the State of Assam.  No development works is possible unless the dyke system 
could be protected. 
 The Brahmaputra dyke around Pazarbhanga area was subject to onslaught of flood 
of 2006 which inflicted severe  injury to the embankment section right from the beginning of 
the flood season.  Massive bank erosion took place towards the end of April 2006 
culminating in the resultant breaches of embankment near Pazarbhanga at ch. 50.00 Km. 
and at ch. 47.00 Km. on 13. 4.2006 in spite of temporary palliative measures taken up to 

 65 
avoid any flood during 2006.  The opening of the breach was about 100 M in length at the 
beginning.  In order to protect the village and cultivable land closing of breaches has become 
very urgent and essential. 
14 (ii) One estimate under the nomenclature „Immediate measure to protect Bahari Satra 
and its adjoining area from the erosion of river Brahmaputra to close the breach at Bar -
Baradi for 2006-07‟ under CRF for Rs. 2,25,21,500.00 with provisi ons of construction of 3.40 
Km. of retirement an anti -erosion works consisting of launching of R.C.C. porcupine in the 
eroded reach of length of launching of R.C.C. porcupine in the eroded reach of length 2.0 
Km. was sanctioned by Revenue (General) and Dis aster Management Department, Assam 
vide letter No. RGR105/2007/15 dated 12.6.2007.  In the meantime flood water of river 
Brahmaputra was rising alarmingly so the scheme could not be implemented before the flood 
of 2007, though scheme was inaugurated by the  Hon‟ble MLA of Chenga Legislative 
Assembly Constituency. 
 During the year 2007 the Barpeta District was badly affected by the three wave of 
flood.  The Brahmaputra basin experienced unprecedented flood and the active erosion from 
up-stream of Bahari Satra  to Pazarbhanga and Bar -Baradi was observed and about 300 m 
(average) depth of erosion was recorded all along the river reach and the further erosion 
took place at Bar -Baradi from where the retirement for closing of breaches caused during 
2006 was proposed to be started.  Though the opening of breach gap of 2006, flood water of 
2007 entered to country side and created heavy devastation at many revenue villages 
around the breach site namely, Bar-Bahari, Pazarbhanga, Palhaji etc. with a large number of 
population and many private and public institutions of importance.  The opening of the 
breach extended about 2 Km. in length. 
 As per decision of High Powered Meeting two separate estimates as below were 
prepared one for closing of breach in the Brahmaputra dyke caused during flood of 2006 and 
2007 and other for anti -erosion measures to check erosion for entire erosion affected reach 
covering 11 Km. 
Anti-erosion measures from Bahari Satra to Balartari under C.R.F. for Rs. 7.03 crore. 
Construction of retirement fo r closing of breaches at Phulbari and Bar -Baradi under NREGA 
for Rs. 3.25 crore. 
 The construction of retirement was to be executed by Barpeta District  
Administration and anti-erosion works was executed by Barpeta W.R. Division. 

 66 
 
Implementation of the scheme under CRF (Rs. 7.03 crores) 
 
 As brought out above, the estimate with nomenclature “Immediate measures to 
protect Bahari Satra, Fulbari, Bhogerper and its adjoining area from the erosion of river 
Brahmaputra for 2007 -08 under CRF amounting to Rs. 7.03 crore was prepared and 
submitted to Deputy Commissioner, Barpeta for his necessary recommendation and the 
estimate was recommended by the Deputy Commissioner, Barpeta District vide his letter No. 
BRR-59/2007/38 dtd. 12.11.2007 and sanctioned by Revenue and  Disaster Management 
Deptt. 
The Deputy Commissioner, Barpeta District inaugurated the scheme on 20.2.2008. 
 The work of pile screen No. 1 to 5 progressed satisfactorily and were completed 
successfully before flood and saved the area from Bahari Satra to Gumafulbari. 
 The Deputy Commission, Barpeta District visited the site frequently and reflected his 
satisfaction at the progress of pile screen No. 1 to 5 vide his letter No. BRR -59/2007/59 dtd. 
16.04.2008 to the Secretary to the Govt. of Assam but displease d at the progress of pile 
screen No. 6 to 9. 
 The concerning contractors of pile screen No. 6 to 9 started their works lately in the 
last week of March 2008.  In the meantime, monsoon started in the April 2008 and water 
level started rising and the river c urrent become furious.  Works of pile screen No. 6 to 9 
could not be achieved in spite of best effort of department. 
 During the last week of April 2008, water level increased further and due to turbulent 
current of the river, part of the pile screen from 6 to 9 so far constructed mostly washed 
away. 
 Deputy Commissioner (DC) Barpeta and Additional Chief Engineer Water 
Resources Department visited the site on 2.05.2008 and 4.05.2008 respectively and in a 
joint meeting it was decided to stop with the work in  pile screen from 6 to 9 further and from 
the saving of the pile screen RCC porcupine suggested from ch. 45,250.00 m to 47,500 m.  
During the month May and June 2008, the work has been executed and fruitful result 
obtained. 
 One meting was held on 4.1.2009  with the Deputy Commissioner, Barpeta, officials 
of Water Resources Deptt. and local public and as per decision modified estimated 
amounting to Rs. 5.54 crores submitted to D.C., Barpeta for actual work dune out of the 

 67 
sanction of Rs. 7.03 crore.  One sep arate estimate was prepared for the balance amount 
(7.03-5.54) Rs. 1.49 crore with provision for renovation pile screen No. 1 to 5, construction of 
new pile screen in the down stream and armouring of PWD road and accordingly works 
taken up. 
Payment of the scheme-As per CRF norms fund will be released for payment on the basis of 
completion certificate from the concerning Deputy Commissioner.  No completion certificate 
issued till now. 
Performance of the scheme -Desire result has been obtained in nabbing the e rosion in 
between ch. 40.20 Km. to 47.50 Km. during flood time i.e. from June, 2008 to October, 2008.  
Sand casting has been observed in between pile screen No. 1 to 5 i.e. from Bahari Satra to 
Gomafulbari ara and bank erosion is totally stopped between 45.25 Km. to 47.50 Km. 
 
 
Implementation of the scheme under NREGA (Rs. 3.25 crore) : 
As estimate for closing of breaches by construction of retirement at Brahmaputra 
bank from Bahari to Bagbar at Pazarbhanga, Dongra PG, Bhogarpar area amounting to Rs. 
3.25 crore was submitted to D.C. Barpeta to be taken up by D.C. Barpeta under supervision 
of W.R. Department.  Accordingly, D.C. Barpeta sanctioned the estimate and NOC issue by 
WR Deptt. and work was completed.  But due to progressive erosion of river Brahmaput ra, 
newly constructed retirement was eroded away during the flood of 2008.  The payment for 
this is made Civil Administration. 
14 (iii)  For permanent solution of the problem, proposals sanctioned are : 
 
1. Flood Management Programme : 
Raising & strengthen ing of Brahmaputra dyke from Bahari to Baghbar and construction of 
retirement at Betortari and Chesra including A/E measures at different area around Babari, 
Pazarbhanga, Chesra and Baghbar from the erosion of river Brahmaputra for Rs. 7.45 crore. 
 
2. Under CRF 
Immediate measures to protect Fulbari, Bhogarper and its adjoining area from the erosion of 
river Brahmpautra for 2008-09 (including breach closing0 CRF for Rs. 22.36 crores. 
The above schemes are being taken up. 
In addition to above proposal for one  new scheme “Protection of Fulbari, Bhogarper, 
Pazarbhanga and its adjoining area from the erosion of Brahmaputra (construction of land 

 68 
spur at ch. 44.30 Km., 44.65 Km., 45.00 Km. and 45.35 Km.)” amounting to Rs. 67.90 crore 
is recommended in the 45 th Technical Advisory Committee, preparation of detailed estimate 
is under process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 69 
APPENDIX-V 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH  SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2007-2008) HELD ON MONDAY, 09 JUNE 2008 
  
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 170 0 hours in Committee Room „B‟, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri R. Sambasiva Rao – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Bhanwar Singh Dangawas 
3. Shri Bikram Keshari Deo 
4. Shri Prakash B. Jadhav 
5. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
6. Shri Raghuveer Singh Kaushal 
7. Smt. Manorama Madhavraj 
8. Shri Shankhlal Majhi 
9. Shri Abu Ayes Mondal 
10. Shri  Harilal Madhavajibhai Patel 
11. Dr. Arun Kumar Sarma 
12. Smt. Minati Sen 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
13. Kumar Deepak Das 
14. Shri K.E. Ismail 
15. Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar 
16. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
17. Smt. Vasanthi Stanley  
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N.K. Sapra  - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy   - Deputy Secretary 
  
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
1. Shri S. Manoharan, Additional Secretary MoWR 
2. Shri A.K. Bajaj, Chairman, Central Water Commission  

 70 
3. Shri Rajan Nair, Chairman, Brahmaputra Board 
4. Shri Narender Kumar, Commissioner (B&B), MoWR 
 
 
 
At the outset, the Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the members to the sitting and congratulated 
to Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania for his re -nomination to t he Committee and also welcomed Smt. 
Vasanthi Stanley and Shri Bharatsinh Prabhatsinh Parmar, MPs, Rajya Sabha who were  nominated 
for the first time to the Committee .  Then he invited attention of the Members towards the provisions 
of Rule 259 of Rules of P rocedure & Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha relating to quorum of the 
sittings of the Committee.   
2. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Water Resources were called in and the 
Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Wat er Resources, Chairman, 
Central Water Commission and Chairman, Brahmaputra Board as well as their colleagues to the 
sitting of the Committee and requested them to introduce themselves to the Committee.   
3. After the introduction, the Chairman, Brahmaputra Bo ard gave a brief power point 
presentation on different aspects of the „Working of Brahmaputra Board‟.  Thereafter, the Hon‟ble 
Chairman and the Members of the Committee sought certain clarifications on various aspects of the 
subject and the Additional Secr etary, Ministry of Water Resources and other representatives gave 
clarifications thereto. 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting of the Committee has been kept. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

 71 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2008-2009) HELD ON FRIDAY, 13 MARCH 2009 
 
The Committee sat from 1515 hours to 1630 hours in Committee Room „B‟, Ground Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri R. Sambasiva Rao – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Bhanwar Singh Dangawas 
3. Shri Raghuveer Singh Kaushal 
4. Shri Abu Ayes Mondal 
5. Shri Harilal M. Patel 
6. Smt. Minati Sen 
7. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
8. Kumar Deepak Das 
9. Smt. Vasanthi Stanley 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri C.S. Joon   - Director 
3. Shri P.V.L.N. Murthy    - Deputy Secretary 
  
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
 
1.  Shri S. Manoharan, Additional Secretary (WR) 
2. Shri Rajan Nair, Chairman, Brahmaputra Board 
3. Shri R.C. Jha, Member (RM), CWC 
4. Shri Indra Raj, Commissioner (PR), MoWR 
 
 
At the outset, the Hon‟ble Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Standing 
Committee on Water Resources.   

 72 
2. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Water R esources were called in and the  
Hon‟ble C hairman welcomed the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources and his 
colleagues to the sitting of the Committee.  He drew their attention to the provision of Direction 55(1) 
of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha and requested them to introd uce themselves to the 
Committee.   
3. After the introduction the Committee took oral evidence of the witnesses.  The Additional 
Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources gave a brief introduction on “Working of Brahmaputra Board.”  
The Chairman, Brahmaputra Board then gave a power point presentation on different aspects of the 
“Working of Brahmaputra Board .”  Thereafter, the Hon‟ble Chairman and the members of the 
Committee sought certain clarifications on various aspects of the subject from the representatives o f 
the Ministry of Water Resources and the Brahmaputra Board.  The representatives of the Ministry 
responded to the queries raised by members. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings of the sitting has been kept separately. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
**************** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 73 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES  (2009-10) HELD ON TUESDAY, 27 OCTOBER 2009 
  
The Committee sat from 1400 hours to 1600 hours in Room No. 62, First Floor, Parliament 
House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
              Shri Beni Prasad Verma – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi 
3. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
4. Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
5. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
6. Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
7.           Shri S.P.Y. Reddy 
8.           Shri Arjun Roy 
9.          Shri G.M. Siddeshwara  
10.         Dr. P. Venugopal (Tiruvallur) 
11.         Shri Sajjan Verma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12.         Smt. Syeda Anwara Taimur 
13.  Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
14. Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
15. Shri Ranjitsinh Vijaysinh Mohite-Patil 
           16. Shri Mangala Kisan 
17. Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
   
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri B.S. Dahiya    - Director 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES 
1.       Shri S. Manoharan, Additional Secretary 
2.       Shri A.K. Bajaj, Chairman, Central Water Commission 
3.       Shri Narender Kumar, Commissioner (B&B) 
4.         Shri Rajan Nair, Chairman, Brahmaputra Board 
 

 74 
 
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of  the Committee .  
Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Water Resources and 
Brahmaputra Board to the sitting of the Committee convened to have briefing on the subject “Working 
of Brahmaputra Board” by the officials of the Ministry of Water Resources  and Brahmaputra 
Board. 
2. After the introduction, the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources gave a briefing 
on the subject.  Thereafter , Chairman, Brahmaputra Board gave power point presentation on the 
working of the Brahmaputra Board.  The Members sought clarifications on various issues relating to 
the working of Brahmaputra Board including the erosion control works undertaken at Majuli Island  
and reported construction of a dam by China in the upper course of the Bra hmaputra river which 
were replied to by  the Additional Secretary and other representatives of the Ministry and 
Brahmaputra Board.  The Committee decided to hold another meeting for detailed discussion on the 
Brahmaputra Board. 
3. The witnesses then withdrew. 
4. The Committee decided to hold next sitting on 13 November, 2009 for consideration of the 
draft Report on „Demands for Grants‟ (2009-10) pertaining to the Ministry of Water Resources. 
5. The verbatim proceedings of the sitting were kept for record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
**************** 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 75 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
WATER RESOURCES HELD ON TUESDAY, 22 JUNE  2010 
  
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1600 hours in Committee Room „D‟, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  
Shri Beni Prasad Verma – Chairman 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi 
3. Shri Mahendrasinh P. Chauhan 
4. Shri Sher Singh Ghubaya 
         5. Shri Badri Ram Jakhar 
6. Shri Haribhau Jawale 
7. Shri Virender Kashyap 
8. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar 
       9.          Shri K.R.G. Reddy 
             10.        Shri S.P.Y. Reddy 
 11.        Shri Arjun Roy 
12.        Smt. J. Shantha 
13.     Smt. Annu Tandon 
14. Dr. P. Venugopal (Tiruvallur) 
15.  Shri Sajjan Verma 
 
         RAJYA SABHA 
 
16.         Shri B.S. Gnanadesikan 
17. Dr. Gyan Prakash Pilania 
    18.       Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
           19. Shri Mangala Kisan 
 20.  Shri Kumar Deepak Das 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Shri N.K. Sapra   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Devender Singh  - Joint Secretary 
3. Shri B.S. Dahiya   - Director 

 76 
 
 
  
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for consideration and adoption of draft Report on „ ”Working of 
Brahmaputra Board”. 
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up the draft Report on „ ”Working of 
Brahmaputra Board” for consideration .  After some discussion, the Committee 
adopted the Report with the minor amendment/modification arising out of discussion.  
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalize the Report in view 
of the consequential changes arising out of factual verification and present the same 
to both the Houses of Parliament in the ensuing Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 