 
13 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2016-2017) 
                 
         
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
                 
         
                 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA 
REJUVENATION 
 
         
         
INDIGENOUS AND MODERN FORMS OF WATER CONSERVATION – 
TECHNIQUES AND PRACTICES 
         
         
THIRTEENTH  REPORT 
  
 
         
            
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
March, 2017 / Phalguna,1938 (Saka) 

 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2016-2017) 
          
(SIXTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND  
GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
                 
         
INDIGENOUS AND MODERN FORMS OF WATER CONSERVATION – 
TECHNIQUES AND PRACTICES 
  
         
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.03.2017 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 16.03.2017 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
         
March, 2017 / Phalguna,1938 (Saka) 

 
W. R. C.  No. 18 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
         
        © 2016 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha  
(Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CONTENTS 
         PAGE  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016-2017) ………………………………..  (iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………………..  (v) 
 
PART – I 
 
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I Introductory …………………………………………………….  1 
 
CHAPTER II Need for Water Conservation in India     3 
 
Per Capita Live Storage in India vis-à-vis other countries……..  3 
Decline in Ground Water levels…………………………………..  5 
Ground Water Improvement Programme…..…………………….   9 
   
CHAPTER III Techniques and Practices of Water Conservation   10 
Traditional Water Recharge Practices……………………………  10 
Modern Water Conservation Techniques………………………..  15 
Sprinkler and Drip Irrigation Systems…………………………….  15 
Aquifer Mapping …………………………………………………….  20 
Water Budgeting ………………………………………..………….  22 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Factors & Practices Influencing Water Conservation in India  25 
   Water Use Efficiency ………………………………………….  25 
   Climate Change and Water Conservation ………………….  29 
   Cropping Pattern and Water Conservation ………………….  31 
   Participatory ground water management in Maharashtra….  32 
 
CHAPTER V National Water Mission      37 
National Water Mission and  Study of  impact of Climate Change on water 
resources……………………………………………………………  37 
National Water Mission and Citizen and State Action on water conservation, 
augmentation and preservation……………………………………..  39 
National Water Mission and Training, Capacity-building and Awareness 
Programmes………………………………………………………….  40 
National Water Mission and Efforts on Increasing Water Use  
Efficiency ……………………………………………………………..  42 
eound water contamination ……….. 48 
Causes by industries …PART – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS ………………………….   45 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I.  Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee (2015-16) held on 24 May, 2016..  69 
II. Minutes of the Sixth Sitting of the Committee (2016-17) held on 14 March, 2017.. 73 
 
 
(i) 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2016-17) 
  
 
  
  Shri Hukum Singh  -  Chairperson 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Radheshyam Biswas 
3. Shri Devusinh Jesingbhai Chauhan 
4. Shri Sudhir Gupta@ 
5. Shri Prakash B. Hukkeri* 
6. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
7. Shri Mohanbhai Kundariya# 
8. Shri Maganti Murali Mohan 
9. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
10. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
11. Shri Subhash Patel 
12. Shri Sanjaykaka Ramchandra Patil 
13. Shri Vijaysinh Mohite Patil 
14. Smt. Aparupa Poddar 
15. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
16. Shri S. P. Y. Reddy 
17. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah 
18. Smt. V. Sathyabama 
19. Shri Lallu Singh 
20. Shri Liladharbhai Vaghela 
21. Smt. Dimple Yadav 
 
        RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
23. Shri Harshvardhan Singh Dungarpur 
24. Mir Mohammad Fayaz 
25. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
26. Shri Sanjiv Kumar 
27. Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
28. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
29. Shri Sanjay Seth 
30. Shri A.V. Swamy  
31. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
 
32.   
 
_______________________________________________________________________________ 
@ Nominated w.e.f. 19.10.2016. 
* Nominated w.e.f. 23.11.2016. 
# Nominated w.e.f. 19.10.2016. 
 
(iii) 

 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.  Shri Shiv Kumar   -  Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Rita Jailkhani  -  Director 
3.  Shri Kushal Sarkar  -  Additional Director 
4.  Shri Ginsuanlian Guite  -  Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

INTRODUCTION 
         
 
I, the Chair person, Standing Committee on Water Resources (20 16-17) having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the R eport on their behalf, present th e Thirteenth Report on 
“Indigenous and Modern Forms of Water Conservation – Techniques and Practices.”  
 
2. The Committee (2016-17) took up the subject “ Indigenous and Modern Forms of Water 
Conservation – Techniques and Practices” for a detailed examination and Report.  The Committee 
took  evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Water Resources , River Development and 
Ganga Rejuvenation on 24 May, 2016. 
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 14 March, 
2017.  
 
4. The Committee wish  to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry of Water 
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation  for providing the  requisite written 
information and for the deposition made in connection with the examination of the subject.   
 
5. The Committee would also like to place on record their sense of deep appreciation for the 
assistance rendered to them by the officials of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee. 
             
     
NEW DELHI                                                HUKUM SINGH, 
8 March, 2017                                                          Chairperson,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
17 Phalguna, 1938 (Saka)          Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
(v) 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTORY 
1.1 Our country is endowed with a rich and vast diversity of natural resources, water being 
the most precious of them.  Water security, water management and its development is of 
immense importance in all walks of human life and also for all living beings. 
1.2 According to Indian Meteorological Department (IMD), there are only 40 rainy days in 
India. Primary source of water in India is South -west and North -east Monsoons. Monsoon, 
however, is erratic and the duration and the amount of rainfall is highly variable in different parts 
of our country, hence, there is a need to conserve water from rainfall and surface runoff to the 
extent possible. 
1.3 It is stated in the written note of t he Ministry of Water Resources, River Dev elopment 
and Ganga Rejuvenation that Water is primarily a State subject, and hence, State Governments 
are taking various actions for development of water resources to augment the surface water 
storage capacities according to their own resources and priorities. The wastage of precious 
water can be reduced by creating more storage capacity. As per constitutional provisions, the 
development and management of water resources projects including creation of storage fall 
within the purview of the States. The water storage schemes are planned, investigated, 
implemented and managed by the State Governments as per their own priority and resources 
available with them. The Union Government renders assistance to States which is technical, 
advisory, catalytic and promotional in nature. The Central government is also providing financial 
support to States through schemes such as Accelerated Irrigation Beneficiary Programme, 
Repair, Renovation and Restoration of water bodies, Command Area Development and Water 
Management etc. Governme nt of India has launched the National Water Mission with the 

2 
 
objective of conservation of water, minimizing wastage and ensuring its more equitable 
distribution both across and within States through integrated water resources development and 
management. 
1.4 In the course of the examination of the subject, the Committee took evidence of the 
officials of Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Gan ga Rejuvenation on 24 
May, 2016. Apart from oral testimony of the witnesses, the Committee obtained b ackground 
documents from the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation.  For questions which needed further clarification s, post-evidence clarifications / 
replies were also obtained from the Ministry. 
1.5 The Committee’s examina tion of the subject “Indigenous and Modern Forms of Water 
Conservation – Techniques and Practices” inter-alia include (i) Need for Water Conservation in 
India, (ii) Techniques and Practices of Water Conservation , (iii) Factors and Practices 
influencing Water Conservation in India, and (iv) National Water Mission. 
  

3 
 
CHAPTER II 
NEED FOR WATER CONSERVATION IN INDIA 
(a) Per Capita Live Storage in India vis-à-vis Other countries 
2.1 According to the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation (MoWR,RD&GR), out of maximum feasible storage of 450 km 3, total live storage 
of 253 km 3 has been constructed in India till XI Plan.  The per capita live storage in India is 
about 209 m3 based on population of 2011.  The data regarding p er capita live storage in some 
other countries is given in the table below: 
Table – 1 : Data on per capita live storage in some countries of the world 
Sl. No. Name of Country Per capita live storage (in 
cubic meters or m3) 
1. Russia 6103 
2. Australia 4733 
3. Brazil 3145 
4. USA 1964 
5. Turkey 1739 
6. Spain 1410 
7. China 1111 
8. South Africa 753 
 
2.2 The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation , in a 
written information furnished to the Committee, stated that a per capita water availability of less 
than 1700 cubic meters (m 3) is termed as a water -stressed condition whereas if per capita 
availability falls below 1000 m 3, it is termed as a water sc arcity condition.  The Ministry, inter-

4 
 
alia, have also stated that Russia can sustain consecutive droughts for about 4 years as its per 
capita water storage is about 4 times water stress index of 1700 m 3 per capita per year.  
Similarly, Australia can susta in for about 03 years of consecutive droughts.  India, however, 
cannot sustain drought beyond one non -Monsoon season due to low per capita storage, and 
faces acute stress if any year happen to be a drought year. 
2.3 When the Committee asked to suggest meas ures needed to be taken to increase per 
capita live storage capacity in India without adversely compromising on the ecological balance 
in different parts of India, the Ministry submitted:  
“Measures for increased per capita live storage capacity without compromising the 
ecological balance are as follows: 
I. Creation of storage based water resources projects throughout the country on 
appropriate sites with carry over storage. 
II. Through various water conservation measures, taking up watershed 
development schemes, soil conservation measures, rainwater harvesting, etc. 
III. Repair, Renovation and Restoration of water bodies throughout  the country in 
general and in notified blocks where ground water is becoming critical in 
particular.” 
 
2.4 The Ministry of W ater Resources, River D evelopment and Ganga Rejuvenation,  in a 
written statement, informed that although the average water availability in the country remains 
more or less fixed according to the natural hydrologic cycle, the per capita availability is 
reducing progressively owing to increasing population.  In 1991, the national average per capita 
availability in India was around 2209 cubic meter (cu.m.) per year, which has gone down to 
about 1545 cu.m. per year in 2011.  With the projected future population , the per capita water 
availability may go down to around 1340  cu. m. and 1140 cu.m. by the year 2025 and 2050 
respectively. 

5 
 
2.5 On being asked by the Committee about India’s present position regarding the national 
average water per capita availability vis-à-vis other countries of the world, the Ministry furnished 
the data which are reproduced in a table below: 
Table – 2 :  Data on per capita water availability in India vis -à-vis some other countries 
of the world. 
 
Sl. No. Name of Country Per capita water availability 
(in cubic meters or m3) 
1. Russia 31883 
2. Australia 21764 
3. Brazil 41865 
4. USA 9802 
5. Turkey 2890 
6. Spain 2506 
7. China 2060 
8. South Africa 1007 
9. India 1545 (2011 census) 
 
(b) Decline in Ground Water Levels 
2.6 It is  stated that in certain areas, ground water development is very high leading to 
severe decline in ground water levels in wells and tube wells, large seasonal drops in water 
levels in wells specially in hard rock areas and under certain situations, deterior ation in quality 
of ground water.  As a consequence, there has been (i) increase in pumping depths, drastic 
reduction in wells / tube wells yields and enormous rise in the cost of pumping ground water, (ii) 
widespread and acute scarcity of ground water in summer months for irrigation and drinking 
uses, and (iii) increase in fluoride content in certain areas and increase in salinity in  the coastal 

6 
 
areas.   According to the representative of the Ministry, as per data compiled by the Central 
Ground Water Authority (CGWA), there are 90% blocks of Punjab where water have been over -
extracted.  It was also stated that water being a State subject, 100% subsidy on p ower in 
Punjab is being given in respect of agricultural sector, despite the fact that the Kirit Parikh 
Committee Report (2010) had suggested that water should not be treated as such being a 
common resource. 
2.7 The Committee called for the comments of the  Ministry on the issue of excessive 
extraction of water due to free electricity provided by the State Governments in India, the 
Ministry in a written reply submitted as under: 
 “The rapid development of ground water has led to over-exploitation of ground water in 
certain regions of the country. In the State of Punjab , out of 138 assessment units 110 
are Over -Exploited; 4 are Critical; 2 are Semi -Critical and 22 are Safe as per the 
Ground Water Resource Estimate Report, 2011. One of the major reason s is 
attributed for shifting to water intensive crop in the State of Punjab which has resulted 
in depletion of  ground water table in many parts due to over -exploitation, imposing an 
increasing financial burden on farmers who need to deepen their wells and replace 
their pump sets and on State Governments whose subsidy burden for electricity 
supply  increases due to the provis ion of free electricity in the S tate for agriculture 
connections. 
(1)  Ground water use has expanded in the State, as it provides control over 
 irrigation to the farmer and its growth stimulated by spread of electrification and 
 subsidized power. Even in the command area of major irrigation projects of the 
 State, farmers often use ground water as a matter of routine to supplement 
 canal water to maximize agricultural production. 
(2)  In order to prevent lowering of water tables due to excessive extraction, there is 
 a dire need for cooperation with agricultural users. It is essential to develop a 
 cooperative mechanism of water users and Panchayat repres entatives with an 
 objective to regulate use within average annual recharge level. Further, the 

7 
 
 ground water based resources (need) to be provided with a recharge structure 
 which  would help keep the source alive. Rain water harvesting in schools and 
 community buildings are being made compulsory and individual household 
 rooftop rain water harvesting systems are promoted. CGWB has prepared 
 comprehensive ground water recharge plan for 45 notified blocks/ areas in the 
 State of Punjab for addressing the problem of over-exploitation of ground water.” 
 
2.8 To a query of the Committee whether any advisory has been issued by the Government 
to State / Local bodies to curb the extravagant supply of electricity for ground water extraction, 
the Ministry replied as follows:  
“The following Initiatives (were) taken by Central Ground Water Board for Reducing 
Ground Water usage in Agriculture/ Irrigation Sector: 
(i) DO letter to all Chief Secretaries of the States for adoption of modern 
technology for judicious, efficient management utilization and development of 
ground water resources – as per recommendations of “Fifth Report of 
Standing Committee on Water Resources on Ground Water Scenario”..  
(ii) DO letter to Chief Secretaries of Haryana, Punjab & Rajasthan for revamping 
the agriculture power supply policy and pricing structure in order to curb 
wasteful and excessive withdrawal of water by the irrigation sector – as per 
recommendations of “Fifth Report of Standing Committee on Water 
Resources on Ground Water Scenario”.  
(iii) Letter to the Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture to propose economically viable 
tools and   techniques for irrigation to propagate, educate and bring 
awareness among farmers in the over-exploited and water stress areas in the 
country – as per recommendations of “Fifth Report of Standing Committee on 
Water Resources on Ground Water Scenario”.   
Other Directions/ Advisories by Central Ground Water Authority for Ground Water 
Management are: 

8 
 
(i)  Chief Secretaries/ Administrators, MoUD, NHAI, CRRI, CPWD, State Public 
Works Departments, Indian Railways, Sports Authority of India, Ministry of Youth 
Affairs, Ministry of Civil Aviation, etc. have been advised: 
a. To adopt Artificial Recharge/ RWH in Critical &  Over-exploited blocks/ taluks/ 
mandals. 
b. For adopting Artificial Recharge/ RWH on all the Govt. Buildings.  
c. To ensure inclusion of RTRWH in building bye laws.  
d. To promote conservation of water through mass awaren ess, management 
trainings, etc.” 
2.9 The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation 
informed that Maharashtra is the first State which has set up Maharashtra Water Resources 
Regulatory Authority (MWRRA) in 2005 under the World Bank Pr ogramme.  The MWRRA has 
implemented water tariff system in Maharashtra for agriculture, domestic and industrial users.  
It is informed that the assessment, recovery of the water charges from agriculture, domestic , 
industrial users and O&M cost in the State during the last 7 years are as follows: 
Table – 3 :  Recovery of water charges from agriculture, domestic, industrial users 
and O&M cost in Maharashtra during last 7 years. 
(Rs. in Crore) 
Year O&M Cost   (including 
establishment) 
Assessment* Recovery 
 
2013-14 843 607 515 
2012-13 762 753 506 
2011-12 765 651 620 
2010-11 745 767 746 
2009-10 709 811 803 
2008-09 555 808 673 
2007-08 466 674 627 
 
2.10 The Ministry also inter-alia stated that as regards the use of the revenue collected, 
Government of Maharashtra ploughs back 75% of the revenue collected to the water user 

9 
 
associations.  In case of non -irrigation users, revenue collected is deposited in Government 
treasury. 
(c) Ground Water Improvement Programme 
2.11 As per Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, an 
initiative of Government of India, “Ground Water Improvement Programme’ is stated to be 
launched shortly.  Initially, five States, viz. Raja sthan, Haryana, Maharashtra, Gujarat and 
Karnataka, have been selected which have some of the most heavily exploited ground water 
areas in India and confront serious ground water availability and quality issues. 
2.12 Asked about the funding pattern, the Mi nistry stated this would be Central Sector 
scheme and the budgetary support from Central Government and World Bank loan would be in 
the ratio of 50:50, subject to the same being approved by the Ministry of Finance and the 
approval of the Cabinet.  The Proj ect duration is of six years, and the programme will have 
inherent linkages with National Hydrology Project (NHP) and NAQUIM.  The funds would be 
transferred to Special Purpose Vehicle or PIU in the State.  An initial amount of 66% of the 
Central share app roved will be released to the PIU and funds would be reimbursed after an 
expenditure of not less than 50% has been rendered by the State Government / SLSC.  15% 
funds will be used for institutional strengthening.  The Scheme has provision for social audit 
and third party verification.  Besides, the Programme is to be implemented in a ‘Programme for 
Result’ (P for R) mode under which disbursement will be hiked with the results achieved. 
 
  

10 
 
CHAPTER III 
TECHNIQUES AND PRACTICES OF WATER CONSERVATION 
3.1 ‘Water Conservation’ means preservation and careful management of fresh water as a 
sustainable resources to protect the water environment and to meet current and future human 
demand.  Water conservation in large scale is possible by construction of major and med ium 
irrigation projects and in small scale, it is possible by traditional water bodies. 
(A) Traditional Water Recharge Practices 
3.2 India had had a rich tradition of water harvesting which is more than two millennia old.  
The Kuhals of Jammu, Kulsi  of Himachal Pradesh, Guls of Uttarakhand, Pats of Maharashtra, 
Zings of Ladakh, Zabos of Nagaland, Eris of Tamil Nadu, Keres of Karnataka, Tankas, Kundis, 
Bawdis, Jhalaras etc. of Rajasthan are but a few of the traditional rain harvesting systems 
which ex isted in India but have fallen into disuse with the introduction of piped water supply 
system. 
3.3 The traditional artificial recharge practices of India since ancient times as per 
information received from the Ministry of Water Resources, River Developmen t and Ganga 
Rejuvenation, are mentioned in the table below: 
Table – 4: Traditional Recharge Practices of India 
Eco-zone Traditional water 
harvesting systems 
Description Found in 
1. Trans-Himalayan 
Region 
Zing Tanks for collecting 
water from melted ice 
Ladakh 
2. Western Himalayas Kul Water channels in 
mountain areas 
Jammu, Himachal 
Pradesh 
Naula Small ponds Uttaranchal 
Kuhl Headwall across a 
ravine to divert water 
Himachal Pradesh 

11 
 
from a natural stream 
for irrigation 
Khatri  Chambers carved in 
hard rock for storing 
water 
Himachal Pradesh 
3. Eastern Himalayas  Apatani Terraced plots 
connected by inlet 
and outlet channels 
 
Arunachal Pradesh 
4. Northeastern Hill 
Ranges 
Zabo Impounding runoff Nagaland 
Cheo-oziihi Channels from rivers Nagaland 
Bamboo drip irrigation  Water from streams 
in the hills is brought 
to the plains via 
bamboo pipes for drip 
irrigation 
Meghalaya 
5. Brahmaputra 
Valley  
Dongs Ponds Assam 
Dungs / jampois Small irrigation canals 
linking rice fields and 
a stream 
W. Bengal 
6. Indo-Gangetic 
Plain 
Ahar-pynes Embanked catchment 
basin and channels 
S. Bihar 
Bengal's inundation 
channels 
Inundation canals W. Bengal 
Dighis Small square or 
circular reservoir fed 
by canals from rivers 
Delhi 
Baolis Stepwells Delhi 
7. Thar Desert Kunds / kundis Underground storage W.Rajasthan 
Kuis / beris Deep pits near tanks W.Rajasthan 

12 
 
Baoris / bers Community wells Rajasthan 
Jhalaras Tank Rajasthan, Gujarat 
Nadi Village ponds Jodhpur, Rajasthan 
Tankas Underground tank Bikaner, Rajasthan 
Khadins Embankment across 
lower hill slopes 
Jaisalmer, W. 
Rajasthan 
Vav / Vavdi / Baoli / 
Bavadi 
Stepwells Gujarat, Rajasthan 
Virdas Shallow wells Rann of Kutch, 
Gujarat 
Paar Area where water has 
percolated, accessed 
by kuis 
- 
8. Central Highlands  Talab / Bandhis Reservoirs Bundelkhand, 
Madhya Pradesh 
SazaKuva Open well Mewar, E. Rajasthan 
Johads Earthen check dams Alwar district, 
Rajasthan  
Naada / bandh Stone check dam Mewar, Thar desert 
Pat Diversion bund 
across stream  
Jhabua district, 
Madhya Pradesh 
Rapat Percolation tank Rajasthan 
Chandela tank Tank Rajasthan 
Bundela tank  Tank Rajasthan 
9. Eastern Highlands  Katas / Mundas / 
Bandhas 
Earthen 
embankments across 
drainage lines 
Orissa & Madhya 
Pradesh 
10. Deccan Plateau  Cheruvu Reservoirs to store 
runoff 
Chitoor,Cuddapah 
districts of Andhra 
Pradesh 

13 
 
Kohli tanks Tanks Maharashtra 
Bhandaras Check dams Maharashtra 
Phad Check dams and 
canals 
North western 
Maharashtra 
Kere Series of tanks Central Karnataka 
Ramtek Model  Intricate network of 
groundwater and 
surface waterbodies, 
connected through 
surface and 
underground canals 
Ramtek, Maharashtra 
11. Western Ghats  Surangam Horizontal well Kasargode, Kerala 
12. Western Coastal 
Plains 
Virdas Shallow wells Rann of Kutch, 
Gujarat 
13. Eastern Ghats  Korambu Temporary wall of 
brushwood, grass 
and mud laid across 
channels to raise the 
level of water 
Kerala 
14. Eastern Coastal 
Plains 
Yeri Tank Tamil Nadu 
Ooranis Pond Tamil Nadu 
15. The Islands Jackwells Bamboo pipes are 
used to lead water 
into shallow pits 
Great Nicobar Island 
 
3.4 Regarding the status of indigenous water harvesting methods / practices in India, 
including their contribution to water resources conservation and management, the Ministry 
stated that as per the 4th MI Census , about 6 lakh tanks and storages in India are used for 
minor irrigation schemes under surface flow and surface lift and it has in creased from 5.56 lakh 
ha during 3rd Census. The major States/UTs which have large number of reservoirs and tanks 

14 
 
include A ndhra Pradesh (81 Th.), Maha rashtra (71 Th.), Chhattisgarh (56 Th.), M adhya 
Pradesh (56 Th.), Odisha (39 Th.), T amil Nadu (39 Th.), U ttarakhand (31 Th.), and W est 
Bengal (30 Th.). 
Out of these 6 lakh surface flow schemes including tanks,  5 lakh schemes are in use 
and remaining 1 lakh schemes are not in use due to various reasons. The total irrigation 
potential created through tanks is about 58.9 lakh ha out of which 39.31 lakh ha has been 
utilized; as such about 19.5 lakh ha has been lost due to underutilisation. Out of the surface 
flow schemes not in use, 74 thousand are temporarily not in use and about 24 thousand are 
permanently not in use. 
3.5 When the Committee asked about the advantages enjoyed by these traditional water 
harvesting methods, the Ministry, in a written reply, submitted: 
 “Through the ages, Indian agriculture has been sustained by natural and man -made 
water bodies suc h as lakes, tanks, ponds and similar structures. A water body is a 
structure where rain water is accumulated or water is stored by diversion from a 
stream, nala or river.  Water bodies serve as storage reservoirs of water in the 
monsoon dependent areas of the country where there exist a shorter period of rainfall 
and a long dry spell with very high deviation of annual rainfall. The small storage tanks 
are called ponds or bundhis which are mostly community owned.  The large storage 
tanks whose command varies  from 20 to 2000 hectares are generally constructed by 
government departments or local bodies.  Water bodies are even religiously quite 
significant.  Lakes of India, such as, Pushkar in Rajasthan, Gurudongmar  in Sikkim, 
and others are renowned for their religious importance.  The striking beauty of lakes of 
India, like Vembanad Lake (Kerala), Bhimtal Lake (Uttarakhand), etc has made them 
favourite haunts for the tourists.  The lakes of Rajasthan add vigour to the colossal 
forts and palaces.” 

15 
 
3.6 The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, in a 
written reply, stated that the water bodies have gone into disuse mainly due to prolonged and 
continuous neglect of maintenance.  Heavy sil ting of the tank bed, choked up feeder channels, 
leaking and weak bund, leaky sluices and dilapidated surplus weirs and ill maintained 
distribution channels are the common deficiencies in the present conditions of these minor 
irrigation tanks.  Further, en croachments in the tank bund, foreshore, water-spread and supply 
channels, deforestation and denundation in the catchment areas leading to extinction of water 
bodies as a whole for housing and urbanization and indiscriminate use of tank beds as dumping 
yards have also contributed to deterioration of the water bodies. 
3.7 On being asked by the C ommittee as to  whether any study has been made so far 
regarding the efficacy, merits, viability or sustainability of traditional water harvesting techniques 
and also to state the efforts made by the Government to preserve, improve and develop the 
indigenous water harvesting methods in India, the Ministry have not furnished the relevant reply 
but have merely cited the various  objectives of the Scheme for Repair, Renovat ion and 
Restoration (RRR) of water bodies being implemented by the Government of India (GOI) since 
the 10th Plan and which is being continued during the 12th Plan as well. 
(B) Modern Water Conservation Techniques 
(i) Sprinkler and Drip Irrigation Systems 
3.8 According to the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation, pressurised irrigation lead to saving of water and increase in yield.  Pressurised 
irrigation system is being promoted in canal commands to increase the efficiency and to save 
water.  It consists of two types as given below:  

16 
 
(a) Sprinkler irrigation : 
In sprinkler irrigation, water is discharged under pressure in air through a set of 
nozzles attached to a network of high density polyethylene pipes, simulating rainfall. 
Sprinkler irrigation systems are suitable for irrigating crops where the plant densit y is 
very high. It is widely used for cereals, pulses, seeds and other field crops. When 
many sprinklers are used they are attached to a pipeline at a predetermined spacing in 
order to achieve a uniform water application. The sprinkler or overhead irrigati on 
system consists of conveying water to the field by aluminium or High Density Poly 
Ethylene (HDPE) pipes and distributing it over the field under pressure through a 
system of nozzles. For spraying water under pressure, a booster pump or high -speed 
low discharge pump is necessary. As water is conveyed through pipes, the seepage 
and evaporation losses are eliminated.  Since the water application rate is less than 
the infiltration rate of the soil, there are no runoff losses in this method of irrigation. 
Even when the soil is too porous and difficult to distribute water uniformly in the 
surface method, a sprinkler system can irrigate it efficiently. This method can be used 
under most climatic conditions where irrigation is feasible.  
(b) Drip irrigation: 
Drip irrigation involves technology for irrigating plants at the root zone through emitters 
fitted on a network of pipes (mains, sub mains and laterals). The emitting devices 
could be drippers, micro sprinklers, mini sprinklers, micro jets, misters, fan jets, micr o 
sprayers, foggers etc. which are designed to discharge water at prescribed rates. The 
use of different emitters will depend upon specific requirements, which may vary from 
crop to crop. 

17 
 
Water requirement, age of plant, plant to plant spacing, soil type, water quality and 
water availability etc are some of the factors which would decide the choice of the 
emitting system.  
3.9 The Committee specifically desired  to know the comparative merits of the various 
modern water conservation techniques.  To this query, the Ministry, in a written reply, furnished 
the information: 
 “The important modern water conservation techniques are Drip and Sprinkler irrigation 
systems. State Governments are encouraging adoption of these water saving 
technologies through provision of subsidies to farmers on purchase of these systems. 
The comparative merits of these water conservation techniques are tabulated below: 
Table – 5: Comparative merits of Drip and Sprinkler irrigation. 
Drip Irrigation System 
 
Sprinkler Irrigation system 
Water is delivered at the root zone 
of the crops through emitters like 
drippers, micro sprinklers, mini 
sprinklers, micro jets, misters, fan 
jets, micro sprayers, foggers etc.  
Designed to discharge water at 
prescribed rates. 
 
Requires energized pump sets 
 
Use of different emitters depends 
upon specific requirements which 
may vary from crop to crop.  
 
Micro tube drips work under a very low 
pressure head 
Less water requirement resulting 
in water saving. 
 
Irrigate more uniformly than gravity systems 

18 
 
Higher fertilizer application 
efficiency. 
Typical efficiency is about 70%.   Particularly 
more effective  
 
Energy conservation. Particularly effective in sandy undulating 
terrains. 
Higher water use efficiency. Require much less maintenance when 
compared with the conventional pressurized 
irrigation systems.  
 
Feasible for  irrigation  in difficult 
terrains 
Suitable  for irrigation  of crops with high  
density. 
 
Suitable for problematic soils and 
prevention of water logging 
Widely used for cereals, pulses, seeds and 
other field crops.  
 
 Convenience of watering through pipes. 
 
 Eliminates seepage and evaporation losses. 
 
 Expensive land leveling   not required 
 
 No requirement of skilled manpower 
 
 Frequent and light irrigation possible giving 
better response from the crops. 
 
 
3.10 The Ministry also informed that as far as the application of water by Sprinkler and Drip 
is concerned, as per the 12 th Plan guidelines of Command Area Development and Water 
Management (CAD&WM) programme, a minimum of 10% of Culturable Command Area (CCA) 

19 
 
of each project is to be covered through micro irrigation.  Central Assistance to the tune of 50% 
is provided to the States for development of infrastructure to faci litate use of sp rinkler / drip 
irrigation. 
3.11 The Committee enquired about the current status of water conservation techniques in 
India, including the funds allocated and incurred by the Government on them during the last 03 
(three) years.  Responding to this query, the Ministry submitted:  
“The Ministry has taken initiatives that the States adopt micro irrigation as far as 
possible, especially for development of common infrastructure to facilitate use of 
sprinkler / drop irrigation systems, in the command areas of new projects.  The States of 
Punjab and Rajasthan have already come forward with projects having micro irrigation 
component.” 
3.12 Regarding ‘fertigation’, the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation stated that it is a method  of fertilizer application in which fertilizer is incorporated 
within the irrigation water by the sprinkler and drip system.  In this system, fertilizer solution is 
distributed evenly in irrigation. The availability of nutrients is very high , therefore, the efficiency 
is more. In th is method , liquid fertilizer as well as water soluble fertilizers are used. By this 
method, fertilizer use efficiency is increased from 80 to 90 per cent. 
Advantages of fertigation 
1. Nutrients and water are supplied near the active root zone through fertigat ion which 
results in greater absorption by the crops. 
2. As water and fertilizer are supplied evenly to all the crops through fertigation, there is 
possibility for getting 25-50 per cent higher yield. 
3. Fertilizer use efficiency through fertigation  ranges between 80-90 per cent, which helps 
to save a minimum of 25 per cent of nutrients. 

20 
 
4. By this way, along with less amount of water and saving of fertilizer, time, labour and 
energy use is also reduced substantially. 
 
3.13 It was further stated by the Ministry that o ther methods of modern water conservation 
techniques include inter-linking of water bodies through canals, mulching (application of organic 
or inorganic material to improve soil fertility), use of ICT Tools, Catchment Area Treatment, 
promoting in-situ moisture conservation  practices, conjunctive use of surface and ground water 
(i.e. re-use of canal seepage water for conjunctive use with ground water and preventing water 
logging along canal banks), and minimization of losses due to evaporatio n through measure for 
reducing evaporation from reservoirs, canals etc. and closed conduits conveyance of water 
instead of water instead of open channels to reduce evaporation and percolation. 
(iii) Aquifer Mapping 
3.14 According to the Ministry of Water R esources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation, the National Aquifer Management (NAQUIM) Programme is an ongoing 
programme since 2012.   The Ministry informed the Committee during evidence that under 
National Aquifer Mapping Programme, only an area of 5.5 lakh square kms. has so far been 
mapped and 23 lakh square kms. remain to be mapped, for which Rs. 3000 crore is needed.  
3.15 The Commi ttee desired to know the reasons for under -achievement in the 
implementation of National Aqu ifer Mapping Programme in India .  To this query, the Ministry 
replied: 
“Under National Aquifer M apping Programme, the total mappable area of the country is 
around 23 lakh sq. km area. During 12th Plan period (2012-17), Aquifer Mapping and 
Management Plan program me has been taken up in 8.89 Lakh Sq. Km focusing on 
ground water over -exploitation, water scarcity in Bundelkhand and arsenic 
contamination. There has been d elay in commencement of the programme due to late 

21 
 
approval of the scheme in September 2013.Out of 8.89 Lakh Sq. Km, an area of 5.25 
lakh sq. km has been re -prioritized in the water stressed areas of the States of  
Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Andh ra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka, Tamil 
Nadu, NCT Delh i and Bundelkhand Region for aquifer mapping and preparation of 
aquifer-wise ground water management plans. So far, the data collection, data 
compilation, data gap analysis has already been completed in  the 12th Plan target area 
of 8.89 lakh sq.km. Aquifer Maps and Management Plans for an area of 2.28 lakh sq. 
km has been prepared by March 2016 against the target of 2.38 lakh sqkm. Sincere 
efforts are been made to expedite the work and achieve the target  within the specified 
time frame.” 
 
3.16 To a Committee’s query about the time by which  the NAQUIM is likely to be completed 
in India, the Ministry in a written reply, stated: 
“As per the proposed programme, data generation for Aquifer Mapping in around 23 
lakh sq. km mappable area of the country will be completed by March, 2020 and aquifer 
maps and management plans will be completed by December, 2022.” 
 
3.17 When asked about the corrective steps taken by the Government to accelerate the pace 
of implementation of National Aquifer Mapping Programme, the Ministry submitted a written 
reply submiitedr: 
 “Review of the work done is being carried out at CGWB through a tw o tier evaluation 
mechanism comprising (i) An internal committee comprising of Members CGWB and 
headed by Chairman, CGWB and (ii) A peer review committee headed by Chairman, 
CGWB comprising of all Members of CGWB, and External experts, wherein regular 
presentations are being taken up for monitoring progress of work and its outputs.  
 Regular progress is being reviewed through presentations at Ministry level 
including the weekly Meeting taken by Hon’ble Minister of Water Resources, 
River development and Ganga Rejuvenation. 

22 
 
 State Ground Water Coordination Committees (SGWCC) are geared up as per 
the direction of National Inter -departmental Steering Committee (NISC) for 
Aquifer Mapping & Management Program. The aquifer maps and management 
plans are presented and deliberated in the SGWCC.  
 Workshops are being organized by CGWB involving concerned Central / State 
Government departments, academic institutions, experts etc. to have regular 
feedback on activities being carried out under Aquifer Mapping & Management 
Program.” 
 
3.18 As regards the expected benefits of aquifer mapping programme, i.e. National Project 
on Aquifer Management (NAQUIM), the Ministry submitted: 
“The expected benefits from NAQUIM include (i) specific information on Aquifer extent, 
its dimensions, resource availability and quality, (ii) characteristic of Aquifer in terms of 
its storage and transmission properties, available resources and (iii) areas, aquifers and 
design of ground water recharge interventions.” 
 
3.19 The Ministry also submitted that based on the aquifer maps and management plans 
prepared under the programme, the concerned State Governments are being pursued for 
taking up of proposed management measures for sustainability of ground water resources.  
Aquifer Mapping is one of the components of Scheme of Ground Water Management and 
Regulation, for which a total outlay of Rs. 3319 crore has been made for 12 th Plan (2012-2017).  
So far, the total expenditure on Aquifer Mapping i n prioritized area (upto June, 2016) is Rs. 
146.48 crore. 
(iv) Water Budgeting 
3.20 According to the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation, ‘Water Budgeting’ is an accounting of all the water utilised by the system that 
flows into and out of a project area.  This area can be a project area, a wetland, a lake or any 

23 
 
other point of interest.  Development can alter the natural supply of water and severely impact 
an area, especially if there are nearby ponds  or wetlands.  Water bu dgeting is worked out from 
1st June to 31 st May of that year collating with the onset of Monsoon in Kerala in the country.  
Based on the availability of water as per the rainfall data, allocation of water to various sectors 
(irrigation/agriculture/domestic/industrial) is made for the year especially for Rabi and Kharif 
crops.   
 The Ministry also stated that water use is also a factor driving availability, and is itself 
affected by more than simply the demand for consumption – with laws, regulations, economics, 
and other environmental factors influencing its use. 
3.21 Replying to a query by the Committee on the role played by water budgeting in water 
conservation, the Ministry stated: 
“As per the Indian Meteorological Department (IMD), there are only forty rainy days in 
the country.  The Monsoon is erratic and the duration and amount of rainfall is highly 
variable in different parts of the country.  About 80% of the total water is received during 
this period only which needs proper water conservation.  There fore, proper water 
budgeting is helpful to conserve water from rainfall and surface run off to the extent 
possible.” 
 
3.22 The Committee invited comments of the Ministry on the feasibility of implementing water 
budgeting to prom ote water conservation in In dia. In reply,  the Ministry of Water Resources, 
River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation stated: 
“National Water Mission has requested all the States/UTs to prepare State Specific 
Action Plan (SSAP) for water sector linking with State Action Plans for Clim ate Change.  
The SSAP will address the present situation of water resource development and 
management, water governance, institutional arrangements, water related policies, 
cross boundary issues, agreements etc.  So far, six States, namely Andhra Pradesh, 
Assam, Gujarat, West Bengal, Uttarakhand and Telangana have initiated their State 

24 
 
Specific Action Plans in f irst p hase and other States  (are) to follow.  National Water 
Mission, Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation has 
undertaken studies on benchmarking industrial water use to assist policy for enhancing 
industrial water use efficiency in India. 
State/UT Government (s) have also been requested to set up Water Regulatory 
Authorities to regulate the use of water and to promote  conservation.  Government(s) of 
Maharashtra and Gujarat have established Water Regulatory Authorities in their State.” 
 
  

25 
 
CHAPTER IV 
FACTORS AND PRACTICES INFLUENCING WATER CONSERVATION IN INDIA 
(a) Water Use Efficiency 
4.1 The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, in a 
written note, stated that the efficient water use practices play an important role in water 
conservation in a particular area. 
4.2 Regarding the steps taken by the Government to popularize the pract ices adopted for 
water conservation, the Ministry informed the Committee as follows: 
 “Modified Guidelines for the Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (effective from 
October 2013) has encouraging provisions for inclusion of the ERM Projects of the 
water sector reforming States which are committed to implement Micro Irrigation in at 
least 10% of command area. Central Water Commission has been keeping eye on 
performance overview and management improvement of Major and Medium irrigation 
projects of the Country. It has so far appraised water use efficiency of 35 irrigation 
projects and 131 performance evaluation studies and the findings there -from were 
conveyed to the r espective project authorities for taking up suggested corrective 
measures. It has been encouraging water auditing and benchmarking of irrigation 
projects. In this vein, CWC had published general guidelines for water audit and water 
conservation for the States as also the Guidelines for improving water use efficiency in 
irrigation, domestic & industrial sectors. 
Under the  Per Drop More Crop component of the Prime Minister’s Krishi Sinchai 
Yojana (PMKSY),  promotion of efficient water conveyance and  precisi on water 
application,   installation of  devices like   drips, sprinklers, pivots and rain -guns in the  
farms is envisaged. Schemes to be taken up under this component are as follows :  
(i) Topping up of input cost particularly under civil construction beyond p ermissible 
limit (40%), under MGNREGS for activities like lining inlet, outlet, silt traps, 
distribution system etc.  

26 
 
(ii) Construction of micro  irrigation structures to supplement  source creation 
activities including tube wells and dug wells (in areas where ground water is 
available and not under semi -critical / critical / over -exploited category of 
development) which are not supported under AIBP, PMKSY (Har Khet ko Pani), 
PMKSY (watershed) and MGNREGS as per block/district irrigation plan.  
(iii) Secondary storage  structures at tail end of canal system to store water when  
available in abundance (rainy season) or from perennial sources like streams for 
use during dry periods through effective on-farm water management. 
(iv) Water lifting devices like diesel/ electric/sol ar pump sets including  water 
carriage pipes, underground piping system. 
(v) Extension activities for promotion of scientific moisture conservation and 
agronomic measures including cropping alignment to maximize use of available 
water including rainfall and minimize irrigation requirement (Jal Sarankshan).” 
4.3 When asked by the Committee to give suggestions for improving efficient water use 
practices in the country, the Ministry further submitted as under: 
 “In general, irrigation sector has been operating at low economic terms world over, 
being charged at subsidized rates on area basis, though monitored in volume for 
larger social benefits. Improving efficiency is a rather slow, expensive process that 
requires willingness, knowhow and action at various levels and is subject to local 
water scarcity situation. Element of reliability in canal irrigation has to be raised - in 
general, and prevailing supply based delivery in irrigation sector has to shift to the 
demand-based management.  
Besides the mentioned smart irrigation scheduling and use of low flow systems; 
at farm level, with the co -operation of farmers, there are other possibilities like modest 
Crop Shifting – shifting a small percentage of lower -value water -intensive crops to 
higher-value water -efficient crops; advanced Irrigation Management water saving 
methods – alternate wetting and drying method of application, regulated deficit 
irrigation, crop diversification etc.  
Until the users/WUAs are sensitized for efficient water use practices and roped 
in for water conservation, the on -ground improvement is a bit difficult. There need to  

27 
 
be lucrative incentivizing provisions to make  them ac tive stakeholders rather the end 
users.  
Also, given the predominance of small land holder farmers in India, affordability 
of water saving technology is also a challenge and proper institutional financial 
interventions may be necessary for promoting the co st intensive low flow systems on 
sustainable basis.  
There may be a Nationwide platform for intense dialogue with the famers - may 
be in the shape of farm schools/strengthened WALMIs - for capacity building of 
farmers and information dissemination about be st practices, such as land levelling, 
warabandi, SRI, AWD, crop rotation etc. This would also help in demonstrating new 
practices as pilot projects.  
The monitoring of water balance through auditing of the irrigation projects may 
sensitize all the concerne d on potential water savings. Ground water mapping may 
help in optimizing conjunctive use.  
So far as application of water by Sprinkler and Drip Irrigation methods is 
concerned, as per XII Plan guidelines of CADWM programme, minimum 10% of CCA 
of each proj ect is to cover through micro -irrigation.  Central assistance to the tune of 
50% is provided to the States for development of infrastructure to facilitate use of 
sprinkler/ drip irrigation systems as an alternative to on -farm development works.  
Following schemes have been sanctioned in respect of micro irrigation works in 12 th 
Plan:-  
Table – 6: Micro Irrigation works sanctioned in 12th Plan. 
Name of project State Estimated 
Cost  
(Rs. cr.) 
CCA 
(th.ha) 
Year of 
Sanction/ 
inclusion 
Central 
assistance 
released 
(Rs. Cr.) 
Development of 
pressure irrigation 
in command area of 
six lift schemes of 
IGNP, Stage-II 
Rajasthan 1658.80 320.117 2015-16 10.85 
Kandi Canal 
CADWM project 
Punjab 73.44 19.867 2016-17 0.0 

28 
 
Kotla Branch, Part -
II 
Punjab 38.325 7.995 2015-16 4.01 
The suggestions for improving water use efficiency  were furnished by the Ministry as 
follows: 
i. Enhanced coverage under micro-irrigation practices may be effective. 
ii. Participatory Irrigation Management with empowerment of Water Users’ 
 Associations (WUAs). 
iii. Volumetric measured supply of water at field levels to be monitored by WUAs 
iv. Levy of certain minimum water tariff so as to discourage wasteful drawl of water 
 from irrigation systems. 
v. Enforcement of key measures (e.g. reasonable power tariffs) for encouraging 
 conjunctive use of ground and surface water 
vi. Proper maintenance and management of surface water irrigation system so as 
 to give an assured water supply for each field of the command area.” 
4.4 The Committee specifically desired to know whether any research / study has been 
undertaken to assess conservation  and water management practices being used by various 
water users in the country.  To this query, the Ministry, in a written reply, submitted: 
“To make a realistic assessment of Water Use Efficiency (WUE)  for completed 
major/medium irrigation projects under Plan Scheme of Ministry of Water Resources, 
River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation – ‘R & D in Water Sector’ thirty -five (35) 
studies have been undertaken  by CWC (Central Water Commission).  The 
recommendations/results of the study reports about interventions required / step to be 
taken up, have been sent to the concerned State Governments for taking necessary 
action”. 
4.5 Asked whether the Government proposed to undertake any research / study to ensure 
optimum utilization of water, preservation and management of fresh water as a sustainable 
resource, the Ministry replied:  

29 
 
 “Various Research and Development organisations of the Ministry like National 
Institute of Hydrology, Central Water Commission, Central Ground Water Board and 
Central Water and Power Research Station etc are carrying out various research 
studies to ensure optimum utilisation of water, preservation and man agement of fresh 
water as a sustainable resource. NWM has identified eight river basins (Mahanadi, 
Mahi, Luni, Tapi, Sutlej, Sabarmati, Subarnarekha and western flowing rivers from 
Tadri to Kanyakumari) for study of impact of climate change in association with 
research institutes like IITs, NITs, IISc. and NIH under the R  and D scheme of the 
Ministry.  A scoping study  on the Water Use Efficiency for the Major -Medium Irrigation 
Projects has been completed by NWM in association with Asian Development Bank 
(ADB).  The report has been circulated to all the State Governments and uploaded on 
the website of MoWR, RD & GR for implementation. Baseline studies of major/medium 
water resource projects to get information on the present status of water use efficiency 
for 21 irrigation projects have been undertaken through NERIWALM, Tezpur, 
WALAMTARI, Hyderabad and WALMI, Aurangabad. National Water Mission has 
initiated actions to prepare State Specific Action Plan (SSAP) for water sector  
covering irrigation, agriculture, domestic water supply, industrial water supply and 
waste water utilization in respect of all the States/UTs.” 
 
(b) Climate Change and Water Conservation 
4.6 The Ministry during their deposition before the Committee stated that they have initiated 
“Climate Change, Impact Study on Eight River Basins” and global models are going to be 
statistically and dynamically down -scaled to carry out the effect of climate change in the range 
of 30 years, 50 years and 100 years from now.  It is also stated that in assessin g those impact, 
plan can be made for conservation of water.  But these studies are yet to take off. 
4.7 When the Committee asked the Ministry to elaborate as to how “Climate Change, 
Impact Study on Eight River Basins” of the Government is proposed to be co mpleted, the 
Ministry submitted: 

30 
 
“The study proposals have been invited from academic institutions of repute like 
IITs, NITs, IISc, NIH, etc.  for eight river basins viz. Mahanadi, Luni, Tapi, Satluj, 
Subarnrekha, Sabarmati, Mahi and Areas of Inland Drainage, Tadri to Kanyakumari 
river basin.  
Further, other two  studies on downscaling of coarse resolution climate variables 
simulated by General Circulation Model s (GCMs) i.e.  one project based on 
statistical downscaling (data-driven) and another based on dynamic downscaling  
(physics based), have also been initiated. The duration of the studies vary from 2 to 
3 years.  
Methodologies to model the hydrologic variables at a smaller scale based on 
large scale GCM outputs are k nown as downscaling. The methodologies include 
dynamic downscaling and statistical downscaling that produces future scenarios 
based on statistical relationship between larger scale climate features and 
hydrologic variables such as precipitation.  
 
4.8 When the Committee enquired as to how these impact studies would benefit the goal of 
water conservation in India, the Ministry in a written reply submitted: 
“Research studies have been initiated on assessing impacts of climate change 
specifically on water reso urces and on different adaptation and mitigation 
approaches. The present work will provide the meteorological projections for next 
hundred years considering greenhouse emission scenarios. The results will be 
used in river basin scale climate change impact assessment studies. 
The research work would contribute to water resources sector in the following ways: 
a. The regional climate scenarios will guide the policy makers for future planning. 
b. The modelling results will provide estimate of the future water availability in the 
basin and would be useful in planning and development works. 
c. The model results might be used for assessing the effectiveness of the existing 
flood fighting structures and other infrastructures like bridges, weirs in the area 
under the flooding condition. 
d. Performance of reservoirs would be evaluated to assess the impact of climate 
change and adaptation measures will be suggested. 

31 
 
e. The adaptation strategies will help the local population to minimise the risk due 
to changing climate.” 
 
(c) Cropping Pattern and Water Conservation 
4.9 The Committee  desired to know how cropping pattern impact water conservation in 
agricultural sector in a given area.  To this query, the Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, in a written reply, submitted: 
 “At the time of designing any irrigation project, based on the availability of water during 
Kharif and Rabi seasons, suitable cropping pattern is suggested for both the seasons. 
This combination of crop variation is decided base d on the water demand. If the 
proposed cropping pattern is being practiced by the farmers of particular command 
area, the entire command will be able to receive sufficient irrigation water. If the 
farmers change the cropping pattern, i.e. from less water d emand to high water 
demand crops like sugarcane and paddy, then the designed irrigation system fails to 
irrigate the entire command area and generally the farmers at the head and middle 
reaches utilise all available water and the tail end farmers are depri ved to get water for 
irrigation. Thus, for effective management of water, the proposed cropping pattern in 
the project area should be enforced so that each field in command could get adequate 
water.” 
4.10 Elaborating on water -saving technologies such as sp rinkler and drip irrigation systems, 
the Ministry further stated that State Governments are encouraging adoption of water -saving 
technologies, such as sprinkler and drip irrigation systems, through provision of subsidies to the 
farmers on the purchase of these systems. These technologies are recommended for achieving 
higher irrigation efficiencies and could be used for very small -sized holdings. While sprinklers 
require energized pump sets, micro tube drips can work under a very low -pressure head, with 
as l ittle as a bucket full of water. Sprinklers tend to irrigate   more uniformly than gravity 
systems and therefore efficiencies typically average about 70%. But in windy and dry areas 

32 
 
much water can be lost due to evaporation in this system. The sprinkler sy stem is particularly 
effective in sandy undulating terrain. For fruits, vegetables and orchard crops, drip irrigation 
(also known as trickle irrigation) is more suitable. These systems require much less 
maintenance when compared with the conventional press urized irrigation systems. The ease of 
maintenance is more significant in microtube drip systems. However, the adoption of these 
technologies by poor farmers would depend heavily on the supply of information, materials and 
services for installation. 
Cropping pattern for irrigation projects is suggested by the concerned State Agriculture 
Department keeping in view the food habits, climate , etc. Water demands for this cropping 
pattern suggested by State Agriculture Department are matched with the available wa ter. If 
water available is less, alteration in the cropping pattern is suggested and farmers are 
discouraged to grow water intensive crops. 
(d) Participatory ground water management in Maharashtra  
4.11 The Ministry informed that in the districts of Satara , Jalna and Beed in Maharashtra , the 
community decided to adopt efficient irrigation practices, change in cropping pattern from sugar 
to low water-consuming crops on the demand side.  On the supply side, they adopted artificial 
recharge to enhance the yiel d of aquifer, and completed 116 recharge structures (55 in Satara, 
30 in Jalna and 31 in Beed). 
4.12 When the Committee a sked about the role of the Government (Union/State) in the 
successful adoption of efficient ground water management practices in these 3 districts, the 
Ministry in a written reply, stated: 

33 
 
 “Aquifer based participatory groundwater management pilot projects in these three 
districts was undertaken in Maharashtra Water Sector I mprovement Project (MWSIP), 
aided by the World Bank. The project was implemented in total 52 villages of these 
districts. Tenure of project was from 2005 to 2013. State Government initiated the 
project activities with the mapping and delineation of the aquifer in the selected areas 
and then prepared the aquifer based wa ter balance of the project area, with 
community participation. A non -Governmental Organization (NGO) was also engaged 
for facilitation. 
The local community in each village was organized into Gram Panchayat Level 
Committees (GPLCs) having village level repr esentation. The Gram  Sabha approved 
their byelaws and then GPLCs  were   registered under the Society Registration Act. 
The members of the Executive Committee of GPLCs were elected through democratic 
process by holding elections. 
After the formation of GPLCs and election of executive members, all the GPLCs 
in the pilot aquifer have been federated into Ground Water Management Association 
(GWMA) at the aquifer level. GWMA is an apex body for the aquifer and has a 
supervisory role for  equitable utilization of ground water recharge and overviewing of 
the activities of GPLCs and controlling the actions that are detrimental to the 
sustainable development and management of ground water within the aquifer.   
Separate byelaws have been approved by GWMA. 
The community has been sensitized to keep their water account and now they 
are measuring rainfall and ground water levels through GWMA and GPLCs and trying 
to manage the crops as per availability of ground water every year. GPLCs and 
GWMA have been enabled to deliberate on the current ground water situation in the 
aquifer and have adopted appropriate interventions to improve ground water 
efficiency, reduce ground water extraction and arrest declining of water levels. 
The community manages aquif er with the help of NGO as per  the Ground 
Water Management Action Plan (GWMAP) under the technical supervision of District 
Technical Support Group which is comprised of the officers from various disciplines 
and departments like Water Resources, Water Supp ly, Agriculture, and GSDA. 
Measures for controlling the surplus ground water along with the measures of artificial 

34 
 
ground water recharge are promoted. Based on the capacity of the aquifer and 
availability of surplus surface runoff, the artificial recharge structures were finalized.” 
4.13 On being asked by the Committee if this model has been replicated elsewhere  in the 
country, the Ministry replied that the same aquifer based participatory ground water 
management is being replicated in the Jalswarajya project.  The project is being implemented in 
7 districts of Maharashtra, and the same model is being propagated through the implementation 
of Maharashtra Ground Water (Development and Management) Act, 2009, which came in to 
force from 1st June, 2014. 
4.14 The Ministry also informed the successful implementation of ground water management 
by community participation / Gram Panchayat in Hiware Bazar, Ahmednagar district, 
Maharashtra having a population of 1233 (2011).  This was achieved through water budgetin g 
leading to change in cropping pattern and use of Drip/Sprinkler irrigation on the demand side, 
and construction of rai n water harvesting, e.g. earthe n bunds, percolation tanks, stone bunds, 
check dams, trenches, etc., afforestation and protection of recharge zones, and revival of water 
bodies on supply side.  The benefits achieved include improvement in water level and increase 
in soil moisture, enhanced average income of the villagers due to assured crop yields, and 
assured drinking water supply. 
4.15 When the Committee asked the role of the Government (Union/State/local bodies) in 
the successful implementation of ground water management in Hiware Bazar, Ahmednagar 
district, Maharashtra, the Ministry replied: 
 “The Government of Maharashtra played an active and crucial role in successful 
implementation of the ground w ater management programme in Hiwa re Bazaar. 
Encouraged by the support of villagers on 15 Aug ust 1994,  Yashwant Agriculture and 

35 
 
Watershed Development Trust was es tablished to implement the watershed 
development programme  in the village. The Gov ernment of Maharashtra sanctioned 
Rs. 66 Lakhs under various schemes  related to watershed development programme 
and the Villagers of Hiware Bazar contributed about Rs. 21 La khs in the form of 
Shramdan. Under this programme, around 660 soil and water conservation structures 
like contour bunding, nala bund, cement nala bund, van tale, percolation tank, loose 
boulder structures, earthen bund and storage bandhara in addition to C CT in private 
and panchayat lands  were constructed by Shramdan of villagers till 2005. A large -
scale tree plantation along the roadside and farm bunds was also taken up with the 
help of Forest Department, Government of Maharashtra and people’s participation.  
In 2006 –07, Gramsabha decided to implement “Bo rewell Blast Technique 
(BBT)”, an unconventional method developed by Ground Water Survey and 
Development Agency, Government of Maharashtra in the village. This was taken up to 
increase ground water storage  and recharge so as to strengthen source of drinking 
water existing along downstream side of watershed.  Geo -physical study of village 
indicated that area above gaothan is favourable for using BBT to interconnect the 
upper and lower fractures within the ba saltic aquifer system in the area.  About 103 
bore wells of depth 5 to 16 meters were drilled in 162 Sq m of land.  These bore wells 
were charged by ammonium nitrate and blasted to create artificial fractures and cracks 
in hard massive basalt formation. It  was observed that the yield of the well located 
downstream of the area has increased considerably. 
The water -auditing programme introduced by Gov ernment of Maharashtra has 
been successfully implemented in the village. Under this programme,  every Gram 
Panchayat is provided with the rain gauge equipment properly installed in the office 
premises at appropriate places. The villagers are trained to monitor and maintain daily 
rainfall record and to calculate the actual yearly availability of   water based on ra infall 
of that year. They are also trained in monitoring the ground water levels in selected 
wells in the village. The data generated thus is utilised for allocation of water for its 
different uses in the village in a planned manner based on the decisions taken by the  
Gram Sabha. Thus Government  of Maharashtra was involved in providing 
infrastructure facility, capacity building, data generation for water budgeting. This data 

36 
 
was used for participatory ground water management with active involvement of 
villagers as per the decisions taken by the Gram Sabha.” 
4.16 The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation have 
informed that the model of participatory ground water management at Hiware Bazar, 
Ahmednagar, Maharashtra  with social initiatives has been very effective.  All these initiatives 
greatly improved the socio -economic conditions in the village, and the village was declared an 
‘Ideal Village’ by the Government of Maharashtra.  The Gram Panchayat also received the 
National Water Award in 2007 from Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR), Government of India.   
During 1992, there were 168 families Below Poverty Line (BPL).  By 2008, there was not a 
single BPL family left.  Earlier, there was a lot of migration from the vil lage towards urban areas 
in search of work.  Now, not only the migration has stopped, but reverse migration from urban 
areas to the village is noticed. 
 
 
 
 
  

37 
 
CHAPTER V 
NATIONAL WATER MISSION 
5.1 The Government of India has launched National Water Mission (NWM) as one of the 8 
National Missions under National Action Plan for Climate Change.  The main objective of the 
NWM is “conservation of water, minimizing wastage and ensuring its more equitable distribution 
both across and within States through integrated water resources development and 
management”.  The NWM document approved by the Union Cabinet on 6 th April, 2011 has 
identified 5 goals for the mission.  Five goals identified for achievement und er the National 
Water Mission are : 
(i) Comprehensive water data base in public domain and assessment of the impact 
of climate change on water resources; 
(ii) Promotion of citizen and state actions for water conservation, augmentation and 
preservation; 
(iii) Focussed attention to vulnerable areas including over-exploited areas; 
(iv) Increasing water use efficiency by 20%; and 
(v) Promotion of basin level integrated water resources management. 
(a) National Water Mission and study of impact of Climate Change on water resources 
5.2 The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation have, in 
a written statement, informed the Committee that to achieve goal for “comprehensive water 
data base in public domain  and assessment of the impact of climate change on water 
resources”, the National Water Mission (NWM) has requested the Central Water Commission 
(CWC) to set up required number of hydro meteorological stations across the country above the 
permanent snowline, glaciated area, seasonal snow areas in Himalayan region, p lain regions 

38 
 
and coastal areas based on global norms to facilitate collection of comprehensive data of water 
flow, water quality and sedimentation and overall water resources availability.   
5.3 When asked by the Committee to give the updated status of the set ting up of hydro 
meteorological stations proposed by CWC under National Water Mission, the Ministry 
submitted: 
“Presently, there are 878 Hydrological observation Stations (HoS) working in different 
river basins.  Central Water Commission (CWC) has a target  of establishment 800 new 
(HoS) in 12th Plan out of which CWC has opened 676 new HoS upto December, 2016.  
The Scheme is under CWC, not  NWM. 
CWC has a target of 200 Automatic satellite based telemetry system (FY 2016 -17) for 
hydrological network, real tim e information, improved water resource assessment, 
planning and flood forecasting.  There is an achievement of 57 telemetry systems up to 
December, 2016. 
There is a plan of establishing 100 additional CWC flood forecasting stations using 
hydrological and h ydraulic modeling. The network is proposed to be expanded from 
existing 176 flood forecasting stations to 276 stations.  24 flood forecasting stations 
have been established at the end of December, 2016.CWC has issued about 6,627 
flood forecasts during the year 2016-17.” 
5.4 The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation have 
also stated that an independent website of NWM was launched on 26 April, 2016 which aims at 
providing all the information relating to water resources organizations and their activities on 
different aspects of water resources at one  point, in addition to India -WRIS (Water Resources 
Information System) already developed at CWC.  NWM has identified 8 river basins (viz. 
Mahanadi, Mahi, Luni, Tapi, Sutl ez, Sabarmati, Subarnarekha and western flowing rivers from 
Tadri to Kanyakumari) for study of impact of climate change in association with research 
institutes like IITs, NITs, IISc and NIH under the R & D scheme of the Ministry.  Further, studies 

39 
 
on all the river bodies of the country is planned through statistical and dynamic downscaling of 
global climate change models. 
5.5 When further asked about the updated status of the proposed study of impact of climate 
change identified by NWM of 8 river basins in association with IITs, NITs, IISc and NIH, and by 
statistical and dynamic downscaling of g lobal climate change models, the Ministry submitted as 
under:  
“Studies on impact of climate change on water resources for seven river basins 
(Mahanadi, Mahi, Luni, Tapi, Sabarmati, Subarnarekha and western flowing rivers from 
Tadri to Kanyakumari ) in association with research institutes like IITs, NITs, IISc. and 
NIH have been approved under the Research  and Development scheme of the 
Ministry.  A study on statistical downscaling of global climate change models for the 
river basins has also been approved in 2016. The work has been awarded to the project 
implementing agencies. The R and D scheme is planned and being implemented by the 
Planning and Policy Wing, MoWR, RD and GR.  
NWM in association with the Asian Development Bank (ADB) has completed t he study 
“Operational Research to support mainstreaming of integrated flood management under 
climate change” with focus on community participation.  Two pilot studies have been 
completed for Burhi Gandak basin in Bihar and Brahmani -Baitarani basin in Odish a. 
The project reports have been sent to State Governments for taking necessary 
action/implementation.” 
(b) National Water Mission and Citizen and State Action on water conservation, 
augmentation and preservation 
 
5.6 As per information received from the Ministry, the National Convention of Water Users 
Associations (WUAs) was held at New Delhi in November, 2014 and three Regional 
Conventions aimed at “promotion of citizen and state action for water conservation, 
augmentation and preservation” were organise d at Ludhiana on 25 -26th August, 2015, at 

40 
 
Aurangabad on 8-9th January, 2016 and at Bengaluru on 24 -25th September, 2016 respectively, 
which the Ministry stated, have yielded the following outcomes: 
(a) “Capacity building of representatives of WUAs on PIM, wate r conservation and 
  improving water use efficiency. 
(b) Identification of problems faced by WUAs by taking feedback and group  
  discussions. 
(c) Made a number of recommendations. 
Under the Command Area Development (CAD) programme of MoWR, RD & GR about 
84,799 water user associations have been set up for community management of canal 
command areas.” 
(c) National Water Mission and Training, Capacity-building and Awareness Programmes 
5.7 The Ministry informed the Committee that the NWM has entered into MoU with TISS 
(Tata Institute of Social Science), Mumbai, NIRD (National Institute of Rural Development ), 
Hyderabad and other institutes to undertake sensitization, training and capacity building 
programmes in water resources management , augmentation and conservation .  NWM has 
prepared Guidelines for organizing HRD/training/capacity bui lding/mass awareness 
programmes, and  25 training capacity building/mass awareness programmes have been 
organized to address various strategies during 2015 -16.  Further, a training polic y has been 
developed by NWM to undertake capacity building exercise of farmers, WUAs and field officials 
in water resource and agricultural sectors. 
5.8 The Committee wanted to know whether the guidelines prepared by NWM for 
organising HRD/training/capacity bu ilding/mass awareness programmes have been circulated 
to the States/UTs and about their responses thereof so far.  To this query, the Ministry replied 
as follows:  

41 
 
“NWM guidelines for organizing HRD Capacity Building were circulated to the 
Central/State Go vernment organizations like Water and Land Management Institutes 
(WALMIs) in May, 2016. 
The following institutes submitted the proposals for undertaking training and capacity 
building/mass awareness programmes on water conservation during the financial year 
2016-17: 
Table – 6: Institutes which submitted proposals for training and capacity building 
/ awareness programmes on water conservation during 2016-17. 
Sl.
No 
Organization  Nature of Training/Workshop/Mass 
Awareness  
No. of 
Programm
e  
1 NERIWALM, 
Tezpur 
IWM for WUAs, women & self help 
groups  
4  
2 IGNP, Bikaner Capacity Building / Mass Awareness 
Programmes on IWM  
4  
3 India Network for 
PIM, New Delhi  
Regional Conventions on PIM for WUA 
Presidents at Bangalore, Eastern 
Regions  
2  
4 WALMI, 
Aurangabad  
Workshops/Trainings on WUE in IWM  7  
5 HIRMI, 
Kurukshetra  
Trainings on WUE for farmers  1  
6 NIRD&PR, 
Hyderabad  
Trainings / workshops on PIM, Basin 
level IWM, WRM of over exploited 
areas, WUE for water resource system 
and PIM  
4  
7 NIH, Roorkee  Brain Storming Session on impacts of 
climate change on water resources  
5  
8 WALAMTARI, 
Hyderabad  
WUE, Water Management & Rainwater 
Harvesting  
7  
9 CWPRS, Pune  National Seminar on Water 
Environment  
(in Hindi)  
1  
 WUE- Water use efficiency,    
IWM- Irrigation Water Management 
WUA – Water User Association 
PIM – Participatory Irrigation Management 
 
55 training and capacity building programmes were organized in association with 
various organizations and about 4,420 persons trained during 2015 -16 for various 

42 
 
stakeholders, such as, Government officials/ water users association/ farmers and 
NGOs working in water sector. 
(d) National Water Mission and Efforts on increasing Water Use Efficiency 
5.9 The Ministry also stated that to achieve the goal of “increasing water use efficiency by 
20%”, the NWM has proposed to undertake demonstration project proposals in water sectors 
namely, irrigation, industry, domestic water supply and re -cycle and re -use of  water.  These 
demonstrative projects shall be aimed at increasing water use efficiency in different water 
sectors including state-of-the-art technologies.  NWM has identified the six irrigation projects for 
preparation of DPR, which shall be undertaken after availability of additional funds. 
Table – 7: 6 Demonstrative Irrigation projects identified by NWM for preparation of DPRs 
Sl. No. State Project  
1. Telangana Kaddam Project (CCA-27519 ha.) 
2. Maharashtra Khekranala Project (CCA-3810 ha.) 
3. Rajasthan Chambal Project (CCA-229000 ha.) 
4. Rajasthan Indira Gandhi Nahar Project stage II, (CCA-320000 ha.) 
5. Punjab Project for renovation of Kokari distributary, Abohar 
Branch, Sirhind Canal System (CCA-28756 ha.) 
6. Haryana Project for renovation of the Hisar Major Distributary 
Sub-system of the WJC system (CCA-21270 ha.) 
 
5.10 Asked by the Committee about the progress of the 6 demonstrative irrigation projects 
identified by NWM for preparation of DPRs, the Ministry replied as follows:  
“National Water Mission (NWM), MoWR, RD & GR have identified six Demonstrative 
Irrigation projects for preparation of Detailed Project Reports (DPR) under Goal No. IV 
titled “Increasing Water Use Efficiency by 20 % in six states viz. Telangana (Kad dam 
Project),  Maharashtra (Khekranala Project),  Rajasthan (Indira Gandhi Nahar Project), 
Punjab (Kokri Distributory - Abohar Branch, Sirh ind Canal System), Haryana (Hissar 
Major Distributory sub -system of West Yamuna Canal System) and Madhya Pradesh 

43 
 
(Chambal Canal Project). NWM has requested the respective State Governments to 
notify the Nodal Officers for these projects. Two State Governments (Punjab and 
Rajasthan Irrigation Departments) have nominated the nodal officers. The responses 
from other states are awaited. The targets are to be fixed in consultation with the 
concerned State Governments. 
NWM has awarded a demonstration project work to National Institute of Hydrology 
(NIH), Roorkee, namely, Grey water to blue water -  Natural Treatment Techniques for 
Transforming Wastewater into Sustainable Useable Water” in 2016.  The project is 
being implemented in association with IIT, Mumbai, Uttrakhand Jal Sansthan (UJS) and 
NIH, Roorkee.” 
5.11 The Ministry also informed the Committee that the ‘National Bureau of W ater Use 
Efficiency” (NBWUE) has been proposed to be set up under NWM.  When queried about its 
status, the Ministry submitted: 
“The NBWUE draft proposal was prepared in NWM and approved by the Hon’ble 
Minister (WR, RD &  GR). The proposal was forwarded to the PMO and the cabinet 
secretariat as advance copy in June 2016. The PMO vide I.D note dated 10.08.2016 
made the observations: “In light of the discussion held during the meeting chaired by 
Principal Secretary to the Pr ime Minister on 28.07.2016  the proposal  is returned so as 
to take appropriate action as part of integrated Water Management Efforts. 
  
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation has taken a 
number of activities related to improving water use efficiency/water conservation. 
 
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) to ensure access to some means of 
protective irrigation to all agricultural farms in the coun try to produce ‘per drop more 
crop’.  The guidelines for PMKSY have been revised to cover 10% of the command 
area under efficient irrigation system (drip/sprinkler system).  The main components 
under  PMSKY are: 
(a) Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme (AI BP)- completion of on -going 99 
Major Medium Irrigation (MMI) projects to realize an irrigation potential of 76 lakh 
hectares in a mission mode. 

44 
 
(b) Har Khet ko Pani -Minor Irrigation  (both surface and ground water); Repair, 
Restoration and Renovation of water bodies; Command Area Development; 
Improvement in water management and distribution system; Ground water 
development; Creating and rejuvenating traditional water storage systems . To restore 
and augment storage capacities of water bodies, and also to recove r and extend their 
lost irrigation potential. 
1. A scoping study for a National Water Use Efficiency Improvement Support 
Program for Major/Medium Irrigation Projects has been completed with technical 
assistance from Asian Development Bank (ADB).  Two pilot pr ojects, Dharoi Irrigation 
Project in Gujarat and Sanjay Sarovar Irrigation Project in Madhya Pradesh, have been 
taken up under Phase-II of the study. 
2. Baseline studies of 21 major/medium water resource projects to assess the 
present status of water use effi ciency have been initiated in March, 2016 in the states 
Assam, Manipur, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and Maharashtra in association with 
Water and Land Management Institutes (WALMIs).  
NERIWALM, Tezpur – 5 irrigation projects in the North-East region (Manipur, Assam).  
WALAMTARI, Hyderabad - 10 irrigation projects (5 in Telengana and 5 in Andhra 
Pradesh).  
WALMI, Aurangabad – 6 irrigation projects in the State of Maharashtra.  
 
3. National Water Mission, MoWR, RD & GR has awarded a study on establishing 
benchmarks for industrial water use to assist policy for enhancing industrial water use 
efficiency in India to The Energy and Research Institute, New Delhi. The study would 
focus on scoping exercise, prelim inary baseline assessment of water & comprehensive 
water audit/ benchmarking in two industrial sectors i.e. Thermal power plants & textile 
industries.” 
  

45 
 
PART II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS  
LOW PER CAPITA WATER STORAGE AND AVAILABILITY IN INDIA 
1. The Committee note that the per capita live water storage in India is about 209 m 3 
(cubic meters) based on population of 2011 census, which is far below 1000 cubic 
meters, the minimum threshold for identifying water -scarcity condition of a locality, 
State or country.  The Committee also note that as per the information provided by the 
Ministry of Water Resources, River De velopment and Ganga Rejuvenation , Russia and 
Australia can sustain consecutive droughts for about  4 and 3 years respectively. 
However, India cannot sustain drought beyond one non -Monsoon season due to low per 
capita stor age, and as such, thus may face acute stress , if any year happen to be a 
drought year.  Further, whereas the average water availability in the country remains 
more or less fixed according to the natural hydrologic cycle, the per capita availability is 
reducing progressively owing to increasing population, from 2209 cu. m. (cubic meter) 
per year in 1991 to about 1545 cu. m. per year in 2011.  The Committee note with concern 
that the country is steadily hurtling towards a great water crisis in the near future due to 
the prevailing near water-scarcity situation in the country as well as the regressive trend 
towards declining per capita water availability, specially since 1991.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that urgent, specific initiatives be made by the  Government to 
increase the live per capita water storage as well as per capita water availability in India.   
In this connection, the Committee note the Ministry’s observation that creation of 
storage-based water resources projects on appropriate sites can result in increased per 
capita live storage capacity - without compromising the ecological balance in the 

46 
 
country.  The Committee therefore, strongly recommend the Government to (i) compile 
information / data regarding the large and medium dams / reservoirs presently under 
implementation in the country separately, (ii) make a review of the status of their 
execution including the bottlenecks (if any) hampering the timely completion, and (iii) 
make a time -frame for completion of each of these large/medium dams or reservoirs .  
The Committee desire to be apprised of  the initiatives taken by the Government in this 
regard. 
DECLINE IN GROUND WATER LEVELS 
2. The Committee note that in certain areas of India, there has been (i ) increase in 
pumping depths, drastic reduction in wells / tube wells yields and enormous rise in the 
cost of pumping ground water, (ii) widespread and acute scarcity of ground water in 
summer months for irrigation and drinking uses, and (iii) increase in fluoride content in 
certain areas and increase in salinity in the coastal areas . As per data compiled by 
Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA), there are 90% blocks in Punjab where ground 
water have been extracted and also that ‘ Water’ being a State subjec t, 100% subsidy on 
power in Punjab is being provided to the Agriculture S ector, despite the fact that the 
Kirit Parikh Committee Report (2010) had suggested that water should not be treated as 
such - being a common resource.  The Committee are further to note that perturbed that 
in Punjab, out of 138 assessment units, 110 have been classified as ‘Over -exploited’, 4 
‘Critical’, 2 ‘Semi -Critical’ and 22 ‘safe’ as per the Ground Water Resource Estimate 
Report, 2011, one  of the major reasons for which is being attributed to shifting to water 
intensive crop in the State, which has resulted in depletion of ground water table in 
many parts due to over-exploitation, imposing financial burden on farmers - who need to 

47 
 
deepen their wells and replace their  pump sets an d on State Governments - whose 
subsidy burden for electricity supply increase due to the provision of free electric ity in 
the State for agricultural  connections.  The Committee are convinced that a major factor 
responsible for the scenario has been the absence of a clear-cut policy on ground water 
extraction till now.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate the recommendation (no. 6) 
contained in their 5th Report (16th Lok Sabha on “Review of Ground Water Scenario, need 
for a comprehensive policy and measur es to address problems in the country with 
particular reference to (i) Dark Blocks; and (ii) Contamination of underground water by 
certain industries” viz. that the Government should come out with a well -defined policy 
on ground water extraction.   The prac tice of free supply of electricity to farmers for 
extraction of ground water be regulated with proper accountability by the States .  The 
Committee of the considered view that an expert panel needs to be set up by the 
Government for making a scientific study of the impact of excessive withdrawal of 
ground water due to paddy cultivation in the State of Punjab – which should also 
suggest remedial measures to address the issue of wasteful draft of water fo r agriculture 
in the entire country.   The Committee would like to be apprised of action taken in this 
regard. 
TRADITIONAL WATER RECHARGE / HARVESTING PRACTICES 
3. The Committee observe from the information provided by the Ministry that India 
had a rich tradit ion of water harvesting , which is more than two millennia  old, viz. the 
Kuhals of Jammu, Kulsi of Himachal Pradesh, Guls of Uttarakhand , Pat of Maharashtra, 
Zings of Ladakh,, Zabos of Nagaland, Eris of Tamil Nadu, Keres of Karnataka, Tankas / 
Kundis / Bawdis / Jhalaras , etc. of Rajasthan.  Sadly, however, these age -old traditional 

48 
 
rain-harvesting systems have fallen into disuse with the introduction of piped water 
supply system.  In this connection, the Committee,  further note that when the 
information pertaining the status of indigenous water harvesting methods / practices in 
India including their contribution to water resources conservation and management was 
sought, the Ministry have replied that about 6 lakh tanks / storages in India are used for 
minor irrigation (MI) schemes as per 4 th Minor Irrigation Census, out of which 5 lakh are 
in use at present.  The Committee also  categorically desired to know whether any study 
has been made so far regarding the efficacy, merits, viability or sustainability o f 
traditional water recharge / harvesting techniques and also to state the efforts made by 
the Government to preserve, improve and develop the indigenous water recharge / 
harvesting methods in India.  To this query, however, the Ministry have not furnished the 
relevant reply but have merely cited the various objectives of the scheme of Repair, 
Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies being implemented by the 
Government of India since the 10 th Plan.  The Committee deplore the cavalier attitude of 
the Ministry, and they recommend that the Ministry immediately take steps to institute a 
panel of experts, professionals drawn from various reputed institutions in the country 
for undertaking a study on the efficacy, merits, viability or sustainability of tra ditional 
water recharge / harvesting techniques in India  as existing now and apprise the 
Committee of the findings of their study .  The Committee also desire that the Ministry 
hold consultations with various States / UTs with a view to devise ways and mean s to 
preserve, improve and develop indigenous water recharge / harvesting methods in  the 
country that have fallen into disuse for various reasons.   The Committee would like to be 
updated about action taken in this matter. 

49 
 
MODERN WATER CONSERVATION TECHNIQUES – DRIP AND SPRINKLER SYSTEMS 
4. The Committee observe that Drip and Sprinkler irrigation systems constitute the 
chief modern water conservation techniques in India.  In Drip irrigation, water is 
delivered at the root zone of the crops through emitters like drippers, micro sprinklers, 
micro jets, misters, fan jets, micro sprayers, foggers , etc.  This method has less water 
requirement resulting in water saving, higher fertilizer application efficiency, energy 
conservation, higher water use efficiency, and is feasible in different terrains and 
suitable for problematic soils and prevention of water logging.  Sprinkler irrigation 
system requires energized pump sets, irrigate more uniformly than gravity systems, 
require much less maintenance when compared with con ventional pressurized irrigation 
systems, eliminates seepage and evaporation losses, has no requirement of skilled 
manpower, no expensive land levelling, and is suitable for irrigation of crops with high 
density and particularly effective in sandy undulati ng terrains and widely used for 
cereals, pulses, seeds and other field crops.  The Committee are happy to note that State 
Governments are encouraging adoption of these water saving techniques through 
provision of subsidies to farmers on purchase of these s ystems.  The Committee further 
note that as per the 12 th Plan guidelines of Command Area Development and Water 
Management (CAD&WM) programme, a minimum of 10% of Culturable Command Area 
(CCA) of each project is to be covered through micro irrigation and the Central 
Assistance to the tune of 50% is provided to the States for development of infrastructure 
to facilitate use of sprinkler / drip irrigation.  The Committee also note that through 
‘fertigation’ process in sprinkler / drip irrigation systems, more efficiency is achieved by 
combining fertiliser as well as water soluble fertilizers, thereby increasing fertilizer use 

50 
 
efficiency from 80 to 90 per cent.  Taking cognizance of the paramount need for 
conservation of water in India through traditional as well as modern methods, the 
Committee desire that micro irrigation comprising Drip and Sprinkler irrigation 
techniques be taken up in the country as a popular movement with a great sense of 
urgency by bot h the Central and the State Governments and proactive action needs 
initiated by the Government in this regard .  The Committee also recommend that apart 
from the provision of incentives provided through CAD&WM programme by the 
Government, the Ministry should also come up with novel initiatives to incentivise the 
States/UTs to adopt Sprinkler and Drip irrigation systems for achieving water use 
efficiency in agriculture and other allied sectors of the country without loss of further 
precious time, and als o take steps to promote ‘fertigation’ across the country .  They 
would further strongly recommend the Government to promote and propagate Drip and 
Sprinkler irrigation methods through the print and electronic media such as television, 
cinema, internet etc. so as to create necessary awareness among the farming 
community as well as general public .  They would like to be apprised of  the progress 
made in this direction through the initiatives taken by the Ministry. 
AQUIFER MAPPING 
5. The Committee  note that under the National Aquifer Management (NAQUIM) 
programme initiated since 2012, only an area of 5.5 lakh sq. km. has so far been mapped 
and 23 lakh sq. km. remain to be mapped, for which Rs. 3000 crore is needed.  The 
reason for under -achievement in the implementation of NAQUIM programme, according 
to the Ministry, was delay in commencement of the programme due to late approval of 
the scheme in September, 2013.  The Ministry also informed that NAQUIM programme 

51 
 
has been taken up in 8.89 lakh sq. km . during 12th Plan, focussing on ground water over -
exploitation, water scarcity in Bundelkhand and arsenic contamination and that out of 
8.89 lakh sq. km., an area of 5.25 lakh sq. km. has been re-prioritized in the water 
stressed areas of the States of Ha ryana, Punjab, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, 
Telangana, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, NCT Delhi and Bu ndelkhand region for aquifer 
mapping and preparation of aquifer -wise ground water management plans.  The 
Committee have also been apprised that (i) review of the work done under NAQUIM 
programme is being carried out at CGWB through a two -tier evaluation mechanism,  (ii) 
regular progress is being reviewed at Ministry -level including the weekly meeting taken 
by Minister of Water Resources, River Development and  Ganga Rejuvenation, (iii) State 
Ground Water Coordination Committees (SGWCC) are geared up as per direction of 
National Inter -Departmental Steering Committee (NISC) for Aquifer Mapping and 
Management Programme, and (iv) workshops are being organised by CGWB involving 
Central / State Government departments, academic institutions, experts , etc. to have 
regular feedback on activities being carried under NAQUIM.  Despite these tall claims, 
the Committee are disappointed that although a total outlay of Rs. 3319 crore has been 
made for 12 th Plan (2012 -2017) for the scheme of Ground Water Management and 
Regulation with Aquifer Mapping as one of the components, a total expenditure of only 
Rs. 146.48 crore has been made on Aquifer Mapping upto June, 2016.  The Committee 
are convinced that special measures are desperately needed to ensure smooth progress 
in the implementation of NAQUIM programme in the country.  Noting that the 12 th Plan 
(2012-17) is s oon coming to an end without commensurate achievements being made 
under NAQUIM in the country, the Committee desire that they be apprised of the 

52 
 
physical and financial achievements made under NAQUIM in 5.25 lakh sq. km. re -
prioritised, water -stressed areas  till date.   They also desire that effective measures / 
methods be devised and put in place by the Government to ensure timely, optimum 
utilization of budgetary outlays made for Aquifer Mapping under the sch eme of Ground 
Water Management and  Regulation before the end of the 12 th Plan period.  Additionally, 
the issue of late approval of the National Aquifer Management (NAQUIM) programme be 
addressed on priority so that  this problem at least  do not plague its implementation 
during the ensuring 13th Plan, if the scheme is proposed to be carried over  further. In the 
opinion of the Committee, the  monitoring and evaluation works of the programme also 
needs to be intensified by the Government during 2017 -18 in order to speed up its 
implementation and achieve targets-oriented results. 
GROUND WATER IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMME 
6. The Committee observe that a Central sector scheme called ‘Ground Water 
Improvement Programme’ is proposed to be launched shortly by the Government with 
budgetary support fr om the Central Government and loan from the World Bank in the 
ration of 50:50.  Subject to approval by the Ministry of Finance and the Union Cabinet, 
the scheme is to be of six years duration, and would have inherent linkages with 
National Hydrology Project  (NHP) and National Aquifer Management (NAQUIM) 
programme.  Initially, five States, viz. Rajasthan, Haryana , Maharashtra, Gujarat and 
Karnataka, having some of the most heavily exploited ground water areas in India 
confronting serious water availability an d quality issues, have been selected for 
inclusion in the Scheme, which also has provision for social audit and third party 
verification.  Given the serious ground water scenario prevailing in the country, the 

53 
 
Committee recommend the Government to ensure t hat the ‘Ground Water Improvement 
Programme’ as proposed is launched in the aforesaid six States of the country without 
further delay by obtaining necessary approval / clearance for it from the Ministry of 
Finance and Union Cabinet.   The Committee also des ire the Government to ensure that 
the modalities of implementation, detailed model of funding, approval of the specific 
projects to be included under the Programme, monitoring and evaluation system of the 
scheme be worked out at  the earliest and be forward ed to the States for eliciting their 
responses.  Additionally, the Committee also recommend that apart from these six 
States, the Ministry should explore ways and means to include the other remaining 
States in ‘Ground Water Improvement Programme’ in due course.   The Committee desire 
to be apprised of progress made in the matter , after the presentation of this Report to 
the House. 
WATER BUDGETING 
7. According to the Minister of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation, ‘water budgeting’ is an accounting of all the water utilized by the system 
that flows into and out of a project area.  Based on the availability of water as per the 
rainfall data, allocation of water to various sectors 
(irrigation/agriculture/domestic/industrial) is made for the year specially for Rabi and 
Kharif crops.  The Ministry also informed that proper water budgeting is helpful to 
conserve water from rainfall and surface run off to the extent possible in view of the 
erratic and highly variable duration and amount of Monsoon rainfall in different parts of 
the country.  In this connection, the Committee note that the National Water Mission 
(NWM) has requested all the States / UTs to prepare State Specific Action Plan (SSAP) 

54 
 
for water sector linking with State Action Plans  for Climate Change, as a result of wh ich 
six States, viz. Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Gujarat, West Bengal, Uttarakhand and 
Telangana have initiated their State Specific Action Plans in the first phase and other 
States are to follow.  The Committee also note that State / UT Governments have been 
asked to set up Water Regulatory Authorities to regulate the use of water and promote 
water conservation, and the Governments of Maharashtra and Gujarat have established 
such Authorities in their respective States. Having fully convinced that ‘water budgeting’ 
is an efficacious technique for judicious and efficient use of water in the country, the 
Committee strongly recommend that appropriate guidelines be issued by the 
Government to all States/UTs, Central Institutions/bodies and local bodies to promote 
and popularize the concept of ‘water budgeting’ all through the country, and necessary 
steps be immediately initiat ed by the Ministry in this direction under intimation to this 
Committee.  The Committee also recommend that the Ministry vigorously pursue with all 
the remaining States/UTs to prepare State -Specific Action Plan (SSAP) for water sector 
by linking them with State Action Plans for Climate Change  - in compliance with the goal 
of National Water Mission within a specified time -frame.  Side by side, steps be taken by 
the Government to ensure that all the other remaining States/UTs duly set up Water 
Regulatory Authorities for regulation of the use of water and also its conservation on the 
pattern already done in the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat, and  also targets to  
achieve thereby be set up  by the Government for compliance by all the States/UTs.  The 
Committee would like to be informed of further action taken in this regard. 
 
 

55 
 
WATER USE EFFICIENCY 
8. The Committee observe that for improving water conservation, the Central Water 
Commission (CWC) of Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation has been keeping eye on performance overview and management 
improvement of Major and Medium Irrigation (MMI) projects of the country.  It has so far 
appraised water use efficiency of 35 irrigati on projects and 131 performance evaluation 
studies and the findings there from were conveyed to the respective project authorities 
for taking up corrective measures.  The CWC has also been encouraging water auditing 
and benchmarking of irrigation projects b y publishing general guidelines for it for the 
States as also the Guidelines for improving water use efficiency in irrigation, domestic 
and industrial sectors.  The Committee further note that under the ‘Per Drop More Crop’ 
component of the Prime Minister’s Krishi Sinchai Yojana (PMKSY), promotion of efficient 
water conveyance and precision water application, installation of devices like drips, 
sprinklers, pivots and rain -guns in the farms is envisaged.  The Committee are 
convinced that the time has come fo r the Government to adopt proactive steps to 
promote water use efficiency in the country, specially in the agricultural sector.  They, 
therefore, recommend that additional Major and Medium Irrigation projects apart from 
the 35 irrigation projects already  undertaken, may be taken up by the CWC for 
performance appraisal and overview in regard to water use efficiency during 2017 -18.  
Noting further that 131 performance evaluation studies and their findings pertaining to 
irrigation projects were already conveye d to the respective Project Authorities for taking 
up corrective measures, the Committee urge the Ministry not only to undertake and 
forward performance evaluation studies of  Major and Minor Irrigation projects but also 

56 
 
to endeavour to obtain relevant feed back from the concerned Project Authorities for 
perusal.  The Committee are also fully convinced that with the general increasing trends 
towards water scarcity in the country in the present times, it is pertinent to think that the 
time has come for the country to go for bold initiatives toward the irrigation practices, 
and they, therefore, strongly recommend that the Ministry / Government institute a study 
on the viability of introducing piped -water supply to the  fields - which will definitely 
reduce losses in water conveyance losses in canals, reduce water -logging and ensure 
water availability to tail -end farmers as well on a large -scale.  The Committee further 
desire that performance evaluation (State/UT -wise) regarding the phy sical and financial 
achievements under PMKSY till date be made by the Ministry / Government and the 
results achieved thereby be furnished to them at the earliest. 
WATER USERS ASSOCIATIONS 
9. The Committee note the Ministry’s observation that unless the water users / 
Water Users Association (WUAs) are sensitivized for efficient water use practices and 
roped in for water conservation, the on -ground improvement is a bit difficult , which 
thereby underlines the need to have lucrative incentivizing provisions to make them 
active stakeholders rather than the end users.  The Committee fully concur with the view 
of the Ministry on this issue, and they strongly recommend that the Ministr y bring out a 
Model Bill to be adopted by all States / UTs , which would provide legal framework for 
enactment of Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM) by them.   The Committee also 
desire that the Ministry immediately enter into consultations with all t he States/UTs for 
ensuring the enactment of PIM expeditiously in their respective territories providing for 
formation of a robust, efficient network of Water Users Association (WUAs) all over the 

57 
 
country.  The Committee would further like to be updated abo ut the status of 
participatory approach to management of water resources, i.e. enactment of PIM 
legislation and formation and functioning of WUAs in different States/UTs of the country.  
They also strongly recommend that a periodic monitoring and review mechanism on the 
working and performance of WUAs be worked out by the Mi nistry so as to eliminate the 
shortcomings noticed in their functioning, if any. 
 
COMMAND AREA DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT 
10. As per the Min istry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation, a minimum 10% of Cultural Command Area (CCA) of each project is to 
cover through micro irrigation under the 12th Plan guidelines.  Further,  Central 
Assistance (C A) to the tune of 50% is provided to the States for development of 
infrastructure to facilitate use of sprinkler / drip irrigation systems as an alternative to 
on-farm development works.  Three schemes have been sanctioned in respect of micro 
irrigation works in 12 th Plan, viz. Development of pressure irrigation in command area of 
six lift schemes of Indira Gandhi N ahar Pariyojana (IGNP), Stage -II, Rajasthan, Kandi 
Canal CAD&WM project, Punjab, and Kotla Branch, Part -II, Punjab.  Whereas CA of a 
mere Rs. 10.85 crore and Rs. 4.01 crore have been released in respect of six lift irrigation 
schemes udner IGNP, Stage -II (Rajasthan) and Kotla Branch, Part -II, (Punjab), no such 
release has been made for Kandi Canal CAD&WM  project (Punjab) although 12 th Plan is 
shortly coming to an end, whi ch speak volumes about the casualness with which the 
execution of the CAD&WM projects / schemes are being done by the Government.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly  recommend the Government to take immediate steps for 

58 
 
release of the full amount of estimat ed Central Assistance for each of the three 
CAD&WM projects / schemes within this financial year (2017 -18), viz. six lift schemes of 
IGNP, Stage – II, Rajasthan (Rs. 1658.80 crore) Kandi canal CAD&WM project, Punjab 
(Rs. 73.44 crore) and Kotla  Branch, Part-II project, Punjab (Rs. 38.325 crore)  and apprise 
them of action taken in this regard .  The Committee also note that the Central Water 
Commission have undertaken 35 (thirty -five) studies to make a realistic assessment of 
water use efficiency for completed major / medium projects under Plan scheme of the 
Ministry, the recommendations / results of the study reports about interventions 
required / step to be taken up, have reportedly been sent to the concerned State 
Governments for taking necessar y action .  The Committee would like to know the 
specific follow-up action taken by the concerned States where such recommendations / 
results of study reports had been sent by the Government, and they also desire that the 
Ministry impress upon these State G overnments to accord priority to taking the required 
remedial action for each of these projects.   They would also desire the Ministry to take 
new initiatives with the States for improving water use efficiency in the form of 
guidelines / directives which wo uld broadly include these measures, i.e. volumetric  
measured supply of water at field levels to be monitored by WUAs, levy of certain 
minimum water tariff to discourage wasteful water withdrawal from irrigation systems, 
enactment of PIM Act with empowermen t of Water Users’ Associations (WUAs), proper 
maintenance and management of surface water irrigation system so as to give an 
assured water supply for each field of the command area .  The Committee would like to 
be apprised of action in this regard. 
 

59 
 
CLIMATE CHANGE AND WATER CONSERVATION 
11. The Committee observe that the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development 
and Ganga Rejuvenation have initiated ‘Climate Change, Impact Study on Eight River 
Basins’ which would assess the impact of climate change o n water resources specially 
on eight river basins of the country and global models are to be statistically and 
dynamically to be downscaled in the range of 30 years, 50 years and 100 years from 
now, and assessing that can help in framing of plan for the conservation of water.  
Accordingly, study proposals have been invited from reputed academic institutions like 
IITs, NITs, IISc, NIH, etc. for eight river basins, viz. Mahanadi, Luni, Tapi, Satluj, 
Subarnarekha, Sabarmati, Mahi and areas of inland drainage, Tadri to Kanyakumari river 
basin.  The duration of the studies would vary from 2 to 3 years.  The Committee  
strongly feel that the threat to climate change is now considered as an established fact.  
The Committee are happy to note the Ministry’s reply that research studies have been 
initiated on assessing impacts of climate change specially on water resources and on 
different adaptation and mitigation approaches, which would contribute to water sector 
in several ways, viz. (i) the regional climate scenarios  will guide the policy makers for 
future planning, (ii) the modelling results will provide estimate of the future water 
availability in the basin , and (iii) the model results might be used for assessing the 
effectiveness of the existing flood fighting str uctures and other infrastructures like 
bridges, weirs in the area under the flooding condition, (iv) performance  of reservoirs 
would be evaluated to assess the impact of climate change and adaptation measures will 
be suggested, and (v) the adaptation strat egies will help the local population to minimize 
the risk due to changing climate.  The Committee urge the Ministry to tackle the issue of 

60 
 
the impact of climate change on water resources conservation in the country with all 
seriousness, and they, therefore, recommend the Ministry to enlist support from not only 
the academic institutions but other NGOs/individual experts well -versed in the subject 
so that a pragmatic solution could be found to meet the adverse effects of climate 
change on water resources con servation.  The Committee also urge the Ministry to get 
the studies on “Climate Change, Impact Study on Eight River Basins” and related 
research studies  initiated by it and completed in a time -bound manner, which would 
serve as a catalyst for the Ministry  to evolve measures aimed at holistic conservation of 
India’s water resources.  They desire to be informed of the action taken in respect of the 
above. 
CROPPING PATTERN AND WATER CONSERVATION 
12. The Committee note the Ministry’s reply that change of cropping pattern by 
farmers, specially from less water demand crops to high water demands crops such as 
sugar cane and paddy induces failure of the designed irrigation system to irrigate the 
entire command area, resulting in the tail -end farmers being deprived of i rrigation water.  
Hence, it is necessary to enforce the proposed cropping pattern in the project area for 
effective management of water so that each filed in command could get adequate water.  
The Committee also note that State Governments are encouraging adoption of water -
saving technologies, such as sprinkler and drip irrigation systems, through provision of 
subsidies to the farmers on the purchase of these systems, which are also 
recommended for achieving higher irrigation efficiencies and could be used for very 
small-sized holdings.  However, the adoption of these technologies by poor farmers 
would depend heavily on the supply of information, material  and service for installation.  

61 
 
In this connection, the Committee note that para 6.5 of the National Wate r Policy, 2012 
contains provision which stresses water saving in irrigation use, viz. “ water saving in 
irrigation use States is of paramount importance.  Methods like aligning cropping pattern 
with natural resources endowments,  micro irrigation (drip, spri nkler etc.), automated 
irrigation operation, evaporation – transpiration reduction, etc., should be encouraged 
and incentivized.”  Keeping in view the fact that the bulk of farmers in India are poor who 
may not be in a position to avail of the tools for wa ter-saving technologies, the 
Committee desire the Ministry to devise innovative steps to incentivise the farmers for 
adoption of these water -saving technologies in a big way, and also to explore avenues 
for encouraging farmers to stick to the agreed croppi ng pattern for effective water 
management so that each field in the command area including tail -end farmers get 
adequate water supply throughout the year .  Assuming further that adequate finances 
may not be available either with the States/UTs or farmers, the Committee also 
recommend the Government to encourage private sector participation in agriculture and 
water resources sector specially in  the micro irrigation.  The Committee also desire the 
Ministry to make a study on the impact of cropping pattern on water conservation in the 
country with the help of individual experts / professionals  and research institutes under 
the Government for  identifying the shortcomings noticed and advising solution so that 
the results of such a study may be disseminated to the  States/UTs, farmers, water users, 
etc. for their benefits. The Committee would like to be informed about the action taken in 
this regard. 
 
 

62 
 
PARTICIPATORY GROUND WATER MANAGEMENT IN MAHARASHTRA 
13. The Committee are informed that the village community in the three (3) districts 
of Satara, Jalna and Beed in Maharashtra had successfully adopted efficient irrigation 
practices, change in cropping pattern from sugar to low water -consuming crops on the 
demand side and also adopted artificial recharge to enhance the yield of aquifer 
completing 116 recharge structures (55 in Satara, 30 in Jalna and 31 in Beed).  The 
aquifer-based participatory ground water management pilot projects in these three 
districts was undertaken under Maharashtra Water Sector Improvement Project (MWSIP), 
aided by World Bank, and implement ed in a total of 52  villages of these districts within 
the tenure from 2005 to 2013  with the State Government play ing a crucial role and 
initiating project activities with the mapping and delineation of the aquifer in the selected 
areas and then prepar ing the aquifer based water balance of the project area with 
community participation and with facilitation of a non -Governmental Organisation 
(NGO).  The  local community in each village was organised into Gram Panchayat Level 
Committees (GPLCs), having their own by -laws, whose Executive Committees were 
elected through democratic elections.  All the GPLCs in the project pilot aquifer area 
after their format ion, were federated into Ground Water Management Association 
(GWMA).  The GPLCs and GWMA deliberated on current ground water situation and 
adopted appropriate intervention to improve ground water efficiency, reduce ground 
water extraction and arrest declin ing of wate r levels.  The community manages  aquifer 
with the help of NGO as per the Ground Water Management Action Plan (GWMAP) under 
the technical supervision of District Technical Support Group composed of officers from 
various disciplines and Departments like water resources, water supply, agriculture and 

63 
 
GSDA.  Based on the capacity of the aquifer and availability of surplus runoff, the 
artificial recharge structures were finalized.  The Committee are happy to know that the 
same aquifer based participat ory ground water management is being replicated in ‘Jal -
swarajya’ project (of Maharashtra Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Department) - 
which is being implemented in 7 districts of the State, and that the same model is being 
propagated through the Maharashtra Ground Water (Development and Management) Act, 
2009, which came into force w.e.f. 1 st June, 2014.  The Committee have also been 
apprised of the successful implementation of ground water management by community 
participation / Gram Panchayat in Hiware Bazar, Ahmednagar district, Maharashtra 
having a population of 1233 (2011), which was achieved through water budgeting leading 
to change in cropping pattern and use of Drip/Sprinkler irrigation on the demand side 
and construction of rai n water harvesting, e.g. earthe n bunds, percolation  tanks, stone 
bunds, check dams, trenches etc., afforestation and protection recharge zones, and 
revival o f water bodies on the supply side.  The Government of Maharashtra was 
involved in providing the needed infrastructure facility, capacity building, data 
generation for water budgeting.  This data was used for participatory ground water 
management with activ e involvement of villagers as per the decisions of the Gram 
Sabha.  The Committee are heartened to note that the initiatives under participatory 
ground water management at Hiware Bazar, Ahmednagar, Maharashtra have greatly 
improved the socio -economic conditions of the village, and the village was declared an 
‘Ideal Village’ by the Government of Maharashtra  and, while during 1992, there were 168 
families Below Poverty Line (BPL).  But by 2008, there was not a single BPL family left.  
The Committee recommend the Government to earnestly explore the viability of 

64 
 
replicating such models in the other remaining States/UTs so that concrete 
improvements are visible on ground water front in the near future, specially in those 
States/UTs facing ground water over-exploitation, water scarcity and arsenic / fluoride 
contamination – areas having serious ground water availability and quality issues .  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of initiatives taken by the Government in this 
regard. 
NATIONAL WATER MISSION AND STUDY OF IMPACT OF CLIMATE CHANGE ON WATER 
RESOURCES 
 
14. The Committee observe that to achieve the goal for “comprehensive water data 
base in public domain and assessment of the impact of climate change on water 
resources” 878 Hydrological Observation S tations (H OS) have been established in 
different basins, and 800 new HO S have been targeted to be established by Central 
Water Commission (CWC) in 12 th Plan.  The Committee also note that CWC has a target 
of 200 Automatic satellite -based telemetry system for financial year 2016 -17 for 
hydrological network, real time information, improved water resource assessment, 
planning and flood forecasting, out of w hich 57 telemetry systems have been achieved 
upto December, 2016.  Besides, the Committee have been informed that studies of 
impact of climate change on water resources for seven river basins (Mahanadi, Mahi, 
Luni, Tapi, Sabarmati, Subarnarekha and west fl owing rivers from Tadri to Kanyakumari) 
in association with research institutes like IITs, NITs, IISc and NIH have been approved, 
and work on a study on statistical downscaling of global climate models for the river 
basins (approved in 2016)  has been award ed.  The Committee desire that the Ministry 
chalk out action plan for achieving the goal of 800 new hydrological stations to be set up 
by CWC during 12 th Plan and also the target of 200 Automatic satellite based telemetry 

65 
 
system during  2016-17 as planned b y CWC.   Further, progress of work pertaining to 
studies on impact on climate change on water resources for the said seven river system 
for which work has been awarded to the project implementing agencies, may also be 
constantly  monitored by the Ministry and apprised to the Committee .  In addition, the 
Committee also note that, NWM in association wi th the Asian Development Bank (A DB) 
has completed the study “ Operational Research to support mainstreaming of integrated 
flood manage ment under climate change” with focus on community participation, and 
two pilot studies have been completed for Burhi Gandak basin in Bihar and Brahmani 
Baitarani basin in Odisha for which the project reports have been sent to State 
Governments for taking necessary action / implementation.  The Committee would like 
the Ministry to keep tab on the matter so that a tangible outcome emerge s from these 
two pilot studies and an awareness on the impact of climate change on water resources 
related issues is created in the country as a whole. 
NATIONAL WATER MISSION AND CITIZEN AND STATE ACTION ON WATER 
CONSERVATION AND TRAINING, CAPACITY -BUILDING AND AWARENESS 
PROGRAMMES 
 
15. The Committee note that the National Co nvention of Water Users Associations 
(WUAs) was held at New Delhi in November, 2014 and three Regional conventions aimed 
at “promotion of citizen and state action for water conservation, augmentation and 
preservation” were organised at Ludhiana on 25-26th August, 2015, at Aurangabad on 8 -
9th January, 2016 and at Bengaluru on 24 -25th September, 2016 respectively wherein 
several outcomes were noticed, viz. capacity building of representatives for WUAs on 
PIM water conservation and improving water use efficien cy, identification of problems 
faced by WUAs and recommendations made.  The Committee desire that such events be 

66 
 
organized on a permanent basis on rotational basis in every region of the country in 
order to highlight the need for having a robust WUAs at St ate levels .  The Committee 
also note that under MoU  entered by the NWM with Tata Institute of Social Science 
(TISS), Mumbai, the NWM has circulated guidelines for organising HRD Capacity 
building to the Central / State Government organisations like Water and Land 
Management Institutes  (WALMIS) in May, 2016  and 55 training / capacity building 
programmes have been organised in association with various organisations and about 
4,420 persons trained during 2015 -16 for various stakeholders, such as, Government 
officials / water users association / farmers and NGO s working in water sector.  The 
Committee appreciate these initiatives of the Ministry, and they recommend tha t such 
training be organised for the elected representatives  of the people  at the village 
Panchayat level, such as Sarpanch, village ward members and also Corporators in urban 
local bodies as well , and necessary initiative be taken by the Ministry in this regard as 
the earliest. 
NATIONAL WATER MISSION AND EFFORTS ON INCREASING WATER USE EFFICIENCY 
16. The Committee observe that in order to achieve the g oal of “increasing water use 
efficiency by 20 %”, the National Water Mission has proposed to undertake proposals in 
water sector, namely irrigation, industry, domestic water supply and re -cycle and re-use 
of water, and six (6) demonstrative irrigation projects have been identified for 
preparation of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs), which shall be undertaken after 
availability of additional funds , viz. Telangana (Kaddam Project), Maharashtra 
(Khekranala Project), Rajasthan (Indira Gandhi Nahar Projet), P unjab (Kokri Distributory 
– Abohar Branch, Sirhind Canal System), Haryana (Hissar Major Distributory sub -system 

67 
 
of West Yamuna Canal System), and Madhya Pradesh (Chambal Canal Project). The 
Committee also note that the NWM had requested the respective Stat e Governments to 
notify the Nodal Officers for these projects, out of which two State Governments, i.e. 
Punjab and Rajasthan have done the nomination and the responses from other States 
are awaited, after which the targets are to be fixed in consultation w ith the concerned 
State Governments . The Committee desire the Ministry to pursue with the State 
Governments of the remaining States, viz. Telangana, Maharashtra, Haryana, and 
Madhya Pradesh for ensuring expeditious steps in notifying Nodal Officers for the said 
demonstrative irrigation projects  under NWM . They also strongly recommend that 
specific targets be fixed to achieve the goal of execution of demonstrative irrigation 
projects by all the concerned six States after holding necessary consultations with them. 
The Committee further note that the draft  proposal for the setting up of National Bureau 
of Water Use Efficiency (NBWUE) had been prepared in NWM and the proposa l approved 
by the Minister, Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation was 
forwarded to the Prime Minister Office (PMO) and Cabinet Secretariat in June, 2016. 
However, the PMO has returned the proposal on 28.07.2016, with the remark to take 
appropriate action  as a part of Integrated Water Management efforts. The Committee 
desire to see  a clear -cut policy outcome regarding the Ministry’s proposal to create 
NBWUE so that a national framework directives on water use efficiency may be framed 
at the earliest and is sued by the Centre to all the Sates/UTs in the near future . The 
Committee also note that baseline studies of 21 major/medium water resources projects 
to assess the status of water use efficiency was initiated in March , 2016 in the States of 
Assam, Manipur, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and Maharashtra in association with Water 

68 
 
and Land Management Institutes (WALMIS) and that NWM has awarded a study on 
establishing benchmarks for industrial use to assist policy for enhancing industrial 
water use efficiency in In dia to ‘The Energy and  Research Institute’, New Delhi, which 
would focus on scoping exercise, preliminary baseline assessment of water and 
comprehensive water audit/benchmarking in two industrial sectors, i.e. thermal power 
plants and textile industries. The Committee desire the Ministry to expedite  completion 
of these studies and apprise them of the outcome . The Committee would, however, also 
like to be informed of the progress made in this regard.  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                HUKUM SINGH, 
8 March, 2017                                                          Chairperson,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
17 Phalguna, 1938 (Saka)          Standing Committee on Water Resources 
  
 

  
 
ANNEXURE - I 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES (2015-16) HELD 
ON TUESDAY, 24 MAY 2016 
  
The Committee sat from 1 500 hours to 1630 hours in Committee Room 'D', Ground Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  
Shri Hukum Singh – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Maganti Murali Mohan 
3. Dr. Sidhant Mohapatra 
4. Shri Rodmal Nagar 
 5. Shri Sanjay Kaka Patil 
 6. Shri Vijaysinh Mohite Patil 
7. Smt. Aparupa Poddar 
 8. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
9. Smt. V. Sathyabama 
10. Shri Lallu Singh     
       
 RAJYA SABHA 
11. Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
12. Shri Hanumantha Rao 
13. Shri A.V. Swamy  
14. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia 
  
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar    - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Rita Jailkhani   - Director 
2. Shri Kushal Sarkar   - Additional Director 
 
 
  

  
 
 
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation(MoWR,RD&GR) 
1. Shri Shashi Shekhar, Secretary  
2. Dr. Amarjit Singh, Special Secretary  
3. Dr. Amita Prasad, JS (Admn. & GW) 
4. Dr. B. Rajender, JS (PP) 
5. Shri Jagmohan Gupta, JS&FA 
6. Shri R. K. Gupta, JS (Parl.) 
7. Dr. M. Satya Narayana, Advisor (C&M) 
8. Shri Joginder Singh, Advisor (Tech.) 
9. Shri K. Vohra, Commissioner (SPR) 
10. Shri Bhupender Singh, SJC (SPR-I) 
11. Shri Ravinder Singh, Director  (WQ) 
 
Central Water Commission 
12. Shri G. S. Jha, Chairman, CWC 
13. Shri R. K. Jain, Chief Engineer, CWC 
14. Shri P. M. Scot, CE (PPO&PO&MI), CWC 
15. Shri Sher Singh, Director, CWC 
16. Shri R. P. S. Verma, Director, CWC 
 
Central Ground Water Board 
17. Shri K. B. Biswas, Chairman, CGWB 
18. Dr. Dipankar Saha, Member (SAM), CGWB 
19. Shri G. C. Pati, Member (TT&WQ), CGWB 
 
National Water Mission 
20. Shri Nikhilesh Jha, AS&MD, NWM 
 
National Mission for Clean Ganga 
21. Dr. Rajat Bhargava, JS(CAD) &MD, NMCG 
  

  
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee , convened to take 
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation (MoWR,  
RD & GR) - in connection with the examination of the subject " Indigenous and Modern forms of Water Conservation – 
Techniques and Practices".  Thereafter, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry.   
3. The Committee discussed in detail with the re presentatives of the Ministry, the national scenario of water 
resources, ground water position in the country , need for water conservation, different methods / measures of water 
conservation, artificial recharge of ground water  and methods thereof , area specific techniques therefor, the budgetary 
provisions made for all these purposes , etc.  Thereafter, the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation were allowed to make a power point presentation on various issues relating t o the subject which inter-alia 
including water availability in  the country, increasing demand  of water for various purposes, traditional practices and 
modern techniques of water conservation, challenges facing this sector and the interventions required to address them 
along with the successful implementation of projects like Hiware Bazar of Maharashtra, Far mers Participatory Action 
Research Programmer of Tamil Nadu, Upleta taluka of Gujarat, etc.  and best practices in ground water management in 
districts of Beed, Jalna & Satara in Maharashtra. 
4. The Chairperson, however, expressed deep concern of the Committee over the challenges highlighted by the 
Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources, River De velopment & Ganga Rejuvenation  and categorically desired to know 
about the steps taken / being taken by the Ministry to tackle these challenges, to create awareness among the masses 
about the conservation of water and its efficient use.  Noting the mandate of the National Water Mission, the Committee 
also stressed the need  for proper coordination among various Ministries , especially the Ministry of Water Resources, 
River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation  and the Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Cha nge, for the 
conservation of water and its proper utilisation for agriculture, drinking, sanitation and industry  purposes.  On being 
informed that under National Aquifer Mapping Programme, only an area of 5.5 lakh square kilometers has so far been 
mapped and 23 lakhs square kilometers  remain to be mapped, for which a sum of 3000 crore of rupees is needed, the 
Committee emphasized the need for finishing the work related to Aquifer Mapping at the earliest  as aquifer recharging is 
very important for increasing level of ground water.  Responding to various queries from the Members of the Committee, 
the Secretary / representatives of the Ministry highlighted the significance of change in cropping patterns for minimal use 
of water and growing multiple crops  in a given area .  They also explained to the Committee in detail about the modern 
water conservation techniques viz. pressurized irrigation – sprinkler and drip methods, water harvesting through  

  
 
 
rejuvenation of water bodies, construction of percolation tanks, check dams, farm ponds, preservation of natural forests, 
sacred Grooves, etc.  They also elaborated other methods of water conservation techniques including Inter-linking of 
water bodies through canals; M ulching – application of organic or inorganic material to improve soil fertility;  Use of 
Information and Communication Technology tools (ICT tools) for dissemination of information on Hydro meteorological 
data like water flow, water quality, etc.; Catchment Area Treatment, Efficient Water Uses Practices, Conjunctive Use of 
Surface and ground water , minimization of losses due to evaporation, Advanced Artificial Recharge Techniques sub -
surface Dykes, Rain Water Harvesting through Recharge Shaft, etc.  The issues related to traditional methods of farming 
and climate change impact  on water resources, river basin models , over exploitation of the ground water and pollution 
were also discussed.  The Committee noted that despite having all the knowledge and techniques on the conservation of 
water, ground water continues to fall, pollution is increasing and there is an acute shortage of drinking water and the 
Ministry have not been able to solve these problems in the past so many years.  The Committee stated categorically that 
the time has come to show some demonstrable results.   The Committee felt that further discussion is needed on these 
issues and accordingly asked the Ministry officials to come prepared with a definite roadmap  for the purpose, if and 
when, called the next time. 
5.   The Committee , then, asked the Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation to furnish written replies to those queries raised by Members during the sitting - which could not be replied 
to by the representatives orally. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
6. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept for record. 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 

ANNEXXURE - II 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2016-17) HELD ON 14 MARCH, 2017 
  
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1515 hours in Committee Room 'C', Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  
Shri Hukum Singh – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Radheshyam Biswas 
3. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
4. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
5. Shri Subhash Patel 
6. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
7. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah 
8. Smt. V. Sathyabama 
9. Shri Liladharbhai Vaghela 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
11. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
12. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
13. Shri A.V. Swamy  
14. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
 
15.   
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Rita Jailkhani    - Director 
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar   - Additional Director 
 
  

 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chair person welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.   
Thereafter, t he Committee took up for consideration (a) Thirteenth Report on the subject 
“Indigenous and Modern forms of Water Conservation – Techniques and Practice s”; (ii) 
Fourteenth Report on the subject “Review of the Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme 
(AIBP)”; (iii) Fifteenth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the  Committee on 
“Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies – Encroachment on water bodies and 
steps required to remove the encroachment and restore the water bodies”; and (iv) Sixteenth 
Report on “Demands for Grants (2017-18) of Ministry of Water Resources, River Development 
and Ganga Rejuvenation.  After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid four 
draft Reports without any modification.   
3.   x x x x x x x x x 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chair person to present the above Four Reports to 
both the Houses of Parliament in the current Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 