STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
                                (2017-2018) 
 
 
 
                              SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT & GANGA REJUVENATION  
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2018-19) 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Twentieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources} 
 
 
 
 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
August, 2018 /   Shravana,1940 (Saka) 
 
22 

 
TWENTY SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
 
(2017-2018) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT & GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2018-19) 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Twentieth Report on Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the Ministry of Water 
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation} 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on    09.08.2018 
     Laid in Rajya Sabha on     09.08.2018 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2018 /    Shravana,1940 (Saka) 

WRC NO. 32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2018 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
 

CONTENTS 
 
 
     
Page  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2017-18) …………………………………  (iii)  
 
INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
 
CHAPTER I -      Report        1 
  
       
CHAPTER II - Observations / Recommendations which have been 
  accepted by the Government ………………………………  37 
             
CHAPTER III - Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
  not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ..  59 
  
CHAPTER IV    - Observations / Recommendations in respect of which  
 replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
 the Committee  ……. …………………………………………  60 
 
CHAPTER V    - Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
 Replies of the Government are still awaited ……………….  76 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I. State-wise list of Dams and their Estimated Cost   77 
       
  
II. List of Major Works to be Undertaken under Drip Dams  78 
  
 
III. Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Standing Committee   80 
 held on 07.08.2018 
 
IV. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the   82 
 Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
 Twentieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2017-18) 
  
 
  
  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy  -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Radheshyam Biswas 
3. Shri Devusinh Jesingbhai Chauhan 
4. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
5. Shri Prakash B. Hukkeri 
6. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
7. Shri Mohanbhai Kundariya 
8. Shri Maganti Murali Mohan 
9. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
10. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
11. Shri Subhash Patel 
12. Shri Sanjaykaka Ramchandra Patil 
13. Shri Vijaysinh Mohite Patil 
14. Smt. Aparupa Poddar 
15. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
16. Shri S. P. Y. Reddy 
17. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah 
18. Smt. V. Sathyabama 
19. Shri Lallu Singh 
20. Shri Liladharbhai Vaghela 
21. Smt. Dimple Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
23. Shri Harshvardhan Singh Dungarpur 
24. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain^ 
25. Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim^ 
26. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena^ 
27. Mir Mohammad Fayaz 
28. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
29. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
30. Vacant  
31. Vacant 
 
                                                 
 Appointed as Member and Chairperson w.e.f. 15.02.2018 
^ Appointed as Member of the Committee w.e.f. 02.06.2018. 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.  Shri Shiv Kumar   -  Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Rita Jailkhani  -  Director 
3.  Shri Kushal Sarkar  -  Additional Director 
4.  Smt. Shanta B. Datta  -  Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2017-2018) having 
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the 
Twenty Second Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources on Demands for Grants (2018-19) of  the 
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation.  
2. The Twentieth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 13 March, 2018.  The replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received in this Secretariat on 15 June, 
2018. 
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered 
and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 07 August, 2018. 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Annexure-IV. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;           RAJIV PRATAP RUDY, 
07 August, 2018                                            Chairperson, 
16 Shravana, 1940 (Saka)                       Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
(v) 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations / recommendations contained in their Twentieth Report (16th Lok 
Sabha) on the Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation, which was presented to Lok Sabha on 13 March, 2018. 
Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of all the 22 observations / 
recommendations of the Committee, have been categorized as under:  
(i) Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
(Chapter II):  
Para Nos. 1, 3, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 16, 17, 19, 20 and 21   
                                (Total – 13) 
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government’s replies (Chapter III):  
Para Nos. NIL            (Total – NIL) 
  
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV):  
Para Nos. 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 14, 15, 18  and 22          (Total – 09)  
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited (Chapter V):  
Para Nos. NIL             (Total – NIL)  
 2. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of the 
observations / recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 

2 
 
A. Management of Water Resources – Challenges to Meet Future Demands of Water 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
3. The Committee were concerned to note about the alarming situation in respect of availability of 
scarce water resources in India. They were particularly worried about the decline in per capita availability of 
water from 2209 m3 in the year 1991 to 1545 m3 in the year 2011. Water demand from irrigation, drinking 
water, industry, energy and other sectors is estimated to rise from 710 Billion Cubic Metre (BCM) in the 
year 2010 to 843 BCM in the year 2025 and upto 1180 BCM in the year 2050 as against the availability of 
1123 BCM.  Against this backdrop, the Committee noted that the Ministry had proposed several new 
schemes viz. Ground Water Irrigation Scheme under the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana (PMKSY) – 
Har Khet Ko Paani (HKKP) to provide assured Irrigation to Small and Marginal Farmers, Incentivisation 
Scheme to Bridge Irrigation Gap (ISBIG) to ensure utilization of irrigation potential for Projects other than 
99 Priority Projects selected under PMKSY, Atal Bhujal Yojana (ABY) for select over exploited and ground 
water stressed areas to ensure efficient use of ground water through community participation. Besides 
State Water Budgeting on the lines of financial budgeting was being introduced to address the issue of over 
consumption of water and thereby ensure water security, safety and sustainability. While appreciating the 
proposed Schemes, the Committee desired that implementation of these Schemes should be expedited to 
realize their benefits at ground level at the earliest. 
4. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
“Ministry is taking action for prompt completion of appraisal and approval process of these 
schemes and the status is as under. 
i. The proposed scheme “ PMKSY-Har Khet Ko Pani- GW” of  Ministry of Water 
Resources, RD & GR aims at providing assured irrigation facilities in the identified 
‘most irrigation deprived’ districts with sufficient scope for groundwater 
development. The scheme envisages enhancement of food production by more 
than two-fold in 96 prioritized ‘most irrigation deprived’ districts in 12 States, 
namely Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya 

3 
 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal by 
providing assured irrigation to about 21.35 lakh hectare by creating irrigation 
facilities through tube wells, dug wells, bore wells and dug cum bore wells. This 
programme will give a boost to irrigation and food production in the largely tribal 
and backward areas of the country which are traditionally deprived of canal 
command irrigation. Assured irrigation will improve the socio-economic conditions 
of the farmers. The concept note of the proposed scheme has been submitted to 
the Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure for in-Principle Approval of the 
Scheme and the scheme proposal has been uploaded on the web site of Ministry 
of Finance in March 2018 for circulation and comments. 
ii. Atal Bhujal Yojana (ABHY) of the Ministry of Water Resources, RD & GR 
envisages sustainable ground water management with emphasis on demand side 
management through community participation. The scheme is proposed to be 
implemented in identified over-exploited and water scarce areas in Haryana, 
Rajasthan, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Karnataka. 
The scheme has two major components, viz. Investment Component and 
Incentive Component. The investment component is aimed at building the capacity 
of the communities for self-governance of water resources and comprises 
institutional strengthening, improved monitoring systems to facilitate better data 
availability, awareness creation and capacity building of stakeholders. The 
incentive component envisages incentivizing the participating States for achieving 
pre-defined targets in respect of various activities such as preparation of Gram 
Panchayat wise water security, implementation of supply and demand side 
interventions through convergence of on-going schemes etc. The ultimate aim of 
the scheme of is to bring in behavioral changes at the grass-root level to change 
the way ground water resources are presently being managed. Provisions for 
participation of the communities at planning, implementation and monitoring of 
various interventions have also been incorporated in the scheme design.  EFC of 
the scheme was held on 27.03.2018 and the proposal is under process for 
approval of the Cabinet. 
The cost of the Scheme is Rs 6,000 cr to be funded equally by Govt. of India and 
The World Bank.  The Bank has approved a loan of US$ 450 million on 5th June, 2018 
iii. The meeting of EFC for the Incentivization Scheme for Bridging Irrigation Gap 
(ISBIG) was held on 27.3.2018.  The proposal is under process for approval of the 
Cabinet.” 
 
5. The Committee observe that in order to face the challenge of meeting increasing demand of 
water from various sectors viz. Irrigation, Drinking Water, Industry, Energy, etc. which is projected 
to rise from 710 Billion Cubic Metre (BCM) in the year 2010 to 1180 BCM in the year 2050 as against 
the total water availability of 1123 BCM, the Government has proposed the introduction of three 

4 
 
new Schemes viz.  Ground Water Irrigation Schemes under the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai 
Yojana (PMKSY)- Har Khet Ko Pani with the objective of providing assured Irrigation to Small and 
Marginal Farmers, Incentivisation Scheme to Bridge Irrigation Gap (ISBIG) to ensure utilization of 
irrigation potential in Projects other than 99 Priority Projects selected under PMKSY – Accelerated 
Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP) and Atal Bhujal Yojana (ABY) to ensure efficient use of Ground 
Water through Community Participation in the select over exploited and Ground Water Stressed 
Areas. All the above Schemes, if implemented will give a boost to availability of water and its 
judicious use. Although the Ministry has assured the Committee that it is taking prompt action for 
appraisal and approval process of these Schemes, the Committee are distressed to note that all 
these Schemes are still in the process of approval. For instance, the concept note of the Ground 
Water Irrigation Schemes under PMKSY has been submitted to the Department of Expenditure, 
Ministry of Finance for in principal approval and was uploaded on the website of the Ministry of 
Finance in March 2018 for circulation and comments. Similarly proposals for ABY and ISBIG 
Schemes are yet to be approved by the Cabinet. Also no information has been furnished to the 
Committee with regard to the introduction of State Water Budgeting on the lines of Financial 
Budgeting to ensure economic consumption of water. As the country is reeling under the pressure 
of severe scarcity of water, the very first challenge in the efficient and alternative management of 
water calls for urgent introduction of measures/schemes to ensure adequate availability of water 
and its economic use. Mere formulation of good schemes on paper without any plan for immediate 
execution will fail to be a good panacea for deteriorating condition of Water Availability in the 
country. Therefore, in the considered opinion of the Committee, Ministry should take urgent steps 
for early approval of the proposed Schemes and their implementation. The Committee would like to 
be apprised of the details of measures taken to complete the approval process of Schemes 
expeditiously and action plan chalked out for their implementation within the current financial year. 

5 
 
The Committee would also, in particular, like to know about the measures taken for introducing 
Water Budgeting to address the issue of wastage of water. 
B. Budget Allocations 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
6. The Committee were distressed to note that although the Budget Allocations of the Ministry of 
Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation (MoWR, RD and GR) were increased 
consecutively in the last four years from Rs. 4,232 crore in the year 2015-16 to Rs. 8,860 crore in the year 
2018-19, still the Ministry was increasingly depending on the borrowings to finance its crucial projects such 
as completion of 99 Priority Projects selected under Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP), 
their Command Area Development, Surface Minor Irrigation (SMI) Projects and Repair, Renovation and 
Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies besides financing the Polavaram Multipurpose Irrigation Project, which 
is a National Project. The additional funds proposed to be released from NABARD under the Long Term 
Irrigation Fund (LTIF) in the current year was Rs.8,000 crore, almost equal to the total budgetary provisions 
of the Ministry.  However it was disheartening that the Ministry had woefully lagged behind in utilization of 
the Budget Provisions made in the last 2 years i.e. Actual Expenditure of only Rs. 4714 crore as compared 
to BE Allocation of Rs. 6201 crore in the year 2016-17 and Actual Expenditure of only Rs. 3003 crore as 
compared to BE of Rs. 6887 crore in the year 2017-18. Further an Expenditure of Rs. 3003 crore incurred 
up to 20 February, 2018 included the interest of Rs. 548.98 crore paid to NABARD during the year 2017-18 
with no payment against Principal as initially there is a moratorium of 3 years. They found that so far, an 
amount of Rs. 6,974.757 crore was borrowed from NABARD. The Committee expressed their concern over 
the committed liability due to increasing borrowings, more so when they found that on the one hand the 
Ministry had not been able to utilize the funds year after year and on the other hand, it was resorting to 
borrowings from NABARD to finance its projects which reflected inefficient management of resources. The 

6 
 
Committee were at a loss to understand the reasons for not utilizing the unused amount in the Projects 
which had been brought under NABARD borrowings. Therefore, the Committee recommended the Ministry 
to re-evaluate the allocations in order to ensure judicious utilization of the available resources and reduction 
in future borrowings.  
7. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
“The provisional expenditure booked during 2017-18 is actually Rs 5310.51 cr.  The 
savings are primarily due to less expenditure under the schemes of Namami Gange and 
repayment towards NABARD loan under PMKSY.  Since the States/ implementing 
agencies under the schemes of Namami Gange did not require funds, the releases were 
lesser than anticipated. Similarly, due to less demand and consequent less drawal of 
loans, interest payment towards NABARD loan under PMKSY during 2017-18 was less 
than anticipated expenditure on this account. 
 Funding of prioritized projects through LTIF has been undertaken to ensure 
assured funding arrangements as per requirement of the identified projects, which hitherto, 
were constrained due to budget mismatch and availability in States/Union Budget.  
Further, these projects required large quantum of funds over a short span of three years, 
which was not feasible given the limited resource position of the States. 
 The expenditure progress is being regularly monitored by the Ministry and as a 
result the utilization of funds improved in 2015-16 i.e. Rs 6862.05 cr against Rs 7032.43 cr 
(RE) which was higher than the BE.  In 2016-17 also, the expenditure booked was Rs 
4714.13 cr against RE of Rs 4755.50 cr i.e. 99%.  The reduction of RE was largely on 
account of Namami Gange, Ground Water and National Hydrology Project (NHP) 
Schemes. 
 Further, Budget provisions under Demand of the Ministry are distributed 
Scheme/Head/Sub-head wise and Ministry is not at liberty to re-appropriate surplus funds 
under one Scheme/Head/Sub-head to another Scheme/Head/Sub-head.” 
8. The Committee note that as against the Budget Estimate (BE) allocation of Rs. 6,887 crore in 
the year 2017-18, the Ministry has booked a provisional expenditure of Rs. 5,310.51 crore for the 
year 2017-18. They find that saving has occurred primarily due to lesser demands from States for 
Projects under Namami Gange and Projects financed with loans from NABARD. Although the 
Ministry is satisfied with the fact that its Actual Expenditures are in congruence with the Revised 
Estimate (RE), the constant deviation of expenditure from the Budget Allocations reflects poor 

7 
 
projections while anticipating expenditures for the next financial year resulting into savings year 
after year. The fact that the BE allocations are never realistic and are substantially revised at the RE 
stage, has been observed consecutively in their previous Reports on Demands for Grants by the 
Committee. In addition, large amount of loans have also been made available from NABARD to 
address paucity of funds for financing Projects. However, the Committee find that the problem is 
rather inability of the Ministry to spend the allocated funds due to lack of commensurate support 
from the State Governments in implementing the Projects expeditiously. The Committee therefore 
are of the opinion that the Ministry should constantly pursue with the States for executing the 
Projects at a faster pace to harness the funds and also ensure speedy completion of the Projects. 
They, therefore, recommend the Government to assess the status of the Projects in the States and 
re-evaluate the allocations in order to ensure judicious utilization of the available resources and 
reduction in future borrowings. 
C.  Namami Gange  
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
9. The Committee observed that the Government had launched the ambitious programme for 
cleaning and rejuvenating River Ganga, namely Namami Gange in the year 2014-15 with an approved cost 
of Rs. 20,000 crore. The Programme is being implemented through the National Mission for Clean Ganga 
(NMCG). The Committee found that out of Rs. 20,000 crore allocated under this Programme, 191 projects, 
at an estimated cost of Rs. 16,681.10 crore had been sanctioned. However as per the Ministry’s 
submission, the details of completion of the Programme and time and cost over-runs (if any) would be 
clearer only when the Projects sanctioned came to a significant stage of implementation by December, 
2018. They further noticed that NMCG had been recently restructured and strengthened to expedite the 
implementation of the Project. The Allocations to NMCG were being provided for four components i.e. (i) 

8 
 
National River Conservation Plan (NRCP)– Externally Aided Programme (EAP) (ii) NRCP– Non Externally 
Aided Programme (iii) National Ganga Plan (NGP) and (iv) Ghat Works and Beautification of River fronts. 
National River Conservation Plan (NRCP) 
The Committee noted that under the National River Conservation Plan (NRCP), the World Bank 
assisted Projects under the National Ganga River Conservation Authorities were being executed. They 
further observed that the ongoing Project Cost under this Programme was being shared between the 
Centre and the State Governments on 70:30 basis for World Bank  funded  Projects  and  on  85:15  basis  
for  Japan  International  Cooperation Agency (JICA) assisted Projects. However for all World Bank funded 
Projects approved after the year 2015, Central Government was bearing 100 per cent cost.   The 
Committee found that during the year 2016-17, the expenditure incurred under this programme was Rs. 
167.5 crore (Rs. 87.10 crore under EAP Component and Rs. 80.40 crore under Programme Component). 
However, as informed by the Ministry, from March 2017 to January 2018, this programme had gained 
momentum as 21 projects involving an amount of Rs. 6054.8 crore had been sanctioned and hence, 
keeping in view the anticipated expenditure, the Budgetary Allocations were revised upto Rs. 627 crore for 
EAP component. They further noted that Allocations for the financial year 2018-19, had been kept at Rs. 
770 crore (Rs. 600 crore under EAP component and Rs. 170 crore under programme component). 
However, to utter surprise of the Committee, an Actual Expenditure of only Rs. 224 crore had been incurred 
under this Programme during the year 2017-18. As per the Ministry’s own admission, only 20 Projects of 
sewerage infrastructure projects had been completed out of the total of 97 Projects as most of the projects’ 
implementation had suffered on account of such factors as delay in tendering process, retendering, non 
availability of land, legal issues, natural calamities (like floods, landslides etc.), delay in permission from 
local authorities for road cutting/ crossing etc. They also noted that initially, Projects could not be 
implemented speedily due to lack of proper planning. Now, the NMCG had taken remedial measures such 

9 
 
as continuous follow up with the State Programme Management Groups (SPMGs) and Urban Local Bodies 
(ULBs) to resolve the issues for delay. The Committee were, however, not satisfied with the pace of 
implementation of the Projects. In their view, had this Programme been implemented in a more planned 
way with details of ground work already in hand, a lot of precious time and money could have been saved. 
In view of the sluggish manner of Project implementation and consequent lower expenditure incurred, the 
Committee hoped that the Ministry will at least now make sincere efforts to complete all the sanctioned 
projects under this programme so as to achieve the goals of this programme within the targeted year of 
2020. The Committee were further of the opinion that besides river Ganga, the scope of this Scheme 
should be widened to include all the Major Rivers of the country which are in equally polluted state and as 
such need urgent action for their rejuvenation. The Committee, therefore, recommended the Ministry to 
look into this aspect and inform them about the measures taken for this purpose. 
 
10. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
“The actual expenditure (released from the Ministry) under Namami Gange during 2017-18 
is Rs 1423.22 cr. and not Rs 224 cr. The expenditure by NMCG including release to 
Executing Agencies during 2017-18 is Rs 1625.11 cr. Out of 104 Sewerage Infrastructure 
Projects sanctioned, 26 have been completed and balance 78 are planned to be 
completed by the timelines indicated below. 
 
S.No. Number of Projects Target date of completion 
1. Twenty four December, 2018 
2. Six March, 2019 
3. Twenty December, 2019 
4. Twenty eight December, 2021 
 
 All efforts are being made to complete these projects as per the schedule.  

10 
 
Following important measures have been taken by NMCG to complete the projects in a 
time-bound manner. 
i. Regular review meetings are being held at the level of Hon’ble Minister too where progress 
of each project is reviewed with concerned State agency; 
ii. Project engineers have been appointed by NMCG to monitor the progress of the projects 
including appointment of Project Management Consultant (PMC) (Tata Consultancy of 
Engineers); 
iii. Regular meetings and follow up action is taken up in NMCG with State executing agencies; 
iv. Close monitoring of mile-stones for projects is being done including regular field visits. 
 
In terms of allocation of business to various Ministries and the Scheme scope, mandate for 
Namami Gange Programme is for cleaning of River Ganga and its tributaries. The 
recommendation of the Committee to cover all major rivers of the country is a policy 
decision and would be referred to the concerned Ministry i.e. Ministry of Environment, 
Climate Change and Forests.” 
 
 
11. The Committee note that an amount of Rs. 1423.22 crore has been spent under the 
Programme of Namami Gange during the year 2017-18 whereas the Committee had pointed out 
Actual Expenditure of Rs. 224 crore incurred by the Government of India under the National River 
Conservation Plan (NRCP) component of National Mission For Clean Ganga (NMCG) during the year 
2017-18 out of Rs. 627 crore allocated.  The Committee, therefore, would like to be apprised of the 
Project/ Scheme wise Actual Expenditure made under the NRCP till date. They further observe that 
so far 26 Sewerage Infrastructure Projects have been completed out of 104 Projects sanctioned and 
the 78 remaining Projects are now scheduled to be completed by the Year December, 2021. Further 
several initiatives viz. regular review meetings at the level of Hon’ble Minister, appointment of 
Project Management Consultant (Tata Consultancy of Engineers) to monitor the progress of the 
projects, regular meetings and follow up action with State Executing Agencies and regular field 
visits have been started to monitor the status of completion of Projects in time. Noting that now the 
scheduled date of completion of Projects under Namami Gange has been extended by one year i.e. 
December, 2021, the Committee hope that now the Projects will be completed fast and with the 

11 
 
constant monitoring, the ambitious programme of cleaning and rejuvenating River Ganga will be 
completed within the targeted year of December, 2021. 
12. The Committee further observe that as per the existing Allocation of Business to various 
Ministries and scope of the Scheme, Namami Gange programme is for cleaning of only River Ganga 
and its Tributaries. They further notice that inclusion of all the other Major Rivers of the country 
under the umbrella of this Scheme, is a major policy decision which would be taken up in 
consultation with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC). The 
Committee are however, astonished to find that no reply has been furnished with regard to status / 
outcome of the consultation with the MoEF&CC in the matter of covering all the Major Rivers under 
this Scheme.  In the considered opinion of the Committee, since the Ministry of Water Resources, 
River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation is the nodal Ministry entrusted with the 
responsibility/task to manage the water resources of the country, it becomes all the more 
imperative that rejuvenation of all the Major Rivers, in all of the Northern, Southern, Eastern and 
Western parts of the country is taken up as a whole under the umbrella of one Programme.  They, 
therefore, reiterate the Government to move away from its Ganga centric approach and look into 
the aspect of bringing all the Major rivers of the country into its fold. They further recommend the 
Ministry to apprise them of the measures taken in this regard to enable holistic rejuvenation of all 
the Major Rivers of the country - which are the significant source of water for the country. 
D. National Ganga Plan 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
13. The Committee observed that under the National Ganga Plan (NGP), provisions were made for 
implementing schemes/projects for the River Ganga and its tributaries. The Schemes for rehabilitation and 

12 
 
up gradation of existing Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs) and commissioning of new STPs are also 
included under this programme. They found that total expenditure of Rs. 1329.12 crore had been incurred 
under this programme, during the last four years upto 15 February, 2018. They also found that during the 
period March, 2017 to January, 2018 Projects worth Rs. 1670 crore had been sanctioned. Further two 
projects had been awarded under Hybrid Annuity Model. Besides major projects for creation of Individual 
Household Latrine and Solid and Liquid Waste Management worth Rs. 800 crore approx. was also being 
taken up. However they were concerned to find that out of 191 Projects sanctioned under Namami Gange, 
only 48 projects had been completed so far. Further as against the target of setting up 89 projects for 
sewage management interventions at 56 towns located along main stem of river Ganga, only 19 projects 
had been completed. The Committee expressed their displeasure over the fact that though the programme 
for cleaning and rejuvenation of River Ganga started 4 years back, a lot of time had been lost in finalizing 
modalities of its execution. As admitted by the Secretary himself, the actual work under this Programme 
had started since March, 2017 only. In view of this, the Committee were of the opinion that unless the 
projects were executed strictly in a time bound manner, the prospects of cleaning the river by the targeted 
year of 2020 looked bleak. They, therefore, strongly recommended the Ministry to make concerted efforts 
to complete the projects by the targeted period of 2020.  
14. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
 “ As stated in reply to para 4 under NRCP, the actual expenditure (released from 
the Ministry) under Namami Gange during 2017-18 is Rs 1423.22 cr and not Rs 224 cr. 
The expenditure by NMCG including release to Executing Agencies during 2017-18 is Rs 
1625.11 cr. Out of 104 Sewerage Infrastructure Projects sanctioned, 26 have been 
completed and balance 78 are planned to be completed by the timelines indicated below. 
 
S.No. Number of Projects Target date of completion 
1. Twenty four December, 2018 

13 
 
2. Six March, 2019 
3. Twenty December, 2019 
4. Twenty eight December, 2021 
 
 All efforts are being made to complete these projects as per the schedule.  
 Following important measures have been taken by NMCG to complete the projects 
in a time-bound manner. 
i. Regular review meetings are being held at the level of Hon’ble Minister too where 
progress of each project is reviewed with concerned state agency; 
ii. Project engineers have been appointed by NMCG to monitor the progress of the 
projects including appointment of PMC (Tata Consultancy of Engineers); 
iii. Regular meetings and follow up action is taken up in NMCG with state executing 
agencies; 
iv. Close monitoring of mile-stones for projects is being done including regular field visits. 
 In terms of allocation of business to various Ministries and the scheme scope, 
mandate for Namami Gange Programme is for cleaning of River Ganga and its tributaries. 
The recommendation of the Committee to cover all major rivers of the country is a policy 
decision and would be referred to the concerned ministry i.e. Ministry of Environment, 
Climate Change and Forests.” 
15. The Committee find the replies furnished by the Ministry in the matter are more of repetitive 
in nature. There is no additional information on concrete achievement of milestones under the 
Namami Gange programme except the completion of 26 Sewarage Infrastructure Projects out of 104 
sanctioned Projects.  However, the recent spurt in expenses by National Mission for Clean Ganga 
(NMCG) to the tune of Rs. 1625.11 crore in 2017-18 shows that at least now, the implementation of 
Projects has gained pace. The Committee are inclined to believe that the current tempo of progress 
in Project implementation, if maintained, will enable achievement of the target of cleaning the River 
Ganga within the revised schedule of December, 2021. They also hope that with the current 
monitoring mechanism in place and vigorous work undertaken, soon the results, in terms of 
substantial reduction in pollution, improvement in water quality, flourishing of healthy aquatic life 
and beautified river fronts will be visible. Keeping in view the completion of Projects, so far, under 

14 
 
the various components of Namami Gange programme, the Committee would like to be apprised of 
the details of the results achieved till date in terms of maintaining aviral dhara, improvement in 
water quality, flourishing of healthy aquatic life and beautified river fronts etc. so as to reflect the 
exact details and extent upto which the mission for cleaning River Ganga and its Tributaries has 
been achieved.  
E. Ghat Works and Beautification of River Fronts 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
16. The Committee observed that under the component of Ghat works and Beautification of River 
Fronts of Namami Gange, as against the budgetary provision of Rs. 50 crore for the year 2017-18, no 
Actual Expenditure could be incurred. During the year 2018-19, again an allocation of Rs. 50 crore was  
made under this Head. The Committee were astonished to find that out of total 64 projects taken up, only 
24 Projects in West Bengal had been completed. Also, at present the Ministry was concentrating on Ghat 
works and Beautification of River Fronts of only Ganga River.  However, while disapproving the Ganga 
centric mindset of the Ministry, the Committee thought that the provision of Rs. 50 crore for the works of 
Ghat and  Beautification of River Fronts was minuscule as Ghats and River Fronts needed to be developed 
for a large number of Rivers in the country. They further noted that though the Projects were initially 
sanctioned for an amount of Rs. 1100 crore, later on only Priority Projects were taken up due to lower 
amount of availability of funds. They observed that recently, the Ministry was trying to arrange funds from 
the Corporate sector under their Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) activities.  The Committee, 
however, appreciated the fact that through the works like River Development and Maintenance of Ghats, 
the efforts of the Government to clean the River were more visible on the ground and as such they created 
an element of awareness amongst public to keep the Rivers clean.  The public get more sensitized to 
maintain the health of Rivers around.  The Committee,  therefore, were of the view that there was a need to 

15 
 
increase Budgetary Support for these works. Further, the Committee also were of the opinion that the River 
Front Development works should not be limited to only River Ganga, rather it should be expanded to cover 
all the Major Rivers of the country. They, therefore, strongly recommended the Ministry to explore the 
possibility of expanding the scope of this Programme to include other Major Rivers of the country as well.   
17. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
“In addition to the Budgetary support available for river front development and 
construction/renovation of Ghats and crematoria, steps have been initiated to take up such 
works through Clean Ganga Fund. Corporate funding is also being explored for such 
works. 
As far as taking up such works on rivers other than Ganga and its tributaries, in terms of 
allocation of business to various Ministries and the scheme scope, mandate for Namami 
Gange Programme is for cleaning of River Ganga and its tributaries. The recommendation 
of the Committee to cover all major rivers of the country is a policy decision and would be 
referred to the concerned Ministry i.e. Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate 
Change.” 
18. The Committee express their displeasure over the very abridged form of replies furnished 
by the Ministry with regard to the progress of ongoing work under Ghat Works and Beautification of 
River Fronts component of Namami Gange Programme. Though the Ministry has apprised the 
Committee about the steps taken to supplement the Budget resources for financing the works for 
Beautification of Ghats /River Fronts and Crematoria, etc. through Clean Ganga Fund and 
Corporate funding, no details have been furnished with regard to the quantum of fund garnered so 
far through corporate funding and amount to be taken/proposed to be taken from the Clean Ganga 
Fund. Further, the Ministry has also failed to provide any information on the total number of Ghat 
/Crematoria works undertaken along the main stem of River Ganga and the total number of such 
Projects so far completed. The Committee would, therefore, recommend the Ministry to provide 
information on the number of  Ghat/Crematoria works completed on the Banks of the River, total 
corpus of fund accumulated and spent on these Projects so far separately and the timeline fixed for 

16 
 
completion of these different Projects.  
19. Further regarding their recommendation to commence Beautification of River Fronts works 
for all the major rivers of the country, the Committee find that the Ministry has simply reiterated the 
fact that it is a major policy decision to be taken up with the Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change (MoEF &CC). However as stated earlier in their 20th Report on Demands for Grants 
(2018-19) (16 LS), the Committee are of the strong opinion that the River Front Development works 
should not be limited to only River Ganga, rather it should be expanded to cover all the Major 
Rivers of the country. Therefore, they would again urge the Ministry to immediately start the 
process of consultation with the MoEF &CC in the matter and apprise them of the outcome thereof 
and the measures taken to develop and beautify the river fronts and Ghats of all the major rivers of 
the country. 
F. River Basin Management 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
20. The Committee noted that the scheme of River Basin Management (RBM) consisted of two broad 
components namely Brahmaputra Board and Investigation of Water Resources Development Scheme 
(IWRDS). IWRDS was being implemented by (a) National Water Development Authority (NWDA) and (b) 
Central Water Commission (CWC). Under this Scheme, Brahmaputra Board was carrying out works of – (i) 
Survey, Investigation & preparation of Master Plan,  (ii) Preparation of DPR of Multipurpose Projects (iii) 
Drainage Development Schemes  (iv)  Anti-erosion works including protection of Majuli Island, Balat Village 
in Meghalaya, Mankachar and Masalabari area in Assam etc from flood and erosion and (v) Construction of 
Raised Platforms.  Further CWC had been preparing Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) of Projects in the 
river basins of North east region to provide hydroelectric and irrigation benefits as per proposed plan of the 
RBM Scheme. They also noted that the NWDA had updated water balance studies for 26 links, completed 
pre-feasibility studies for 15 intra-State link and Detailed Project Report (DPR) of 3 intra State links. The 
Committee found that Budget provision of Rs. 225 crore had been earmarked for this Scheme for the 
financial year 2018-19.  However they observed that an Expenditure of only Rs. 146.18 crore had been 

17 
 
incurred in 2017-18 as against Budget Provision of Rs. 199.99 crore.  They further observed that the funds 
had remained unutilized to a great extent due to problems such as unseasonal rainfall and high flood level 
of rivers, local disturbances, unavailability of forest clearances, shortage of staff, non completion of 
Feasibility Reports (FRs) of Himalayan Component due to international issue of Nepal/ Bhutan, etc. The 
Committee also noted that formation of River Basin Authority for management of water resources of each 
river basin in a holistic manner had been kept in abeyance despite proposal to this effect given in the 
Report of the National Commission for Integrated Water resources Development way back in 1999, which 
had suggested for enacting a legislation to replace the River Boards Act, 1956. Further a Draft River Basin 
Management Bill had been recommended by Doabia Committee in 2012, which had been considered by a 
Group of Experts under the Chairmanship of Shri A. B. Pandya, Ex Chairman, CWC. The Group of Experts 
had now submitted the finalized draft of the River Basin Management Bill, 2017 which was currently being 
considered by the Ministry.  The Committee were of the opinion that many of the problems stated above 
which had hampered faster implementation of Projects/Works under this Scheme could be resolved if the 
works were undertaken basin wise. They, therefore, recommended the Ministry to take expeditious 
measures for the enactment of the proposed River Basin Act, to enable establishment of the River Basin 
Authority and management of water resources of each river basin in a holistic manner. The Committee 
desired to be apprised of the timelines fixed for the purpose. 
21. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
 “The second Administrative Reforms Commission in its 7th Report titled "Capacity 
Building for Conflict Resolution-Fiction to Fusion" recommended under Para 5.5(c) that 
River Basin Organizations (RBOs) should be set up for each inter-State river, as proposed 
by the Report of the National Commission for Integrated Water resources Development, 
1999 by enacting a legislation to replace the River Boards Act, 1956.  A Committee under 
Chairmanship of Shri Tejinder Singh Doabia, Former Judge of M.P. and J&K High Court 
gave its recommendation in 2012 in the form of Draft River Basin Management Bill. A 
Group of Officers was constituted on 2.3.2017 to examine the report and suggest possible 
changes required in the draft River Basin Management Bill to make it implementable. The 
First meeting of the Group of officers was held on 28.4.2017. Subsequently, a meeting was 
held on 25.07.2017 under Chairmanship of Secretary (WR, RD & GR) wherein experts and 
professionals of the subject matter participated for wider discussion on the provisions of 
the Bill. In this meeting, it was further decided to constitute a three member Group of 
Experts (GoE) under Chairmanship of Shri A.B. Pandya, Ex-Chairman, CWC. 
 The GoE so constituted held two meetings on 25.09.2017 and on 04.12.2017 and 
had a closer look on implementation of the Bill keeping in mind the experiences in the 
functioning of existing River Boards. The GoE have now submitted the finalized draft of the 

18 
 
RBM Bill, 2017, which is under consideration of the Ministry. Since ‘Water’ is a State 
subject and the Bill having far reaching implications in the field of Water management and 
conservation, it will be circulated among various stakeholders viz. State Governments and 
general public at large (by way of uploading on website). After receiving comments from 
various stakeholders, the Bill will be finalized by the Ministry and will be sent to Ministry of 
Law and Justice and Cabinet for their comments and approval. As such the consultation 
on the Bill and subsequent action is likely to take considerable time and fixing of definite 
timeline at this stage is not feasible.” 
22. The Committee note that the Draft River Basin Management Bill, 2017 has been examined 
and finalized by the Group of Experts under the Chairmanship of Shri A.B. Pandya, Ex-Chairman, 
CWC. However, the Draft Bill is under consideration of the Ministry and is proposed to be put up in 
public domain for wider consultation among State Governments and public. Thereafter, the Bill will 
be sent to the Ministry of Law and Justice and Cabinet for their comments and approval. The 
Committee further note that the Ministry has expressed its inability to enact  the River Basin 
Management Bill expeditiously within a stipulated time frame on the ground that the ‘Water’ is a 
State subject and there will be far reaching implications of the Bill in the field of water management 
and conservation. However, the Committee are not ready to accept this contention, as in the 
opinion of the Committee, the conceptual framework for management of River Basins in the country 
in a holistic manner has been mooted and examined by a number of Committees and Groups of 
Experts involving comprehensive deliberations at each stage for a considerable period of time. It is 
now high time that this Bill be enacted expeditiously given the fact that water crisis is deepening in 
the country day by day, calling for integrated management of river water Basin wise, benefitting 
people in a much wider area, beyond the existing boundaries of States. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate taking expeditious measures for the enactment of the proposed River Basin Act, to enable 
establishment of the River Basin Authority and management of water resources of each River Basin 
in a holistic manner. They further desire to be apprised of the timelines fixed for the purpose. 
 

19 
 
G. Real Time Assessment of Water in Reservoirs 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
23. The Committee were surprised to note that with respect to assessment of water in Reservoirs, only 
91 Reservoirs had Hydrological Observation (HO) sites as against the existing 121 reservoirs in the 
country.  They were further surprised to note that there were still some HO sites, which were still being 
manned physically and were yet to be converted into Telemetry Based Stations to enable real time 
availability of data.  The Committee strongly recommended that Ministry should take utmost measures to 
modernize all such stations into Telemetry Based Stations and information should be made available online 
to enable Real Time Assessment of the Water Table.  They further recommended the Ministry to expand 
the HO sites for all the 121 reservoirs in the country. 
 
24. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
 “At present, monitoring of water availability in 91 major reservoirs is being carried 
out. Out of these 91 reservoirs, telemetry has been installed on 54 reservoirs. In order to 
monitor the water availability in 120 reservoirs on real time basis, 66 remaining reservoirs 
are to be installed with telemetry. Procurement process is underway for installation of 
telemetry on these 66 reservoirs.” 
 
25. The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry has started procurement process for 
installing  Telemetry on remaining 66 reservoirs in the country to enable real time monitoring of 
water level and better management of water in Reservoirs in an integrated manner. However, at the 
same time no information has been furnished to the Committee with regard to establishment of 
Hydrological Observation (HO) Stations on the remaining 30 Reservoirs.  In view of the fact that all 
the Reservoirs in the country need to have HO sites with Telemetry based Real Time Assessment of 
water availability, the Committee recommend that the work should be completed in time bound 

20 
 
manner so that the remaining 66 Reservoirs are also covered expeditiously to facilitate Real Time 
Monitoring of water availability. 
H. Early enactment of Dam Safety Bill 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
26. The Committee were concerned to note the lackadaisical attitude of the Government in bringing 
forth the legislative framework for Safety of Dams.  Keeping in view the large number of Dams in India 
(about 5200 Dams) many of which required urgent actions to reinforce their safety, the Committee were of 
the opinion that the Ministry should enact the Dam Safety Legislation at the earliest.  They desired to be 
apprised of the details of the measures taken by the Ministry for an early enactment of Act for Dam Safety. 
27. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
 “The proposal for enactment of Dam Safety Bill is under consideration in the 
Ministry to provide robust legal and institutional framework for Dam Safety for the Central 
& the State Governments. 
 The Ministry introduced the Dam Safety Bill 2010 in Parliament on 30th August, 
2010 under Article 252 of the Constitution, which was subsequently referred to the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Water Resources for examination. The 
Parliamentary Standing Committee submitted the recommendations vide its Seventh 
Report on Dam Safety Bill, 2010 in the Parliament in August, 2011 and subject to its 
recommendations and observations, the Standing Committee had recommended passing 
of the Bill by the Parliament. The observation and recommendations of the Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Water Resources were examined by this Ministry and accordingly 
a new Bill was prepared incorporating the recommendations/suggestion of the Standing 
Committee. 
 However, the said Bill lapsed on the dissolution of the 15th Lok Sabha. As in view 
of the bifurcation of the States of Andhra Pradesh, a fresh resolution of two States was 
required under Article 252 of the Constitution for introducing the Bill, the process of 
enactment of Dam Safety Bill under Article 252 could not be taken up by this Ministry. 
 Further, considering the limitation of the Dam Safety Bill (2010) in terms of its 
initial applicability to the two States of Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal and the Union 
Territories only, the Ministry explored the possibilities available in the Constitution of India 
for ensuring national level applicability of the Bill in consultation with Ministry of Law & 

21 
 
Justice (MoL&J). Accordingly, a new draft Dam Safety Bill, 2016 has been prepared with 
nationwide applicability of the Bill. 
 As advised by NITI Aayog, the Bill was circulated to all the States and Union 
Territories on 09.08.2016 for fresh consultation. In the meantime, 37th Meeting of National 
Committee on Dam Safety (NCDS) was held on 17 & 18th February, 2017. In accordance 
with the comments received from various States and outcome of the 37th Meeting of 
NCDS, the Bill has been modified and Dam Safety Bill, 2018 has been prepared. Further, 
Note for Cabinet on Dam Safety Bill has been prepared by the Ministry and submitted to 
cabinet secretariat for consideration.” 
28. The Committee note that the Dam Safety Bill, 2016 with nationwide applicability was 
circulated among all the States and Union Territories and based on the comments received from 
them the Bill was modified. Accordingly, the Dam Safety Bill, 2018 has been prepared and 
submitted to the Cabinet Secretariat for consideration. However, the Committee are concerned to 
note that despite their preparation of the revised Bill in 2016, it took almost two years to complete 
the consultation process.  Now, as the Dam Safety Bill, 2018 has been prepared, it is yet to be 
approved by the Cabinet. Since framing of an enabling law to facilitate the adoption of timely 
measures for ensuring safety of around 5200 Dams in the country is necessary, in the opinion of 
the Committee, it is highly imperative in the interest of the country to enact the law at the earliest.  
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should take utmost measures for the enactment 
of the proposed legislation at the earliest. 
I. Research And Development And Implementation Of National Water Mission 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
29. The Committee observed that the scheme of Research and Development and Implementation of 
National Water Mission had been formulated by amalgamating existing schemes of (i) Research and 
Development and (ii) Implementation of National Water Mission included under XII Plan.  This Scheme 
intended to undertake Research and Development to provide educational training and human resources 
development programme in water sector and implement Schemes / Projects for conservation of water, 

22 
 
minimizing wastage and ensuring its more equitable distribution both across and within States through 
National Water Mission.  The Committee noted that under the scheme of National Water Mission, as 
compared to BE of Rs. 15 crore for the year 2017-18, the RE was Rs. 5 crore whereas the Actual Utilization 
was only Rs. 0.69 crore upto 31 January, 2018.  However, the BE allocations for the year 2018-19 had 
been again increased substantially to Rs. 20.10 crore for National Water Mission.  The Committee found 
that the main reason for underutilization of resources under the Head National Water Mission was due to 
inadequate staff and absence of full time Mission Director in National Water Mission who had to coordinate 
with other Ministries, State Governments and other Organizations intensively for fulfilling its mandate and 
objectives.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommended the Ministry to take urgent measures to fill 
up the vacancies in the National Water Mission at the earliest. 
 
30. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
 “A proposal for filling up of the vacancies of staff viz. Consultants and Young 
Professionals through outsourcing was moved for 13 professionals. Applications have 
been received in this regard and short-listing of the candidates is being done by a 
screening committee for final selection through interviews. Meanwhile, a proposal for 
continuation of services of 3 Consultants who earlier worked in National Water Mission 
(NWM) is under consideration in the Ministry as a stop-gap arrangement till the joining of 
the finally selected candidates. CWC and CGWB were also requested to depute two 
officers in NWM for implementation of its activities.” 
 
31. The Committee are concerned to note that no expeditious measures have been taken to 
address the problem of staff crunch at National Water Mission and the same state of affairs still 
continues. So far, a proposal to recruit Consultants and Young professionals through outsourcing 
has been moved with the short listing of candidates currently for interview. Till then, continuation 
of services of 3 Consultants who earlier worked in National Water Mission (NWM) and deputation 
from Central Water Commission (CWC) and Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) is being 
considered for discharging the work of the NWM. While the National Water Mission (NWM) was set 

23 
 
up with the laudable objectives of implementing Schemes / Projects for conservation of water, 
minimizing wastage and ensuring its more equitable distribution both across and within States, the 
half hearted approach of the Government to fully equip it with the competent and desired level of 
manpower to undertake its responsibilities in an effective way shows Government apathy and 
negligence. The Committee would, therefore, recommend the Government to take urgent steps to 
fill up the vacancies at the NWM expeditiously to strengthen it and reinforce its objective of 
conserving water which is the need of the hour at present. 
 
J. National Bureau of Water Use Efficiency 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
32. With regard to increasing water use efficiency by 20 per cent which is one of the goals of National 
Water Mission, the Committee found that not much headway had been made.  As informed to the 
Committee, the water use efficiency in agriculture was only 38% whereas it was the largest consumer of 
water using 80 per cent of water for irrigation.  The Committee further observed that establishment of 
proposed National Bureau of Water use efficiency had been put on a back burner, which could have gone a 
long way in improving water use efficiency by making users accountable for wastage.  The Committee 
therefore, stressed the need for establishing National Bureau of Water Use Efficiency with immediate effect 
with statutory powers.  They desired to be apprised of the measures taken/proposed to be taken for an 
early establishment of National Bureau of Water Use Efficiency. 
 
33. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
“The proposal for establishment of National Bureau of Water Use Efficiency (NBWUE) with 
statutory powers was reviewed and submitted to the competent authority for his approval/ 
advice. Appropriate measures will be taken for implementation of NBWUE after approval 
from Competent Authority is received.” 

24 
 
 
34. The Committee note that the proposal for establishing National Bureau of Water Use 
Efficiency (NBWUE) with the Statutory powers has been placed before the Competent Authority for 
approval. However, no further details have been furnished with regard to the likely time period by 
which the proposed Bureau will be set up. The Committee disapprove of such non – committal  
attitude on the part of the Ministry towards an extremely important and pressing issue of improving 
water use efficiency. While the Government has set lofty goal for improving water use efficiency by 
20 per cent under the National Water Mission (NWM), the zeal to implement the same is lacking, as 
is evident from the dire state of affairs at the NWM, discussed earlier in this Report and indifferent 
approach in setting up the Bureau for encouraging efficient use of water. The Committee would like 
to know the steps taken by the Ministry for early approval for setting up the NBWUE and time 
period fixed to make it operational. They would further like to be apprised of the measures taken to 
improve water use in agriculture which is the biggest consumer of water and in other sectors of 
industries and domestic use, etc. within three months of presentation of this Report. 
K. Census of Water Bodies 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
 
35. The Committee found that under Har Khet Ko Pani (HKKP) Component of Pradhan Mantri Krishi 
Sinchai Yojana (PMKSY), two Schemes viz. Surface Minor Irrigation scheme (SMI) and Repair, Renovation 
and Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies Scheme had been taken up.  Under the SMI Scheme, Minor 
Irrigation Schemes having irrigation potential of less than 2000 hectare are included, while Central 
Assistance given to States for repair, renovation and restoration of water bodies are included under RRR 
scheme.  The Committee further noted that an allocation of Rs. 2600 crore had been made under the 
component HKKP which is Rs. 712 crore more as compared to RE allocations in the year 2017-18.  The 
reason for increase in allocation was stated to be due to inability of the Ministry to release commensurate 

25 
 
Central Assistance for ongoing pending proposal of SMI/RRR of water bodies scheme last year due to 
Budget constraints.  Also provision of Rs. 1310 crore has been made to provide for likely payments for the 
year 2018-19 on the basis of projections made by NABARD/NWDA. 
With regard to implementation of RRR scheme, the Committee found that though Central 
Assistance was being given to States to undertake works for repair, renovation and restoration of water 
bodies, the Ministry had not taken concrete action to prevent existing water bodies from being encroached 
upon and making them pollution free.  The entire responsibility on this count had been shifted to the 
concerned State Governments on the ground that subject of water was at present under the State List.  The 
Committee expressed their displeasure over the fact that Ministry had not initiated any action to conduct a 
survey of water bodies in the country particularly with reference to their size, condition, status of 
encroachment, etc. despite their recommendation in this regard in the Tenth Report (16th Lok Sabha).  
Taking note of the fact that a number of water bodies in the country were severely polluted, the Committee 
desired that the Ministry should take proactive measures to address the situation.  They, therefore, again 
recommended the Ministry to conduct a survey of all the water bodies including their size, condition, status 
of encroachments and furnish the findings of the survey to the Committee within three months of 
presentation of this Report. 
36. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
 “During FY 2018-19, Rs. 300 crore has been provided for RRR and SMI schemes.  
 Regarding the encroachment issue, Secretary (MoWR, RD & GR) vide D.O. letters 
dated 26.02.2016 and 07.11.2016 requested State Governments to take several measures 
for protection of water bodies including encroachment issue. Guidelines regarding 
conservation of water bodies have also been circulated. 
The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation has 
planned to conduct the Census of Water Bodies during the period 2017-18 to 2020-21 
under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme-"Irrigation Census". The objective of the Census is 
to build up a database on water bodies. Information on use, storage capacity, status of 
encroachments, storage etc. of water bodies will be collected through the Census.” 

26 
 
37. The Committee note that the Ministry has planned to conduct the Census of Water Bodies 
during the period 2017-18 to 2020-21 under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of ‘Irrigation Census’. 
However, as recommended by the Committee in their previous Reports, this work should have been 
undertaken much earlier.  Now, that the Ministry has planned to conduct a census of Water Bodies 
with Irrigation Census, the Committee apprehend that the work may get delayed on the ground of 
coinciding with the Irrigation Census. Keeping in view the pathetic condition of Water Bodies in the 
country, the Committee feel that the work of conducting census should be started immediately. The 
Committee would, therefore, desire to be apprised of the details of likely commencement of the 
Irrigation Census. The Committee would further like to clarify and impress upon the Ministry that in 
case of any foreseeable delay, the work of conducting the census/survey of Water Bodies may be 
undertaken separately to expedite the completion of the Census as early as possible and enable 
formation of a good Database of Water Bodies at Centre with information on State of Water Bodies, 
storage capacity, extent of encroachment, water quality, etc. and facilitate adoption of immediate 
remedial measures to address the problems related therewith.  
L. More Crop Per Drop – Micro Irrigation 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
 
38. The Committee found that the objective of 'More Crop Per Drop' or efficient use of water in 
agriculture was being encouraged partly through the Command Area Development (CAD) Works 
implemented pari-passu in AIBP projects and partly under PMKSY component being implemented by the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare.  As of now, the thrust in AIBP and CADWM projects was on 
the encouragement of the use of underground pipeline network to reduce the wastage of water.  They also 
noticed that Har Khet Ko Pani (HKKP) under PMKSY, being executed by the Ministry of Water Resources, 
River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation included only creation of irrigation potential under the 

27 
 
Schemes of SMI and RRR of water bodies, based on proposals submitted by the States.  They further 
observed that the Ministry did not have any information on area covered under Micro Irrigation under 99 
Prioritized Projects of AIBP.  They also noted with utmost concern that the proposed Micro Irrigation Fund 
(announced in Budget 2017-18), to be created in NABARD with an initial corpus of Rs. 5000 crore under 
the jurisdiction of Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare and proposed implementation of 
"Incentivisation Scheme for Bridging Irrigation Gap (ISBIG)" Scheme under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of 
Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation were yet to see the light of the day.  ISBIG 
scheme was yet to be approved by Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC).  Noting that the use of Drip and 
Sprinkler Irrigation Devices had not been included in the Micro Irrigation infrastructure component of 
CADWM programme, the Committee were of the opinion that the measures so far taken by the Ministry 
were not sufficient to increase the use of Micro Irrigation methods in a big way.  Further, at present, the 
farmers were expected to bear the cost of such devices either themselves or avail subsidies available in 
extant scheme of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare.  The Committee were of the view that 
the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation should play a pivotal role in 
spreading Micro Irrigation Methods alongwith laying of underground pipelines, creating a robust network.  In 
this regard, the Ministry should formulate scheme to propagate Micro Irrigation in a big way by giving 
incentives to farmers in the form of financial assistance / subsidy in consultation with the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare.  The Committee, therefore, recommended the Ministry to initiate 
measures to incentivize farmers and apprise the Committee in detail about the efforts made in this direction 
within three months of presentation of this Report.  The Committee also recommended the Ministry to make 
sincere efforts for implementation of ISBIG Scheme at the earliest.  Further the Ministry should collect 
information on total area covered under Micro Irrigation in the 99 Prioritised Projects of AIBP and furnish 
the details to the Committee as well. 
 

28 
 
39. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
 “Ministry of Agriculture and farmers Welfare’s Micro Irrigation (MI) scheme already 
provides for direct subsidies to the farmers to bear the cost of devices such as drip 
sets/sprinkler sets. The scope of CADWM programme is accordingly, restricted to only the 
creation of infrastructure including components of sump (waste water pipe), pump, High 
Density Polyethelene (HDPE) pipelines and pertinent devices. However, for the overall 
effectiveness, convergence of efforts (for creation of both MI infrastructure up to farm 
outlets and MI devices within farm) is sought with MOA&FW. Accordingly, the MOA&FW 
has agreed to provide support through the Micro Irrigation Fund(IMF) proposed to be 
created under their Ministry. As such a separate scheme for incentivization of farmers 
directly by MOWR,RD&GR is not proposed. 
 The proposed ‘Incentivization Scheme for Building Irrigation Gap (ISBIG)’ targets 
balance CCA of 80 lakh ha. under 317 projects in 24 States at a cost of Rs. 61237 cr. 
State level consultations were held during April, 2017 to finalise the scope of the scheme. 
The meeting of EFC was held on 27th march, 2018, minutes are awaited, following which 
the case will be put up for the approval of the Cabinet. 
 In the ongoing projects under 99 prioritized projects, the States are required to 
cover at least 10% of the CCA under MI wherever feasible. However, the States in most 
cases are presently focused on conventional On Farm Development (OFD) works while 
indicating coverage of MI at a later phase of project implementation.” 
40. The Committee note that at present the incentives to farmers for using Micro Irrigation 
methods are being given by the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmer’s Welfare (MOA&FW) in the form 
of Direct Subsidy to bear the cost of Drip/Sprinkler sets. They observe that the scope of the 
Command Area Development works administered by the Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation (MoWR, RD & GR) is restricted to only creation of 
infrastructure including components of sump (waste water pipe), pump, High Density Polyethelene 
(HDPE) pipelines and pertinent devices. However, in view of the Committee, the MoWR, RD & GR 
should take a more proactive role in spreading the use of Micro Irrigation methods as it will save 
the wastage of extremely precious and scarce Water resource which is a burning issue at present.  
As informed to the Committee, the Ministry has taken initiative to converge their efforts with the 
MOA&FW for creation of both Micro Irrigation Infrastructure up to farm outlets and Micro Irrigation 
devices within farm, for which the MOA&FW has agreed to provide support through the Micro 

29 
 
Irrigation Fund proposed to be created under their Ministry. However, no information has been 
furnished to the Committee with regard to the creation of the Micro Irrigation Fund (announced in 
Budget 2017-18), which was to be created in NABARD with an initial corpus of Rs. 5000 crore. 
Further they are concerned to note that the proposed ‘Incentivization Scheme for Building Irrigation 
Gap (ISBIG)’ which aims to cover 80 Lakh Hectares of the balance Culturable Command Area [CCA] 
of 317 projects in 24 States at a cost of Rs. 61,237 crore, is yet to be put up for approval of the 
Cabinet. Also they are surprised to find that in the ongoing 99 Prioritized Projects, in which the 
States are required to cover at least 10% of the CCA under Micro Irrigation wherever feasible, the 
States in most cases are presently focused on conventional On Farm Development (OFD) works 
and coverage of Micro Irrigation will be indicated at a later phase of Project Implementation. The 
Committee express their displeasure over the sluggishness in implementation of the proposed 
Schemes. While deprecating such attitude, the Committee desire that the MoWR, RD & GR should 
take the lead in spreading the benefits of Micro Irrigation and work in collaboration with the 
MOA&FW for incentivizing its use. They, therefore, recommend the Ministry to pursue with the 
MOA&FW for setting up the Micro Irrigation Fund at the earliest to promote the use of Micro 
Irrigation methods. They further reiterate that sincere efforts should be made for early 
implementation of ISBIG Scheme to enable States to utilize the irrigation potential created.  The 
Committee would also direct the Ministry to furnish the details of the total area covered under Micro 
Irrigation in the 99 Prioritised Projects of AIBP to them at the earliest. 
M. River Management Activities and works related to Border Areas 
Recommendation (Para No. 21) 
 
41. Regarding the scheme of River Management Activities and works related to Border Areas, the 
Committee observed that although Pancheshwar Development Authority was set up in September 2014, 

30 
 
the Detailed Project Report of Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project, prepared by M/s WAPCOS Ltd. was yet 
to be finalized by both the sides.  Further Saptkosi field investigation was still continuing.  The reason for 
slow progress was stated to be due to security problems on Nepal side.  The Committee desired to know 
the outcome of bilateral discussions held in this regard.  Although discussions were being held in Joint 
Committees at Ministry level and Secretaries level, the frequency of such meetings should be increased to 
resolve the issues.  Further, the Committee were of the opinion that the Ministry should adopt a more 
proactive approach in discussions with Nepal by giving more financial support for completion of Projects on 
Rivers originating from Nepal and crucial for Flood Management in downstream Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. 
Besides, the Committee also recommended the Ministry to evaluate the anti erosion works undertaken in 
higher reaches of mountains in Nepal where there had been reckless deforestation resulting in unbridled 
flow of water during monsoon and its effect on floods in Bihar.  The Committee were of the opinion that the 
Ministry should undertake Projects/Works/Activities to ensure afforestation in the higher reaches of 
mountains and take up this matter, in particular, with Nepal at appropriate level.  The Committee desired to 
know the details of such measures. 
42. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
“The bilateral discussions on water resources matters with Nepal are being held through 
multi-tier mechanism of bilateral committees as under. 
1) Indo-Nepal Joint Ministerial Committee on Water Resources (JMCWR). 
2) Joint Committee on Water Resources (JCWR). 
3) Joint Standing Technical Committee (JSTC). 
4) Joint Committee on Kosi &Gandak Projects (JCKGP). 
5) Joint Committee on Inundation of Flood Management (JCIFM). 
6) Joint Team of Experts (JTE). 
Besides the above, the Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project (PMP) is being planned and 
implemented by Pancheshwar Development Authority (PDA). The associated committees 
in this regard are as under: 
7) Governing Body and Joint Committee of PDA. 

31 
 
8) Team of Experts/Officials (ToE) for finalization of DPR of Pancheshwar Multipurpose 
project. 
 The Indian side of these Committees is headed at various levels. JMCWR is 
headed by the Union Minister for Water Resources, RD & GR, JCWR by Secretary, WR, 
RD & GR, JSTC by Chairman, GFCC, JCKGP by Principal Secretary, WRD, Govt. of 
Bihar, JCIFM by Member, GFCC and JTE by Member (RM), CWC. The Co-chair of the 
Governing Body of PDA is Secretary, WR, RD& GR while the Co-chair of Joint Committee 
of PDA is Joint Secretary (Administration) of MoWR, RD & GR. The Indian side of the 
Team of Experts/ Officials for finalization of DPR of Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project is 
Chairman, CWC. All meetings are held as mutually agreed on convenient dates to both 
India and Nepal side. 
JCIFM 
 The last meeting of JCIFM was recently held on 16-20th April, 2018 at 
Janakpur/Kathmandu, Nepal. Ministry of External Affairs, GoI is extending assistance to 
the Govt. of Nepal for flood management works on trans-boundary Rivers in Nepal along 
India-Nepal border flowing into UP and Bihar. The broad issues under discussion include 
inundation and flood management aspects. There are various rivers originating from Nepal 
which enter India at various places in Bihar & Uttar Pradesh. These rivers carry a huge 
amount of water and sediment and cause flooding in the Indian territory. In this connection, 
project works related to three rivers namely Bagmati, Kamla, and Lalbakeya have been 
taken up by Nepal Government under Indo- Nepal cooperation projects funded by MEA, 
Government of India to prevent flooding events from the aforesaid three rivers from Nepal 
side to the protected area in Bihar by extending the embankments along these rivers from 
the India-Nepal border to high grounds in Nepal. Further, river management projects on 
other rivers would be taken in future after completion of the aforesaid works in Bagmati, 
Kamla, and Lalbakeya rivers. The recommendations of the Committee will be considered 
in consultation with MEA for taking up the matter with Nepali side at appropriate level for 
their consideration. 
JCKGP 
 The last meeting of JCKGP was held in February 2016. The next meeting is being 
planned in June 2018 by both sides. The issues discussed under JCKGP include operation 
and maintenance of the infrastructure of Kosi and Gandak Projects and all related issues. 
JTE  
 The last meeting of JTE was held in July 2017 at Kathmandu. The issues 
discussed under JTE include review of the progress of the field investigation works and 
preparation of DPR for Sapta Kosi-Sun Kosi projects in Nepal for which a Joint Project 
Office (JPO) is functioning at Biratnagar in Nepal. The preparation of DPR and the JPO is 
fully funded by MoWR, RD & GR, Government of India. These projects would benefit both 
India and Nepal by way of irrigation, hydropower generation, flood control and navigation. 
The field investigations comprising of drilling and drifting works at Sapta Kosi dam site 
have not progressed much due to hindrance by local people. The Nepal side has assured 
to create awareness among the local people for early resumption of field investigation 
works. 

32 
 
JSTC, JCWR and JMCWR 
 JSTC coordinates the works of all the Committees under JCWR. The JCWR deals 
with all the issues related to inundation & flood management, Pancheshwar Project, DPR 
of Sapta Kosi – Sun Kosi Project, issues related to Kosi and Gandak projects, Power 
Supply, Energy Banking etc. The next meeting of these Committees is being planned for 
this year. 
PDA 
 The Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project (PMP), a bi-national project of 
Government of India (GoI) and Government of Nepal (GoN), has been envisaged on the 
Mahakali River (known as Sarada in India), where the river forms the international 
boundary between India and Nepal. In February 1996, His Majesty’s Government of Nepal 
and the Government of India had signed a Treaty (known as “Mahakali Treaty”) for 
integrated development of the Mahakali River. The Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project is 
the centre piece of the Treaty. Under Article 3 of the Treaty, both sides have agreed to 
implement the Pancheshwar Project in accordance with the Detailed Project Report (DPR) 
under finalization jointly by both the countries.  
 For development, execution and operation of the Pancheshwar Project, the 
Pancheshwar Development Authority (PDA) was set up in September, 2014with the 
approval of both the Governments initially with its headquarter at Kathmandu, which was 
later shifted to Mahendranagar (Nepal). The Authority shall act as an independent 
autonomous body. It shall have two Co-Chairpersons, one from each Party and twelve 
Members (six Members from each side) which will be working as a Governing Body of the 
Authority. The Authority shall take immediate measures to finalize the Detailed Project 
Report of Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project. Thereafter, the Authority shall undertake the 
execution, operation and maintenance of the Project, including the re-regulating dam at 
Rupaligad site in an integrated manner.  
 During the second meeting of PDA held in November 2014 in New Delhi, both 
sides agreed to award the work of updating of the Pancheshwar DPR to M/s WAPCOS 
Limited based upon the latest data. Government of India is bearing the entire cost of 
preparation of DPR for the project. M/s WAPCOS prepared a draft final DPR of 
Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project and submitted to the Pancheshwar Development 
Authority (PDA) in November, 2016. A Joint Team of Experts/Officials (ToE) from both 
sides has been constituted to jointly discuss the issues raised by both sides and finalize 
the DPR. The ToE has held two meetings so far. 
 The meeting of Governing Body of PDA and Joint Committee has been recently 
held on 23 – 25th April, 2018 and 26th April, 2018 respectively, at Kathmandu. All the 
Administrative, Financial and technical issues of PDA were discussed in these two 
Committees.” 
43. The Committee note that for managing the rivers at the Nepal border, Bilateral discussions 
are held at the level of Multi Tier Bilateral Committees viz. Indo-Nepal Joint Ministerial Committee 
on Water Resources (JMCWR), headed by the Union Minister of Water Resources, River 

33 
 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, Joint Committee on Water Resources (JCWR) headed by the 
Secretary, Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, Joint Standing Technical 
Committee (JSTC) headed by Chairman, Ganga Flood Control Commission, Joint Committee on 
Kosi &Gandak Projects (JCKGP) headed by the Principal Secretary, Water Resource Department, 
Government of Bihar, Joint Committee on Inundation of Flood Management (JCIFM) headed by 
Member, Ganga Flood Control Commission and Joint Team of Experts (JTE) headed by Member 
(River Management), Central Water Commission. Further, Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project is 
being implemented by the Pancheshwar Development Authority. The Committee are satisfied to 
note that regular bilateral meetings at these committees have been held. While appreciating the 
efforts made by the Ministry, the Committee are of the opinion that there is a further need to engage 
Nepal more proactively for management of our Rivers at the Border. In their view, the frequency of 
these meetings should be increased and early resolution of local issues need to be impressed upon 
the Government of Nepal for speedy completion of Projects such as Sapt Kosi –Sun Kosi Project 
and Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project. They further notice that no reply has been furnished with 
regard to the reckless felling of trees at the higher reaches of mountains which result in severe 
floods during the Rainy Season. They would therefore, reiterate taking up this issue with Nepal at 
appropriate level and take initiative to start Projects/Schemes for afforestation to address the issue 
of frequent floods. 
N. CENTRAL GROUND WATER BOARD (CGWB) 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
 
44. The Committee note that the Central Ground Water Board (CGWB), a Multidisciplinary Scientific 
Organization has been entrusted with the responsibility to develop and disseminate information 
technologies, monitor and implement national policies for the scientific and sustainable development and 

34 
 
management of India's Ground Water resources including their exploitation, assessment, conservation, 
augmentation, protection from pollution and distribution based on principles of economic and ecological 
efficiency and equity.  They further note that the Board is not sufficiently empowered to carry out its 
activities effectively as it has serious shortage of both manpower and modern equipment.  At present out of 
total sanctioned staff strength of 4012, 1209 posts are vacant in the Board.  Further 23 technical and non-
technical staff have been deployed at Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) Central Head Quarter at 
New Delhi.  Also, at Regional level, CGWA NOC/issues are being handled by existing CGWB manpower 
only. They observe that measures such as revision in recruitment rules, revival of posts, pursuing UPSC for 
filling up of Scientific Group 'B' Gazetted posts etc. are being undertaken.  The activities of the Board are 
also getting handicapped due to lack of modern equipments.  Besides, CGWB, State Ground Water 
Departments are not adequately equipped to handle their work as these are also suffering from lack of 
domain specialists. With regard to the proposal for restructuring of CGWB, as recommended in Dr. Mihir 
Shah Committee's Report, they notice that the proposal is presently being considered by the Ministry.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to take urgent steps for filling up vacancies without further 
delay at CGWB by recruitment of domain specialist.  Further the Ministry should take measures to increase 
staff strength under CGWA to enable it to carry out its regulatory role independently.  Besides, steps should 
also be initiated to procure the modern equipment to enable CGWB to carry out its activities more 
effectively.  State Governments should be persuaded to take desired steps for strengthening the State 
Ground Water Departments with whose collaboration, the Board can effectively manage and develop the 
Ground Water Resources. 
45. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
“The Central Ground Water Board is making all possible efforts for filling up of vacancies 
by way of direct recruitment through Staff Selection Commission (SSC), Union Public 
Service Commission (UPSC) and through promotion. Amendments in Recruitment Rules 
are being processed at Ministry / Dept. of Personnel & Training (DOPT) level. Further, a 

35 
 
proposal prepared by Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA), New Delhi for creation of 
additional posts for handling work related to Authority is under consideration.” 
46. The Committee find that the replies on this issues are very short and casual. Though the 
Ministry has stated that process of Direct Recruitment has been started through Staff Selection 
Commission (SSC), Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) and vacancies are also being filled 
up through promotion, no specific information has been furnished to the Committee regarding the 
time period by which vacancies will be filled up.  The Committee further note in particular that the 
amendments in Recruitment Rules have been undertaken which remain to be finalized. Also a 
proposal of Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA), to create additional posts for carrying out its 
activities is being considered by the Ministry. However, no information has been furnished on the 
measures taken to recruit domain specialists/ technical experts and procurement/acquisition of 
modern equipments to strengthen the Board’s technical expertise and enable it to function more 
effectively. Besides, the Ministry has also not furnished any information on the steps taken to 
strengthen the State Ground Water Boards who are very crucial partners for successfully carrying 
out activities relating to development and monitoring of Ground Water Resources. Furthermore, the 
replies also lack any information on status of implementation of Dr. Mihir Shah committee Report 
on restructuring the Central Water Commission (CWC) and the Central Ground Water Board 
(CGWB), which is stated to be still under consideration of the Ministry. The Committee cannot help 
but note the nonchalant manner in which the issues/problems are being handled by the Ministry 
and stress the need to take urgent steps for addressing the problems in ground water management 
and control. They, therefore, recommend the Ministry to finish recruitment process for filling up the 
vacancies including domain specialist at CGWB without further delay to reinforce its capability.  
Further, immediate measures should be taken to increase the staff strength under CGWA to enable 
it to carry out its regulatory role independently. Besides, need for strengthening the State Ground 

36 
 
Water Departments should be impressed upon the State Governments and should be pursued 
continuously to make them effective partners in carrying out the activities of CGWB. The 
Committee would also desire to be apprised of the steps taken to modernize and upgrade the 
equipment needed for better assessment, management and development of the Ground Water. The 
Committee would further like to be apprised of the details of the measures taken in the above 
direction within three months of presentation of this Report including the measures taken to 
implement the recommendations of Dr. Mihir Shah Committee Report. 
  

37 
 
CHAPTER -  II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation  (Para No. 1)  
MANAGEMENT OF WATER RESOURCES - Challenges to Meet Future Demands of Water 
The Committee are concerned to note about the alarming situation in respect of availability of 
scarce water resources in India. They are particularly worried about the decline in per capita availability of 
water from 2209 m3 in the year 1991 to 1545 m3 in the year 2011. Water demand from irrigation, drinking 
water, industry, energy and other sectors is estimated to rise from 710 Billion Cubic Metre (BCM) in the 
year 2010 to 843 BCM in the year 2025 and upto 1180 BCM in the year 2050 as against the availability of 
1123 BCM.  Against this backdrop, the Committee note that the Ministry has proposed several new 
schemes viz. Ground Water Irrigation Scheme under the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana (PMKSY) – 
Har Khet Ko Paani (HKKP) to provide assured Irrigation to Small and Marginal Farmers, Incentivisation 
Scheme to Bridge Irrigation Gap (ISBIG) to ensure utilization of irrigation potential for Projects other than 
99 Priority Projects selected under PMKSY, Atal Bhujal Yojana (ABY) for select over exploited and ground 
water stressed areas to ensure efficient use of ground water through community participation. Besides 
State Water Budgeting on the lines of financial budgeting is being introduced to address the issue of over 
consumption of water and thereby ensure water security, safety and sustainability. While appreciating the 
proposed Schemes, the Committee desire that implementation of these Schemes should be expedited to 
realize their benefits at ground level at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry is taking action for prompt completion of appraisal and approval process of these schemes 
and the status is as under. 

38 
 
i.  The proposed scheme “ PMKSY-Har Khet Ko Pani- GW” of  Ministry of Water Resources, RD & 
GR aims at providing assured irrigation facilities in the identified ‘most irrigation deprived’ districts with 
sufficient scope for groundwater development. The scheme envisages enhancement of food 
production by more than two-fold in 96 prioritized ‘most irrigation deprived’ districts in 12 states, 
namely Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Odisha, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal by providing assured irrigation to about 21.35 
lakh hectare by creating irrigation facilities through tube wells, dug wells, bore wells and dug cum 
bore wells. This programme will give a boost to irrigation and food production in the largely tribal and 
backward areas of the country which are traditionally deprived of canal command irrigation. Assured 
irrigation will improve the socio-economic conditions of the farmers. The concept note of the proposed 
scheme has been submitted to Ministry of Finance, department of Expenditure for in Principle 
Approval of the Scheme and the scheme proposal has been uploaded on the web site of Ministry of 
Finance in March 2018 for circulation and comments. 
ii.  Atal Bhujal Yojana (ABHY) of Ministry of Water Resources, RD & GR envisages sustainable 
ground water management with emphasis on demand side management through community 
participation. The scheme is proposed to be implemented in identified over-exploited and water 
scarce areas in Haryana, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and 
Karnataka. The scheme has two major components, viz. Investment Component and Incentive 
Component. The investment component is aimed at building the capacity of the communities for self-
governance of water resources and comprises institutional strengthening, improved monitoring 
systems to facilitate better data availability, awareness creation and capacity building of stakeholders. 
The incentive component envisages incentivizing the participating states for achieving pre-defined 
targets in respect of various activities such as preparation of Gram Panchayat wise water security, 
implementation of supply and demand side interventions through convergence of on-going schemes 
etc. The ultimate aim of the scheme of is to bring in behavioral changes at the grass-root level to 
change the way ground water resources are presently being managed. Provisions for participation of 
the communities at planning, implementation and monitoring of various interventions have also been 
incorporated in the scheme design.  EFC of the scheme was held on 27.03.2018 and the proposal is 
under process for approval of the Cabinet. 
The cost of the Scheme is Rs 6,000 cr to be funded equally by Govt. of India and The World Bank.  
The Bank has approved a loan of US$ 450 million on 5th June, 2018 

39 
 
iii.  The meeting of EFC for the Incentivization Scheme for Bridging Irrigation Gap (ISBIG) was held 
on 27.3.2018.  The proposal is under process for approval of the Cabinet. 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2018 - Budget, Dated : 13.06.2018) 
Recommendation  (Para No. 3)  
TARGETS AND ACHIEVEMENTS UNDER XII PLAN 
The Committee are perturbed to note that most of the Schemes/ Programmes of the Ministry could 
not be completed during the tenure of XII Plan and expenditure incurred during that period is way below the 
outlays approved under each Scheme except the Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement Programme (DRIP) 
wherein Actual Expenditure of Rs. 2057.63 crore has been incurred as against the total outlay of Rs. 2100 
crore for the Project. They, however, note that the Ministry has now, proposed appropriate measures to be 
taken in respect of each of the schemes, after identification of bottlenecks, to enable their completion in a 
time bound manner. Taking note of the proposed measures to speed up the implementation process, the 
Committee desire that the Ministry should devise actionable plan and adopt target oriented approach to 
implement the Schemes within stipulated time period.  
Reply of the Government 
 Recommendation of Hon’ble Committee is noted.  
 A total of ten schemes continuing from 12th Plan have been subjected to fresh appraisal process. 
As part of the appraisal process, the reasons for shortfall have been identified and appropriate corrective 
measures including alignment of targets to institutional capacities, Medium Term Expenditure Framework 
(MTEF) etc. undertaken.  
 Defined output and outcome targets under all schemes of Ministry would also be monitored 
through Output-Outcome Monitoring Framework of NITI Aayog through a web-portal, both at the level of 
Ministry and NITI Aayog. 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2018 - Budget, Dated : 13.06.2018) 

40 
 
Recommendation  (Para No. 7)  
GROUND WATER MANAGEMENT AND REGULATION 
The Committee observe that the Central sector scheme of Ground Water Management and 
Regulation was  implemented during XII Plan and is being continued further for the period 2017-2020 with a 
total outlay of Rs. 1164 crore. This Scheme has three components of National Aquifer Mapping and 
Management Programme (NAQUIM), Ground Water Monitoring, Resource Assessment, Regulation, 
Information Dissemination, etc. and Strengthening of infrastructure for technological upgradation 
(Machinery & Equipment). The Committee note that an allocation of Rs. 450 crore has been made in the 
year 2018-19 for this Scheme despite actual expenditure of only Rs. 164.12 crore in the previous year (upto 
December, 2017).  The main reasons for increasing budgetary allocation under this scheme is stated to be 
due to committed liability of Rs. 300 crore for outsourcing works for undertaking Aquifer Mapping; which 
has been carried forward to the year 2018-19 resulting in to the increase in the requirement of funds in the 
next financial year. They further observe that the Ministry has taken several measures to speed up the 
implementation of National Aquifer Mapping and Management Programme such as formation of National 
Inter-Departmental Steering Committee (NISC) under the Chairmanship of Secretary, MoWR, RD&GR, 
sharing of Aquifer Maps and Management Plans with State Ground Water Coordination Committees 
(SGWCC)  and regular review of the outputs of aquifer mapping by a National Level Expert Committee 
drawing domain experts, which include ex- Chairman CGWB, academicians from IIT, Delhi and Roorkee, 
agriculture experts, etc. The Committee are however, disturbed to find that the work of Aquifer Mapping, 
crucial for compiling information on the availability of ground water in Aquifers has not been undertaken in a 
planned manner. Under utilization of funds under this Scheme year after year shows the lack of proper 
planning and seriousness on the part of the Ministry in execution of this Scheme on account of which 
aquifer mapping could be completed so far for only 7.99 lakh hectare of land as against the target of 

41 
 
covering 12.91 lakh sq. Km. area by 2020.  With the adoption of the remedial measures for expediting this 
Programme, the Committee hope that work of Aquifer Mapping will be completed at the earliest without any 
further delay. The Committee further desire that targets should be fixed to complete this work within a 
specific time period under intimation to the Committee.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Scheme for Ground Water Management & Regulation would continue in the remaining period 
of the 14th Finance Commission i.e. upto 2019-20.  The scheme has been appraised by the Expenditure 
Finance Committee (EFC) and it is envisaged to cover an additional area of 6.6 lakh sq.km during 2017-
2020 (total coverage till March, 2020 will be 12.91 lakh sq.km area). In order to complete this work targets 
have been fixed for each year as below:- 
 
S. No. Year Area to be covered 
1 2017-18 2.3 lakh sq. km 
2 2018-19 2.1 lakh sq. km 
3 2019-20 2.2 lakh sq. km 
Area to be covered during 2017- 2020 – 6.6 lakh sq. km 
Area already covered (till March, 2017) - 6.31 lakh  sq. km 
Total Area to be covered by March 2020 - 12.91 lakh sq. km 
 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2018 - Budget, Dated : 13.06.2018) 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
DEVELOPMENT OF WATER RESOURCES INFORMATION SYSTEM (DWRIS) 
The Committee note that the Scheme of Development of Water Resources Information System 
(DWRIS) aims to create a standardized National Water Information System through an existing Nationwide 

42 
 
Network of 1598 Hydrological Observation Stations.  Under this scheme census of minor irrigation 
Schemes and pilot census of Major and Medium Irrigation Schemes are being conducted.  Besides, this 
Scheme also aims to create an integrated data bank to tackle coastal erosion.  They further note that this 
Scheme has been merged with the Flood Forecasting scheme since the financial year 2018-19 under 
which a robust early flood warning system is being developed to manage floods in the country.  Under the 
Flood Forecasting scheme, nationwide network of flood forecasting Stations is being created and existing 
Stations are being further modernized to help data transmission in real time mode using satellite telemetry 
units.  An amount of Rs. 211.27 crore has been allocated for combined scheme of DWRIS and Flood 
Forecasting schemes in the financial year 2018-19.  However the Expenditure incurred by the Ministry 
during the year 2017-18 was only Rs. 84 crore as against the revised allocation of Rs. 115 crore.  The 
Committee find that in all the components of DWRIS scheme viz. setting up of Hydrological Observation 
(HO) sites, Coastal Management Information System, Data Bank and Information system, strengthening of 
monitoring unit in CWC, physical and financial targets could not be achieved fully during the last four years.  
The reasons for non-achievement are attributed to non engagement of work charged staff for repair and 
maintenance of new HO sites, delays in administrative approval and expenditure sanction, delay in 
approval of work of reassessment of water availability and transfer of establishment of National Water 
Informatics Centre (NWIC) to National Hydrology Project scheme, etc.  The Committee observe that the 
work relating to Coastal Management Information System and Data Bank and Information System have 
lagged behind to a great extent due to delays in the approvals and sanction for Expenditure.  Keeping in 
view the need for having an authentic information / data on water availability, flood level etc. the Committee 
desire that the required approvals and procedures should be completed fast to finish works envisaged 
under the Scheme of DWRIS expeditiously.  Further the setting up of the proposed National Water 
Information Centre should be expedited.   
 

43 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Tenders for hiring of support services, outsourcing of supervisory staff and lab assistants and 
procurement of equipments are in various stages of finalisation by CWC for operationalisation of 720 newly 
opened Hydrological Observation Sites. Studies on reassessment of water availability have almost been 
completed. Studies related to Coastal Management Information System have commenced.  
 National Water Information Centre (NWIC) has been created as a repository of nation-wide water 
resources data vide Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation notification 
dated 28th March 2018. 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2018 - Budget, Dated : 13.06.2018) 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
The Committee further note that the Central Water Commission is presently monitoring flood 
situation in the country through Flood Forecasting (FF) Stations covering 166 low lying areas / cities and 
towns and 60 reservoirs.  The existing network of flood forecasting stations is spread over all the 19 Major 
River Systems in the country.  They observe that the FF network is proposed to be extended to 325 
Stations by covering additional 3 States.  However from the information furnished to the Committee, they 
note that during the last three years, modernization of existing FF network has lagged behind as out of 629 
Stations proposed to be modernized by installation of telemetry, work on only 65 stations could be 
completed.  Further during XII Plan period out of 100 new FF Stations proposed to be established, 51 new 
Stations were established.  Also out of 275 FF stations proposed to be covered, only 171 FF Stations could 
be covered under rainfall based hydrodynamic flood forecasting models.  While appreciating the measures 
taken by the Ministry to set up modern FF network in the country to enable dissemination of flood related 
information well in advance, the Committee desire that the pending works under the Scheme should be 
completed expeditiously but strictly within the period of three year plan (2017-18 to 2019-20) as envisaged 
by the Ministry. 
 

44 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Works on installation of 453 telemetry stations is in final stages and expected to be completed 
before monsoon of 2018. Locations of 49 Flood Forecasting Stations, carried over from XII Plan period 
have been finalized and they would be made operational during monsoon of 2018. Rainfall based 
Hydrodynamic Flood Forecasting Models have been developed for all basins except Indus basin for issuing 
flood forecasts/advisory on flood forecasting stations lying in these basins. 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2018 - Budget, Dated : 13.06.2018) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
The Committee are further surprised to note that with respect to assessment of water in 
Reservoirs, only 91 Reservoirs have HO sites as against the existing 121 reservoirs.  They are further 
surprised to note that there are still some HO sites, which are physically manned stations and are yet to be 
converted into Telemetry Based Stations to enable real time availability of data.  The Committee strongly 
recommend that Ministry should take utmost measures to modernize all such stations into Telemetry Based 
Stations and information should be made available online to enable Real Time Assessment of the Water 
Table.  They further recommend the Ministry to expand the HO sites for all the 121 reservoirs in the 
country. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 At present, monitoring of water availability in 91 major reservoirs is being carried out. Out of these 
91 reservoirs, telemetry has been installed on 54 reservoirs. In order to monitor the water availability in 120 
reservoirs on real time basis, 66 remaining reservoirs are to be installed with telemetry. Procurement 
process is underway for installation of telemetry on these 66 reservoirs. 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2018 - Budget, Dated : 13.06.2018) 
 
 

45 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
DAM REHABILITATION AND IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMME (DRIP) 
 
The Committee note that Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement Programme (DRIP) is being 
implemented in 223 Large Dams in four States of Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Kerala and Tamil Nadu.  The 
total cost of the Project is estimated at Rs. 2100 crore.  They notice that the Project was initially scheduled 
to be completed within six years from its inception i.e. 18 April, 2012.  However, scheduled date of its 
completion has been revised upto June 2020.  Further from the submissions of the Secretary, the 
Committee observe that the Ministry has approved DRIP II for a cost of Rs. 8000 crore.  They note that 
Budgetary Provisions under DRIP are made only for CWC and Damodar Valley Corporation (DVC).  
However, the Committee find that the Ministry has not been able to utilise the Budgetary Provisions under 
this Scheme fully as is evident from the fact that out of Rs. 160 crore allocated in 2017-18, the Ministry 
could utilize only Rs. 50 crore upto February, 2018.  The Committee are not satisfied with the progress of 
the Scheme as the work under the scheme could not be started as per the Scheduled Programme and now 
will be completed in another two years.  Taking note of the fact that another Programme is going to be 
started for rehabilitation of dams, the Committee desire that the works under the scheme should be 
expedited.  Further, they desire to be apprised of the details of DRIP II scheme including the total number 
of Dams to be covered thereunder along with details of the States wherein these are located, funding 
pattern, works envisaged, etc. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Budget allocated by the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation for the two Central agencies i.e. for Central Water Commission (CWC) and Damodar Valley 
Corporation (DVC) under Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement Programme (DRIP) for the Financial year 
2017-18 was Rs.160 cr, which was reduced to Rs.95 cr at RE stage. Actual expenditure during 2017-18 by 

46 
 
CWC & DVC together has been Rs. 92.10 cr (Rs. 50.00 cr and Rs. 42.10 cr respectively) upto 31st March, 
2018.  
 There was a shortfall in expenditure under CWC component as procurements/stage payments 
anticipated did not materialize. Expenditure incurred by DVC was less compared to the budgetary 
allocation, as some of the works required that reservoir level to be below crest level of the spillway. 
However, due to excessive rains in the previous year, water level did not reduce to the anticipated level. 
Also, tendering process for some of the major packages could not be completed due to non-participation of 
prospective bidders. 
 Against the total initial cost of DRIP Scheme Rs. 2100 cr, total financial commitment made so far is 
Rs. 2056 cr and total expenditure incurred under the project till March 2018 is Rs. 1421 cr. The scheme 
faced bottlenecks in its initial years of implementation and is being considered for further extension of two 
years i.e. upto 30.06.2020 at an additional cost of Rs.1366 cr. It is expected that the objectives of scheme 
will be achieved in all respects within the extended time frame.  
 CWC has received proposals from 19 States and 2 Central Agencies covering rehabilitation of 719 
dams at an estimated cost of Rs 10,220 cr for the proposed DRIP-II. The proposal was referred to 
Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance, which has given subjective in-principal approval for 
the project. The exact number of States/Agencies as well as number of dams may vary at the time of 
signing of Agreement with the World Bank depending upon the required institutional as well as financial 
preparedness of these Agencies. State-wise list of dams proposed under DRIP-II and their financial 
requirement at this stage is given as Annexure-I. 
 Provisional details of the works envisaged in most of the dams are enclosed at Annexure-II. 
 The funding pattern envisaged for DRIP II shall be 70:30 (70% as World Bank loan and 30% to be 
pitched in by the respective States) for all the States except for the Hilly States as decided by the Dept. of 
Economic Affairs. In relation to the central agencies, the funding shall be in the ratio of 50:50 (50% from 
World Bank and 50% from Central Government). 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2018 - Budget, Dated : 13.06.2018) 
 
 
 

47 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
The Committee are further concerned to note the lackadaisical attitude of the Government in 
bringing forth the legislative framework for Safety of Dams.  Keeping in view the large number of Dams in 
India (about 5200 dams) many of which require urgent actions to reinforce their safety, the Committee think 
that the Ministry should enact the Dam Safety Legislation at the earliest.  They would like to be apprised of 
the details of the measures taken by the Ministry for an early enactment of Act for Dam Safety. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The proposal for enactment of Dam Safety Bill is under consideration in the Ministry to provide 
robust legal and institutional framework for Dam Safety for the Central & the State Governments. 
 The Ministry introduced in the Dam Safety Bill 2010 in Parliament on 30th August, 2010 under 
Article 252 of the Constitution, which was subsequently referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Water Resources for examination. The Parliamentary Standing Committee submitted the 
recommendations vide its Seventh Report on Dam Safety Bill, 2010 in the Parliament in August, 2011 and 
subject to its recommendations and observations, the Standing Committee has recommended passing of 
the Bill by the Parliament. The observation and recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Water Resources were examined by this Ministry and accordingly a new Bill was prepared incorporating 
the recommendations/suggestion of the Standing Committee. 
 However, the said Bill lapsed on the dissolution of the 15th Lok Sabha. As in view of the bifurcation 
of the States of Andhra Pradesh, a fresh resolution of two States was required under Article 252 of the 
Constitution for introducing the Bill, the process of enactment of Dam Safety Bill under Article 252 could not 
be taken up by this Ministry. 

48 
 
 Further, considering the limitation of the Dam Safety Bill (2010) in terms of its initial applicability to 
the two states of Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal and the Union Territories only, the Ministry explored the 
possibilities available in the Constitution of India for ensuring national level applicability of the Bill in 
consultation with Ministry of Law & Justice (MoL&J). Accordingly, a new draft Dam Safety Bill, 2016 has 
been prepared with nationwide applicability of the Bill. 
 As advised by NITI Aayog, the Bill was circulated to all the States and Union Territories on 
09.08.2016 for fresh consultation. In the meantime, 37th Meeting of National Committee on Dam Safety 
(NCDS) was held on 17 & 18th February, 2017. In accordance with the comments received from various 
States and outcome of the 37th Meeting of NCDS, the Bill has been modified and Dam Safety Bill, 2018 
has been prepared. Further, Note for Cabinet on Dam Safety Bill has been prepared by the Ministry and 
submitted to cabinet secretariat for consideration. 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2018 - Budget, Dated : 13.06.2018) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
PRADHAN MANTRI KRISHI SINCHAI YOJANA (PMKSY) - Har Khet Ko Pani (HKKP) 
The Committee observe that Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana (PMKSY) was launched in 
2015-16 with a view to enhance the physical access of water on farm and expand cultivable area under the 
Assured Irrigation, improve on farm water use efficiency, introduce sustainable water conservation 
practices, etc.  Har Khet Ko Pani (HKKP) is one of the components of PMKSY; which includes Surface 
Minor Irrigation (SMI) and Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of water bodies scheme and grants 
to National Water Development Agency for debt servicing of NABARD loan under Long Term Irrigation 
Fund (LTIF). 
 
 

49 
 
ACCELERATED IRRIGATION BENEFITS PROGRAMME (AIBP) – 99 ongoing priority projects 
 The Committee note that during the year 2016-17, 99 ongoing Accelerated Irrigation Benefits 
Programme (AIBP) Major / Medium irrigation projects were identified for completion in phases up to 
December, 2019.  So far only 18 prioritised projects out of 99 projects identified have been completed and 
irrigation potential of more than 4 lakh hectare has been created.  However, the Committee find that even 
with the availability of funds through Long Term Irrigation Fund (LTIF) created in NABARD, the progress of 
completion of Projects is not at all impressive, given the fact that only 18 out of 99 Projects are complete.  
With this pace of work, completing all the Projects by December, 2019 seems to be unachievable, despite 
multiple monitoring mechanisms in place to oversee the progress of the projects.  The Committee would, 
therefore, like to know the factors responsible for the slow pace of work.  Since the financing of these 
Projects are through LTIF carrying loan liabilities, the Committee desire that the implementation should be 
expedited to finish the Projects by the end of December, 2019. 
Reply of the Government 
 The scheme of mission mode implementation of 99 prioritized projects and their funding 
arrangement under LTIF through NABARD was approved on 27.7.2016 and guidelines / procedures/ 
approvals etc. were put in place by October 2016.  During short time left in 2016-17, Central Assistance of 
Rs. 3308 cr and state share of Rs. 3334 cr was released during 2016-17.  States have reported that AIBP 
works in 18 projects have been completed/almost completed. Further AIBP works of another 28 projects 
are planned for completion by June 2018.  The pace of completion of projects has increased many folds as 
compared to an average of about 7 projects per year upto 03/2016. 
 Extensive monitoring and review of the progress of the projects is being carried out at various 
levels for expeditious completion of the projects. However, the execution of irrigation projects is very 
complex process involving land acquisition, rehabilitation and resettlement, contractual, execution issues 
etc.  The efforts are being made by the Ministry to expedite the projects. 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2018 - Budget, Dated : 13.06.2018) 
 

50 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
HAR KHET KO PANI  
The Committee find that under Har Khet Ko Pani (HKKP) Component of PMKSY, two Schemes viz. 
Surface Minor Irrigation scheme (SMI) and Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies 
scheme have been taken up.  Under the SMI scheme, minor irrigation schemes having irrigation potential 
of less than 2000 hectare are included, while Central Assistance given to States for repair, renovation and 
restoration of water bodies are included under RRR scheme.  The Committee further note that an allocation 
of Rs. 2600 crore has been made under the component HKKP which is Rs. 712 crore more as compared to 
RE allocations in the year 2017-18.  The reason for increase in allocation is stated to be due to inability of 
the Ministry to release commensurate Central Assistance for ongoing pending proposal of SMI/RRR of 
water bodies scheme last year due to Budget constraints.  Also provision of Rs. 1310 crore has been made 
to provide for likely payments for the year 2018-19 on the basis of projections made by NABARD/NWDA. 
With regard to implementation of RRR scheme, the Committee find that though Central Assistance 
is being given to States to undertake works for repair, renovation and restoration of water bodies, the 
Ministry has not taken concrete action to prevent existing water bodies from being encroached upon and 
making them pollution free.  The entire responsibility on this count has been shifted to the concerned State 
Governments on the ground that subject of water is at present under the State List.  The Committee 
express their displeasure over the fact that Ministry has not initiated any action to conduct a survey of water 
bodies in the country particularly with reference to their size, condition, status of encroachment, etc. despite 
their recommendation in this regard in the Tenth Report (16th Lok Sabha).  Taking note of the fact that a 
number of water bodies in the country are severely polluted, the Committee desire that the Ministry should 
take proactive measures to address the situation.  They, therefore, again recommend the Ministry to 
conduct a survey of all the water bodies including their size, condition, status of encroachments and furnish 
the findings of the survey to the Committee within three months of presentation of this Report. 

51 
 
Reply of the Government 
 During FY 2018-19, Rs. 300 cr has been provided for RRR and SMI schemes.  
 Regarding the encroachment issue, Secretary (MoWR, RD & GR) vide D.O. letters dated 26.02.2016 
and 07.11.2016 requested State Governments to take several measures for protection of water bodies 
including encroachment issue. Guidelines regarding conservation of water bodies have also been circulated. 
The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation has planned to conduct the 
Census of Water Bodies during the period 2017-18 to 2020-21 under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme-
"Irrigation Census". The objective of the Census is to build up a database on water bodies. Information on use, 
storage capacity, status of encroachments, storage etc. of water bodies will be collected through the Census. 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2018 - Budget, Dated : 13.06.2018) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
FLOOD MANAGEMENT AND BORDER AREAS PROGRAMME (FMBAP) 
The Committee find that the Schemes of Flood Management Programme (FMP) and River 
Management Activities and Works Related to Border Areas (RMBA) have been continued from XII Plan and 
clubbed together for implementation under the name of Flood Management and Border Areas Programme 
(FMBAP).  Under the Flood Management Component of FMBAP scheme, spill over portion of works 
already approved under XII Plan and new flood management works proposed by the State Governments 
during 2017-20 will be implemented.  The second component of FMBAP i.e. RMBA deals with Hydrological 
Observations and Flood Forecasting on common Border Rivers with the Neighbouring countries, joint 
observations on rivers common to Bangladesh and neighbouring countries, investigation of Water 
Resources Projects in the neighbouring countries, Pancheshwar Multipurpose project, Survey and 
Investigation of Kosi High Dam, Flood protection/anti erosion works in border areas etc. 
The Committee note that out of 522 Flood Management Works approved and included under Flood 
Management Programme during XI and XII Plan, only 298 Schemes were completed upto 31 March 2017, 

52 
 
extending flood protection benefits to an area of 34.66 lakh hectare and 265.79 lakh people have been 
benefitted.  The Committee further observe that principal reason for slow financial progress of the works, as 
stated by the Outcome Review / Third Party Evaluation Committee is due to less release of funds on 
account of lower allocation of Budget funds.  As regards funding pattern under the FMP, the Committee 
note that for Special Category States, the cost is shared by Central and State Governments in the ratio of 
70:30, while for General Category States the ratio is 50:50.  They also observe with great concern that 
allocation of funds for FMP has been continuously decreasing under  XII Plan after devolution of Central 
taxes on the recommendations of 14th Finance Commission, resulting in slow physical / financial progress 
of remaining 224 Projects.  The allocation for FMP during the years 2016-17 and 2017-18 was Rs. 149.99 
crore and Rs. 150 crore respectively. Further Rs. 527 crore has been allocated for the merged scheme of 
FMBAP during the next financial year 2018-19.  Keeping in view the flood menace being faced every year 
in a large part of the country and the necessity for executing Flood Protection Works regularly, the 
Committee strongly recommend that adequate funds may be allocated under this Programme so as to 
enable the State Governments to complete the work in time.  They also notice with great concern that at 
present, reservoirs are not being managed in a synchronized manner to avoid flooding in the downstream 
areas.  Therefore, in view of the need for timely release of reservoirs and integrated management of 
reservoirs, basin wise, they recommend the Ministry to take urgent action/measures for the Reservoir 
Management as well under intimation to this Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The continuation of Flood Management Programme (FMP) during XII Plan period was approved vide 
Ministry order dated 31.10.2013. Consequent upon devolution of central taxes to State based upon the 
recommendations of 14th Finance Commission, the allocation under FMP has been reduced substantially 
since 2015-16. A large number of FMP projects are remaining incomplete due to insufficient funds allocation 
under FMP. During the year 2017-18, while the initial budgetary allocation was Rs. 150.00 cr, at 

53 
 
supplementary stage, the allocation was enhanced to Rs.562.67 cr, which was fully released to States as 
central assistance under FMP, benefitting the States. 
 
 The Memo for Expenditure Finance Committee on FMBAP for the period 2017-18 to 2019-20 has 
made provision for completion of spillover works approved under XI and XII Plan under FMP and for taking up 
new flood management works. During the meeting of the Expenditure Finance Committee held in March 2018 
on FMBAP, the EFC observed that there is a huge liability towards spillover works approved under XI and XII 
Plan. Therefore, no fresh projects under the FMP component should be included till committed liabilities are 
cleared. EFC has also desired that a Committee be set up by MoWR, RD & GR to review all such spillover 
works to critically examine status of their completion and outstanding works against these liabilities and only 
such projects which are worth continuing should be continued under the scheme. Accordingly, a Committee 
set up by MoWR, RD & GR under Chairman, CWC is examining these schemes. Adequate budgetary 
allocation would be required for completing the spillover works already approved under FMP. 
 
CWC has identified 74 reservoirs in 8 basins for the integrated operation of reservoirs. Under the approved 
Scheme “Development of Water Resources Information System (DWRIS)” beyond XII Five Year Plan for the 
three year period from 2017-18 to 2019-20, a new component of Integrated Reservoir Operation has been 
added for hiring of consultant to develop Integrated Reservoir Operations Manual & Decision Support 
System(DSS). Provision of Rs. 585.75 lakh has been kept for this new component. 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2018 - Budget, Dated : 13.06.2018) 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
The Committee are further concerned to note that the legislation on Flood Plain Zones has not 
been enacted in several States despite circulation of Model Bill for Flood Plain Zoning in 1975.  In spite of 
repeated requests from the Ministry, only the States of Manipur, Rajasthan and Uttarakhand have enacted 
legislations as per the Bill.  The Committee note that the State Government of Bihar has expressed 
reservations against the Bill, stating that Flood Plain Zoning Bill is neither practicable nor implementable in 
the State of Bihar.  The Committee would, therefore, recommend the Ministry to hold discussions with the 

54 
 
State Governments in the matter and resolve the underlying factors due to which State Governments are 
not forthcoming with the desired legislation.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 The response from the State Governments towards enactment of flood-plain zoning legislation has 
not been encouraging. This Ministry has repeatedly impressed upon the State/ UT Governments in this 
regard. Vide D.O. letter dated 28.01.2014 by Additional Secretary, MoWR, the State Governments have been 
requested to enact flood plain zoning legislation. Views have not been received from States/UTs except the 
State of Bihar. Bihar Government has conveyed vide letter dated 13th March 2014 that Flood Plain Zoning Bill 
is neither practicable nor implementable in the State of Bihar. The Ministry has again impressed upon the 
State/ UT Governments vide Hon'ble Minister (WR, RD & GR) D.O. letter dated 08.02.2017.  
 As recommended by the Committee, Ministry would hold discussions with the State Governments in 
the matter and try to resolve the underlying factors due to which State Governments are not forthcoming with 
the desired legislation 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2018 - Budget, Dated : 13.06.2018) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 21) 
Regarding the scheme of River Management Activities and works related to Border Areas, the 
Committee observe that although Pancheshwar Development Authority was set up in September 2014, the 
Detailed Project Report of Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project, prepared by M/s WAPCOS Ltd. is yet to be 
finalized by both the sides,  Further Saptkosi field investigation is still continuing.  The reason for slow 
progress is stated to be due to security problems on Nepal side.  The Committee would like to know the 
outcome of bilateral discussions held in this regard.  Although discussions are being held in Joint 
Committees at Ministry level and Secretaries level, the frequency of such meetings should be increased to 
resolve the issues.  Further, the Committee think that the Ministry should adopt a more proactive approach 
in discussions with Nepal by giving more financial support for completion of Projects on Rivers originating 

55 
 
from Nepal and crucial for Flood Management in downstream Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. Besides, the 
Committee also recommend the Ministry to evaluate the anti erosion works undertaken in higher reaches of 
mountains in Nepal where there has been reckless deforestation resulting in unbridled flow of water during 
monsoon and its effect on floods in Bihar.  The Committee are of the opinion that the Ministry should 
undertake Projects/Works/Activities to ensure afforestation in the higher reaches of mountains and take up 
this matter, in particular, with Nepal at appropriate level.  The Committee would like to know the details of 
such measures. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The bilateral discussions on water resources matters with Nepal are being held through multi-tier 
mechanism of bilateral committees as under. 
1) Indo-Nepal Joint Ministerial Committee on Water Resources (JMCWR). 
2) Joint Committee on Water Resources (JCWR). 
3) Joint Standing Technical Committee (JSTC). 
4) Joint Committee on Kosi &Gandak Projects (JCKGP). 
5) Joint Committee on Inundation of Flood Management (JCIFM). 
6) Joint Team of Experts (JTE). 
 Besides the above, the Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project (PMP) is being planned and 
implemented by Pancheshwar Development Authority (PDA). The associated committees in this regard are 
as under: 
7) Governing Body and Joint Committee of PDA. 
8) Team of Experts/Officials (ToE) for finalization of DPR of Pancheshwar Multipurpose project. 
 The Indian side of these Committees is headed at various levels. JMCWR is headed by the Union 
Minister for Water Resources, RD & GR, JCWR by Secretary, WR, RD & GR, JSTC by Chairman, GFCC, 
JCKGP by Principal Secretary, WRD, Govt. of Bihar, JCIFM by Member, GFCC and JTE by Member (RM), 
CWC. The Co-chair of the Governing Body of PDA is Secretary, WR, RD& GR while the Co-chair of Joint 

56 
 
Committee of PDA is Joint Secretary (Administration) of MoWR, RD & GR. The Indian side of the Team of 
Experts/ Officials for finalization of DPR of Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project is Chairman, CWC. All 
meetings are held as mutually agreed on convenient dates to both India and Nepal side. 
JCIFM 
 The last meeting of JCIFM was recently held on 16-20th April, 2018 at Janakpur/Kathmandu, 
Nepal. Ministry of External Affairs, GoI is extending assistance to the Govt. of Nepal for flood management 
works on trans-boundary Rivers in Nepal along India-Nepal border flowing into UP and Bihar. The broad 
issues under discussion include inundation and flood management aspects. There are various rivers 
originating from Nepal which enter India at various places in Bihar & Uttar Pradesh. These rivers carry a 
huge amount of water and sediment and cause flooding in the Indian territory. In this connection, project 
works related to three rivers namely Bagmati, Kamla, and Lalbakeya have been taken up by Nepal 
Government under Indo- Nepal cooperation projects funded by MEA, Government of India to prevent 
flooding events from the aforesaid three rivers from Nepal side to the protected area in Bihar by extending 
the embankments along these rivers from the India-Nepal border to high grounds in Nepal. Further, river 
management projects on other rivers would be taken in future after completion of the aforesaid works in 
Bagmati, Kamla, and Lalbakeya rivers. The recommendations of the Committee will be considered in 
consultation with MEA for taking up the matter with Nepali side at appropriate level for their consideration. 
JCKGP 
 The last meeting of JCKGP was held in February 2016. The next meeting is being planned in June 
2018 by both sides. The issues discussed under JCKGP include operation and maintenance of the 
infrastructure of Kosi and Gandak Projects and all related issues. 
JTE  
 The last meeting of JTE was held in July 2017 at Kathmandu. The issues discussed under JTE 
include review of the progress of the field investigation works and preparation of DPR for Sapta Kosi-Sun 
Kosi projects in Nepal for which a Joint Project Office (JPO) is functioning at Biratnagar in Nepal. The 
preparation of DPR and the JPO is fully funded by MoWR, RD & GR, Government of India. These projects 
would benefit both India and Nepal by way of irrigation, hydropower generation, flood control and 
navigation. The field investigations comprising of drilling and drifting works at Sapta Kosi dam site have not 

57 
 
progressed much due to hindrance by local people. The Nepal side has assured to create awareness 
among the local people for early resumption of field investigation works. 
JSTC, JCWR and JMCWR 
 JSTC coordinates the works of all the Committees under JCWR. The JCWR deals with all the 
issues related to inundation & flood management, Pancheshwar Project, DPR of Sapta Kosi – Sun Kosi 
Project, issues related to Kosi and Gandak projects, Power Supply, Energy Banking etc. The next meeting 
of these Committees is being planned for this year. 
PDA 
 The Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project (PMP), a bi-national project of Government of India (GoI) 
and Government of Nepal (GoN), has been envisaged on the Mahakali River (known as Sarada in India), 
where the river forms the international boundary between India and Nepal. In February 1996, His Majesty’s 
Government of Nepal and the Government of India had signed a Treaty (known as “Mahakali Treaty”) for 
integrated development of the Mahakali River. The Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project is the centre piece 
of the Treaty. Under Article 3 of the Treaty, both sides have agreed to implement the Pancheshwar Project 
in accordance with the Detailed Project Report (DPR) under finalization jointly by both the countries.  
 For development, execution and operation of the Pancheshwar Project, the Pancheshwar 
Development Authority (PDA) was set up in September, 2014with the approval of both the Governments 
initially with its headquarter at Kathmandu, which was later shifted to Mahendranagar (Nepal). The 
Authority shall act as an independent autonomous body. It shall have two Co-Chairpersons, one from each 
Party and twelve Members (six Members from each side) which will be working as a Governing Body of the 
Authority. The Authority shall take immediate measures to finalize the Detailed Project Report of 
Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project. Thereafter, the Authority shall undertake the execution, operation and 
maintenance of the Project, including the re-regulating dam at Rupaligad site in an integrated manner.  
 During the second meeting of PDA held in November 2014 in New Delhi, both sides agreed to 
award the work of updating of the Pancheshwar DPR to M/s WAPCOS Limited based upon the latest data. 
Government of India is bearing the entire cost of preparation of DPR for the project. M/s WAPCOS 
prepared a draft final DPR of Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project and submitted to the Pancheshwar 
Development Authority (PDA) in November, 2016. A Joint Team of Experts/Officials (ToE) from both sides 

58 
 
has been constituted to jointly discuss the issues raised by both sides and finalize the DPR. The ToE has 
held two meetings so far. 
 The meeting of Governing Body of PDA and Joint Committee has been recently held on 23 – 25th 
April, 2018 and 26th April, 2018 respectively, at Kathmandu. All the Administrative, Financial and technical 
issues of PDA were discussed in these two Committees. 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2018 - Budget, Dated : 13.06.2018) 
  

59 
 
CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
  NIL 
  

60 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
BUDGET ALLOCATIONS 
The Committee are distressed to note that although the Budget Allocations of the Ministry of Water 
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation (MoWR, RD and GR) has increased 
consecutively in the last four years from Rs. 4232 crore in the year 2015-16 to Rs. 8860 crore in the year 
2018-19, still the Ministry is increasingly depending on the borrowings to finance its crucial projects such as 
completion of 99 Priority Projects selected under Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP), their 
Command Area Development, Surface Minor Irrigation (SMI) Projects and Repair, Renovation and 
Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies besides financing the Polavaram Multipurpose Irrigation Project, which 
is a National Project. The additional funds proposed to be released from NABARD under the Long Term 
Irrigation Fund (LTIF) in the current year is Rs.8000 crore which is almost equal to the total budgetary 
provisions of the Ministry.  However it is disheartening that the Ministry has woefully lagged behind in 
utilization of the Budget Provisions made in the last 2 years i.e. Actual Expenditure of only Rs. 4714 crore 
as compared to BE Allocation of Rs. 6201 crore in the year 2016-17 and Actual Expenditure of only Rs. 
3003 crore as compared to BE Rs. 6887 crore in the year 2017-18. Further an Expenditure of Rs. 3003 
crore incurred up to 20 February, 2018 includes the interest of Rs. 548.98 crore paid to NABARD during the 
year 2017-18 with no payment against Principal as initially there is a moratorium of 3 years. They find that 
so far, an amount of Rs. 6974.757 crore has been borrowed from NABARD. The Committee express their 
concern over the committed liability due to increasing borrowings, more so when they find that on the one 
hand the Ministry has not been able to utilize the funds year after year and on the other hand, it is resorting 
to borrowings from NABARD to finance its projects which reflects inefficient management of resources. The 

61 
 
Committee find themselves at a loss to understand the reasons for not utilizing the unused amount in the 
Projects which have been brought under NABARD borrowings. Therefore, the Committee would 
recommend the Ministry to re-evaluate the allocations in order to ensure judicious utilization of the available 
resources and reduction in future borrowings.  
Reply of the Government 
 
 The provisional expenditure booked during 2017-18 is actually Rs 5310.51 cr.  The savings are 
primarily due to less expenditure under the schemes of Namami Gange and repayment towards NABARD 
loan under PMKSY.  Since the States/ implementing agencies under the schemes of Namami Gange did 
not require funds, the releases were lesser than anticipated. Similarly, due to less demand and consequent 
less drawal of loans, interest payment towards NABARD loan under PMKSY during 2017-18 was less than 
anticipated expenditure on this account. 
 Funding of prioritized projects through LTIF has been undertaken to ensure assured funding 
arrangements as per requirement of the identified projects, which hitherto, were constrained due to budget 
mismatch and availability in States/Union Budget.  Further, these projects required large quantum of funds 
over a short span of three years, which was not feasible given the limited resource position of the states. 
 The expenditure progress is being regularly monitored by the Ministry and as a result the utilization 
of funds improved in 2015-16 i.e. Rs 6862.05 cr against Rs 7032.43 cr (RE) which was higher than the BE.  
In 2016-17 also, the expenditure booked was Rs 4714.13 cr against RE of Rs 4755.50 cr i.e. 99%.  The 
reduction of RE was largely on account of Namami Gange, Ground Water and NHP schemes. 
 Further, budget provisions under Demand of the Ministry are distributed Scheme/Head/Sub-head 
wise and Ministry is not at liberty to re-appropriate surplus funds under one Scheme/Head/Sub-head to 
another Scheme/Head/Sub-head. 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2018 - Budget, Dated : 13.06.2018) 
  

62 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
NAMAMI GANGE 
 The Committee observe that the Government has launched the ambitious programme for cleaning 
and rejuvenating River Ganga, namely Namami Gange in the year 2014-15 with an approved cost of Rs. 
20,000 crore. The Programme is being implemented through the National Mission for Clean Ganga 
(NMCG). The Committee find that out of Rs. 20,000 crore allocated under this Programme, 191 projects, at 
an estimated cost of Rs. 16,681.10 crore have been sanctioned. However as per the Ministry’s submission, 
the details of completion of the Programme and time and cost over-runs (if any) would be clearer only when 
the Projects sanctioned come to a significant stage of implementation by December, 2018. They further 
notice that NMCG has been recently restructured and strengthened to expedite the implementation of the 
Project. The Allocations to NMCG are being provided for four components i.e. (i) National River 
Conservation Programme (NRCP)– Externally Aided Programme (EAP) (ii) NRCP– Non Externally Aided 
Programme (iii) National Ganga Plan (NGP) and (iv) Ghat Works and Beautification of River fronts. 
 
NATIONAL RIVER CONSERVATION PLAN (NRCP) 
The Committee note that under the National River Conservation Plan (NRCP), the World Bank 
assisted Projects under the National Ganga River Conservation Authorities are being executed. They 
further observe that the ongoing Project Cost under this Programme is being shared between the Centre 
and the State Governments on 70:30 basis for World Bank  funded  Projects  and  on  85:15  basis  for  
Japan  International  Cooperation Agency (JICA) assisted projects. However for all World Bank funded 
projects approved after the year 2015, Central Government is bearing 100 per cent cost.   The Committee 
find that during the year 2016-17, the expenditure incurred under this programme was Rs. 167.5 crore (Rs. 
87.10 crore under EAP Component and Rs. 80.40 crore under Programme Component). However, as 

63 
 
informed by the Ministry, from March 2017 to January 2018, this programme has gained momentum as 21 
projects involving an amount of Rs. 6054.8 crore have been sanctioned and hence, keeping in view the 
anticipated expenditure, the Budgetary Allocations were revised upto Rs. 627 crore for EAP component. 
They further note that Allocations for the financial year 2018-19, have been kept at Rs. 770 crore (Rs. 600 
crore under EAP component and Rs. 170 crore under programme component). However, to utter surprise 
of the Committee, an Actual Expenditure of only Rs. 224 crore has been incurred under this Programme 
during the year 2017-18. As per the Ministry’s own admission, only 20 Projects of sewerage infrastructure 
projects have been completed out of the total of 97 Projects as most of the projects’ implementation has 
suffered on account of such factors as delay in tendering process, retendering, non availability of land, legal 
issues, natural calamities (like floods, landslides etc.), delay in permission from local authorities for road 
cutting/ crossing etc. They also note that initially, Projects could not be implemented speedily due to lack of 
proper planning. Now, the NMCG has taken remedial measures such as continuous follow up with the 
State Programme Management Groups (SPMGs) and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) to resolve the issues for 
delay. The Committee are, however, not satisfied with the pace of implementation of the Projects. In their 
view, had this Programme been implemented in a more planned way with details of ground work already in 
hand, a lot of precious time and money could have been saved.  In view of the sluggish manner of project 
implementation and consequent lower expenditure incurred, the Committee hope that the Ministry will at 
least now make sincere efforts to complete all the sanctioned projects under this programme so as to 
achieve the goals of this programme within the targeted year of 2020. The Committee are further of the 
opinion that besides river Ganga, the scope of this Scheme should be widened to include all the Major 
Rivers of the country which are in equally polluted state and as such need urgent action for their 
rejuvenation. The Committee would , therefore, recommend the Ministry to look into this aspect and inform 
them about the measures taken for this purpose. 

64 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The actual expenditure (released from the Ministry) under Namami Gange during 2017-18 is Rs 
1423.22 cr and not Rs 224 cr. The expenditure by NMCG including release to Executing Agencies during 
2017-18 is Rs 1625.11 cr. Out of 104 Sewerage Infrastructure Projects sanctioned, 26 have been 
completed and balance 78 are planned to be completed by the timelines indicated below. 
 
S.No. Number of Projects Target date of completion 
1. Twenty four December, 2018 
2. Six March, 2019 
3. Twenty December, 2019 
4. Twenty eight December, 2021 
 
 All efforts are being made to complete these projects as per the schedule.  
 Following important measures have been taken by NMCG to complete the projects in a time-bound 
manner. 
i. Regular review meetings are being held at the level of Hon’ble Minister too where progress of each 
project is reviewed with concerned state agency; 
ii. Project engineers have been appointed by NMCG to monitor the progress of the projects including 
appointment of PMC (Tata Consultancy of Engineers); 
iii. Regular meetings and follow up action is taken up in NMCG with state executing agencies; 
iv. Close monitoring of mile-stones for projects is being done including regular field visits. 
 
 In terms of allocation of business to various Ministries and the scheme scope, mandate for 
Namami Gange Programme is for cleaning of River Ganga and its tributaries. The recommendation of the 
Committee to cover all major rivers of the country is a policy decision and would be referred to the 
concerned ministry i.e. Ministry of Environment, Climate Change and Forests. 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2018 - Budget, Dated : 13.06.2018) 

65 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
NATIONAL GANGA PLAN 
 The Committee observe that under the National Ganga Plan (NGP), provisions are made for 
implementing schemes/projects for the River Ganga and its tributaries. The Schemes for rehabilitation and 
up gradation of existing Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs) and commissioning of new STPs are also 
included under this programme. They find that total expenditure of Rs. 1329.12 crore has been incurred 
under this programme, during the last four years upto 15 February, 2018. They also find that during the 
period March, 2017 to January, 2018 Projects worth Rs. 1670 crore have been sanctioned. Further two 
projects have been awarded under Hybrid Annuity Model. Besides major projects for creation of Individual 
Household Latrine and Solid and Liquid Waste Management worth Rs. 800 crore approx. is also being 
taken up. However they are concerned to find that out of 191 Projects sanctioned under Namami Gange, 
only 48 projects have been completed so far. Further as against the target of setting up 89 projects for 
sewage management interventions at 56 towns located along main stem of river Ganga, only 19 projects 
have been completed. The Committee express their displeasure over the fact that though the programme 
for cleaning and rejuvenation of river Ganga started 4 years back, a lot of time has been lost in finalizing 
modalities of its execution. As admitted by the Secretary himself, the actual work under this Programme 
has started since March, 2017 only. In view of this, the Committee are of the opinion that unless the 
projects are executed strictly in a time bound manner, the prospects of cleaning the river by the targeted 
year of 2020 looks bleak. They, therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry to make concerted efforts to 
complete the projects by the targeted period of 2020.  
Reply of the Government 
  As stated in reply to para 4 under NRCP, the actual expenditure (released from the Ministry) under 
Namami Gange during 2017-18 is Rs 1423.22 cr and not Rs 224 cr. The expenditure by NMCG including 

66 
 
release to Executing Agencies during 2017-18 is Rs 1625.11 cr. Out of 104 Sewerage Infrastructure 
Projects sanctioned, 26 have been completed and balance 78 are planned to be completed by the 
timelines indicated below. 
 
S.No. Number of Projects Target date of completion 
1. Twenty four December, 2018 
2. Six March, 2019 
3. Twenty December, 2019 
4. Twenty eight December, 2021 
 
 All efforts are being made to complete these projects as per the schedule.  
 Following important measures have been taken by NMCG to complete the projects in a time-bound 
manner. 
i. Regular review meetings are being held at the level of Hon’ble Minister too where progress of each 
project is reviewed with concerned state agency; 
ii. Project engineers have been appointed by NMCG to monitor the progress of the projects including 
appointment of PMC (Tata Consultancy of Engineers); 
iii. Regular meetings and follow up action is taken up in NMCG with state executing agencies; 
iv. Close monitoring of mile-stones for projects is being done including regular field visits. 
 
 In terms of allocation of business to various Ministries and the scheme scope, mandate for 
Namami Gange Programme is for cleaning of River Ganga and its tributaries. The recommendation of the 
Committee to cover all major rivers of the country is a policy decision and would be referred to the 
concerned ministry i.e. Ministry of Environment, Climate Change and Forests. 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2018 - Budget, Dated : 13.06.2018) 
 

67 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
GHAT WORKS AND BEAUTIFICATION OF RIVER FRONTS 
 The Committee observe that under the component of Ghat works and Beautification of River Fronts 
of Namami Gange, as against the budgetary provision of Rs. 50 crore for the year 2017-18, no Actual 
Expenditure could be incurred. During the year 2018-19, again an allocation of Rs. 50 crore has been made 
under this Head. The Committee are astonished to find that out of total 64 projects taken up, only 24 
Projects in West Bengal have been completed. Also, at present the Ministry is concentrating on Ghat works 
and Beautification of River Fronts of only Ganga River.  However, while disapproving the Ganga centric 
mindset of the Ministry, the Committee think that the provision of Rs. 50 crore for the works of Ghat and  
Beautification of River Fronts is minuscule as Ghats and River Fronts need to be developed for a large 
number of Rivers in the country. They further note that though the Projects were initially sanctioned for an 
amount of Rs. 1100 crore, later on only Priority Projects were taken up due to lower amount of availability 
of funds. They observe that recently, the Ministry is trying to arrange funds from the Corporate sector under 
their Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) activities.  The Committee, however, appreciate the fact that 
through the works like River Development and Maintenance of Ghats, the efforts of the Government to 
clean the River are more visible on the ground and as such they create an element of awareness amongst 
public to keep the Rivers clean.  The public get more sensitized to maintain the health of Rivers around.  
The Committee,  therefore, are of the view that there is a need to increase Budgetary Support for these 
works. Further the Committee also are of the further opinion that the River Front Development works 
should not be limited to only River Ganga, rather it should be expanded to cover all the Major Rivers of the 
country. They, therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry to explore the possibility of expanding the scope 
of this Programme to include other Major Rivers of the country as well.   

68 
 
Reply of the Government 
 In addition to the budgetary support available for river front development and 
construction/renovation of ghats and crematoria, steps have been initiated to take up such works through 
Clean Ganga Fund.  Corporate funding is also being explored for such works. 
 As far as taking up such works on rivers other than Ganga and its tributaries, in terms of allocation 
of business to various Ministries and the scheme scope, mandate for Namami Gange Programme is for 
cleaning of River Ganga and its tributaries. The recommendation of the Committee to cover all major rivers 
of the country is a policy decision and would be referred to the concerned ministry i.e. Ministry of 
Environment, Climate Change and Forests. 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2018 - Budget, Dated : 13.06.2018) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
RIVER BASIN MANAGEMENT 
 The Committee note that the scheme of River Basin Management (RBM) consists of two broad 
components namely Brahmaputra Board and Investigation of Water Resources Development Scheme 
(IWRDS). IWRDS is being implemented by (a) National Water Development Authority (NWDA) and (b) 
Central Water Commission (CWC). Under this Scheme, Brahmaputra Board is carrying out works of – (i) 
Survey, Investigation & preparation of Master Plan,  (ii) Preparation of DPR of Multipurpose Projects (iii) 
Drainage Development Schemes  (iv)  Anti-erosion works including protection of Majuli Island, Balat Village 
in Meghalaya, Mankachar and Masalabari area in Assam etc from flood and erosion and (v) Construction of 
Raised Platforms.  Further CWC has been preparing Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) of Projects in the 
river basins of North east region to provide hydroelectric and irrigation benefits as per proposed plan of the 
RBM Scheme. They also note that the NWDA has updated water balance studies for 26 links, completed 
pre-feasibility studies for 15 intra-State link and  Detailed Project Report (DPR) of 3 intra State links. The 
Committee find that Budget provision of Rs. 225 crore has been earmarked for this Scheme for the financial 

69 
 
year 2018-19.  However they observe that an Expenditure of only Rs. 146.18 crore has been incurred in 
2017-18 as against Budget Provision of Rs. 199.99 crore.  They further observe that the funds have 
remained unutilized to a great extent due to problems such as unseasonal rainfall and high flood level of 
rivers, local disturbances, unavailability of forest clearances, shortage of staff, non completion of Feasibility 
Reports (FRs) of Himalayan Component due to international issue of Nepal/ Bhutan, etc. The Committee 
also note that formation of River Basin Authority for management of water resources of each river basin in 
a holistic manner has been kept in abeyance despite proposal to this effect given in the Report of the 
National Commission for Integrated Water resources Development way back in 1999, which suggested for 
enacting a legislation to replace the River Boards Act, 1956. Further a Draft River Basin Management Bill 
was recommended by Doabia Committee in 2012, which has been  considered by a Group of Experts 
under the Chairmanship of Shri A. B. Pandya, Ex Chairman, CWC. The Group of Experts has now 
submitted the finalized draft of the River Basin Management Bill, 2017 which is currently being considered 
by the Ministry. The Committee are of the opinion that many of the problems stated above which have 
hampered faster implementation of Projects/Works under this Scheme can be resolved if the works are 
undertaken basin wise. They, therefore, recommend the Ministry to take expeditious measures for the 
enactment of the proposed River Basin Act, to enable establishment of the River Basin Authority and 
management of water resources of each river basin in a holistic manner. The Committee desire to be 
apprised of the timelines fixed for the purpose. 
Reply of the Government 
 The second Administrative Reforms Commission in its 7th Report titled "Capacity Building for 
Conflict Resolution-Fiction to Fusion" recommended under Para 5.5(c) that River Basin Organizations 
(RBOs) should be set up for each inter-State river, as proposed by the Report of the National Commission 
for Integrated Water resources Development, 1999 by enacting a legislation to replace the River Boards 
Act, 1956.  A Committee under Chairmanship of Shri Tejinder Singh Doabia, Former Judge of M.P. and 

70 
 
J&K High Court gave its recommendation in 2012 in the form of Draft River Basin Management Bill. A 
Group of Officers constituted on 2.3.2017 to examine the report and suggest possible changes required in 
the draft River Basin Management Bill to make it implementable. The First meeting of the Group of officers 
was held on 28.4.2017. Subsequently, a meeting was held on 25.07.2017 under Chairmanship of Secretary 
(WR, RD & GR) wherein experts and professionals of the subject matter participated for wider discussion 
on the provisions of the Bill. In this meeting, it was further decided to constitute a three member Group of 
Experts (GoE) under Chairmanship of Shri A.B. Pandya, Ex-Chairman, CWC. 
 The GoE so constituted held two meetings on 25.09.2017 and on 04.12.2017 and had a closer look 
on implementation of the Bill keeping in mind the experiences in the functioning of existing River Boards. 
The GoE have now submitted the finalized draft of the RBM Bill, 2017, which is under consideration of the 
Ministry. Since water is a state subject and the Bill having far reaching implications in the field of Water 
management and conservation, it will be circulated among various stakeholders: State Governments and 
general public at large (by way of uploading on website). After receiving comments from various 
stakeholders, the Bill be finalized by the Ministry and will be sent to Ministry of Law and Justice and 
Cabinet for their comments and approval. As such the consultation on the Bill and subsequent action is 
likely to take considerable time and fixing of definite timeline at this stage is not feasible 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2018 - Budget, Dated : 13.06.2018) 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF NATIONAL WATER MISSION 
 The Committee observe that the scheme of Research and Development and Implementation of 
National Water Mission has been formulated by amalgamating existing schemes of (i) Research and 
Development and (ii) Implementation of National Water Mission included under XII Plan.  This Scheme 
intends to undertake Research and Development to provide educational training and human resources 
development programme in water sector and implement Schemes / Projects for conservation of water, 
minimizing wastage and ensuring its more equitable distribution both across and within States through 
National Water Mission.  The Committee note that under the scheme of National Water Mission, as 
compared to BE of Rs. 15 crore for the year 2017-18, the RE was Rs. 5 crore whereas the Actual Utilization 

71 
 
was only Rs. 0.69 crore upto 31 January, 2018.  However, the BE allocations for the year 2018-19 has 
been again increased substantially to Rs. 20.10 crore for National Water Mission.  The Committee find that 
the main reasons for underutilization of resources under the Head National Water Mission is due to 
inadequate staff and absence of full time Mission Director in National Water Mission who has to coordinate 
with other Ministries, State Governments and other Organizations intensively for fulfilling its mandate and 
objectives.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry to take urgent measures to fill up 
the vacancies in the National Water Mission at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 A proposal for filling up of the vacancies of staff viz. Consultants and Young Professionals through 
outsourcing was moved for 13 professionals. Applications have been received in this regard and short-
listing of the candidates is being done by a screening committee for final selection through interviews. 
Meanwhile, a proposal for continuation of services of 3 Consultants who earlier worked in National Water 
Mission (NWM) is under consideration in the Ministry as a stop-gap arrangement till the joining of the finally 
selected candidates. CWC and CGWB were also requested to depute two officers in NWM for 
implementation of its activities.  
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2018 - Budget, Dated : 13.06.2018) 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 Further, with regard to increasing water use efficiency by 20 per cent which is one of the goals of 
National Water Mission, the Committee find that not much headway has been made.  As informed to the 
Committee, the water use efficiency in agriculture is only 38% whereas it is the largest consumer of water 
using 80 per cent of water for irrigation.  The Committee further observe that establishment of proposed 
National Bureau of Water use efficiency has been put on a back burner, which could have gone a long way 
in improving water use efficiency by making users accountable for wastage.  The Committee therefore, 

72 
 
stress the need for establishing National Bureau of Water Use Efficiency with immediate effect with 
statutory powers.  They would like to be apprised of the measures taken/proposed to be taken for an early 
establishment of National Bureau of Water Use Efficiency. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The proposal for establishment of National Bureau of Water Use Efficiency (NBWUE) with statutory 
powers was reviewed and submitted to the competent authority for his approval/ advice. Appropriate 
measures will be taken for implementation of NBWUE after approval from Competent Authority is received. 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2018 - Budget, Dated : 13.06.2018) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
MORE CROP PER DROP – MICRO IRRIGATION 
 The Committee find that the objective of 'More Crop Per Drop' or efficient use of water in 
agriculture is being encouraged partly through the Command Area Development (CAD) Works 
implemented pari-passu in AIBP projects and partly under PMKSY component being implemented by the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare.  As of now, the thrust in AIBP and CADWM projects is on the 
encouragement of the use of underground pipeline network to reduce the wastage of water.  They also 
notice that Har Khet Ko Pani (HKKP) under PMKSY, being executed by the Ministry of Water Resources, 
River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation includes only creation of irrigation potential under the 
Schemes of SMI and RRR of water bodies, based on proposals submitted by the States.  They further 
observe that the Ministry does not have any information on area covered under Micro Irrigation under 99 
Prioritized Projects of AIBP.  They also note with utmost concern that the proposed Micro Irrigation Fund 
(announced in Budget 2017-18), to be created in NABARD with an initial corpus of Rs. 5000 crore under 
the jurisdiction of Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare and proposed implementation of 

73 
 
"Incentivisation Scheme for Bridging Irrigation Gap (ISBIG)" Scheme under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of 
Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation are yet to see the light of the day.  ISBIG 
scheme is yet to be approved by Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC).  Noting that the use of Drip and 
Sprinkler Irrigation Devices has not been included in the Micro Irrigation infrastructure component of 
CADWM programme, the Committee are of the opinion that the measures so far taken by the Ministry are 
not sufficient to increase the use of Micro Irrigation methods in a big way.  Further, at present, the farmers 
are expected to bear the cost of such devices either themselves or avail subsidies available in extant 
scheme of the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare.  The Committee are of the view that the 
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation should play a pivotal role in 
spreading Micro Irrigation Methods alongwith laying of underground pipelines, creating a robust network.  In 
this regard, the Ministry should formulate scheme to propagate Micro Irrigation in a big way by giving 
incentives to farmers in the form of financial assistance / subsidy in consultation with the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to initiate measures 
to incentivize farmers and apprise the Committee in detail about the efforts made in this direction within 
three months of presentation of this Report.  The Committee also recommend the Ministry to make sincere 
efforts for implementation of ISBIG Scheme at the earliest.  Further the Ministry should collect information 
on total area covered under Micro Irrigation in the 99 Prioritised Projects of AIBP and furnish the details to 
the Committee as well. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry of Agriculture and farmers Welfare’s Micro Irrigation (MI) scheme already provides for 
direct subsidies to the farmers to bear the cost of devices such as drip sets/sprinkler sets. The scope of 
CADWM programme is accordingly, restricted to only the creation of infrastructure including components of 
sump, pump, HDPE pipelines and pertinent devices. However, for the overall effectiveness, convergence of 
efforts (for creation of both MI infrastructure up to farm outlets and MI devices within farm) is sought with 

74 
 
MOA&FW. Accordingly, the MOA&FW has agreed to provide support through the Micro Irrigation 
Fund(IMF) proposed to be created under their Ministry. As such a separate scheme for incentivization of 
farmers directly by MOWR,RD&GR is not proposed. 
 The proposed ‘Incentivization Scheme for Building Irrigation Gap (ISBIG)’ targets balance CCA of 
80 lakh ha. under 317 projects in 24 States at a cost of Rs. 61237 cr. State level consultations were held 
during April, 2017 to finalise the scope of the scheme. The meeting of EFC was held on 27th march, 2018, 
minutes are awaited, following which the case will be put up for the approval of the Cabinet. 
 In the ongoing projects under 99 prioritized projects, the States are required to cover at least 10% 
of the CCA under MI wherever feasible. However, the States in most cases are presently focused on 
conventional On Farm Development (OFD) works while indicating coverage of MI at a later phase of project 
implementation. 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2018 - Budget, Dated : 13.06.2018) 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
CENTRAL GROUND WATER BOARD (CGWB) 
 The Committee note that the Central Ground Water Board (CGWB), a Multidisciplinary Scientific 
Organization has been entrusted with the responsibility to develop and disseminate information 
technologies, monitor and implement national policies for the scientific and sustainable development and 
management of India's Ground Water resources including their exploitation, assessment, conservation, 
augmentation, protection from pollution and distribution based on principles of economic and ecological 
efficiency and equity.  They further note that the Board is not sufficiently empowered to carry out its 
activities effectively as it has serious shortage of both manpower and modern equipment.  At present out of 
total sanctioned staff strength of 4012, 1209 posts are vacant in the Board.  Further 23 technical and non-
technical staff have been deployed at Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) Central Head Quarter at 
New Delhi.  Also, at Regional level, CGWA NOC/issues are being handled by existing CGWB manpower 
only. They observe that measures such as revision in recruitment rules, revival of posts, pursuing UPSC for 
filling up of Scientific Group 'B' Gazetted posts etc. are being undertaken.  The activities of the Board are 

75 
 
also getting handicapped due to lack of modern equipments.  Besides, CGWB, State Ground Water 
Departments are not adequately equipped to handle their work as these are also suffering from lack of 
domain specialists. With regard to the proposal for  restructuring of CGWB, as recommended in Dr. Mihir 
Shah Committee's Report, they notice that the proposal is presently being considered by the Ministry.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to take urgent steps for filling up vacancies without further 
delay at CGWB by recruitment of domain specialist.  Further the Ministry should take measures to increase 
staff strength under CGWA to enable it to carry out its regulatory role independently.  Besides, steps should 
also be initiated to procure the modern equipment to enable CGWB to carry out its activities more 
effectively.  State Governments should be persuaded to take desired steps for strengthening the State 
Ground Water Departments with whose collaboration, the Board can effectively manage and develop the 
Ground Water Resources. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Central Ground Water Board is making all possible efforts for filling up of vacancies by way of 
direct recruitment through Staff Selection Commission (SSC), Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) 
and through promotion. Amendments in Recruitment Rules are being processed at Ministry / Dept. of 
Personnel & Training (DOPT) level. Further, a proposal prepared by Central Ground Water Authority 
(CGWA), New Delhi for creation of additional posts for handling work related to Authority is under 
consideration. 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2018 - Budget, Dated : 13.06.2018) 
 
 
 
 
 
  

76 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF THE 
GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
  NIL 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;           RAJIV PRATAP RUDY, 
07 August, 2018                                                            Chairperson, 
16 Shravana, 1940 (Saka)                         Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
 
 
  

77 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
STATE WISE LIST OF DAMS AND THEIR ESTIMATED COST 
   
(Rs in Crore) 
Sl. 
No. State/Agency No. of 
Dams 
Estimated cost              
(Rs in Crore) 
1 Karnataka 28 386.14 
2 Uttar Pradesh 41 1618.14 
3 Rajasthan 207 1205.81 
4 Telangana 29 645.13 
5 Maharashtra 173 1170.75 
6 Goa 2 58.00 
7 Manipur 2 19.99 
8 Meghalaya 6 108.75 
9 Andhra Pradesh 65 1200.00 
10 BBMB 3 230.00 
11 Kerela WRD 19 165.90 
12 Gujarat 8 230.00 
13 West Bengal 9 126.47 
14 Madhya Pradesh 27 103.69 
15 Bihar 10 63.52 
16 CWC - 570.00 
17 Chattisgarh 5 91.52 
18 Kerala SEB 12 150.00 
19 TANGEDCO 25 454.00 
20 Punjab 12 472.46 
21 Odisha 36 1150.00 
 TOTAL 719 10220.27 
 
  

78 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
LIST OF MAJOR WORKS TO BE UNDERTAKEN UNDER DRIP DAMS 
1.  Geophysical Investigations  
2.  Geo-membrane  
3.  Finite Element Studies  
4.  Consultancy s 
5.  Construction of Additional Spillways/Flush bar/Breaching dyke (Fuse Plug) 
6.  Guniting on upstream face of Masonry dam/other locations 
7.  Pointing on Upstream face of Masonry dams 
8.  Pointing on Downstream face of Masonry dams 
9.  Strengthening of Masonry dams from stability considerations 
10.  Underwater Repairs of cracks, cavities etc. formed due to Alkali Aggregate Reaction in concrete dams 
11.  Grouting of Dam Body  
12.  Curtain Grouting  
13.  Reaming/Drilling of drainage holes in Concrete/Masonry Dams.  
13 (i) Drainage holes in dam body 
13 (ii) Foundation Drainage holes 
14.  Dam Contraction Joints Treatment (Hydrophilic Water Seal etc.) 
15. Lift/Elevators 
16.  Works in Galleries like provision of hand rails, electrification, painting, floor tiles etc 
17.  Repairs to Spillway Crest/Glacis/Piers  
18.  Repairing of Energy Dissipation Arrangement  
19.  Repairs /Provision of new Apron D/s of Energy Dissipation Arrangements.  
20.  Repairs /Construction/Extension of Training Walls of Main spillway/Power channel of Barrage 
21. Repairs to structures in Spill Channel (Fall Structures, Training walls, Energy Dissipation etc.) 
22. Widening/other works for improving flow conditions in Spill Channel  
23.  Re-sectioning/Strengthening of the disturbed D/s face of earthen dam (due to rain cuts/other reasons) 
to design section 
24. Resetting of Disturbed Rip-Rap on the u/s face for earthen dams 
25. Provision /Cleaning of Toe Drains  
26.  Resetting of disturbed downstream Rock Toe in Earth dams  
27. Provision of Cut - off Trench u/s of Homogeneous Earth dams 
28.  Repairs to Chute (transverse) and Longitudinal drains in Earth dams 
29. Repairs/Provision of Steps in dams on the downstream 
30.  Repairing of Dam Top Road 
31.  Raising Height of Dams 
32.  Grouting in Embankment Dams. 
33. Construction/Raising of Upstream Parapet Wall 
34. Construction of Downstream parapet wall / guide posts/D/s Edging 
35.  Repairs of Parapet walls of dams (Upstream/Downstream) 

79 
 
36.  Repairs to outlet work 
37. Turfing on D/s face of earth dam 
38.  Electrification on Dam Top 
39.  Repairing of Dam Approach / Access Roads 
40. Provision of Stand-by Generator/D.G set 
41. Pumps for De-watering 
42. Works for Encouraging Tourism Development 
43.  Miscellaneous works (Construction/Repairs of Buildings such as Inspection Bunglow, Chowkidar Qtr., 
Control rooms etc.) 
44. Reservoir fencing (around reservoir periphery area, d/s of dam etc.) 
45.  De-silting of Reservoirs 
46. Trash Rack cleaning machine 
47. Repair to Power Channel 
48. Repair to Protection Works u/s and d/s of barrage (C.C Blocks, Launching Apron) 
49. Pointing of Granite Stone over Barrage Floor and in damaged Piers of Barrage 
50. Instrumentation 
51.  Remote control for Operation of Gates (SCADA) 
52.  Service /Repairs for Spillway Gates/Spillway hoist, Stop Log including replacement of seal etc. 
53.  Service /Repairs for Draft Tube, Under Sluice gates, Intake gates/Valves  
54.  Provision of new gate /shutters 
55.  Foot bridge for service/approach to trunnion 
56.  Surface preparation and painting work on Hoists, Gates, Lifting Beams, Stop logs, Gantry cranes etc. 
57.  Service /Repairs of Gantry Crane. 
58.  Replacement of Wire ropes and attachments 
59.  Service /Repairs of Electrical equipments and Control H.M works 
60.  Underwater inspection of Gate blockouts and embedded parts by divers/ROV 
61.  Miscellaneous H.M works 
 
  

80 
 
ANNEXURE-III 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2017-18) HELD ON TUESDAY, 07 AUGUST 2018 
  The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1530 hours in Committee Room No. 139, First Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  
Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Radheshyam Biswas 
3. Shri Devusinh Jesingbhai Chauhan 
4. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
5. Shri Mohanbhai Kundariya 
6. Shri Maganti Murali Mohan 
7. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
8. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
9. Shri Subhash Patel 
10. Shri Sanjaykaka Ramchandra Patil 
11. Shri Vijaysinh Mohite Patil 
12. Smt. Aparupa Poddar 
13. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
14. Smt. V. Sathyabama 
15. Shri Lallu Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
16. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
17. Shri Harshvardhan Singh Dungarpur 
18. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
19. Shri Ahmad Ashfaque Karim 
20. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena 
21. Shri Mir Mohammad Fayaz 
22. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
23. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Kushal Sarkar  - Additional Director 
3. Shri R. C. Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 

81 
 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.   
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption (i) Draft Report on Action Taken 
by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report 
(16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation.  (ii) Draft Report on the subject ‘Socio-economic impact of 
commercial exploitation of water by Industries’.  After some deliberations, the Committee adopted 
the aforesaid two draft Reports with minor modifications, subject to factual verification of facts in 
the narration.   
3. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to present these two Reports to both the 
Houses of Parliament in the current Monsoon Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
  

82 
 
    ANNEXURE –IV 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS / 
OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTIETH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF 
THE COMMITTEE 
(i) Total number of Recommendations/Observations         22  
(ii)  Recommendation/Observations which have been accepted by the Government 
Para Nos. 1, 3, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 16, 17, 19, 20 and 21   
   
     Total - 13  
Percentage -59.09% 
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government’s replies 
Para Nos. NIL              Total - NIL  
         Percentage- 0%  
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee  
Para Nos. 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 14, 15, 18 and 22     
      Total – 09 
  Percentage 40.90 - %                                          
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the Government is still 
awaited  
Para Nos. NIL        
                                           Total NIL 
                     Percentage - 0% 
 
 