STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
                                (2017-2018) 
 
 
 
                              SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION  
 
 
 
 
REVIEW OF ACCELERATED IRRIGATION BENEFITS PROGRAMME (AIBP) 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Fourteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources} 
 
 
 
 
 TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
March, 2018 / Phalguna,1939 (Saka) 
 
21 

 
 TWENTY FIRST REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
 
(2017-2018) 
 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
 
 
REVIEW OF ACCELERATED IRRIGATION BENEFITS PROGRAMME (AIBP) 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Fourteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources} 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13.03.2018 
     Laid in Rajya Sabha on 13.03.2018 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March, 2018 / Phalguna,1939 (Saka) 

 
WRC NO. 31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2018 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 

CONTENTS 
 
 
     
Page  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2017-18) …………………………………  (iii)  
 
INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
 
CHAPTER I -      Report        1 
  
       
CHAPTER II - Observations / Recommendations which have been 
  accepted by the Government ………………………………  16 
             
CHAPTER III - Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
  not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ..  39 
  
CHAPTER IV    - Observations / Recommendations in respect of which  
 replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
 the Committee  ……. …………………………………………  40 
 
CHAPTER V    - Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
 Replies of the Government are still awaited ……………….  46 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
I Minutes of the Tenth Sitting of the Standing Committee   51  
 held on 08 March, 2018 
 
II  Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the   53 
 Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
 Fourteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
 
  
   
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2017-18) 
   
  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy  -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Radheshyam Biswas 
3. Shri Devusinh Jesingbhai Chauhan 
4. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
5. Shri Prakash B. Hukkeri 
6. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
7. Shri Mohanbhai Kundariya 
8. Shri Maganti Murali Mohan 
9. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
10. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
11. Shri Subhash Patel 
12. Shri Sanjaykaka Ramchandra Patil 
13. Shri Vijaysinh Mohite Patil 
14. Smt. Aparupa Poddar 
15. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
16. Shri S. P. Y. Reddy 
17. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah 
18. Smt. V. Sathyabama 
19. Shri Lallu Singh 
20. Shri Liladharbhai Vaghela 
21. Smt. Dimple Yadav 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
23. Shri Harshvardhan Singh Dungarpur 
24. Mir Mohammad Fayaz 
25. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
26. Shri Sanjiv Kumar 
27. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
28. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
29. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.  Shri Shiv Kumar   -  Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Rita Jailkhani  -  Director 
3.  Shri Kushal Sarkar  -  Additional Director 
4.  Smt. Rinky Singh  -  Sr. Committee Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2017-2018) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Twenty First Report 
on the Action Taken by Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the 
Fourteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water Resources on the 
subject “Review of the Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP)”.  
2. The Fourteenth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 16 March, 2017.  The replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in 
the Report were received on 07 July, 2017. 
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and adopted 
by the Committee at their sitting held on 08 March, 2018. 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Fourteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is 
given in Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                 RAJIV PRATAP RUDY, 
08 March, 2018                                                     Chairperson,                                                                      
17 Phalguna, 1939 (Saka)         Standing Committee on Water Resources 
  
 
 
 
(v) 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources deals with the Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations / recommendations contained in their Fourteenth Report                   
(16th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Review of the Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP)’ 
relating to the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, which 
was presented to Lok Sabha on 16 March, 2017. Action Taken Notes received from the 
Government in respect of all the 14 observations / recommendations of the Committee, have been 
categorized as follows:  
(i) Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
(Chapter II): 
 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 10 and 13  
          (Total – 08) 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the Government’s replies (Chapter III): 
 
Para No. NIL                        
(Total – NIL) 
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
 
Para Nos. 8, 9 and 14                 
(Total – 03) 
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited (Chapter V): 
 
Para Nos. 6, 11 and 12   
               (Total – 03)  
 
2. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of the 
observations / recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs:- 
 

2 
 
(A)  Overview of AIBP 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
3. The Committee noted that since the inception of the Accelerated Irrigation Benefits 
Programme (AIBP), in 1996, various bodies viz. Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG), 
Public Accounts Committee, four Indian Institutes of Management (IIM Lucknow, IIM Ahmedabad, 
IIM Bangalore and IIM, Kolkata, Programme Evaluation Division of Planning Commission have 
examined the Programme and commented upon numerous discrepancies and shortcomings in the 
implementation of the AIBP Projects. The Standing Committee on Water Resources, had also been 
reviewing and commenting upon the implementation of the AIBP in their Reports on Demands for 
Grants. The Committee expressed dismay on noting that despite all the recommendations by 
several Organisations / Bodies / Committees, myriad problems viz. poor progress in completion of 
Projects, financial irregularities in the AIBP components, short creation of Irrigation Potential, non-
utilization of created Irrigation facilities, deficiencies in planning and approval of the AIBP projects, 
poor project execution and financial management had undermined the success of the Programme. 
The Committee had concluded that though the AIBP was launched with laudable objectives, its 
implementation had suffered a setback and could not attain the desired results.  The Committee, 
therefore, strongly opined that sincere and rigorous  efforts were needed to be made by the 
Ministry for not only achieving the goals of envisaged under the AIBP but also for ensuring the 
sustainability of irrigation Projects so as to achieve optimum irrigation development and utilization 
of Irrigation Potential created in the country. The Committee had also desired that resolute and 
concrete action to be taken to address the impediments indentified in subsequent paragraphs, for 
making the Programme successful and timely achievement of the targets of the AIBP. 
 
4. The Ministry, it its action taken note, has replied as follows: 
“The Union Government launched the Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP) in 
1996-97 for providing financial assistance, with an objective of expediting completion of 
ongoing Major/Medium including Extension, Renovation and Modernization (ERM) irrigation 
projects and Surface Minor Irrigation schemes.  Since 1996, 297 Major and Medium Irrigation 
(MMI) Projects under the AIBP have been taken up. Out of 297 projects 143 MMI projects have 
been completed, 5 foreclosed, remaining 149 projects are ongoing. 
 

3 
 
During 2015-16, Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) was launched with an aim 
to enhance physical access of water on farm and expand cultivable area under assured 
irrigation, improve on farm water use efficiency, introduce sustainable water conservation 
practices etc. With the launch of PMKSY, the AIBP was subsumed in it & now Major and 
medium irrigation/multipurpose irrigation (MMI) projects are being funded under PMKSY-AIBP.   
 
Further, during 2016-17, 99 ongoing AIBP  projects have been identified in consultation with 
States  which could be completed by Dec. 2019 including CAD works. A special funding 
mechanism has been created through borrowing from NABARD which could be utilized by the 
Central and State Governments to bridge the requirement of funds for completion of the 99 
priority projects.  21 projects are likely to be completed by June,2017 and another 31 projects 
by  June,2018.  The balance 47 projects are likely to be completed by Dec.,2019.  
 
Various actions were taken for time bound completion of work on 99 prioritized Major/Medium 
irrigation projects under the AIBP. These projects will be assessed at the field level jointly by 
CWC and the State officers, and based on their joint recommendation; the PMKSY Mission 
shall approve the CA release for the same (both AIBP and CAD component) subject to 
utilization certificate and performance reports received from third party. 
 
For time bound completion of works, in addition to above mentioned efforts, following has been 
approved: 
 20% cost escalation on latest approved estimated cost (AIBP component) of project as on 
March 2012 may be allowed for which, no separate clearance/TAC clearance/Investment 
Clearance will be required for funding these projects. 
 Fast track proforma clearance from CWC may be sufficient for projects where revised cost may 
be more than the 20% over and above approved cost as on 01.04.2012 and no separate 
investment clearance from MOWR may be required. 
 Entire cost escalation above 20% to be borne by the concerned State Government.  The 
MoWR, RD & GR would facilitate this by arranging loan from NABARD at lower rate of interest 
(i.e.6%). 
 The pari-passu implementation of Command Area Development (CAD) works for enhancing 
potential utilization. 
 
Progress during 2016-17 
 
 Total funds of Rs. 10010 crore have been released through LTIF/budget  for prioritized projects 
including Polavaram project. 
 In all, 21 projects (AIBP works) having total potential of 5.22 Lha. are likely to be completed by 
June, 2017.  Irrigation potential utilization is expected to be more than 14 lakh ha during 2016-
17 from all the 99 projects.  Alongwith completion of these 21 projects, 22 projects of 
Maharashtra, 6 projects of Odisha, 17 projects(including phases) of Madhya Pradesh have 
been put on fast track and likely to be completed in advance of the scheduled time.  

4 
 
 Further, issues in respect of many other projects which were at standstill such as Gosikhurd in 
Maharashtra state have been streamlined and are getting back on track so as to meet the 
completion targets of March, 2019.  This project is likely to create an irrigation potential of 2.50 
lakh ha. Similarly, Polavaram Project has been put on a fast track when completed this project 
is likely to irrigate 2.9 lakh ha.   
 Many States like Maharashtra have undertaken innovative means such as installation of 
underground pressure pipelines to get over the difficulties of land acquisition for timely 
completion of these projects.” 
 
5. The Committee note that during the year 2016-17, 99 ongoing AIBP projects have 
been identified in consultation with the States of which 21 projects are likely to be 
completed by June, 2017, 31 projects by June, 2018 and balance 47 projects by December, 
2019.  The Committee also note that a special funding mechanism has been created for 
borrowing from NABARD for bridging the requirement of funds for completion of the 
aforesaid 99 priority projects.  The Committee  are happy to note that the Ministry has 
initiated various actions for time bound completion of work on the 99 prioritized Major / 
Medium projects under the AIBP.  Further, these projects will be assessed at the field level 
jointly by CWC and the States officers and based on their joint recommendation, the 
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) Mission shall approve the release for 
both the AIBP and CAD component - subject to Utilization Certificates and Performance 
Reports received from the third party.  The Committee, however, further note that to ensure 
the time bound completion of works, the Ministry has also approved (a) 20% cost escalation 
on latest approved estimated cost (AIBP component); (b) Fast track proforma clearance 
from CWC and for this purpose no separate investment clearance is required from Ministry 
of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation.  However, entire cost 
escalation above 20% are to be borne by the concerned State Government and (d) the pari-
passu implementation of Command Area Development (CAD) works for enhancing potential 
utilization. 
 The Committee are also happy to note the following progress made by the Ministry in 
this context during the year 2016-17: 
(i) Total funds of Rs. 10010 crore have been released through LTIF/budget  for 
prioritized projects including Polavaram project. 
 

5 
 
(ii) In all, 21 projects (AIBP works) having total potential of 5.22 Lha. are likely to be 
completed by June, 2017.  Irrigation potential utilization is expected to be more 
than 14 lakh ha during 2016-17 from all the 99 projects.  Alongwith completion of 
these 21 projects, 22 projects of Maharashtra, 6 projects of Odisha, 17 
projects(including phases) of Madhya Pradesh have been put on fast track and 
likely to be completed in advance of the scheduled time.  
 
(iii) Issues in respect of many other projects which were at standstill such as 
Gosikhurd in Maharashtra state have been streamlined and are getting back on 
track so as to meet the completion targets of March, 2019.  This project is likely 
to create an irrigation potential of 2.50 lakh ha. Similarly, Polavaram Project has 
been put on a fast track when completed this project is likely to irrigate 2.9 lakh 
ha.   
(iv) Many States like Maharashtra have undertaken innovative means such as 
installation of underground pressure pipelines to get over the difficulties of land 
acquisition for timely completion of these projects.” 
 
The Committee, while expecting that the measures taken by the Ministry will achieve 
desired results, recommend the Ministry to put in more rigorous effort for tackling all the 
impediments encountered in implementing the projects and achieve the goals envisaged 
under the AIBP.  Further, the Committee desired to be apprised about the status of all the 99 
prioritized projects to be completed by December, 2019 particularly of the 21 projects; 
which were to be completed by June, 2017.   
(B) Review of Fiscal Progress 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
6. The Committee noted that since 1996, 297 Major and Medium Irrigation (MMI) Projects 
have been taken up under the Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme. Out of 297 projects, 143 
MMI projects had been completed, 5 projects had been deferred, while the remaining 149 projects 
are ongoing. Out of these 149 ongoing projects, 89 projects are presently active, of which 46 
projects had been prioritized for completion. The Committee also noted that out of 46 projects, 23 
projects had been shortlisted for completion by March, 2017 remaining 23 projects were targeted to 
be completed by March, 2020.  The Committee further noted that out of the 23 shortlisted projects 
to be completed by March, 2017,  two are in Assam, one in Rajasthan, three in Jammu and 
Kashmir, two in Karnataka, four in Madhya Pradesh, seven in Maharashtra, two in Manipur, one in 
Odisha and one in Telangana.  In addition, 12,552 Surface Minor Irrigation schemes have also 

6 
 
been completed.  The Committee further noted that the fund required for 89 ‘Active Projects’ to be 
completed by March, 2020 was Rs. 86,411 crore (Central and State share) which include Rs. 
55,163 crore for Canal Network and Rs. 31,248 crore for CAD.  Out of 89 ‘Active Projects’ the fund 
requirement for 23 shortlisted projects, which were targeted to be completed by March, 2017, was 
Rs. 13,338 crore (Rs. 8,030 crore is AIBP component and Rs. 5,308 crore for CAD works) - where 
the Central share was  Rs. 3,950.42 crore and State share was Rs. 4,080 crore.  The Committee 
noted that the Irrigation Projects under the AIBP were required to be completed within a period of 
four years. However, completion of some Irrigation Projects was delayed due to various reasons 
such as land acquisition, Resettlement and Rehabilitation of the affected population, clearance 
from the Ministry of Environment and Forest, litigation, geological surprises during execution, 
paucity of funds etc.,  one major challenge cited for it being the insufficiency of funds for Central 
Assistance.  Responding to a query regarding initiative envisaged for overcoming the aforesaid 
problems the Ministry informed that 99 projects have been prioritized (out of 149 ongoing projects) 
under the AIBP. Out of these 23 projects had been shortlisted, which were having the least 
bottlenecks and were planned to be completed by March 2017 and remaining projects to be 
completed by December, 2019. The Committee were  concerned to note the tardy rate of 
completion of the AIBP projects which were causing time and cost over-runs as also of the serious 
lapse in distribution / management of funds like diversion / misuse of funds, issuance of false 
certificate for completion of the AIBP projects, under-utilisation of funds, delayed submission of 
Utilisation Certificates, etc.  The Committee also noted that due to delay in completion of projects 
under the AIBP,  the cost over-run was as high as 1382% in Major Irrigation Projects and 325% in 
Medium projects.  Responding to a query about the measures taken to check/reduce the cost over-
run in implementing the projects under the AIBP, the Ministry had informed that the priority projects 
are being closely monitored at various levels to overcome the bottlenecks and to complete them as 
per time schedule.  As far as funding of these projects was concerned it was envisaged through 
NABARD.  For ensuring proper utilization of the funds, the State Governments had been requested 
to submit the Utilization Certificates in respect of projects where Central Assistance is released. 
While taking cognisance of these initiatives taken by the Ministry, the Committee,  expressed 
serious concern over the  lapses encountered in distribution / management of fund like diversion / 
misuse of funds, issuance of false certificate for completion of the AIBP projects, under utilisation 

7 
 
of funds, delayed submission of Utilisation Certificates, etc., and they, therefore, strongly 
recommended the Ministry to devise a mechanism to prevent the lapses causing further delay as 
well as to have stringent measures to obviate such time and cost over-runs. The Committee also 
reiterated their recommendations made in 3rd Report on DFG (2005-06) on the subject and urged 
the Ministry to be extra vigilant and take innovative and take corrective measures to prevent any 
further diversion /misuse/waste of funds under the AIBP. The Committee further recommended the 
Ministry to have a separate component in the AIBP funds for incentivising the States who were 
using modern water saving technologies and were implementing the projects under the AIBP in a 
time bound manner. The Committee also desired to be apprised about the detailed status of the 
outcome of all the efforts/initiatives enumerated by the Ministry to have proper budget allocation 
and its utilisation under the AIBP. 
7. The Ministry, it its action taken note, has replied as follows: 
“AIBP is now a part of Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) after its launch in 
2015-16. 99 ongoing AIBP projects have been prioritized for their completion by Dec.,2019 
(in phases). Aarrangement of requisite funds for these projects has been made through 
NABARD. In   order to ensure that the funds released to the projects are used for intended 
purpose, utilization certificates and audited Statement of Expenditure are sought from the 
states.  The audit certificate/Statement is submitted alongwith the proposal for Central 
Assistance.  
CWC regularly monitors the physical financial progress of the project.  Apart from 
regular monitoring of these projects by CWC, third party monitoring is also contemplated for 
which a project Management Unit is being established. NABARD may also carry out 
monitoring of these projects. 
CAG has also been requested for concurrent audit of these 99 prioritized projects.” 
 
8. In response to the Committee’s recommendation, to be extra vigilant and to take 
innovative and corrective measures to prevent any further diversion/misuse/waste of fund 
under the AIBP, the Ministry has informed that the AIBP is now a part of PMKSY after its 
launch in 2015-16 and engagement of requisite funds for 99 ongoing prioritized projects has 
been made through NABARD.  The Committee note that in order to ensure that the funds 
released to the projects are used for intended purpose, Utilization Certificates and an 
Audited Statement of Expenditure are sought from the States.  The Audit 
Certificate/Statement is submitted alongwith the proposal for Central Assistance.  Besides, 
CWC regularly monitors the physical and financial progress of the project.  Apart from 

8 
 
regular monitoring of these projects by CWC, third party monitoring is also contemplated 
for which a project Management Unit is being established. In addition, NABARD may also 
carry out monitoring of these projects and CAG has also been requested for concurrent 
audit of these 99 prioritized projects.  The Committee, while hoping that the above initiatives 
taken by the Ministry will resolve all the problems associated with the funding under the 
AIBP, would like to be apprised about the outcome / impact of all these measures on the 
physical and Fiscal Progress of the AIBP.  The Committee would also like to be apprised 
about the position as obtaining in respect of the concurrent Audit of the 99 prioritized 
projects proposed to be done by the CAG. 
 
(C) Physical progress and IPC vis-a-vis IPU 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
9. The Committee noted that since the early seventies a substantial gap between the 
Irrigation Potential Created (IPC) and Irrigation Potential Utilised (IPU) was observed and in 1972 
the Irrigation Commission in its Report had made specific recommendation for systematic 
development of Commands of Irrigation projects for fully utilising the Irrigation Potential created.  In 
1973, a Committee of Ministers, set up by Ministry of Irrigation and Power, had also analysed this 
issue.  Subsequently, in 1974 a Centrally sponsored Command Area Development Programme 
(CADP) was initiated to improve Irrigation Potential Utilisation.  In addition, concerned with the 
issue of widening gap between IPC and IPU, the Ministry had sponsored study by the four premier 
Institutes of the country (namely, IIMA, IIMB, IIMC and IIML) for understanding and evolving 
strategies for resolving this problem.   Despite all these efforts, the Committee noted with concern 
that the AIBP was not only suffering from short creation of irrigation potential but also that there 
was a wide gap between the IPC and IPU,  which was growing every year to the extent that the 
gap at the point in time was found to be approximately 24 Mha (IPC is 113 Mha and the IPU is 89 
Mha).  According to an analysis of the achievement of total Irrigation Potential created and Utilised 
by the States at the end of 2002-07, it was found that there was a gap of 26.1% between the IPC 
and IPU.   The Committee also noted that for 149 ongoing Major/Medium/ERM Irrigation Projects 
under the AIBP, the targeted potential to be created  was  12104.46 MHa whereas the potential 

9 
 
created upto March, 2014 was 5638.21 MHa leaving a balance of 6466.25 MHa Irrigation Potential 
to be created.  The Committee had been informed that in order to bridge the gap between the IPC 
and IPU, parri-passu implementation of CAD with AIBP was envisaged for 99 ongoing prioritized 
projects, for which provision of adequate funds had been arranged through NABARD.  Further,  a 
new scheme of incentivisation for bridging the gap between IPC and IPU, in respect of completed 
projects, was under preparation. Nevertheless, the Committee were concerned to note that despite 
the above measures taken by the Ministry some hindrances were persisting at that point in time 
which inter-alia include (a) Gap in terms of “On Farm Development” works and Micro Irrigation 
infrastructure in the command of irrigation projects;  (b) Deficiencies in the old irrigation canal 
network and (c) Gap in Participatory Irrigation Management. Another disquieting fact was found to 
be that the Ministry did not have the data of the targets initially set for Irrigation Potential to be 
created and Irrigation potential utilized under each project in one place.  Since there was no data 
for the estimated / targeted Irrigation Potential to be created, the Committee could not have a 
comprehensive view of the AIBP projects in terms of IP targeted, created and actually utilised.  The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommended the Ministry to devise strategies and take urgent 
steps to not only increase the creation of Irrigation Potential IP created but also to ensure proper 
utilisation of the Irrigation Potential. The Ministry should positively achieve the target set, during 
12th Five Year Plan, for closing the gap between the Irrigation Potential created and Irrigation 
potential utilized, which is 36 lakh hactare. The Committee also urged the Ministry to look into the 
bottlenecks leading to the gaps seriously and address the deficiencies in the old irrigation canal 
network, gaps in infrastructure in command of irrigation projects, gaps in participatory irrigation 
management, etc., for the better management of Irrigation projects.  The Committee further 
recommended the Ministry to reconcile the data with respect to Irrigation Potential since the 
inception of the projects State-wise, Year-wise and Project-wise and maintain them at one place so 
as to have a holistic picture of the progress, actual gap between irrigation potential targeted, 
created and utilised. The Committee also desired to be apprised of the concrete action taken in this 
direction. 
 
10. The Ministry, it its action taken note, has replied as follows: 

10 
 
“There may be many reasons for gap in the Irrigation Potential Created and Irrigation 
Potential Utilised. Change in cropping pattern (use of high water consuming crops) by 
select farmers may constraint supply of water to full extent of CCA as envisaged in project’s 
original design, may lead to overall reductions in crop areas, leading to variations in actual 
measure of IPC realized after the AIBP and CADWM interventions vis-a-vis IPC originally 
envisaged under the project. Further the Irrigation Potential Utilization (IPU), as a measure 
of gross area actually irrigated in a particular year, is also a variable quantity; and may fall 
short in the pertinent span of data collection because of lean monsoon in that particular 
year. The reasons for IPC-IPU gap also include issues of reluctance by farmers, migration 
of farmers, and diversion and pilferage of project water; besides, there may be cases where 
project water use is wrongly accounted as groundwater use.  
Thus the IPC and IPU though do not provide a firm quantitative basis, the overall 
objective of bridging IPC-IPU gap is sought to be achieved through structural interventions 
related to CADWM works in the Culturable Command Area of project, and the correction of 
system deficiencies in project’s canal network. The other reasons of IPC-IPU gaps are 
sought to be addressed through non-structural interventions focussing on strengthening of 
participatory irrigation management.  
Further, Ministry is proposing a new scheme ‘Incentivisation scheme for Bridging 
Irrigation Gap’ covering more than 300 completed projects and CCA of about 80 lakhs Ha. 
in this regard which would help to reduce gap between IPC and IPU through these 
projects.” 
 
11. The Committee note that responding to their recommendation for increasing the 
creation of Irrigation Potential and for ensuring proper utilization of the Irrigation Potential 
created, the Ministry has submitted that there may be many reasons for gap in the Irrigation 
Created (IPC) and Irrigation Potential Utilised (IPU).  The Ministry also informed that the IPC 
and IPU though, do not provide a firm quantitative basis, the overall objective of bridging 
IPC-IPU gap is sought to be achieved through structural interventions related to CADWM 
works in the Culturable Command Area of project and the correction of system deficiencies 
in project’s canal network. The other reasons for IPC-IPU gaps are sought to be addressed 
through non-structural interventions focusing on strengthening of Participatory Irrigation 
Management. Further, it has been submitted that the Ministry is proposing a new scheme 
‘Incentivisation Scheme for Bridging Irrigation Gap’ covering more than 300 completed 
projects and CCA of about 80 lakhs Ha., which would help to reduce gap between IPC and 
IPU.  While noting that the proposed new scheme ‘Incentivisation scheme for Bridging 
Irrigation Gap’ has not yet started even after 6 months of the presentation of the Fourteenth 
Report on ‘Review of the Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP)’, the Committee 

11 
 
strongly disapprove such laxity on the part of the Ministry.  The Committee also note with 
concern that Ministry’s reply is silent on the issue of reconciling the data of the Irrigation 
Potential created and utilized since the inception of the projects.  The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their stand and urge the Ministry to not only address the bottlenecks leading to the 
gap between the IPC and IPU but also to reconcile the data with respect to the Irrigation 
Potential created and utilized since the inception of the projects State-wise, Year-wise and, 
Project-wise and maintain them at one place so as to have a holistic picture of the progress, 
actual gap between Irrigation Potential targeted, created and utilized. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the concrete action taken in this direction. 
 
(D) Monitoring Mechanism / Institutions 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
12. The Committee observed that for hassle free and time-bound completion of the projects, 
monitoring was an essential part of the Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme since the main 
objective of monitoring was to ensure the achievement of physical and financial targets of creation 
of Irrigation Potential. The Committee were apprised that Central Water Commission (CWC) had 
been assigned the responsibility to comprehensively monitor the projects receiving Central 
Assistance (CA). As per the arrangement at that point in time in CWC, projects under the AIBP and 
Repair, Renovation and Restoration of water bodies (RRR) were monitored by respective field 
units, whereas externally assisted and Centrally aided Inter-State/National projects were being 
monitored by Directorates of PMO (Project Monitoring Organisation) / PPO (Project Preparation 
Organisation) at CWC Head Quarter (HQ).  The Committee had been informed that the CWC with 
the help of its 13 Regional offices situated all over the country and a Project Monitoring 
Organization (PMO) at HQ, monitored the irrigation projects under the AIBP.  Monitoring of 
physical and financial progress of the projects involved periodical visits and submission of the 
Status Report of the project by the CWC.  Further, review meeting was taken by the Secretary, M/o 
WR, RD & GR, every year with the Secretary, Water Resources/Irrigation of the State 
Governments, Officers of CWC and Planning Commission for reviewing the physical and financial 
progress of the projects under the AIBP and resolving the bottlenecks hindering the completion of 

12 
 
the project. The Committee also noted that a three-tier system of monitoring of Irrigation Projects at 
the State and Centre level was introduced in 1975 viz. first and second tier monitoring at project 
and State Government level and monitoring at the Central level, by MoWR, RD & GR/CWC, was 
the third tier of the monitoring mechanism. The Committee further noted that apart from the 
procedure for monitoring of Major and Medium Irrigation (MMI) Projects there was monitoring of 
Surface Minor Irrigation (SMI) schemes, which were getting Central Assistance under the AIBP and 
this was done by the State Government. The Committee noted with concern that the number of MI 
schemes getting Central Assistance under the AIBP was large and the available CWC staff 
strength was found to be low.  Regarding monitoring visits, the Committee noted that, as per the 
then AIBP guidelines, it was to be undertaken once in a year subsequent to release of CA.  The 
Committee were informed that the decreasing trend of the monitoring visits in the last 3 years 
2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15, which was 163, 108 and 56 respectively was due to the fact that 
there was decrease in the required number of visits also because the number of projects that were 
given Central Assistance in the Twelfth Five Year Plan  were reduced due to the reduction in 
Budget.   The Committee believed that any lapse/lacunae in monitoring process/mechanism would 
be a hindrance in giving true picture of project implementation. The Committee, therefore, 
recommended the Ministry to take remedial action for removing all the bottlenecks in monitoring 
and strictly implement all the criteria/guidelines for monitoring the projects/Schemes under the 
AIBP. The Committee also recommended the Ministry to adopt carrot and stick model for 
penalizing those States which are not adhering to the terms and conditions and incentivizing those 
- which followed them scrupulously. In addition, apart from having effective monitoring mechanism 
at I and II tier, the Ministry was to also ensure that there was timely and adequate visit of the 
monitoring team to verify the completion of the irrigation potential creation and proper utilization of 
the irrigation potential created. Furthermore, the Committee recommended the Ministry to take 
initiative to increase the number of Regional offices and the staff strength in CWC so as to avoid 
their adverse impact on the monitoring mechanism. In addition, the Committee recommended the 
Ministry to develop a modus operandi for having systematic synergy between the physical visits 
made and online monitoring methods which will not only facilitate the visiting team with concrete 
data but will also help in conducting effective monitoring. The Committee also desired to be 

13 
 
apprised about the action taken on all the aforesaid recommendations along with the outcome of 
the same. 
 
13. The Ministry, it its action taken note, has replied as follows: 
“Thirteen regional offices of Central Water Commission have been established in different 
parts of the country the Monitoring Directorates under these regional offices are monitoring the 
physical and financial progress of the AIBP Projects on continuous basis and sending 
monitoring reports to concerned.   
 
Further, during 2016-17, 99 ongoing AIBP projects have been identified in consultation with 
States which could be completed by Dec., 2019 including CAD works. To keep close watch on 
the physical and financial progress of the projects, One nodal officer from the State for each of 
the 99 priority project has been identified who would be updating the physical and financial 
progress of the project regularly in the  MIS. 
 
Online Management Information System has been developed and nodal officers are regularly 
feeding the data on the component-wise physical and financial progress of the project. A 
mobile app  for uploading the geo-tagged photographs of works being executed under these 
projects for monitoring the progress is also under development.  
 
Also third party monitoring of these projects would be carried our besides monitoring visits by 
CWC offices.” 
 
14. The Committee find the Ministry’s reply repetitive in nature, reflecting status quo 
regarding the measures taken to monitor physical and financial progress of the Accelerated 
Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP).  The Committee, therefore, while reiterating their 
stand recommend the Ministry to adopt carrot and stick model for penalizing those States 
which are not adhering to the terms and conditions and to ensure timely and adequate 
visits of the monitoring team to verify the completion of the Irrigation Potential Creation and 
proper utilization thereof.  The Committee also recommend the Ministry to take initiative to 
increase the number of Regional offices and the staff strength in CWC so as to avoid its 
adverse impact on monitoring mechanism. In addition, the Committee recommend the 
Ministry to develop a modus operandi for having systematic synergy between the physical 
visits made and online monitoring methods.  The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the details of the concrete action taken on all the aforesaid points separately. 
 

14 
 
 
 
 
(E) Successful Models of Irrigation Projects 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
15. On the issue of adaptation of successful models of Irrigation Projects of other countries, the 
Committee had been informed that M/o WR, RD and GR in partnership with European Union was 
in the process of finalizing possible priorities and activities for the work programme 2017.  The 
Committee had also been informed about the Israel Model of Irrigation, which led to an increase in 
water use efficiency, and their innovation for efficient and sustainable water use that made them 
international leader in developing water-saving technology in agriculture.  In view of the 
disheartening ground reality of Irrigation Projects in the country, the Committee were convinced 
that the current initiatives taken by the Ministry were not sufficient to uplift the status of Irrigation 
Projects.  The Committee, therefore, were of the opinion that though the AIBP was launched with 
laudable objectives, its implementation had not yet attained the desired results and was engulfed in 
myriad shortcomings.  The Committee recommended the Ministry to take fresh initiatives for  
technology transfer from other countries, for emulating the successful models of other 
countries/States  suited to the needs of the country and make efforts to devise out of the box 
methods  for  implementation and sustainability of irrigation Projects under Accelerated Irrigation 
Benefits Programme.  While appreciating the Ministry’s plan to adopt the successful model of 
Madhya Pradesh, the Committee also recommended the Ministry to exercise caution and carry out 
proper feasibility study of the successful models of other Countries/States before emulating the 
same. The Committee desired to be apprised about the concrete action taken in the matter. 
 
16. The Ministry, it its action taken note, has replied as follows: 
“Ministry has signed MoUs with European Union under Indo-European Water Partnership 
(IEWP) on 7th October,2016 and another MoU with Israel has been signed on 11th 
November,2016  to develop cooperation in the field of water management and sharing of 
experiences and expertise in the areas mutually agreed upon including techniques in the 
efficient use of water resources, desalination, aquifer recharge etc. The cooperation is aimed 
at Strategic Partnership on Water so that through suitable wide ranging terms of reference, the 

15 
 
whole gamut of sustainable development in water sector encompassing Agriculture, water 
quality, irrigation, drinking water etc may be covered.” 
 
17. The Committee appreciate the fact that the Ministry has signed MoUs with European 
Union under Indo-European Water Partnership (IEWP) on 7th October,2016 and another MoU 
with Israel has been signed on 11th November,2016  to develop cooperation in the field of 
water management and sharing of experiences and expertise in the areas mutually agreed 
upon including techniques in the efficient use of water resources, desalination, aquifer 
recharge, etc.  The Committee are also happy to note that the cooperation is aimed at 
Strategic Partnership on Water so that through suitable wide ranging terms of reference, the 
whole gamut of sustainable development in the water sector encompassing Agriculture, 
water quality, irrigation, drinking water, etc may be covered.  The Committee however, note 
with disapproval that the Ministry’s reply is silent on their recommendation to take fresh 
initiatives for technology transfer from other countries, for emulating the successful models 
of other countries/States suited to the needs of the country and make efforts to devise out 
of the box methods for implementation and sustainability of irrigation Projects under the 
Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP).  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
stand and recommend the Ministry to exercise caution and carry out proper feasibility study 
of the successful models of other Countries/State - before emulating the same.  The 
Committee strongly recommend the Ministry to take concrete action in this regard and 
apprise the Committee accordingly. 
 
  

16 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
18. The Committee note that since the inception of the Accelerated Irrigation Benefits 
Programme (AIBP), in 1996, various bodies viz. Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG), 
Public Accounts Committee, four Indian Institutes of Management (IIM Lucknow, IIM Ahmedabad, 
IIM Bangalore and IIM Kolkata), Programme Evaluation Division of Planning Commission have 
examined the Programme and commented upon numerous discrepancies and shortcomings in the 
implementation of the AIBP Projects. The Standing Committee on Water Resources have also 
been reviewing and commenting upon the implementation of the AIBP in their reports on Demand 
for Grants. The committee are dismayed to note that despite all the recommendations by several 
Organisations/Bodies/Committees, myriad problems viz. poor progress in completion of projects, 
financial irregularities in the AIBP components, short creation for Irrigation Potential, non-utilization 
of created Irrigation facilities, deficiencies in planning and approval of the AIBP projects, poor 
project execution and financial management have undermined the success of the Programme. The 
Committee, cannot but conclude that though the AIBP was launched with laudable objectives, its 
implementation has suffered a setback and has not been able to attain the desired results. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly opine that sincere and rigorous efforts need to be made by the 
Ministry for not only achieving the goals of envisaged under the AIBP but also for ensuring the 
sustainability of irrigation projects so as to achieve optimum irrigation development and utilization 
of Irrigation Potential created in the country. The Committee also desire that resolute and concrete 
action be taken to address the impediments identified in subsequent paragraphs, for making the 
Programme successful and timely achievements of the targets of the AIBP. 
19. The Ministry, it its action taken note, has replied as follows: 
“The Union Government launched Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP) in 1996-
97 for providing financial assistance, with an objective of expediting completion of ongoing 
Major/Medium including Extension, Renovation and Modernization (ERM) irrigation projects 
and Surface Minor Irrigation schemes.  Since 1996, 297 Major and Medium Irrigation (MMI) 

17 
 
Projects under AIBP have been taken up. Out of 297 projects 143 MMI projects have been 
completed, 5 foreclosed, remaining 149 projects are ongoing. 
 
During 2015-16, Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) was launched with an aim 
to enhance physical access of water on farm and expand cultivable area under assured 
irrigation, improve on farm water use efficiency, introduce sustainable water conservation 
practices etc. With the launch of PMKSY, the AIBP was subsumed in it & now Major and 
medium irrigation/multipurpose irrigation (MMI) projects are being funded under the PMKSY-
AIBP.   
 
Further, during 2016-17, 99 ongoing AIBP  projects have been identified in consultation with 
States  which could be completed by Dec.,2019 including CAD works. A special funding 
mechanism has been created through borrowing from NABARD which could be utilized by the 
Central and State Governments to bridge the requirement of funds for completion of the 99 
priority projects.  21 projects are likely to be completed by June,2017 and another 31 projects 
by  June,2018.  The balance 47 projects are likely to be completed by Dec.,2019.  
 
Various actions were taken for time bound completion of work on 99 prioritized Major/Medium 
irrigation projects under the AIBP. These projects will be assessed at the field level jointly by 
CWC and the State officers, and based on their joint recommendation; the PMKSY Mission 
shall approve the CA release for the same (both the AIBP and CAD component) subject to 
utilization certificate and performance reports received from third party. 
 
For time bound completion of works, in addition to above mentioned efforts, following has been 
approved: 
 20% cost escalation on latest approved estimated cost (AIBP component) of project as on 
March 2012 may be allowed for which, no separate clearance/TAC clearance/Investment 
Clearance will be required for funding these projects. 

18 
 
 Fast track proforma clearance from CWC may be sufficient for projects where revised cost may 
be more than the 20% over and above approved cost as on 01.04.2012 and no separate 
investment clearance from MOWR may be required. 
 Entire cost escalation above 20% to be borne by the concerned State Government.  The 
MoWR, RD & GR would facilitate this by arranging loan from NABARD at lower rate of interest 
(i.e.6%). 
 The pari-passu implementation of Command Area Development (CAD) works for enhancing 
potential utilization. 
 
Progress during 2016-17 
 
 Total funds of Rs. 10010 crore have been released through LTIF/budget  for prioritized projects 
including Polavaram project. 
 In all, 21 projects (AIBP works) having total potential of 5.22 Lha. are likely to be completed by 
June, 2017.  Irrigation potential utilization is expected to be more than 14 lakh ha during 2016-
17 from all the 99 projects.  Alongwith completion of these 21 projects, 22 projects of 
Maharashtra, 6 projects of Odisha, 17 projects(including phases) of Madhya Pradesh have 
been put on fast track and likely to be completed in advance of the scheduled time.  
 Further, issues in respect of many other projects which were at standstill such as Gosikhurd in 
Maharashtra state have been streamlined and are getting back on track so as to meet the 
completion targets of March, 2019.  This project is likely to create an irrigation potential of 2.50 
lakh ha. Similarly, Polavaram Project has been put on a fast track when completed this project 
is likely to irrigate 2.9 lakh ha.   
 Many States like Maharashtra have undertaken innovative means such as installation of 
underground pressure pipelines to get over the difficulties of land acquisition for timely 
completion of these projects.” 
F. No. H-1102/1/2016-Parl. Dated 07.07.2017 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 5 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 

19 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
20. The Committee note that since the inception of the Accelerated Irrigation Benefits 
Programme (AIBP) there have been sets of modifications in the norms, scope, coverage and 
funding pattern of the scheme i.e. in the years 1996-97, 1999-2000, 2002, 2004, 2005, 2006 an 
recent being in October, 2013, and that despite the observations made in the CAG’s audit Report 
on repetitive modification (in 2004 and 2010) the Ministry have once again made changes in the 
norms for providing Central Assistance under the Programme in 2013 and 2016. During the year 
1996-97 the ratio of Central Loan Assistance (CLA) to State’s share was 1 (c) : 1 (s) for Special 
Category States. This ratio of CLA to State’s Share was changed to 2 (c) : 1 (s) for General 
category States – while for Special Category States it was changed to 3 (c) : 1 (s) in 1999-2000. 
During this year the AIBP was also extended to Minor Surface Irrigation Projects of Special 
Category States (NE States and Hilly States of H.P., Sikkim, J&K, Uttarakhand and Projects 
benefiting KBK districts of Orrisa). The Committee also note that in 2002, for Sates of General 
Category, the Centre – State ratio of loan assistance was again changed as 4:1 and for Special 
Category States the Centre’s share was made as 100% whereas the State’s share was ‘Nil’. 
Further, with effect from 01.04.2004, as an incentive for completion of projects on schedule, CLA 
was converted to 70% loan and 30% grant for General Category States and 10% loan and 90% 
grand for Special Category States. Further, in December 2006, the Central grant for Special 
Category States, projects benefiting drought prone areas, tribal areas and flood prone areas 
remained as 90% of the project cost however, in case of Non-Special category Sates it was made 
25%. Further, completion of an ongoing project under the AIBP for including a new project under 
the AIBP has been relaxed for projects benefiting a) drought prone areas, b) tribal areas, c) States 
with lower irrigation development as compared to national average, and d) districts identified under 
the PM’s Package for agrarian distress districts. The Committee note that again in October, 2013 
implementation of Command Area Development (CAD) works pari-passu with project works was 
emphasized. Besides, other changes have also been made which inter-alia include (i) 90% Central 

20 
 
Assistance (CA) of project cost (works Component) in case of Special Category States, and KBK 
region of Odisha; (ii) 75% CA of project cost in Special Areas i.e. Major/medium projects benefiting 
drought prone area, desert prone area, tribal area and flood prone area in Non-Special Category 
States and (iii) 25% CA of Project cost in case of Non-Special Category States areas other than 
covered at (ii) above could be enhanced upto 50% for new projects subject to condition that the 
States actually carry out Water Sector Reforms. 
 As regards the reason for making changes in the AIBP the Committee have been informed that 
the guidelines for AIBP have been revised from time to time for maximising the benefits as well as to 
allow special consideration for the regions lagging behind in development – which presently include 
north-eastern States, hilly States, drought prone and tribal areas and States with lower irrigation 
development as compared to national average. Nevertheless, when the Committee desired to know 
about the success of the relaxing the criteria repetitively, the Ministry’s reply was silent on this aspect. 
The Committee are convinced that such repeated changes in guidelines hampered the smooth 
implementation of the Programme and it also reflects lack of farsightedness in framing policy. The 
Committee are of the opinion that the Ministry have failed to act in accordance with the larger vision of 
the programme. The Committee deplore the piecemeal approach to such a significant programme and 
strongly recommend the Ministry to tackle the issue with a long-term perspective and planning to avoid 
repeated modifications and adhocism in future. 
 
21. The Ministry, it its action taken note, has replied as follows: 
“To maximize the benefits, the guidelines of the AIBP are being revised from  time to time in 
order to widen the scope of funding as well as to allow special consideration for the regions 
lagging behind in development, which presently include north-eastern states, hilly states, 
drought prone and tribal areas, KBK districts of Orissa, states with lower irrigation development 
as compared to national average and districts identified under PM package for agrarian 
distressed districts in the states of Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka and Kerala. The 
latest modifications in the AIBP guidelines was made in October, 2013.  
As mentioned at reply to para 1 above, during 2016-17, PMKSY – AIBP component has been 
reviewed so that projects can be completed in time bound manner. 99 projects have been 

21 
 
identified for completion by Dec.,2019 funding arrangements have been tied up to complete 
them in phases upto Dec.,2019. The details in this regard and progress made is already 
mentioned at para 1 above.” 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
22. The Committee note that the Union Cabinet on 7th February 2008 gave its consent to the 
proposal of the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation for 
implementing National Projects with the Central Assistance of 90% of the cost of the project as grant, 
and that the scheme has been approved for continuation and implementation in the 12th Plan by the 
Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs on 12.9.2o13 with proposed outlay of Rs. 8,150 crore under 
the ambit of the AIBP i.e. a part of the sub-schemes of the AIBFMP. The committee however, note 
with concern that out of 16 projects selected, only 5 projects are under execution viz. Gosikhund 
lrrigation project, Shahpurkandi Dam project, Teesta Barrage project, Saryu Nahar Pariyojana and 
Polavaram project, while remaining projects are either at Appraisal PFR / DPR preparation stage. 
Besides, one project, Ken Betwa Link project was accepted in 129th meeting of TAC held on 8.7.2016 
subject to conditions of statutory clearance. The reasons for non achievement of target under the 
National projects, as informed by the Ministry, include R&R problem, shortage of funds, execution 
issues, land acquisition problem, gap in canal network assured funding arrangements, Inter-state 
issues, etc. The committee are perturbed to note the delay made in implementing the ‘National 
Projects' so much so that 4 out of these 5 projects viz. Goshikhurd Irrigation Project (Maharashtra), 
Shahpurkandi Dam Project (Punjab), Teesta Barrage Project (West Bengal) and Saryu-Nahar 
Pariyojna, have passed exceeded targeted date of completion i.e. March, 2015/2016. It is a matter of 
Concern that the revised time-lines have been extended till December 2019 /  March, 2020 and the 
cost for two of the projects viz. Goshikhurd Irrigation Project (Maharashtra) and Polavaram project 
have also been revised. The Committee deplore the lackadaisical attitude of the Ministry and reiterate 
the recommendation made in their 9th Report on DFG (2016-17) (Para 2.27) enjoining the Ministry to 
promptly initiate action in consultation with the concerned State Governments to sort out the 
issues/hurdles and efforts be made for timely completion of the 5 projects which are currently under 
execution. The Committee also recommend that henceforth realistic and achievable targets be made 
for addressing all contentious issues in consultation with the concerned States/Organisations viz 

22 
 
NHPC, CWC, etc., and the remaining National Projects, which are at various stages of 
implementation, be completed as per the scheduled timeline. Efforts should also be made to ensure 
that the Ken Betwa Link project, which was accepted in 129th meeting of TAC held on 8.7.2016 
subject to conditions of statutory clearance,  should not meet the same fate as other delayed National 
Projects. The Committee would like to be apprised about the concrete measures taken for timely 
implementation of the National Projects so that its objectives are achieved and unnecessary time and 
cost over-run is minimised. 
 
23. The Ministry, it its action taken note, has replied as follows: 
“Efforts are being made to expedite the completion of National Projects. The status in this 
regard is given below: 
(i) Gosikhurd Project 
The ultimate irrigation potential of the project is 2,50,800 ha. Out of targeted 2,50,800 Ha, 
Irrigation Potential of 39970 ha has been created up to 03/2016. An amount of Rs. 5022.075 cr 
including central assistance of Rs. 2987.940 crore has been spent till March 2016.  
 
Headwork of the project has been completed and partial storage has been created in the dam 
as R&R works are yet to be completed. 85 villages affected due to the project are to be shifted 
in 64 new Gaothans. Works in 53 new Gaothans have been completed. Out of 38337.23 ha of 
land required for project , 7227.75 ha of land is still required to be acquired. This consists of 
606.40 ha of forest land, 4277.96 ha of Govt. land and 2343.38 ha of private land.  
 
The project is now included in the list of 99 prioritized projects to be completed by Dec., 2019. 
The funds for the prioritized projects (Both Central share and State share) have been arranged 
through NABARD.  
 
There are issues regarding construction quality of the project. These issues have been 
discussed in meetings of High Powered Steering Committee (HPSC). The last meeting of the 
Committee was held on 3rd March 2017. Various teams visited Gosikhurd Irrigation Project to 

23 
 
examine various issues related to the project and have suggested remedial measures. Such 
remedial works are in progress. Further, state has also intimated that they have taken several 
measures recently to streamline the works. They have taken action on recommendations of 
various committees and cancelled various contracts where works were held up and signed 
fresh MoU with NBCC to fast track the project works. 
 
 
(ii)  Saryu Nahar Pariyojna  
 
Saryu Nahar Pariyojana was included in the scheme of National Projects on 03.08.2012. The 
estimated cost of the project is Rs. 7270.32 Crore (NP cost Rs. 3011.53 Cr) at PL 2008-09 and 
4.37 lakh ha  of potential would be created though this project.  Central assistance of Rs. 
1159.58 Crore was released upto March, 2016. Further, Rs. 62 Cr as Central Assistance has 
been released during the FY: 2016-17. Total Expenditure made up to March, 2016 is reported 
as  Rs. 4843.16 Cr. and potential of 1,26,850 ha has been created under the scheme of 
National Projects. Saryu National Project is one of the identified 99 ongoing AIBP Projects to 
be completed by Dec.,2019.  
 The major bottlenecks of the projects are changes in IP of Canals, inclusion of new canals 
other than those mentioned in EFC, massive increase in number of structures on main canals, 
branch canals and distributaries, drastic reduction in drainage component, thereby increase in  
cost of the works to Rs.  6676.98 Crores .Further, the land acquisition is yet to be completed. A 
modified proposal  was received from Govt. of UP in October 2016,. CCA of project  has been 
reduced to 3.54 lakh ha under NP, which would now amount to change in scope of work. State 
Government  is now required to  submit the revised cost estimate/DPR for  TAC/ investment 
clearance from MoWR,RD&GR. The revised DPR is under preparation by the State Govt and 
they have indicated that same may be finalised within one month’s time. 
 
(iii) Ken Betwa Link Project 
The Advisory Committee of Ministry of Water Resources, RD & GR has accorded the Techno-
economic clearance to the Ken-Betwa project (Phase-I) in its meeting held on 08.07.2016. 

24 
 
Investment clearance of the Project for Rs. 18057.08 crore 2015-16 PL has also been granted 
for the project on 19-6-2017. Various other statutory clearances have also been obtained. The 
project is now being proposed for PIB/EFC/Cabinet for necessary financial approvals. 
 
(iv) Polavarm Project 
The project was accorded investment clearance by the Planning Commission for Rs. 10151.04 
cr (at 2005-06 price level) in 2009.  The cost at 2010-11 level is Rs. 16010.45 crore. The 
project was under construction with Central Assistance under the Accelerated Irrigation 
Benefits Programme (AIBP). An expenditure of Rs. 5135.87 crore had been incurred upto 
31.03.2014 including Central Assistance of Rs. 562.469 crore provided under the AIBP. The 
Polavaram Irrigation Project was declared a National Project vide section 90 of AP 
Reorganisation Act, 2014 with Union Government to take under its control the regulation and 
development of the Polavaram Project.  Central Government has created Polavaram Project 
Authority (PPA) with Governing Body to execute the Project and obtain all requisite clearances 
including environmental, forests and rehabilitation and settlement norms and all court cases.  
After declaration of National Project, the cost of balance irrigation component on Polavaram 
Project as on 01.04.2014 to the extent of cost of irrigation component as on that date is to be 
borne by the Central Govt.  
 
After declaration of National Project in the Year 2014, Rs 3349.70 crore has already been 
released to Polavaram Project Authority till date. Further, arrangement of funds from NABARD 
has been made.  
 
A Joint Committee of MoWR, RD & GR, Govt of AP, Chhattisgarh & Odisha, has been   
constituted to resolve the issues related to Polavaram Project. A meeting in this regard was 
held on 02.06.2016 and information sought by states of Chhattisgarh and Odisha was sent to 
them by CWC/PPA/Govt. of Andhra Pradesh.  
 

25 
 
Further a Dam Design Review Panel(DDRP) has been constituted in June,2016 for providing 
technical assistance and strategic guidance for planning, design and related aspects as per 
need of the project. DDRP has held 7 meetings so far and made 5 visits to project. They have 
made number of suggestions which have helped in streamlining the works of project. 
 
An Expert committee was formed in April 2017 to overview the implementation of Polavaram 
Project till completion. After visit to project in April 2017, the committee has suggested various 
measures to expedite progress of the works. 
 
(v) Other National Projects 
 
Sl. 
No 
Name of the 
National 
Project / State 
(River) 
Stage at which the 
National Project is  Status/Action Taken 
1 
Teesta Barrage 
Project / 
West Bengal 
(Teesta) 
Under Execution. 
 
 
Difficulty in land acquisition by Project 
Authority for minors and distributaries is the 
main reason for delay of the project. 
 
The project was discussed in 10th meeting of 
High Powered Steering Committee (HPSC)  
held on 03.03.2017. West Bengal Govt. 
informed that the report of a High Level Task 
Force, which was constituted to suggest the 
appropriate course of action for the execution 
of balance work of project, is under 
consideration of the State Government. The 
final decision of the State Govt will be 
conveyed to the Government of India. The 
same is awaited. 
 
5092 ha land has been acquired against total 
requirement of 8375 ha. Out of the balance 
land to be acquired (3283 ha), 435 ha is for 
main canal & 2848 ha for Dis-Net (against 
requirement of 5137 ha for Dis-Net) 
 
2. Shahpurkandi 
Dam Project  / 
Under Execution. 
 
The work on main dam has been stopped 
since 30.08.2014 as Govt. of J&K has 

26 
 
Sl. 
No 
Name of the 
National 
Project / State 
(River) 
Stage at which the 
National Project is  Status/Action Taken 
Punjab 
(Ravi) 
declined to lease land to Govt. of Punjab 
required for the project  
 
This issue has been discussed in various 
meetings including meetings of HPSC. 
 
Agreement of Secretaries of Govt. of Punjab, 
and J&K on resolution of issues and 
resumption of work of Shahpurkandi Dam 
Project was signed by Secretaries of both 
States in presence of Secretary, MoWR, 
RD&GR. on 03.03.2017. The agreement has 
been ratified by the Govt of Punjab; however, 
the agreement is yet to be ratified by the Govt 
of J&K. 
3. 
Lakhwar 
multipurpose 
project / 
Uttarakhand 
(Yamuna) 
Appraisal & 
Investment 
clearance 
completed. 
The Agreement among co-basin States for 
benefit sharing in respect of upstream 
projects on river Yamuna was signed on 
21.03.2017 in the meeting of UYRB. 
However, the agreement is yet to be ratified 
by the co-basin States. Upper Yamuna River 
Board (UYRB) is pursuing the matter with the 
co-basin States. 
 
Further, a Special Purpose vehicle (SPV) as 
Joint Venture between Uttarakhand & 
Himachal Pradesh has been constituted for 
execution of Kishau project and the first 
meeting of SPV has been held in February, 
2017. As intimated by project authority, 
compliances to comments of CWC/CEA on 
the Detailed Project Report of Kishau project 
will be submitted after deployment of 
adequate staff in SPV.  
4.  
Renuka Dam 
project / 
HP 
(Giri/Yamuna) 
Project was 
accepted by 
Advisory Committee 
of MoWR, RD & GR 
in its 132nd meeting 
held on 6th March 
2017 for Rs. 
4596.76 crore.  
5.  
Kishau 
multipurpose 
project / HP & 
Uttarakhand 
(Tons / 
Yamuna) 
Under appraisal  
6.  
Ujh 
Multipurpose 
Project / J&K 
(Ujh / Ravi) 
Project was agreed 
“In Principal” by the 
Advisory Committee 
of MoWR, RD & GR 
in its 131st Meeting 
held on 17.11.2016 
Due to issue of large submergence by the 
project, it was decided by Advisory 
Committee of MoWR, RD & GR that a team 
shall visit the project site and explore the 
alternate options with reduced submergence / 
displacement. A team was constituted in 

27 
 
Sl. 
No 
Name of the 
National 
Project / State 
(River) 
Stage at which the 
National Project is  Status/Action Taken 
December 2016 to explore the alternate 
options with reduced submergence / 
displacement. The team undertook visit to the 
project site during 16.03.2017 to 17.03.2017. 
The report of the team has been received  in 
May 2017. The team has suggested to send 
this report to Govt. of J&K for preparing the 
R&R Plan accordingly. 
7.  
Kulsi dam 
Project / 
Assam 
(Kulsi) 
Tributary of 
Brahamputra 
Under appraisal Project Authority (Brahmaputra Board) to 
submit compliance to CWC/CEA. They were 
asked in 10th HPSC meeting held on 
03.03.2017. to expedite submission of 
compliance  
8.  
Noa Dihing 
Dam Project / 
Arunachal 
Pradesh  (Noa-
Dihing) 
Under appraisal Project Authority (Brahmaputra Board) to 
submit compliance to CWC/CEA. They were 
asked in 10th HPSC meeting held on 
03.03.2017. to expedite submission of 
compliance 
9.  
Bursar H E 
Project / J&K 
(Marusudar/ 
Chenab/ Indus) 
Under appraisal NHPC prepared the DPR of the project and 
submitted to CWC in January 2017. The 
appraisal is under active stage. 
10.  
Gyspa HE 
Project / 
Himachal 
Pradesh 
(Bhaga / 
Chenab / Indus 
DPR under 
preparation by 
Govt. of Himachal 
Pradesh.  
DPR of the project is under preparation by 
HPPCL. However, HPPCL is facing 
resistance from local people (Jispa Bandh 
Sangarsh Samiti) in completing survey & 
investigation works.  CWC requested Govt. 
of H.P. in December 2015 to provide 
adequate security & support to HPPCL staff 
and its consultants to complete S&I works. 
In 10th HPSC meeting, Secretary (WR, RD 
&GR) advised to offer attractive packages 
to oustees and get this matter amicably 
resolved. 
 
11.  
2nd Ravi Vyas 
Link Project/  
Punjab 
(Ravi Beas 
At  PFR Stage 
Project is in PFR Stage. Govt. of Punjab 
submitted a PFR/ Inspection Note of the 
project to CWC in July 2014, which lacked 
basic details like topographical survey, 

28 
 
Sl. 
No 
Name of the 
National 
Project / State 
(River) 
Stage at which the 
National Project is  Status/Action Taken 
Link) geotechnical investigations, details of 
networks of UBDC system, etc., to ascertain 
the feasibility of the project.  
Govt. of Punjab has communicated in Feb 
2015 that the project is technically not 
feasible due to reverse slope involving 85 to 
96 feet lift, opposition of local farmers due to 
high water level leading to water logging in 
the area. 
It was decided during meeting of 10th HPSC 
on 03.03.2017 that Government of Punjab 
will submit the requisite details to CWC. A 
team will inspect the site and submit a report 
to the MoWR RD&GR. The team has been 
constituted in April 2017 and will visit the 
project site on receipt of requisite details 
from State Govt. 
 
12.  
Upper Siang 
Project / 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
(Siang) 
Project Authority 
has to submit single 
stage PFR/DPR of 
the project 
This is a major power (9750 MW 
approx) & flood moderation project on Siang 
River, a tributary of Brahmaputra River in 
East Siang district of Arunachal Pradesh. In 
the meeting of 10th HPSC, it was decided 
to prepare DPR of Upper Siang Project 
considering it as a single project with one 
dam. It was clarified that two stage/multi 
stage planning and implementation of the 
project will not be considered by the 
Ministry. Project Authority has to submit 
single stage PFR/DPR of the project. 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
24. The Committee note that the Centrally - sponsored Command Area Development (CAD) 
programme was launched during the year 1974-75 for development of adequate delivery system of 
irrigation water up to farmers' field and to enhance water use efficiency and productivity of crops 

29 
 
per unit of land and water. From 01-04-2004, the CAD programme was restructured and renamed 
as Command Area Development and Water Management (CAD&WM) Programme. The scheme 
has been implemented as a State Sector scheme from the year 2008-09 and is being implemented 
pari-passu with the Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme during the Twelfth Five Year Five 
Year Plan with a total outlay of Rs. 15,000 crore. As far as the physical progress for construction of 
field channels during Eleventh and Twelfth Five Year Plan is concerned the Committee note that 
for the years 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15 the achievements are 0.361, 0.308 and 0.33 Mha 
respectively and the revised physical target is to cover CCA of 3.6 Mha. The Committee are 
unhappy to note that though a new Plan period is about to begin this year, the targets under 
CAD&WM programme are yet to be achieved. The Committee also note that the delay in approval 
of cabinet for continuation of the scheme and subsequent delay in issuance of guidelines have 
adversely affected the progress of CAD&WM Programme so much so that the State Governments 
delayed the works under the Programme during the year 2013-14 and budget related reductions in 
CA during 2015-16 also resulted in reduced coverage of Command Area Development works. The 
Committee further note that to mitigate the aforesaid adverse impacts, the Command Area 
Development and Water Management Programme have been made a part of Har Khet Ko Pani 
component of Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yoina (PMKSY) from the year 2015-16 with enhanced 
funding of the Rs.1,142.71 crore targeting CCA of about 5.7 lakh hectare. Further, from the year  
2016-17 funding arrangement for CAD works of 99 prioritized AIBP projects has been made 
through NABARD and an amount of Rs. 667.37 crore has already been released upto October, 
2016 targeting a CCA of about 5.6 lakh hectare. The Committee are of the considered opinion that 
if the Ministry had avoided delayed release/reduced allocation of the Central Assistance for 
CAD&WM programme, the situation of funding arrangement through borrowing from NABARD 
would not have arisen. The Committee desire the Ministry to take initiatives to avoid delayed 
release of funds under Central Assistance and also its subsequent reduction. The Committee also 
recommend the Ministry to ensure timely and proper implementation of CAD&WM programme and 
take fresh measures to ensure that objectives of the Programme are achieved. The Committee 
would like to be apprised about the action taken in this regard, including the year-wise physical and 
financial achievements made under CAD&WM during 12th Plan period. 
25. The Ministry, it its action taken note, has replied as follows: 

30 
 
“To resolve the issue of funds crunch under general budget allocation, the innovative funding 
mechanism for implementation of Command Area Development (CAD) works of the 99 
prioritized AIBP projects through NABARD borrowing has been adopted after Cabinet approval 
during July, 2016. Central Assistance (CA) is being released to the States for implementation 
of CAD works of projects of prioritized AIBP projects through NABARD from 2016-17 onwards 
and CA of Rs.853.96 crore with physical target of covering about 6.8 lakh hectares of 
Culturable Command Area (CCA), as per proposals received from the States, has been 
released during financial year 2016-17. The funding will be continued till targeted completion of 
the projects through NABARD from the dedicated corpus of funds provided for the purpose. 
State Governments may also take loan from NABARD for State share for completion of the 
projects. 
 
The year wise physical and financial progress under CADWM programme during 12th Plan are 
as under: 
 
Year Physical Progress (CCA covered) 
(lakh Hectare) 
Financial Achievement 
(Rs. crore) 
2012-13 3.61 365.19 
2013-14 3.08 179.99 
2014-15 1.79 199.99 
2015-16 5.71* 1142.71 
2016-17 6.80** 853.96 
*As per progress report received from the States 
**Targeted to be covered against the CA released 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
26. The Committee observe that during the Eleventh Five year plan, the Government of India 
launched the 'Flood Management programme, (FMP), a State Sector Scheme, for providing 
Central Assistance (CA) of Rs. 8,000 crore to the State Governments for undertaking works related 

31 
 
to river management, flood control, anti-erosion, anti-sea-erosion, drainage development, flood 
proofing, flood prone area development, restoration of damaged flood management works etc. 
Under this programme, a total of 420 works were approved and a Central Assistance of Rs. 3,565 
crore was released. Out of which, 252 works have been physically completed. The completed 
works have restored 17.004 lakh hectare of old flood prone area and provided reasonable 
protection to 2,589 lakh hectare of new flood prone area. A total of number of 97 new projects, with 
an estimated cost of Rs. 4411.595 crore, have been approved for funding under FMP during 
Twelfth Five Year Plan. The Committee also note that in view of the demands made by the States 
and also recommendations of Twelfth Five Year plan Working Group on Flood Management and 
region specific issues, the Government of India has approved continuation of Flood Management 
Programme during the Twelfth Five Year Plan with an outlay of Rs. 10,000 crore and the Central 
Assistance of Rs. 991.39 crore has been released up to 31.12.2015. Noting that the ‘Flood 
Management Programme' forms an essential part of the AIBP, and that the deficiencies of this 
programme have been identified by this Committee in their 1st Report on DFG (2014-15) and 9th 
Report on DFG (2016-17), the Committee recommend that such deficiencies hampering the FMP 
be tackled with all seriousness by the Ministry and effective steps taken to remove them in a 
concerted way so that the loopholes of Flood Management Programme doesn't have an adverse 
cascading impact on the AIBP. 
27. The Ministry, it its action taken note, has replied as follows: 
“Flood Management scheme is a separate scheme from AIBP. Under Flood Management 
programme, , physical and financial progress of works of flood control under RMBA is being 
monitored by Central Water Commission (CWC), Ganga Flood Control Commission (GFCC) in 
their respective jurisdiction and timely completion of works is emphasised  during interaction 
with the State governments.  The maintenance of embankments of Kosi & Gandak projects in 
Nepal under Plan scheme RMBA are undertaken as per recommendation of Kosi High Level 
Committe(KHLC) and Gandak High Level Standing  Committee (GHLSC) respectively. For 
rivers having common border with Bangladesh which face problem of erosion of river banks 
and beds causing loss of land and endangering life and property, works are undertaken under 

32 
 
EMBA scheme. The flood protection works along Indo-Pak borders on river Ravi and its 
tributaries is being executed by Govt. of Punjab. 
During XII Plan, the Cabinet approved continuation of FMP with an outlay of Rs. 10,000 crore 
which included Rs. 3900 crore towards Spillover works and Rs. 6100 crore towards new works 
proposed to be undertaken during 12th Plan keeping in view  provision for new works for 
catchment area treatment for attaining flood management in a more effective manner. Entire 
amount of Rs.150 crore allocated during 2016-17 has been released. 
 
As reported by State Governments, the reason for delay in completion of the projects are 
mainly due to prolonged monsoon season in the hilly area, shortage of central share and 
budgetary constraints, land acquisition etc. Efforts are being made to complete the projects 
subject to receipt of eligible proposals from State governments and availability of funds. 
 
Development of Flood Forecasting Models 
The rainfall-runoff based mathematical models utilising observed rainfall, Automatic Weather 
Stations/Automatic Rain Guage  data and quantitive precipitation forecast of IMD for more 
warning /lead time say upto 3 days is being adopted in select basins in formulation of forecast. 
on the lines of rainfall based hydrodynamic flood forecasting model developed for Jhelum river 
at Ram Munshibagh (Srinagar), the same for other basins are being developed. CWC is 
making all efforts for completion of such models for flood forecasting in all the rivers where 
flood forecast stations are located before monsoon 2017. the rainfall based hydrodynamic flood 
forecasting models will cover the existing network of 175 flood forecast stations upto 11th Plan 
as well as new 100 stations being operationized during XII Plan. So far such models have been 
developed for the basins fo Godavari, Cauvery, Mahanadi, TApi, Chambal, Yamuna, 
Alaknanda,< Bhagirathi, Pennar covering 62 stations. Models for Krishna, Ganga, Brahmani- 
Baitarni, Mahi, Sabarmati are in advance stage of development. 
 
Development of the inundation model for Mahanadi will be completed before monsoon 2017. 
Development of inundation models for other basins will be taken up under World Bank assisted 
National Hydrology Project (NHP) through outsourced modelling experts in a phased manner.” 

33 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
28. The Committee note that since 1996, 297 Major and Medium Irrigation (MMl) Projects have 
been taken up under the Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme. Out of 297 projects, 143 MMI 
projects have been completed, 5 projects have been deferred, while remaining 149 projects are 
ongoing. Out of these 149 ongoing projects, 89 projects are presently active, of which 46 projects 
have been prioritized for completion. The Committee also note that out of 46 projects, 23 projects 
have been shortlisted for completion by March, 2017 while remaining 23 projects are targeted to be 
completed by March, 2020. The Committee also note that out of the 23 shortlisted projects, to be 
completed by March, 2017, two are in Assam, one in Rajasthan, three in Jammu and Kashmir, two 
in Karnataka, four in Madhya Pradesh, seven in Maharashtra, two in Manipur, one in Odisha and 
one in Telangana. The Committee also note that in addition, 12,552 Surface Minor Irrigation 
schemes have also been completed. The Committee further note that the fund required for 89 
'Active projects’ to be completed by March, 2020 is Rs. 86,411 crore (Central and State share) 
which include Rs. 55,163 crore for Canal Network and Rs. 31,248 crore for CAD. Out of 89 'Active 
Projects' the fund requirement for 23 shortlisted projects, which are targeted to be completed by 
March, 2017, is Rs. 13,338 crore (Rs. 8,030 crore is AIBP component and Rs. 5,308 crore for CAD 
works) - where the Central share is Rs. 3,950.42 crore and State share is Rs. 4,080 crore. The 
Committee note that the irrigation projects under the AIBP are required to be completed within a 
period of four years. However, completion of some irrigation projects is delayed due to various 
reasons such as land acquisition, Resettlement and Rehabilitation of the affected population, 
clearance from the Ministry of Environment and Forest, litigation, geological surprises during 
execution, paucity of funds etc., one major challenge cited for it being the insufficiency of funds for 
Central Assistance. Responding to a query regarding initiative envisaged for overcoming the 
aforesaid problems the Ministry have informed that 99 projects have been prioritized (out of 149 
ongoing projects) under the AIBP. Out of these 23 projects have been shortlisted which are having 
the least bottlenecks and are planned to be completed by March 2017 and remaining projects are 
to be completed by December, 2019. The committee are concerned to note the tardy rate of 
completion of the AIBP projects which are causing time and cost over-run as also of the serious 
lapse in distribution / management of fund like diversion / misuse of fund, issuance of false 

34 
 
certificate for completion of the AIBP projects, under-utilisation of funds, delayed submission of 
Utilisation Certificates, etc. The Committee also note that due to delay in completion of projects 
under the AIBP, the cost over-run is as high as 1382% in Major Irrigation projects and 325% in 
Medium projects. Responding to a query about the measures taken to check/reduce the cost over-
run in implementing the projects under the AIBP, the Ministry have informed that the priority 
projects are being closely monitored at various levels to overcome the bottlenecks and to complete 
them as per time schedule. As far as funding of these projects is concerned it is envisaged through 
NABARD. For ensuring proper utilization of the funds, the State Governments are requested to 
submit the Utilization Certificates in respect of projects where Central Assistance is released. While 
taking cognisance of these initiatives taken by the Ministry, the Committee, however express 
serious concern over the lapses encountered in distribution / management of fund like diversion / 
misuse of fund, issuance of false certificate for completion of the AIBP projects, under utilisation of 
funds, delayed submission of Utilization Certificates, etc., and they, therefore, strongly recommend 
the Ministry to devise a mechanism to prevent the lapses causing further delay as well as to have 
stringent measures to obviate such time and cost over-runs. The Committee also reiterate their 
recommendations made in 3rd Report on DFG (2005-06) on the subject and urge the Ministry to be 
extra vigilant and take innovative and corrective measures to prevent any further diversion / 
misuse/waste of fund under AIBP. The Committee further recommend the Ministry to have a 
separate component in the AIBP fund for incentivising the States who are using modern water 
saving technologies and are implementing the projects under the AIBP in a time bound manner. 
The Committee would like to be apprised about the detailed status of the outcome of all the 
efforts/initiatives enumerated by Ministry to have proper budget allocation & its utilisation under the 
AIBP. 
 
29. The Ministry, it its action taken note, has replied as follows: 
“AIBP is now a part of Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) after its launch in 
2015-16. 99 ongoing AIBP projects have been prioritized for their completion by Dec.,2019 (in 
phases). Aarrangement of requisite funds for these projects has been made through NABARD. 
In   order to ensure that the funds released to the projects are used for intended purpose, 

35 
 
utilization certificates and audited Statement of Expenditure are sought from the states.  The 
audit certificate/Statement is submitted alongwith the proposal for Central Assistance.  
 
CWC regularly monitors the physical financial progress of the project.  Apart from regular 
monitoring of these projects by CWC, third party monitoring is also contemplated for which a 
project Management Unit is being established. NABARD may also carry out monitoring of 
these projects. 
CAG has also been requested for concurrent audit of these 99 prioritized projects.” 
 
F. No. H-1102/1/2016-Parl. Dated 07.07.2017 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
30. The committee are heartened to note that Remote sensing Technique (RST) has been 
deployed for assessing the Irrigation Potential created by the projects under the AIBP. In the first 
phase (during 2009-10), study of 53 projects covering area of 5447.743 thousand hectare have 
been completed by the National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC). In the second phase (during the 
year 2013-14), work for similar study in respect of 50 AIBP funding projects, covering an area of 
851.428 thousand hectare, have been completed. All the 50 Reports have been submitted by 
NRSC, Hyderabad. The committee are, however, concerned to learn about the low resolution of 
Cartosat-I and II imageries hosted in Bhuvan Platform which is 2.5 m and 1 m respectively and the 
fact that the tools/user manual available in the portal has limited facility and it is not so user 
friendly. The committee also note that inadequately trained staff in some of the regional offices is 
another constraint. The committee have been informed, in this regard, that in order to deal with the 
problem of low resolution, Bhuvan portal is used for online monitoring of MMI projects and if 
required better resolution imageries from Google are used by the Ministry to supplement the 
imageries provided by NRSC. In addition, to overcome the problem of low resolution of Cartosat 
imageries, it has been decided to obtain the better resolution imageries from KOMSAT. A proposal 

36 
 
is also under way for procurement of Cartosat-II and KOMPSAT imageries for 99 priority projects. 
The committee also note that the digitisation of the priority projects under the AIBP is in progress 
using Google Earth, and also to overcome the problem of inadequately trained staff, NRSA has 
been approached to provide training to about 60 officers of the CWC and the list of those 60 
officers has already been sent to NSRA This is in addition to short training also being provided to 
the CWC officers by the Remote Sensing Directorate of CWC. Further, the Ministry have informed 
that all the imageries needs to be procured only through ISRO/NRSC and an MoU with NRSC is to 
be signed for using their Bhuvan portal and hosting the processed imageries proposed to be 
procured, the proposal for which-is under process and the Central Water Commission is 
coordinating with NRSA to do needful. Taking cognisance of the significance of the Remote 
Sensing Technique in monitoring the Irrigation projects, the Committee recommend the Ministry to 
set up and maintain well-established infrastructure/arrangements for obtaining better resolution 
imageries within this financial year, which would be cost effective as well – in the long run. The 
Committee also recommend the Ministry to institute a system for ensuring the safety/security of 
data while using online monitoring mechanism and have a systematic compilation of the data so as 
to have a comprehensive picture, and take necessary steps in this regard at the earliest. The 
committee would like the Ministry to expeditiously work in this direction in a time-bound manner 
and apprise them accordingly. 
31. The Ministry, it its action taken note, has replied as follows: 
“As mentioned in the reply to pra 10 above, an Online Management Information System has 
been developed and nodal officers are regularly feeding the data on the component-wise 
physical and financial progress of the project.  A  mobile app  for uploading the geo-tagged 
photographs of works being executed under these projects for monitoring the progress is also 
under development.  
 
 Also Bhaskaracharya Institute for Space Application and Geoinfomatics (BISAG) under 
Department of Science & Technology, Government of Gujarat has been approached to 
analyse  details of year wise / season wise cropped area in the command of these 99 
projects from 2012-13 onwards till 2016-17 using remote sensing technologoies. Requisite 

37 
 
details of command of the projects in the digitised format has been provided to them and 
study is underway.” 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
32. The Committee note that for creating awareness, for better management / implementation / 
monitoring of the irrigation programme, regular training on water management is given to the 
officials both at Centre and State level. Besides, time to time training programme is also conducted 
at National Water Academy, Pune under M/o WR, GR & RD. The Committee also note that the 
CAD&WM programme of the PMKSY (HKKP) has provision for training of farmers too. Further, 
under PMKSY, there is provision of adequate funds for Information, Education and Communication 
(IEC) activities which can be used for awareness of the farmers/officials. While noting these 
initiatives, the Committee strongly opine that there is an urgent need for an integrated approach for 
training all the stakeholders involved in implementing and monitoring of the AIBP. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Ministry to organize more frequent workshops training and conference, 
design more awareness campaigns and utilise Print and Electronic media to sensitise the farmers 
about the significance of irrigation projects and their contribution for success of the programme. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the initiatives taken in this direction as well as about 
the outcome of the same, The Committee further note that there is a separate Research & 
Development (R&D) Program, under MoWR, RD & GR, that supports research based activities 
related to water resources which inter-alia include Irrigation Techniques and Irrigation 
Performance. The Indian National Committee on Surface Water (INCSW) is a specialized entity 
under CWC which manages the R&D functions as well as it works as an Indian platform for 
International Organizations like ICID, UNESCO, INE, etc. The Ministry have also proposed to hold 
an International Conference on Micro Irrigation during the year 2018 for which the preparations are 
underway. The Committee are happy to note that this International Conference would open up new 
windows for technology transfer for Micro-irrigation technology in Indian Market. The Committee 
recommend the Ministry to take tangible and bold initiatives for focused R&D and inform the 
Committee accordingly. 

38 
 
33. The Ministry, it its action taken note, has replied as follows: 
“Ministry of Water Resources, RD and GR  is sponsoring research schemes through three 
Indian National Committees (INCs) viz: on Surface Water, Ground Water and Climate Change 
under the Plan scheme “Research and Development Programme for water sector”. Also, 
organisations of the ministry namely CWPRS, CSMRS, NIH and CWC are presently carrying 
out research of applied nature and provide solutions to the demand driven problems through 
their specific research activities. Besides, studies are undertaken through consultancy in 
priority areas such as (a) Water Use Efficiency (b) Post Project Performance Evaluation (c) 
Environment Impact Assessment in respect of completed / upcoming irrigation projects and 
other areas including impact of climate change on water resources and awareness thereof. 
These activities are proposed to be continued beyond the XII Plan period.” 
 
 
  

39 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
  

40 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
34. The Committee note that since the early seventies a substantial gap between the Irrigation 
Potential Created (lPC) and Irrigation Potential Utilised (lPU) was observed and in 1972 the 
Irrigation Commission in its Report had made specific recommendation for systematic development 
of Commands of Irrigation projects for fully utilising the Irrigation Potential created. In 1973, a 
Committee of Ministers, set up by Ministry of Irrigation and Power, had also analysed this issue. 
Subsequently, in 1974 a Centrally sponsored Command Area Development Programme (CADP) 
was initiated to improve Irrigation Potential Utilisation. In addition, concerned with the issue of 
widening gap between IPC and IPU, the Ministry had sponsored study by the four premier 
Institutes of the country (namely, IIMA, IIMB, IIMC and IIML) for understanding and evolving 
strategies for resolving this problem. Despite all these efforts, the Committee not with concern that 
the AIBP is not only suffering from short creation of irrigation potential but also that there is a wide 
gap between the IPC and IPU, which is growing every year to the extent that the current gap is 
approximately 24 Mha (IPC is 113 Mha and the IPU is 89 Mha). According to an analysis of the 
achievement of total Irrigation Potential created and Utilised by the States at the end of 2002-07, it 
is found that there is a gap of 26.1% between the IPC and IPU. The committee also note that for 
149 ongoing Major/Medium/ERM Irrigation Projects under the AIBP, the targeted potential to be 
created was 12101.46 MHa whereas the potential created upto March, 2014 was 5638.21 MHa 
leaving a balance of 6466.25 MHa Irrigation Potential to be created. The Committee have been 
informed that in order to bridge the gap between the IPC and IPU, parri-passu implementation of 
CAD with the AIBP is envisaged for 99 ongoing prioritized projects, for which provision of adequate 
funds have been arranged through NABARD. Further, a new scheme of incentivisation for bridging 
the gap between IPC and IPU, in respect of completed projects, is under preparation. 
Nevertheless, the Committee are concerned to note that despite the above measures taken by the 
Ministry some hindrances are still persisting which inter-alia include (a) Gap in terms of "On Farm 
Development'' works and Micro Irrigation infrastructure in the command of irrigation projects; (b) 

41 
 
Deficiencies in the old irrigation canal network and (c) Gap in participatory irrigation management. 
Another disquieting fact is that the Ministry do not have the data of the targets initially set for 
Irrigation Potential to be created and Irrigation potential utilized under each project in one place. 
Since there is no data for the estimated / targeted Irrigation Potential to be created, the committee 
could not have a comprehensive view of the AIBP projects in terms of IP targeted, created and 
actually utilised. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry to devise strategies 
and take urgent steps to not only increase the creation of Irrigation Potential IP created but also to 
ensure proper utilisation of the Irrigation Potential. The ministry should positively, achieve the 
target set, during 12th Five Year Plan for closing the gap between the Irrigation Potential created 
and Irrigation potential utilized, which is 36 lakh hectare. The Committee also urge the Ministry to 
look into the bottlenecks leading to the gap seriously and address the deficiencies in the old 
irrigation canal network, gaps in infrastructure in command of irrigation projects, gaps in 
participatory irrigation management etc., for better management of Irrigation projects. The 
Committee further recommended the Ministry to reconcile the data with respect to the Irrigation 
Potential since the inception of the projects State-wise, Year-wise and, Project-wise and maintain 
them at one place so as to have a holistic picture of the progress, actual gap between irrigation 
potential targeted, created and utilised. The committee would like to be apprised of the concrete 
action taken in this direction. 
 
35. The Ministry, it its action taken note, has replied as follows: 
“There may be many reasons for gap in the Irrigation Potential Created and Irrigation 
Potential Utilised. Change in cropping pattern (use of high water consuming crops) by 
select farmers may constraint supply of water to full extent of CCA as envisaged in project’s 
original design, may lead to overall reductions in crop areas, leading to variations in actual 
measure of IPC realized after AIBP and CADWM interventions vis-a-vis IPC originally 
envisaged under the project. Further the Irrigation Potential Utilization (IPU), as a measure 
of gross area actually irrigated in a particular year, is also a variable quantity; and may fall 
short in the pertinent span of data collection because of lean monsoon in that particular 
year. The reasons for IPC-IPU gap also include issues of reluctance by farmers, migration 
of farmers, and diversion and pilferage of project water; besides, there may be cases where 
project water use is wrongly accounted as groundwater use.  

42 
 
Thus the IPC and IPU though do not provide a firm quantitative basis, the overall objective 
of bridging IPC-IPU gap is sought to be achieved through structural interventions related to 
CADWM works in the Culturable Command Area of project, and the correction of system 
deficiencies in project’s canal network. The other reasons of IPC-IPU gaps are sought to be 
addressed through non-structural interventions focussing on strengthening of participatory 
irrigation management.  
Further, Ministry is proposing a new scheme ‘Incentivisation scheme for Bridging Irrigation 
Gap’ covering more than 300 completed projects and CCA of about 80 lakhs Ha. in this 
regard which would help to reduce gap between IPC and IPU through these projects.” 
F. No. H-1102/1/2016-Parl. Dated 07.07.2017 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
36. The Committee observe that for hassle free and time-bound completion of the projects, 
monitoring is an essential part of the Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme since the main 
objective of monitoring is to ensure the achievement of physical and financial targets of creation of 
Irrigation potential. The Committee was apprised that Central Water Commission (CWC) have 
been assigned the responsibility to comprehensively monitor the projects receiving Central 
Assistance (CA). As per the present arrangement in CWC, projects under AIBF and Repair, 
Renovation and Restoration of water bodies (RRR) are monitored by respective field units and 
lnter-State whereas externally assisted and centrally aided projects are being monitored by 
Directorates of PMO/PPO (Project preparation Organisation) at Head Quarter (HQ). The 
Committee have been informed that the CWC with the help of its 13 Regional offices situated all 
over the country and a project Monitoring Organization (PMO) at HQ, monitors the irrigation 
projects under the AIBP. Monitoring of physical and financial progress of the projects involves 
periodical visit and submission of the status report of the project by the CWC. Further, review 
meeting is taken by the secretary M/o WR, RD & GR, every year with the secretary water 
Resources/Irrigation of the state Governments, officers of CWC and planning Commission for 
reviewing the physical and financial progress of the projects under the AIBP and resolving the 

43 
 
bottlenecks hindering the completion of the project. The Committee also note that a three-tier 
system of monitoring of Irrigation Projects at the State and Centre level was introduced in 1975 viz. 
first and second tier monitoring at project and State Government levels and monitoring at the 
Central level, by MoWR, RD & GR/CWC, which is the third tier of the monitoring mechanism. The 
Committee also note that apart from the procedure for monitoring of Major and Medium Irrigation 
(MMl) Projects there is monitoring of Surface Minor Irrigation (SMI) schemes which are getting 
Central Assistance under the AIBP and this is done by the State Government. The Committee note 
with concern that the number of Ml schemes getting Central Assistance under the AIBP is large 
and the available CWC staff strength is low. Regarding monitoring visits, the Committee note that, 
as per the latest AIBP guidelines, it is to be undertaken once in a year to the projects subsequent 
to release of CA. The Committee were informed that the decreasing trend of the monitoring visits in 
last 3 years 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15 which was 163, 108 and 56 respectively was due to 
the fact that there was decrease in the required number of visits also because the number of 
projects that were given Central Assistance in the Twelfth Five Year Plan were reduced due to the 
reduction in Budget. The Committee, believe that any lapse/lacunae in monitoring 
process/mechanism will be a hindrance in giving true picture of project implementation. The 
Committee therefore, recommend the Ministry to take remedial action for removing all the 
bottlenecks in monitoring and strictly implement all the criteria/guidelines for monitoring the 
projects/Schemes under the AIBP. The Committee also recommend the Ministry to adopt carrot 
and stick model for penalizing those States which are not adhering to the terms and conditions and 
incentivizing those - which follow them scrupulously. In addition, apart from having effective 
monitoring mechanism at I and II tier, the Ministry should also ensure that there is timely and 
adequate visit of the monitoring team to verify the completion of the irrigation potential creation and 
proper utilization of the irrigation Potential created. Furthermore, the Committee recommend the 
Ministry to take initiative to increase the number of Regional offices and the staff strength in CWC 
so as to avoid their adverse impact on monitoring mechanism. In addition, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to develop a modus operandi for having systematic synergy between the 
physical visits made and online monitoring methods which will not only facilitate the visiting team 
with concrete data but will also help in conducting effective monitoring. The Committee would like 

44 
 
to be apprised about the action taken on all the aforesaid recommendations along with the 
outcome of the same. 
37. The Ministry, it its action taken note, has replied as follows: 
“Thirteen regional offices of Central Water Commission have been established in different parts 
of the country the Monitoring Directorates under these regional offices are monitoring the 
physical and financial progress of the AIBP Projects on continuous basis and sending 
monitoring reports to concerned.   
 
Further, during 2016-17, 99 ongoing AIBP projects have been identified in consultation with 
States which could be completed by Dec., 2019 including CAD works. To keep close watch on 
the physical and financial progress of the projects, One nodal officer from the State for each of 
the 99 priority project has been identified who would be updating the physical and financial 
progress of the project regularly in the  MIS. 
 
Online Management Information System has been developed and nodal officers are regularly 
feeding the data on the component-wise physical and financial progress of the project. A 
mobile app  for uploading the geo-tagged photographs of works being executed under these 
projects for monitoring the progress is also under development.  
 
Also third party monitoring of these projects would be carried our besides monitoring visits by 
CWC offices.” 
F. No. H-1102/1/2016-Parl. Dated 07.07.2017 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
38. On the issue of adaptation of successful models of Irrigation Projects of other countries, the 
Committee have been informed that M/o WR, RD and GR in partnership with European Union is in 
the process of finalizing possible priorities and activities for the work programme 2017. The 

45 
 
Committee have also been informed about the Israel Model of Irrigation, which has led to an 
increase in water use efficiency, and their innovation for efficient and sustainable water use that 
has made them international leader in developing water-saving technology in agriculture. In view of 
the disheartening ground reality of Irrigation Projects in the country, the Committee are convinced 
that the current initiatives taken by the Ministry are not sufficient to uplift the status of Irrigation 
Projects. The Committee, therefore, are of the opinion that though the AIBP was launched with 
laudable objectives, its implementation has not yet attained the desired results and is engulfed in 
myriad shortcomings. The Committee recommend the Ministry to take fresh initiatives for 
technology transfer from other countries, for emulating the successful models of other 
countries/States suited to the needs of the country and make efforts to devise out of the box 
methods for implementation and sustainability of irrigation Projects under Accelerated Irrigation 
Benefits Programme. While appreciating the Ministry's plan to adopt the successful model of 
Madhya Pradesh, the Committee also recommend the Ministry to exercise caution and carry out 
proper feasibility study of the successful models of other Countries/State before emulating the 
same. The Committee would like to be apprised about the concrete action taken in the matter. 
39. The Ministry, it its action taken note, has replied as follows: 
“Ministry has signed MoUs with European Union under Indo-European Water Partnership 
(IEWP) on 7th October,2016 and another MoU with Israel has been signed on 11th 
November,2016  to develop cooperation in the field of water management and sharing of 
experiences and expertise in the areas mutually agreed upon including techniques in the 
efficient use of water resources, desalination, aquifer recharge etc. The cooperation is aimed at 
Strategic Partnership on Water so that through suitable wide ranging terms of reference, the 
whole gamut of sustainable development in water sector encompassing Agriculture, water 
quality, irrigation, drinking water etc may be covered.” 
F. No. H-1102/1/2016-Parl. Dated 07.07.2017 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 
  

46 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
40. During the Tenth Five Year Plan, a Pilot scheme namely Repair, Renovation and 
Restoration (RRR) of Water bodies directly linked to agriculture was launched in January, 2005 
with an outlay of Rs. 300 crore and with 75% as Central Assistance by Government of India and 
25% by State Government. Based on success of this Pilot Scheme, two schemes of RRR, one with 
domestic support with an outlay of Rs.1,250 crore and other with external assistance with an outlay 
of Rs. 1,500 crore were launched during the Eleventh Five Year Plan. The scheme for continuation 
for Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies during Twelfth Plan period was approved 
by the union Government on 20.9.2013 and guidelines were issued in October, 2013. The 
Committee also note that it is also envisaged to provide the Central Assistance for restoration of 
about 10,000 water bodies with an earmarked outlay of Rs. 6,235 crore for the scheme so as to 
restore an irrigation potential of 6.235 lakh hectare. In this connection, the committee note that they 
have, in their Tenth Report on the subject 'Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies-
Encroachment on Water Bodies and steps required to remove the encroachment and restore the 
Water Bodies’, examined various issues like state of water bodies in the country, encroachment, its 
extent and impact, implementation of judicial guidelines/directions in the matter, the provision for 
prevention of encroachment under the RRR scheme, pollution of water bodies and measures for 
increasing public awareness, etc. The committee are fully convinced that there is an imperative 
need to remove the encroachment and for repairing, renovating and restoring the water bodies not 
only to improve the health of Water Bodies but also to ensure a positive impact on the Accelerated 
Irrigation Benefits Programme. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to act in right 
earnest to address all the concerns of the Committee expressed in the aforesaid Report so that the 
efforts of the Centre and the State Governments results in a sustainable development and efficient 
management of water resources and Irrigation Infrastructure. 
 
 

47 
 
41. The Ministry, it its action taken note, has replied as follows: 
“Based on the recommendation of Standing Committee in its Tenth Report on Subject “Repair, 
Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies – Encroachment on water bodies and steps 
required to remove the encroachment and restore the water bodies”, Secretary(MOWR, RD & 
GR) vide D.O. letter dated 26.02.2016 requested State Governments to take several measures 
for protection of water bodies including encroachment issue. The States have been again 
requested to intimate the Status on the number of water bodies and its encroachment vide 
D.O. letter dated 07.11.2016. 
 
Further, detailed draft guidelines for consideration and protection of water bodies have also 
been circulated to central Ministries and States/UTs.” 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
42. The committee note that, as on 31.03.2015, there are 149 ongoing Major and Medium 
Irrigation (MMl) Projects under the Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme. As informed by the 
Ministry 100 percent monitoring of the ongoing Major and Medium Irrigation(MMl) Projects is to be 
undertaken by the Central water Commission (CWC). However, due to large number of ongoing Ml 
and RRR schemes, the monitoring of all ongoing schemes by CWC is not possible. The Ministry 
have also informed that due to limited availability of the manpower with the CWC, it is necessary to 
outsource monitoring through experienced firms. The procedure for engaging of independent 
monitors, terms of reference for the independent monitors, methodology to be followed for 
monitoring by independent monitors, proforma for reporting the monitoring status of the Ml scheme 
by the independent monitors, procedure for submission of the Monitoring Report and further action 
on the Report by the State Governments and Central Water Commission will be finalized and 
submitted to MoWR, RD & GR. The Committee note in this regard, that a Panel  headed by Dr. 
Mihir Shah, in their Report on the subject ‘Restructuring the CWC and CGWB' had observed that a 
paradigm shift is required in both surface and ground water and the new national challenges in the 
21st century demand major reforms in the CWC and CGWB. In addition, they have also observed 
that CWC and CGWB suffer from a lack of professionals from a large number of disciplines. 
Besides, several State Governments have testified that a huge delay in techno-economic appraisal 

48 
 
by CWC has become a matter of concern. When the Committee desired to know about the likely 
impact of the Report, the Ministry have informed that the recommendations of the said Report are 
under consideration. In view of the significant function of the CWC, particularly in light of its role in 
monitoring of irrigation projects under the AIBP, the Committee recommend the Ministry to take 
expeditious steps on the issue of restructuring CWC and apprise this Committee accordingly. 
43. The Ministry, it its action taken note, has replied as follows: 
“A Committee was constituted vide order dated 11.09.2015 by this Ministry for Restructuring of 
Central Water Commission (CWC) and Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) for optimal 
development of water resources in the country in the backdrop of integrated water resources 
management.  This Committee which was chaired by Dr. Mihir Shah, former Member, Planning 
Commission, gave its final report in July, 2016. In view of importance of the subject matter, 
inputs from eminent water experts, retired senior officers from CWC / CGWB etc as well as 
other stakeholders are being sought on this matter to proceed further.” 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
44. The Committee note that under the CAD&WM Programme, a thrust is given on 
Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM) and therefore the Central Assistance to the States has 
been linked to enactment of PIM legislation as well as with the formation of water users’ 
Associations. So far, 84,779 Water Users' Associations (WUA's) have been formed in various 
States covering an area of 17.84 million hectare under various commands of Irrigation Projects. 
However, the states of Sikkim and Tripura and the Union Territories do not have any Water Users' 
Associations. The Committee also note that hitherto 16 States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, 
Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Nagaland, Odisha, 
Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh have either enacted exclusive legislation or 
amended their Irrigation Acts for involvement of farmers in irrigation management, while other 
States are also taking steps in this direction. The committee, however, note that various hindrances 
have been witnessed in forming Water Users' Associations which inter-alia include (i) lack of legal 
back up and policy changes in some States to take up Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM) 
and lack of clarity of legislation and implementation of legislation for empowerment of WUAs in 

49 
 
States where PIM has been enacted, (ii) system deficiency in the irrigation scheme (iii) uncertainty 
over water availability and (iv) lack of capacity building of the members of the WUAs for various 
technical and financial issues. The Committee also note that in order to remove the aforesaid 
hindrances, the Ministry have requested the state Governments to enact the PIM Act where the Act 
is not yet to be enacted and to strengthen the existing PIM Acts - where these have already been 
enacted. The committee also note that to increase the number of Water Users' Associations, the 
Ministry releases one time functional grant to the registered WUA’s under CADWM programme. In 
addition, for the 99 prioritized projects, the Ministry have proposed to utilize the services of TISS 
and select NGOs for capacity building of WUAs. The committee recommend the Ministry to provide 
States/UTs with incentives for increasing the participation of WUAs in management of water 
resources and Irrigation Projects. The Committee also recommend the Ministry to increase their 
effort to facilitate the formation and involvement of WUAs/local communities by increasing, the 
incentives as well as nominate one person in each WUA to coordinate all the activities for 
promoting coordination, cooperation and participation among the farmers. The Ministry should also 
ensure that the enactment of PIM legislation in all the States/UTs is done at the earliest as well as 
the existing PIM Acts be strengthened where it has already been enacted. While appreciating the 
mandatory feature of CAD&WM programme for inclusion of Panchayat representative in WUAs / 
District Level Implementation Monitoring Committee/ State Level Monitoring Committee, the 
Committee further recommend the Ministry to ensure its proper implementation in all States/UTs. In 
addition, the Committee desire that the Ministry's proposal to utilize the services of TISS and select 
NGOs for capacity building of WUAs also be done on priority. The Committee desire that the 
Ministry take specific action on the aforesaid recommendations and accordingly apprise them of 
the same. 
45. The Ministry, it its action taken note, has replied as follows: 
“The 'Guidelines for central Assistance for CAD works in prioritized AIBP funded Irrigation 
Projects' have been circulated in January, 2017. The provision under Non-Structural 
Intervention include one-time functional grant to registered Water Users' Associations (WUAs) 
and One-time infrastructure grant to the registered WUAs for strengthening Participatory 
Irrigation Management (PIM). A provision for hand-holding support for strengthening PIM by 

50 
 
select Social Facilitator (an NGO, or similar entity having substantial experience in influencing 
village level social activities and reforms) per project to be engaged through the process of 
empanelment has also been kept in the Guidelines. 
Further, the remaining State Governments are being pursued for enactment of PIM legislation 
as well as strengthening of the existing PIM Acts where it has already been enacted.” 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                  RAJIV PRATAP RUDY, 
08 March, 2018                                                      Chairperson,                                                                      
17 Phalguna, 1939 (Saka)          Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                HUKUM SINGH 
_________, 2017                                                                                              Chairperson, 
________, 1939 (Saka)                                       Standing Committee on Water Resources 
  

51 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2017-18) HELD ON THURSDAY, 08 MARCH 2018 
  
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1520 hours in Committee Room No. 2, First Floor, Parliament House 
Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  
Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 LOK SABHA  
2. Shri Radheshyam Biswas 
3. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
4. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
5. Shri Maganti Murali Mohan 
6. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
7. Shri Subhash Patel 
8. Shri Vijaysinh Mohite Patil 
9. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
10. Shri Lallu Singh 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
11. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
12. Shri Harshvardhan Singh Dungarpur 
13. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
14. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
15. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
16. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Rita Jailkhani  - Director 
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar  - Additional Director 
4. Shri R. C. Sharma  - Deputy Secretary 

52 
 
 
  
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.   
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption (i) Draft Report on Demands for 
Grants (2018-19) of the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation 
and (ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the observations / recommendations 
contained in Fourteenth Report on the subject "Review of Accelerated Irrigation Benefits 
Programme (AIBP)."  After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid two draft 
Reports without any modification.   
3. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to present these two Reports to both the 
Houses of Parliament in the current Winter Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
  

53 
 
ANNEXURE – II 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTEENTH REPORT 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE  
  
(i)  Total number of Observations/ Recommendations    14 
 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations  which have been accepted    
by the Government  
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 10, and 13 
Total : 08 
           Percentage    : 57.14%   
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations  which the Committee do  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
Para Nos. NIL 
Total : NIL  
         Percentage : 00.00 % 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies    
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Para Nos. 8, 9 and 14 
         Total : 03  
                Percentage  : 28.57 % 
(v) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which final reply 
 of the Government are still awaited 
Para No. 6, 11 and 12 
         Total : 03 
          Percentage   : 35.71% 
 