STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
                                (2016-2017) 
 
 
 
                              SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION  
 
 
 
INDIGENOUS AND MODERN FORMS OF WATER CONSERVATION – TECHNIQUES AND 
PRACTICES 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Thirteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources} 
 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
August, 2017 / Shravana,1939 (Saka) 
 
18 

 
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
 
(2016-2017) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
 
 
INDIGENOUS AND MODERN FORMS OF WATER CONSERVATION – TECHNIQUES AND 
PRACTICES 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Thirteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources} 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on       10.08.2017 
     Laid in Rajya Sabha on       10.08.2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2017 / Shravana,1939 (Saka) 

 
WRC NO. 25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2017 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 

CONTENTS 
 
 
     
Page  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016-17) …………………………………  (iii)  
 
INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
 
CHAPTER I -      Report        1 
  
       
CHAPTER II - Observations / Recommendations which have been 
  accepted by the Government ………………………………  27 
             
CHAPTER III - Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
  not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ..  53 
  
CHAPTER IV    - Observations / Recommendations in respect of which  
 replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
 the Committee ……. …………………………………………  54 
 
CHAPTER V    - Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
 Replies of the Government are still awaited ……………….  63 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I. Committee on sustainable withdrawal and effective    65 
Utilization of Ground Water and its Management 
 
II. State-wise achievements made under NAQUIM programme 68 
 
III. Projects approved by MoWR,RD&GR     69 
 
IV. List of Abbreviations      70 
 
V. Minutes of the Tenth Sitting of the Standing Committee    72 
 held on 10 August, 2017 
 
VI.  Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the   74 
 Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
 Thirteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2016-17) 
   
  Shri Hukum Singh  -  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Radheshyam Biswas 
3. Shri Devusinh Jesingbhai Chauhan 
4. Shri Sudhir Gupta@ 
5. Shri Prakash B. Hukkeri* 
6. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
7. Shri Mohanbhai Kundariya# 
8. Shri Maganti Murali Mohan 
9. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
10. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
11. Shri Subhash Patel 
12. Shri Sanjaykaka Ramchandra Patil 
13. Shri Vijaysinh Mohite Patil 
14. Smt. Aparupa Poddar 
15. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
16. Shri S. P. Y. Reddy 
17. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah 
18. Smt. V. Sathyabama 
19. Shri Lallu Singh 
20. Shri Liladharbhai Vaghela 
21. Smt. Dimple Yadav 
 
        RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
23. Shri Harshvardhan Singh Dungarpur 
24. Mir Mohammad Fayaz 
25. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
26. Shri Sanjiv Kumar 
27. Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
28. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
29. Shri Sanjay Seth 
30. Shri A.V. Swamy  
31. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
 
32.   
 
_______________________________________________________________________________ 
@ Nominated w.e.f. 19.10.2016. 
* Nominated w.e.f. 23.11.2016. 
# Nominated w.e.f. 19.10.2016. 
(iii) 
 

 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.  Shri Shiv Kumar   -  Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Rita Jailkhani  -  Director 
3.  Shri Kushal Sarkar  -  Additional Director 
4.  Shri Ginsuanlian Guite  -  Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2016 -2017) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on th eir behalf, present the Eighteenth Report on 
the Action Taken by Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the 
Thirteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water Resources on the 
subject “Indigenous and Modern forms of Water Conservation – Techniques and Practices”.  
2. The Thirteenth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on  16 March, 2017.  The replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in 
the Report were received on 22 June, 2017. 
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and adopted 
by the Committee at their sitting held on 8 August, 2017. 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is 
given in Annexure-VI. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                  HUKUM SINGH, 
04 August, 2017                                           Chairperson, 
13 Shravana, 1939(Saka)                      Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
  
 
 
 
 

 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources deals with the action taken 
by the Government on the observations / recommendations contained in their Thirteenth 
Report (16th Lok Sabha) on the subject “Indigenous and Modern forms of Water Conservation – 
Techniques and Practices” which was presented to Lok Sabha on 16.03.2017. 
2. Action Taken Notes were received from the Government on 22 June, 2017, in respect 
of all the 16 observations / recommendations of the Committee, which have  been categorized 
as follows:- 
(i) Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
  Para Nos. 1, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15 and 16 
(Total – 11) 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies: 
  Para Nos. NIL      
(Total – NIL) 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: 
  Para Nos. 2, 3, 12 and 14     
(Total – 04) 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: 
  Para No. 6      
(Total – 01) 

 
2 
 
2. The draft comments (i.e. Recommendation Para Nos. 1, 3, 4, 9, 10, 12, 14 and 16) 
along with Replies of the Government will form the Chapter-I of the Report. 
3. The Committtee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of the 
observations / recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A. Low Per Capita Water Storages and Availability in India 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
4. The Committee note d that the per capita live water storage in India is about 209 m 3 
(cubic meters)  based on population of 2011 census, which is far below 1000 cubic meters, the 
minimum threshold for identifying water -scarcity condition of a local ity, State or country. The 
Committee also noted that as per the information provided by the Ministry of Water Resources, 
River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, Russia and Australia can sustain consecutive 
droughts for about 4 and 3 years respectively. H owever, India cannot sustain drought beyond 
one non -Monsoon season due to low per capita storage, and as such, thus may face acute 
stress, if any year happen to be a drought year. Further, whereas the average water availability 
in the country remains more or less fixed according to the natural hydrologic cycle, the per 
capita availability is reducing progressively owing to increasing population, from 2209 cu. m. 
(cubic meter) per year in 1991 to about 1545 cu. m. Per year in 2011. The Committee note d 
with concern that the country is steadily hurtling towards a great water crisis in the near future 
due to the prevailing near water -scarcity situation in the country as well as the regressive trend 
towards declining capita water availability, specially since 199 1. The Committee, therefore, 
recommended that urgent, specific initiatives be made by the Government to increase the live 
per capita water storage as well as per capita water availability in India.  In this connection, the 

 
3 
 
Committee note d the Ministry’s ob servation that creation of storage -based water resources 
projects on appropriate sites can result in increased per capita live storage capacity without 
compromising the ecological balance in the country. The Committee therefore, strongly 
recommended the Go vernment to (i) compile information / data regarding the large and 
medium dams / reservoirs presently under implementation in the country separately, (ii) make a 
review of the status of their execution including the bottlenecks (if any) hampering the timel y 
completion, and (iii) make a time-frame for completion of each of these large / medium dams or 
reservoirs. The Committee  also desired to be apprised of the initiative taken by the 
Government in this regard. 
5. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“The per capita live water storage in India is about 209 m 3, based on population of 2011 
census, which is far below 1000 cubic meters, the minimum threshold for identifying 
water-scarcity condition of a locality, state of a country. In t his regard, it is to mention 
that the per capita live storage and per capita water availability (Falkenmark Water 
Stress Indicator) are two different things. The per capita availability of water in the 
country is 1545 cubic meters as per the 2011 census wh ich is more than 1000 cubic 
meters. National Register of Large Dam (NRLD) is a compilation of the dams in the 
country prepared as per information received from the State Government/Authority 
concerned. The information which is sought cannot be derived from  NRLD and 
additional work is required to be conducted. For timely completion of old projects efforts 
are being made to expedite old projects under PMKSY -AIBP programme of 
Government of India and several new projects are being initiated at the same time. 99  
ongoing AIBP projects have been identified in consultation with the States for 
completion by Dec. 2019.” 
 
6. The Committee are not fully satisfied with the information as furnished by the 
Ministry.  The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry the fact that the per capita 
live water storage of 209 m3 in India (2011 census) ;  which is far below 1000 cubic 
meters i.e., the minimum threshold for identifying water scarcity condition of a locality, 
State of  a country .  They are  understand that more per c apita water storage would     

 
4 
 
eventually result into more per capita w ater availability in future in the country, which is 
reducing progressively owing to increasing population .   The Committee would, 
therefore, emphasize that apart from compilation of the  data about the  apart from 
compilation of large dams by National Register of Large Dam (NRLD), the Government 
should conduct additional work and compile information / data  regarding the large and 
medium dams / reservoirs presently under implementation in t he country, the status of 
their execut ion including the bottlenecks (if  any) hampering the timely completion 
thereof and also fix a time-frame for completion of each of these dams / reservoirs, and 
apprise the Committee accordingly. The Committee are happy  to note that efforts are 
being made by the Government of India for timely completion of old projects under 
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana (PMKSY) – Accelerated Irrigation Benefits 
programme (AIBP) and that several new projects are also being initiat ed at the same 
time.  In this context, the Committee would further desire categorically to be informed of 
the new projects being started by the Government under PMKSY -AIBP programme - 
which would have potential to increase the per capita water storage in t he country  as 
also the extent thereof .  Also noting that 99 ongoing AIBP projects have been identified 
in consultation with the States for completion by December  2019, the Committee would 
also like to be informed about the details fo such ongoing AIBP proj ects, State-wise/UT-
wise along with their status of completion so far within three months of the presentation 
of this Report. 
 
 

 
5 
 
B. Traditional Water Recharge / Harvesting Practices 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
7. The Committee observed from the information  provided by the Ministry that India had a 
rich tradition of water harvesting, which is mor e than two millennia old, viz. t he Kuhals of 
Jammu, Kulsi of Himachal Pradesh, Guls of Uttarakhand, Pat of Maharastra, Zings of Ladakh, 
Zabos of Nagaland, Eris of T amil Nadu, Keres of Karnataka, Tankas / Kundis / Bawdis/ 
Jhalaras, etc. of Rajasthan. Sadly, however, these age -old traditional rain -harvesting systems 
have fallen into disuse with the introduction of piped water supply system. In these connection, 
the Com mittee, further note d that when the information pertaining the status of indigenous 
water harvesting methods/practices in India including their contribution to water resources 
conservation and management was south, the Ministry have replied that about 6 la kh tanks/ 
storages in India are used for minor irrigation (MI) schemes as per 4 th Minor Irrigation Census, 
out of which 5 lakh are in use at present. The Committee also categorically desired to know 
whether any study has been made so far regarding the efficacy, merits, viability or sustainability 
of traditional water recharge/ harvesting techniques and also to state the efforts made by the 
Government to preserve, improve and develop the indigenous water recharge / harvesting 
methods in India. To this query,  however, the Ministry have not furnished the relevant reply but 
have merely cited the various objectives of the scheme or Repair, Renovation and Restoration 
(RRR) of Water Bodies being implemented by the Government of India since the 10 th Plan. The 
Committee deplore d the cavalier attitude of the Ministry, and they recommend ed that the 
Ministry immediately take steps to institute a panel of experts, professionals drawn from various 
reputed institutions in the country for undertaking a study on the efficacy,  merits, viability or 

 
6 
 
sustainability of traditional water recharge /harvesting techniques in India as existing now and 
apprise the Committee of the findings of their study. The Committee also desire d that the 
Ministry hold consultations with various State / UTs with a view to devise ways and means to 
preserve, improve and develop indigenous water recharge / harvesting methods in the country 
that have fallen into disuse for various reasons. The Committee had liked to be updated about 
the action taken in the matter. 
8. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“In order to preserve and improve the water storing capacity of water bodies, based on 
NRSC data, Unique Identity (UID) for all the water bodies has been generated under 
India-WRIS. The India-WRIS has generated information for 7,98,909 water bodies with 
the support of NRSC.  
An Inter-sectoral Advisory Group (ISAG) was constituted in National Water Mission to 
advice and review the progress made in respect of Goal -III which is “Focussed  
Attention to Vulnerable Areas including Over -exploited Areas”. The Group is headed by 
Chairman, Central Ground Water Board with members from Central Water 
Commission, Ministry of Rural Development, Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation, Ministry of 
Environment, Forests and Climate Change and Principal Secretaries of Water 
Resources of four State Governments. One of the important objectives of this Group is 
promotion of traditional  system of water conservation and to take up matters related to 
timely release of funds for completion of backlog RRR projects with Ministry. ISAG is 
pursuing the convergence programme for ground water recharge with MNREGA, 
Watershed Development Programmes , NWM and CGWB. This committee also 
recommended that the monitoring mechanism for ground water recharge will be 
through Principal Secretary (Water Resources/Irrigation/Rural Develo pment 
Department) of the State.” 
9. The Committee note from the reply of the  Government that an Inter -Sectoral 
Advisory Group (ISGAG) was constituted in National Water Mission (NWM) to advise and 
review the progress  made in respect of Goal -III which is “Focussed Attention to 
Vulnerable Areas including Over -exploited Areas”, and on e imp ortant objective of this 
Group is promotion of traditional system of water conservation and to take up matters 

 
7 
 
related to timely release of funds for completion of backlog RRR projects with Ministry .  
The Committee feel  that given the dire need for re viving traditional water recharge / 
harvesting practices in India, such an internal governmental body may not meet the 
intended objective of reviving indigenous water recharge / harvesting methods in the 
near future. The Committee, therefore, reiterate the ir earlier recommendation that the 
Ministry immediately take steps to institute a panel comprising of experts, professiona ls 
drawn from reputed institutions of the country for undertaking a study on the efficacy,  
merits, viability and sustainability of tra ditional water recharge / harvesting techniques 
in India as it exists for now as also for the future and apprise the Committee of the 
findings of their study.  They further desire that instead of focussing attention on a 
centralized scheme of Repa ir, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of  Water Bodies as is 
being done since the 10 th Plan, the crucial participation of States / UTs in the Scheme 
may also be sought and for achieving it, necessary consultations be held by the Ministry 
with all the State/UT Governments.  The Committee are also of the view that, If 
necessary, the States / UTs may also be incentivized with liberal financial assistance to 
take active part in the efforts on reviving traditional water recharge / water harvesting 
methods. 
C. Modern Water Conservation Techniques – Drip and Sprinkler systems 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
10. The Committee observe d that Drip and Sprinkler irrigation systems constitute the chief 
modern water conservation techniques in India. In Drip irrigation, water is delivere d at the root 

 
8 
 
zone of the crops through emitters like drippers, micro sprinklers, micro jets, misters, fan jets, 
micro sprayers, foggers, etc. This method has less water requirement resulting in water saving, 
higher fertilizer application efficiency, energ y conservation, higher water use efficiency, and is 
feasible in different terrains and suitable for problematic soils and prevention of water logging. 
Sprinkler irrigation system requires energized pump sets, irrigate more uniformly than gravity 
systems, r equire much less maintenance when compared with conventional pressurized 
irrigation systems, eliminates seepage and evaporation losses, has no requirement of skilled 
manpower, no expensive land levelling, and is suitable for irrigation of crops with high d ensity 
and particularly effective in sandy undulating terrains and widely used for cereals, pulses, 
seeds and other field crops. The Committee were happy to note that State Governments are 
encouraging adoption of these water saving techniques through provi sion of subsidies to 
farmers on purchase of these systems. The Committee further note d that as per the 12 th Plan 
guidelines of Command Area Development and Water Management (CAD&WM) programme, a 
minimum of 10% of Culturable Command Area (CCA) of each proje ct is to be covered through 
micro irrigation and the Central Assistance to the tune of 50% is provided to the States for 
development of infrastructure to facilitate use of sprinkler / drip irrigation. The Committee also 
noted that through ‘fertigation’ pro cess in sprinkler / drip irrigation systems, more efficiency is 
achieved by combining fertiliser as well as water soluble fertilizers, thereby increasing fertilizer 
use efficiency from 80 to 90 per cent. Taking cognizance of the paramount need for 
conservation of water in India through traditional as well as modern methods, the Committee 
desired that micro irrigation comprising Drip and Sprinkler irrigation techniques be taken up in 
the country as a popular movement with a great sense of urgency by both the  Central and the 

 
9 
 
State Governments and proactive action needs initiated by the Government in this regard. The 
Committee also recommend ed that apart from the provision of incentives provided through 
CAD&WM programme by the Government, the Ministry should al so come up with novel 
initiatives to incentivise the States/UTs to adopt Sprinkler and Drip irrigation systems for 
achieving water use efficiency in agriculture and other allied sectors of the country without loss 
of further precious time, and also take st eps to promote ‘fertigation’ across the country. They 
had further strongly recommend ed the Government to promote and propagate Drip and 
Sprinkler irrigation methods through the print and electronic media such as television, cinema, 
internet etc. so as to c reate necessary awareness among the farming community as well as 
general public. They also had liked to be apprised of the progress made in this direction 
through the initiatives taken by the Ministry. 
11. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“Looking to the vast potential under Micro -Irrigation, the Government of India set up a 
‘Task Force on Micro Irrigation’ in the year 2004, which assessed that the potential of 
coverage area under Micro -Irrigation was of the order of 69 Mha . (27 Mha. under drip 
irrigation and 42.5 Mha . under sprinkler). The Task Force also suggested that the 
Planning Commission should make it obligatory for the project authorities to implement 
Micro-Irrigation in at least 10% of the Command Area while sanctionin g new irrigation 
projects. Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation is 
providing Central Assistance to States under Command Area Development and Water 
Management Programme (CAD&WM ) for development of infrastructure to facilitat e use 
of drip/sprinkler irrigation system as an alternative to construction of field channels. The 
assistance under this item will be towards construction of stilling tank, pump house and 
laying of conveyance pipes up to farmer’s field.  
 
The Guidelines fo r Central Assistance for CAD works in prioriti zed AIBP Irrigation 
Projects including a coverage of 10% of CCA of each project for infrastructure cost of 
micro irrigation have already been circulated during January, 2017. The implementation 
of micro irrigat ion is proposed to be up -scaled to 30% of CCA of the projects under a 
new incentivization scheme for bridging the irrigation gap, which is under State level 
consultation after “in Principle” approval of Ministry of Finance. National Water Mission 
has organ ized about 70 training/ mass awareness programmes (about 14200 

 
10 
 
participants) for promoting efficient use of water in irrigation sector including water 
conservation.” 
 
12. The Committee note that the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development 
and Ganga Rejuvenation is providing Central Assistance (CA) to States under Command 
Area Development and Water Management (CAD&WM)  programme for the development 
of infrastructure to facilitate the use of Drip/Sprinkler irrigation system as an alternative 
to construction of field channels.  They also note that the Government of India set up a 
‘Task Force on Micro Irrigation’ in 2004, which suggested that the Planning Commission 
should make it obligatory for the Project Authorities to implement Micro Irrigation in  at 
least 10% of the command area while sanctioning new irrigation projects, and that the 
Guidelines for Central Assistance  in CAD works in prioritized AIBP projects including a 
coverage of 10% of C ulturable Command Area (CCA) project for infrastructure cost o f 
Micro Irrigation were circulated in Janua ry, 2017 and further that the implementation  of 
Micro Irrigation is proposed to be up -scaled to 30% of CCA of the projects  under a new 
incentivization scheme for bridging the irrigation gap, which is under State l evel 
consultation ‘in principle’ approval of Ministry of Finance.  The Committee recommend 
the Government to strictly enforce the Guideines for CA for CAD works in prioritised 
AIBP projects.   The Committee strongly recommend further that the process of St ate 
level consultation s pertaining to up -scaling of Central Assistance to the tune of 30% 
towards infrastructure cost of Micro Irrigation under the new incentivization scheme for 
bridging up the irrigation gap be expedite and concretized at the earliest .  Noting further 
that the National Water Mission (NWM) has organised about 70 training/mass awarenss 
programmes involving about 14,200 participants for promoting efficient use of water in 

 
11 
 
the irrigation sector including water conservation, the Committee also  recommend the 
Ministry to initiate specific steps to promote ‘fertigation’ and popularize Micro Irrigation  
in the print and electronic media.  The Committee would further like to be apprised of the 
gist of recommendations of the ‘Task Force on Micro Irrig ation’ (2004) and the t otal 
funds released to States/UT s as of now as CA for Micro Irrigation under CAD&WM 
programme. 
D. Water Users’ Associations 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
13. The Committee note d the Ministry’s observation that unless the water users / Water 
Users Association (WUAs) are sensitivized for efficient water use practices and rope in for 
water conservation, the on -ground improvement is a bit difficult, which thereby underlines the 
need to have lucrative incentivizing provisions to make them ac tive stakeholders rather than 
the end users. The Committee fully concur red with the view of the Ministry of this issue, and 
they strongly recommend that the Ministry bring out a Model Bill to be adopted by all States / 
UTs, which would provide legal framew ork for enactment of Participatory Irrigation 
Management (PIM) by them. The Committee also desire d that the Ministry immediately enter 
into consultations with all the States / UTs for ensuring the enactment of PIM expeditiously in 
their respective territor ies providing for formation of a robust, efficient network of Water Users 
Association (WUAs) all o ver the country. The Committee further liked to be updated about the 
status of participatory’ approach to management of water resources, i.e. enactment of PIM  
legislation and formation and functioning of WUAs in different States/UTs of the country. They 
also strongly recommend ed that a periodic monitoring and review mechanism on the working 

 
12 
 
and performance of WUAs be worked out by the Ministry so as to eliminat e the shortcomings 
noticed in their functioning, if any. 
14. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation has been 
promoting Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM) in the country to enact new 
irrigation acts/amending the existing irrigation acts for facilitating PIM so that the 
farmers are involved in maintenance of the created assets. Accordingly 16 States viz. 
Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujara t, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Nagaland, Orissa, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu and 
Uttar Pradesh have enacted legislation for involvement of farmers in irrigation 
management. The matter is being pursued with the State Government who have not yet 
enacted PIM Acts. The working and performance of WUAs will be monitored and 
strengthened through involvement of social facilitators as per provisions made in the 
Guidelines for central assistance under CADWM Programme. NWM, MoWR, RD & GR 
has initiated action to draft Model Bill on Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM) Act 
which is under finalization stage.” 
 
15. The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation  has been promoting Par ticipatory Irrigation 
Management (PIM) in the country to enact new irrigation Acts / amending the existing 
irrigation Acts for facilitating PIM so that the farmers are involved in maintenance of the 
created assets.  The Committee also note that 16 States, viz. Andhra Pradesh, Assam, 
Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Mah arashtra 
Nagaland, Odisha, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh have enacted 
legislations for the involvement of farmers in irrigation managemen t.  The Committee 
would like to be informed of the nu mber of Water Users’ Associations (WUAs) formed 
under PIM in va rious States/UTs including the total area coverage, the total incentives 
(or funds) given by Government (State/UT-wise) till date.  The Committee also desire that 
the G overnment speedily complete the Draft Bill on PIM for which the National Water 
Mission had already initiated action and which is stated to be under finalization stage.  

 
13 
 
The Committee desire, in particular, that immediately t hereafter, consultations with  the 
States/UTs may be initiated (both with the 16 States who enacted PIM legislation and the 
remaining States) with a view to enact PIM Act in the light of recommendations 
contained in the Model Bill.  Side b y side, the Committee  recommend that a th orough 
review / evaluation of the  performance and working of WUAs in different States/UTs of 
the country be made, including the shortcomings noticed and necessary corrective 
measures be taken / pr oposed to be taken by the Government at the earliest.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of action taken by the Government in this regard. 
E. Command Area Development and Management  
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
16. As per the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuve nation, 
a minimum 10% of Cultural Command Area (CCA) of each project is to cover through micro 
irrigation under the 12 th Plan guidelines. Further, Central Assistance (CA) to the tune of 50% is 
provided to the States for development of infrastructure to fac ilitate use of sprinkler/drip 
irrigation systems as an alternative to on -farm development works. Three schemes ha d been 
sanctioned in respect of micro irrigation works in 12 th Plan, viz. Development of pressure 
irrigation in command area of six lift scheme s of Indira Gandhi Nahar Pariyojana (IGNP), 
Stage-II, Rajasthan, Kandi Canal CAD&WM project, Punjab, and Kotla Branch, Part -II, Punjab. 
Whereas CA of a mere Rs.10.85 crore and Rs. 4.01 crore ha d been released in respect of six 
lift irrigation schemes under  IGNP, Staqge-II (Rajasthan) and Kotla Branch, Part -II(Punjab), no 
such release had been made for Kandi Canal CAD&WM project (Punjab) although 12 th Plan is 
shortly coming to an end, which speak volumes about the casualness with which the execution 

 
14 
 
of the C AD&WM projects/schemes are being done by the Government. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend ed the Government to take immediate steps for release of the 
full amount of estimated Central Assistance for each of the three CAD&WM projects / schemes 
within this financial year (2017 -18), viz. Six lift schemes of IGNP, Stage -II, Rajasthan 
(Rs.1658.80 crore) Kandi canal CAD&WM project, Punjab (Rs.73.44 crore) and Kotla Branch, 
Part-II project, Punjab (Rs.38.325 crore ) and apprise them of action taken in t his regard. The 
Committee also note d that the Central Water Commission have undertaken 35 (thirty -
five)studies to make a realistic assessment of water use efficiency for completed major / 
medium projects under Plan scheme of the Ministry, the recommendatio ns / results of the study 
reports about interventions required / step to be taken up, have reportedly been sent to the 
concerned State Governments for taking necessary action. The Committee desired to know the 
specific follow-up action taken by the concern ed States where such recommendations / results 
of study reports had been sent by the Government, and also desire d that the Ministry impress 
upon these State Governments to accord priority to taking the required remedial action for each 
of these projects. T hey also desire d the Ministry to take new initiatives with the States for 
improving water use efficiency in the form of guidelines / directives which would broadly include 
these measures, i.e. volumetric measured supply of water at field levels to be monit ored by 
WUAs, levy of certain minimum water tariff to discourage wasteful water withdrawal from 
irrigation systems, enactment of PIM Act with empowerment of Water Users’ Association 
(WUAs), proper maintenance and management of surface water irrigation syst em so as to give 
an assured water supply for each field of the command area. The Committee had desired to be 
apprised of the action in this regard.  

 
15 
 
17. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“During 2015 -16, Pradhan Mantri Krishi S inchai Yojana (PMKSY) was launched with 
aims of enhancing physical access of water on farm and expanding cultivable area 
under assured irrigation, improving on-farm water use efficiency, introducing sustainable 
water conservation practices etc. and central  assistance was released to development 
of Pressure Irrigation of Command Areas of 6 Lift schemes of IGNP Stage -II, Rajasthan 
and Kotla Brach Part -II, Punjab for micro -irrigation, as per physical and financial target 
proposed by the State Governments conce rned. No central assistance could be 
released to Kandi Canal Project, Punjab during 2015 -16 which did not submit proposal 
with physical and financial targets. CAD works have now been restricted to 99 priority 
AIBP projects for implementation under CADWM pr ogramme from 2016 -17 onwards; 
and the development of Pressure Irrigation of Command Areas of  6 Lift schemes of 
IGNP Stage-II, Rajasthan, Kotla Branch Part -II and Kandi Canal Project, Punjab are not 
covered in the list of prioritized projects. The outstand ing CADWM projects including the 
above mentioned projects are proposed to be covered under the new Incentivization 
Scheme for Bridging the Irrigation Gap. The suggested measures for improving water -
use efficiency and for strengthening of Participatory Irri gation Management will also be 
included in the new proposed scheme. The final reports of 35 WUE Studies (now from 7 
States) were sent with request to appraise the Ministry about the feedback on the action 
taken, based on the recommendations contained therein, of the respective WR Projects. 
None of the States have responded, so far. However, the seven States are being re -
approached for the feedback as also, impressed to accord high priority to it.  
 
It is also to add that under new initiatives - Guideline fo r improving WUE in Irrigation, 
Domestic & Industrial Sectors – November, 2014 have been prepared and available at 
MoWR, RD & GR web portal.” 
 
18. As per the Ministry ’s reply , no Central Assistance  (CA) could be released to 
Kandi Canal CAD&WM Project, Punja b (Rs. 73.44 crore) during 2015 -16 due to non -
submission of proposal by the Government of Punjab with physical and financial targets 
and CAD works have now been restricted to 99 priority AIBP projects for implementation 
under the CAD&WM Programme from 2016 -17 onwards.  The Committee desire the 
Government to ask the State Government of Punjab to expe dite submission of project 
proposal with physical and financial targets with respect to Kandi Canal  CAD&WM 
project, Punjab.  Noting further that 6 Lift schemes o f IGNP, Stage -II, Rajasthan, Kandi 
Canal CAD&WM project, Punjab and Kotla Branch, Part -II project, Punjab are not 

 
16 
 
included in the list of 99 priority AIBP  projects, the Committee would like to be informed 
categorically about  the reasons for non -inclusion o f these projects under CAD&WM 
programme since 2016-17.  The Committee further note that the final reports of 35 water 
use efficiency (WUE) studies for CAD&WM projects from 7 States were sent to these 
States with the request to apprise the Ministry about th e feedback on the action taken, 
based on recommendations contained therein, of the respective water resources  
projects;  to which none of the States have so far responded.  The Committee would like 
the Government to pursue the matter with the State Governm ents for submission of the 
feedback at the earliest.  They also desire that general guidelines / directives for 
improving water use efficiency specially for  CAD&WM projects  be formulated and 
issued to all States/UTs - which would broadly include these measures, viz. volumetric 
measured supply of water at fi eld levels to be monitored by WUAs, levy of certain 
minimum water tariff to discourage wasteful water from irrigation systems, proper 
maintenance of surface water irrigation system to give assured water supply to each 
field of the command area, and enactment of PIM Act with empowerment of WUAs. 
F. Cropping Pattern and Water Conservation 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
19. The Committee note d the Ministry’s reply that change of cropping pattern by farmers, 
specially from less water demand crops to high water demands crops such as sugar cane and 
paddy induces failure of the designed irrigation system to irrigate the entire command area, 
resulting in the tail -end farmers being deprived of irrigation water. Hence , it is necessary to 
enforce the proposed cropping pattern in the project area for effective management of water so 

 
17 
 
that each field in command could get adequate water. The Committee also note d that State 
Governments are encouraging adoption of water -saving technologies, such as sprinkler and 
drip irrigation system, through provision of subsidies to the farmers on the purchase of these 
systems, which are also recommended for achieving higher irrigation efficiencies and could be 
used for very small -sized hol dings. However, the adoption of these technologies by poor 
farmers would depend heavily on the supply of information, material and service for installation. 
In this connection, the Committee note d that para 6.5 of the National Water Policy, 2012 
contains provision which stresses water saving in irrigation use, viz. “water saving in irrigation 
use States in of paramount importance. Methods like aligning cropping pattern with natural 
resources endowments, micro irrigation (drip, sprinkler etc.) automated irri gation operation, 
evaporation – transpiration reduction, etc., should be encouraged and incentivized.” Keeping in 
view the fact that the bulk of farmers in India are poor who may not be in a position to avail of 
the tools for water-saving technologies, the Committee desired the Ministry to devise innovative 
steps to incentivize the farmers for adoption of these water -saving technologies in a big way, 
and also to explore avenues for encouraging farmers to stick to the agreed cropping pattern for 
effective water management so that each field in the command area including tail -end farmers 
get adequate water supply throughout the year. Assuming further that adequate finances may 
not be available either with the State/UTs or farmers, the Committee also recommend ed the 
Government to encourage private sector participation in agriculture and water resources sector 
specially in the micro irrigation. The Committee also desire d the Ministry to make a study on 
the impact of cropping pattern on water conservation in the c ountry with the help of individual 
experts / professionals and research institutes under the Government for identifying the 

 
18 
 
shortcomings noticed and advising solution so that the results of such a study may be 
disseminated to the States/UTs, farmers, water  users, etc. for their benefits. The Committee 
had liked to be informed about the action taken in this regard.  
20. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“99 ongoing AIBP projects have been identified in consultation with the State s for 
completion by Dec. 2019. The Union Government has approved arrangement of funds 
both for Central Assistance and State Share from a Long Term Irrigation Fund (LTIF) 
through NABARD. During 2016 -17, Central Assistance of Rs.3307.9 crore was 
released to these prioritized projects under AIBP. Further, State share amounting to 
about Rs. 3334 crore was also released through NABARD for these prioritized projects. 
21 projects having irrigation potential of 5.22 lakh Ha., are expected to be complete by 
June, 2017. To reduce the wastage of water , parri passu implementation of CAD works 
in respect of these 99 ongoing projects is being done. Also, the states are emphasi zed 
to use piped water supply and coverage of command area by micro -irrigation system 
wherever feasible and this is one of the condition in the revised MoU being signed with 
the States in respect of 99 on-going AIBP projects under funding in PMKSY-AIBP.” 
 
21. The Committee note  that the Government approved arrangements of funds both 
for Central Assist ance (CA) and State share from a Long -Term Irrigation Fund (LTIF) 
through the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD), and 
further that during 2016 -17, CA to the tune of Rs. 3,307.9 crore was released for 99 
ongoing AIBP Projects identified for completion by December, 2019. However, the 
Committee feel that the Central Assistance alone would not produce tangible result in 
the efforts of the farmers to adopt water -saving technologies including Micro Irrigation 
(Drip and Sprinkler techniqu es) for efficient water utilization, for which the Committee 
had recommended the Government to encourage private sector participation in 
agriculture and water resources sector specially in the Micro Irrigation. The reply of the 
Government is silent on this  aspect of the Committee’s recommendation.  The 
Committee had also recommended that the Ministry to make a study about the impact of 

 
19 
 
cropping pattern on water conservation in the country with the help of individual 
experts/professionals and research Institutes of the Government for indentifying the 
shortcomings and advising solution s thereto so that the results of such a study may be 
disseminated to the States/UTs, farmers, water users, etc. for their benefits.  The reply of 
the Ministry does not provide any information about this as well .  The Committee desire 
the Ministry to clearly apprise about the action taken by them in respect of these two 
recommendations - which ha s not been indicated in the  Action Taken Reply. The 
Committee further desire the Government to explore avenues for encouraging farmers 
to stick to the agreed cropping pattern for effective water management so that each field 
in the command area including the tail-end farmers receive water supply required for the 
purpose throughout the year.  
G. National Water Mission and Study of Impact of Climate Change on water 
resources 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
22. The Committee observe d that to achieve the goal for “comprehensive water data base 
in public domain and assessment of the impact of climate  change on water resources” 878 
Hydrological Observation Stations (HOS) have been established in different basins, and 800 
new HOS have been target to be established by Central Water Commission(CWC) in 12 th Plan. 
The Committee also note d that CWC has a tar get of 200 Automatic satellite -based telemetry 
system for financial year 2016 -17 for hydrological network, real time information, improved 
water resources assessment, planning and flood forecasting, out of which 57 telemetry 
systems have been achieved upto  December, 2016. Besides, the Committee ha d been 
informed that studies of impact of climate change on water resources for seven river basins 

 
20 
 
(Mahanadi, Mahi, Luni, Tapi, Sabarmati, Subarnarekha and west flowing rivers from Tadri to 
Kanyakumari) in associat ion with research institutes like IITs, IISc and NIH have been 
approved, and work on a study on statistical downscaling of global climate models for the river 
basins (approved in 2016) has been awarded. The Committee desire d that the Ministry chalk 
out action plan for achieving the goal of 800 new hydrological stations to be set up by CWC 
during 12 th plan and also the target of 200 Automatic satellite based telemetry system during 
2016-17 as planned by CWC. Further, progress of work pertaining to studies on  impact on 
climate change on water resources for the said seven river system for which work has been 
awarded to the project implementing agencies, also be constantly monitored by the Ministry 
and apprised to the Committee. In addition, the Committee also n oted that, NWM in association 
with the Asian Development Bank (ADB) has completed the study “Operational Research to 
support mainstreaming of integrated flood management under climate change” with focus on 
community participation, and two pilot studies hav e been completed for Burhi Gandak basin in 
Bihar and Brahmani Baitarani basin in Odisha for which the project reports have been sent to 
State Government for taking necessary action / implementation. The Committee had liked the 
Ministry to keep tab on the m atter so that a tangible outcome emerges from these two pilot 
studies and an awareness on the impact of climate change on water resources related issues 
is created in the country as a whole. 
 
23. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“a) There is a provision to install 629 telemetry systems at existing ad newly 
proposed stations under the approved SFC memo for the scheme “Flood Forecasting”. 
Out of this, 65 stations have been installed so far during XII Plan. The sites have been 
rationalised based on the requirement of Rainfall based Hydrodynamic Flood 
Forecasting Models being developed for various basins. Based on this rationalisation, 

 
21 
 
tenders have been floated for 458 Stations and work has been awarded during March, 
2017 under diff erent river basins organisations of Central Water Commission. The 
same are under process of installation.  
b) Out of the total 800 new hydrological observations sites proposed, 716 are in 
final stage of installation and can start observation with support of additional manpower. 
Asian Development Bank (ADB) has completed the study “Operational Research to 
support mainstreaming of integrated flood management under climate change” with 
focus on community participation.  Two pilot studies have been completed fo r Burhi 
Gandak basin in Bihar and Brahmani -Baitarani basin in Odisha. The project reports 
have been sent to State Governments for implementation.  
Under the HRD and Capacity Building component of National Water Mission, various 
trainings, mass awareness pr ogrammes/conventions etc. have been carried out on 
water conservation, improving water use efficiency, participatory irrigation management, 
etc. during the XII Plan in association with WALMIs, research insti tutes and other 
organizations.” 
 
24. The Committe e, in their Thirteenth Report, had recommended the Ministry to 
chalk out an action paln for achieving the goal of 800 new Hydrological Obse rvation 
Stations (HOS) to be set up by the Central Water Commission (CWC) during the 12th Plan 
and also the target of  200 Automatic Satellite Based Telemetry Systems during 2016-17 
as was planned by  the Central Water Commission (CWC) .  However, the reply of the 
Government is conspicuously silent about initiatives for such an action plan being made 
by the Government. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation 
that the Ministry works out an action plan in this regard so that the goal of 800 new HOS 
could be achieved by the CWC during 12 th Plan itself and also that the target of 200 
Automatic Satellite Based Telemetry Systems is achieved during 2016-17.The Committee 
further note that out of the total of 800 new Hydrological Observation Stations ( HOS) 
targeted to be established by CWC in 12 th Plan, 716 are in the final stage of installation 
and can start making observation with the support of additional manpower. The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry make earnest efforts for providing the required 

 
22 
 
manpower  as projected by the  CWC.  They also desire that the Ministry may further 
seek information about the status of the two pilot studies, viz. Burhi -Gandak basin 
(Bihar) and Brahmani -Baitarani basin (Odisha) for which project reports have been sent 
to State Governments for implementation.  The Committee would like to be informed of 
the progress of work pe rtaining to studies on impact on climate change on water 
resources for the 7 river basins viz. Mahanadi, Mahi, Luni, Tapi , Sabarmati, 
Subarnarekha and west flowing rivers from Tadri to Kanyakumari which have been 
awarded to Project implementing agencies. 
 
H. National Water Mission and Efforts on increasing Water Use Efficiency 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
25. The Committee observe d that in order to achieve the goal of “increasing water use 
efficiency by 20%”, the National Water Mission has proposed to under take proposals in water 
sector, namely irrigation, industry, domestic water supply and re -cycle and re-use of water, and 
six (6) demonstrative irrigation projects have been identified for preparation of Detailed Project 
Report (DPRs), which shall be undert aken after availability of additional funds, viz. Telangana 
(Kaddam Project), Maharashtra (Khekranala Project), Rajasthan (Indira Gandhi Nahar Project), 
Punjab (Kokri Distributory – Abohar Branch, Sirhind, Canal System), Haryana (Hissar Major 
Distributory sub-system of West Yamuna Canal System), and Madhya Pradesh(Chambal 
Canal Project).  The Committee also note d that the  NWM had requested the respective State 
Governments to notify the Nodal Officers for these projects,  out of which two State 
Governments, i.e. Punjab and Rajasthan have done the nomination and the responses from 

 
23 
 
other States are awaited,  after which the targets are to be fixed in consultation with the 
concerned State Governments.   The  Committee desire d the Ministry to pursue with the Sta te 
Governments of the remaining States, viz.  Telangana, Maharashtra, Haryana, and Madhya 
Pradesh for ensuring expeditious  steps in notifying  Nodal Officers for the said demonstrative 
irrigation projects under NWM.  They also strongly recommend ed that specific targets be fixed 
to achieve the goal of execution  of demonstrative irrigation projects by all the concerned six 
States after holding necessary consultations with them. The Committee further note d that the 
draft proposal for the setting up of Nation al Bureau of Water Use Efficiency(NBWUE) had been 
prepared in NWM and the proposal approved by the Minister, Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation was forwarded to the P:rime Minister Office(PMO)  and 
Cabinet Secretariat in June 2016.  However, the PMO has returned the proposal on 
28.07.2016, with the remark to take3 appropriate action as a part of Integrated Water 
Management efforts.  The Committee desire d to see a clear -cut policy outcome regarding the 
Ministry’s proposal to create NBW UE so that a national framework directives on water use 
efficiency may be framed at the earliest and issued by the Centre to all the States/UJTs in the 
near future.   The Committee also note d that baseline studies of 21 major/medium water 
resources projects to assess the status of water use efficiency was initiated in March 2016 in 
the States of Assam, Manipur, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and Maharashtra in association 
with Water and Land Management Institutes (WALMIS) and that NWM has awarded a study on 
establishing  benchmarks for industrial use to assist policy for enhancing industrial water use 
efficiency in India to “The Energy and Research Institute,’ New Delhi, which would focus on 
scoping exercise, preliminary baseline assessment of water and comprehen sive water 

 
24 
 
audit/benchmarking in two industrial sectors, i.e. thermal power plants and textile industries.  
The Committee desired to Ministry to expedite completion of these studies and apprise them of 
the outcome, The Committee also liked to  be informed of the progress made in this regard. 
26. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 “The progress made so far  in conducting Base Line studies is as under: 
 
I.  NERIWALAM- Tezpur  (Assam):   Draft Inception Report in respect of four baseli ne 
Studies (Pahumara Medium Irrigation Project, Loktak Irrigation Project, Kaliabor Lift 
Irrigation Project and Sukla Irrigation Project) have been received in NWM. The Draft 
Inception Reports were forwarded to Central Water Commission (CWC) for 
examination/comments. The observations offered on the reports have been forwarded 
to NERIWALM for needful action. 
II. WALMTARI, Hyderabad (Telangana): Draft Inception Report of all the ten projects 
(Rallapdu Medium Irrigation Project, Torrigadda Medium Irrigation Projec t, Thadipudi 
Medium irrigation project, Vengalarasagaram Medium irrigation Project and Guntur 
Channel Medium Irrigation Project) are sent to CWC for examination/comments.  
III. WALMI, Aurangabad (Maharashtra):  Preparation of draft inception Reports are in 
progress. 
  Regarding “Benchmarking industrial water use to assist policy for enhancing 
industrial water use efficiency (Thermal Power plants, Textile, Pulp & Paper and Steel 
Industry) in India” being undertaken by The Energy and Research Institute (TERI). In th e 
Phase I of the study, we have completed scoping exercise and preliminary baseline 
assessment of all the 4 sectors viz. TPP, Textiles, Pulp & Paper and Steel. 
  For Phase I, water audits have been completed in 6 industries out of 12 in total. 
TERI has recently completed water audit at Arvind Mills Limited, Gandhinagar and Mafatlal 
Industries Limited, Nadiad, Gujarat. Remaining 6 no. of water audits for phase I are 
planned during June - August 2017 in TPP & Textile sector.” 
 
27. The Committee note that basel ine studies of 21 major / medium water resources 
Projects for assessing the status of water use efficiency was initiated in Mar ch, 2016 in 
the States of Assam, Manipur, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and Maharashtra in 
association with  the Water and Land Manage ment Institutes (WALMIS) and that the 
National Water Mission ( NWM) has awarded a study  on establishing the benchmarks for 
Industrial use to assist policy for enhancing industrial water use efficiency in India to 

 
25 
 
“The Energy and Research Institute ”, New Del hi.  The Committee further note from the 
reply of the Ministry  that Draft Inception Reports of 4 baseline studies, viz. Pahumara 
Medium Irrigation Project, Lok tak Irrigation Project, Kaliabor Lift Irrigaiton project and 
Sukla Water Irrigation Project as re ceived from the National Water Mission  were 
forwarded to the Central Water Commission , whose observations have been further 
forwarded to the North Eastern Regional Institute of Water and Land Managemetn 
(NERIWALM) for needful action.  Besides, while the D raft Incepiton Report of all the 10 
projects are stated to be sent to CWC  for examination / comment, only 5 such projects 
viz. Rallapadu Medium Irrigation Project, Torrigadda Medium Irrigation Project, 
Thadipudi Medium Irrigation Project, Vengalara Sagaram  Medium Irrigation Project and 
Guntur Channel Medium Irrigation Project have been mentioned.  The Committee would 
like to be informed of the details fo r all the 10 projects for which Draft Inception Reports 
have been sent to CWC for the comments by the Water and Land Management and 
Training and Institute.  The Committee would also like to see a clear -cut policy outcome 
regarding the Ministry’s proposal to create the National Bureau of Water Use Efficiency 
(NBWUE) for which the draft proposal has been prepar ed by the NWM.  Additionally, the 
Committee are of the opinon that the Ministry sho uld pursue with the concerne d State 
Governments for notifying the Nodal Officers for 6 demonstrative Irrigation projects 
already identified for preparation of Detailed Proje ct Report s (DPRs) which aim to 
achieve the go al of “increasing water use efficiency by 20%” under the National Water 
Mission viz. Telangana (Kaddam Project), Maharashtra (Khekranala Project), Rajasthan 
(Indira Gandhi Nahar Project), Punjab (Kokri Distribut ory – Abohar Branch, Sirhind 

 
26 
 
Canal system), Haryana (Hissar Major Distributory sub -system of West Yamuna Canal 
system), and Madhya Pradesh (Chambal Canal Project), by fixing specific targets to 
achieve the goal of execution of demonstrative irrigation proj ects by all these St ates 
after holding necessary consultations with them. 

 
27 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
The Committee note that the per capita live water storage in India  is about 209 m 3 
(cubic meters)  based on population of 2011 census, which is far below 1000 cubic meters, the 
minimum threshold for identifying water -scarcity condition of a locality, State or country. The 
Committee also note that as per the information p rovided by the Ministry of Water Resources, 
River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, Russia and Australia can sustain consecutive 
droughts for about 4 and 3 years respectively. However, India cannot sustain drought beyond 
one non -Monsoon season due to low  per capita storage, and as such, thus may face acute 
stress, if any year happen to be a drought year. Further, whereas the average water availability 
in the country remains more or less fixed according to the natural hydrologic cycle, the per 
capita avail ability is reducing progressively owing to increasing population, from 2209 cu. m. 
(cubic meter) per year in 1991 to about 1545 cu. m. Per year in 2011. The Committee note with 
concern that the country is steadily hurtling towards a great water crisis in t he near future due 
to the prevailing near water -scarcity situation in the country as well as the regressive trend 
towards declining capita water availability, specially since 1991. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that urgent, specific initiatives be ma de by the Government to increase the live per 
capita water storage as well as per capita water availability in India.  In this connection, the 
Committee note the Ministry’s observation that creation of storage -based water resources 
projects on appropriate sites can result in increased per capita live storage capacity without 
compromising the ecological balance in the country. The Committee therefore, strongly 

 
28 
 
recommend the Government to (i) compile information / data regarding the large and medium 
dams / reservoirs presently under implementation in the country separately, (ii) make a review 
of the status of their execution including the bottlenecks (if any) hampering the timely 
completion, and (iii) make a time-frame for completion of each of these large / m edium dams or 
reservoirs. The Committee desire to be apprised of the initiative taken by the Government in 
this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
The per capita live water storage in India is about 209 m 3, based on population of 2011 census, 
which is far bel ow 1000 cubic meters, the minimum threshold for identifying water -scarcity 
condition of a locality, state of a country. In this regard, it is to mention that the per capita live 
storage and per capita water availability (Falkenmark Water Stress Indicator) are two different 
things. The per capita availability of water in the country is 1545 cubic meters as per the 2011 
census which is more than 1000 cubic meters. National Register of Large Dam (NRLD) is a 
compilation of the dams in the country prepared as pe r information received from the State 
Government/Authority concerned. The information which is sought cannot be derived from 
NRLD and additional work is required to be conducted. For timely completion of old projects 
efforts are being made to expedite old projects under PMKSY-AIBP programme of Government 
of India and several new projects are being initiated at the same time. 99 ongoing AIBP 
projects have been identified in consultation with the States for completion by Dec. 2019.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 6 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 

 
29 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
The Committee observe that Drip and Sprinkler irrigation systems constitute the chief 
modern water conservation techniques in India. In Drip irrigation, water is delivered at th e root 
zone of the crops through emitters like drippers, micro sprinklers, micro jets, misters, fan jets, 
micro sprayers, foggers, etc. This method has less water requirement resulting in water saving, 
higher fertilizer application efficiency, energy conse rvation, higher water use efficiency, and is 
feasible in different terrains and suitable for problematic soils and prevention of water logging. 
Sprinkler irrigation system requires energized pump sets, irrigate more uniformly than gravity 
systems, require much less maintenance when compared with conventional pressurized 
irrigation systems, eliminates seepage and evaporation losses, has no requirement of skilled 
manpower, no expensive land levelling, and is suitable for irrigation of crops with high density 
and particularly effective in sandy undulating terrains and widely used for cereals, pulses, 
seeds and other field crops. The Committee are happy to note that State Governments are 
encouraging adoption of these water saving techniques through provision of subsidies to 
farmers on purchase of these systems. The Committee further note that as per ;the 12 th Plan 
guidelines of Command Area Development and Water Management (CAD&WM) programme, a 
minimum of 10% of Culturable Command Area (CCA) of each project is to  be covered through 
micro irrigation and the Central Assistance to the tune of 50% is provided to the States for 
development of infrastructure to facilitate use of sprinkler / drip irrigation. The Committee also 
note that through ‘fertigation’ process in s prinkler / drip irrigation systems, more efficiency is 
achieved by combining fertiliser as well as water soluble fertilizers, thereby increasing fertilizer 
use efficiency from 80 to 90 per cent. Taking cognizance of the paramount need for 

 
30 
 
conservation of w ater in India through traditional as well as modern methods, the Committee 
desire that micro irrigation comprising Drip and Sprinkler irrigation techniques be taken up in 
the country as a popular movement with a great sense of urgency by both the Central a nd the 
State Governments and proactive action needs initiated by the Government in this regard. The 
Committee also recommend that apart from the provision of incentives provided through 
CAD&WM programme by the Government, the Ministry should also come up w ith novel 
initiatives to incentivise the States/UTs to adopt Sprinkler and Drip irrigation systems for 
achieving water use efficiency in agriculture and other allied sectors of the country without loss 
of further precious time, and also take steps to promo te ‘fertigation’ across the country. They 
would further strongly recommend the Government to promote and propagate Drip and 
Sprinkler irrigation methods through the print and electronic media such as television, cinema, 
internet etc. so as to create necess ary awareness among the farming community as well as 
general public. They would like to apprised of the progress made in this direction through the 
initiatives taken by the Ministry. 
Reply of the Government 
 Looking to the vast potential under Micro -Irrigation, the Government of India set up a 
‘Task Force on Micro Irrigation’ in the year 2004, which assessed that the potential of coverage 
area under Micro -Irrigation was of the order of 69 Mha (27 Mha under drip irrigation and 42.5 
Mha under sprinkler). The Task Force also suggested that the Planning Commission should 
make it obligatory for the project authorities to implement Micro -Irrigation in at least 10% of the 
Command Area while sanctioning new irrigation projects. Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation is providing Central Assistance to States under 

 
31 
 
Command Area Development and Water Management Programme (CAD&WM ) for 
development of infrastructure to facilitate use of drip/sprinkler irrigation system as an alternative 
to construction of field channels. The assistance under this item will be towards construction of 
stilling tank, pump house and laying of conveyance pipes up to farmer’s field.  
The Guidelines for Central Assistance for CAD works in prioritised AIBP Irrigation Projects 
including a coverage of 10% of CCA of each project for infrastructure cost of micro irrigation 
have already been circulated during January, 2017. The implementation of micro irrigation is 
proposed to be up-scaled to 30% of CCA of the projects under a new incentivization scheme for 
bridging the irrigation gap, which is under State level consultation after “in Principle” approval of 
Ministry of Finance. National Water Mission has organised about 70 training/ mass awareness 
programmes (about 14200 par ticipants)  for promoting efficient use of water in irrigation sector 
including water conservation .   
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
The Committee note that under the National Aqu ifer Management (NAQUIM) 
programme initiated since 2012, only an area of 5.5 lakh sq.km. has so far been mapped and 
23 lakh sq. Km. Remain to be mapped, for which Rs. 3000 crore is needed. The reason for 
under-achievement in the implementation of NAQUIM pr ogramme, according to the Ministry, 
was delay in commencement of the programme due to late approval of the scheme in 
September, 2013. The Ministry also informed that NAQUIM programme has been taken up in 
8.89 lakh sq. Km. During 12 th Plan, focussing on gro und water over-exploitation, water scarcity 

 
32 
 
in Bundelkhand and arsenic contamination and that out of 8.89 lakh sq. Km., and area of 5.25 
lakh sq. Km. Has been re -prioritized in the water stressed areas of the States of Haryana, 
Punjab, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, NCT Delhi 
and Bundelkhand region for aquifer mapping and preparation of aquifer -wise ground water 
management plans. The Committee have also been apprised that (i) review of the work done 
under NAQUIM progra mme is being carried out at CGWB through a two -tire evaluation 
mechanism, (ii) regular progress is being reviewed at Ministry -level including the weekly 
meeting taken by Minister of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, 
(iii) State Ground Water Coordination Committees (SGWCC) are geared up as per direction of 
National Inter-Departmental Steering Committee (NISC) for Aquifer Mapping and Management 
Programme, and (iv) workshops are being organised by CGWB involving Central / State 
Government departments, academic institutions, experts, etc. to have regular feedback on 
activities being carried under NAQUIM. Despite these tall claims, the Committee are 
disappointed that although a total outlay of Rs. 3319 crore has been made for 12 th Plan (2012-
2017) for the scheme of Ground Water Management and Regulation with Aquifer Mapping as 
one of the components, a total expenditure of only Rs. 146.48 crore has been made on Aquifer 
Mapping upto June, 2016. The Committee are convinced that special measur es are 
desperately needed to ensure smooth progress in the implementation of NAQUIM programme 
in the country. Noting that the 12 th Plan (2012 -17) is soon coming to an end without 
commensurate achievements being made under NAQUIM IN THE COUNTRY, THE Committ ee 
desire that they be apprised of the physical and financial achievements made under NAQUIM 
in 5.25 lakh sq. Km. Re-prioritised, water-stressed areas till date. They also desire that effective 

 
33 
 
measures / methods be devised and put in place by the Governme nt to ensure timely, optimum 
utilization of budgetary outlays made for Aquifer Mapping under the scheme of Ground Water 
Management and Regulation before the end of the 12 th Plan period. Additionally, the issue of 
late approval of the National Aquifer Manag ement (NAQUIM) programme be addressed on 
priority so that this problem at least do not plague its implementation during the ensuring 13 th 
Plan, if the scheme is proposed to be carried over further. In the opinion of the Committee, the 
monitoring and evalua tion works of the programme also needs to be intensified by the 
Government during 2017 -18 in order to speed up its implementation and achieve targets -
oriented results. 
Reply of the Government 
During implementation of Aquifer Mapping (NAQUIM), special measu res have been 
undertaken to ensure smooth progress of NAQUIM. These measures include; regular 
appraisal/review of the activities under NAQUIM by National Inter -departmental Steering 
Committee (NISC), engagement of a reputed PSU as Project Management Consul tant to 
streamline the outsourcing activities, evaluation of Aquifer maps and management plans being 
prepared by a National level expert committee and increased involvement of institutions of 
excellence like NGRI, GSI, NIH, BARC and NRSC for various inputs  related to Aquifer 
Mapping. 
The aforementioned steps in conjunction with advance planning made for various 
activities under NAQUIM to be taken up during coming years would ensure timely and 
optimum utilisation of the budgetary outlays made for Aquifer Map ping. In this regard, i n-

 
34 
 
principle approval of plan for NAQUIM in the coming years has been obtained from the Ministry 
and EFC for approval and continuation of the scheme is under finalization.  
Intensification of monitoring and evaluation of Aquifer Mappi ng has been ensured by 
convening regular meetings of the NISC which has been constituted as the apex body for 
overall guidance for the implementation of the NAQUIM  at National level under the 
Chairmanship of the Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources, RD& GR. The members of NISC 
include representatives from related Ministries like Science & Technology, Earth Sciences, 
Rural Development, Drinking Water & Sanitation etc as well as the Principal Secretaries of 
States. During last 6 months, in order to intensif y the activities under Aquifer mapping and to 
speed up its implementation, two meetings of NISC have been held during September 2016 
and March 2017. 
As part of Aquifer mapping, a total of 5.90 lakh Sq Km area has been covered including 
areas pertaining to priority States such as Andhra Pradesh, Telengana, Tamil Nadu, 
Karnataka, Gujarat, Rajasthan, Punjab, Haryana and Bundelkhand region (covering parts of 
Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh) under the Ground Water Management and Regulation 
Scheme. An expenditur e of Rs 581 Crores has been incurred against the RE allotment of Rs 
742 Crores during the 12 th Plan.   The State wise achievements made under Aquifer Mapping 
is given as Annexure II.  
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
According to the Minister of Water Resources , River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation, ‘water budgeting’ is an accounting of all the water utilized by the system that 
flows into and out of a project area. Based on the availability of water as per the rainfall data, 

 
35 
 
allocation of water to various se ctors (Irrigation/agriculture/domestic/industrial) is made for the 
year specially for Rabi and Kharif crops. The Ministry also informed that proper water budgeting 
is helpful to conserve water from rainfall and surface run off to the extent possible in vie w of the 
erratic and highly variable duration and amount of Monsoon rainfall in different parts of the 
country. In this connection, the Committee note that the National Water Mission (NWM) has 
requested all the States / UTs to prepare State Specific Action  Plan (SSAP) for water sector 
linking with State Action Plans for Climate Change, as a result of which six States, viz. Andhra 
Pradesh, Assam, Gujarat, West Bengal, Uttarakhand and Telangana have initiated their State 
Specific Action Plans in the first pha se and other States are to follow. The Committee also note 
that State / UTs Governments have been asked to set up Water Regulatory Authorities to 
regulate the use of water and promote water conservation, and the Government of 
Maharashtra and Gujarat have e stablished such Authorities in their respective States. Having 
fully convinced that ‘water budgeting’ is an efficacious technique for judicious and efficient use 
of water in the country, the Committee strongly recommend that appropriate guidelines be 
issued by the Government to all States/UTs, Central Institution/bodies and local bodies to 
promote and popularize the concept of ‘water budgeting’ all through the country, and necessary 
steps be immediately initiated by the Ministry in this direction under inti mation to this 
Committee. The Committee also recommend that the Ministry vigorously pursue with all the 
remaining States/UTs to prepare State -Specific Action Plan (SSAP) for water sector by linking 
them with State Action Plans for Climate Change -  in comp liance with the goal of National 
Water Mission within a specified time -frame. Side by side, steps be taken by the Government 
to ensure that all the other remaining States/UTs duly set up Water Regulatory Authorities for 

 
36 
 
regulation of the use of water and a lso its conservation on the pattern already done in the 
States of Maharashtra and Gujarat and also targets to achieve thereby be set up by the 
Government for compliance by all the States/UTs. The Committee would like to be informed of 
further action taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
District Irrigation Plans (DIPs) and State Irrigation Plan (SIP) shall be the cornerstone for 
planning and implementation of PMKSY. DIPs will present holistic irrigation development 
perspective of the district outli ning medium to long term development plans integrating three 
components viz. water sources, distribution network and water use applications incorporating all 
usage of water like drinking & domestic use, irrigation and industry. Further, SIP will not only 
consolidate the DIPs and correlate with State Agriculture Plan (SAP) but also prioritize resources 
and outline definite annual action plan with a medium to long term horizon. DIPs and SIP will 
provide requisite emphasis on convergence by eliminating overlap  of resources & efforts and 
ensuring optimal utilization of funds available through various Centrally Sponsored/State Plan 
Schemes. In addition under Jal Kranti Abhiyan, water security plans are being developed for every 
Jal Gram. Seminars/Training program s and workshops have been organized under IEC activities 
to create awareness amongst stakeholders.  
For preparation of State Specific Action Plans for Water Sector, MoU has been signed with 
12 States and funds have been released to 11 States through NERIWA LM, Tezpur, Assam.  NIH, 
Roorkee has also been declared as nodal agency for remaining 17 States and work is in progress. 
A National Level Orientation Workshop was held on 5 th June, 2017 at New Delhi where in 

 
37 
 
participants from National Water Mission, variou s Central Ministries/Departments, State 
representatives along with their Nodal Officers, Experts/ Resource Persons from water sector 
attended the workshop in which draft Status Reports of 8 states were discussed in detail along with 
the observations of Cen tral Government organisations and experts associated with preparation of 
SSAPs.  
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
The Committee observe that for improving water conservation, the Central Water 
Commission (CWC) of Ministry of Water Resources, River Development a nd Ganga 
Rejuvenation had been keeping eye on performance overview and management improvement 
of Major and Medium Irrigation (MMI) projects of the country. It has so far appraised water use 
efficiency of 35 irrigation projects and 131 performance evaluatio n studies and the findings 
there from were conveyed to the respective project authorities’ for taking up corrective 
measures. The CWC has also been encouraging water auditing and benchmarking of irrigation 
projects by publishing general guidelines for it f or the States and also the Guidelines for 
improving water use efficiency in irrigation, domestic and industrial sectors. The Committee 
further note that under the ‘Per Drop More Crop’ component of the Prime Minister’s Krishi 
Sinchai Yojana (PMKSY), promoti on of efficient water conveyance and precision water 
application, installation of devices like drips, sprinklers, pivots and rain -gums in the farms is 
envisaged. The Committee are convinced that the time has come for the Government to adopt 
proactive steps  to promote water use efficiency in the country, specially in the agricultural 
sector. They, therefore, recommend that additional Major and Medium Irrigation projects apart 
from the 35 irrigation projects already undertaken, may be taken up by the CWC for 

 
38 
 
performance appraisal and overview in regard to water use efficiency during 2017 -18. Noting 
further that 131 performance evaluation studies and their findings pertaining to irrigation 
projects were already conveyed to the respective Project Authorities for  taking up corrective 
measures, the Committee urge the Ministry not only to undertake and forward performance 
evaluation studies of Major and Minor Irrigation projects but also to endeavour to obtain 
relevant feedback from the concerned Project Authorities  for perusal. The Committee are also 
fully convinced that with the general increasing trends towards water scarcity in the country in 
the present times, it is pertinent to think that the time has come for the country to go for bold 
initiatives toward the i rrigation practices, and they, therefore, strongly recommend that the 
Ministry / Government institute a study on the viability of introducing piped -water supply to the 
fields – which will definitely reduce losses in water conveyance losses in canals, reduc e water-
logging and ensure water availability to tail -end farmers as well on a large -scale. The 
Committee further desire that performance evaluation (States/UTs -wise) regarding the physical 
and financial achievements under PMKSY till date be made by the Mi nistry / Government and 
the results achieved thereby be furnished to them at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
 Out of 131 Performance Evaluation Studies (PES), 41 are pre -project evaluation 
studies, 44 PES were conducted by State Government.  Rest 46 PES were undertaken by 
CWC and MOWR, RD&GR during VIIIth to XIth Five Year Plan through consultants like 
WALMIs, IMTIs, WAPCOS, Universities, etc. The final reports containing findings & 
recommendations were sent to   the Project authorities of the concern ed States and requested 
to provide feedback on implementation of findings & recommendations of PES of their Projects. 

 
39 
 
Reminders were also sent, but no response has so far been received from the project 
authorities. However, the concerned States are being r e-approached for the feedback as also, 
impressing upon according higher priority to it. 
99 ongoing AIBP projects have been identified in consultation with the States for 
completion by Dec. 2019. The Union Government has approved arrangement of funds both f or 
Central Assistance and State Share from a long Term Irrigation Fund (LTIF) through NABARD. 
During 2016 -17, Central Assistance of Rs.3307.9 crore was released to these prioritized 
projects under AIBP. Further, State share amounting to about Rs. 3334 cror e was also 
released through NABARD for these prioritized projects. 21 projects having irrigation potential 
of 5.22 Lakh Ha., are expected to be complete by June, 2017. To reduce the wastage of water, 
parri passu implementation of CAD works in respect of th ese 99 ongoing projects is being 
done. Also, the states were emphasised to use piped water supply and coverage of command 
area by micro-irrigation system wherever feasible and this is one of the condition in the revised 
MoU being signed with the States in respect of 99 on -going AIBP projects under funding in 
PMKSY-AIBP. The performance evaluation of the CADWM component of 99 prioritized projects 
will be taken up on completion of the scheme. CWC has organised a Piped Irrigation Workshop 
at CWC, New Delhi (Ma rch, 2017) and have framed guidelines on “DESIGN OF 
PRESSURIZED PIPE IRRIGATION SYSTEM AND GUIDELINES FOR PLANNING AND 
DESIGN OF PIPED IRRIGATION NETWORK (SOURCE TO OUTLET)”.  
Twenty Six Base line studies have been awarded to NERIWALM, Assam, WALMTARI, 
Hyderabad, WALMI, Aurangabad and CWRDM, Kazhikode to improve water use efficiency in 

 
40 
 
Medium and Major irrigation projects. Draft Inception Reports of 14 projects have been 
received from institutions and uploaded on NWM web site.  
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
The Committee note the Ministry’s observation that unless the water users / Water 
Users Association (WUAs) are sensitivized for efficient water use practices and rope in for 
water conservation, the on -ground improvement is a bit difficult, which thereby und erlines the 
need to have lucrative incentivizing provisions to make them active stakeholders rather than 
the end users. The Committee fully concur with the view of the Ministry of this issue, and they 
strongly recommend that the Ministry bring out a Model Bill to be adopted by all States / UTs, 
which would provide legal framework for enactment of Participatory Irrigation Management 
(PIM) by them. The Committee also desire that the Ministry immediately enter into 
consultations with all the States / UTs for e nsuring the enactment of PIM expeditiously in their 
respective territories providing for formation of a robust, efficient network of Water Users 
Association (WUAs) all over the country. The Committee ‘would further like to be updated 
about the status of pa rticipatory’ approach to management of water resources, i.e. enactment 
of PIM legislation and formation and functioning of WUAs in different States/UTs of the country. 
They also strongly recommend that a periodic monitoring and review mechanism on the 
working and performance of WUAs be worked out by the Ministry so as to eliminate the 
shortcomings noticed in their functioning, if any. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation has been 
promoting Participato ry Irrigation Management (PIM) in the country to enact new irrigation 

 
41 
 
acts/amending the existing irrigation acts for facilitating PIM so that the farmers are involved in 
maintenance of the created assets. Accordingly 16 States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Assam, B ihar, 
Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Nagaland, 
Orissa, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu and Uttar Pradesh have enacted legislation for 
involvement of farmers in irrigation management. The matter is being pursued wi th the State 
Government who have not yet enacted PIM Acts. The working and performance of WUAs will 
be monitored and strengthened through involvement of social facilitators as per provisions 
made in the Guidelines for central assistance under CADWM Program me. NWM, MoWR, RD & 
GR has initiated action to draft Model Bill on Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM) Act 
which is under finalisation stage. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 18 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
As per the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, 
a minimum 10% of Cultural Command Area (CCA) of each project is to cover through micro 
irrigation under the 12 th Plan guidelines. Further, Central Assistance (CA) to the tune of 50% is 
provided to the States for development of infrastructure to facilitate use of sprinkler/drip 
irrigation systems as an alternative to on -farm development works. Three schemes have been 
sanctioned in respect of micro irrigation works in 12 th Plan, viz. Development of pressure 
irrigation in command area of six lift schemes of Indira Gandhi Nahar Pariyojana (IGNP), 
Stage-II, Rajasthan, Kandi Canal CAD&WM project, Punjab, and Kotla Branch, Part -II, Punjab. 
Whereas CA of a mere Rs.10.85 crore and Rs. 4. 01 crore have been release in respect of six 

 
42 
 
lift irrigation schemes under IGNP, Staqge -II (Rajasthan) and Kotla Branch, Part -II(Punjab), no 
such release has been made for Kandi Canal CAD&WM project (Punjab) although 12 th Plan is 
shortly coming to an end, which speak volumes about the casualness with which the execution 
of the CAD&WM projects/schemes are being done by the Government. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend the Government to take immediate steps for release of the full 
amount of estimat ed Central Assistance for each of the three CAD&WM projects / schemes 
within this financial year (2017 -18), viz. Six lift schemes of IGNP, Stage -II, Rajasthan 
(Rs.1658.80 crore) Kandi canal CAD&WM project, Punjab (Rs.73.44 crore) and Kotla Branch, 
Part-II project, Punjab (Rs.38.325 crore ) and apprise them of action taken in this regard. The 
Committee also note that the Central Water Commission have undertaken 35 (thirty -
five)studies to make a realistic assessment of water use efficiency for completed major  / 
medium projects under Plan scheme of the Ministry, the recommendations / results of the study 
reports about interventions required / step to be taken up, have reportedly been sent to the 
concerned State Governments for taking necessary action. The Commi ttee would like to know 
the specific follow -up action taken by the concerned States where such recommendations / 
results of study reports had been sent by the Government, and they also desire that the 
Ministry impress upon these State Governments to accord  priority to taking the required 
remedial action for each of these projects. They would also desire the Ministry to take new 
initiatives with the States for improving water use efficiency in the form of guidelines / directives 
which would broadly include t hese measures, i.e. volumetric measured supply of water at field 
levels to be monitored by WUAs, levy of certain minimum water tariff to discourage wasteful 
water withdrawal from irrigation systems, enactment of PIM Act with empowerment of Water 

 
43 
 
Users’ Association (WUAs), proper maintenance and management of surface water irrigation 
system so as to give an assured water supply for each field of the command area. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of action in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
 During 2015-16, Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) was launched with 
aims of enhancing physical access of water on farm and expanding cultivable area under 
assured irrigation, improving on -farm water use efficiency, introducing sustainable water 
conservation practices etc. and central assistance was released to development of Pressure 
Irrigation of Command Areas of 6 Lift schemes of IGNP Stage -II, Rajasthan and Kotla Brach 
Part-II, Punjab for micro -irrigation, as per physical and financial target pr oposed by the State 
Governments concerned. No central assistance could be released to Kandi Canal Project, 
Punjab during 2015 -16 which did not submit proposal with physical and financial targets. CAD 
works have now been restricted to 99 priority AIBP proje cts for implementation under CADWM 
programme from 2016 -17 onwards; and the development of Pressure Irrigation of Command 
Areas of  6 Lift schemes of IGNP Stage -II, Rajasthan, Kotla Branch Part -II and Kandi Canal 
Project, Punjab are not covered in the list of prioritized projects. The outstanding CADWM 
projects including the above mentioned projects are proposed to be covered under the new 
Incentivization Scheme for Bridging the Irrigation Gap. The suggested measures for improving 
water-use efficiency and fo r strengthening of Participatory Irrigation Management will also be 
included in the new proposed scheme. The final reports of 35 WUE Studies (now from 7 States) 
were sent with request to appraise the Ministry about the feedback on the action taken, based 
on the recommendations contained therein, of the respective WR Projects. None of the States 

 
44 
 
have responded, so far. However, the seven States are being re -approached for the feedback 
as also, impressed to accord high priority to it.  
It is also to add that under new initiatives - Guideline for improving WUE in Irrigation, 
Domestic & Industrial Sectors – November, 2014 have been prepared and available at MoWR, 
RD & GR web portal. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 21 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
The Committee observe that the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and 
Ganga Rejuvenation have initiated ‘Climate Change, Impact Study on Eight River Basins’ 
which would assess the impact of climate change on water res ources specially on eight river 
basins on the country and global models are to be statistically and dynamically to be 
downscaled in the range of 30 years and 100 years from now, and assessing that can help in 
framing of plan for the conservation of water. Accordingly, study proposals have been invited 
from reputed academic institutions like IITs, NITs, IISc, NIH, etc. for eight river basins, viz. 
Mahanadi, Luni, Tapi, Satluj, Subarnarekha, Sabarmati, Mahi and areas of inland drainage, 
Tadri to kanyakuamri river basin. The duration of the studies would vary from 2 to 3 years. The 
Committee strongly feel that the threat to climate change is now considered as an established 
fact. The Committee are happy to note the Ministry’s reply that research studies have be en 
initiated on assessing impacts of climate change specially on water resources and on different 
adaptation and mitigation approaches, which would contribute to water sector in several ways, 
viz. (i) the regional climate scenarios will guide the policy ma kers for future planning, (ii) the 

 
45 
 
modeling results will provide estimate of the future water availability in the basin, and (iii)the 
model results might be used for assessing the effectiveness of the existing flood fighting 
structures and other infrastructures like bridges, weirs in the area under the flooding conditions, 
(iv) performance of reservoirs would be evaluated to assess the impact of climate change 
adaptation measures will be suggested, and (v) the adaptation strategies will help the local 
population to minimize the risk due to changing climate. The Committee urge the Ministry to 
tackle the issue of the impact of climate change on water conservation in the country with all 
seriousness, and they, therefore, recommend the Ministry to enlist support  from not only the 
academic institutions but other NGOs/individual experts well -versed in the subject so that a 
pragmatic solution could be found to meet the adverse effects of climate change on water 
resources conservation. The Committee also urge the Min istry to get the studies on “climate 
change, impact study on Eight River Basins” and related research studies initiated by it and 
completed in a time -bound manner, which would serve as a catalyst for the Ministry to evolve 
measures aimed at holistic conser vation of India’s water resources. They desire to be informed 
of the action taken in respect of the above. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation had approved 
7 projects for various Research Organization . The details of projects approved along with the 
institutes through which these projects are going to be taken up are at  Annexure-III. Funds for 
release of first installment is under active consideration in the Ministry. The studies are to be 
completed within three years. The reports of various studies initiated by the Ministry of Water 
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation on climate change are uploaded on 

 
46 
 
website. Before finalization of such reports, they are also circulated to different C entral/State 
Government organizations, experts and other stake holders for comments/observations. Any 
suitable inputs are incorporated in final reports and documents.  
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
The Committee are informed that the village community in th e three (3) districts of 
Satara, Jalna and Beed in Maharashtra had successfully adopted efficient irrigation practices, 
change in cropping pattern form sugfar to low water -consuming crops on the demand side and 
also adopted artificial recharge to enhance t he yield of aquifer completing 116 recharge 
structures (55 in Satara, 30 in Jalna and 31 in Beed). The aquifer -based participatory ground 
water management pilot projects in these three districts was undertaken under Maharashtra 
Water Sector Improvement Pro ject (MWSIP), aided by World Bank, and implemented in a total 
of 52 village of these districts within the tenure from 2005 to 2013 with the State Government 
playing a crucial role and initiating project activities with the mapping and delineation of the 
aquifer in the selected areas and then preparing the aquifer based water balance of the project 
area with community participation and with facilitation of a non -Government Organization 
(NGOs). The local community in each village was organized into Gram Panch ayat Level 
Committee (GPLCs), having their own by -laws, whose Executive Committee were elected 
through democratic elections. All the GPLCs in the project pilot aquifer area after their 
formation, were federated into Ground Water Management Association (GWM A). The GPLCs 
and GWMA deliberated on current ground water situation and adopted appropriate intervention 
to improve ground water efficiency, reduce ground water extraction and arrest declining of 
water levels. The community manages aquifer with the help o f NGO as per the Ground Water 

 
47 
 
Management Action Plan (GWMAP) under the technical supervision of District Technical 
Support Group composed of officers form various disciplines and Departments like water 
resources, water supply, agriculture and GSDa. Based o n the capacity of the aquifer and 
availability of surplus runoff, the artificial recharge structures were finalized. The Committee are 
happy to know that the same aquifer based participatory ground water management is being 
replicated in ‘Jal -swarajya’ pro ject (of Maharashtra Rural Water Supply and Sanitation 
Department) – Which is being implemented in   7 districts of the State, and that the same 
model is being propagated through the Maharashtra Ground Water (Development and 
Management) Act, 2009, which ca me into force w.e.f. 1 st June 2014. The Committee have also 
been apprised of the successful implementation of ground water management by community 
participation / Gram Panchayat in Hiware Bazaar, Ahmednagar district, Maharashtra having a 
population of 1233 (2011), which was achieved through water budgeting leading to change in 
cropping pattern and use of Drip/Sprinkler irrigation on the demand side and construction of 
rain water harvesting, e.g. earthen bunds, percolation tanks, stone bunds, check dams, 
trenches etc., afforestation and protection recharge zones, and revival of water bodies on the 
supply side. The Government of Maharashtra was involved in providing he needed 
infrastructure facility, capacity building, data generation for water budgeting. This data was 
used for participatory ground water management with active involvement of villagers as per the 
decisions of the Gram Sabha. The Committee are heartened to not that the initiatives under 
participatory ground water management at Hiware Bazaar, Ahmed nagar, Maharashtra have 
greatly improved the socio -economic conditions of the village, and the village was declared an 
‘Ideal Village’ by the Government of Maharashtra and, while during 1992, there were 168 

 
48 
 
families Below Poverty Line (BPL). But by 2008, t here was not a single BPL family left. The 
Committee recommend the Government to earnestly explore the viability of replicating such 
models in the other remaining States/UTs so that concrete improvement are visible on ground 
water front in the near future,  specially in those States/UTs facing ground water over -
exploitation, water scarcity and arsenic / fluoride contamination – areas having serious ground 
water availability and quality issues. The Committee would like to be apprised of initiatives 
taken by the Government in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
Extensive consultations were held with NGOs, Civil Society Organizations and 
Voluntary Organizations credited with successful initiatives of participatory ground water 
management from across the country  including Maharashtra during the preparation of the 
proposal for National Ground Water Management Improvement Program (NGMIS). The best 
practices of such initiatives have been incorporated in the scheme proposal. Based on the 
efficacy of such intervention s in the identified areas, MoWR, RD & GR will explore the 
possibility of taking up such initiatives in other States in future. 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
The Committee note that the National Convention of Water Users Associations (WUAs) 
was held at New Delhi in November, 2014 and three Regional conventions aimed at “promotion 
of citizen and state action for water conservation, augmentation and preservation” were 
organized at Ludhiana on 25 -26th August, 2015, at Aurangabad on 8 -9th January, 2016 and at 
Bengaluru on 24 -25th September, 2016 respectively wherein several outcomes were noticed, 
viz. capacity building of representatives for WUAs on PIM water conservation and improving 

 
49 
 
water use efficiency, identification of problems faced by WUAs and recommendati ons made. 
The Committee desire that events be organized on a permanent basis on rotational basis in 
every region of the country in order to highlight the need for having a robust WUAs at State 
levels. The Committee also note that under MoU entered by the N WM with Tata Institute of 
Social Science (TISS), Mumbai, the NWM has circulated guidelines for organizing HRD 
Capacity building to the Central / State Government organizations like Water and Land 
Management Institute (WALMIS) in May, 2016 and 55 training /  capacity building programmes 
have been organized in association with various organizations and about 4,420 persons trained 
during 2015 -16 for various stakeholders, such as, Government officials / water users 
association / farmers and NGOs working in water  sector. The Committee appreciate these 
initiatives of the Ministry, and they recommend that such training be organized for the elected 
representatives of the people at the village Panchayat level, such as Sarpanch, village ward 
members and also Corporator s in urban local bodies as well, and necessary initiative be taken 
by the Ministry in this regard at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
National Water Mission is exploring the possibilities of organising the training 
programmes to elected representative s through various organisations like NERIWALM, NIRD 
&PR, WALAMTARI, WALMI (Aurangabad), CWPRS, CWRDM, ICAR -IIWM, HIRMI, NIH, IGNP 
and India NPIM. Aaction is initiated in this aspect collaboration with NIRD, Hyderabad during 
current Financial Year. 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 

 
50 
 
The Committee observe that in order to achieve the goal of “increasing water use 
efficiency by 20%”, the National Water Mission has proposed to undertake proposals in water 
sector, namely irrigation, industry, domestic water supply and  re-cycle and re-use of water, and 
six (6) demonstrative irrigation projects have been identified for preparation of Detailed Project 
Report (DPRs), which shall be undertaken after availability of additional funds, viz. Telangana 
(Kaddam Project), Maharashtra (Khekranala Project), Rajasthan (Indira Gandhi Nahar Project), 
Punjab (Kokri Distributory – Abohar Branch, Sirhind, Canal System), Haryana (Hissar Major 
Distributory sub -system of West Yamuna Canal System), and Madhya Pradesh(Chambal 
Canal Project).  T he committee also note that the  NWM had requested the respective State 
Governments to notify the Nodal Officers for these projects,  out of which two State 
Governments, i.e. Punjab and Rajasthan have done the nomination and the responses from 
other States  are awaited,  after which the targets are to be fixed in consultation with the 
concerned State Governments.   The  Committee desire the Ministry to pursue with the State 
Governments of the remaining States, viz.  Telangana, Maharashtra, Haryana, and Madhy a 
Pradesh for ensuring expeditious  steps in notifying  Nodal Officers for the said demonstrative 
irrigation projects under NWM.  They also strongly recommend that specific targets be fixed to 
achieve the goal of execution  of demonstrative irrigation proj ects by all the concerned six 
States after holding necessary consultations with them. The Committee further note that the 
draft proposal for the setting up of National Bureau of Water Use Efficiency(NBWUE) had been 
prepared in NWM and the proposal approved  by the Minister, Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation was forwarded to the P:rime Minister Office(PMO)  and 
Cabinet Secretariat in June 2016.  However, the PMO has returned the proposal on 

 
51 
 
28.07.2016, with the remark to take3 appropri ate action as a part of Integrated Water 
Management efforts.  The Committee desire to see a clear -cut policy outcome regarding the 
Ministry’s proposal to create NBWUE so that a national framework directives on water use 
efficiency may be framed at the earl iest and issued by the Centre to all the States/UJTs in the 
near future.   The Committee also note that baseline studies of 21 major/medium water 
resources projects to assess the status of water use efficiency was initiated in March 2016 in 
the States of A ssam, Manipur, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and Maharashtra in association 
with Water and Land Management Institutes (WALMIS) and that NWM has awarded a study on 
establishing  benchmarks for industrial use to assist policy for enhancing industrial water use 
efficiency in India to “The Energy and Research Institute,’ New Delhi, which would focus on 
scoping exercise, preliminary baseline assessment of water and comprehensive water 
audit/benchmarking in two industrial sectors, i.e. thermal power plants and textil e industries.  
The Committee desire to Ministry to expedite completion of these studies and apprise them of 
the outcome, The Committee would, however, also like to  be informed of the progress made in 
this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
The progress made so far  in conducting Base Line studies is as under: 
I. NERIWALAM- Tezpur  (Assam):  Draft Inception Report in respect of four 
baseline Studies (Pahumara Medium Irrigation Project, Loktak Irrigation Project, 
Kaliabor Lift Irrigation Project and Sukla Irrigation Project) have been received in NWM. 
The Draft Inception Reports were forwarded to Central Water Commission (CWC) for 

 
52 
 
examination/comments. The observations offered on the reports have been forwarded 
to NERIWALM for needful action. 
II. WALMTARI, Hyder abad (Telangana): Draft Inception Report of all the ten 
projects (Rallapdu Medium Irrigation Project, Torrigadda Medium Irrigation Project, 
Thadipudi Medium irrigation project, Vengalarasagaram Medium irrigation Project and 
Guntur Channel Medium Irrigation  Project) are sent to CWC for 
examination/comments.  
III. WALMI, Aurangabad (Maharashtra): Preparation of draft inception Reports are 
in progress. 
  Regarding “Benchmarking industrial water use to assist policy for enhancing industrial 
water use efficiency (Thermal Power plants, Textile, Pulp & Paper and Steel Industry) in 
India” being undertaken by The Energy and Research Institute (TERI). In the Phase I of 
the study, we have completed scoping exercise and preliminary baseline assessment of all 
the 4 sectors viz. TPP, Textiles, Pulp & Paper and Steel. 
 For Phase I, water audits have been completed in 6 industries out of 12 in total. TERI has 
recently completed water audit at Arvind Mills Limited, Gandhinagar and Mafatlal 
Industries Limited, Nadiad, Gujarat. R emaining 6 no. of water audits for phase I are 
planned during June - August 2017 in TPP & Textile sector.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 27 of Chapter-I of the Report) 

 
53 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT  
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
NIL 

 
54 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
The Committee note that in certain a reas of India, there has been (i) increase in 
pumping depths, drastic reduction in wells / tube wells yields and enormous rise in the cost of 
pumping ground water, (ii) widespread and acute scarcity of ground water in summer months 
for irrigation and drink ing uses, and (iii) increase in fluoride content in certain areas and 
increase in salinity in the coastal areas. As per data compiled by Central Ground Water 
Authority (CGWA), there are 90% blocks in Punjab where ground water have been extracted 
and also that ‘Water’ being a State subject, 100% subsidy on power in Punjab is being provided 
to the Agriculture Sector, despite the fact that the Kirit Parikh Committee Report (2010) had 
suggested that water should not be treated as such – being a common resources . The 
Committee are further to note that perturbed that in Punjab, out of 138 assessment units, 110 
have been classified as ‘Over -exploited’, 4 ‘Critical’, 2 ‘Semi -Critical’ and 22 ‘safe’ as per the 
Ground Water Resource Estimate Report, 2011, one of the m ajor reasons for which is being 
attributed to shifting to water intensive crop in the State, which has resulted in depletion of 
ground water table in many parts due to over-exploitation, imposing financial burden on farmers 
– who need to deepen their wells  and replace their pump sets and on State Government – 
whose subsidy burden for electricity supply increase due to the provision of free electricity  in 
the State for agricultural connections. The Committee are convinced that a major factor 
responsible for  the scenario has been the absence of a clear -cut policy on ground water 

 
55 
 
extraction till now. The Committee, Therefore, reiterate the recommendation (no. 6 ) contained 
in their 5the Report (16 th Lok Sabha on ‘Review of Ground Water Scenario, need for a 
comprehensive policy and measure to address problems in the country with particular 
reference to (i)) Dark Blocks; and (ii) Contamination of underground water by certain industries’ 
viz. That the Government should come out with a well -defined policy on ground  water 
extraction. The practice of free supply of electricity to farmers for extraction of ground water be 
regulated with proper accountability by the States. The Committee of the considered view that 
an expert panel needs to be set up by the Government fo r making a scientific study of the 
impact of excessive withdrawal of ground water due to paddy cultivation in the State of Punjab 
– which should also suggest remedial measures to address the issue of wasteful draft of water 
for agriculture in the entire co untry. The Committee would like to be apprised of action taken in 
this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
National Aquifer Mapping and Management Programme is also addressing the issue of 
withdrawal of groundwater for irrigation including Punjab State. The management strategies are 
discussed before the National Level Expert Committee for National Aquifer Mapping in which 
an eminent agriculture expert is also a Member. 
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation has 
constituted an Inter -Ministerial committee on ‘Sustainable Withdrawal and effective Utilization 
of Ground Water and its Management’ under the Chairmanship of Secretary, MoWR, RD & GR 
to look into the various challenges being faced in sustainable management of ground water 
resources. The Office Order of the Committee along with the Terms of Reference is enclosed 

 
56 
 
as Annexure I.  Besides, the integration of roles performed by different Ministries while 
handling issues related to water is also being discussed by Niti Aayog.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
The Committee observe from the information  provided by the Ministry that India had a 
rich tradition of water harvesting, which is more than two millennia old , viz. The Kuhals of 
Jammu, Kulsi of Himachal Pradesh, Guls of Uttarakhand, Pat of Maharastra, Zings of Ladakh, 
Zabos of Nagaland, Eris of Tamil Nadu, Keres of Karnataka, Tankas / Kundis / Bawdis/ 
Jhalaras, etc. of Rajasthan. Sadly, however, these age -old traditional rain-harvesting systems 
have fallen into disuse with the introduction of piped water supply system. In these connection, 
the Committee, further note that when the information pertaining the status of indigenous water 
harvesting methods/practice s in India including their contribution to water resources 
conservation and management was south, the Ministry have replied that about 6 lakh tanks/ 
storages in India are used for minor irrigation (MI) schemes as per 4 th Minor Irrigation Census, 
out of whi ch 5 lakh are in use at present. The Committee also categorically desired to know 
whether any study has been made so far regarding the efficacy, merits, viability or sustainability 
of traditional water recharge/ harvesting techniques and also to state the efforts made by the 
Government to preserve, improve and develop the indigenous water recharge / harvesting 
methods in India. To this query, however, the Ministry have not furnished the relevant reply but 
have merely cited the various objectives of the sche me or Repair, Renovation and Restoration 
(RRR) of Water Bodies being implemented by the Government of India since the 10 th Plan. The 

 
57 
 
Committee deplore the cavalier attitude of the Ministry, and they recommend that the Ministry 
immediately take steps to institute a panel of experts, professionals drawn from various reputed 
institutions in the country for undertaking a study on the efficacy, merits, viability or 
sustainability of traditional water recharge /harvesting techniques in India as existing now and 
apprise the Committee of the findings of their study. The Committee also desire that the 
Ministry hold consultations with various State / UTs with a view to devise ways and means to 
preserve, improve and develop indigenous water recharge / harvesting method s in the country 
that have fallen into disuse for various reasons. The Committee would like to be updated about 
action taken in this matter. 
Reply of the Government 
In order to preserve and improve the water storing capacity of water bodies, based on 
NRSC data, Unique Identity (UID) for all the water bodies has been generated under India -
WRIS. The India-WRIS has generated information for 7,98,909 water bodies with the support of 
NRSC.  
An Inter-sectoral Advisory Group (ISAG) was constituted in National Wate r Mission to 
advice and review the progress made in respect of Goal -III which is “Focussed Attention to 
Vulnerable Areas including Over -exploited Areas”. The Group is headed by Chairman, Central 
Ground Water Board with members from Central Water Commission , Ministry of Rural 
Development, Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Ministry 
of Drinking Water and Sanitation, Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change and 
Principal Secretaries of Water Resources of four St ate Governments. One of the important 
objectives of this Group is promotion of traditional system of water conservation and to take up 

 
58 
 
matters related to timely release of funds for completion of backlog RRR projects with Ministry. 
ISAG is pursuing the convergence programme for ground water recharge with MNREGA, 
Watershed Development Programmes, NWM and CGWB. This committee also recommended 
that the monitoring mechanism for ground water recharge will be through Principal Secretary 
(Water Resources/Irrigation/Rural Development Department) of the State.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
The Committee note the Ministry’s reply that change of cropping pattern by farmers, 
specially from less water demand crops to high water demands crops such as sugar cane and 
paddy induces failure of the designed irrigation system to irrigate the entire command area, 
resulting in the tail -end farmers being deprived of irrigation water. Hence, it is necessar y to 
enforce the proposed cropping pattern in the project area for effective management of water so 
that each field in command could get adequate water. The Committee also note that State 
Governments are encouraging adoption of water -saving technologies, s uch as sprinkler and 
drip irrigation system, through provision of subsidies to the farmers on the purchase of these 
systems, which are also recommended for achieving higher irrigation efficiencies and could be 
used for very small -sized holdings. However, t he adoption of these technologies by poor 
farmers would depend heavily on the supply of information, material and service for installation. 
In this connection, the committee note that para 6.5 of the National Water Policy, 2012 contains 
provision which str esses water saving in irrigation use, viz. “water saving in irrigation use 
States in of paramount importance. Methods like aligning cropping pattern with natural 

 
59 
 
resources endowments, micro irrigation (drip, sprinkler etc.) automated irrigation operation, 
evaporation – transpiration reduction, etc., should be encouraged and incentivized.” Keeping in 
view the fact that the bulk of farmers in India are poor who may not be in a position to avail of 
the tools for water -saving technologies, the Committee desire the Ministry to devise innovative 
steps to incentivize the farmers for adoption of these water -saving technologies in a big way, 
and also to explore avenues for encouraging farmers to stick to the agreed cropping pattern for 
effective water management so t hat each field in the command area including tail -end farmers 
get adequate water supply throughout the year. Assuming further that adequate finances may 
not be available either with the State/UTs or farmers, the committee also recommend the 
Government to encourage private sector participation in agriculture and water resources sector 
specially in the micro irrigation. The Committee also desire the Ministry to make a study on the 
impact of cropping pattern on water conservation in the country with the help o f individual 
experts / professionals and research institutes under the Government for identifying the 
shortcomings noticed and advising solution so that the results of such a study may be 
disseminated to the States/UTs, farmers, water users, etc. for their  benefits. The Committee 
would like to be informed about the action taken in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
99 ongoing AIBP projects have been identified in consultation with the States for 
completion by Dec. 2019. The Union Government has approved arrangement of funds both for 
Central Assistance and State Share from a long Term Irrigation Fund (LTIF) through NABARD. 
During 2016 -17, Central Assistance of Rs.3307.9 crore was released to these prioritized 
projects under AIBP. Further, State share amoun ting to about Rs. 3334 crore was also 

 
60 
 
released through NABARD for these prioritized projects. 21 projects having irrigation potential 
of 5.22 Lakh Ha., are expected to be complete by June, 2017. To reduce the wastage of water, 
parri passu implementation of  CAD works in respect of these 99 ongoing projects is being 
done. Also, the states are emphasised to use piped water supply and coverage of command 
area by micro-irrigation system wherever feasible and this is one of the condition in the revised 
MoU being signed with the States in respect of 99 on -going AIBP projects under funding in 
PMKSY-AIBP.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 21 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
The Committee observe that to achieve the goal for “comp rehensive water data base in 
public domain and assessment of the impact of climate change on water resources” 878 
Hydrological Observation Stations (HOS) have been established in different basins, and 800 
new HOS have been target to be established by Centr al Water Commission(CWC) in 12th Plan. 
The Committee also note that CWC has a target of 200 Automatic satellite -based telemetry 
system for financial year 2016 -17 for hydrological network, real time information, improved 
water resources assessment, planning  and flood forecasting, out of which 57 telemetry 
systems have been achieved upto December, 2016. Besides, the Committee have been 
informed that studies of impact of climate change on water resources for seven river basins 
(Mahanadi, Mahi, Luni, Tapi, Saba rmati, Subarnarekha and west flowing rivers from Tadri to 
Kanyakumari) in association with research institutes like IITs, IISc and NIH have been 
approved, and work on a study on statistical downscaling of global climate models for the river 

 
61 
 
basins (approved in 2016) has been awarded. The Committee desire that the Ministry chalk out 
action plan for achieving the goal of 800 new hydrological stations to be set up by CWC during 
12th plan and also the target of 200 Automatic satellite based telemetry system dur ing 2016-17 
as planned by CWC. Further, progress of work pertaining to studies on impact on climate 
change on water resources for the said seven river system for which work has been awarded to 
the project implementing agencies, may also be constantly monit ored by the Ministry and 
apprised to the Committee. In addition, the Committee also note that, NWM in association with 
the Asian Development Bank (ADB) has completed the study “Operational Research to support 
mainstreaming of integrated flood management un der climate change” with focus on 
community participation, and two pilot studies have been completed for Burhi Gandak basin in 
Bihar and Brahmani Baitarani basin in Odisha for which the project reports have been sent to 
State Government for taking necessar y action / implementation. The Committee would like the 
Ministry to keep tab on the matter so that a tangible outcome emerges from these two pilot 
studies and an awareness on the impact of climate change on water resources related issues 
is created in the country as a whole. 
Reply of the Government 
a) There is a provision to install 629 telemetry systems at existing ad newly proposed 
stations under the approved SFC memo for the scheme “Flood Forecasting”. Out of this, 65 
stations have been installed so far during XII Plan. The sites have been rationalised based on 
the requirement of Rainfall based Hydrodynamic Flood Forecasting Models being developed 
for various basins. Based on this rationalisation, tenders have been floated for 458 Stations 

 
62 
 
and work has be en awarded during March, 2017 under different river basins organisations of 
Central Water Commission. The same are under process of installation.  
b) Out of the total 800 new hydrological observations sites proposed, 716 are in final stage 
of installation and can start observation with support of additional manpower. 
Asian Development Bank (ADB) has completed the study “Operational Research to 
support mainstreaming of integrated flood management under climate change” with focus on 
community participation.  Two pilot studies have been completed for Burhi Gandak basin in 
Bihar and Brahmani -Baitarani basin in Odisha. The project reports have been sent to State 
Governments for implementation.  
Under the HRD and Capacity Building component of National Water Missi on, various 
trainings, mass awareness programmes/conventions etc. have been carried out on water 
conservation, improving water use efficiency, participatory irrigation management, etc. during 
the XII Plan in association with WALMIs, research institutes and other organizations.   
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 24 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
 

 
63 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
The Commit tee observe that a Central sector scheme called ‘Ground water 
Improvement Programme’ is proposed to be launched shortly by the Government with 
budgetary support from the Central Government and loan from the World Bank in the ration of 
50:50. Subject to app roval by the Ministry of Finance and the Union Cabinet, the scheme is to 
be of six years duration, and would have inherent linkages with National Hydrology Project 
(NHP) and National Aquifer Management (NAQUIM) programme. Initially, five States, viz. 
Rajasthan, Haryana, Maharashtra, Gujarat and Karnataka, having some of the most heavily 
exploited ground water areas in India confronting serious water availability and quality issues, 
have been selected for inclusion in the Scheme, which also has provision for  social audit and 
third party verification. Give the serious ground water scenario prevailing in the country, the 
Committee recommend the Government to ensure that the Ground Water Improvement 
Programme’ as proposed is launched in the aforesaid six States of the country without further 
delay by obtaining necessary approval/ clearance for it from the Ministry of Finance and Union 
Cabinet. The Committee also desire the Government to ensure that the modalities of 
implementation, detailed model of funding, appr oval of the specific projects to be included 
under the Programme, monitoring and evaluation system of the scheme be worked out at the 
earliest and be forwarded to the States for eliciting their responses. Additionally, the Committee 
also recommend that apart from these six States, the Ministry should explore ways and means 

 
64 
 
to include the other remaining States in ‘Ground Water Improvement Programme’ in due 
course. The Committee desire to be apprised of progress made in the matter, after the 
presentation of this Report to the House. 
Reply of the Government 
The program is proposed to be taken up in identified over-exploited/critical/water-scarce 
blocks of  seven States viz. Haryana, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh (Bundelkhand & Western U.P), 
Madhya Pradesh (Bundelkh and Region), Gujarat, Maharashtra & Karnataka States. The 
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance has raised certain queries, which are being 
replied to. 
Depending upon the efficacy of the project, MoWR, RD & GR will explore the possibility 
of up-scaling the scheme to other States/ UTs as recommended by the Committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                HUKUM SINGH 
4 August, 2017                                                                                                      Chairperson, 
13 Shravana, 1939 (Saka)                                          Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 

 
65 
 
ANNEXURE – I 
 

 
66 
 
 

 
67 
 


 
68 
 
ANNEXURE – II 
State-wise achievements made under NAQUIM programme 
State/UT Achievement 
(area in Km2) 
Andhra Pradesh 21175 
Bihar 9086 
Chhattisgarh 10619 
Delhi 1483 
Gujarat 31522 
Haryana 44179 
Jammu & Kashmir 3000 
Jharkhand 17693 
Karnataka 48311 
Kerala 5200 
Madhya Pradesh 32961 
Maharashtra 30400 
North Eastern States (Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, 
Meghalayaa, Manipur, Nagaland and Tripura)* 
10855 
Odisha 10193 
Punjab 50368 
Rajasthan 141963 
Tamil Nadu 38942 
Telangana 22328 
Uttar Pradesh 45339 
Uttarakhand 2811 
West Bengal 8008 
 UT of Dadra and Nagar Haveli 490 
Puducherry 293 
Lakshadweep 32 
Special Study Areas (covering parts of Bihar, 
Karnataka, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Tamil 
Nadu) 
3006 
TOTAL 590287 

 
69 
 
ANNEXURE – III 
Projects Approved by MoWR, RD&GR 
Sl.No. Project 
No. 
Name of the Project Name of Institute 
1. RP-1 Impact Assessment o f Climate Change on 
Hydro-meteorological processes and water 
resources of Mahanadi River Basin 
IISc Bangalore 
 
IIT Bhubaneshwar 
2. RP-2 Climate Change Impact Studies for 
Rajasthan 
(Area of Inland Drainage and Mahi basin) 
MNIT Jaipur  
CUJ Ajmer 
IIT Delhi 
3. RP -4 Impact of Climate Change on Water 
Resources of Tapi Basin 
SVNIT Surat 
MNIT Jaipur 
MANIT Bhopal 
4. RP -6 Effect of Climate Change and land 
arse/land cover changes on spatial and 
temporal water availability in 
Subarnarekha Basin 
IIT Kharagpur 
5. RP -7 Impact of Climate Change on Water 
Resources of Sabarmati Basin 
IIT Gandhinagar 
SVNIT Surat 
6. RP -8 Impact of Climate Change on Water 
Resources in River Basins from Tadri to 
Kanyakumari 
IIT Mumbai 
NIT Surakthal 
CWRDM Kozhikode 
7. RPD-1 Statistical Downscaling for hydro -climatic 
projections with CMIP5 Simulations to 
assess impact of Climate Change  
IIT Mumbai 
IIT Guwahati 
IISc Bangalore 
IIT Gandhinagar 
IIT Kanpur 
 
 

 
70 
 
ANNEXURE – IV 
List of Abbreviations 
Cu.mt Cubic Meters  
NRLD National Register of Large Dams  
PMKSY Prime Minister’s Krishi Sinchayee Yojana 
AIBP Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme  
CGWA Central Ground Water Board 
NRSC National Remote Sensing Centre 
UID Unique Identity 
ISAG Inter Sectoral Advisory Group 
MNREGA Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
CAD & WM Command Area Development and Water Management  
CCA Culturable Command Area  
NAQUIM National Aquifer Management Programme  
SGWCC State Ground Water Coordination Committee 
NISC National Inter-Departmental Steering Committee 
SSAP State Specific Action Plan 
DIP District Irrigation Plans 
SIP State Irrigation Plans  
CWC Central Water Commission 
PES Performance Evaluation Studies 
WALMI Water and Land Management Institute 
IMTI Irrigation Management Training Institutes  
WAPCOS Water and Power Consultancy Services 
NABARD National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 
LTIF Long Term Irrigation Fund 
NERIWALM North Eastern Regional Institute of Water and Land 
Management  
WALAMTARI Water and Land Management and Training and Research 
Institute 
CWRDM Centre for Water Resources Development and Management  
WUA Water Users Associations 
PIM Participatory Irrigation Management  
CA Central Assistance 
IGNP Indira Gandhi Nahar Pariyojana 
NIH National Institute of Hydrology 
GPLC Gram Panchayat Level Committee  
GWMA Ground Water Management Association 
GWMAP Ground Water Management Action Plan 
BPL Below Poverty Line 
NGMIS National Ground Water Management Impr ovement 
Programme  
HOS Hydrological Observation Stations 
ADB Asian Development Bank 

 
71 
 
TISS Tata Institute of Social Sciences 
ICAR-IIWM Indian Council of Agricultural Research - International Institute 
of Water Management  
HIRMI Haryana Irrigation Management Institute 
India NPIM India National Participatory Irrigation Management  
NWM National Water Mission  
NBWUE National Bureau of Water Use Efficiency 
TERI The Energy and Research Institute 
 
 

 
72 
 
ANNEXURE -  V 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING  COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2016-17) HELD ON 8 AUGUST, 2017 
  
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1515 hours in Committee Room No. 1, First 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
  
Shri Hukum Singh – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Radheshyam Biswas 
3. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
4. Shri Maganti Murali Mohan 
5. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
6. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
7. Shri Sanjaykaka Ramchandra Patil 
8. Smt. Aparupa Poddar 
9. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
10. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah 
11. Shri Lallu Singh 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
13. Shri Harshvardhan Singh Dungarpur 
14. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
15. Shri Sanjay Seth 
16. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
 
17.   
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Rita Jailkhani    - Director 
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar   - Additional Director 
 

 
73 
 
 
-2- 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.   
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration (a)  Seventeenth Report on Action Taken 
by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report 
on Demands for Grants (2017 -18) of Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and 
Ganga Rejuvenation;  (ii) Eighteenth Report on  Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations / Recommendations contained in the Thir teenth Report on ‘Indigenous and 
Modern forms of Water Conservation – Techniques and Practices’ ; and (iii) Nineteenth Report 
on ‘The Inter-State River Water Disp utes (Amendment) Bill, 2017 ’.  After some deliberations, 
the Committee adopted the aforesaid three draft Reports without any modification.   
3. The Committee also authorized the Chair person to present the above three Reports to 
both the Houses of Parliament in the current Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 

 
74 
 
ANNEXURE – VI 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRTEENTH 
REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE  
  
(i)  Total number of Observations/ Recommendations    16 
 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations  which have been accepted    
by the Government  
 
Para Nos. 1, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 15 and 16 
Total : 11 
           Percentage    : 68.75% 
   
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations  which the Committee do  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Para Nos. NIL 
Total : NIL  
         Percentage : 00.00 % 
 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies    
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Para Nos. 2, 3, 12 and 14 
         Total : 04  
                Percentage  : 25.00 % 
 
(v) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which final reply 
 of the Government are still awaited 
 
Para No. 6 
         Total : 01 
          Percentage   : 6.25% 
  
 