o
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES
(2015-2016)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA 
REJUVENATION 
ISSUES CONCERNING FLOOD MANAGEMENT, COMPENSATION AND STATUS OF 
OWNERSHIP OF SUBMERGED AND ERODED LAND IN THE COUNTRY, INCLUDING 
COMPENSATION TO FARMERS FOR LOSS OF THEIR CROPS DESTROYED BY FLOODS 
AND RIGHT TO DISPOSAL OF THE SAND LEFT IN THE FIELDS OF FARMERS
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations
contained in the Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Water Resources}
EIGHTH REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
May, 2016/Vaisakha,1938 (Saka)
8

EIGHTH REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES
(2015-2016)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION
ISSUES CONCERNING FLOOD MANAGEMENT, COMPENSATION AND STATUS OF 
OWNERSHIP OF SUBMERGED AND ERODED LAND IN THE COUNTRY, INCLUDING 
COMPENSATION TO FARMERS FOR LOSS OF THEIR CROPS DESTROYED BY FLOODS 
AND RIGHT TO DISPOSAL OF THE SAND LEFT IN THE FIELDS OF FARMERS
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations
contained in the Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Water Resources}
Presented to Lok Sabha on 02.05.2016
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 02.05.2016
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 2016/Vaisakha,1938 (Saka)


CONTENTS
Page 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2015-16) ………………………………… (iii)
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………… (v)
CHAPTER I - Report 1
CHAPTER II - Observations / Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ……………………………… 21
CHAPTER III - Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies .. 36
CHAPTER IV - Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee ……. ………………………………………… 41
CHAPTER V    - Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final
Replies of the Government are still awaited ………………. 49
ANNEXURES
I. Status of Implementation of Recommendations of XII 52
Plan Working Group on Flood Management and Region 
Specific Issues
II. State-Wise Works approved, Works completed and Funds 62
released under Flood Management Programme (FMP) 
during XI and XII Plan
III. Statement Showing State-Wise Flood Damage during 2013 63
IV. Statement Showing State-Wise Flood Damage During 2014 65
V. Minutes of the Fourth sitting of the Standing Committee  
held on 18 January, 2016 ……………………………. 67
VI. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee ……………………………………………….. 69

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES
(2015-2016)
Shri Hukum Singh - Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Radheshyam Biswas
3. Shri Devusinh Jesingbhai Chauhan
4. Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunpuria
5. Shri Tariq Hameed Karra
6. Shri B. Vinod Kumar
7. Shri Maganti Murali Mohan
8. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra
9. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
10. Shri Rodmal Nagar
11. Shri Subhash Patel
12. Shri Sanjaykaka Ramchandra Patil
13. Shri Vijaysinh Mohite Patil
14. Smt. Aparupa Poddar
15. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
16. Shri S. P. Y. Reddy
17. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah
18. Smt. V. Sathyabama
19. Shri Lallu Singh
20. Shri Liladharbhai Vaghela
21. Smt. Dimple Yadav
RAJYA SABHA
22. Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder
23. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
24. Smt. Naznin Faruque
25. Mir Mohammad Fayaz
26. Shri Sanjiv Kumar
27. Prof. Mrinal Miri
28. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
29. Shri Amar Shankar Sable
30. Shri A.V. Swamy 
31. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia
(iii)

SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Kumar - Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Rita Jailkhani - Director
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar - Additional Director
4. Shri Kamal Khurana - Committee Officer
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2015-2016) having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Eighth Report on 
the Action Taken by Government on the observations / recommendations contained in the Fourth 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water Resources (2014-2015) on 
“Issues concerning Flood Management, Compensation and Status of ownership of submerged 
and eroded land in the country, including compensation to farmers for loss of their crops 
destroyed by floods and right to disposal of the sand left in the fields of farmers”. 
2. The Fourth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya 
Sabha on 13 May, 2015.  The replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained 
in the Report were received on 04 November, 2015.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and 
adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 18 January, 2016.
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the observations / 
recommendations contained in the Fourth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is 
given in Annexure - VI.
NEW DELHI; HUKUM SINGH,
04 March, 2016    Chairperson,
14 Phalguna, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on Water Resources

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources deals with the action taken 
by the Government on the observations/recommendations of the Committee contained in the
Fourth Report of the Committee (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on "Issues concerning Flood 
Management, Compensation and Status of Ownership of Submerged and Eroded Land in 
the Country including Compensation to Farmers for loss of their crops destroyed by 
Floods and Right to Disposal of the Sand left in the Fields of Farmers" ,  which was 
presented to Parliament on 13 May, 2015.
2. Action taken notes, received from the Government in respect of all the twenty two
observations/recommendations of the Committee, have been categorised as follows:-
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:
Para nos. 2,3,4,5,6,10,13,16,20,21 and 22  (Total-11)
(ii) Recommendations/ Observations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies:
Para Nos. 8,14 and 18 (Total-3)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 1,7,9,12 and 15 (Total-5)
(iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the 
Government is still awaited:
Para Nos. 11,17 and 19 (Total-3)
3. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of the 
observations/ recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.

A. Water under concurrent list of Constitution 
Recommendation (Para No.1)
4. In their original recommendation, the Committee had observed that despite having 
more than 18% of world's population, India has only 4% of world's renewable water 
resources. The Committee also noted that the variability of rainfall in space and time is high 
in the country. The Committee also noted that the monsoon season accounts for nearly 
three-fourth of annual rainfall leading to natural calamities in the form of floods, erosion in 
flood plains of the rivers, besides drought.
The Committee further noted that though the subject of flood control does not find a 
mention in any of the three legislative lists included in the Constitution of India, drainage and 
embankments are specified in entry 17 of list II (State List).  The Committee also noted that 
the subject of flood management falls within the purview of the States and the primary 
responsibility of management of water resources including floods, therefore, lies with the 
State Governments. Flood management schemes are planned, investigated and executed 
by the State Government concerned. The role of Union Government is technical, advisory, 
catalytic· and promotional in nature. The Committee, however, felt that the role of the Union 
Government should extend beyond this as not all the flood-prone States were well-equipped 
to manage devastating floods with the limited resources they have in their possession. 
However, considering the limited role presently vested in the Union Government with regard 
to floods under the present constitutional set-up and the urgent necessity to take proactive
steps to combat and control recurrent floods in the country, the Committee strongly 
recommended that the Central Government and State Governments should make necessary 
periodic reviews to facilitate enhanced role by the Union Government in flood related aspects 
so that better coordinated, pre-emptive measures are taken before there are indications of 
impending floods in their respective States. The Committee therefore, felt that mere hand 
holding by the Union Government was not sufficient and the Government must play a 
pro-active role which according to Committee could effectively be done if the subject “Water” 
is brought under Concurrent List of the Constitution of India. The Committee reiterated their 
earlier recommendation to bring “Water” as a subject under Concurrent List of the 
Constitution of India, made in the Sixteenth Report of the Committee (2012-13) during 
Fifteenth Lok Sabha. 

5. The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, in 
their Action Taken Reply have stated that as far as the matter relating to bringing water in the 
Concurrent list of the Constitution is concerned, demands have been raised by the 
professionals and civil society to bring ‘water’ in Concurrent list primarily to ensure national 
perspective on water management and to avoid inter-State disputes and the tendencies of 
the State Governments to use more water (in excess of justified needs through efficient use) 
only to claim more apportionment of water in inter State rivers. However, these have been 
opposed by most of the States.
The matter was also examined by the two Commissions on Centre State Relations 
chaired by Justice R.S. Sarkaria (1983-88) and Justice M.M. Punchhi (2007-10). The 
proposal to bring ‘water’ in the Union/ Concurrent list did not find favour with either of these 
two Commissions.
Further, Constitutional amendment for bringing ‘water’ in Concurrent list, would 
need to be passed in both the Houses by a majority of the total membership of that House 
and by a majority of not less than two thirds of the Members of that House present and voting. 
This would also require ratification by the Legislatures of at least one-half of the States. Thus, 
there is need to have wider consultation with all stakeholders to bring broader consensus in 
the matter.
6. The Committee note that the Ministry have simply stated the fact that the 
issue to bring 'Water' in the Union/Concurrent has been opposed by most of the 
States.  Further the two Commissions on the Centre-State Relations chaired by 
Justice R. S. Sarkaria (1983-88) and Justice M. M. Punchhi (2007-10) also did not 
favour the proposal to bring "Water" in Union/Concurrent list. The Ministry has further 
apprised the Committee about the Constitutional amendment procedure for bringing 
‘Water’ in Concurrent List.  The Ministry has also stated that there is a need to have 
wider consultations with all stakeholders to bring broader consensus in the matter.  
The Committee do not accept this standoffish response given by the Ministry. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation and desire the Ministry to 
continue persuasive efforts with all stake holders in this regard so as to evolve a 

consensus on this issue. 
B. Flood Scenario in the Country
Recommendation (Para No.4)
7. The Committee observed that the XII Plan Working Group on Flood Management 
and Regional Specific Issues in December, 2011 had compiled the sum of maximum flood 
affected area state-wise for the entire country during the period 1953 to 2010 which was 
49.815 mha. The Committee, however, expressed their concern on the data furnished by the 
Ministry, as it did not reflect any information with regard to the maximum area affected (mha) 
by the Tsunami floods in the States of Kerala and Andaman & Nicobar Islands etc in the year 
2004. The Committee, therefore, liked to know from the Ministry the precise reasons for not 
incorporating the information related to Tsunami floods in the information furnished by the 
Ministry specially when the Working Group had compiled the data for the entire country 
during the period 1953 to 2010. The Committee desired that the Ministry should come back to 
the Committee with a comprehensive information in this regard. The Committee also noted
that the Report by the XII Plan Working Group on Flood Management and Regional Specific 
Issues had been submitted to the Planning Commission in 2011. The Committee liked to be 
apprised of the action taken on the Report. 
The Committee were also displeased to note that the Ministry had furnished information 
related to human lives lost / cattle loss during the period from 1953 to 2012 only and had
stated that information pertaining to the year 2013 was still under verification / assessment by 
States. Observing the gravity of Iosses due to floods, the Committee deplored the 
lackadaisical attitude adopted by the Ministry in furnishing half baked information both in 
respect of areas affected by Tsunami floods and losses to lives in 2013. The Committee 
therefore, liked the Ministry to expedite the furnishing of updated information in these regard 
within three months of the presentation of the report.
8. The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, in 
its Action Taken Reply, have stated that the flood damage data is primarily collected from 
the State Governments on annual basis. XII Plan Working Group on Flood Management and 
Regional Specific Issues had compiled the State-wise data based on the information 
provided by the State Governments. Despite persuasion, some of the States did not provide 
the data and hence the national data remained tentative. No separate information for flood 

affected area due to 2004 Tsunami floods and lives lost was made available by the State 
Governments. Therefore, only such information as made available by State Governments 
had been presented to the Standing Committee. The tentative flood damage data as 
compiled for 2013 and 2014 by Central Water Commission (CWC) based on the information 
received from various State Governments are given in Annexures – 3 and 4.
9. While appreciating the steps taken by the Ministry in collecting the flood 
damage data from some State Governments on annual basis relating to flood damage,
the Committee are displeased to note that some of the States have not provided the 
data and hence, the national data on the same remains tentative. Further, the 
Committee find that the Ministry has also not furnished any information on the steps, 
if any, taken by them in pursuing the remaining State Governments in providing 
information on flood damage. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
recommendation and desire that updated information including the one related to the 
extent of flood affected areas and lives lost due to 2004 Tsunami floods should be 
made available to the Committee without any further delay. The Committee would also 
like to be apprised of the specific action taken in this direction.
C. Strengthening of Brahmaputra Board
Recommendation (Para No.7)
10. In their original recommendation, the Committee had noted with dismay that the 
vacancies in Brahmaputra Board had not been filled up, despite having pointed out by the 
Committee in its First Report of Sixteenth Lok Sabha (2014-15) on examination of Demand 
for Grants for the year 2014-15. The Committee felt that the Brahmaputra Board which is 
required to play a vital role in the preparation of master plan for river basin, etc. could ill-afford 
vacancies in its Board. The Committee, therefore, reiterated their earlier recommendation 
and requested the Ministry to take necessary steps in this regard expeditiously and apprise 
the Committee of the action taken.
11. The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, in 
its Action Taken Reply, have stated that the Ministry had filled up the post of Chairman of 
Brahmaputra Board and a proposal for the setting up of North East Brahmaputra and Barak 
River Authority was under consultation with concerned States.

12. The Committee appreciate the efforts of the Ministry to fill up the post of the 
Chairman of Brahmaputra Board.  However, the Committee are dismayed over the 
fact that there are still a large number of vacancies in the Brahmaputra Board. Instead 
of furnishing information on the steps taken or proposed to be taken to fill up the 
vacant posts, the Ministry has, however, conveniently chosen to remain silent on the 
issue.  The Committee have, however, noted that the proposal for the setting up of 
North East Brahmaputra and Barak River Authority was under consultation with the 
States concerned.  The Committee would, therefore, like to know the timeframe by 
which the setting up of North East Brahmaputra and Barak River Authority would be 
finalised and made functional, so that the preparation of Master Plan for river basin, 
etc. could be initiated and completed in time. Accordingly the Committee, reiterate 
their recommendation for filling up the vacancies in the Brahmaputra Board. The 
Committee desire to be apprised of the concrete progress made in the matter and 
furnish the reasons so far not for filling up the vacancies as it seriously hampers the 
functioning of the Brahmaputra Board.   
D. Relief and Rehabilitation for Flood affected Families
Recommendation (Para No.9)
13. In their original recommendation, the Committee had noted that the Government 
had issued a revised National Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy, 2007, which among 
others included a provision that Social Impact Assessment (SIA) study would be carried out 
in proposed affected areas wherein voluntary displacement is of 400 families in the plain 
areas and 200 families in the hilly areas or more or in blocks / areas mentioned in Schedule V 
or Schedule VI of the Constitution. It was further stipulated that while undertaking SIA, the 
appropriate Government shall consider the impact, the project will have on public and 
community properties, assets and infrastructure particularly roads, public transport, drinking 
water, drainage, sanitation, health care, places of worship, places of burial / cremation along 
with grazing land for cattle. The Committee recommended the Government to ensure that 
necessary effective steps to implement the provisions of the revised National Resettlement 
and Rehabilitation Policy, 2007 are taken by concerned project / State and Central authorities 
while executing water resources projects in the country, so that stake holders, i.e. farmers, 

landless labourers, tribals, depressed sections of the community etc., are not put to 
disadvantage. They also desired the Ministry to formulate a mandatory guideline within this 
year (2015) to enjoin that the concerned project / State and Central authorities while 
implementing the projects, duly pay compensation to the project-affected families (PAFs) 
which was adequate to enable them to adopt an alternative occupation in case of loss of 
agricultural lands and to settle in alternate lands in case of loss of houses/ dwellings. The 
Committee liked to be apprised of action taken by the Ministry in this regard.
The Committee further noted that the XII Plan Working Group on Flood 
Management and Regional Specific issues had recommended providing of Central 
assistance by the Ministry of Home Affairs to the States under State Disaster Response Fund 
(SDRF) and National Disaster Relief Fund (NDRF) to facilitate immediate relief in calamities 
of severe nature including floods. It was also recommended that a provision be made in the 
SDRF/ NDRF guidelines for assistance to States to meet expenditure on restoration of critical 
flood management structures. The Committee were pained to note that the aforesaid 
recommendation had not yet been implemented by the Ministry of Home Affairs and further 
no time schedule had been specified for the implementation of the same. Taking note of the 
dire necessity of tackling the recurrent devastations caused by floods year after year and to 
alleviate human miseries and also to reduce the ultimate colossal damage to sand, houses 
and public utilities, the Committee recommended that the Ministry, should in consultation with 
all the flood-prone States, chalk out a time-bound implementable programme of action in this 
regard.
14. The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, in 
their Action Taken Reply, has stated that regarding Resettlement and Rehabilitation (R&R)
policy, Ministry of Environment , Forest and Climate Change (MoEF & CC) had informed that 
:
(i) The National Resettlement & Rehabilitation (R&R) Policy is administered by the 
Department of Land Resources, Ministry of Rural Development. However, MoEF & CC 
looks into the issues of R&R and Social Impact Assessment (SIA) as part of the 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA).
(ii) Although MoEF & CC intends to prepare Guidelines and Notification on River 

Regulation Zone (RRZ), the same are only at a draft stage.
Regarding relief during natural calamities, the Ministry of Home Affairs had
informed that the Central Government had constituted State Disaster Response Fund 
(SDRF) in each State for meeting the expenses for providing immediate relief to the victims of 
notified natural disasters. In case of ‘severe’ disaster, the Central Government provides 
additional financial assistance to the State from National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF), 
provided there was no adequate balance in SDRF. The norms of SDRF/ NDRF were based 
on the recommendations of the successive Finance Commissions. The norms and guidelines 
of SDRF/NDRF permits only immediate repair works for damaged infrastructure. The 
medium and long term repair/ reconstruction work were not permitted under SDRF/NDRF.
The norms of SDRF/NDRF had been recently revised on 8th April, 2015. The 
norms permit following repair works under SDRF/NDRF:
(i) Immediate repair of damaged canal structures and earthen/mansonry works of tanks 
and small reservoirs with the use of cement, sand bags and stones.
(ii) Repair of weak areas such as piping or rat holes in dam walls/ embankments.
(iii) Removal of vegetative material/building material/ debris from canal and drainage 
system.
(iv) Repair of embankments of minor, medium and major irrigation projects.
(v) Any expenditure beyond the norms of SDRF/NDRF was required to be met from 
State’s own resources. However, support of the Central Government might be sought 
under appropriate Central Plan or Centrally sponsored schemes.
Regarding R&R policy, the Ministry of Mines had informed that the policy requires 
the concerned State Governments to undertake a Social Impact Assessment (SIA) study of 
the projects which involved involuntary displacement of four hundred or more families en 
masse in plain areas, or two hundred or more families en-masse in tribal or hilly areas, 
DDP blocks or areas mentioned in the Schedule V or Schedule VI to the Constitution.  The 
said Policy also contains details of the Resettlement and Rehabilitation plans to be 
undertaken for the project affected areas and families. Ministry of Mines had also clarified 
that it is for the concerned state governments to give effect to the provisions of the said 

Policy.
15. The Committee note with dismay that the Guidelines and Notifications on the River 
Regulation Zone to be issued by the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate 
Change (MoEF&CC) are only at a draft stage.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
recommendation and desire that the Ministry should continue their persuasive efforts 
with the MoEF&CC in this regard so as to ensure   early finalization of the said 
Guidelines and issuance of necessary Notifications. The Committee, however, appreciate 
that the Ministry of Home Affairs has revised the norms in regard to permitting repair 
works under the State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) and National Disaster Response 
Fund (NDRF) on 8 April, 2015 as was desire by the Committee.  
The Committee further note from the reply of the Ministry as forwarded by the 
Ministry of Mines that Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy requires the State 
Governments concerned to undertake a Social Impact Assessment (SIA) study of the 
projects involving displacement of four hundred or more families en masse in the plain 
areas, or two hundred or more families en-masse in the tribal or hilly areas, DDP blocks or 
areas mentioned in the Schedule V or Schedule VI of the Constitution. The Committee 
further note that the said policy also contains details of the Resettlement and 
Rehabilitation plans to be undertaken for the project affected areas and families and that 
it is for the concerned State Governments to give effect to the provisions of the said 
Policy. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Government to pursue this
matter effectively with State Governments and keep the Committee apprised thereabout.
E. Integrated Basin Development 
Recommendation (Para No.11)
16. In their original recommendation, the Committee had noted that the erstwhile 
Planning Commission had specifically directed the Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation to expedite the setting up of River Basin Organisations 
by the States and Central Government in order to have integrated basin development 
including flood management in a holistic manner. The Ministry, to the dismay of the 
Committee, had yet to implement it. Moreover, no time schedule for this had been fixed. The 
Committee therefore, recommended that the Ministry should initiate measures to implement 

the recommendations expeditiously and apprised the Committee accordingly.
17. The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, in 
their Action Taken Reply, have stated that they had proposed to establish two RBOs for river 
basins namely Mahanadi and Godavari during XI Plan under River Boards Act, 1956. As per 
River Board Act, 1956 the RBOs, were to be established in consultation with the interested 
States. Their establishment would depend upon consensus and co-operation of the Co-basin 
States. The Ministry had made efforts at various levels to get the concurrence/ comments of 
all the co-basin States of Mahanadi and Godavari basins for establishment of River Basin 
Organisations. However, all the co-basin States had not given consent for establishment of 
River Basin Organisation of Mahanadi and Godavari River Basins. MoWR, RD & GR has set 
up a Committee under the Chairmanship of Justice T.S. Doabia, former Judge, MP and J&K 
High Courts to study the activities for optimal development of a river basin and changes 
required in the existing River Boards Act, 1956 for the achievement of the same. The report of 
the Committee had been placed before National Forum of Minister of Water Resources/ 
Irrigation of the States and on the website MoWR, RD & GR. Report had also been circulated 
to all States / UTs and concerned Central Ministries.
Further, a major initiative had been taken  by the Ministry for integrated water 
resources management in Brahmani - Baitarni river for :
(a) Understanding water availability and the multiple demands for the basin’s water 
resources.
(b) Define objectives and measures for developing and protecting the water resources of the 
basin.
(c) Scenario planning to improve integrated water resources management. It was now 
proposed to take 12 more basins for:
(i) Building on the understanding of the water resource to develop evidence based 
approach to maximize social and economic outcomes and promoting 
sustainability of the ecosystems within the basin.
(ii) Continued focus on capacity building to design, implement and evaluate water 
resources assessments for basin planning.
This exercise would be a pre-requisite for better understanding of the basin for the 
setting up of the River Basin Authorities.

18. The Committee are not satisfied with the casual reply of the Ministry on the 
issue of setting up of River Basin Organisations (RBOs) by the States and Central 
Government in order to have integrated basin development including the flood 
management in a holistic manner as recommended by the Committee. The Ministry 
has also not been able to furnish to the Committee any plausible reasons given by 
co-basin States for not giving their consent for establishment of river basin 
Organisations of the Mahanadi and Godavari River Basins, except for stating the fact 
that the Ministry had set up a committee under the Chairmanship of Justice Doabia, 
Former Judge, Madhya Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir High Courts, to study the 
activities for optional development of river basins and amendments sought under the 
River Boards Act, 1956. The Committee further note that the Report of that committee 
had been placed before National Forum of Minister of Water Resources/ Irrigation of 
the States and on the website MoWR,RD&GR. Further the Report had also been 
circulated to all States / UTs and concerned Central Ministries. The Committee, 
however, appreciate  that the Ministry has taken a major initiative for integrated water 
resources management in Brahmani - Baitarni river, which would be a pre-requisite 
for better understanding of the basin for the setting up of the River Basin Authorities.
Taking note of the current pace of work for establishment of River Basin 
Organisations, the Committee are again constrained to observe that it may take 
decades to set up the river basin organisations, if expeditious measures in this 
direction are not taken up. While strongly disapproving this a quantum of delay in the 
matter, the Committee reiterate their recommendation that the work for the setting 
up of RBOs may be taken up in a time bound manner to ensure the early setting up of 
River Basin Organisations by the States.
F. Flood Cushion
Recommendation (Para No.12)
19. In their original recommendation, the Committee had noted that the erstwhile 
Planning Commission had also recommended that as a policy, minimum flood cushion of 10 
% of the live storage capacity should be provided in all new dams and if affordable, with 
respect to other purposes, providing even a flood cushion upto 20% could be considered. A 
portion of the capital cost of the reservoir should be allocated to flood control and shared by 

all beneficiary States. To the utter dismay of the Committee, neither the policy in this regard 
had been formed by the Ministry in consultation with beneficiary States, nor any time 
schedule for this had been fixed. With development and population growth, habitations were 
coming very close to the downstream of reservoirs and operation of such reservoirs needed
to be done carefully, The Committee, therefore, recommended the Ministry should initiate 
steps to formulate the policy and also pursue the matter with all the States to achieve better 
results in this regard. The Committee liked to see expeditious steps taken by the Ministry in 
this regard.
20. The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, in 
their Action Taken Reply, has stated that National Water policy, 2012 (Para 10.5) stipulates 
that the operating procedures for reservoirs should be evolved and implemented in such a 
manner to have flood cushion and to reduce trapping of sediment during flood season. These 
procedures should be based on sound decision support system.
The XII Plan Working Group on Flood Management and Regional Specific Issues 
set up by the Planning Commission in 2011 recommended that the long term solution to 
problems of recurrent floods and droughts lies in construction of dams and reservoirs with 
adequate flood-cushion. Construction of dams and reservoirs with adequate flood cushion 
might be undertaken wherever feasible.
The policy needed wider consultation with project authorities. However, as an 
alternative, besides 28 reservoirs already under inflow forecast network, the Ministry had
also proposed to include 64 more reservoirs under the Inflow Forecasting network of CWC in 
XII Plan, which would help the concerned project authorities in regulation of reservoirs more 
effectively and have flood moderation in these reservoirs. 
21. The Committee note that the erstwhile Planning Commission had 
recommended that as a policy, a minimum flood cushion of 10% of the live storage 
capacity should be provided in all the new dams and if affordable, with respect to 
other purposes, providing even a flood cushion up to 20% could be considered. 
The Committee are not satisfied with the casual reply furnished by the Ministry with 
regard to formulation of the policy and steps taken by the Government to persuade 
the beneficiary States to allocate a certain percentage of the live storage capacity as a 

flood cushion.  The Committee also note that though the National Water Policy, 2012 
(Para 10.5) stipulates the provision regarding flood cushion to reduce trapping of 
sediment during flood season, the Ministry has not furnished any information about
the States/UTs which so far have complied with this provision of the National Water 
Policy, 2012 - in true letter and spirit.  The Committee further find that the replies of 
the Ministry are also silent on the measures to be undertaken, if any, by the 
Government for construction of dams and reservoirs with an adequate flood cushion, 
as recommended by XII Plan Working Group on Flood Management and Regional 
Specific Issues - set up by the Planning Commission in 2011 so as to provide long 
term solution to recurrent floods and droughts in the country. The Committee deplore 
the casual reply of the Ministry to ensure implementation of one of the provisions of 
the National Water Policy, 2012.  The Ministry has also not been able to furnish any 
reasons for not holding wider consultation with Project Authorities - with regard to the 
formulation of the policy except for stating the fact that the Government as an 
alternative had proposed to include 64 more reservoirs under the Inflow Forecasting 
Network of Central Water Commission (CWC) in the XII Plan-in addition to 28 
reservoirs already under the network. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
earlier recommendation asking for expeditious measures to be taken in this regard.  
The Committee would also like to be apprised of the same. 
G. Flood Forecast 
Recommendation (Para No.14)
22. In their original recommendation, the Committee had noted the fact that Central 
Water Commission (CWC) had been making continuous endeavour for automation of 
processes of data collection, forecast and dissemination of information of floods since Ninth
Plan onwards, the Committee felt that still timely warnings did not reach people and there had
been no decline in the number of casualties occurring due to sudden onset of floods. The 
Ministry in their reply had admitted that in areas which do not experience frequent floods or 
where the flood generation time was very less, the flood forecasting network of CWC was not 
considered, and therefore, no warnings were formulated by CWC in event of unprecedented 
floods in such areas, The Committee felt that the present flood forecasting infrastructure 
needed to be modernised and broadened to include the entire stretch of the country so that 

tangible improvements were visible even in non-flood-prone States. The Committee were 
also amazed to note that though CWC faced no bottlenecks in providing forecast to the local 
administration as well as uploading on the CWC website, still there was lack of coordination 
between the local administration and Central Water Commission in the matter of flood 
forecasting. The Committee therefore, strongly recommended the Ministry to take steps so 
that the present flood forecasting infrastructure of CWC was upgraded effectively to 
disseminate the news of Impending floods well in time so as to avert havoc caused by floods. 
The Committee further noted that around 219 stations of existing flood forecast networks 
were yet to be modernized by the Government. The Committee therefore, strongly 
recommended that all stations are modernized with telemetry system. The Committee also 
desired to be informed of the action taken in this regard.
23. The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, in 
their Action Taken Reply, have stated that out of the total 708 stations used to flood 
forecasting, automatic data acquisition and transmission systems had already been  set up 
at 445 stations. The Ministry had proposed modernisation of remaining 219 existing stations 
and setting up 420 new stations equipped with state of the art data acquisition systems 
besides establishing three more Earth Receiving Stations and 6 new Modelling Centres. The 
XII Plan proposal on the Plan Scheme “ Flood Forecasting” amounting to Rs. 281 crore had
been cleared by the SFC in its meeting held on 4.8.2015 and the same was under the 
process of approval. The CWC had already started preparatory works of preparation of 
tender documents including specification of specialised equipment.
Modernization/ up gradation of forecasting system included automatic data 
collection & transmission, development of computer based models & dissemination of 
forecast using modern technology such as mobiles, web & media. In this regard, data 
collection through telemetry was already in place. Presently 445 sites had already been 
modernized with the telemetry system. Installations of telemetry system on other stations 
were planned during 12th Plan which would be taken up after the approval of Plan Scheme 
“Flood Forecasting”. Station/ reach specific computer-based models’ development is in 
progress. These models were being put in use after development. Using such models, the 
warning time had enhanced wherein observed rainfall from the CWC network as well as the 
IMD network and rainfall forecast of IMD were used as inputs in addition to the river water 
levels. Similarly for user friendly dissemination of forecast, CWC was putting its forecast on 

its website (www.india-water.gov.in/ffs) for public viewing. The information was also shared 
with the local media for greater awareness. Based on CWC forecast, State administration 
was supposed to generate warning for the affected population.
24. The Committee note with appreciation that under the XII Plan, a proposal on 
the Plan Scheme “Flood Forecasting” amounting to Rs. 281 crore had been cleared by 
the State Finance Committee (SFC) in its meeting held on 4.8.2015 and the same was 
under the process of approval. Further, the Central Water Commission (CWC) had 
also initiated preparatory work for the preparation of tender documents including 
specification of specialized equipment. The Committee would like to remind the 
Ministry to impress upon the Authorities concerned to expedite the process of 
approval of the Plan Scheme "Flood Forecasting" to achieve the objective of 
modernizing all the forecasting stations by installation of telemetry system. The 
Committee would like to be apprised about the steps taken by the Ministry in this 
regard.
H . Inadequate Drainage Facility
Recommendation (Para No.15)
25. In their original recommendation, the Committee had observed that inadequate 
drainage is one of the major causes of floods. The Committee were surprised to note that no 
corrective measures had been taken to facilitate drainage facilities and no separate 
allocation of funds under Flood Management Programme (FMP) had been made for works 
related to drainage measures. The Committee had been informed that the works for such
measures were executed by concerned States and the physical and financial progress of 
works approved under FMP was monitored by the Central Water Commission, Ganga Flood 
Control Commission and Brahmaputra Board. 
The Committee while acknowledging the limits to further possibilities of 
constructing large storages and embankments, felt that floods could be tackled by placing
greater emphasis on rehabilitation of traditional, natural drainage systems. The Committee, 
however, recommended that the overall supervision should vest with one single nodal 
authority, i.e. the Ministry of Water Resources, River development & Ganga Rejuvenation 
which should obtain regular feedbacks & inputs from the concerned units and should 
accordingly frame a policy in this regard. The Committee recommended that separate 

allocation for drainage works may be made under FMP. The Committee liked to be apprised 
of the action taken.
26. The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, in 
their Action Taken Reply, have stated that in the light of recommendations of 14 th Finance 
Commission and devolution of the central taxes, the mechanisms of centrally sponsored 
schemes are under review in NITI Aayog / Finance Ministry. The allocations made under 
Flood Management Programme in the current financial year, 2015-16, were not sufficient to 
complete even approved and ongoing works. Thus, the States needed to allocate more funds 
from the available enhanced financial resources to complete the ongoing works. 
However, the Ministry was working on the proposal to bring paradigm shift in 
supporting the States in undertaking critical measures of flood mitigation in an integrated 
manner addressing the issues of desilting of rivers wherever feasible, protection and 
construction of embankments using state of the art materials such as geo-textile, changes in 
funding pattern as per importance and criticality of flood management measures in tandem 
with appropriate non-structural measures like flood forecasting and flood plain zoning. If, the 
Government decided to continue FMP, the issue of providing separate outlay for drainage 
congestion removal works would be duly addressed in the modified proposal. Under “Flood 
Management Programme”, the works related to river drainage development were included.
27. The Committee note with concern the oft-repeated stand taken by the 
Ministry that the funds allocated in the financial year 2015-16 under the Flood 
Management Programme are not sufficient to complete even the approved and 
ongoing works. The Committee are deeply anguished to note that the Ministry has not 
apprised the Committee of the steps taken/being taken, if any, to impress upon the 
Ministry of Finance for in-time disbursement and allocation of more funds to complete 
the ongoing works.  Expressing serious concern over the issue, the Committee 
reiterate and recommend that the Ministry undertakes speedy and efficacious 
measures to make the funds available before the closure of the financial year 2015-16. 
They would also like to be apprised about the progress made in this regard.
The Committee are however, happy to note that the works related to river 
drainage development were included under 'Flood Management Programme'. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to undertake measures to incorporate 

and address the issue of providing separate outlay for drainage congestion removal 
works in the modified proposal as stated by the Ministry. The Committee would also 
like to be apprised of the same.  
I. River Zone Regulation
Recommendation (Para No.17)
28. In their original recommendation, the Committee had noted that many kinds of 
structures had been erected in the areas near sea banks upto the sea levels. The Ministry of 
Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation had taken initiatives for 
regulation of river zones for which a Committee had set up and a Report had since been 
submitted. The Committee therefore, liked to know the status of the implementation of the 
River Zone Regulation Report.
29. The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, in 
their Action Taken Reply, have stated that as informed by MoEF&CC, the guidelines 
regarding River Zone Regulation were at a draft stage.
30. The Committee note with dismay the reply of the Ministry as forwarded by 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) that guidelines 
regarding River Zone Regulation were at a draft stage. The Committee are least 
satisfied with the reply of the Ministry on such a crucial issue of taking initiatives for 
the regulation of river zones as recommended by the Committee.  The Ministry has
also not been able to furnish any plausible reasons for such an inordinate delay in 
getting the approval of the guidelines on the River Zone Regulation. While strongly 
disapproving such a quantum of delay, the Committee reiterate their 
recommendation for expediting the implementation of the River Zone Regulation 
Report.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the conclusive action taken in 
this regard.
J.Mining of Sand
Recommendation (Para No.19)
31. In their original recommendation, the Committee had noted that as per Mines and 
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, sand had been notified as a minor 

mineral. The Committee observed that a lot of damage had been caused to the environment 
by uncontrolled and unregulated mining of minor minerals. In this connection, the Committee 
were further informed that only twenty State Governments have framed rules under section 
23C of Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 to curb illegal mining, 
etc. of minor minerals viz. sand. Taking in view the vital role of agriculture in our economy, the 
Committee strongly recommended that the Ministry should make efforts to induce the 
remaining States/UTs to frame relevant Rules under the said Act. The Committee further 
desired that the necessary mechanism for implementation of the rules so framed by these 
States/UTs be worked out by the Government within a year. The Committee be apprised 
accordingly.
32. The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, in 
their Action Taken Reply, have stated that the Ministry of Mines had informed that the 
Ministry was in the process of issuing an advisory enjoining these states to frame rules u/s 
23C.
33. The Committee observe from the reply of the Ministry that the Ministry of 
Mines is in the process of issuing an advisory enjoining the remaining States to frame 
rules under Section 23C of Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 
1957.  The Committee are, however, disappointed to note that the Ministry has 
chosen to remain silent over the steps, if any, being taken by the Ministry to induce 
the remaining States/UTs to frame relevant Rules under the said Act or develop 
necessary mechanism for implementation of the rules so framed by the States/UTs. 
The Ministry has also not been able to specify the time-frame for issuing such an 
advisory to the States. The Committee, therefore, recommend this advisory to be 
issued without any further delay to develop the necessary mechanism for 
implementation of the rules so as to ensure that all the States/UTs in the country are 
able to effectively curb the illegal-mining of minor minerals and damage being caused 
to environment.
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
34. In their original recommendation, the Committee had observed that “mining 
operations” means any operation undertaken for the purpose of winning any mineral. 
Accordingly, if desilting was undertaken per se with the objective of winning a mineral then 

only it would be construed as a mining operation. Apparently, if the desilting was undertaken 
not for winning any mineral, it would not be construed as mining operation and therefore, the 
farmer could remove the sand from the land without requiring the requisite permit. However, 
the Committee strongly felt that the farmers be given the right to use and dispose of the sand 
accumulated over their land post flood, by incorporating the necessary provision in the Mines 
and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957. The Committee desired to be 
apprised of the action taken.
35. The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, in 
their Action Taken Reply, have stated that Ministry of Mines had informed that as per section 
3(d) of the MMDR Act, 1957, "mining operations" meant any operations undertaken for the 
purpose of winning any mineral.  In the context of this definition, if desilting is undertaken per 
se with the objective of winning a mineral, it would be construed as a mining operation for 
which a mineral concession is required to be obtained from the State Government apart from 
other statutory permits/clearances like environment  clearance etc.  As a corollary any 
operation that was not undertaken with the objective of winning a mineral, would not be a 
mining operation and would not, therefore, require the issue of a permit under the Act.  State 
Governments were being advised to enable the farmers to undertake desilting of the sand 
accumulated in their agricultural lands after recession of floods without the requirement of 
obtaining permits, clearances etc.
36. The Committee note from the reply furnished by the Ministry that the Ministry 
of Mines had informed that as per Section 3(d) of the Mines and Minerals 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, "mining operations" meant any operations 
undertaken for the purpose of winning any mineral.  In the context of this definition, 
if desilting is undertaken per se with the objective of winning a mineral, it would be 
construed as a mining operation - for which a mineral concession is required to be 

obtained from the State Government apart from other statutory permits/clearances 
like environment  clearance, etc.  Further as a corollary any operation that was not 
undertaken with the objective of winning a mineral, would not be a mining operation 
and would not, therefore, require the issue of a permit under the Act.
The Committee further note that the State Governments were being advised 
by the Ministry of Mines to enable the farmers to undertake desilting of the sand 
accumulated in their agricultural lands after recession of floods without the 
requirement of obtaining permits, clearances etc. 
In this context, the Committee, however, strongly feel that merely issuing 
advice for enabling "the farmers to undertake disilting of the sand accumulated in 
their agricultural lands after recession of floods without the requirement of obtaining 
permits, clearances etc."  would not suffice.  In the considered opinion of the 
Committee, to settle the matter for all times to come, it would be better if necessary 
provision in the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation Act, 1957) is 
incorporated to ensure that the farmers are given the right to use and dispose of the 
sand accumulated over their land - post flood. The Committee, therefore, reiterate 
their earlier recommendations on the subject and would accordingly desire the 
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation to take up 
again the matter with the Ministry of Mines so as to make sure that the 
recommendation of the Committee is complied with. 

CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
The Committee observe that the XII Plan Working Group on Flood Management and
Regional Specific Issues has submitted its report to the erstwhile Planning Commission in 
December, 2011 and the response from the erstwhile Planning Commission on the report of the 
Working Group is awaited. The Committee note that the Ministry has, however, taken initiatives 
on urgent nature of recommendations. The Committee hope that the erstwhile Planning 
Commission extends its response expeditiously so that necessary follow up action in the matter 
is taken up immediately by the Government on all the recommendations of the Working Group. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the status of the implementation of all the 
recommendations of the XII Working Group on Flood Management and Regional Specific issues.
Reply of the Government
The status of implementation of recommendations of “XII Plan Working Group on Flood 
Management and Region Specific Issues” is given in Annexure - I.
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
The Committee. observe that Central assistance is being provided to the State 
Governments under Flood Management Programme for addressing flood problems in critical 
areas. The Committee were told that this programme was launched during Eleventh Plan to 
provide assistance to the States for taking up works related to flood management, etc. The 
Committee note that though 517 works at a total estimated cost off Rs, 12,242.82 crore were 
approved during XI and XII Plan {till 31st March, 2012), the number of works completed are only 
252 and the funds released upto 31st March, 2012 only amount to Rs. 4,431.59 crore. The 
Committee are constrained to express their total dissatisfaction over the slow &tardy progress of 
approved programmes and recommend that urgent action would be taken to expedite completion 
of the remaining pending works. The Committee also urge upon the Ministry to re-prioritise the 
pending works and more emphasize should be given on the last mile projects to obviate any 

further possibility of time and cost overruns. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
action taken in this regard by the Ministry.
Reply of the Government
The monitoring agencies under the Ministry have taken up the matter with the concerned 
State Governments and as a result 41 more projects have been completed raising the works 
completed to 293. The updated status of works approved, works completed and funds released 
till date under Flood Management Programme is given in Annexure - II. 
MoWR, RD&GR has already constituted a Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri B. 
N. Navalawala, Chief Adviser, for restructuring and remodeling various Schemes including FMP. 
Further, it is stated that in the light of recommendations of 14th Finance Commission and 
devolution of taxes, the mechanisms of centrally sponsored schemes are under review in NITI 
Aayog / Finance Ministry. In view of this only 201 crore have been allocated under Flood 
Management Programme in the current financial year, 2015-16. This amount is not sufficient to 
complete the approved and ongoing works. Thus, the States would need to allocate more funds 
from the available enhanced financial resources to complete the ongoing works. However, the 
Ministry is working on the proposal to bring paradigm shift in supporting the States in undertaking 
critical measures of flood mitigation in an integrated manner addressing the issues of desilting of 
rivers wherever feasible, protection and construction of embankments using state of the art 
material such as geo-textile, changes in funding pattern as per importance and criticality of flood 
management measures in tandem with appropriate non-structural measures like flood 
forecasting and flood plain zoning.
Recommendation (Para No. 4)
The Committee note that the XII Plan Working Group on Flood Management and 
Regional Specific Issues in December, 2011compiled the sum of maxima flood affected area 
state-wise for the entire country during the period 1953 to 2010 which was 49.815 mha. The 
Committee, however, express their concern on the data furnished by the Ministry, as it does 
not reflect any information with regard to the maximum area affected (mha) by the Tsunami 
floods in the States of Kerala and Andaman & Nicobar Islands etc in the year 2004. The 
Committee would, therefore, like to know from the Ministry the precise reasons for not 

incorporating the information related to Tsunami floods in the information furnished by the 
Ministry specially when the Working Group compiled the data for the entire country during the 
period 1953 to 2010. The Committee desire that the Ministry should come back to the 
Committee with a comprehensive information in this regard. The Committee also note that 
the report by XII Plan Working Group on Flood Management and Regional Specific Issues 
has been submitted tothe Planning Commission in 2011. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the action taken on the Report. 
The Committee are also displeased to note that the Ministry have furnished information 
related to human lives lost / cattle loss during the period from 1953 to 2012 only and have 
stated that information pertaining to the year 2013 is still under verification / assessment by 
States. Observing the gravity of Iosses due to floods, the Committee deplore the 
lackadaisical attitude adopted by the Ministry in furnishing half baked information both in 
respect of areas affected by Tsunami floods and losses to lives in 2013. The Committee 
would therefore, like the Ministry to expedite furnishing of updated information in these 
regard within three months of the presentation of this report.
Reply of the Government
The flood damage data is primarily collected from the State Governments on annual basis. 
XII Plan Working Group on Flood Management and Regional Specific Issues had compiled 
the State-wise data based on the information provided by the State Governments. Despite 
persuasion, some of the States do not provide the data and hence the national data remains 
tentative. No separate information for flood affected area due to 2004 Tsunami floods & lives 
lost was made available by the State Governments. Therefore, only such information as 
made available by State Governments had been presented to the Standing Committee. The 
tentative flood damage data as compiled for 2013 & 2014 by CWC based on the information 
received from various State Governments are given in Annexure – III & IV.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter-I of the Report)

Recommendation (Para No. 5)
The Committee note the statement of the representative of the Ministry that the Central 
Water Commission has no forecasting network in Jammu & Kashmir. This fact reveals an appalling 
gap in the flood management efforts of the Government which was exposed to public glare during 
the unprecedented flood havoc in the State of Jammu & Kashmir in 2014. The Committee 
therefore, recommend that Central Water Commission should waste no further time but initiate 
urgent remedial steps to set up a centralized forecasting station in the State. They also desire the 
Ministry / Central Water Commission to work in dose coordination with the local / 
stateadministration so that works for flood control in that State do not proceed in an unplanned and 
haphazard manner as witnessed during the flood fury of 2014. 
The Committee also note that an Expert Group under the Chairmanship of Central Water 
Commission, was constituted on 18 September, 2014 to conduct an in-depth study and analysis of 
the recent unprecedented floods in Jammu & Kashmir. The Committee note that the report of the 
Expert Group has been finalized and submitted to the Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation on 31 October, 2014. The Group has analysed the 
problem and has suggested various immediate short-term and long-term measures to tackle the 
problem. The Committee, therefore,  hope that the Government initiates necessary follow up 
action on recommendations / measures of the Expert Group so that there is no repeat of the flood 
havoc as witnessed in 2014. The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome within three 
months of the presentation of this Report.
Reply of the Government
During XII Plan, the Ministry has proposed to set up 3 flood forecasting stations of CWC 
in addition to the existing flood forecasting station of the State Government. The CWC would assist 
the Government of J&K by providing nearly real time flood forecasts at its 3 stations.  Besides, 
data of 19 base stations of CWC, would also be available with the State Government and with this, 
the State would have enhanced capability to provide flood warning to the people in the related area 
more effectively.  The Technical Committee headed by Chairman, CWC had recommended 
immediate taking up of flood protection structural measures on river Jhelum. The State 
Government had earlier formulated a comprehensive master plan for flood management in Jhelum 
basin, with an estimated cost of Rs. 2083 crore, which the State Government has decided to revise 
on the suggestions of CWC in order to have a techno-economically viable DPR. Meanwhile, the 

State Government formulated a DPR for emergent measures in river Jhelum, which had been 
techno-economically cleared by the Ministry’s Advisory Committee on 25.05.2015. However, the 
works on Jhelum river are now proposed to be funded by Finance Ministry under the special 
package to J&K for infrastructure reconstruction. 
After the devastating floods of 2014 which resulted in colossal damage to human life and 
property and having felt an urgent need to address the problem of floods in the valley on long term 
basis, MoWR, RD &GR constituted a Group headed by Chairman, CWC on 18.09.2014, to 
conduct an in-depth study and analysis of the recent unprecedented floods in J&K so as to make 
suitable recommendations along with a detailed action plan to deal with such threat in future. The 
Group was also to review the status of project ‘Flood Threat Management of river Jhelum’ by 
Government of J&K.
Based on the analysis of the flood in J & K, the Group recommended following measures 
to manage floods in J & K depending upon the implementation time:  
Immediate, Short term and Long term.
(A) Immediate Measures (to be implemented before next flood season):
(i) Closing of breaches
(ii) Development of Flood Forecasting and Warning Networks
(B) Short Term Measures (to be implemented within 2 to 3 years):
(i) Raising/ strengthening of existing embankment
(ii) Enhancement of carrying capacity of existing Flood Spill Channel (FSC)
(iii) Dredging of Out Fall Channel (OFC) to increase its carrying capacity
(iv) Setting up of rapid action dewatering facilities in urban areas
(v) Establishment of adequate emergency response measures and rescue areas
(C) Long Term Measures ( to be implemented within 5 to 10 years):
(i) Additional Supplementary Flood Spill Channel

(ii) Creation of Storage
(iii) Development and enhancing the capacity of Wullar Lake
(iv) Flood Plain Zoning
(v) Checking of sewage/solid waste from urban areas 
(vi) Afforestation and catchment area treatment along the hill slopes
(vii) Improvement of the flood warning times 
As a follow-up action on recommendation (No A2 & C7)., CWC has developed rainfall-runoff 
model based hydrological/hydrodynamic model for flood forecasting at Ram-Munshibagh 
(Srinagar) on Jhelum using hydrological data of CWC network, hourly rainfall data of IMD network 
& rainfall forecast of IMD. With the help of such model, flood forecast with sufficient warning time is 
generated & shared with the State Govt. with effect from 2015 monsoon season. With the help of 
flood forecasting, suitable and timely action will be taken state disaster management to minimize 
the losses to movable properties and lives. Further modernization & expansion of the network 
would be taken up after approval of the plan scheme “Flood Forecasting” for the XII Plan.
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
The Committee express their serious concern over the unabated loss of human lives and 
damage to properties due to recurring floods in river Brahmaputra. This also have an endangering 
effect on the animal life of the species, especially in Kaziranga National Park (Assam). The 
Committee note that dredging operation is a measure for channel improvement and is used for 
clearing river mouths or narrow constrictions subject to techno-economical justification. The 
Committee are however, amazed to note that dredging operations on river Brahmaputra which 
were undertaken in the early seventies on an experimental basis, were discontinued because of 
the costs involved in it and limited benefits. Having noted that States falling within 
Brahmaputra-Meghna, Ganga and Indus river basins are the most affected by floods, the 
Committee strongly recommend the Government to review the proposal seriously and also to 
explore newcost-effective technology so that dredging operations of the Brahmaputra could be 
resumed. The Committee would also like to know the current status of the initiatives taken by the 

Government of Assam with the World Bank for a massive flood control project of river Brahmaputra 
for which the Ministry has already given its, in principal, clearance.
Reply of the Government
In order to supplement the efforts of the Government of Assam, the Ministry is 
considering to set up an Expert Committee headed by Chairman, CWC and having experts from 
NIH, CWPRS, Brahmaputra Board, GFCC, Remote Sensing Agency and the State Governments 
to find out causes of erosion and silting in Ganga and Brahmaputra rivers and to recommend 
suitable remedial strategy. 
Besides, the Ministry has also initiated consultation with Governments of Arunachal 
Pradesh and Assam on construction of a storage dam on river Siang, which on completion, would 
be able to moderate flood peaks in Siang river and thus, would mitigate impacts of floods in 
Assam.
The Government of Assam had submitted a project proposal titled “Assam Flood, Erosion 
and River Management Modernization Project” for an estimated cost of Rs.1500 crore. The project 
covering  Brahmaputra-Barak aims at improved management of floods through better flood 
forecasting and warning systems, and to develop an integrated flood and erosion management 
framework for the State of Assam. The State Government submitted the modified concept note in 
July 2014.
The Ministry considered the proposal and conveyed in-principle approval to the M/o DoNER 
on 17.9.2014. Then, M/o DoNER sought the comments of erstwhile Planning Commission. NITI 
Aayog and M/o DoNER both had supported the proposal and separately informed the Department 
of Economic Affairs (DEA), Ministry of Finance in February 2015 for processing the proposal for 
World Bank funding. The proposal is under consideration in DEA.
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
The Committee observe that erosion causes severe damage to soil fertility. Silt 
discharged due to erosion chokes lakes, reservoirs and canals; clogs up river beds; blocks 
navigation passes and aggravates flood and water logging. All these adversely affect the 
agriculture production in the country. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to impress upon 
the State Governments the need to check erosion by taking necessary measures on priority basis 

to plant trees, vegetation in inaccessible terrains and to take appropriate engineering measures, 
etc. They would like to be apprised of the achievements made in this regard. 
Reply of the Government
In order to supplement the efforts of State Governments in the field of flood management, 
the Ministry had launched a Flood Management Programme in XI Plan. In October, 2013, the 
Cabinet approved continuation of FMP in XII Plan expanding scope of the Programme to include 
catchment area treatment in selected / prioritised basins and with the objective of floods 
management. Out of the total outlay of Rs. 10,000 crore, an amount of Rs. 1000 crore was 
earmarked for catchment area treatment. However, due to reduction in central funding pattern, the 
response from States has not been encouraging in this area. Therefore, the scheme features like 
funding pattern and eligibility criteria for such measures require a rethinking. 
Besides, the Ministry has been continuously impressing upon the States for undertaking 
measures of erosion control and these steps have been fruitful. For example, the total area of the 
land mass of Majuli Main Island was 502.21 sq km in the year 2004. Since the year 2004, with 
regular implementation of anti-erosion / bank protection measures by Brahmaputra Board, the total 
area of Majuli Island has increased to 520.26 sq km till the year 2011. 
Recommendation (Para No. 13)
The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that the disastrous flood of Jammu and 
Kashmir was due to combination of several factors, the primary being the low carrying capacity of 
existing Flood Spill Channel (FSC). With passage of time the carrying capacity of existing FSC 
diminished from 481.45 cumec (17080 cusec) to nearly 100 cumec (3531 cusec). The Committee 
are pained to note that the work undertaken to enhance the capacity under scheme "Flood threat 
of river Jhelum - Urgent works" is yet to be completed to maintain the designed capacity of River 
Jhelum passing near Srinagar city. Similarly, the live storage capacity of Wularlake, which has 
been reduced due to siltation, etc., needs to be enhanced in order to reduce back water effect 
and absorb more flood water, thereby reducing the impact of  flood in its upstream areas. The 
Committee feel that the floods in Jammu & Kashmir though unprecedented could have been 
managed in a more appropriate way had there been no delay in completing the pending works 
which have a direct bearing on management of floods in Jammu & Kashmir. The Committee are, 
therefore, of the view that all works including flood spill channels regarding flood management in 

Jammu & Kashmir and other parts of the country should be given top priority and a time bound 
programme should be formulated in consultation with the State Government to complete the 
pending works expeditiously. The Committee would also like to have a status report on the work 
“Flood threat of river Jhelum-Urgent works”.
Reply of the Government
In 2009, the Government of J&K had formulated a master plan for flood management in 
Jhelum basin, with an estimated cost of Rs. 2083 crore. The plan envisaged managing 1 in 100 
years flood of 3260 cumec (1,15,000 cusec) at Sangam. the floods effectively covering entire 
reach of about 150 km from upstream of Sangam to downstream of Baramulla. The phases of the 
proposed project were as under: 
Phase-I
(Completion 
time 2 years) 
To manage floods 
of the order of 
1700 cumec = 
60000 cusec 
At  Padshahi 
Bag (50 km d/s 
of Sangam) 
Through existing 
Channel and FSC 
35000 cusec through city 
reaches of Main Jhelum  and 
25000 cusec through existing 
Flood spill channel 
Phase-II To manage floods 
of the order of 
1560 cumec = 
55059 cusec 
At Sangam Through construction 
of new 81 km long 
supplementary flood 
spill channel from 
Dogripora to Wullar 
Lake  
Dogripora to Wullar lake or 
taking up flood storage projects 
on tributaries of Jhelum in upper 
reaches or combination of both. 
After discussions with the Ministry, the State Government formulated a DPR amounting to Rs. 
399.29 crore for emergent measures in river Jhelum, which envisages the following works :
• Re-Sectioning of Flood Spill Channel (FSC) from RD 38.068km to 39.860km at Naidkhai
• Re-Sectioning of FSC from RD 6.55km to 11.95km near Sherifabad
• Replacement of road cutting across the FSC by a Bridge at Shariefabad at RD 9.6km
• Increasing waterway at Naidkhai Bridge at RD 38.088km by providing additional bays.
• Improving drainage capability of Main Jhelum from RD 58 km to RD 80 km by 
channelization of river, removal of garbage dumps, providing retaining wall and toe protection at 
vulnerable spots. 

• Improving drainage capability of Kutkhul from RD 0km to RD 1.15km and of Sunurikhul 
from RD 0km to RD1.63km by channelization of river, removal of garbage dumps, providing 
retaining wall and toe protection at vulnerable spots. 
• Construction of retaining wall/toe protection wall & stone pitching on vulnerable spots in 
the city reach of main Jhelum from between RD 93.80 km 123.114 km Panzinara to Wullar.
• Dredging of (OFC) River Jhelum from Sopore to Ladoora RHL in about 4 km reach and 
shoal clearance at identified spots within Baramullah/ Khadinyar town in about 2.19km reach. 
• Improvement of main channel, protection works at identified spots and strengthening 
around confluence points of streams in Anantnag and Pulwama districts.
The DPR for emergent works had been techno-economically cleared by the Ministry’s Advisory 
Committee on 25.05.2015. However, these works are now proposed to be funded by Finance 
Ministry under the special package to J&K for infrastructure reconstruction.
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
The Committee note that the flood plain' zoning which is a non-structural measures aim at 
demarcating zones likely to be affected by floods of different magnitudes or frequencies of 
probability levels and specify the types of permissible development in these zones so that 
whenever the floods actually occur, the damage could be minimized. However, although a Model 
Draft Bill for Flood Plain Zoning was circulated by the Union Government to an the States/UTs for 
implementation of Flood Plain Zoning approach, only the States of Manipur, Rajasthan and 
Uttarakhand have enacted legislation about Flood Plain Zoning. The Committee therefore, 
recommend that the Ministry take vigorous steps for persuading the remaining States to enact 
the necessary legislation in this regard without delay. Further, The Committee would like the 
Ministry to coordinate with these State Governments to ensure that pending enactment of 
legislation in this regard, they take necessary administrative measures to prevent further 
encroachment of areas located in the flood plain zone. The Committee may be apprised of this 
action taken.

Reply of the Government
The Central Water Commission prepared a Model Bill on Flood Plain Zoning and 
circulated it to all the States in 1975 for guidance of States for enactment of legislation in this 
regard. The Model Bill provides model clauses about flood zoning authorities, surveys and 
delineation of flood plain area, notification of limits of flood plains, prohibition or restriction of the 
use of the flood plains, compensation, power to remove obstruction after prohibition. The 
guidelines on flood plain regulations have also been appended in the Model Bill.
Manipur enacted flood plain zoning legislation in 1978, but the demarcation of flood 
zones is yet to be done. The State of Rajasthan also enacted legislation in the State; however, 
enforcement thereof is yet to be done. The State Govt. of Uttarakhand has also passed Flood 
Plain Zoning Act on 16 December, 2012 but the demarcation of flood zones is yet to be done. 
Some States like Bihar and UP have informed about difficulties in implementation of Bill due to 
large flood affected areas. Other States have yet not taken any action for enactment of 
legislation.
For effective implementation of FPZ, incentives to States who enact FPZ bill could be 
considered.
Further, it is stated that Rashtriya Barh Ayog(RBA) had made an assessment of the area 
liable to floods in the country as 40 million       hectare (mha).  An Expert Committee had been 
constituted in July, 2012 for “Scientific Assessment of Flood Prone Area”. The committee is 
headed by Chairman, CWC and has representation from IMD, Survey of India, CWC, PC, GFCC,
BB, NDMA, MoWR, NRSC, DoS, IITs. Further, Regional Committees in each State/UT having 
representatives of various Central/State Agencies is to be headed by Principal Secretary (Water 
Resources) of the respective State have been constituted for all the 35 States/UTs except for the 
State of Uttarakhand. The Committee will finalise flood prone area in the country. The information 
will be shared with the state & will also be utilized in flood plain zoning works.
Recommendation (Para No. 20)
The Committee further observed that due to the floods, the agricultural land of 
farmer is destroyed and rendered infertile. Further, the farmer loses his livelihood as the 

produce of his land is destroyed by flood and become unsaleable. The farmer is also 
deprived of the right of lifting sands from his land. He is therefore, left helpless and destitute 
and leave their land in search of job. The Committee also observe that to mitigate the plight of 
the farmers, neither Central nor State Governments are forthcoming with any assistance. To 
the utter dismay of the Committee, the Ministry of Agriculture has no information either on the 
status of ownership of fertile land or submerged piece of land in the aftermath of floods. 
Taking a humanitarian view of the plight of these farmers, the Committee therefore, strongly 
recommend that both State & Central Government should work out a solution to provide 
maximum possible assistance to the farmers in the post-flood scenario. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter and hope that the Government look 
into' the issue regarding legal status of ownership of submerged piece of land, etc. in the 
event of floods. The Committee further recommend that the immediate relief so disbursed to 
the farmers affected by floods in the post-flood scenario should be based on the type of 
standing crops in the fields and their value not necessarily be uniformly distributed to the 
affected farmers on the basis of acreage.
Reply of the Government
In this regard, Ministry of Mines has informed that as per section 3(d) of the MMDR 
Act, 1957, “mining operations" means any operations undertaken for the purpose of 
winning any mineral. In the context of this definition, if desilting is undertaken per se with 
the objective of winning a mineral, it will be construed as a mining operation for which a 
mineral concession is required to be obtained from the State Government apart from other 
statutory permits / clearances like environment clearance etc. As a corollary any operation 
that is not undertaken with the objective of winning a mineral, would not be a mining 
operation and would not, therefore, require the issue of a permit under the Act. State 
governments are being advised to enable the farmers to undertake desilting of the sand 
accumulated in their agricultural lands after recession of floods without the requirement of 
obtaining permits, clearances etc.
Recommendation (Para No. 21)
The Committee observe that “mining operations” means any operation undertaken for 

the purpose of winning any mineral. Accordingly, if desilting is undertaken per se with the 
objective of winning a mineral then only it will be construed as a mining operation. Apparently, 
if the desilting is undertaken not for winning any mineral, it will not be construed as mining 
operation and therefore, the farmer can remove the sand from the land without requiring the 
requisite permit. However, the Committee strongly feel that the farmers be given the right to 
use and disposed off the sand accumulated over their land post flood, by incorporating the 
necessary provision in the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken. 
Reply of the Government
(Replied under para above)
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 36 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
The Committee note that the work for Digital Elevation Models (DEMs) in three 
States i.e., Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal is initially proposed under NMCG for 
inundation forecast by CWC. The Committee would like to know the further progress made 
on these projects and also recommend the Government to cover more States with DEMs. 
The Committee also recommend that the Ministry should strive to evolve new updated 
technology suitable to compete with the contemporary requirements to effectively fight varied 
onslaughts of floods. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this 
regard by the Ministry within three months of the presentation of the Report.
Reply of the Government
Preparation of DEM for 2 lakh sq km of most flood prone areas in State of UP, Bihar 
and West Bengal was initially proposed in the XII Plan EFC for “Flood Forecasting” Scheme 

at a cost of Rs. 400 crore. The  EFC during its last meeting held on 3/3/2014, suggested to 
re-work out the cost of this component in view of the activity being a mandate of Survey of 
India which was to be implemented by them out of their own funds. As the issues remained 
unresolved, this component has been excluded from the plan scheme “Flood Forecasting” 
and proposed under “National Hydrology Project”, which has been cleared by EFC in its 
meeting held on 16.10.2015. 
The initiatives proposed / taken by CWC towards introduction of modern and updated 
technology in the field of flood forecasting can be summarized as below.
(i) CWC has a total network of 708 remote stations which include 175 flood forecasting 
stations, whose data is being utilized for formulation of flood forecast by CWC. CWC 
has already modernized 445 of these remote stations by providing sensor based data 
collection technology and satellite telemetry based data transmission system so as to 
obtain real time data at its Modelling Centres.  Remaining 219 stations (about 44 
stations are test stations and are not required to be modernized) are proposed to be 
modernized during XII Plan Period.  This data is also being displayed in real time 
domain on web based INDIA WRIS platform.
(ii) CWC uses latest techniques viz., sms, emails, phone etc for dissemination of these 
forecasts to various stake holders including State governments authorities, project 
authorities, digital media etc whose a-priori data base is available.  
(iii) CWC utilizes high end numerical models for formulation of its flood forecasts and also 
proposes to enter into MoU with reputed global agencies who are active in the field of 
flood forecasting so as to operationalise modern techniques in formulation of 
forecasts.  
(iv) CWC has already initiated rainfall based flood forecasting using Quantitative 
Precipitation Forecasts of IMD so as to ensure increase in lead time of flood forecast of 
Himalayan basins by CWC.  Accordingly, CWC has developed CWC Rainfall Runoff 
based mathematical models for preparing advisory flood forecast using Quantitative 
precipitation Forecast (QPF) of IMD for Alaknanda, Bhagirathi and Jhelum River.  The 
advisory forecast is being issued for Srinagar, Tehri Dam, Rishikesh and Haridwar in 
Uttarakhand and Rammunshi Bagh in Srinagar (J&K).

(v) As part of XII Plan Flood Forecasting Scheme, CWC has proposed to utilize high 
resolution DEMs for 30,000 sq km of flood prone areas in Brahmaputra, Mahanadi, 
Kosi and Sabri basins presently available with NRSC, for carrying out pilot flood 
inundation studies in these basins.

CHAPER III
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
The Committee note that in order to contain the flood havoc caused by rivers of 
international dimensions, the Twelfth Plan had recommended that steps be taken for 
installation of automatic data collection and transmission through satellite - based 
communication system. However, the Committee note that the same has been only partially 
Implemented, The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry take necessary steps 
for implementing the recommendations of Twelfth Plan and keep them apprised in due 
course. In this connection, the Committee further note with satisfaction that the 
recommendation of the XII Plan Working Group for setting up of Pancheshwar Development 
Authority at Kathmandu, Nepal has been implemented. Besides, the recommendation to take 
steps by the Government to provide hourly hydrological data by China to India on rivers 
Brahmaputra and Sutlej for meaningful flood forecasting in India has also been implemented. 
The Committee desire to be apprised of the updated position in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Out of the total 708 stations used for flood forecasting, automatic data acquisition 
and transmission systems have already been  set up at 445 stations. The Ministry has 
proposed modernisation of remaining 219 existing stations and setting up 410 new stations 
equipped with state of the art data acquisition systems besides establishing three more Earth 
Receiving Stations and 6 new Modelling Centres. The XII Plan proposal on the Plan Scheme 
“Flood Forecasting” amounting to Rs. 281 crore has been cleared by the SFC in its meeting 
held on 4.8.2015 and the same is under the process of approval. CWC has already started 
preparatory works of preparation of tender documents including specification of specialised 
equipment. 
With the increased momentum given by the Hon’ble Prime Minister, the 
Pancheshwar Development Authority (PDA) had been set up in August, 2014 PDA has 
started formulating strategy for preparation of DPR, obtaining necessary clearances 
including environmental clearance. 

As regards the issue of providing hourly hydrological data by China to India, it is 
stated that the issue of increasing the frequency of provision of hydrological information on 
rivers Brahmaputra and Sutlej is being pursued with People’s Republic of China through 
diplomatic channel since 2nd Meeting of Expert Level Mechanism (ELM) between India and 
China on Trans-border Rivers held in April, 2008. However, Chinese side has conveyed 
non-feasibility of increasing frequency of observations in view of the harsh local conditions. 
Chinese side stated that water level of Yaluzangbo/ Brahmaputra river in flood season is 
featured as flat and smooth without sudden rise or fall, so there is no need to increase data 
provision frequency. Besides, the data measurement of Langquen Zangbo / Sutlej river is 
done manually and conditions are not available for increasing the measurement frequency.
The matter was also taken up recently during the 9 th Meeting of ELM held in May, 
2015 in which Indian side strived to get the data provision period enhanced to thrice a day 
“round the year” on both Brahmaputra and Sutlej Rivers, however the Chinese side 
expressed their inability to increase the frequency and duration of transmission of data.
Recommendation (Para No. 14)
Taking note of the fact that Central Water Commission (CWC) has been making 
continuous endeavour for automation of processes of data collection, forecast and 
dissemination of information of floods since Ninth Plan onwards, the Committee feel that still 
timely warnings do not reach people and there has been no decline in the number of 
casualties occurring due to sudden onset of floods. The Ministry in their reply have admitted 
that in areas which do not experience frequent floods or where the flood generation time is 
very less, the flood forecasting network of CWC is not considered, and therefore, no warnings 
are formulated by CWC in event of unprecedented floods in such areas, The Committee feel 
that the present flood forecasting infrastructure needs to be modernised and broadened to 
include the entire stretch off the country so that tangible improvements are visible even in 
non-flood-prone States. The Committee are also amazed to note that though CWC faces no 
bottlenecks in providing forecast to the local administration as well as uploading on the CWC 
website, still there is lack of coordination between the local administration and Central Water 
Commission in the matter of flood forecasting. The Committee therefore, strongly 
recommend. the Ministry to take steps so that the present flood forecasting infrastructure of 

CWC is upgraded effectively to disseminate the news of Impending floods well in time so as 
to avert havoc caused by floods. The Committee further note that around 219 stations of 
existing flood forecast networks are yet to be modernized by the Government. The 
Committee therefore, strongly recommend that all stations are modernized with telemetry 
system. The Committee be also informed of the action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
Out of the total 708 stations used to flood forecasting, automatic data acquisition 
and transmission systems have already been  set up at 445 stations. The Ministry has 
proposed modernisation of remaining 219 existing stations and setting up 420 new stations 
equipped with state of the art data acquisition systems besides establishing three more Earth 
Receiving Stations and 6 new Modelling Centres. The XII Plan proposal on the Plan Scheme 
“ Flood Forecasting” amounting to Rs. 281 crore has been cleared by the SFC in its meeting 
held on 4.8.2015 and the same is under the process of approval. CWC has already started 
preparatory works of preparation of tender documents including specification of specialised 
equipment.
Modernization/ up gradation of forecasting system includes automatic data 
collection & transmission, development of computer based models & dissemination of 
forecast using modern technology such as mobiles, web & media. In this regard, data 
collection through telemetry is already in place. Presently 445 sites have already been 
modernized with the telemetry system. Installations of telemetry system on other stations are 
planned during 12th Plan which will be taken up after the approval of Plan Scheme “Flood 
Forecasting”. Station/ reach specific computer-based models’ development is in progress. 
These models are being put in use after development. Using such models, the warning time 
has enhanced wherein observed rainfall from CWC network as well as IMD network & rainfall 
forecast of IMD are used as inputs in addition to the river water levels. Similarly for user 
friendly dissemination of forecast, CWC is putting its forecast on its website 
(www.india-water.gov.in/ffs) for public viewing. The information is also shared with the local 
media for greater awareness. Based on CWC forecast, State administration is supposed to 
generate warning for the affected population.

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 24 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
The Committee observe that pursuant to Hon’ble Supreme Court of India decision 
in “Deepak Kumar case” in April, 2012, regulations were framed by the Ministry of Mines to 
guide environmental clearance of minor minerals. However, The Committee are shocked to
note from the reply of the Government that the Central Government does not maintain any 
information in this regard as all the powers of regulation of mines vest with State Government 
as per section 15 of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957. Itwas 
only the interference of the apex court that led the Ministry of Mines to take up the matter with 
the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change and that steps are now being taken 
to ensure environmental clearance of minor minerals even in areas less than 5 hectares. The 
Committee, therefore, desire the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and 
Ganga Rejuvenation to work in close coordination with the Ministry of Mines and 
Environment, Forests and Climate Change to frame regulations/ guidelines in this regard 
expeditiously. The Committee would like to be apprised of the regulations/guidelines made in 
this regard within three months from the presentation of this Report.
Reply of the Government
As informed by the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change, the draft 
“Sustainable Sand Mining Management Guidelines” have been prepared in Sept. 2015 
In this Regard, Ministry of Mines has informed that & the best course of action 
would be for MoEF & CC to simplify the procedures in respect of obtaining EC for minor 
mineral projects. MoEF & CC can provide for a simpler procedure for grant of ECs for mining 
of minor minerals less than 5 ha by: (i) increasing the number of State Environmental Impact
Assessment Authorities (SEIAAs) in each State; or (ii) by reviewing its stand by deciding to 
delegate powers of granting EC to authorities below the State level. As grant of Environment 
Clearance comes under the administrative jurisdiction of MoEF & CC, there is not much role 
for Ministry of Mines in this matter.

Further, the Ministry of Mines has informed that as far as the framing of regulations to 
guide environmental clearance of minor minerals is concerned, it is clarified that Ministry of 
Mines has not framed regulations to guide environmental clearance of minor minerals. 
Secondly, as per section 15 of the Act regulation of grant of mineral concessions only for 
minor minerals and purposes connected therewith are within the administrative and 
legislative jurisdiction of state governments; and regulation of mines for major minerals is not 
in the purview of state governments. Thirdly, in the Deepak Kumar case, the Supreme Court 
had ruled that leases of minor minerals for an area less than 5 hectares should be granted by 
the States/ Union Territories only after getting environmental clearance from the MoEF&CC; 
and thereafter in accordance with the apex court’s ruling, steps were taken by MoEF&CC to 
ensure environmental clearance for minor minerals leases for an area less than 5 ha.

CHAPTER – IV
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
The Committee observe that despite having more than 18% of world's population, 
India has only 4% of world's renewable water resources. The Committee also note that the 
variability of rainfall in space and time is high in the country. The monsoon season accounts 
for nearly three-fourth of annual rainfall leading to natural calamities in the form of floods, 
erosion in flood plains of the rivers, besides drought.
The Committee note that though the subject of flood control does not find a mention 
in any of the three legislative lists included in the Constitution of India, drainage and 
embankments are specified in entry 17 of list II (State List).  The Committee also note that 
the subject of flood management falls within the purview of the States and the primary 
responsibility of management of water resources including floods, therefore, lies with the 
State Governments. Flood management schemes are planned, investigated and executed 
by the State Government concerned. The role of Union Government is technical, advisory, 
catalytic· and promotional in nature. The Committee, however, feel that the role of the Union 
Government should extend beyond this as not all the flood-prone States are well-equipped to 
manage devastating floods with the limited resourcesthey have in their possession. 
However, considering the limited role presently vested in the Union Government with regard 
to floods underthe present constitutional set-up and the urgent necessity to take proactlve 
steps to combat and control recurrent floods in the country, the Committee strongly 
recommend that the Central Government and State Governments should make necessary 
periodic reviews to facilitate enhanced role by the Union Government in flood related aspects 
so that better coordinated, pre-emptive measures are taken before there are indications of 
impending floods in their respective States. The Committee therefore, feel that mere hand 
holding by the Union Government is not suffice and the Government must play a pro-active 
role which according to Committee can effectively be done if the subject “Water” is brought 
under Concurrent List of the Constitution of India. The Committee would, therefore, like to 
reiterate their earlier recommendation to bring “Water” as a subject under Concurrent List of 
the Constitution of India, made in the Sixteenth Report of the Committee (2012-13) during 

Fifteenth Lok Sabha. 
Reply of the Government
As far as the matter relating to bringing water in the Concurrent list of the 
Constitution is concerned, it is stated that demands have been raised by the professionals 
and civil society to bring ‘water’ in Concurrent list primarily to ensure national perspective on 
water management and to avoid inter-State disputes and the tendencies of the State 
Governments to use more water (in excess of justified needs through efficient use) only to 
claim more apportionment of water in inter State rivers. However, these have been opposed 
by most of the States.
The matter was also examined by the two Commissions on Centre State Relations 
chaired by Justice R.S. Sarkaria (1983-88) and Justice M.M. Punchhi (2007-10). The 
proposal to bring ‘water’ in the Union/ Concurrent list did not find favour with either of these 
two Commissions.
Further, Constitutional amendment for bringing ‘water’ in Concurrent list, would 
need to be passed in both the Houses by a majority of the total membership of that House 
and by a majority of not less than two thirds of the Members of that House present and voting. 
This would also require ratification by the Legislatures of at least one-half of the States. Thus, 
there is need to have wider consultation with all stakeholders to bring broader consensus in 
the matter.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 6 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
The Committee further note with dismay that the vacancies in Brahmaputra Board 
have not been filled up, despite having pointed out by the Committee in its First Report of 
Sixteenth Lok Sabha (2014-15) on examination of Demand for Grants for the year 2014-15. 
The Committee feel that Brahmaputra Board which is required to play a vital role in the 
preparation of master plan for river basin, etc. can ill-afford vacancies in its board. The 
Committee, therefore, would like to reiterate its earlier recommendation and request the 
Ministry to take necessary steps in this regard expeditiously and apprise the Committee of 

the action taken.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry has filled up the post of Chairman of Brahmaputra Board and a 
proposal for setting up of North East Brahmaputra and Barak River Authority is under 
consultation with concerned States.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
The Committee note that the Government had issued a revised National 
Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy, 2007, which among others include a provision that 
Social Impact Assessment (SIA) study is to be carried out in proposed affected areas wherein 
voluntary displacement is of 400 families in plain areas and 200 families in hilly areas or more 
or in blocks / areas mentioned in Schedule V or Schedule VI of the Constitution. It was further 
stipulated that while undertaking SIA, the appropriate Government shall consider the impact, 
the project will have on public and community properties, assets and infrastructure 
particularly roads, public transport, drinking water, drainage, sanitation, health care, places of 
worship, places of burial / cremation along with grazing land for cattle. The Committee 
recommend the Government to ensure that necessary effective steps to implement the 
provisions of the revised National Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy, 2007 are taken by 
concerned project / State and Central authorities while executing water resources projects in 
the country, so that stake holders, i.e. farmers, landless labourers, tribals, depressed 
sections of the community etc., are not put to disadvantage. They also desire that the Ministry 
formulate a mandatory guideline within this year (2015) to enjoin that the concerned project / 
State and Central authorities while implementing the projects, duly pay compensation to the 
project-affected families (PAFs) which is adequate to enable them to adopt an alternative 
occupation in case of loss of agricultural lands and to settle in alternate lands in case of loss 
of houses/ dwellinqs. The Committee would like to be apprised of action taken by the Ministry 
in this regard.
The Committee further note that the XII Plan Working Group on Flood Management 

and Regional Specific issues had recommended providing of Central assistance by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs to the States under State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) and 
National Disaster Relief Fund (NDRF) to facilitate immediate relief in calamities of severe 
nature including floods. It was also recommended that a provision be made in the SDRF/ 
NDRF guidelines for assistance to States to meet expenditure on restoration of critical flood 
management structures. The Committee are pained to note that the aforesaid 
recommendation has not yet been implemented by the Ministry of Home Affairs and further 
no time schedule has been specified for the implementation of the same. Taking note of the 
dire necessity of tackling the recurrent devastations caused by floods year after year and to 
alleviate human miseries and also to reduce the ultimate colossal damage to sand, houses 
and public utilities, the Committee recommend that the Ministry, should in consultation with 
all the flood-prone States, chalk out a time-bound implementable programme of action in this 
regard.
Reply of the Government
Regarding R&R policy, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF & 
CC) has informed that :
(i) The National Resettlement & Rehabilitation (R&R) Policy is administered by the 
Department of Land Resources, Ministry of Rural Development. However, 
MoEF & CC looks into the issues of R&R and Social Impact Assessment (SIA) 
as part of the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA).
(ii) Although MoEF & CC intends to prepare Guidelines and Notification on River 
Regulation Zone (RRZ), the same are only at a draft stage.
Regarding relief during natural calamities, the Ministry of Home Affairs has informed 
that the Central Government had constituted State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) in each 
State for meeting the expenses for providing immediate relief to the victims of notified natural 
disasters. In case of ‘severe’ disaster, the Central Government provides additional financial 
assistance to the State from National Disaster Response Fund (NDRF), provided there is no 
adequate balance in SDRF. The norms of SDRF/ NDRF are based on the recommendations 
of the successive Finance Commissions. The norms and guidelines of SDRF/NDRF permits 
only immediate repair works for damaged infrastructure. The medium and long term repair/ 
reconstruction work are not permitted under SDRF/NDRF.

The norms of SDRF/NDRF have been recently revised on 8th April, 2015. The norms 
permit following repair works under SDRF/NDRF:
(i) Immediate repair of damaged canal structures and earthen/mansonry works 
of tanks and small reservoirs with the use of cement, sand bags and stones.
(ii) Repair of weak areas such as piping or rat holes in dam walls/ embankments.
(iii) Removal of vegetative material/building material/ debris from canal and 
drainage system.
(iv) Repair of embankments of minor, medium and major irrigation projects.
(v) Any expenditure beyond the norms of SDRF/NDRF is required to be met from 
State’s own resources. However, support of the Central Government may be 
sought under appropriate Central Plan or Centrally sponsored schemes.
Regarding R&R policy, the Ministry of Mines has informed that the policy requires the 
concerned State Governments to undertake a Social Impact Assessment (SIA) study of the 
projects which involve involuntary displacement of four hundred or more families en masse
in plain areas, or two hundred or more families en-masse in tribal or hilly areas, DDP blocks 
or areas mentioned in the Schedule V or Schedule VI to the Constitution.  The said Policy 
also contains details of the Resettlement and Rehabilitation plans to be undertaken for the 
project affected areas and families. Ministry of Mines has also clarified that it is for the 
concerned state governments to give effect to the provisions of the said Policy.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 12)
The Committee note that the erstwhile Planning Commission had also 
recommended that as a policy, minimum flood cushion of 10 % of the live storage capacity 

should be provided in all new dams and if affordable, with respect to other purposes, 
providing even a flood cushion upto 20% could be considered. A portion of the capital cost of 
the reservoir should be allocated to flood control and shared by all beneficiary States. To the 
utter dismay of the Committee, neither the policy in this regard has been formed by the 
Ministry in consultation with beneficiary States, nor any time schedule for this has been fixed. 
With development and population growth, habitations are coming very close to the 
downstream of reservoirs and operation of such reservoirs needs to be done carefully, The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry should initiate steps to formulate the policy 
and also pursue the matter with all the States to achieve better results in this regard. The 
Committee would like to see expeditious steps taken by the Ministry in this regard.
Reply of the Government
National Water policy, 2012 (Para 10.5) stipulates that the operating procedures for 
reservoirs should be evolved and implemented in such a manner to have flood cushion and 
to reduce trapping of sediment during flood season. These procedures should be based on 
sound decision support system.
The XII Plan Working Group on Flood Management and Regional Specific Issues 
set up by the Planning Commission in 2011 recommended that the long term solution to 
problems of recurrent floods and droughts lies in construction of dams and reservoirs with 
adequate flood-cushion. Construction of dams and reservoirs with adequate flood cushion 
may be undertaken wherever feasible.
The policy needs wider consultation with project authorities. However, as an 
alternative, besides 28 reservoirs already under inflow forecast network, the Ministry has also 
proposed to include 64 more reservoirs under the Inflow Forecasting network of CWC in XII 
Plan, which would for help the concerned project authorities in regulation of reservoirs more 
effectively and have flood moderation in these reservoirs. 
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 21 of Chapter-I of the Report)

Recommendation (Para No. 15)
The Committee observe that inadequate drainage is one of the major causes of 
floods. The Committee are surprised to note that no corrective measures had been taken to 
facilitate drainage facilities and no separate allocation of funds under Flood Management
Programme (FMP) has been made for works related to drainage measures. The Committee 
have been informed that the works for such measures are executed by concerned States and 
the physical and financial progress of works approved under FMP is monitored by Central 
Water Commission, Ganga Flood Control Commission and Brahmaputra Board. 
The Committee while acknowledging the limits to further possibilities of constructing 
.large storages and embankments, feel that floods can be tackled by placing greater 
emphasis on rehabilitation of traditional, natural drainage systems. The Committee, however, 
recommend that the overall supervision should vest with one single nodal authority, i.e. the 
Ministry of Water Resources, River development& Ganga Rejuvenation which should obtain 
regular feedbacks & inputs from the concerned units and should accordingly frame a policy in 
this regard. The Committee recommend that separate allocation for drainage works may be 
made under FMP. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken.
Reply of the Government
In this regard, it is stated that in the light of recommendations of 14 th Finance 
Commission and devolution of central taxes, the mechanisms of centrally sponsored 
schemes are under review in NITI Aayog / Finance Ministry. The allocations made under 
Flood Management Programme in the current financial year, 2015-16, are not sufficient to 
complete even approved and ongoing works. Thus, the States would need to allocate more 
funds from the available enhanced financial resources to complete the ongoing works. 
However, the Ministry is working on the proposal to bring paradigm shift in 
supporting the States in undertaking critical measures of flood mitigation in an integrated 
manner addressing the issues of desilting of rivers wherever feasible, protection and 
construction of embankments using state of the art materials such as geo-textile, changes in 
funding pattern as per importance and criticality of flood management measures in tandem 
with appropriate non-structural measures like flood forecasting and flood plain zoning. If, the 
Government decides to continue FMP, the issue of providing separate outlay for drainage 
congestion removal works will be duly addressed in the modified proposal. Under “Flood 

Management Programme”, the works related to river drainage development are included.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 27 of Chapter-I of the Report)

CHAPTER – V
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
The Committee note that the erstwhile Planning Commission had specifically 
directed the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development &Ganga Rejuvenation to 
expedite setting up of River Basin Organisations by the States and Central Government in 
order to have integrated basin development including flood management in a holistic 
manner. The Ministry, to the dismay of the Committee, have yet to implement it. Moreover, no 
time schedule for this has been fixed. The Committee therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
should initiate measures to implement the recommendations expeditiously and apprise the 
Committee accordingly.
Reply of the Government
MoWR, RD & GR had proposed to establish two RBOs for river basins namely 
Mahanadi and Godavari during XI Plan under River Boards Act, 1956. As per River Board 
Act, 1956 the RBOs, are to be established in consultation with the interested States. Their 
establishment would depend upon consensus and co-operation of the Co-basin States. The 
Ministry has made efforts at various levels to get the concurrence/ comments of all the 
co-basin States of Mahanadi and Godavari basins for establishment of River Basin 
Organisations. However, all the co-basin States have not given consent for establishment of 
River Basin Organisation of Mahanadi and Godavari River Basins. MoWR, RD & GR has set 
up a Committee under the Chairmanship of Justice T.S. Doabia, former Judge, MP and J&K 
High Courts to study the activities for optimal development of a river basin and changes 
required in the existing River Boards Act, 1956 for the achievement of the same. The report of 
the Committee has been placed before National Forum of Minister of Water Resources/ 
Irrigation of the States and on the website MoWR, RD & GR. Report has also been circulated 
to all States / UTs and concerned Central Ministries.
Further, a major initiative has been taken  by the Ministry for integrated water 
resources management in Brahmani - Baitarni river for :

(d) Understanding water availability and the multiple demands for the basin’s water 
resources.
(e) Define objectives and measures for developing and protecting the water resources of the 
basin.
(f) Scenario planning to improve integrated water resources management.
It is now proposed to take 12 more basins for:
(iii) Building on the understanding of the water resource to develop evidence based 
approach to maximize social and economic outcomes and promoting 
sustainability of the ecosystems within the basin.
(iv) Continued focus on capacity building to design, implement and evaluate water 
resources assessments for basin planning. 
This exercise would be a pre-requisite for better understanding of the basin for setting up of the 
River Basin Authorities.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 18 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 17)
The Committee note that many kinds of structures have been erected in the areas near 
sea banks upto the sea levels. The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and 
Ganga Rejuvenation have taken initiatives for regulation of river zones for which aCommittee 
was set up and a Report has since been submitted. The Committee therefore, would like to 
know the status of the implementation of the River Zone Regulation Report. 
Reply of the Government
As informed by MoEF&CC, the guidelines regarding River Zone Regulation are at a 
draft stage.

Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 30 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
The Committee note that as per Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) 
Act, 1957, sand has been notified as a minor mineral. The Committee observe that a lot of 
damage had been caused to the environment by uncontrolled and unregulated mining of 
minor minerals. In this connection, the Committee were further informed that only twenty 
State Governments have framed rules under section 23C of Mines and Minerals 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 to curb illegal mining, etc. of minor minerals viz. 
sand. Taking in view the vital role of agriculture in our economy, the Committee strongly 
recommend that the Ministry make efforts to induce the remaining States/UTs to frame 
relevant Rules under the said Act. They also further desire that the necessary mechanism for 
implementation of the rules so framed by these States/UTs be worked out by the Government 
within a year, and apprise the Committee accordingly.
Reply of the Government
In this regard, Ministry of Mines has informed that the Ministry is in the process of issuing 
an advisory enjoining these states to frame rules u/s 23C.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 33 of Chapter-I of the Report)
NEW DELHI HUKUM SINGH, 
04 March, 2016               Chairperson, 
14 Phalguna, 1937 (Saka) Standing Committee on Water Resources

ANNEXURE – I
STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS OFXII PLAN WORKING GROUP ON FLOOD MANAGEMENT AND REGION SPECIFIC 
ISSUES
Para Recommendation in Brief Status of Implementation
7.0 The Planning Commission has prepared a draft Approach Paper for strategies and focused 
attention in preparing various components of the XII Plan ensuring development in the key areas 
in order to achieve the broad objectives, targets, associated challenges and implementation of 
policies by the Centre and the States. The sustainable management of natural resources 
including water has been given due emphasis inviting attention on maintenance of water bodies 
comprising of lakes, reservoirs and tanks so that these storages continue to give fruitful results 
for the requirements planned. The developmental plans of the country will not be able to achieve 
the objectives of an overall growth unless flood management sector is given due attention and 
priority. This is more so in view of the heavy flood damages caused by the floods in the past and 
the severe floods faced by many parts of the country recently in Bihar, UP, Assam, West Bengal, 
Orissa and Andhra Pradesh. Therefore, we need to plan our strategies to reduce the flood 
damages in the country in a best techno-economically viable manner and our efforts should also 
be oriented towards reduction of the agony brought by floods to the common man. In order to 
have effective programmes for addressing the problem of flood in the country, the following 
strategies are recommended to be effectively implemented during XII Plan.
General para
7.1 Integrated Basin Management Approach
7.1.1 Integrated flood management calls for a paradigm shift from the traditional, fragmented and 
localized approach, and encourages the use of the resources of a river basin as a whole. 
Therefore, there is a need for an approach backed by latest technologies and implemented in a 
most effective manner.
MoWR, RD &GR has already issued National Water Policy 
-2012 which lays emphasis on integrated basin management 
approach.
Further, in the direction of having an i
management approach in NE Region, the Ministry is 
considering to propose setting up a North East Brahmaputra 
River Rejuvenation Authority (NEBRRA).
The Government of India in collaboration with Government of 
Australia had announced Water S
Partnership in 2012 and an MoU had also been signed 

between the two countries for capacity building of concerned 
officials of Central / State Governments. To start with, it has 
been decided to initiate preparation of Integrated Water 
Resources Management Plan (IWRM) in basins which can 
serve a basis for IWRM in future. Accordingly, 4 basins namely, 
Mahi, Narmada, Palar and Yamuna ( upto Etawah) have been 
selected for the purpose. The IIT Delhi and e
have separately e ntered into an MoU for capacity building 
programmes and support for use of e
Besides, the Ministry has already undertaken modernisation of  
flood forecasting network and its expansion with application of 
latest technologies of real
transmission. 
7.1.2 In order to have integrated basin development including flood management in a holistic manner, 
setting up of River Basin Organisations may be expedited by the States and the Central 
Government. 
The issue is under active consideration in the Ministry.
7.2 Construction of Dams and reservoirs with adequate Flood Cushion 
7.2.1 The long term solution to problems of recurrent floods and droughts lies in construction of dams 
and reservoirs with adequate flood-cushion and interlinking of water abundant and water scarce 
regions so that excess flood water is judiciously utilized and inherent agony of floods is turned to 
the benefit of people. However, due to geographical and political constraints, construction of 
large reservoirs in every region appears to be a tough task. There are other constraints that some 
reservoirs were initially constructed without any flood cushion but with the development and 
population growth, the inhabitations have come up very close to the downstream of these 
reservoirs and operation of such reservoirs needs to be done carefully. Under such situations, the 
use of latest knowledge based techniques of inflow forecasting could be employed. Also, 
an optimum combination of structural and non-structural measures may yield fruitful 
results.
CWC presently issues inflow forecasts for 28 reservoirs and it 
has planned to include 64 additional reservoirs under 
network. The SFC has cleared the proposal of flood forecasting 
and its modernisation / expansion for Rs. 281 crore in XII Plan. 
Under the modernisation programme, the latest sensor based 
data collection equipment, satellite based transmission and 
data analysis & flood forecast formulation using state of the art 
mathematical models, is proposed. During XII Plan, it is also 
proposed to develop inundation models for Mahanadi and 
Godavari basins where Digital Elevation Maps are available 
with NRSC. This wou
forecasting  giving details of specific areas likely be 
submerged.  
The NWDA has undertaken studies of 30 Inter
transfer of water from surplus basins to water scarce basins. 
7.2.2 Construction of dams and reservoirs with adequate flood cushion may be undertaken wherever 
feasible. In the reservoirs initially constructed for power and other benefits and where flood 
cushion was not initially provided, inflow forecasting may be used for reservoir regulation to 
achieve flood moderation. The projects for interlinking of rivers for diversion of flood water to 
water scarce areas may be taken up in a time bound manner. Integrated reservoir operation 

should be adopted as a matter of rule and there should be a state of the art information system 
about releases from the reservoirs to enable timely operation of reservoirs located
This would have incidental flood moderation benefits. 
The reservoirs under the inflow forecast network in a basin will 
have state of the art information system and would facilitate the 
Project Authorities to have optimum regulation of reservoirs in 
an in tegrated manner ensuring safe passage of floods 
downstream and also keeping in view the storages required to 
meet the non-monsoon requirements.
7.2.3 As a policy, a minimum flood cushion of 10% of the live storage capacity should be provided in all 
new dams and, if affordable with respect to other purposes, providing even a flood cushion upto 
20% could be considered. A portion of the capital cost of the reservoir should be allocated to flood 
control and shared by all beneficiary States.
For new dams under planning, CWC has been recommending 
to keep minimum food cushion. However, a firm policy in this 
regard is yet to be formulated. 
7.3 Emergency Action Plans and Operation Procedures
7.3.1 Development of dam break models and preparation of Basin-wise Emergency Action Plans may 
be undertaken by the State Governments / Project Authorities. 
CWC had prepared, circulated and uploaded on its web site the 
Guidelines for preparation of Emergency Action Plans (EAPs) 
based on dam break analysis,
dams. Accordingly, various Project Authorities have so far 
prepared 327 nos of EAPs for the large dams. 
7.3.2 Special emphasis may be given on formulation of operating procedures / manuals for operation 
of gates / structures in the water resources projects and the associated officers and staff be given 
specialized training to manage the distress situations in a professional manner.
Reservoir Operation Manuals are maintained by each Project 
Authority and related specialis
National Water Academy , Pune. 
The Ministry has also launched a Dam Rehabilitation and 
Improvement  Programme (DRIP) which envisages review of 
reservoir operation manuals from the angle of safety of 225 
dams in seven States v
Karnataka, Jharkhand and Uttarakhand. The Programme also 
involves institutional strengthening of participating States and 
CWC. 
7.4 Detention Basins – The States should identify suitable sites for creation of detention basins for 
their use to store flood water which would help in flood moderation besides availability of water 
during non-monsoon periods. 
Action by States. 
7.5 Operation and Maintenanc e – A separate budget for O&M of the existing flood management 
works (excluding salary) may be provided by the State Governments in their annual budget 
estimates in order to ensure that maintenance of the existing works is given due consideration. 
This is being emphasised while releasing funds to State 
Governments under Flood Management Programme. 

The O&M works may also be supported by Planning Commission in the State Plan budgetary 
requirements.
7.6 Flood Forecasting and Warning
7.6.1 The existing flood forecasting network of Central Water Commission is not sufficient to cover 
adequately the entire country. More flood information about the important cities is required to plan 
measures for safety of lives and property of people. Therefore, a concrete plan for extension of 
CWC’s flood forecasting network may be drawn in consultation with the State Governments and 
IMD to cover A, B-1, B-2 and C-class Cities located near rivers under the network of automatic 
data collection, transmission and flood information dissemination. 
The expansion of flood forecasting network is to be undertaken 
in Phases. Presently, CWC has a network of 176 flood 
forecasting stations and 99 more stations are proposed to be 
brought under CWC’s network in XII Plan. Fur
required, will be planned in consultation with State 
Governments keeping in view the manpower and financial 
constraints. 7.6.2 Presently, CWC provides inflow forecasts to 28 reservoirs / barrages in the country. 
It is recommended that the Inflow Forecast services may be extended to more dams to cover 80 
to 90% of the live storage capacity. 
7.7 Flood Plain Zoning
MOWR/CWC had prepared a Model Bill on Flood Plain Zoning and circulated it to State 
Governments for enacting suitable legislature and enforcement. The State Governments have 
reported difficulties in enactment of necessary legislation and enforcement of laws in this regard 
due to constraints of evacuation of people who are already occupying the flood plains and their 
settlement elsewhere due to constraints of land. However, for orientation of plans for flood 
damage reduction, it is necessary to have the flood plain zones marked / demarcated by the 
concerned States in accordance with criteria suggested by CWC in the Model Flood Plain Zoning 
Bill and draw their zone specific strategies about the use of flood plains including schemes of 
incentives and dis-incentives about their use. The States should also bring out standard norms 
for types of buildings which can be constructed in different zones of flood plains considering that 
required waterway is available for passing the flood discharge.
The Ministry / CWC had
Zoning way back in 1975 to all the States / UTs for 
implementation. By now legislations have been enacted by 
Manipur, Rajasthan and Uttarakhand only and there also actual 
demarcation of flood zones is yet to be don
been taken up with States and also their suggestions were 
invited about any changes required in the existing provisions of 
the Bill for its effective implementation. The States of Bihar, UP 
and Delhi have expressed their inability for imp
the Bill in the current scenario. The matter is being further 
pursued by the Ministry with States / UTs.   
7.8 Watershed Management - Watershed management in the hilly catchments of the rivers 
originating in Nepal, Bhutan and hilly areas of India should be selectively chosen and funded 
fully. Implementation should be done through a joint mechanism. Ministry of Agriculture, who is 
the nodal Ministry for the watershed management works should work out a detailed programme 
in consultation with the Ministry of Water Resources.
Action by M/o Agriculture. 
7.9 Drainage Improvement - Drainage development aspects need to be given due importance, as 
there have been cases of flooding wherein the floodwater stayed for long periods due to drainage 
related problems. Special schemes may be formulated by States for improvement of drainage.
Such works related to drainage congestion due to river water , 
are covered under ongoing Flood Management Programme.
7.10 Need for proper Strengthening of Organisations for execution of works with conventional 

approach
7.10.1 Presently, the execution of flood management works is done by the Government agencies and 
expenditure on execution of works including their maintenance is borne by the Government as a 
social responsibility and the service is provided to the general public by the Government. 
However, for effectiveness of this approach the working of existing departments needs to be 
appropriately improved by strengthening the monitoring system with very rigid financial discipline, 
transparent procedures of tendering of execution of works and involvement of local 
administration and Grampanchayats. Proper infrastructural facilities including vehicles may be 
provided to the central and State organizations involved in flood management for more 
effectiveness of services being provided by them to the public.
Strengthening of State Departments  being  done by 
respective States. Restructuring of CWC  is under active 
consideration in the Ministry for which a Committee , headed by 
Shri Mihir Shah, former Member, Planning Commission has 
been constituted.  
7.10.2 Restructuring and Strengthening of existing organizations of State /Central Governments may be 
done in an appropriate and time bound manner to enable them in performing various activities of 
flood management in an effective manner. Also, there should not be any restriction on new 
recruitments required for undertaking flood management related field jobs.
7.10.3 Specialized in-house and foreign training may be imparted to the officers/staff of Central/State 
Governments in all areas of flood management including hydrological data collection & its 
management, survey & investigation, planning & design, hydrological studies, preparation of 
techno-economically sound DPRs, flood forecasting, inundation forecasting, construction, 
equipment operation & maintenance, use of latest GIS based technologies in decision making, 
etc. The specific training programmes may be drawn by respective organisations and adequate 
funds for the purpose may be provided.
Being done by respective organisation
7.10.4 Appropriate strengthening of NWA, Pune may be done for its functioning as centre of excellence 
for conducting domestic and international training programmes in flood management and 
NDMA’s disaster risk reduction programmes.
In progress 
7.11 Public-Private Partnership Concept
7.11.1 In order to address the concerns about irregularities and transparency in execution of various 
projects, the Planning Commission has recently favoured adoption of the concept of Public 
Private Partnership (PPP) in operation of Infrastructure related projects. Under this concept the 
services to the general public are provided by the private agencies and the funds are arranged for 
implementation of projects through investments by private investors and revenue from the users 
as a commercial system. The responsibility for the services, however, remains with the 
Government. Such a system is already in practice in case of major highway projects where 
revenue generation is through toll plazas. Such a system ensures better financial discipline, 
transparency in award of works and maintenance of the services. However, efficiency, economy, 

competition and transparency should be the touchstones for assessing the level of success when 
dealing with the private sector.
The State Governments who execute flood management 
projects are yet to adopt such concepts wherever possible. 
7.11.2 In the flood sector, if the embankments are made roadworthy, there are great investment 
opportunities by private investors. Therefore, efforts should be made to make the embankments 
roadworthy and adopt PPP model for their construction and maintenance and collection of 
revenue / tax by the private agencies by setting up Toll Plazas
7.12 Inventory of Works completed by State Governments - Presently, no consolidated records 
are being maintained by the State Governments about the flood management works completed 
by them. In order to have a holistic view on the works already completed and further measures 
required for reasonable flood management, the State Governments are required to maintain 
inventory of the flood management works completed by them. These details may be compiled 
river-wise and district-wise. The appraisal agencies may emphasize preparation of such 
inventories and no new schemes may be recommended by them unless the inventory registers of 
works already completed are produced and gaps identified by the State Governments in flood 
management measures.
Action by States. 
7.13 Scientific Assessment of Flood Prone Area - The flood prone area forms the basis of any 
assessment of prioritizing the programmes of flood management. The flood prone areas 
assessed by RBA in 1980 were based on many assumptions due to inadequate data for carrying 
out a scientific and rational analysis. Making use of new technologies available today, it is 
desirable that a scientific assessment of the flood prone areas detailing at micro level using latest 
satellite imagery data and considering frequency of flooding, duration and depth of inundation 
etc., may be done. The NDMA may play a lead role in this regard with the help of NRSC, CWC, 
GFCC, Brahmaputra Board and representatives from flood prone States.
In July, 2012, the Ministry had constituted an Expert Committee 
for scientific assessment of flood prone a
The Committee has evolved the criteria for classifying the flood 
prone areas on the basis flood frequencies. The Regional 
Committees have been entrusted with the task and the work is 
in progress. 
7.14 Embankments - Generally, the non-structural measures are conceived as short term measures 
but in absence of sufficient large storages which could ensure safety on long-term basis and 
apprehensions developed due to recent breaches in major embankments, the modern 
techniques like flood plain zoning, durable buildings in flood plains, flood forecasting, inundation 
forecasting and all remote sensing technology based tools need to be included a part of our 
long-term strategy of fighting against the menace of floods.
MoWR is already pursui
zoning bill with States, which , inter
stilt type buildings in flood plains to provide required water way 
to river and minimise damages. CWC has already modernised 
445 data collection / foreca
modernisation of remaining stations including expansion of 
network is proposed in XII Plan. CWC has also planned to get 
inundation models developed for inundation forecast based on 
satellite data in order to enhance capability of St
inundation forecast for local areas. 
7.14.1 The conventional flood management measures like construction of new embankments, raising & 

strengthening of existing embankments, construction of spurs for deflecting flow directions to 
ensure safety to the embankments, for better and assured preparedness against floods may be 
adopted as per necessity. The State Governments are constructing embankments in order to 
stop spilling of water from the rivers. Some of the important embankments were constructed long 
back and these have a huge risk to the people and their properties in case of breach. Therefore, 
State Governments should identify and classify the embankments according to their vulnerability 
and should draw programmes for regular monitoring of the critical reaches of embankments by 
using mobile arrangements to clear blockages so that the waterway gets cleared and pressure on 
embankments is reduced. The state Governments should follow the embankment maintenance 
guidelines.
Action by States 
7.14.2 There may be some embankments which were initially designed with a lower return period of 
flood for providing protection to save agricultural land but at present these embankments need to 
provide protection to townships and industrial areas as a result of development. Therefore, there 
is urgent need for revisiting the design procedures of such embankments making use of latest 
design technologies and new construction materials by the concerned State Governments.
7.14.3 The  State Governments should carry out plantation along the flood embankments for safety of 
embankments against erosion.
Being encouraged  for projects under Flood Management 
Programme
7.14.4 Identification of appropriate location for spilling sections/sluices in the flood embankment for the 
controlled flooding of the protected areas for restoring fertility, recharge of soil moisture and 
ground water. Drainage sluices are recommended to be made an integral part of embankments 
to prevent water-logging in the protected areas.
Being encouraged  for projects under Flood Management 
Programme
7.15 Flood Management Programme - During XI Plan, Government of India started a Flood 
Management Programme, a State Sector Scheme under Central Plan and as informed by the 
Ministry of Water Resources, central assistance is being provided under the scheme as per laid 
down guidelines. The Flood Management Programme may be continued during XII Plan also. 
However, the existing mechanisms and procedures of release of funds may be reviewed and 
simplified to remove the bottlenecks. Only those schemes which are very critical in nature from 
the angle of long-term protection against floods, costing above Rs. 100 crore and having Benefit 
Cost Ratio more than 2.0, may be considered for funding by Union Government under Flood 
Management Programme and other schemes / works may be taken up by the concerned State 
Governments through their State Plan allocation. However, works of special category States may 
be decided and funded on the basis of criticality. Planning Commission may consider allocating 
major portion of the Plan outlay for flood management directly to State Governments as per their 
requirements under Flood Control Sector and make balance allocation under State Sector in 
Central Plan for critical flood management works only.
In October, 2013, the Cabinet had approved continuation of 
Flood Management Programme for XII Plan with an outlay of 
Rs. 10,000 crore. The approved funding pattern and eligibility 
criteria are as under: 
(i) Special Category
Funding Pattern: 
(a) Projects where investment clearance was accorded 
before 30.07.2013 , 90 (centre): 10 ( State) 
(b) Projects where investment clearance was accorded 
after 30.07.2013 , 70 (centre): 30 ( State) 
Eligibility Criteria 
Projects of Rs. 10 crore and above are eligible.
(ii) General Category States 

Funding Pattern: 
(a) Projects where investment clearance was accorded 
before 30.07.2013 , 75 (centre): 25( State) 
(b) Projects where investment clearance was accorded 
after 30.07.2013 , 50
Eligibility Criteria 
Projects of Rs. 10 crore and above are eligible.
7.16 Raised Platforms - A system of scientifically designed raised platforms, community housing with 
livestock units, health units where people can be accommodated during the four months of floods 
may be adopted. Flood shelters may be used as school, community centres during non flood 
time. MHA /NDMA may include sufficient provision for flood shelters under the National Flood 
Risk Mitigation Project or any other related programme.
Action by NDMA
7.17 Procedural Reforms - The Government may consider dispensing with the financial procedure of 
plan and non-plan, since at present meeting of expenditure on continuation and maintenance of 
assets created with plan funds becomes difficult with insufficient funds allocated under non-plan.
The revised procedure as established by Ministry of Finance is 
being followed. The projects under Flood Management 
Programme (FMP), which during XI Plan were approved by 
Empowered Committee (EC) headed by Secretary (Exp.) are 
now approved by an inter
headed by Secretary(WR, RD &GR).
7.18 International Dimensions
7.18.1 Expedite steps for construction of large storage dams in Nepal and emphasis ma y be given on 
flood control besides other benefits of irrigation and hydropower generation. The outstanding 
bilateral issues regarding mutual acceptance on the DPR of Pancheshwar Multi Purpose Project 
may be resolved with Nepal at the earliest.
A Pancheshw ar Development Authority had been set up in 
August, 2014 for resolving the bilateral issues related to 
Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project, finalising its mutually 
acceptable DPR and undertake implementation of the project.
Besides, the field investigations
progress.  
7.18.2 Steps may be taken for installation of automatic data collection and its transmission through 
satellite-based communication systems for the stations in the territories of neighbouring countries 
on rivers which flow into India.
A comprehensive plan has been drawn for installation of 
automatic data collection and its transmission through 
satellite-based communication systems for the stations in 
Nepal, whose data is utilised in India in flood forecasting.
7.18.3 Steps may be taken for providing hourly data by China to India on Brahmaputra and Sutlej so that 
the same could be utilized in the flood forecasting system of India for meaningful flood forecasting 
in the region.
During meetings of India
the  matter was taken up with China for providing hourly data 
of Chinese stations to India. China has expressed difficulty in 
proving hourly data due to difficult terrain conditions. 

7.19 Application of New Technologies
7.19.1 Digital Elevation Models (DEM) along major river systems including area falling in the flood 
affected zone in the range of 0.5 m to 1 m should be prepared for all river basins.
As Phase -I of the initiative, the Ministry had proposed 
preparation of Digital 
of flood affected areas in UP, Bihar and West Bengal under the 
Plan Scheme “ Flood Forecasting. Due to observations of EFC, 
the same had been delinked from the Scheme of Flood 
forecasting and the same is now propose
Project. 
7.19.2 The State Governments may be encouraged to own the data using modern technology, get it fully 
digitized and put into application. The State Governments should develop capacity for 
undertaking such activities in order to tackle the flood problems.
After preparation of DEMs, CWC will utilise it for inundation 
forecasting and share the DEM with States to encourage them  
in generation of local flood warnings and alert the people about 
areas likely to be inundated during a fl
7.19.3 The NRSC has been undertaking the activities of preparation of flood hazard zonation maps, 
close contour information, river configuration & bank erosion studies, development of geo-spatial 
tools and flood mapping & flood damage assessment under the Plan Scheme “ Disaster 
Management Support Programme” ; which may be expanded to include more river basins and 
NDMA may provide necessary support to NRSC in this regard.
Action by NDMA. 
However, NRSC has already prepared Flood Hazard Zonation
Atlas for the States of Assam and Bihar and it has proposed to 
cover UP and Odisha also. 
7.19.4 The States should include in their State Plans the activities of data collection, technology up 
gradation, capacity building, preparation of digital elevation models, hazard zonation maps, 
inundation maps and modelling, installation of computers, VSAT systems for automatic receipt of 
online flood information from CWC.
Action by States
7.19.5 Basin-wise flood management models including ALTM technology based D igital Elevation 
Models, Inundation Forecast Models, Bathymetric Surveys and Cubature Study Models may be 
undertaken jointly by NRSC, CWC and concerned States.
CWC has planned inundation modelling for Godavari basin 
where DEM is already available with NRSC. The work is 
proposed to be undertaken for other basin / States on 
availability of DEMs/ Bathymetric survey data based on LIDAR 
and ALTM technology. The work o
States of UP, Bihar and West Bengal is proposed to be 
undertaken under Hydrology Project. 
7.19.6 Development of Integrated mathematical models may be undertaken jointly by IMD and CWC for 
flood / runoff forecasting using weather parameters, rainfall observed and rainfall forecast.
The activity has been initiated by CWC. 

ANNEXURE – II
STATE-WISE WORKS APPROVED, WORKS COMPLETED AND FUNDS RELEASED UNDER FLOOD MANAGEMENT PROGRAMME ( FMP ) DURING XI AND XII PLAN 
(UP TO 30.09.2015)
Sl. 
No.
State XI Plan XII Plan Total (XI + XII Plan) Status  
Works Approved Funds 
Released 
( XI Plan)
Works Approved Funds 
Released
( XII Plan)
Works Approved
Nos. Estimated 
Cost
Nos. Estimated 
Cost
Nos. Estimated 
1 Arunachal Pradesh 21 107.33 81.69 0 0.00 16.83 21
2 Assam 100 996.14 748.86 41 1386.97 17.76 141
3 Bihar 43 1370.42 723.18 4 447.63 167.96 47
4 Chhattisgarh 3 31.13 15.57 0 0.00 3.75 3
5 Goa 2 22.73 9.98 0 0.00 2.00 2
6 Gujarat 2 19.79 2.00 0 0.00 0.00 2
7 Haryana 1 173.75 46.91 0 0.00 0.00 1
8 Himachal Pradesh 3 225.32 165.98 4 1139.62 144.87 7
9 Jammu & Kashmir 28 408.22 252.57 14 163.18 82.81 42
10 Jharkhand 3 39.30 18.44 0 0.00 4.27 3
11 Karnataka 3 59.46 23.80 0 0.00 0.00 3
12 Kerala 4 279.74 63.68 0 0.00 55.22 4
13 Manipur 22 109.34 66.34 0 0.00 24.36 22
14 Meghalaya 0 0.00 3.81 0 0.00 0.00 0
15 Mizoram 2 9.13 14.48 0 0.00 1.46 2
16 Nagaland 11 49.35 28.96 3 37.38 28.53 14
17 Orissa 67 169.00 101.12 1 62.32 0.00 68
18 Puducherry 1 139.67 7.50 0 0.00 0.00 1
19 Punjab 5 153.40 40.43 0 0.00 0.00 5
20 Sikkim 28 104.92 83.69 17 261.40 2.43 45
21 Tamilnadu 5 635.54 59.82 0 0.00 0.00 5
22 Tripura 11 26.57 23.62 0 0.00 0.00 11
23 Uttar Pradesh 26 667.57 290.69 3 382.27 97.72 29
24 Uttrankhand 12 119.82 49.63 9 183.45 96.95 21
25 West Bengal 17 1822.08 643.26 1 438.94 146.15 18
Total 420 7739.72 3566.00 97 4503.16 893.08 517

ANNEXURE – III
STATEMENT SHOWING STATE-WISE FLOOD DAMAGE DURING 2013
Sl. 
No. Name of State
Area 
affected in
Population 
affected in Damage to Crops Damage to Houses Cattle 
lost
Human 
lives lost
Mha Million Area  
mha
Value 
Rs Crore Nos. Value 
Rs Crore Nos. Nos.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
1 ANDHRA PRADESH  # 1.630 3.020 1.630 44.905 75304 2.244 2743 88
2 ARUNACHAL RADESH* 0.310 0.310 0.310 8.245 986 12.851 75 52
3 ASSAM  # 0.001 0.006 0.001 0.000 0 0.000 0 0
4 BIHAR  # 0.600 6.900 0.600 105.720 156518 24.020 6548 218
5 CHATTISGARH  $ 0.000 NR 0.000 NR 0 NR 0 NR
6 GOA   # NR 0 0 0 4 0.008 0 0
7 GUJARAT   # NR 0.177 0.000 7.750 407 0.144 274 186
8 HARYANA  @ NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
9 HIMACHAL PRADESH * 0.102 0.000 0.102 506.000 11243 200.000 24267 73
10 JAMMU & KASHMIR  @ NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
11 JHARKHAND      $ 0.022 0.199 0.022 3.894 528 0.202 1 3
12 KARNATAKA  # 0.228 0.000 0.228 1703.070 12310 9.997 368 124
13 KERALA   * 0.011 2.839 0.011 138.800 26694 36.830 80059 198
14 MADHYA PRAADESH @ NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
15 MAHARASHTRA @ NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
16 MANIPUR  * 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0 0.000 0 0
17 MEGHALAYA  @ NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
18 MIZORAM  @ NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
19 NAGALAND  # NR 0.075 0.000 1.720 982 29.890 2680 0
20 ODISHA # 0.046 0.390 0.046 0.000 5857 0.216 34 24
21 PUNJAB     * 0.110 0.0087 0.110 136.460 36206 25.040 954 44
22 RAJASTHAN 0.040 0.229 0.040 22.300 13108 3.859 157 14
23 SIKKIM         $ NR 0.200 NR NR 34 NR 106 16
24 TAMILNADU      $ NR NR NR NR 1314 NR 258 92
25 TRIPURA   * 0.002 0.021 0.002 2.163 3338 1.854 0 4
26 UTTAR PRADESH    * 0.349 3.544 0.349 0.000 79600 0.000 550 380
27 UTTARAKHAND  # NR 0 0 0 4726 0 9470 580
28 WEST BENGAL * 0.182 3.112 0.182 533.950 233336 178.970 28311 41
29 A & N ISLAND  @ NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
30 CHANDIGARH * Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
31 D & N HAVELI * Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
32 DAMAN & DIU    *        0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0 0.000 0 0
33 DELHI * 0.007 0.008 0.002 0.010 nil nil nil nil

* Complete information received from States 
$ Incomplete Information received 
# Information collected from NDM website. 
@ No information received from States. 
34 LAKSHADWEEP @ NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
35 PUDUCHCHERRY @ NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
TOTAL 3.640 21.147 3.636 3214.987 662495 526.125 156855 2137

ANNEXURE – IV
STATEMENT SHOWING STATE-WISE FLOOD DAMAGE DURING 2014
Sl. 
No. Name of State
Area 
affected 
Population 
affected Damage to Crops Damage to Houses Cattle lost Human 
lives lost
Damage to 
public utilities 
Mha Million Area  
mha
Value 
Rs Crore Nos. Value
Rs Crore Nos. Nos.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
1 ANDHRA PRADESH  NR NR NR NR 3279 317.040 NR NR
2 ARUNACHAL PRADESH NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
3 ASSAM  # 0.002 0.003 0.002 NR NR NR NR NR
4 BIHAR * 0.500 2.600 0.100 314.240 13166 10.060 30 113
5 CHATTISGARH  NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
6 GOA   # NR NR NR NR 41 NR NR NR
7 GUJARAT   0.000 0.703 0.000 1.147 1785 1.122 344 184
8 HARYANA  NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
9 HIMACHAL PRADESH * 1.780 0.481 0.014 189.150 1963 3.710 698 45
10 JAMMU & KASHMIR  # NR 0.275 NR NR NR NR NR 298
11 JHARKHAND      NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
12 KARNATAKA  # 0.005 NR 0.005 NR 895 NR 85 27
13 KERALA   # 0.019 0.032 0.019 215.563 7197 10.000 NR 122
14 MADHYA PRAADESH NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
15 MAHARASHTRA * Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
16 MANIPUR  NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
17 MEGHALAYA  * 0.016 0.341 0.016 707.000 10701 71.203 8822 66
18 MIZORAM  NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
19 NAGALAND  # 0.004 NR 0.004 NR 847 NR 2860 NR
20 ODISHA # 3.970 4.019 3.970 NR 49104 NR 187 61
21 PUNJAB  * 0.039 0.400 0.039 44.930 36429 21.590 954 44
22 RAJASTHAN NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
23 SIKKIM         NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
24 TAMILNADU      NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
25 TRIPURA   NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
26 UTTAR PRADESH    # 0.450 1.398 0.450 NR 3652 NR 73 106
27 UTTARAKHAND  # 0.001 NR 0.001 NR 1447 NR 348 66
28 WEST BENGAL # 0.051 0.448 0.051 6.132 33621 17.275 145 169
29 A & N ISLAND  NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
30 CHANDIGARH NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
31 D & N HAVELI NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
32 DAMAN & DIU           NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
33 DELHI NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR

34 LAKSHADWEEP NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
35 PUDUCHCHERRY NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
TOTAL 6.837 10.699 4.670 1478.162 164127 452.001 14546 1301
* Complete information received from States
$ Incomplete Information received  
# Information collected from NDM website. 
@ No information received from States

ANNEXURE – V
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2015-16) HELD ON MONDAY, 18 JANUARY 2016
The Committee sat from 1100 hours to 1315 hours in Main Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukum Singh – Chairperson
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Devusinh Jesingbhai Chauhan
3. Dr. Sidhant Mohapatra
4. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
5. Shri Rodmal Nagar
6. Shri Subhash Patel
7. Smt. Aparupa Poddar
8. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
9. Shri Lallu Singh
10.       Shri Liladharbhai K. Vaghela 
RAJYA SABHA
11. Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder
12. Smt. Naznin Faruque
13. Shri Amar Shankar Sable
14. Prof. Mrinal Miri
15. Shri A.V. Swamy 
16. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Shiv Kumar - Joint Secretary
2. Smt. Rita Jailkhani - Director
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar - Additional Director

-2-
2. The Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.
X X X X X X X X
10. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Fourth Report on "Issues concerning Flood Management, Compensation and 
Status of Ownership of Submerged and Eroded Land in the Country including Compensation to Farmers for loss of their crops 
destroyed by Floods and Right to Disposal of the Sand left in the Fields of Farmers", and adopted the same without any 
modification. 
The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to present the Report to both the Houses of Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned

ANNEXURE – VI
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTH REPORT 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE 
(i) Total number of Observations/ Recommendations 22
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government 
Para Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 13, 16, 20, 21 and 22
Total : 11
Percentage    : 50%
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies
Para Nos. 8, 14 and 18
Total : 03
Percentage : 13.63 %
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies
of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee
Para Nos. 1, 7, 9, 12 and 15
Total : 05
Percentage  : 22.72 %

(v) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which final reply
of the Government are still awaited
Para Nos. 11, 17 and 19
Total : 03
Percentage   : 13.63%