 
1 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
                                (2016-2017) 
 
 
 
                              SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION  
 
 
 
REVIEW OF GROUND WATER SCENARIO, NEED FOR A COMPREHENSIVE POLICY AND MEASURES TO 
ADDRESS PROBLEMS IN THE COUNTRY WITH PARTICULAR REFERENCE TO (I) DARK BLOCKS; AND (II) 
CONTAMINATION OF UNDERGROUND WATER BY CERTAIN INDUSTRIES 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources} 
 
 
 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
December, 2016 / Agrahayana,1938 (Saka) 
 
11 

 
2 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
 
(2016-2017) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
 
REVIEW OF GROUND WATER SCENARIO, NEED FOR A COMPREHENSIVE POLICY AND MEASURES TO 
ADDRESS PROBLEMS IN THE COUNTRY WITH PARTICULAR REFERENCE TO (I) DARK BLOCKS; AND (II) 
CONTAMINATION OF UNDERGROUND WATER BY CERTAIN INDUSTRIES 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources} 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on       08 .12.2016 
     Laid in Rajya Sabha on       08 .12.2016 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2016 / Agrahayana,1938 (Saka) 

 
3 
 
WRC NO.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2016 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
 

 
4 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
      Page  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016-17) …………………………………  (iii)  
 
INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
 
CHAPTER I -      Report        1   
       
CHAPTER II - Observations / Recommendations which have been 
  accepted by the Government ………………………………  44  
            
CHAPTER III - Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
  not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ..  76   
CHAPTER IV    - Observations / Recommendations in respect of which  
 replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
 the Committee ……. …………………………………………  85 
 
CHAPTER V    - Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
 Replies of the Government are still awaited ……………….  100 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I. Details of funds released & incurred on Artificial Recharge  107 
projects by CGWB during various Plans 
 
II. Master Plan for Artificial Recharge to Ground Water  109 
 
III. Financial performance in respect of Aquifer Mapping   111 
 under Ground Water Management and Regulation  
 during XII Plan (2012-17) 
 
IV. Status of Ground Water Monitoring stations   112 
 
V. Salient Features of Draft National Water Framework Bill  113 
 
VI. Salient features of Draft River Basin Management Bill  115 
VII. Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Standing Committee    117 
 held on 23 November, 2016 
 
VIII.  Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the   119 
 Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
 Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee 

 
5 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2016-17) 
  
 
  
  Shri Hukum Singh  -  Chairperson 
 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Radheshyam Biswas 
3. Shri Devusinh Jesingbhai Chauhan 
4. Shri Sudhir Gupta 
5. Shri Prakash B. Hukkeri 
6. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
7. Shri Mohanbhai Kundariya 
8. Shri Maganti Murali Mohan 
9. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
10. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
11. Shri Subhash Patel 
12. Shri Sanjaykaka Ramchandra Patil 
13. Shri Vijaysinh Mohite Patil 
14. Smt. Aparupa Poddar 
15. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
16. Shri S. P. Y. Reddy 
17. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah 
18. Smt. V. Sathyabama 
19. Shri Lallu Singh 
20. Shri Liladharbhai Vaghela 
21. Smt. Dimple Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
23. Shri Harshvardhan Singh Dungarpur 
24. Mir Mohammad Fayaz 
25. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
26. Shri Sanjiv Kumar 
27. Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
28. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
29. Shri Sanjay Seth 
30. Shri A.V. Swamy  
31. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 

 
6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.  Shri Shiv Kumar   -  Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Rita Jailkhani  -  Director 
3.  Shri Kushal Sarkar  -  Additional Director 
4.  Shri Ginsuanlian Guite  -  Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          (iv)

 
7 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2016 -2017) having been authorised by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Eleventh Report on the Action Taken by Government 
on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Water Resources on the subject “Review of Ground Water Scenario, need for a comprehensive 
policy and measures to address problems in the country with particular reference to (i) Dark Blocks; and (ii) 
Contamination of underground water by certain industries”.  
2. The Fifth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on  22 December, 
2015.  The replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 12 
August, 2016. 
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and adopted by the 
Committee at their sitting held on 23 November, 2016. 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in 
the Fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Annexure-VIII. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                 HUKUM SINGH, 
26 November, 2016                           Chairperson, 
05 Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)                   Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 

 
8 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the observations / recommendations contained in their Fifth Report (16 th Lok Sabha) on 
“Review of Ground Water Scenario, need for a compr ehensive policy and measures to address problems 
in the country with particular reference to (i) Dark Blocks; and (ii) Contamination of underground water by 
certain industries” which was presented to Lok Sabha on 22 December, 2015. 
2. Action Taken Notes re ceived from the Government in respect of all the 27 observations / 
recommendations of the Committee, have been categorized as follows:- 
(i) Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government  (Chapter 
II): 
 Para Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 and 27 
(Total – 16) 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s replies (Chapter III): 
 Para Nos. 12, 14 and 25 
(Total – 03) 
(iii) Observations / Recommendat ions in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
 Para Nos. 2, 8, 10, 16 and 24 
 (Total – 05) 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government are 
still awaited (Chapter V): 
 Para Nos. 19, 22 and 26 
 (Total – 03) 

 
9 
 
 
3. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of the observations 
/ recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
A. Database on Natural and Artificial Recharge of Water in India 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
4. As per the latest available assessment carried out by the Central Ground Water Board in the year 
2011, the total annual replenishible ground water resources and the net ground water availability are 433 
Billion Cubic Metres (BCM) and 398 (BCM), respectively. Out of the net annual ground water availability of 
398 BCM, the total annual ground water draft in the country is 245 BCM and the overall stage of the 
ground water development has reached 62% of the net ground wa ter availability. The Committee also 
noted that the annual natural recharge to ground water (as in 2011) is around 433 BCM, which includes 
recharge from rainfall, tanks, ponds, Minor Irrgation structures, surface water bodies, irrigation seepage, 
etc., whi le the artificial recharge to ground water was being taken up by various Central / State 
Government Department / NGOs, individuals, etc. In this regard, the Committee were surprised to note 
that the latest assessment of replenishable ground water resources was undertaken by the Central Ground 
Water Board of the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation way back in 
2011, which had revealed that no serious and systematic efforts ha d been made by the Government 
towards development, management, conservation and related issues such shortages, scarcity, depletion 
and pollution of ground water, in spite of the alarming trend towards ground water problems in both 
quantitative and qualitative terms. The Committee were also dismayed to note  the Ministry’s reply that no 
single agency is maintaining the database on quantum of artificial recharge to ground water. The 
Committee, therefore, desired to underline the urgent need on the part of the Ministry of Water Resources, 

 
10 
 
River Development & Ga nga Rejuvenation / Central Ground Water Board to undertake assessment of 
replenishable  ground water resources on a regular basis, preferably after two years, starting from this 
year. Further, noting that the absence of a single agency in maintaining the d atabase on quantum of 
artificial recharge to ground water was a serious lacuna in the efforts towards conservation, development 
and management of ground water resources and tackling related issues such as its over -exploitation, 
depletion and pollution, etc ., the Committee recommend ed that the Ministry prepare a roadmap for 
creating a single agency to maintain database on the quantum of natural and artificial recharge to ground 
water and also on the quantum of ground water being utilized by various stakehold ers, including farmers, 
industries and domestic sectors. The Committee desired to be apprised of the steps taken by the 
Government in this regard. 
5. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“The ground water resources estimation of t he country is being carried out jointly by Central 
Ground Water Board (CGWB) and State Government Departments at required intervals of two 
years as suggested by the Hon’ble Standing Committee of Parliament. The ground water 
estimations were carried out in 2004, 2009 and 2011. The Estimation of Dynamic Ground Water 
Resources as on 2013 is under compilation. 
State Government being the custodian of all the data pertaining to assessment of ground water 
resources are being maintained by respective States, which are being used for assessment jointly 
carried out by State Government and CGWB.  However, at the central level CGWB is compiling the 
data pertaining to natural recharge of ground water and ground water discharge components of 
ground water estimation.” 
 
6. The Committee note  from the reply of the Ministry that the ground water estimations were 
carried out in 2004, 2009 and 2011.  The estimation of dynamic ground water resources as on 2013 

 
11 
 
is under compilation and that the ground water resources estimation of  the country is being 
carried out jointly by the Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) and State Government Departments 
at required intervals of two years as suggested by the Committee.  The Committee  also note that 
at the Central level, CGWB is compiling the data pertaining to natural recharge of ground water and 
ground water discharge components of ground water estimation.  The Committee are dismayed 
that the Ministry have not unequivocally responded to the Committee’s recommendation for 
preparing a roadmap as yet for creating a single agency to maintain database on the quantum of 
natural and artificial recharge to ground water being utilized by various stakeholders including 
farmers, industries and domestic sectors.  The Committee, therefore, desire an early  response 
from the Ministry in th e matter .  Noting further that the estimation of dynamic ground water 
resources as on 2013 is under compilation, the  Committee also fail to understand as to why this 
exercise on dynamic ground water resources estimation for  the year 2013 has not been completed 
till now.  The  Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that this exercise be completed in the 
year 2016  itself and the dynamic ground water resources estimation for 2015 be started 
immediately without further any dela y by fixing a targeted time -frame f or its  completion.  The 
Committee also reiterate their  earlier recommendation for the Ministry to prepare a roadmap for 
creating a single agency to maintain database on the quantum of natural and artificial recharge to 
ground water in India and also the quantum of ground water being utilized by farmers, industries 
and domestic sectors. 
B. Study Group on Impact of Paddy Cultivation on Ground Water in Punjab, Haryana and 
Rajasthan 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 

 
12 
 
7. The Committee noted that as per the latest assessment year 2011, ground water withdrawal  for 
irrigation purpose accounted for 97.96% in the Punjab, 94.58% in Haryana and 88.47% in Rajasthan. The 
Committee note from the reply of the Min istry that no specific study had  been conducted by the Central 
Ground Water Board so far on the problem of excessive withdrawal of groundwater due to paddy 
cultivation in these States. In view of the grim ground water scenario prevailing in the three States, the 
Committee strongly recomme nded that the Ministry should set up a study group comprising experts, 
professionals, officials drawn from their own Ministry / Central Ground Water Board, Ministry of Agriculture, 
State Governments of Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan and reputed institutions  to make a scientific 
assessment of the impact of excessive withdrawal of ground water due to paddy cultivation in the States of 
Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan and to come out with remedial measures to curtail water draft without 
compromising on the output of paddy in these States and apprise the Committee accordingly. 
8. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied that an Inter-Ministerial Study Group would be set 
up. 
9. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that an Inter-Ministerial Study Group is to 
be set up to make a scientific assessment of the impact of excessive withdrawal of ground water 
due to paddy cultivation in the States of Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan.  The Committee are of the 
opinion that the services of experts, professio nals, officials drawn from the concerned State 
Governments of Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan and reputed Institutions will prove to be more 
beneficial in carrying out an assessment of such  far-reaching significance.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate thei r recommendation for inclusion of experts, professionals, officials from 
these three States as well as reputed Institutions in the country in the proposed Inter -Ministerial 
Study Group.  They further desire the Ministry to devise innovative sets of measure s to be adopted 

 
13 
 
by these States to curtail water draft without compromising on the output of paddy in these States 
and apprise the Committee accordingly. 
C. Enforcement of Directions on Rainwater Harvesting / Artificial Recharge to Ground Water  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
10. The Committee note d that directions had been issued on 08.10.2009 to all the Residential Group 
Housing Societies/ Institutions/ Schools/ Hotels/ Industrial Establishments falling in the over -exploited and 
critical areas (except in wat erlogged areas) in the country to adopt Rooftop Rainwater Harvesting System 
in their premises and also for implementation of ground water recharge measures along all National 
Highways/ State Highways and other major roads by the CRRI, National Highways Aut hority of India, 
CPWD, State PWDs; along rail tracks by the Indian Railways; in the Stadia by the Sports Authority of 
India, BCCI and Departments of Sports and Youth Affairs; and in the Airports by the Airport Authority of 
India, Ministry of Civil Aviation , for Promoting Rain Water Harvesting / adoption of Artificial Recharge to 
Ground Water (except in the water -logged area).  Further, the CGWA had issued directions vide letter 
dated 08.08.2006 to the Chief Secretaries of 12 States and Administrators in Uni on Territories having 
over-exploited blocks to take necessary measures to promote/ adopt artificial recharge to ground water/ 
rain water harvesting.  However, despite these regulatory measures, not much ha d happened by way of 
improvement.  To cite an examp le, the Committee note d that there were wastages of water from five star 
hotels in Delhi.  They also note d that the Hon’ble National Green Tribunal (NGT) had issued bailable 
warrants against 12 hospitals in Delhi for not installing Rainwater Harvesting in their hospital premises, 
which ha d been recalled upon application by the hospitals concerned.  Noting that an MoU had  been 
signed by the Government of NCT of Delhi with 33 hotels for completion of installation of Rain Water 
Harvesting System, installation of STPs (Sewage Treatment Plants), Solar Water Heating System, Organic 

 
14 
 
Waste Converter and Re-use of treated effluent leading to Zero discharge and that, all these 33 hotels had 
installed Rain Water Harvesting structures and also installed STPs to treat an d re-use the waste water, 
and also that the hotels ha d also been asked to obtain permission from the Delhi Jal Board (DJB) for 
ground water extraction, the Committee urge d the Government to ensure that these Hotels do not extract 
water without obtaining pr ior permission of the DJB in t he NCT of Delhi.  The Ministry informed that a 
Committee consisting of officials from the department of Environment, Delhi Pollution Control Committee 
(DPCC), academicians of IIT and Jamia Millia Islamia University had been re viewing the progress of 
compliance by these hotels from time to time relating to Green Hotels Guidelines.  The Committee desired 
to be apprised of the outcome of the review/ evaluation work being done by the Said Committee after 
completion of the exercise.  They also desired the Government to ensure that the 12 hospitals in Delhi duly 
install rain water harvesting structures in their premises.  The Committee further desire d that the 
Government take new initiatives to promote re -use of recycled water in  a very city, town of the country, 
and would further like to be apprised of action taken in the matter by the Government. 
11. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“The Hon’ble National Green Tribunal, New Delhi is issuing directions to  all the hotels, hospitals, 
builders and developers in the matter of OA -59/2012 and OA -94/2013.  Hon’ble NGT has 
appointed Local Commissioners and inspection teams for carrying out inspections to verify status 
of rainwater harvesting and ‘No Objection Cert ificate (NOC)’ for extraction of ground water.  
Hon’ble NGT is also taking coercive action against erring/non -compliant hotels, hospitals, builders 
and developers.  Joint inspection teams headed by Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA), as 
constituted by N GT, are carrying out inspections and filing reports at present.   Final outcome of 
the above pending matters will be apprised to the Committee. 
Ministry of Urban Development has already revised the building bye -laws for reuse for 
recycle water which have been implemented / enacted in 61 cities across 30 States/ UTs.” 

 
15 
 
12. The Committee observe that the Hon’ble National Green Tribunal (NGT) , New Delhi is 
issuing directions to all the hotels, hospitals, builders and developers in the matter of OA -59/2012 
and OA-94/2013, and the Hon’ble NGT has appointed Local Commissioners and inspection teams 
for carrying out inspections to verify the status of rainwater harvesting and ‘No Objection 
Certificate (NOC)’ for extraction of ground water.  Further, joint inspection teams headed by the 
Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA), as constituted by NGT, are carrying out inspections and 
filling reports presently.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of inspection 
works of Local Commissioners and inspection teams entrusted to verify the status of rainwater 
harvesting and ‘No Objection Certificate (NOC)’ for extraction of ground water within 03 months of 
presentation of this Report.  They also desire to know the time-frame allotted to the joint inspection 
teams headed by CGWA as also the final outcome in respect of the inspection undertaken by them, 
as and when available.  Further noting that the Ministry of Urban Development has already revised 
the building bye -laws for reuse of recycled water which have been implemented / enacted in 61 
cities across 30 States / UTs, the Committee reiterate their recommendation to the Government to 
take new initiatives to promote reuse of recycled water not only in 61 cities across 30 States / UTs 
but in every town of the count ry.  The Committee also would like the expeditious conclusion of 
review / evaluation works undertaken by a Committee comprising of officials from the Department 
of Environment, Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC), and academicians  from Indian Institute 
of Technology ( IIT) and Jamia Islamia University pertaining to the progress of compliance by 33 
hotels in Delhi - relating to Green Hotel s guidelines, and to furnish to them an appraisal report in 
this regard. 
D. Master Plan for Artificial Recharge to Ground Water 
 

 
16 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
13. The Committee were apprised that a conceptual document titled ‘Master Plan for Artificial 
Recharge to Ground Water to India’ prepared by the Central Ground Water Board in 2013 was circulated 
to all State Government incorporating (i) identification of suitable areas for artificial recharge; (ii) estimation 
of sub-surface storage space availability; (iii) quantification of local surplus annual run -off availability as 
source water for artificial recharge; and (iv) r ecommending number and types of structures required along 
with their estimated costs, and which also provides district -wise number of feasible artificial recharge 
structures along with their estimated costs.  The total area identified for artificial rechar ge in the country is 
nearly 9.4 lakh sq. km., while the total estimated volume of water to be recharge is 85.6 BCM.  However, 
regrettably, only 6 States/ UT Governments have taken follow -up action on the Master Plan viz. Gujarat, 
Madhya Pradesh, Rajas than, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and Andaman and Nicobar  Islands.  Nothing 
that no review has been done regarding implementation of the Master Plan, the Committee desire d that 
the Government take proactive and concerted efforts to encourage all the States/ UTs  to take follow -up 
action on the ‘Master Plan for Artificial Recharge to Ground Water to India’ and also undertake a 
comprehensive review of follow -up action taken by States/UTs in this regard during 2014 -15 positively.  
The Committee also note d that the M aster Plan envisaged construction of different types of Artificial 
Recharge and Rain Water Harvesting structures in an area of 91541 sq. kms. by harnessing surplus 
Monsoon run-off to augment ground water reso urces.  The Ministry had  informed the Committee in this 
regard that during the 12 th Plan, the CGWB had  taken up the Aquifer Mapping and Management 
Programme, wherein aquifer -wise ground water resources and quality is to be assessed in priority areas 
covering 8.89 lakh sq. km which include water stressed  (“Over-exploited’ areas and quality vulnerable 
areas.  Rs. 2051 crore ha d been allocated for the Aquifer Mapping and Management Plan during the 12 th 

 
17 
 
Plan as per the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation.  The 
Committee recommended that the Ministry take necessary steps for judicious utilization of Rs. 2051 crore 
allocated towards Aquifer Mapping and Management Plan during the 12 th Plan by implementing a time -
bound road map to achieve its objective, i.e. assessing aquifer -wise ground water resources and quality in 
priority areas covering 8.89 lakh sq. km. in the country.  The Committee desire d to be informed of the 
steps taken by the Ministry as also the achievements (physical and financial) made during the 12 th Plan so 
far under the Aquifer Mapping and Management Plan.  
14. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“Chairman, CGWB has written a DO letter on 15.01.2015 to Chief Secretaries/ Administrator of all 
the States/UTs enclosing therewith a copy of t he Master Plan for Artificial Recharge to Ground 
Water in India, 2013 for implementation of rain water harvesting and artificial recharge. 
A review was done in 2014-15 regarding implementation of the Master Plan by the respective State 
Governments and status of implementation is given at Annexure-II. 
 Steps taken on Aquifer Mapping : -   
1. During XII plan, an area of about 8.89 lakh sq.km area has been prioritized, out  of 23 
lakh sq.km map-able area of the Country. 
2. The prioritized area include ‘Over-Exploited’, ‘Critical’ and ‘Semi-Critical’  assessment 
units as well as water quality affected and other vulnerable areas in 8  states viz. Punjab, Haryana, 
Rajasthan, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana,  Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and in the National 
Capital Region.  Moreover, water scarce  areas such as Bundelkhand region covering parts of the 
Madhya Pradesh & Uttar  Pradesh and; parts of Arsenic affected areas have also been prioritized. 
3. Current activities of data generation for various activities under Aquifer Mapping  have 
been taken up on a mission mode in prioritized areas of these States and  Bundelkhand Region 
covering an area of around 5.25 lakh sq.km. 

 
18 
 
4. The activities for data generation in the remaining areas of XII plan across the 
 Country are also being taken up simultaneously. 
Physical achievements during the XII Plan (2012-17), as on 31st December, 2015 under the aquifer 
mapping programme is as given below : 
 Data collection, compilation and data gap analysis for the entire prioritized area of 8.89 lakh 
sq.km have been completed. 
 Pilot projects in an area of 3006 sq.km falling under the States of Bihar, Rajasthan, 
Maharashtra, Karnataka and Tamil  Nadu has been completed.  R eports have been finalized and 
uploaded on the website of the department. 
 Aquifer mapping of National Capital Region encompassing an area of 26185 sq.km falling 
under the States/UT of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Delhi has been completed and ground water 
management plan has been prepared.   
 9146 number of Vertical Electrical Sounding (VES) and 383  number of bore -hole logging 
have been conducted. 
 2842 number of ground water exploration wells have been constructed.  
 89651 ground water samples have been analyzed. 
Financial performance in respect of Aquifer Mapping during XII Plan, as on 31 st December, 2015 is 
given at Annexure-III.” 
15. The Committee observe that in order to ensure implementation of ‘Master Plan for Artificial 
Recharge to Ground Water to India’  of Central Ground Water Board , the Chairman, CGWB on 
15.01.2015 had written to Chief Sec retaries / Administrator of all the States / UTs.  Also, a review 
was done in 2014 -15 regarding implementation of the Master Plan by the respective State 
Governments.  Sadly however, the picture that emerged from the said review as forwarded by the 
Ministry to the Committee has revealed a very dismal performance.  Accordingly, out of the 29 

 
19 
 
States / UTs mentioned in the List, the majority of States / UTs have not implemented the Master 
Plan, i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Goa, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, 
Jharkhand, Kerala, Maharashtra, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand, 
Chandigarh, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Lakshadweep, and Puducherry.  Only 03 States / UTs i.e. Delhi , 
Chhattisgarh and Andaman and  Nicobar Islands are state d to be considering the Master Plan for 
implementation, while Daman and Diu is stated be in the process of implementation .  The 
Committee also note that a few States have initiated steps towards implementation of the Master 
Plan, i.e. (i) a Task Force comp rising of technical experts was constituted  by Government of 
Gujarat to prepare First Estimation Report for ground water recharge in 06 major river basins, (ii) 
Minor Irrigation Department, Government of Karnataka has spent about Rs. 9,899/ - lakh  for 
constructing artificial recharge structures like check dams, percolation ponds, gokattes etc., (iii) 
The Chief Engineer (Bodhi) constituted a coordination committee for finalizing Master Plan for 
Artificial Recharge to Ground Water in Madhya Pradesh, (iv) Gove rnment of Uttar Pradesh has 
prepared a comprehensive policy for ground water management, rainwater harvesting and ground 
water recharge highlighting the CGWB’s  Master Plan, and (v) in West Bengal, certain artificial 
recharge structures are being construct ed by PHED, Government of West Bengal utilizing the 
guidelines provided in Master Pl an.  The Committee strongly recommend the Ministry to pursue  
with all the non -performing States / UTs to speed up the implementation of the Master Plan in a 
time-bound manner and apprise the Committee accordingly.  They also desire the Ministry to take 
concrete steps to achieve the target of 8.89 lakh sq. km. prioritized for coverage under Aquifer 
Mapping and Management Plan during 12th Plan under intimation to the Committee. 
E. Census and Inventorization of Water Bodies and Installation of Water Meters on Tube Wells. 
 

 
20 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
16. The Committee note d that as per the 4 th Minor Irrigation Census (2006 -07), the total number of 
water bodies used for Minor Irr igation in the country was 523816, of which the number of water bodies in 
use and not in use are 443688 and 80128 respectively.  The Committee were informed that the data on 
the number of ponds is not available separately.  The Committee also note d the reply of the Ministry that 
inventorization of water bodies is feasible and in order to collect the details of water bodies, the Ministry of 
Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation has planned to undertake census of all 
water bodies in the co untry.  Noting the importance of water bodies for their potential to recharge ground 
water resources, the Committee recommend ed the Ministry to initiate urgent steps to complete 
inventorization of water bodies and also complete the exercise of undertaking census of water bodies, 
being planned by the Ministry, within a definite time -frame.  The Committee were surprised to find that 
even the data on number of ponds wa s not available separately with the Ministry, and they desire that a 
comprehensive assessment in this regard also is an imperative need to be made at the earliest.   Further, 
the Committee we re of the view that no programme/ scheme ha d been initiated by either the Union or 
State Government for desilting water bodies, which are in fact facing encroa chments from human 
settlements as well as plants/weeds etc.  The Committee, therefore, recommend ed that new initiatives in 
this regard be taken up by the Ministry for launching special programme for upkeep, maintenance and 
restoration of water bodies, espe cially in those areas which fall under the Dark Blocks, with sufficient 
budgetary allocation for its proper implementation.  Further, steps were recommended to be taken so that 
extraction of water from water bodies is limited only upto certain permissible level in order to guarantee the 
sustainable level of water bodies.  The Committee further recommended  strong measures need to be 
taken by the Government to undertake survey of the water bodies encroached upon all over the country 

 
21 
 
and steps be initiated for  removal of all encroachment therefrom.  Noting that th e extraction of ground 
water had not been regulated effectively which has led to serious decline in the ground water levels in 
many parts of the country, the Committee also desired that to restrain unnecessary use of ground water for 
irrigation and drinking purposes, installation of water meters be made mandatory on the principle of 
‘Beneficiary Pays’ in all tube -wells across the country.  In the Dark Blocks, special irrigation functional 
schemes be int roduced and farmers should be incentivized to grow more water efficient crops and adopt 
water efficient irrigation techniques like drip irrigation, sprinkler irrigation, etc. to reduce water consumption 
in agriculture and people should also be encouraged t o adopt and apply water efficient technologies and 
re-use of waste water. 
17. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“As regards the mandatory metering on principle of  'Beneficiary Pays' to all tube wells across the 
country, it is submitted that at present one SLP  is pending in Hon'ble Supreme Court of India (SLP 
No. 20888 of 2015: Ramesh Ailawadi v s UOI and Others) on pricing of ground water. The matter 
being sub-judice and also, being an issue falling under State subject, it is pr oposed to send a letter 
to all the States/UTs from M/o WR, RD&GR for taking action as per the observations of Standing 
Committee. A Draft letter is this regard would be submitted to MOWR, RD & GR. 
As informed, Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farme rs Welfare is already implementing 
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) with the vision of extending the coverage of 
irrigation ‘Har Khet Ko Pani’ and improving water use efficiency ‘More Crop Per Drop’ in a focused 
manner and to expand cultivabl e area under assured irrigation and improve on -farm water use 
efficiency. 
The matter of keeping water bodies encroachment free comes under the purview of concerned 
State Governments.  However, Secretary (WR, RD & GR)  vide letter dated 26.02.2016 has issue d 
an advisory to the States for keeping water bodies free from encroachment, removing 

 
22 
 
encroachment of existing water bodies and rejuvenate those water bodies, which have been 
encroached, in mission mode.” 
18. The Committee had recommended to the Ministry t o initiate urgent steps to complete 
inventorization of water bodies and also complete the exercise of undertaking census of water 
bodies, being planned by the Ministry, within a definite time -frame.  Also noting that even data on 
the number of ponds is not  available separately with the Ministry, the Committee had 
recommended that a comprehensive assessment in this regard be made at the earliest.  The 
Committee had further noted that no programme / scheme has been initiated for desilting water 
bodies which a re facing encroachments  from human settlements as well as plants / weeds etc., 
and had, therefore, recommended for taking new initiatives by launching special programme for 
upkeep, maintenance and restoration of water bodies, specially in those areas falli ng under the 
Dark Blocks, with sufficient budgetary allocation for its proper implementation.  They had also 
recommended for taking strong measures by the Government to undertake survey of the water 
bodies encroached upon all over the country and steps be taken for removal of all encroachments 
therefrom.  However, the reply of the Ministry has merely sought to skirt these issues by stating 
that “the matter of keeping water bodies encroachment free comes under the purview of 
concerned States Governments”.  T he Committee are totally dissatisfied with the reply, and they, 
therefore, reiterate their recommendation  with an expectation  that the Ministry would initiate the 
appropriate measures in this matter under intimation to them , within three months of presenta tion 
of this Report. 
F. National Perspective Plan on Ground Water and Task Force to assess Ground Water 
Resources. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 20 & 21) 

 
23 
 
19. The Committee note d that based on the criteria suggested by the Ground Water Resources 
Estimation Comm ittee (GEC 1997), assessment of ground water resources ha d been made and 
categorized under different assessment units.  Accordingly, 1071 assessment units ha d been identified as 
‘Dark’ (over-exploited) blocks, 217 as ‘Critical’ blocks and 697 ‘Semi -critical’ blocks in 2011.  According to 
the Ministry, the number of Dark (over -exploited) blocks ha d witnessed an increase of 765 in 2011 as 
compared with 2009.  The Committee also note d that vagaries of Monsoon rainfall resulting into reduced 
rainfall and exploi tation of ground water for irrigation, domestic and industrial purposes in a proportion 
more than the rainfall recharge are the main factors that have resulted in depletion of ground water.  The 
Committee were fully convinced that the ground water scenario  is heading towards a potential crisis in the 
future and that necessary corrective measures were needed to be undertaken by the Centre, State, Local 
governments/ bodies and all stakeholders, viz. villagers, urban dwellers, farmers, industrialists, Water 
Users Associations (WUAs), etc., without loss of further precious time.  To begin with, the Committee were 
of the view that a national perspective plan needs to be evolved by the government for efficient 
management, development and augmentation of the rapidl y-depleting ground water resources, and they, 
therefore, desire d that the Government expeditiously initiate steps for creation of a separate panel 
comprising experts, specialists and officials drawn from cross -sections of society to deliberate on and 
formulate the national perspective plan on ground water resources, which would prepare a roadmap for 
arresting the present declining trend of ground water and also work out a comprehensive strategy for 
meeting the increasing demands for ground water from the gr owing population in the decades to come.  
The Committee desired to be apprised of the action taken by the government in this regard at the earliest.  
The Committee note d that the ground water quality is gradually but surely declining everywhere.  
They also noted that a vast majority of ground water quality problems are caused by large scale 

 
24 
 
concentrated pollution such as industrial discharge, landfills, sub -surface injection of chemicals and 
hazardous waste.  In some other areas, elevated level of Arsenic in  ground water is caused by natural 
processes and also by application of fertilizers.  According to the Central Pollution Control Board, a vast 
majority of ground water quality problems are caused by contamination, over-exploitation or combination of 
the two.  Ground water pollution is difficult to detect, and the contamination is not detected until obnoxious 
substances actually appear in water used, by which time the pollution has often dispersed over a large 
area.  Noting further the statement of the Minis try of Drinking Water and Sanitation that nearly 85% of rural 
drinking water supply in the country is based on ground water and over -exploitation and subsequent 
ground water development is inducing more chemical contamination in aquifers, the Committee were 
convinced that concerted action is urgently required to be launched by the Ministry of Water Resources, 
River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation to reverse this highly alarming trend of ground water depletion / 
contamination.  The Committee, therefore, recommended that the Ministry, in coordination with other allied 
Ministries such as Environment, Forests & Climate Change, Agriculture, Drinking Water & Sanitation, 
Rural Development, Urban Development  may institute a task force to undertake detailed study /  
assessment of the health, productivity and status of ground water, including aquifers and submit a report in 
the matter with recommendations within a time -frame to protect augment and restore the underground 
water.  The Committee desired to be apprised of action taken by the Government in this regard.  
20. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“Proposal for Constitution of Committee on National Perspective Plan on Ground Water is being 
formulated.  
The regional offices of CGWB have  been requested to carry out the study recommended by the 
Hon’ble Committee or send a detailed proposal if outsourcing is required to carry out such a study.  

 
25 
 
CGWB under NAQUIM is in the process of compilation of data pertaining to aquifer 
characterization, ground water availability, utilization, chemical quality and formulation of 
sustainable management plan of the resources and resources enhancement. 
However, in order to assess the health, productivity and status of ground water due to multi -
sectoral utili zation and its impact on ground water regime, it is proposed to constitute inter -
ministerial Task Force as advised by the Hon’ble Standing Committee of Water Resources. 
Ministry of Urban Development support the recommendations of task force. Central Public  Health 
and Environmental Engineering Organization (CPHEEO), a technical wing of Ministry of Urban 
Development dealing with the matters related to Urban Water Supply & Sanitation may be involved 
in the above programme.” 
21. The Committee note with optimism  from the reply of the Ministry that an Inter-Ministerial 
Task Force is proposed to be constituted in order to assess the health, productivity and status of 
ground water due to multi -sectoral utilization and it s impact on ground water regime,  and they 
recommend that necessary follow -up steps to be taken by the Government to fructify the 
constitution of the proposed task force in a definite time -frame as recommended by the 
Committee.  The Committee also note that Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) under Natio nal 
Aquifer Mapping (NAQUIM) is in the process of compiling data pertaining to aquifer 
characterization, ground water availability, utilization, chemical quality and formulation of 
sustainable management plan of the resources and resources enhancement, and  they desire that 
this exercise be completed during 2016-17 itself.  As regards the Committee’s recommendation for 
constitution of a separate panel comprising experts, specialists and officials to deliberate on and 
formulate National Perspective Plan on gr ound water resources, the Committee note from the 
Ministry’s reply that a proposal for constitution of Committee on National Perspective Plan on 
Ground Water is being formulated.  The Committee are convinced that the ground water scenario 

 
26 
 
of the country is  headed towards a dangerous crisis in the near future, and they , therefore,  
recommend that the proposed constitution of Committee on National Perspective Plan on Ground 
Water be completed at the earliest by making concerted efforts by the Ministry  / CGWB - so that a 
roadmap is chalked out for arresting the present declining trend of ground water in the country 
and for working out a comprehensive strategy for meeting the increasing demands for ground 
water from the growing population in the decades to come.  The Committee would like to be 
informed of further action taken in this regard. 
G. Contamination of Underground Water by Polluting Industries in Dark Blocks. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
22. The Committee observe d from the reply of the Central Pollution Control Board that industries 
responsible for ground water as well as surface water pollution fall broadly in the categories of slaughter 
houses, distilleries, pulp and paper, tanneries, textiles, chemicals and dyeing industries.  The CPCB had 
undertaken a  comprehensive assessment of 88 industrially polluted areas in the country based on the 
Comprehensive Environmental Pollution Index (CEPI) out of which 43 industrial clusters in sixteen States 
had been classified as critically polluted areas (CPAs) with CEPI scores of 70 and above.  So far, 3 rounds 
of environmental quality monitoring (Air, Sur face Water and Ground Water) had  been undertaken by 
CPCB (in 2009, 2011,2013) at a total cost Rs. 21.43 lakh, Rs. 78.34 lakh and Rs. 56.00 lakh during 2009, 
2011 and 2013 respectively.  The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation also informed that directions ha d been issued by the CPCB to all the State Pollution Control 
Board (SPCBs) of 43 CPAs for installation of Continuous Ambient Air Q uality Monitoring Stations and 
Continuous Water Quality Monitoring Stations in each of the 43 CPAs.  The Committee were of the firm 
opinion that there is a need to keep a strict vigil on polluting activities of industrial establishments in the 24 

 
27 
 
CPAs, especially those located in the Dark Blocks Zones.  The Committee, therefore, recommend ed that 
the Ministry in coordination with the Central Pollution Control Board of the Ministry of Environment, Forests 
& Climate Change, devise an effective mechanism to ide ntify CPAs located in Dark Block areas and also 
to take steps to minimize and control the dumping of industrial waste into surface water as well as 
underground aquifers in these area.  Noting that comprehensive remedial action plan for the 43 identified 
critically polluted industrial clusters was prepared by SPCBs, the Committee desired the Ministry to strictly 
pursue with the CPCB/SPCBs for effective implementation of the comprehensive remedial action plan in 
order to reduce and minimize ground water pollu tion in the Dark Blocks zones.  Further noting that three 
rounds of environmental quality monitoring ha d been carried out by the CPCB through reputed 
environmental labs in 2009, 2011 and 2013, the Committee desire d that such monitoring activity by the 
CPCB be undertaken on an annual basis in those 24 CPAs.  The Committee also desire d that the Ministry 
keep tab on CPCB to ensure that its directions to SPCBs concerned of the 43 CPAs regarding installation 
of Continuous Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Stations and Continuous Water Quality Monitoring Stations 
are duly complied with by the SPCBs.  The Committee desired to be informed about further action taken in 
this regard. 
23. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“Ministry of Water Res ources, RD & GR has written several letters and D.O letters to Central 
Pollution Control Board (CPCB), but their Action Taken Report is still awaited.  A copy of this 
Action Taken Report is being endorsed to CPCB for necessary action.” 
24. The Committee, i n their 5 th Report (16th Lok Sabha) , had recommended the Ministry to (i) 
devise an effective mechanism with Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB)  to identify Critically 
Polluted Areas (CPAs) located in Dark Blocks and take steps to minimize / control the dumping of 
industrial waste in surface and underground aquifers in these areas, (ii) pursue with CPCB/SPCBs 

 
28 
 
(State Pollution Control Boards) for implementation of the comprehensive remedial action plan for 
43 critically polluted industrial clusters already prepared by SPCBs, (iii) undertake on annual basis, 
environmental quality monitoring by CPCB in 24 CPAs on line of three rounds of such monitoring 
undertaken by CPCB through reputed environmental labs in 2009, 2011 and 2013, and (iv) keep tab 
on CPCB for ensuring that its directions issued to SPCBs concerned of 43 CPAs  regarding 
installation of Continuous Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Stations are duly complied with by 
SPCBs.  Sadly, the reply of the Ministry has only indicated that the Committee’s recomm endations 
in the foregoing lines have been referred to CPCB, who is yet to send its Action Taken Report.  The 
Committee desire to be apprised of the Action Taken Report of the CPCB within a period of one 
month from the presentation of this Report. 
H. Implementation of 24X7 Monitoring Devices and Zero Liquid Discharge by Industries 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 23) 
25. The Committee noted that the CPCB has directed the SPCBs/PCCs (Pollution Control Committee) 
to install 24 x 7 real time monitoring devices at eff luent and emission discharge points in industrial units 
throughout the country.  Out of 2800 industries to which such directions were issued, nearly 50 per cent of 
the industrial units had  moved towards compliance.  More than 920 industries have installed 24 x7 
monitoring devices and another 400 units ha d moved towards Zero Liquid Discharge (ZLD).  Further, 
online monitoring data communication had been started by the industries to CPCB/SPCBs on the status of 
compliance with respect to effluents and emission s.  The Committee also note d that new industrial units in 
Distillery, Textile, Tannery, Chemicals, Fertilizers, Dyes and Pharmaceuticals ha d been mandated to 
achieve ZLD from the commissioning along with installation of 24 x 7 monitoring systems.  The exis ting 
units in these sector s were required to switch over to ZLD in a time bound manner and were required to 

 
29 
 
install web cameras instead of continuous effluent monitoring devices.  The Committee desire d that the 
CPCBs direction to SPCBs/PCCs regarding insta llation of 24x7 real time monitoring devices at effluent 
and emission discharge points in industrial units throughout the country be made a mandatory requirement 
for all heavy and medium industries.  They also desire d that the CPCB strictly monitor the imp lementation 
of its directions to SPCBs/PCCs in this regard so that no scope is left for emitting or discharging 
contaminated/ polluted air or waste water by the industries.  The Committee also note d that only 50% of 
the industrial units out of 2800 indust ries to which the directions had  been issued by CPCBs, have moved 
towards compliance and they desire d that the remaining 50% of industrial units may also be prevailed 
upon by CPCB for compliance.  The Committee further desire d that all industrial units loca ted in the Dark 
Blocks should be mandatorily required to install necessary devices for achieving ZLD (Zero Liquid 
Discharge) so that industrial wastes discharge to surface as well as ground water is kept at the bare 
minimum.  Additionally, the Committee de sired that all industries, especially those belonging to polluting 
categories such as slaughter houses, distilleries, pulp and paper, tanneries, textiles, chemicals and dyeing 
industries, be mandatorily required to treat their industrial waste through Comm on Effluent Treatment 
Plants (CETPs) and necessary steps may be initiated in this regard by CPCB at the earliest.  The 
Committee desired to be apprised of further action taken in this regard. 
26. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“CPCB has formulated an action plan for implementation of zero liquid discharge, water 
conservation and management practices in water polluting industries. The Action points are as 
under : 
(i) Preparation of Guidelines on techno-economic feasibility of implementation of  Zero 
Liquid Discharge (ZLD), water conservation and management practices in  water pollution 
industries, giving emphasis on Ganga Basin States. 

 
30 
 
(ii) Issue of directions to nine Ganga basin State Pollution Control Boards directing  to 
follow time targeted action plan in Distillery, Sugar, Pulp & Paper, Tannery  and Textile sectors. 
(iii) Preparation and submission of action plan to achieve Zero Liquid Discharge in 
 Tannery, Distillery and Textiles (Medium, Large and cluster based textile units). 
(iv) Distilleries have been directed to operate on ZLD. 
(v) Revised standards have been notified for Sugar industries. Wherein treated  effluent 
discharge quantity has been limited to 200 lit/tonne of cane crushed  with emphasis on water 
conservation and to reduce the pollution load. Effort is  being done to utilise the treated 
effluent in irrigation in order to achieve ZLD to  rivers.  
(vi) Revised charter for corporate responsibility has been implemented in Pulp &  Paper 
industries for reduction in water consumption. 
(vii) Revised standard for tanneries and textile sector are in the process of  notification. 
(viii) Revised standards for CETP have  been notified. 
 
Comprehensive Environmental Pollution Index (CEPI) 
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) in collaboration with Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), 
Delhi had carried out comprehensive environmental assessment of 88 prominent industrial clusters 
during 2009-10 based on Comprehensive Environmental Pollution Index (CEPI) criteria. CEPI is a 
rational number between 0 and 100, assigned  to a given location to characterize the environmental 
quality following the algorithm of source, pathway and receptor.  Out of identified 88 prominent 
industrial clusters, 43 industrial clusters in 16 States having CEPI score of 70 and above are 
identified as Critically Polluted Industrial Clusters, while industrial clusters with CEPI scores 
between 60 & 70 are categorized as severely polluted areas.  Considering the practical problem in 
calculation of CEPI score, CPCB has developed revised CEPI criterion. 
 
The revised Comprehensive Environmental Pollution Index (CEPI) is based on Sources of 
pollution, real time observed values of the pollutants in ambient air, surface water and ground 
water and in and around the industrial cluster and health related statis tics. For assessment of the 
environmental quality of the area i.e. CEPI score, the concept of SNLF i.e. a surrogate number 

 
31 
 
which represents the level of exposure (a function of percentage sample exceedence & 
exceedence factor) shall be used.  
 
Health component to be evaluated based on the health data available from major hospitals in the 
area was also retained in the revised concept. 
Action plan has been prepared for all CPAs and it has been monitored by SPCB & CPCB regularly. 
Ministry of Environment, Fores ts & Climate Change (MoEFCC) imposed moratorium on 
consideration of developmental projects in CPAs in all the 43 CPAs.  Subsequently, MoEFCC lifted 
the moratorium in a phased -manner.  Presently, moratorium has been lifted from 28 CPAs and re -
imposed in 08 CPAs inclusive Vapi (Gujarat) has been kept in abeyance vide MoEFCC’s office 
Memorandum dated 10.06.2014.  Currently, moratorium is in force in 6 CPAs namely - 
Ankaleshwar, Vatva, Vellore (North Arcot), Jodhpur, Pali, Najafgarh Drain Basin.  The status of 
moratorium in the 43 CPAs (State-wise) is given below: 
 
Status of Moratorium 
(as on 09.03.2016) 
State CPAs where 
moratorium has 
been lifted (28) 
CPAs where the re-imposition 
of moratorium is kept in 
abeyance 
CPAs where moratorium 
is currently in-force (15) 
Punjab (2) Mandi-
Gobindgarh 
Ludhiana (R-KIA) ------- 
Haryana (2) Faridabad Panipat (R-KIA) ------- 
Uttar 
Pradesh (6) 
Varanasi- Mirjapur 
Agra 
Noida 
Kanpur ( LR) 
Ghaziabad (R-KIA) Singraulli (R-
KIA) 
------- 
West Bengal 
(3) 
Howrah (LR) 
Haldia (LR) 
Asansole (LR) 
------- ------- 
Jharkhand 
(1) 
Dhanbad (LR) ------- ------- 

 
32 
 
Orissa (3) Angul-Talcher 
Ib valley 
Jharsuguda (R-KIA) ------- 
Chhattisgarh 
(1) 
Korba (LR) ------- ------- 
MP (1) ------- Indore (R-KIA) ------- 
Gujarat (6) Bhavnagar 
Junagarh 
Ahmedabad (LR) 
Vapi (R-KIA) Ankaleshwar 
Vatva 
 
Maharashtra 
(5) 
Tarapur 
Navi Mumbai 
Aurangabad 
Dombivalli 
 Chandrapur 
 
-------  
AP (2) Visakhapatanam 
(LR) 
Patancheru-Bollaram (R-KIA) ------- 
Karnataka 
(2) 
Mangalore 
Bhadravati 
------- ------- 
Tamilnadu 
(4) 
Coimbatore 
Cuddalore 
Manali (LR) 
------- Vellore (North Arcot) 
 
Kerala (1) Greater Kochin ------- ------- 
Rajasthan 
(3) 
Bhiwadi (LR) ------- Jodhpur, Pali 
Delhi (1) ------- ------- Delhi 
(Action Plan awaited from 
DPCC) 
Total 29 8 6 
LR stands for ‘Lifted vide MoEF’s O.M. dated 17th September, 2013  
R-KIA stands for ‘Re-imposed vide MoEF’s O.M. dated 17th September, 2013 and then implementation of 
provisions of this OM is kept in abeyance vide OM dated 10.06.2014 
 

 
33 
 
CPCB has been receiving numbers of representat ions from Gujarat State Pollution Control Board (GPCB) 
and other agencies of State Government of Gujarat on a regular basis for lifting of moratorium.  It has been 
decided that moratorium of CPAs be reviewed after carrying out another round of CEPI assessm ent based 
on the latest Environmental quality data in all the 43 CPAs after another round of CEPI assessment based 
on the latest environmental quality data.” 
 
27. Regarding the issue of contamination of underground water by industries, the Committee 
had recommended that the directions of the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) to the State 
Pollution Control Boards (SCPCBs) / Pollution Control Committees (PCCs) regarding installation of 
24X7 realtime monitoring devices at effluent and emission discharge p oints in industrial  units 
throughout the country be made mandatory for all the heavy and medium industries.  They had 
also desired that all industrial units located in the Dark Blocks be mandatorily required to install 
necessary devices for achieving Zero Liquid Discharge (ZLD)  so that industrial wastes discharge 
to surface and ground water is minimized.  The Committee had further recommended that all 
industries of polluting category, i.e. slaughter houses, distilleries, pulp and paper, tanneries, 
textiles, chemicals and dyeing industries, be mandatorily  required to treat their industrial waste 
through Common Effluent Treat ment Plants (C ETPs) and necessary steps be initiated by CPCB in 
this regard.  However, the reply of the Ministry has suggested that the C ommittee’s 
recommendations in this regard had been referred to the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) 
and its Action Taken Reply is still awaited.  The Committee strongly recommend the Ministry to 
vigorously pursue the matter with the Central Pollution  Control Board (CPCB), and apprise them 
about the factual position within one month of the presentation of this Report. 
I. Water Quality Affected Habitations 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 24) 

 
34 
 
28. The Committee noted that the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation have informed that as per 
online ‘Integrated Management Information System’ (IMIS), as on 18 th May, 2015 States ha d reported 
63,282 water quality -affected rural habitations (Arsenic -1482, Fluoride-11309, Salinity-16289, Iron-32020, 
Nitrate-2182) in the country.  Further, as reported by the States on online IMIS of the Ministry, heavy / toxic 
metals had been found in nearly 8862 rural in habitations, of which  Punjab, Assam and West Bengal we re 
the most affected States in terms of concurrence of emergi ng contaminants in drinking water sources.  In 
this connection, the Committee further note d that excessive intake of Fluoride and Arsenic in drinking 
water poses serious health hazards especially in quality affected rural habitations .  The Committee, 
therefore, desired that a concerted national programme be launched by the Ministry for the 63282 water 
quality affected rural habitations.  They also desire d that a new initiative may be taken up for those 8862 
rural habitations which are facing contamination o f heavy / toxic metals, especially for the States of 
Punjab, Assam and West Bengal, which are the most affected in terms of occurrence of emerging 
contaminants in drinking water sources.   The Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation had  advised all 
States to go in for surface water based, piped water supply PWS) for providing safe drinking water in this 
water quality aff ected areas and these States had  been advised to provide community water purification 
plants.  The Committee were pleased to note that most State Governments ha d shifted their schemes 
towards surface water based piped water scheme, especially in water quality affected areas.  The 
Committee were also happy to note that in Fluoride affected Karnataka, they ha d installed 1320 reverse 
osmosis (RO) plants whereas in the State of Punjab, 1876 RO Plants ha d been installed for providing safe 
water for drinking and cooking purposes.  The Committee, therefore, desired the Government to tackle the 
problem of drinking water in the rural areas on war footin g and make all out efforts for provision of piped 
water supply to maximum rural areas in the country, wherever feasible.  The Committee further 

 
35 
 
recommended to incentivize the worst affected States of Assam and West Bengal to go in for installation of 
RO plants as we done in Punjab and Karnataka.  They also recommend ed that special steps be taken by 
the Ministry in coordination with the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation to promote community water 
purification plants in the water quality affected rura l habitations all over country and desire d to be apprised 
accordingly.  
 
29. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“In each of the State, where cluster water supply is being provided through ground water sources, 
Regional Offices o f Central Ground Water Board being Member of State Level Source Selection 
Committee (SLSSC) recommends necessary remedial measures if required.  
As reported by the States on Integrated Management Information System (IMIS) of Ministry of 
Drinking Water & Sa nitation (MoDWS), as on 03.02.2016, there are 60,953 water quality affected 
rural habitations in the Country which are yet to be provided safe drinking water as below:  
Total 
water 
quality 
affected 
habitations 
 
Fluoride 
affected 
habitations 
Arsenic 
affected 
habitations 
Nitrate 
affected 
habitations 
Iron 
affected 
habitations 
Salinity 
affected 
habitations 
60,953 11,414 1,312 2,212 30,740 15,275 
 
The above figure indicates that 2,329 water quality affected habitations have been tackled by the 
States from the p reviously submitted data by the Ministry (reported at IMIS, as on 18.05.2015).  
Furthermore, MoDWS has taken the issue of heavy/toxic metals contamination reported on the 
website of the Ministry with the States.  The States were advised to check the data a nd delete the 
erroneous figures. Accordingly, States have revised the number of habitations affected with 
heavy/toxic metals to previously reported figure of 8,862 to 5,862 (as on 03.02.2016) as per the 
revised laboratory records entered into IMIS for the year 2015 -16. However, if the laboratory 

 
36 
 
reports of all financial years is taken into cognizance since 2009 -10, the total number of 
heavy/toxic metals affected habitations are 16,094. 
MoDWS has prepared a Strategy Plan to provide safe drinking water to 90%  of the rural population 
of the Country preferably through surface water based piped water supply schemes by the year -
2022 as a long -term sustainable solution, subject to availability of funds.  The Strategy Plan to 
tackle water quality affected habitations is as below: 
Long term sustainable solution:  Since Piped Water Supply (PWS) schemes based on safe 
water sources, is the sustainable solution, MoDWS has advised the States to cover all water 
quality affected habitations with PWS schemes, preferably based on surface water as sources. 
In addition, World Bank assisted projects are presently being implemented in 4 Low Income States 
(Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Assam & Jharkhand), for which the funds are provided through World Bank.  
Water quality affected habitations are also prioritized under this project. 
Short Term solution: Since commencement of large PWS schemes take about 4 -5 years, and the 
people living in these affected habitations cannot be put to risk of consuming contaminated water, 
the Ministry has advise d all the States to install Community Water Purification Plants (CWPPs) in 
all water quality affected habitations prioritizing Arsenic and Fluoride affected habitations, as a 
short term measure to provide 8 -10 litres per capita per day (lpcd) of water (meant for drinking and 
cooking purposes only). 
States are tackling water quality affected habitations by implementation of PWS schemes (as long 
term measure) or by installation of CWPPs (as short term measures) with the funds available 
under the National Rura l Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP).  However, as the funding for 
NRDWP was reduced substantially in 2014-15, installation of new CWPPs in different water quality 
affected habitations was found to be difficult with the available funds under NRDWP.  The matt er 
was taken at the higher level.  Since Arsenic and Fluoride in drinking water are the most hazardous 
elements from health point of view, it was decided that NITI Aayog would provide Rs. 1000 crore to 
the States having Arsenic and Fluoride affected rural habitations as below: 

 
37 
 
1.   Rs. 800 crore for installation of CWPPs for providing 8 -10 lpcd of safe drinking water meant for 
drinking and cooking purposes in 19 States having Arsenic and Fluoride affected rural habitations. 
This would be an interim measure till PWS schemes are commissioned in these habitations. 
CWPPs to be installed by the funds provided by NITI Aayog should, preferably, be commissioned 
by July, 2016 and Operation & Maintenance would rest with the State Governments.  Allocation to 
the affected States is based on population affected in these States. 
2.   Rs. 200 crore would be provided for PWS schemes in water quality affected habitations with a 
specific funding pattern having internal and external monitoring and certain administrative 
expenses of NITI Aayog.  Since Rajasthan has the largest number of Fluoride affected habitations 
and West Bengal has the largest number of Arsenic affected habitations in the Country, special 
focus has been given to prioritize/cover the problems in these States.  NITI Aayog and MoDWS 
discussed with the Principal Secretaries of the States and identified such surface water based 
PWS schemes which require only last mile connectivity.  It was decided that by provisioning of 
certain funds for this purpose, large number  of Arsenic and Fluoride affected habitations would be 
covered. Based on the proposal to be submitted by the States of Rajasthan and West Bengal, NITI 
Aayog will release funds so that the Arsenic and Fluoride affected habitations are tackled, 
preferably, by March, 2017. 
Funds to be provided by NITI Aayog would be in addition to the funds to be provided as 100% 
Central assistance to the States. This would be one time additional Central assistance. The fund to 
be provided by NITI Aayog would not be a part of the NRDWP funds. However, the schemes would 
be monitored jointly by NITI Aayog and MoDWS.” 
30. The Committee note that the Ministry of Drinking Water and  Sanitation has prepared a 
Strategy Plan to provide safe drinking water to 90% of the rural population of the country through 
surface water based Piped Water Supply (PWS) schemes by the ye ar 2022 as a long -term solution.  
As long -term solution  under this Strategy Plan , the MoDWS  has advised the States to cover all 
water quality affected habitations with PWS  schemes, preferably based on surface water as 
sources.  In addition, World Bank assisted projects are presently being implemented in 04 low -

 
38 
 
income States (Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Assam and Jharkhand), for which the funds are provided 
through World Bank and water quality habitations are prioritized under this project.  The 
Committee desire that the coverage of the World Bank assisted projects presently being 
implemented in 04 low-income States may be widened to bring more States / UTs under its ambit in 
order to provide PWS to maximum rural areas of the country, and necessary steps be taken by the 
Ministry with MoDWS in this regard.  The Committee also note that in view of the fact that 
commencement of large PWS schemes take about 4 -5 years, the Ministry have advised all the 
States to install community Water Purification plants (CWPPs) in all water affected habitations, 
prioritizing Arsenic and Fluoride affected habitations, as a short -term measure to provide 8 -10 
litres per capita per day (1pcd) of water (mean t for  drinking and cooking purposes only).  The 
Committee  while appreciating these measures, are however dismayed that  the reply of the 
Ministry has not spelt out steps taken by the Government to implement the Committee’s 
recommendations, viz. (i) launch ing of a concerted programme for 63,282 water quality affected 
rural habitations and taking up of a new initiative for 8862  rural habitations facing heavy / toxic 
metal contamination in Punjab, Assam and West Bengal and (ii) incentivizing worst affected St ates 
of Assam and West Bengal to go in for installation of RO plants as done in Punjab and Karnataka.  
The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation and desire that urgent initiatives be 
taken by the Ministry in the matter in consultation with t he MoDWS.  The Committee would like to 
be informed of further action in this regard. 
J. Fluoride and Arsenic Contamination in West Bengal 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 25) 

 
39 
 
31. The Committee note d the reply of the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation about the Fluoride contamination in Birbhum district and Arsenic contamination in 
Murshidabad district of West Bengal.  They further noted that among various measures taken by the Union 
Government and the State Government of West Benga l, in coordination with UNICEF, a Master Plan on 
fluoride mitigation in Birbhum district was under preparation and would  be finalized on publication of the 
report of the Fluoride task Force on technological option.  The Committee hoped that the said Master Plan 
would be finalized expeditiously and desire d to be apprised of the details of the same after its finalization.   
The Committee also note d that 47 exploratory wells had been constructed by the CGWB in Birbhum 
district, out of which 17 wells having fluo ride free water had been handed over to the State authority.  The 
Committee desired the Ministry/CGWB to intensify its efforts in Birbhum district for construction of more 
fluoride free exploratory well in order to ameliorate the distress of people affecte d by fluoride 
contamination.  The Committee further note d that for tackling ground water contamination in the arsenic 
affected blocks of Murshidabad district, the Government of West Bengal had constituted a Working Group 
comprising of eminent experts in th e related fields from both the State and Union Government 
organizations as well as from academic institutions to examine and investigate into the matter.  The 
Committee desired to be informed of the report of the Working Group in the matter.  They also noted that 
the CGWB, Kolkata, had  carried out detailed ground water exploration in arsenic affected parts of 
Murshidabad district and 43 exploratory wells in 14 blocks ha d been constructed till March, 2014, out of 
which 22 arsenic free exploratory wells have been handed over and accepted by the State Departments.  
Further, a collaborative project ha d been conducted by the CGWB with the United Nations Industrial 
Development Organization (UNIDO) to explore the efficacy of the arsenic removal units in the arseni c 
infected areas of West Bengal.   The Committee, while appreciating such efforts to eliminate arsenic 

 
40 
 
contamination of ground wate r in these areas of West Bengal,  also desired to be apprised of the outcome 
of the collaborative project conducted by the CGWB with UNIDO in this regard. 
32. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“As informed by Public Health Engineering Department (PHED), Government of West Bengal, the 
Master Plan on Fluoride mitigation has been prepared, but the Report i s yet to be published. 
However, several mitigation measures have already been undertaken as per the proposed Master 
Plan & these are as follows:  
 A considerable number of piped water supply schemes have been implemented  
 in the affected areas, tapping sub-surface water in river bed. 
 Rainwater harvesting schemes in a number of schools have been    
 commissioned. 
 Pond based water supply schemes with minor treatment facilities have been  
 implemented. 
 Where any alternative source is not available, extraction of groundwater from  
 deeper aquifer free from fluoride have been arranged. 
Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) is going to undertake an exploration programme in Fluoride 
affected areas of Birbhum by deploying a DTH rig for delineation of Fluoride free aquifers. 
Out of 729 affected villages in West Bengal, mitigation measures have already been taken up by 
commissioned or ongoing schemes in 572 villages. 
The Working Group/ Arsenic Task Force, constituted by Government of West Bengal, examine the 
magnitude of p roblem from time to time, identify appropriate technology for mitigation, formulate 
action plan and discuss operation and  maintenance issues as well as monitoring & evaluating 
aspects.  Based on chemical analysis, carried out in the Water Testing laborator ies set up in West 
Bengal, at present, 83 blocks have been identified as Arsenic affected by Arsenic Task Force.  
PHED has prepared a Master Plan for mitigation of Arsenic menace & the Committee has 

 
41 
 
approved the Plan. The Master Plan is being commissioned & the progress is being monitored by 
the Committee. 
A collaborative project had been conducted by CGWB with the United Nations Industrial 
Development Organization (UNIDO) to explore the efficacy of the Arsenic removal units in the 
Arsenic infected areas of West Bengal in 2000-2001. 
Water quality of 16 community -based Arsenic removal units comprising six technologies viz. 
AIIH&PH by Oxidation –Coagulation- flocculation –Sedimentation, Pal Trockner through Granular 
Ferric Hydroxide, WSI through resin based fi lter, AMAL through activated alumina , PHED by 
oxidation –coagulation-flocculation-sedimentation, APIRON through activated alumina and 40 
domestic units comprising four technologies viz. AMAL through activated alumina, AIIH&PH by 
Oxidation –Coagulation- flocculation –Sedimentation, Pal Trockner through Granular Ferric 
Hydroxide & JU  by fly ash -10 samples  of each technology was examined for determination of 
Arsenic, Iron and heavy metals along with other parameters of general chemistry for the water 
samples before and after it has undergone the treatment process. All the water samples were 
analysed in the chemical laboratory of Eastern Regional office of CGWB. By and large, all the 
Arsenic removal equipments tested are effective in bringing down the concen tration of input water 
(the initial concentration of Arsenic varies from place to place as available in field)  to less than 
0.05 mg/l, although there are few instances, when the output water does contain noticeable 
Arsenic concentration. The concentration of Arsenic in the treated water above the permissible limit 
can mainly be attributed to poor maintenance & monitoring than any inherent weakness in the 
technology itself.  Effectiveness of Arsenic removal media is governed by the total quantity of water 
that has passed through it, its initial Arsenic concentration and its removal capacity.  Since the 
collection of water samples was a time bound programme, it was not feasible to collect sample with 
fresh media every time with the same input of initial conce ntration. Again backwashing of the filter 
media may also influence the removal capacity, which is done off and on.  Arsenic removal 
equipments were subjected to input water of Arsenic concentration that range between wide limits.  
As a result, it is diffic ult to judge their efficacy in terms of bringing down input water concentration 
to less than 0.05 mg/l in the output water.  Experiments conducted by passing Arsenic rich water at 
three different controlled rates of flow through three different types of me dia i.e., granulated Ferric 

 
42 
 
Hydroxide of Pal Trockner, activated alumina of AMAL and Alkon supplied by UNIDO reveals that 
the rate of reduction of Arsenic concentration in the output water enhances with slower rate of flow 
through the media, indicating the  influence of longer contact time of water with media in the 
removal process. The concentration of both Arsenic and Iron is high in the backwash samples that 
were analysed. Arsenic concentration which goes up to 2.52 mg/l is mainly high in the samples of 
community based plants. Iron concentration is also high and is of the order of 33 mg/l in some of 
the samples. 
The study recommended that a Research and Development study is required for safe disposal of 
Arsenic Sludge otherwise backwashing may form a secondary source of contamination.  
It is also recommended in the study report that periodic monitoring, over a considerable period of 
time, of any Arsenic removal equipment should be made mandatory; otherwise it is an act of sheer 
injustice to provide Arsenic rich water to the affected people in the name of arsenic free water. 
It was observed that social acceptance of Arsenic removal equipment, especially the domestic 
filters are yet to gather momentum and requires awareness programmes for their promotion.” 
33. As per the reply of the Ministry, the Master Plan on Fluoride mitigation has been prepared, 
but the Report is yet t o be published.  The Committee also note from the reply of the Ministry that 
several mitigation measures have already been undertaken as per the proposed Master Plan, viz. (i) 
A considerable number of Piped Water Supply (PWS) schemes have been implemented in the 
affected areas, tapping sub -surface water in river bed (ii) rain water harvesting schemes in a 
number of schools have been commission ed, (iii) pond -based water supply schemes with minor 
treatment facilities have been implemented, and (iv) where any alternative source is not available, 
extraction of ground water from deeper aquifer free from fluoride have been arranged.  The 
Committee regret that the information furnished to the Committee pertaining to fluoride mitig ation 
in Birbhum (West Bengal) is  couched in general terms without containing supporting data and 

 
43 
 
details.  They , therefore, strongly advise the Ministry to desist from s uch tendency in future.  The 
Committee also desire to see an early publication of the Master Plan on Fluoride mitigation in West 
Bengal, and apprise them of the steps taken in this regard.  As regards the Arsenic mitigation, the 
Committee note that the Ministry ’s reply is silent on (i) Report of the Working Group of eminent 
experts (Union & States), academic institutions set up to investigate ground water contamination 
in arsenic blocks of Murshidabad district, and (ii) the outcome of the collaborative project 
conducted by CGWB with United Nations Industrial Development Organisation (UNIDO) to explore 
the efficacy of arsenic removal units in arsenic infected areas of West Bengal, as recommended by 
the Committee.  The Committee are dismayed at the half -baked reply  of the Ministry, and they 
would like to be  informed of the details of follow -up action on the above two recommendations of 
the Committee at the earliest. 
K. Pollution of Ground Water in Greater NOIDA and NCR 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 26) 
34. The Committee noted the reply of the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation regarding the deteriorating ground water quality in Greater NOIDA, that as per the order 
dated 14.05.2015 of the National Green Tribunal (NGT), the Uttar Pradesh Po llution Control Board 
(UPPCB) had filed a status report in NGT, wherein, v iolation by eight industries had  been detected about 
‘No Objection Certificate (NOC)’ issued by the CGWA in the Bisrakh Block of Greater NOIDA. They also 
noted that the NGT ha d issued ‘show cause notices’ returnable by 15.07.2015, as to why these industries 
should not be closed and that further action shall be taken up on directions of the NGT after it has 
considered the replies from the eight industries at the next hearing on 15.07.2 015.  The Committee further 
noted that as per ground water sampling carried out by the CGWB during 2013 -14 in Chapraula Industrial 

 
44 
 
Area, Bisrakh block, of Gautam Budhh Nagar district,  heavy metals above permissible limits were 
reported in respect of iron (from all samples), aluminum (Roopvas), lead (Khera Chauganpur and Durai 
Taalpur) and nickel (Chera Chaunganpur).  The Committee desired that early remedial steps be taken by 
the Ministry in coordination with the Ministries of Drinking Water & Sanitation, Environment, Forests& 
Climate Change to address the issue of contamination of ground water with heavy metals in Greater 
NOIDA and apprise the Committee accordingly.  They also desire d to be apprised of the further action 
taken by the government in respect of the eight industries which violated the ‘No Objection Certificate 
(NOC)’ of CGWA while undertaking extraction of ground water in the Bisrakh Block of Greater NOIDA.  
Noting the serious situation arising out of the ground water contamination / pollution in many parts of the 
country, the Committee further recommended that the adverse impact of ground water pollution in India be 
studied and documented in detail and corrective measures as warranted therein initiated by the 
Government.  The Committee also rec ommend the Government to seriously consider constituting of a 
single, centralized agency at the earliest, which would be mandated to curb, control and eliminate ground 
water contamination/ pollution in the country.  The Committee desired to be apprised of the specific steps 
taken in this direction.  
35. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change (MoEFCC) has constituted a High Power 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri TSR Subraman ian, Ex-Cabinet Secretary to generate 
mechanism for addressing the pollution issues. The committee will be apprised of the specific 
steps taken in this direction by MoEFCC on the basis of High Power Committee report along with 
the recommendations. 
The matt er is sub -judice and ‘show cause notice’ has since been given by the Hon’ble NGT to 
these industries.  The concerned industries are in process of filing their reply before the Hon’ble 
NGT in responses to the ‘show cause notice’.   Since the Hon’ble NGT is taking action, CGWA is 

 
45 
 
not taking any separate action. The final outcome of the matter would be intimated to the 
Committee. 
CGWB periodically monitors ground water quality of shallow aquifers on a regional scale, once 
every year mainly for geo-genic parameters. 
CGWB also carried out water quality studies in all the 88 industrial clusters identified by Central 
Pollution Control Board (CPCB). The studies indicated that in most of the cases excess 
concentration of few chemical constituents beyond norms prescri bed by Bureau of Indian 
Standards (BIS) are present.  In Uttar Pradesh, ground water pollution studies were undertaken in 
12 industrial clusters at Ghaziabad, Noida, Kanpur, Agra, Varanasi -Mirzapur, Moradabad, Aligarh, 
Ferozabad, Mathura, Meerut, Bulandshahr-Khurza, Singrauli. 
In Ghaziabad, the study was undertaken in Sahibabad industrial area which includes medicine/ 
Pharmacy, textile, beverages, iron & steel, casting & printing.  A number of dyeing units also exist 
in the area.  It was found that in few l ocations Electrical Conductivity, Total Hardness, Ca, Mg, NO 3 
and metals like Fe, Mn and As were above the permissible limits. 
In the NOIDA industrial belt industries like Automobiles, IT services, Electronics, Electrical, Paints 
are dominant.  Ground wate r pollution study undertaken here showed that only a few samples 
were found to be contaminated with Chlorine (Cl), Iron (Fe) and Lead (Pb) above permissible 
limits.  The reports were circulated to concerned State Departments. 
As informed, the Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation monitors drinking water quality through the 
States and provide funds to the States under National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) 
for treatment of contaminated drinking water for supply of safe drinking water to the rural 
population. 
Taking note of the observations of Hon’ble Members of the Committee on findings of CGWB on 
presence of some toxic heavy metals in ground water in some villages near Chapraula Industrial 
Area of Bisrakh Block of Gautam Budh Nagar district, a D.O  letter has been written by Joint 
Secretary (Water) to the Principal Secretary, Rural Development, Government of Uttar Pradesh to 
look into the problem and send an updated status of the extent of ground water contamination 

 
46 
 
along with the remedial measures taken to mitigate the problem.  The Ministry is awaiting the reply 
from the State Government of Uttar Pradesh and will furnish the same immediately after the reply 
is received.” 
36. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry regarding the ‘show caus e notice’ given 
by National Green Tribunal (NGT) to 08 industries , which were detected as having violated ‘No 
Objection Certificate (NOC)’ issued by CGWA in the Bisrakh Block of Greater NOIDA.  The 
Committee desire to be apprised of the final outcome of th e case, in due course.  Regarding the 
Committee’s recommendation to study and document along  with corrective measures to be 
adopted by the Government on the adverse impact of ground water pollution in India, the 
Committee are dissatisfied that the reply of  the Ministry has not mentioned new initiatives to 
address this issue but have merely stated the routine monitoring done by the CGWB.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation / CGWB i mmediately launch a programme in this regard, which is 
implementable in a specified time -frame, and also widely publicize their findings in mass media, 
CGWB website to create awareness among the general public on this issue.  Further noting that 
the reply of the Ministry is silent on the Committee’s recommendation for early constitution of a 
single, centralized agency with a mandate to curb, control and eliminate ground water 
contamination / pollution in the country, the Committee also reiterate that the Go vernment may 
take specific steps in this regard, and apprise them at the earliest. 

 
47 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
The Committee note that India is endowed with a rich and v ast diversity of natural resources, water 
being the most precious of them. In our country, ground water is a common -pool resource (CPR), used by 
millions of farmers. It also remains the only drinking water source in most of our rural households; besides, 
many industries depend upon ground water. The Committee also note that over the last four decades, 
around 84% of the total addition to the net irrigated area has come from ground water. Further, India is by 
far the largest and fastest growing consumer of gr ound water in the world. However, what is distressing is 
that ground water is being exploited beyond sustainable levels with an estimated 30 million ground water 
structures in play. The Committee are gravely concerned that the country is on the path toward s a serious 
water crisis in the near future due to over -extraction and quality deterioration of ground water. The 
Committee also note with a sense of alarm that despite the fact that around 84% of the total addition to the 
net irrigated area in the country  has come from ground water resources, the concerned 
Ministry/Department have not shown any interest in adoption of latest technology in this vital area and as 
such it has so far remained largely neglected. In view of the foregoing, the Committee would, th erefore, 
strongly recommend that the specific steps be taken by the Central Government / States / UTs and 
concerned agencies in regard to adoption of modern technology for judicious, efficient management, 
utilization and development of ground water resourc es (States/UTs wise) in the country within a year after 
the presentation of this Report. The Committee would categorically like to be apprised of the concrete 
action taken in this direction. 
Reply of the Government 

 
48 
 
Steps taken by Central Ground Water Board towards application of modern technology in Assessment and 
Management of Ground Water Resources: 
 Application of Remote Sensing Techniques and Geographic Information System for analysis of 
data in aquifer mapping studies 
 Application of  Isotope techniques in ground water studies 
 Information dissemination in public domain through Government e-portals (website and WRIS). 
As informed, Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare is promoting micro irrigation 
system (drip and sprinkler), conservatio n of rain water by constructing water harvesting structure/farm 
ponds under its ongoing programmes/schemes, including recently launched scheme of Pradhan Mantri 
Krishi Sinchaee Yojana (PMKSY) for judicious and efficient use of available water resources acr oss the 
country. 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
The Committee observe that the number of Dark Blocks (Over -exploited assessment units) in the country 
as per assessment made in 2011 was 1071. The figure for Dark Blocks in 2009 was 802. The Committee 
note the M inistry’s reply that indiscriminate withdrawal of ground water for irrigation, industries and 
domestic purposes had led to over -exploitation of ground water in 1071 units. They also note in particular 
that while there are 1071 Dark Blocks a covering a tota l area of about 5 lakh square kms., information on 
land use in Dark Blocks is not readily available. The Committee note with concern that agricultural land 
comprises a vast chunk of area which forms the source of livelihood for millions of farmers. They, 
therefore, desire that the Ministry / Central Ground Water Board initiate urgent steps to assess the areas in 
proportion of agricultural land in India falling under Dark Blocks and apprise them accordingly. The 
Committee further note the Ministry’s reply th at no study has been undertaken by the Central Ground 
Water Board regarding the losses caused to agriculture, economy, health and environment due to the Dark 

 
49 
 
Blocks and they, therefore, recommend that a study in this regard should also be initiated by the Ministry / 
Central Ground Water Board within six months of the presentation of this Report and the Committee be 
apprised about the details of the study. 
Reply of the Government 
Information on total agricultural land falling in ‘Over-Exploited’ blocks is under compilation.  
As the matter of impact of over exploitation is related to losses of agriculture produce, economy, 
health and environment, Central Ground Water Board through Ministry of Water Resources, RD & GR 
proposes to constitute an inter-ministerial Committee to initiate the recommended study. 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Agriculture had informed them that the reason for over -
exploitation in the North -Western part of India i.e. Punjab and Haryana, is indiscrimin ate extraction of 
ground water, mainly for irrigation purposes. In the Western part of the country, i.e. Rajasthan and Gujarat, 
over-exploitation is caused by arid climate, resulting in scanty and irregular rainfall and consequent less 
discharge, while in the Southern part, i.e. Karnataka and Tamil Nadu, the large number of over -exploited 
blocks are caused because of the hard rock terrain which permits less recharge, resulting in water 
stressed conditions. The Committee also note with concern the reply of t he Ministry of Water Resources, 
River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation that the situation regarding ground water scenario is 
aggaravating in Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan because of the unsuitable cropping pattern, i.e. the paddy 
that is grown in Punjab an d Haryana uses up a large quantum of water. They also note the suggestion of 
the Ministry to improve the distressing ground water scenario in Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan, viz.  
(i) On-Farm Water Management techniques such as Laser Levelling, Zero Tillage,  use of Tensiometer in 
Paddy cultivation, adoption of improved irrigation methods, adoption of micro irrigation (sprinkler & drip), 

 
50 
 
mulching for reduction of evaporation losses, timely transplanting of paddy, conjunctive use of canal and 
ground water etc.;  (ii) implementation of a conceptual document entitled ‘Master Plan for Artificial 
Recharge to Ground Water’ by the States concerned; and (iii) revamping agricultural power supply and 
pricing structure, in view of the fact that the use of flat rates or fre e electricity, combined with unreliable 
supplies, tends to adversely affect the use of ground water. The Committee, therefore, recommend that (i) 
the Ministry immediately take follow -up action with the State Governments of Punjab, Haryana and 
Rajasthan and provide them technical know -how to adopt and implement the requisite water management 
techniques as outlined above. They also recommend that three States may also be encouraged to 
implement the ‘Master Plan for Artificial Recharge to Ground Water’ which h as already been circulated to 
them for effective implementation. Further, acknowledging that the free supply of electricity to farmers at 
times indirectly encourages wasteful draft of ground water, the Committee recommend that the States 
concerned may be p revailed upon to undertake an exercise for revamping the agricultural power supply 
and pricing structure for implementation to curb wasteful and excessive withdrawal of water by the 
irrigation sector. 
Reply of the Government 
Master Plan for Artificial Rech arge to Ground Water in India, 2013 has been provided to the Chief 
Secretaries of all the States including Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan  with request for its implementation.  
It has also been provided to all Hon’ble Members of Parliament with the request f or its implementation in 
their constituencies. 
MoWR, RD & GR has also requested the Chief Secretaries of all the States including Punjab, 
Haryana and Rajasthan for implementation of rainwater harvesting & artificial recharge programme. 
Department of Agricu lture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare has informed that they already 
promoting various interventions relating to on farm water management, laser levelling, mulching etc.  

 
51 
 
under its ongoing programmes/schemes and also educating farmers by extension wings and  Krishi Vigyan 
Kendras (KVKs) for efficient management of water resources by use of micro -irrigation (drip & sprinkler) 
and suitable cropping sequences as per availability of irrigation water. 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
The Committee further note that as per the latest assessment year 2011, ground water withdrawal 
for irrigation purpose accounts for 97.96% in the Punjab, 94.58% in Haryana and 88.47% in Rajasthan. 
The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that no specific study has been conducted by  the 
Central Ground Water Board so far on the problem of excessive withdrawal of groundwater due to paddy 
cultivation in these States. In view of the grim ground water scenario prevailing in the three States, the 
Committee strongly recommend that the Minis try should set up a study group comprising experts, 
professionals, officials drawn from their own Ministry / Central Ground Water Board, Ministry of Agriculture, 
State Governments of Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan and reputed institutions to make a scientif ic 
assessment of the impact of excessive withdrawal of ground water due to paddy cultivation in the States of 
Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan and to come out with remedial measures to curtail water draft without 
compromising on the output of paddy in these States and apprise the Committee accordingly. 
Reply of the Government 
An Inter-Ministerial Study Group will be set up. 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
The Committee note that (as on Mar ch, 2011), the annual ground water withdrawal for domestic 
and industrial purpose was 22.71 BCM, which constituted only 9.26% of the total ground water withdrawal. 

 
52 
 
In contrast to this, the ground water withdrawal for irrigation purposes reached the stagger ing level of 
222.36 BCM or 90.75% of the total ground water withdrawal in the country. This, no doubt, underlines the 
grim reality that the prime cause for the declining ground water level in the country has been the 
withdrawal of ground water by the irrig ation sector. The Committee are of the view that one of the factors 
responsible for this scenario has been the absence of clear -cut policy guidelines on ground water draft / 
extraction till now.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the Government should come out with a well -
defined policy on ground water extraction for ensuring long -term sustainability of the depleting ground 
water resources at the earliest. They also believe that free supply of electricity to farmers may tend to 
encourage wasteful draft of ground water, and hence, it should be regulated with proper accountability by 
the States where such schemes exist. Also, arrangements should be put in place for a proper time 
separation for pump operation for the farmers as well as the general public. I n addition, in areas where 
farmers have developed their own resources for extraction of ground water, such an operation may also be 
regulated by the authorities concerned, and where there is Government infrastructure in this regard, 
private initiatives sho uld be discouraged or banned. The Committee desire the Government to initiate 
steps in conjunction with the State Governments and authorities / agencies concerned to ensure 
compliance of the aforesaid recommendations and apprise them accordingly. 
Reply of the Government 
Central Ground Water Board has requested all the Chief Secretaries in the State Governments and 
the Administrators in the UTs for immediate intervention and action as per the recommendations of 
Standing Committee.   
The issues / points sugge sted have been considered by the Review Committee of Central Ground 
Water Authority (CGWA) Guidelines and suitable measures have been incorporated as draft proposal in 
revised guidelines of CGWB. 

 
53 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
According to the Ministry of Wat er Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation, the 
Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) has notified 162 areas (Districts/ Blocks/ Mandals/ Talukas/ 
Municipal areas) in the country for regulation of ground water development and management.  In thes e 
notified areas, installation of new ground water structure is not permitted without prior specific approval of 
authorized officers.  The Committee also note that altogether 133 complaints have been received from the 
notified areas for violation of direct ions of the CGWA.  Advisory Committees under the Chairmanship of 
District Collector / Deputy Commissioner with Members drawn from various organizations have been 
constituted and illegal wells have been sealed and action being taken by the authorized office rs under the 
environment (Protection) Act, 1986.  In non -notified areas, the Central Ground water Authority accords ‘No 
Objection Certificate’ (NOC) for the withdrawal of ground water to new projects and also for the expansion 
of industrial / infrastructur e mining – projects with the condition to adopt artificial recharge measures, 
mandatory recycling and reuse of water.  Further, the CGWA has informed all State Pollution control 
Boards to set up monitoring mechanism to verify requirement and actual withdra wal of ground water 
including implementation of artificial recharge measures by industries/ projects.  In addition, random 
inspections by the Central Ground Water Board are carried out to check that the industries/ projects using 
ground water are complying  with the conditions laid down in the NOC granted to them.  The Committee 
are, however, constrained to note that no timeline for inspection is fixed at present, but such inspections 
are ordered/ directed only upon receipt of complaints of violations.  The Committee desire that a system of 
regular inspections should be instituted in respect of industries / projects to whom NOC has been issued 
by the CGWA to ensure compliance of conditions mentioned in the NOC in addition to the system of 
random inspection already in place.  The Committee also desire that the CGWA vigorously pursue with all 

 
54 
 
State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) to ensure that an appropriate, effective monitoring mechanism is 
set up by them to verify the requirement and actual withdrawal water , including implementation of artificial 
recharge measures by industries/ projects.  Further, stringent action may be taken against non -complying 
industries / projects and they be booked under the provisions of the environment (Protection) Act, 1986.  
The Committee also desire that mandatory annual review of the status of implementation of the regulatory 
directions issued by the CGWA may be carried out by the Government to ensure the effective compliance 
by the State Government/ implementing authorities.  
Reply of the Government 
The CGWA grants NOC for a limited period of 2 years with opportunity to Industry/project for 
compliance of conditions of NOC. At the time of renewal of NOC, the CGWA ensures that the conditions of 
NOC are complied with and the Indust ry/Project submits the supporting evidence on compliance of 
conditions of NOC, failing which the NOC is not renewed for further period.  
CGWA in the past has written letters to all the State Pollution Control Boards to ensure appropriate 
and effective monitoring mechanism at the time of collecting water cess from the Industries/projects.   
The authorised officers i.e. the Collector/Deputy Commissioner/ District Magistrate/ Regional 
Director/Officer-in-Charge have been advised to take stringent action agains t industries/projects violating 
the directions of CGWA under relevant provisions of ‘The Environment Protection Act, 1986’. 
Chief Secretaries of State/UTs having areas as notified by CGWA and all the implementing 
authorities have been requested to furnish mandatory annual review report. 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
The Committee note that directions had been issued on 08.10.2009 to all the Residential Group 
Housing Societies/ Institutions/ Schools/ Hotels/ Industrial Establishments falling in the over -exploited and 
critical areas (except in waterlogged areas) in the country to adopt Rooftop Rainwater Harvesting System 

 
55 
 
in their premises and also for implementation of ground water recharge measures along all National 
Highways/ State Highways and other major roa ds by the CRRI, National Highways Authority of India, 
CPWD, State PWDs; along rail tracks by the Indian Railways; in the Stadia by the Sports Authority of 
India, BCCI and Departments of Sports and Youth Affairs; and in the Airports by the Airport Authority  of 
India, Ministry of Civil Aviation, for Promoting Rain Water Harvesting / adoption of Artificial Recharge to 
Ground Water (except in the water -logged area).  Further, the CGWA had issued directions vide letter 
dated 08.08.2006 to the Chief Secretaries o f 12 States and Administrators in Union Territories having 
over-exploited blocks to take necessary measures to promote/ adopt artificial recharge to ground water/ 
rain water harvesting.  However, despite these regulatory measures, not much has happened by way of 
improvement.  To cite an example, the Committee note that there were wastages of water from five star 
hotels in Delhi.  They also note that the Hon’ble National Green Tribunal (NGT) had issued billable 
warrants against 12 hospitals in Delhi for not installing Rainwater Harvesting in their hospital premises, 
which have been recalled upon application by the hospitals concerned.  Noting that an MoU has been 
signed by the Government of NCT of Delhi with 33 hotels for completion of installation of Rain Wa ter 
Harvesting System, installation of STPs (Sewage Treatment Plants), Solar Water Heating System, Organic 
Waste Converter and Re -use of treated effluent leading to Zero discharge and that, all these 33 hotels 
have installed Rain Water Harvesting structure s and also installed STPs to treat and re -use the waste 
water, and also that the hotels have also been asked to obtain permission from the Delhi Jal Board (DJB) 
for ground water extraction, the Committee urge the Government to ensure that these Hotels do n ot 
extract water without obtaining prior permission of the DJB in the NCT of Delhi.  The Ministry has informed 
that a Committee consisting of officials from the department of Environment, Delhi Pollution Control 
Committee (DPCC), academicians of IIT and Ja mia Millia Islamia University had been reviewing the 

 
56 
 
progress of compliance by these hotels from time to time relating to Green Hotels Guidelines.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of the review/ evaluation work being done by the Said  
Committee after completion of the exercise.  They also desire the Government to ensure that the 12 
hospitals in Delhi duly install rain water harvesting structures in their premises.  The Committee would 
further desire that the Government take new initiat ives to promote re -use of recycled water in very city 
town of the country, and would further like to be apprised of action taken in the matter by the Government.  
Reply of the Government 
The Hon’ble National Green Tribunal, New Delhi is issuing directions t o all the hotels, hospitals, 
builders and developers in the matter of OA -59/2012 and OA-94/2013.  Hon’ble NGT has appointed Local 
Commissioners and inspection teams for carrying out inspections to verify status of rainwater harvesting 
and ‘No Objection Cer tificate (NOC)’ for extraction of ground water.  Hon’ble NGT is also taking coercive 
action against erring/non -compliant hotels, hospitals, builders and developers.  Joint inspection teams 
headed by Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA), as constituted by NGT, are carrying out inspections 
and filing reports at present.   Final outcome of the above pending matters will be apprised to the 
Committee. 
Ministry of Urban Development has already revised the building bye-laws for reuse for recycle 
water which have been implemented / enacted in 61 cities across 30 States/ UTs. 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
The Committee note that the Government had circulated a Model Bill to regulate and cont rol the 
development of ground water to all States/UTs as far as in 1970 to enact suitable legislation, which was re -
circulated in 1992, 1996 and revised and re -circulated against on 28.02.2005, incorporating a new chapter 

 
57 
 
on Rainwater Harvesting for rechar ge to ground water.  The Model Bill stipulates (i) establishing of State 
Ground water Authorities to frame polices for administration of the legislation; (ii) empowering the State/ 
Union Territory Government to control and / or regulate the abstraction of ground water; and (iii) requiring 
users of ground water to seek permission from the State Ground Water Authority to sink a well in the 
notified area.  Regarding the implementation of the Model Bill, the Committee were apprised that 15 
States/ UTs have so f ar enacted necessary legislation on the Model Bill, another 15 States/UTs have 
taken initiatives for enactment of the Model Bill, while another 5 States of the North -East region, i.e. 
Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura do not feel the  need for enactment of such 
legislation.  In this connection, the Committee further note that the Supreme Court, while reviewing the 
Model Bill circulated by the Government in 1970 to the States/ Union Territories, had directed the National 
Environmental E ngineering Research Institute (NEERI) in 1996 to examine and submit a report in this 
regard.  They further note that a report from NEERI has since been received which, among others, 
included (i) Regulation on exploitation through legislation and effective administration with focus on water 
conservation, recycle, reuse, restrictions to ensure equitability in water availability and pragmatic land use; 
and (ii) regulation by education, i.e., by creating awareness amongst the people to enable their 
participation and traditional knowledge in sustainable water resource management.  The Committee urge 
the Government to initiate specific action for implantation of the recommendations of NEERI under the 
framework of the existing constitutional provisions within six m onths of the presentation of this Report and 
apprise the Committee accordingly.  The committee will also like the Ministry to pursue with all the States/ 
UTs and especially those 15 States/ UTs which have taken initiatives for enactment of Model Bill so th at 
concrete results are achieved in this regard.  The Committee further note that for regulation of supply of 
water and use of water, the ground water regulations have been implemented by various other countries 

 
58 
 
which include Ground Water Rule of United St ates Environmental Protection Agency (2006), California 
Water Code, Ground Water Management (2014), Oregon Ground Water Quality Protection Act, US (1989), 
British Columbia, Canada (2001), Water Resources Act, UK (1991), Water Act, UK (2003), and European 
Committee Environmental Objectives (Ground Water) Regulations, Ireland (2010).  They desire that if 
needed be a review of the adequacy or otherwise of the provisions of the Model Bill be also undertaken 
keeping in view the provisions made under the various Acts/ regulations as stated above.  In different 
countries of the world, within a definite time -frame to ensure that no loophole is left in the Model Bill for 
regulating ground water laws in various States/UTs in the country.  
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga rejuvenation has constituted a 
Committee to Re -draft National Water Framework Bill, Model Bill for Conservation, Protection and 
Regulation of Ground Water and River Basin Management Bill, which will look in to all aspects related to 
Model Bill.  
The Committee has submitted draft “Model Bill for Conservation, Protection and Regulation of 
Ground Water”, which has been placed in public domain for comments / suggestions. 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
The Committee  note with concern that the ground water monitoring data of the Central Ground 
Water Board for Pre -Monsoon 2014, compared with the decadal mean of Pre -Monsoon (2004 -2014), 
indicates that out of the total wells analyzed, around 39% wells are showing decline  in ground water levels 
as observed in parts of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Daman & Diu, Delhi, Gujarat, Haryana, 
Karnataka, Kerala, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal.  However, as per ground water level 
data, the situation cannot be t ermed as drought like situation.  They also note that the ‘Dark (Over -
exploited) Blocks’ covering 1071 assessment units, i.e. 16.21% of the total units, hold implications such as 

 
59 
 
significant decline in ground water levels, critical (water) position/ situat ion in the Northern States, drying 
up of wells, deterioration in ground water quality, increasing energy consumption for lifting water, and need 
to regulate extraction, development and management of ground water.  The Committee, therefore, note 
with concern that a very grim future awaits large parts of the country on the water front.  They further note 
that the Central Ground Water Board carries out ground water monitoring four times a year on regional 
scale through a network of observation wells, which inc reased in number from 15653 to 20698 across the 
country during the period from March 2012 -13 to March, 2014.  However, while appreciating the increase 
in absolute numbers of ground water observation wells, has shown decrease in respect of several States/ 
UTs, viz. Andhra Pradesh (from 982 to 879), Delhi (from 162 to 120), Karnataka (from 1507 to 1273), 
Rajsathan (from 1118 to 1111) and Chandigarh (from 28 to 25) during the same period.  The Committee 
desire to be apprised of the reasons for the fall the num ber of ground water observation wells in these 
States/ UTs.  They also note that ground water level data has been collected from all the States except for 
Mizoram, Sikkim and UT of Lakshadweep where water level monitoring is not being carried out.  The 
Committee will like to know the reasons for not undertaking water level monitoring in the States of 
Mizoram, Sikkim and UT of Lakshadweep and also urge the Ministry to initiate corrective steps in this 
regard and apprise them accordingly.  
Reply of the Government 
The ground water observation wells being monitored by Central Ground Water Board four times in 
a year has been further increased to on 22,339 (As on March, 2015).   State-wise details are given at 
Annexure-IV. 
As observed by the Standing Committee, tho ugh there is a general increase in ground water 
observation wells in the Country, however, in few States, the number of observation wells has decreased 

 
60 
 
as compared to the previous year.  Also, there are some States/UTs in which there is no ground water 
observation wells, the reasons for above is as given below:  
1. Majority of observation wells identified by CGWB for monitoring are private wells.  
2. In Andhra Pradesh, total number of ground water observation wells has increased; however, the 
number appears to be reduced due to separation of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana.  
3. In Karnataka, number of ground water observation wells has been increased to 1866 (in the year 
2015) from 1273 (in the year 2014). 
4. In Rajasthan and Chandigarh, the reduction in number of observat ion wells is not significant and 
reduction is mainly due to drying up of observation wells (Dug Wells) and abandoning due to 
various development activities. 
5. In Delhi, reduction in number of observation wells is mainly due to urbanization and development 
activities. 
Regarding the absence of ground water observation wells in the States/UT of Sikkim, Mizoram and 
Lakshadweep, it is to submit that all efforts are being made by CGWB for acquisition of water level data 
through community participation involving local people from the respective State. 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
According to the Ministry of Urban Development, revision of building by -laws for mandatory 
Rainwater Harvesting I all buildings has been implemented / enacted in 60 cites across 29 States/ U Ts, 
viz. Andhra Pradesh (4), Arunachal Pradesh (1), Assam (1), Bihar (2), Chandigarh (1), Chhattisgarh (1), 
Goa (1), Gujarat (4), Haryana (1), Himachal Pradesh (1), Jammu & Kashmir (2), Jharkhand (1), Kerala (2), 
Karnataka (2), Madhya Pradesh (4), Maharash tra (5), Manipur (1), Meghalaya (1), Mizoram (1), 
Puducherry (1), Punjab (2), Odisha (2), Rajasthan (2), Tamil Nadu (3), Tripura (1), Uttarakhand (3), Uttar 
Pradesh (7) and West Bengal (2).  They have also informed that by -laws on re-use of recycled water have 

 
61 
 
been implemented/ enacted in 61 cities across 30 States/ UTs.  In this connection, the Committee note 
that the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) had ended on 31.03.2014 and a 
new Urban Rejuvenation Mission is under consideration  of the Ministry for which the guidelines are being 
finalized.  The Committee will like the Ministry to expeditiously launch the new Urban Rejuvenation Mission 
and work on it in a time-bound manner and apprise them accordingly.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Urban Development has launched the new Urban Rejuvenation Mission named Atal 
Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) with the purpose : 
 Ensure that every household has access to a tap with assured supply of water and sewerage 
connection. 
 Increase the amenity value of cities by developing greenery and well maintained open spaces.  
 Reduce pollution by switching to public transport or constructing facilities for non -motorized 
transport (eg. Walking and cycling). 
The Mission focuses on the following thrust areas : 
 Water supply  
 Sewerage facilities and Septage management  
 Storm water Drain to reduce flooding 
 Pedestrian, non-motorized and public transport facilities, parkind spaces. 
 Enhancing amenity values of cities by creating and upg rading green space, parks and recreation 
centers, especially for children. 

 
62 
 
Earlier, MoUD use to give project-by-project sanctions.  In AMRUT, this has been replaced by approval 
of the State annual action plan once a year by the MoUD and the State have to g ive project sanctions and 
approval at their end to make States equal partners in planning and implementation of projects.  Five 
hundred cities will be taken up under AMRUT. 
The total outlay for AMRUT is Rs. 50,000 crore for five years FY 2015 -16 to FY 2019 -20 and the 
mission will be operated as a centrally sponsored scheme. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation had organized three events under the ‘India Wat er Week’ during 2012, 2013 and 
2015 at an approximate total expenditure of Rs. 8.42 crore to resolve water related issues and create 
awareness on ground water. The Committee also note the Ministry’s reply that organization of ‘‘India 
Water Week’ provides a  forum for interaction with stakeholders, policy makers, professionals, managers, 
academicians, etc., from States and various foreign countries and helps in having better understanding of 
the issues pertaining to water, identifying the most rational approa ch to water development and 
management and projecting know -how available in the country.  Acknowledging that public participation 
and social awareness among the masses is a pre -requisite for the success of any initiative taken for 
addressing the problems a ssociated with ground water depletion and pollution, the Committee are 
encouraged to observe that academicians, students and urban local bodies are already involved in India 
Water Week and that during the one day workshop on ‘Harmara Jal – Hamara Jeewan’ o rganized in 
various districts, representatives from NGOs/WALMIS (Water and Land Management Institutes) / 
Panchayati Raj Institutions / Departments of Agricultural / Horticulture/ Watershed Development/ 
PRD/PHED working in the districts were included as mem bers of the organizing committee.  The 

 
63 
 
Committee hope that the Ministry will continue its Endeavour for organizing mass awareness programme 
with participation of all stakeholders and various sections of the community.  They also note that given the 
fact that the overall stage of ground water development has reached 62% of net ground water availability, 
focused efforts be made towards highlighting the issues related to ground water depletion and pollution.  
The committee, therefore, recommend that the Minist ry evolve concrete measures to give ground water 
related issues more importance in all activities organized during such water awareness programmes.  
They also desire that the ‘India Water Week’ of the Ministry be synchronously organized on a permanent, 
annual basis at all State capitals as well, so that the impact of the programme permeate.  Additionally, 
elected representatives at the Panchayat level, such as Sarpanch, village ward members, etc. and 
Corporation in urban local bodies may be trained about th e basics of ground water, its withdrawal effects, 
reasons for contamination, health hazard effects etc. along with the need for taking remedial measures in 
order to make the villagers and other beneficiaries aware in this regard.       
Reply of the Government 
With reference to the observations of the Committee it is submitted that ground water related 
issues are being given importance in all the Media Campaigns undertaken by MoWR, RD & GR.  To 
provide further impetus to the issues concerning water sector in cluding ground water, ‘JAL KRANTI 
ABHIYAN’ was launched simultaneously at Jaipur, Shimla and Jhansi on 05.06.2015. Jal Kranti Abhiyan is 
being observed during 2015 -16 to spread awareness on water conservation and management in the 
Country through a holisti c and integrated approach involving all stakeholders and making it a mass 
movement.  Various activities include Jal Gram Yojana, Development of Model Command Area, Pollution 
Abatement and Mass Awareness Programme. A number of workshops are to be conducted by CWC, 
CGWB at State/UT level. 
As a part of Jal Kranti Abhiyan the Ministry through CGWB organized one day “Bhujal Manthan” at 
Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, Haryana on 21.08.2015. Public Representatives, Ground Water 

 
64 
 
Experts, Representatives of Cen tral & State Governments, Farmers, Students and NGO etc. from across 
the country participated in this program for discussion and deliberation during various technical sessions.  
A book containing selected articles was also released during this program. 
One day workshop on “HAMARA JAL - HAMARA JEEWAN” was taken up during organization of 
India Water Week-2015 in various districts, where, Scientists, Engineers, PRIs Water Communities, Public 
Health Engineering Department officers, Agriculture officers, BDOs, o ther stakeholders and NGOs 
deliberated on issues of water conservation, finding indigenous solutions for meeting the demands and 
suggested future road map to manage water for growth. Participation from school students was an integral 
part at the programme for sensitizing the next generation for water conservation. 
Grand National Level One Day Conferences at 10 State Headquarters (Lucknow, Kolkata, 
Bangalore, Jodhpur, Bhopal, Hyderabad, Ahmedabad, Pune, Guwahati and Patna) are being organized 
under ‘Jal Kranti Abhiyan’. 
CGWB has regularly been publishing booklets/ pamphlets/ brochures etc. on various water 
conservation messages under Information Education & Communication (IEC) scheme.  As regards to Rain 
Water Harvesting/ Artificial Recharge to ground water, CGWB has published the guidelines, manual, 
booklets etc., which are available in the public domain at the website of CGWB. 
PRIs, State Government Officials, NGOs, Progressive Farmers and other stakeholders at 
grassroots level are being trained in the Tier III training of Rajiv Gandhi National Ground Water Training 
Institute. 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
The Committee also observe that several notable outcomes/ recommendations have emerged 
from the India Water Week events of 2012, 2013 and 2015.  These inclu de, among others, (i) need for 
adoption of water ethics in policies and practices for planning and management of water resources; (ii) 
need for scientific assessment of environmental and ecological needs of the river and creation of adequate 
storage needs to augment the flow during lean season; (iii) need for judicious deployment of all  measures 

 
65 
 
for utilization of ground water as well as surface water in order to ensure their sustainability; (iv) need to 
frame policy and to design monitoring network based on available tools and technology for ensuring 
effective and extensive monitoring of water quality as also of waste water quality (v) need to treat waste 
water as resources and need to develop business model involving local entrepreneurship for making 
sewage treatment process a profitable proposition rather than a welfare work; and (vi) stress on 
participation of stakeholders in water management, i.e. ‘Jan Andoland’.  The Committee ardently hope and 
expect that the Ministry will initiate efforts to concreti ze these findings/ recommendations which emerged 
during the three India Water Week events of 2012, 2013 and 2015 and apprise the Committee accordingly.  
They also desire that the area specific factors of ground water depletion be publicized regularly in th e print 
and electronic media especially in the States falling under the Dark Blocks, and useful devices/ techniques 
to avoid ground water depletion and adoption of conservative measures such as Rain water Harvesting/ 
Artificial Recharge to ground water be highlighted regularly and widely to the people.  
Reply of the Government 
The recommendations emerged out of India Water Week events are utilized for taking up new 
initiatives/programmes etc.  In this connection, a half page coloured advertisement on climat e change, in 
leading newspapers of Hindi, English and regional languages, was issued on 18 th  October, 2015 to 
highlight direct/indirect effects of climate change on water resources, the contributory factors and the 
recommended practices to conserve water by adopting efficient/ better water management practices to 
meet challenges of climate change in connection with 21 st Conference of Parties held at Paris during 30 th 
November, 2015 to 11th December, 2015. 
Central Ground Water Board ( CGWB) has regularly bee n publishing booklets/ pamphlets/ 
brochures etc. on various water conservation messages under Information Education & Communication 
(IEC) scheme.  As regards to Rain Water Harvesting/ Artificial Recharge to ground water, CGWB has 

 
66 
 
published the guidelines, manual, booklets etc., which are available in the public domain at the website of 
CGWB. 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
The Committee note that based on the criteria suggested by the Ground Water Resources 
Estimation Committee (GEC 1997), assessment of ground  water resources have been made and 
categorized under different assessment units.  Accordingly, 1071 assessment units have been identified 
as ‘Dark’ (over-exploited) blocks, 217 as ‘Critical’ blocks and 697 ‘Semi -critical’ blocks in 2011.  According 
to the Ministry, the number of Dark (over -exploited) blocks has witnessed an increase of 765 in 2011 as 
compared with 2009.  The Committee also note that vagaries of Monsoon rainfall resulting into reduced 
rainfall and exploitation of ground water for irrigation , domestic and industrial purposes in a proportion 
more than the rainfall recharge are the main factors that have resulted in depletion of ground water.  The 
Committee are fully convinced that the ground water scenario is heading towards a potential crisis  in the 
future and that necessary corrective measures need to be undertaken by the Centre, State, Local 
governments/ bodies and all stakeholders, viz. villagers, urban dwellers, farmers, industrialists, Water 
Users Associations (WUAs), etc., without loss o f further precious time.  To begin with, the Committee are 
of the view that a national perspective plan needs to be evolved by the government for efficient 
management, development and augmentation of the rapidly -depleting ground water resources, and they, 
therefore, desire that the Government expeditiously initiate steps for creation of a separate panel 
comprising experts, specialists and officials drawn from cross -sections of society to deliberate on and 
formulate the national perspective plan on ground wa ter resources, which would prepare a roadmap for 
arresting the present declining trend of ground water and also work out a comprehensive strategy for 
meeting the increasing demands for ground water from the growing population in the decades to come.  
The Committee will like to be apprised of the action taken by the government in this regard at the earliest.  

 
67 
 
Reply of the Government 
Proposal for Constitution of Committee on National Perspective Plan on Ground Water is being 
formulated.  
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 21 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Para No. 21) 
The Committee note that the ground water quality is gradually but surely declining everywhere.  
They also note that a vast majority of ground water quality problems are cau sed by large scale 
concentrated pollution such as industrial discharge, landfills, sub -surface injection of chemicals and 
hazardous waste.  In some other areas, elevated level of Arsenic in ground water is caused by natural 
processes and also by applicatio n of fertilizers.  According to the Central Pollution Control Board, a vast 
majority of ground water quality problems are caused by contamination, over-exploitation or combination of 
the two.  Ground water pollution is difficult to detect, and the contamin ation is not detected until obnoxious 
substances actually appear in water used, by which time the pollution has often dispersed over a large 
area.  Noting further the statement of the Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation that nearly 85% of rural 
drinking water supply in the country is based on ground water and over -exploitation and subsequent 
ground water development is inducing more chemical contamination in aquifers, the Committee are 
convinced that concerted action is urgently required to be launched by the Ministry of Water Resources, 
River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation to reverse this highly alarming trend of ground water depletion / 
contamination.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry, in coordination with other allied 
Ministries such as Environment, Forests & Climate Change, Agriculture, Drinking Water & Sanitation, 
Rural Development, Urban Development  may institute a task force to undertake detailed study / 
assessment of the health, productivity and status of ground water, including aquifers and submit a report in 

 
68 
 
the matter with recommendations within a time -frame to protect augment and restore the underground 
water.  The Committee will like to be apprised of action taken by the Government in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
The regional offices of CGWB have been requested to carry out the study recommended by the 
Hon’ble Committee or send a detailed proposal if outsourcing is required to carry out such a study.  
CGWB under NAQUIM is in the process of compilation of data per taining to aquifer 
characterization, ground water availability, utilization, chemical quality and formulation of sustainable 
management plan of the resources and resources enhancement. 
However, in order to assess the health, productivity and status of grou nd water due to multi -
sectoral utilization and its impact on ground water regime, it is proposed to constitute inter -ministerial Task 
Force as advised by the Hon’ble Standing Committee of Water Resources. 
Ministry of Urban Development support the recommend ations of task force. Central Public Health 
and Environmental Engineering Organization (CPHEEO), a technical wing of Ministry of Urban 
Development dealing with the matters related to Urban Water Supply & Sanitation may be involved in the 
above programme. 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 21 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Para No. 23) 
The Committee note that the CPCB has directed the SPCBs/PCCs (Pollution Control Committee) 
to install 24 x 7 real time monitoring devices at effluent a nd emission discharge points in industrial units 
throughout the country.  Out of 2800 industries to which such directions were issued, nearly 50 per cent of 
the industrial units have moved towards compliance.  More than 920 industries have installed 24 x7 
monitoring devices and another 400 units have moved towards Zero Liquid Discharge (ZLD).  Further, 

 
69 
 
online monitoring data communication has been started by the industries to CPCB/SPCBs on the status of 
compliance with respect to effluents and emissions.  T he Committee also note that new industrial units in 
Distillery, Textile, Tannery, Chemicals, Fertilizers, Dyes and Pharmaceuticals have been mandated to 
achieve ZLD from the commissioning along with installation of 24 x 7 monitoring systems.  The existing 
units in these sectors are required to switch over to ZLD in a time bound manner and are required to install 
web cameras instead of continuous effluent monitoring devices.  The Committee desire that the CPCBs 
direction to SPCBs/PCCs regarding installation of 24x7 real time monitoring devices at effluent and 
emission discharge points in industrial units throughout the country be made a mandatory requirement for 
all heavy and medium industries.  They also desire that the CPCB strictly monitor the implementati on of its 
directions to SPCBs/PCCs in this regard so that no scope is left for emitting or discharging contaminated/ 
polluted air or waste water by the industries.  The Committee also note that only 50% of the industrial units 
out of 2800 industries to whi ch the directions have been issued by CPCBs, have moved towards 
compliance and they desire that the remaining 50% of industrial units may also be prevailed upon by 
CPCB for compliance.  The Committee further desire that all industrial units located in the Dark Blocks 
should be mandatorily required to install necessary devices for achieving ZLD (Zero Liquid Discharge) so 
that industrial wastes discharge to surface as well as ground water is kept at the bare minimum.  
Additionally, the Committee desire that a ll industries, especially those belonging to polluting categories 
such as slaughter houses, distilleries, pulp and paper, tanneries, textiles, chemicals and dyeing industries, 
be mandatorily required to treat their industrial waste through Common Effluent Treatment Plants (CETPs) 
and necessary steps may be initiated in this regard by CPCB at the earliest.  The Committee will like to be 
apprised of further action taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 

 
70 
 
 CPCB has formulated an action plan for implementa tion of zero liquid discharge, water 
conservation and management practices in water polluting industries. The Action points are as under :  
(i) Preparation of Guidelines on techno -economic feasibility of implementation of Zero Liquid 
Discharge (ZLD), water cons ervation and management practices in water pollution industries, 
giving emphasis on Ganga Basin States. 
(ii) Issue of directions to nine Ganga basin State Pollution Control Boards directing to follow time 
targeted action plan in Distillery, Sugar, Pulp & Paper, Tannery and Textile sectors. 
(iii) Preparation and submission of action plan to achieve Zero Liquid Discharge in Tannery, Distillery 
and Textiles (Medium, Large and cluster based textile units). 
(iv) Distilleries have been directed to operate on ZLD. 
(v) Revised standar ds have been notified for Sugar industries. Wherein treated effluent discharge 
quantity has been limited to 200 lit/tonne of cane crushed with emphasis on water conservation 
and to reduce the pollution load. Effort is being done to utilise the treated effl uent in irrigation in 
order to achieve ZLD to rivers.  
(vi) Revised charter for corporate responsibility has been implemented in Pulp & Paper industries for 
reduction in water consumption. 
(vii) Revised standard for tanneries and textile sector are in the process of notification. 
(viii) Revised standards for CETP have  been notified. 
 
Comprehensive Environmental Pollution Index (CEPI) 
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) in collaboration with Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), 
Delhi had carried out comprehensive environ mental assessment of 88 prominent industrial clusters during 
2009-10 based on Comprehensive Environmental Pollution Index (CEPI) criteria. CEPI is a rational 
number between 0 and 100, assigned to a given location to characterize the environmental quality 
following the algorithm of source, pathway and receptor.  Out of identified 88 prominent industrial clusters, 
43 industrial clusters in 16 States having CEPI score of 70 and above are identified as Critically Polluted 
Industrial Clusters, while industrial clusters with CEPI scores between 60 & 70 are categorized as severely 
polluted areas.  Considering the practical problem in calculation of CEPI score, CPCB has developed 
revised CEPI criterion. 

 
71 
 
The revised Comprehensive Environmental Pollution Index (CEPI) is based on Sources of 
pollution, real time observed values of the pollutants in ambient air, surface water and ground water and in 
and around the industrial cluster and health related statistics. For assessment of the environmental quality 
of the area i.e . CEPI score, the concept of SNLF i.e. a surrogate number which represents the level of 
exposure (a function of percentage sample exceedence & exceedence factor) shall be used.  
Health component to be evaluated based on the health data available from major  hospitals in the 
area was also retained in the revised concept. 
Action plan has been prepared for all CPAs and it has been monitored by SPCB & CPCB regularly. 
Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change (MoEFCC) imposed moratorium on consideration o f 
developmental projects in CPAs in all the 43 CPAs.  Subsequently, MoEFCC lifted the moratorium in a 
phased-manner.  Presently, moratorium has been lifted from 28 CPAs and re -imposed in 08 CPAs 
inclusive Vapi (Gujarat) has been kept in abeyance vide MoEFC C’s office Memorandum dated 
10.06.2014.  Currently, moratorium is in force in 6 CPAs namely - Ankaleshwar, Vatva, Vellore (North 
Arcot), Jodhpur, Pali, Najafgarh Drain Basin.  The status of moratorium in the 43 CPAs (State -wise) is 
given below: 
 
Status of Moratorium 
(as on 09.03.2016) 
State CPAs where 
moratorium has 
been lifted (28) 
CPAs where the re -
imposition of moratorium is 
kept in abeyance 
CPAs where 
moratorium is 
currently in-force (15) 
Punjab (2) Mandi-Gobindgarh Ludhiana (R-KIA) ------- 
Haryana (2) Faridabad Panipat (R-KIA) ------- 
Uttar Pradesh 
(6) 
Varanasi- Mirjapur 
Agra 
Noida 
Kanpur ( LR) 
Ghaziabad (R -KIA) Singraulli 
(R-KIA) 
------- 
West Bengal 
(3) 
Howrah (LR) 
Haldia (LR) 
Asansole (LR) 
------- ------- 

 
72 
 
Jharkhand (1) Dhanbad (LR) ------- ------- 
Orissa (3) Angul-Talcher 
Ib valley 
Jharsuguda (R-KIA) ------- 
Chhattisgarh 
(1) 
Korba (LR) ------- ------- 
MP (1) ------- Indore (R-KIA) ------- 
Gujarat (6) Bhavnagar 
Junagarh 
Ahmedabad (LR) 
Vapi (R-KIA) Ankaleshwar 
Vatva 
 
Maharashtra 
(5) 
Tarapur 
Navi Mumbai 
Aurangabad 
Dombivalli 
 Chandrapur 
 
-------  
AP (2) Visakhapatanam 
(LR) 
Patancheru-Bollaram (R-KIA) ------- 
Karnataka (2) Mangalore 
Bhadravati 
------- ------- 
Tamilnadu 
(4) 
Coimbatore 
Cuddalore 
Manali (LR) 
------- Vellore (North Arcot) 
 
Kerala (1) Greater Kochin ------- ------- 
Rajasthan (3) Bhiwadi (LR) ------- Jodhpur, Pali 
Delhi (1) ------- ------- Delhi 
(Action Plan awaited 
from DPCC) 
Total 29 8 6 
LR stands for ‘Lifted vide MoEF’s O.M. dated 17th September, 2013  

 
73 
 
R-KIA stands for ‘Re -imposed vide MoEF’s O.M. dated 17 th September, 2013 and then 
implementation of provisions of this OM is kept in abeyance vide OM dated 10.06.2014 
 
CPCB has been receiving numbers of representations from Gujarat State Pollution Control Board 
(GPCB) and other agencies of State Government of Gujarat on a regular basis for lifting of moratorium.  It 
has been decided that moratorium of CPAs be reviewed after carrying out another round of CEPI 
assessment based on the latest Environmental quality data in all the 43 C PAs after another round of CEPI 
assessment based on the latest environmental quality data.   
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 27 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Para No. 27) 
Further noting that the National Green Tribunal (NGT) est ablished on 18.10.2010 under the 
National Green Tribunal Act, 2010 is looking at resolving the issues related to ground water management, 
monitoring and conservation including  ground water pollution / contamination with due regard to the 
provisions of the  Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, with rules made there under  and the Water 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 with rules made there under, the Committee desire that an 
effective synergy be devised by the government to bring all complaints  of ground water related issues to 
the National Green Tribunal for getting immediate redressal.  Additionally, the Water Quality Assessment 
Authority (WQAA) should be asked to prepare a roadmap for review/ assessment and addressing the 
problem of ground wa ter pollution in the country, and the Committee be apprised accordingly.  The 
Committee further desire that WQAA be revamped and strengthened to meet the challenges of ground 
water quality problems.  Side by side, steps may be taken to constitute branches of WQAA in each 
State/UT at the earliest.  The Committee will like to be apprised of further action taken by the Government 
in this regard.  

 
74 
 
Reply of the Government 
Water Quality Assessment Authority (WQAA) is an inter -ministerial body constituted under ‘T he 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986’ headed by Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate 
Change (MoEFCC), scheduled to meet twice a year.  The secretarial services are provided by Water 
Quality Cell of the Ministry of Water Resources, River D evelopment & Ganga Rejuvenation.  Joint 
Secretary (Admn. & Ground Water), MoWR, RD & GR is the Member Secretary of WQAA.  WQAA is to 
exercise powers under Section 5 of the said Act for issuing directions and for taking measures with respect 
to matters referred to in clauses (ix), (xi), (xii) and (xiii) of Sub -Section 2 of Section 3 of ‘The Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986’ elaborated as follows: 
Clause (ix) carrying out and sponsoring investigations and research, relating to problems of 
environmental pollution; 
Clause (xi) establishment or recognition of environmental laboratories and institutes to carry 
out the functions entrusted to such environmental laboratories and institutes 
under this Act; 
Clause (xii) collection and dissemination of information i n respect of matters relating to 
environmental pollution; 
Clause (xii)     preparation of manuals, codes or guides relating to the prevention, control and 
abatement of environmental pollution; 
 
 Thus, WQAA is vested with very little powers and no judicia l powers. As such, in its present 
capacity, WQAA cannot have synergy with National Green Tribunal (NGT), which is a judicial organization.  
Decision in respect of revamping has already been taken by WQAA.  For this, a sub -committee 
was constituted. The Sub -committee recommended that owing to constraints of infrastructure and 
inadequate manpower, WQAA should focus only on monitoring and assessment of water quality and 
address all the related aspects holistically. The report of the sub -committee has been accepted by WQAA.  

 
75 
 
Accordingly, the revised WQAA notification has been prepared and the same is under process of 
notification. 
 As regards to preparation of a roadmap for review/assessment and addressing the problem of 
ground water pollution in the Country, it is submitted that ‘Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 
1974’ provides power to Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) and State Pollution Control Boards 
(SPCB) to deal with the pollution caused due to discharge of sewage, sullage and trade eff luents.  
Likewise, ‘The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986’ also empowers CPCB & SPCB for protection, 
improvement of environment including addressing to environmental pollution from various sources, 
whatsoever.  Thus, these two Acts fully empower CPCB & SP CBs to deal with the sewage pollution 
including those from municipalities’.  Further, t here is a robust mechanism to curb environmental pollution 
including ground water pollution.  It may be emphasized that undertaking the steps given below, which are 
already under implementation and effective implementation of the provisions of the above Acts in principle 
would curb and prevent the pollution of both surface & underground water, which are interlinked:  
 Control of Industrial pollution under the provision of W ater (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Act, 1974. 
 A mutually agreed time targeted programme is implemented under Corporate 
Responsibility on Environmental Protection (CREP) with a bank guarantee on various 
commitments.  
 Environmental auditing. 
 Common effluent treatment plants for cluster of Small Scale Industrial units. 
 Promotion of low-waste and no-waste technology. 
 Standards and norms have been fixed for disposal of treated liquid effluents by the 
industries for disposal on land. 
 Industries have been directed to install piezometers to detect ground water contamination 
wherever there is apprehension for disposal of effluents on land. 
 In identified critically polluted industrial clusters, action plans have been implemented to 
prevent ground water pollution. 

 
76 
 
 Industries discharging high organic load effluents (like Distilleries, Tanneries, Pulp & Paper) 
are insisted upon to achieve Zero liquid Discharge and adopt cleaner production process 
technologies. 
 Zero Liquid Discharge has been implemented in a number  of categories of industries to 
protect the water quality in view of lean flow situation in rivers and streams in a larger non 
monsoon period. 
 The continuous water quality monitoring systems are being established on industrial units 
in the country through the directives issued by CPCB for getting real time information on 
the effluent quality. 
To coordinate the work with the States, State -level Water Quality Review Committees (WQRC) is 
to be constituted.  It has so far been constituted in 17 States .  The Sta tes where WQRCs are not yet 
constituted have been requested to constitute these bodies.  
 
 

 
77 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
The Committee observe that for strengthening the Satellite Application Centres (SACs) in 8 States, 
namely Maharashtra, Karnataka, Kerala, Chhattisgarh, Andhra Pradesh, Haryana, West Bengal and 
Assam to assist MGNREGA functionaries in better planning of water conserva tion structures, a pilot 
scheme has been initiated with Indore district, Madhya Pradesh, as the first of its kind, which is yet to take 
off.  The Committee trust that the Pilot project in Indore district will be completed expeditiously, thereby 
setting the pace for similar projects to be worked out with the other remaining 7 States.  They will also like 
the Government to pursue with the State Governments concerned to submit proposals for funding the 
project so that the SACs are strengthened to effectively a ssist the MGNREGA functionaries for better 
planning of water conservation structures.  The Committee further desire that, given the fact that different 
district of Odisha have suffered severe drought in the recent years, accordingly steps be taken to inclu de 
Odisha among the States – where SACs are being strengthened for water conservation planning in the 
country.  The Committee would like to be informed of action taken in the matter.  
Reply of the Government 
In this regard, Ministry of Rural Development is of the view that if Satellite Application Centres 
(SACs) are strengthened to assist Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 
functionaries in better planning of water conservation structures, it will be of great help to MGNREGA 
scheme. 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 

 
78 
 
The Committee note that expenditure on water conservation and water harvesting and renovation 
of traditional water bodies constitute 15.1% and 29.4%, respectively of the total expenditure on the 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employm ent Guarantee Act, 2015.  As per a study conducted by the 
Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, and GIZ across 5 States, viz. Rajasthan (Bhilwara), Madhya 
Pradesh (Dhar), Andhra Pradesh (Medak), Karnataka (Chitradurga) and Sikkim (South District), the 
MGNREGA had a positive impact on the environment, which also include rise in water availability and area 
irrigated, improvement in soil quality, improvement in ground water levels, increase in area under crop 
production and reduction in soil erosion.  The Co mmittee are fully convinced that works undertaken under 
MGNREGA, including creation of water conservation and water harvesting structures to augment and 
improve ground water like dykes, earthern dams, stop dams, check dams, etc., will go a long way in 
recharging and stabilizing ground water, including drinking water source, and they, therefore, recommend 
that concerted efforts be launched by the Government to achieve optimized returns on works undertaken 
under the MGNREGA scheme, in respect of ground water augmentation and related works all over the 
country.  The Committee also desire that appropriate steps be initiated to achieve synergy among various 
Ministries concerned, i.e. Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation, , 
Environment, Forests & Climate Change, Agriculture, Drinking Water & Sanitation and Rural Development 
in delivering optimized results under the MGNREGA scheme in both rural and urban areas, specially on 
the works related to ground water conservation.  To achieve th is goal, they urge the Ministry to set up a 
special coordination cell dedicated to achieve the goal of synergy among the Ministries concerned which 
will coordinate information flow among these Ministries and with the States on MGNREGA works related to 
ground water / water harvesting.  The Committee further desire that the Ministry keep a strict watch on the 

 
79 
 
execution of these MGNREGA works, including fund utilization to check misuse and under utilization of 
funds meant for those purposes.  The Committee will like to be apprised to action taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
For Water Conservation, water harvesting and renovation of traditional water bodies under taken 
by MGNREGA, technical guidance will be provided by the regional offices of CGWB.  
CGWB has already provided standard design for water conservation and ground water recharge 
structures feasible for different hydrogeological terrain for adoption under water conservation activities 
under MGNERGA. 
Regarding concerted efforts in order to ach ieve optimized returns on works undertaken under 
MGNREG Scheme, in respect of ground water augmentation and related works as informed by Ministry of 
Rural Development the information is as follows: 
 (i)  Discussed with selected States over a Joint - Video conference (Department of Land Resources 
and Department of Rural Development) and a detailed Action plan was issued for convergence of 
Integrated Watershed Management programme (IWMP) and Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) in 1 023 blocks (out of 2500 most backward blocks in 
which IWMP watershed are under implementation) for achieving the goals of Pradhan Mantri 
Krishi Sanchi Yojna (PMKSY). 
(ii) An emergency meeting of State RD Secretaries was called on 11 th June, 2015 to review the action 
plan of each State for taking up water conservation and water harvesting structures on a war - 
footing basis, in view of the predicted deficit monsoon. In the meeting, it was decided that nearly 
18 lakh rain water harvesting structures will be ta ken up under the campaign. Accordingly, an 
advisory on “Rain water harvesting on a campaign mode through MGNREGA” was issued. In 
current financial year, till December, 2015, nearly 16.73 lakh water related works have been taken 
up under MGNREGA.  

 
80 
 
(iii) In addition to above, the technical functionaries implementing MGNREGS are trained and 
advisories/guidelines/ manuals are issued to achieve optimized returns on works undertaken 
under MGNREGA,  in respect of ground water augmentation and related works. 
MoRD has issued the following joint convergence guidelines. 
(i) Guidelines for convergence between MGNREGS and the schemes of Ministry of Water Resources. 
(ii) Guidelines for convergence between MGNREGS and the schemes of Ministry of Environment & 
Forest. 
(iii) Guidelines for convergence between MGNREGS and the schemes of Ministry of Agriculture for 
development of agriculture & allied sector. 
(iv) Guidelines on watershed management works taken up independently under MGNREGA or in 
convergence with IWMP. 
(v) Guidelines for taking up Rubbe r plantation through convergence of MGNREGS and schemes of 
Rubber Board, Ministry of Commerce & Industry. 
(vi) Guidelines for taking up Coconut plantation through convergence of MGNREGS and Expansion of 
Area under Coconut scheme of Coconut Development Board, MoA &FW. 
Expenditure on water conservation/ harvesting works since inception under Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) is given as under:- 
MGNREGA: Work wise expenditure since inception  
(as per information available in MIS) 
(As on ...............) 
No. Works Expenditure 
(In lakh) %age 
1 Anganwadi 17619.8 0.1% 
2 Coastal Areas 449.9 0.0% 
3 Drought Proofing 1322986.5 4.5% 
4 Rural Drinking Water 9877.6 0.0% 

 
81 
 
5 Food Grain 3489.4 0.0% 
6 Flood Control and Protection 1065778.2 3.7% 
7 Fisheries 20993.7 0.1% 
8 Micro Irrigation Works 1255564.2 4.3% 
9 Works on Individuals Land (Category IV) 1598735.9 5.5% 
10 Land Development 1786247.5 6.1% 
11 Other Works 541142.7 1.9% 
12 Play Ground 5735.5 0.0% 
13 Rural Connectivity 8689276.2 29.9% 
14 Rural Sanitation 244370.1 0.8% 
15 Bharat Nirman Rajeev Gandhi Sewa Kendra 436981.5 1.5% 
16 Water Conservation and Water Harvesting 4315443.4 14.8% 
17 Renovation of traditional water bodies 7793516.7 26.8% 
 
Grand Total 29108208.9   
During the per iod of 2012 -16, a total of 16,36,355 Water Conservation and Recharge structures  
including renovation of Traditional Water Bodies have been completed.  In addition, priority has been given for 
construction of farm ponds in the year 2016 -17 to harvest rain water.  Ministry of Rural Development has kept 
a target to construct 8,82,325 farm ponds under MGNREGA during the FY 2016-17. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 25) 
The Committee note the reply of the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation about the Fluoride contamination in Birbhum district and Arsenic contamination in 
Murshidabad district of West Bengal.  They further note that among various measures taken by the Union 
Government and the State Government of West Bengal, in coordination with UNICEF, a Master Plan on 
fluoride mitigation in Birbhum district is under preparation and will be finalized on publication of the report 
of the Fluoride task Force on technological option.  The Committee hope that the said Master Plan will be 

 
82 
 
finalized expeditiously and desire to be apprised of the details of the same after its finalization.   The 
Committee also note that 47 exploratory wells had been constructed by the CGWB in Birbhum district, out 
of which 17 wells having fluoride free water have been  handed over to the State authority.  The Committee 
will like the Ministry/CGWB to intensify its efforts in Birbhum district for construction of more fluoride free 
exploratory well in order to ameliorate the distress of people affected by fluoride contamin ation.  The 
Committee further note that for tackling ground water contamination in the arsenic affected blocks of 
Murshidabad district, the Government of West Bengal had constituted a Working Group comprising of 
eminent experts in the related fields from b oth the State and Union Government organizations as well as 
from academic institutions to examine and investigate into the matter.  The Committee will like to be 
informed of the report of the Working Group in the matter.   They also note that the CGWB, Kolk ata, has 
carried out detailed ground water exploration in arsenic affected parts of Murshidabad district and 43 
exploratory wells in 14 blocks have been constructed till March, 2014, out of which 22 arsenic free 
exploratory wells have been handed over and accepted by the State Departments.  Further, a collaborative 
project has been conducted by the CGWB with the United Nations Industrial Development Organization 
(UNIDO) to explore the efficacy of the arsenic removal units in the arsenic infected areas of We st Bengal.  
The Committee, while appreciating such efforts to eliminate arsenic contamination of ground water in 
these areas of West Bengal.  They also will like to be apprised of the outcome of the collaborative  project 
conducted by the CGWB with UNIDO in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
As informed by Public Health Engineering Department (PHED), Government of West Bengal, the 
Master Plan on Fluoride mitigation has been prepared, but the Report is yet to be published. However, 
several mitigation measu res have already been undertaken as per the proposed Master Plan & these are 
as follows:  

 
83 
 
 A considerable number of piped water supply schemes have been implemented in the affected areas, 
tapping sub-surface water in river bed. 
 Rainwater harvesting schemes in a number of schools have been commissioned. 
 Pond based water supply schemes with minor treatment facilities have been implemented.  
 Where any alternative source is not available, extraction of groundwater from deeper aquifer free from 
fluoride have been arranged. 
Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) is going to undertake an exploration programme in Fluoride 
affected areas of Birbhum by deploying a DTH rig for delineation of Fluoride free aquifers.  
Out of 729 affected villages in West Bengal, mitigation measu res have already been taken up by 
commissioned or ongoing schemes in 572 villages. 
The Working Group/ Arsenic Task Force, constituted by Government of West Bengal, examine the 
magnitude of problem from time to time, identify appropriate technology for miti gation, formulate action 
plan and discuss operation & maintenance issues as well as monitoring & evaluating aspects.  Based on 
chemical analysis, carried out in the Water Testing laboratories set up in West Bengal, at present, 83 
blocks have been identifie d as Arsenic affected by Arsenic Task Force.  PHED has prepared a Master 
Plan for mitigation of Arsenic menace & the Committee has approved the Plan. The Master Plan is being 
commissioned & the progress is being monitored by the Committee. 
A collaborative project had been conducted by CGWB with the United Nations Industrial 
Development Organization (UNIDO) to explore the efficacy of the Arsenic removal units in the Arsenic 
infected areas of West Bengal in 2000-2001. 
Water quality of 16 community -based Arsen ic removal units comprising six technologies viz. 
AIIH&PH by Oxidation –Coagulation- flocculation –Sedimentation, Pal Trockner through Granular Ferric 
Hydroxide, WSI through resin based filter, AMAL through activated alumina , PHED by oxidation –
coagulation-flocculation-sedimentation, APIRON through activated alumina and 40 domestic units 
comprising four technologies viz. AMAL through activated alumina, AIIH&PH by Oxidation –Coagulation- 

 
84 
 
flocculation –Sedimentation, Pal Trockner through Granular Ferric Hydr oxide & JU  by fly ash -10 samples  
of each technology was examined for determination of Arsenic, Iron and heavy metals along with other 
parameters of general chemistry for the water samples before and after it has undergone the treatment 
process. All the water samples were analysed in the chemical laboratory of Eastern Regional office of 
CGWB. By and large, all the Arsenic removal equipments tested are effective in bringing down the 
concentration of input water (the initial concentration of Arsenic varies from place to place as available in 
field)  to less than 0.05 mg/l, although there are few instances, when the output water does contain 
noticeable Arsenic concentration. The concentration of Arsenic in the treated water above the permissible 
limit can mai nly be attributed to poor maintenance & monitoring than any inherent weakness in the 
technology itself.  Effectiveness of Arsenic removal media is governed by the total quantity of water that 
has passed through it, its initial Arsenic concentration and its  removal capacity.  Since the collection of 
water samples was a time bound programme, it was not feasible to collect sample with fresh media every 
time with the same input of initial concentration. Again backwashing of the filter media may also influence 
the removal capacity, which is done off and on.  Arsenic removal equipments were subjected to input 
water of Arsenic concentration that range between wide limits.  As a result, it is difficult to judge their 
efficacy in terms of bringing down input water co ncentration to less than 0.05 mg/l in the output water.  
Experiments conducted by passing Arsenic rich water at three different controlled rates of flow through 
three different types of media i.e., granulated Ferric Hydroxide of Pal Trockner, activated alu mina of AMAL 
and Alkon supplied by UNIDO reveals that the rate of reduction of Arsenic concentration in the output 
water enhances with slower rate of flow through the media, indicating the influence of longer contact time 
of water with media in the removal  process. The concentration of both Arsenic and Iron is high in the 
backwash samples that were analysed. Arsenic concentration which goes up to 2.52 mg/l is mainly high in 
the samples of community based plants. Iron concentration is also high and is of the  order of 33 mg/l in 
some of the samples. 
The study recommended that a Research and Development study is required for safe disposal of 
Arsenic Sludge otherwise backwashing may form a secondary source of contamination.  
It is also recommended in the study r eport that periodic monitoring, over a considerable period of 
time, of any Arsenic removal equipment should be made mandatory; otherwise it is an act of sheer 
injustice to provide Arsenic rich water to the affected people in the name of arsenic free water. 

 
85 
 
It was observed that social acceptance of Arsenic removal equipment, especially the domestic 
filters are yet to gather momentum and requires awareness programmes for their promotion.   
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 33 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
As per the latest available assessment carried out by the Central Ground Water Board in the  year 
2011, the total annual replenishible ground water resources and the net ground water availability are 433 
Billion Cubic Metres (BCM) and 398 (BCM), respectively. Out of the net annual ground water availability of 
398 BCM, the total annual ground wate r draft in the country is 245 BCM and the overall stage of the 
ground water development has reached 62% of the net ground water availability. The Committee also note 
that the annual natural recharge to ground water (as in 2011) is around 433 BCM, which inc ludes recharge 
from rainfall, tanks, ponds, Minor Irrgation structures, surface water bodies, irrigation seepage, etc., while 
the artificial recharge to ground water is being taken up by various Central / State Government Department 
/ NGOs, individuals, et c. In this regard, the Committee are surprised to note that the latest assessment of 
replenishable ground water resources was undertaken by the Central Ground Water Board of the Ministry 
of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation way back i n 2011, which reveals that no 
serious and systematic efforts have been made by the Government towards development, management, 
conservation and related issues such shortages, scarcity, depletion and pollution of ground water, in spite 
of the alarming trend  towards ground water problems in both quantitative and qualitative terms. The 

 
86 
 
Committee are also dismayed to note the Ministry’s reply that no single agency is maintaining the 
database on quantum of artificial recharge to ground water. The Committee, therefore, will like to underline 
the urgent need on the part of the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation 
/ Central Ground Water Board to undertake assessment of replenishable ground water resources on a 
regular basis, preferably  after two years, starting from this year. Further, noting that the absence of a 
single agency in maintaining the database on quantum of artificial recharge to ground water is a serious 
lacuna in the efforts towards conservation, development and management  of ground water resources and 
tackling related issues such as its over -exploitation, depletion and pollution, etc., the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry prepare a roadmap for creating a single agency to maintain database on the 
quantum of natural and artificial recharge to ground water and also on the quantum of ground water being 
utilized by various stakeholders, including farmers, industries and domestic sectors. The Committee may 
be apprised of the steps taken by the Government in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
The ground water resources estimation of the country is being carried out jointly by Central Ground 
Water Board (CGWB) and State Government Departments at required intervals of two years as suggested 
by the Hon’ble Standing Committee of  Parliament. The ground water estimations were carried out in 2004, 
2009 and 2011. The Estimation of Dynamic Ground Water Resources as on 2013 is under compilation.  
State Government being the custodian of all the data pertaining to assessment of ground wat er 
resources are being maintained by respective States, which are being used for assessment jointly carried 
out by State Government and CGWB.  However, at the central level CGWB is compiling the data 
pertaining to natural recharge of ground water and groun d water discharge components of ground water 
estimation. 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 6 of Chapter I of the Report) 

 
87 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
According to the According to the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation, the CGWB has undertaken Demonstrative Rainwater Harvesting and Artificial Recharge 
Projects in priority areas such as ‘Over -exploited’ (Dark Blocks) and ‘Critical’ Assessment Units during the 
11th Plan under the scheme of ‘Ground Water Management  & Regulation’.  A total of 1661 structures were 
approved and 1389 structures completed at a total approved cost of Rs. 9987.447 lakh, out of which Rs. 
8971.46 lakh have been released to 22 States as on 31.01.2015.  The Committee note that the 
Demonstrative Rainwater Harvesting and Artificial Recharge to ground water during the 8 th, 9 th, and 10 th 
Plan periods resulting in the annual ground water recharge of 4.0 Million Cubic Meter (MCM), 45.0 MCM 
and 2.14 MCM, respectively, while the anticipated recharge fr om the Demonstrative Artificial Recharge 
project implemented during the 11 th Plan was likely to be 55.20 MCM. The Committee are unhappy to note 
that in spite of the substantial benefits brought by the Demonstrative Projects for Rainwater Harvesting 
and Art ificial Recharge Projects, the scheme was closed on 31.03.2012.  The Committee are further 
perturbed that there is no separate scheme for artificial recharge to ground water or contamination of 
ground water during the 12 th Plan, which displays the lack of commitment towards promoting artificial 
recharge and Rainwater Harvesting in the Dark Blocks and ‘Critical’ assessment units.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Demonstrative Projects for Rainwater Harvesting and Artificial Recharge 
Projects in the ‘Dark Blocks’ and ‘Critical’ assessment units should be renewed during the 12 th Plan with 
additional financial allocation.  They also desire to be apprised about the actual achievement (physical and 
financial) made under the Scheme during the 11 th Plan for the entire country.  Further, the Committee also 
feel in this regard, there is a need for ensuring proper functioning of tube -wells which are defunct and are 

 
88 
 
not in use, since they serve as dustbins in the villages / paddy fields and are a major sourc e of ground 
water contamination.  Regarding tube -wells, the Committee are aware that the several villages, tube -wells 
for the drinking water supply have been installed on this agricultural land, which face the risk of 
contamination given the fact that pest icides are being extensively used for cultivation across the country.  
The Committee also feel that steps should be taken to ensure proper spacing between tube -wells in 
general to ensure there is perennial water in the tube -wells located in different parts  of the country.  As for 
the urban areas, given the fact that the existence of concrete structures and roads do not allow the water 
to percolate to the ground, ponds should  be mandatorily set up in every urban locality, and urban local 
bodies should be sp ecifically asked to strictly monitor the Rain Water storage and recharge to ground 
water.  Additionally, in the coastal areas, steps be taken to prevent the encroachment of saline water into 
fresh water pockets, and saline water zones need to be sealed – wherever such encroachments have 
occurred.  The Committee also desire that the periodic aquifer – mapping be carried out in India’s coastal 
areas for assessment of the levels of saline encroachments. 
Reply of the Government 
As desired by the Hon’ble Committ ee, CGWB has submitted Proposal/ EFC amounting to Rs. 
129.41 crore for taking up ground water recharge works as Pilot Project in one ‘Over -Exploited’ block in 
each of the eleven States namely Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana and Uttar Pradesh of the Country.  
During XI Plan, overall 133 demonstrative recharge projects costing Rs. 99.87 crore were 
approved for construction of 1661 artificial recharge structures in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Bihar, Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh Delhi, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, 
Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Nagaland, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, 
Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal .  A sum of Rs. 73.62 crore was released to the State 
implementing agencies by the end of XI Plan i.e., on 31.03.2012. 

 
89 
 
An amount of Rs. 4.08  crore, Rs. 7.34 crore & Rs. 7.66 crore has been released to State 
implementing agencies as second installment (spill  over) during 2012 -13, 2013 -14 and 2014 -15 
respectively.  Thus, a total of Rs. 92.69 crore was released against the approved cost of Rs. 99.87 Crores.  
The information on the utilization of funds under the programme of Demonstrative Artificial 
Recharge projects is attached as Annexure-I. 
It is to mention that 17 Artificial Recharge Projects envisaging construction of 78 number of artificial 
recharge structures with an approved cost of Rs. 317.128  lakhs had been dropped due to different 
reasons as mentioned below :- 
 Rajasthan  Fifteen artificial recharge projects with an approved cost Rs. 78.825 lakhs 
envisaging construction of 13 artificial recharge structures had been dropped as the implementing 
agency had returned the first instalment funds for thirteen projects (Rs. 47.7142 lakhs) expressing 
their inability to execute the Schemes.  For the other two projects, with an approved cost Rs. 17.25 
lakhs  envisaging construction of 2 artificial recharge structures, the implementing agency has 
been requested to r eturn the funds amounting to Rs. 9.66 lakhs, released as first instalment, as 
these two projects have been implemented by the implementing agency from their own funds.  
 Kerala  One Project with an approved cost Rs. 41.6 lakhs envisaging construction of one  
artificial recharge structure was dropped as the implementing agency has expressed its inability to 
execute the Scheme.   Funds were not released to implementing agency. 
 Punjab  One Project with an approved cost Rs. 179.453 lakhs envisaging construction 62 
artificial recharge structures had been dropped, as there was no progress in three years after 
release of the first instalment.  The implementing agency has returned the funds ( Rs. 53.836 
lakhs). 
 In addition to above, 46 artificial recharge structures have been dropped due to different reasons 
viz. 2 in Andhra Pradesh, 16 in Gujarat, 27 in Kerala & 1 in West Bengal. 
Thus, against the target of 1661 artificial recharge structures with the revised target of 1537, so far, 
1432 artificial recharge structures have been constructed. 

 
90 
 
During XII Plan, under National Aquifer Mapping Programme of Central Ground Water Board 
(CGWB), some areas of the coastal tracts of the Country have also been prioritized for aquifer mapping, 
modelling and formulation of aquifer ma nagement plans.  This would include detailed mapping of the 
coastal aquifers and its interaction with sea water. Accordingly, in vulnerable areas suitable plans would be 
formulated to control the sea water ingress through suitable interventions involving r egulation, artificial 
recharge and other management of water resources. A suitable mechanism is also proposed to be 
developed for regular monitoring of these aquifers along coastal tracts. 
As informed, Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfa re is promoting Integrated 
Pest Management (IPM) in which emphasis is given to non -chemical methods and bio pesticides in 
conjunction with chemical pesticides for pest management across the Country. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
The Committee were apprised  that a conceptual document titled ‘Master Plan for Artificial 
Recharge to Ground Water to India’ prepared by the Central Ground Water Board in 2013 was circulated 
to all State Government incorporating (i) identification of suitable areas for artificial re charge; (ii) estimation 
of sub-surface storage space availability; (iii) quantification of local surplus annual run -off availability as 
source water for artificial recharge; and (iv) recommending number and types of structures required along 
with their est imated costs, and which also provides district -wise number of feasible artificial recharge 
structures along with their estimated costs.  The total area identified for artificial recharge in the country is 
nearly 9.4 lakh sq. km., while the total estimated volume of water to be recharge is 85.6 BCM.  However, 
regrettably, only 6 States/ UT Governments have taken follow -up action on the Master Plan viz. Gujarat, 
Madhya Pradesh, Rajashtan, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and Andaman & Nicobar  Islands.  Nothing that 
no review has been done regarding implementation of the Master Plan, the Committee desire that the 
Government take proactive and concerted efforts to encourage all the States/ UTs to take follow -up action 
on the ‘Master Plan for Artificial Recharge to Gr ound Water to India’ and also undertake a comprehensive 

 
91 
 
review of follow -up action taken by States/UTs in this regard during 2014 -15 positively.  The Committee 
also note that the Master Plan envisaged construction of different types of Artificial Recharge and Rain 
Water Harvesting structures in an area of 91541 sq. kms. By harnessing surplus Monsoon run -off to 
augment ground water resources.  The Ministry have informed the Committee in this regard that during the 
12th Plan, the CGWB has taken up the Aquifer  Mapping and Management Programme, wherein aquifer -
wise ground water resources and quality is to be assessed in priority areas covering 8.89 lakh sq. km 
which include water stressed (“Over -exploited’ areas_ and quality vulnerable areas.  Rs. 2051 crore hav e 
been allocated for the Aquifer Mapping and Management Plan during the 12 th Plan as per the Ministry of 
Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation.  The Committee recommend that the 
Ministry take necessary steps for judicious utilization of R s. 2051 crore allocated towards Aquifer Mapping 
and Management Plan during the 12 th Plan by implementing a time -bound road map to achieve its 
objective, i.e. assessing aquifer -wise ground water resources and quality in priority areas covering 8.89 
lakh sq. km. in the country.  The Committee desire to be informed of the steps taken by the Ministry as 
also the achievements (physical and financial) made during the 12 th Plan so far under the Aquifer Mapping 
and Management Plan.  
Reply of the Government 
 Chairman, CGWB has written a DO letter on 15.01.2015 to Chief Secretaries/ Administrator of all 
the States/UTs enclosing therewith a copy of the Master Plan for Artificial Recharge to Ground Water in 
India, 2013 for implementation of rain water harvesting & artificial recharge. 
 A review was done in 2014-15 regarding implementation of the Master Plan by the respective State 
Governments and status of implementation is given at Annexure-II. 
Steps taken on Aquifer Mapping : -   

 
92 
 
1. During XII plan, an area of about 8.89 lakh sq.km area has been prioritized, out of 23 lakh sq.km 
map-able area of the Country. 
2. The prioritized area include ‘Over -Exploited’, ‘Critical’ and ‘Semi -Critical’ assessment units as well 
as water quality affected and other vulnerable areas in 8 states  viz. Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan, 
Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and in the National Capital Region.   
Moreover, water scarce areas such as Bundelkhand region covering parts of the Madhya Pradesh 
& Uttar Pradesh and; parts of Arsenic affected areas have also been prioritized. 
3. Current activities of data generation for various activities under Aquifer Mapping have been taken 
up on a mission mode in prioritized areas of these States and Bundelkhand Region covering an 
area of around 5.25 lakh sq.km. 
4. The activities for data generation in the remaining areas of XII plan across the Country are also 
being taken up simultaneously. 
Physical achievements during the XII Plan (2012-17), as on 31st December, 2015 under the aquifer 
mapping programme is as given below : 
 Data collection, compilation and data gap analysis for the entire prioritized area of 8.89 lakh sq.km 
have been completed. 
 Pilot projects in an area of 3006 sq.km falling under the States of Bihar, Rajasthan, Maharashtra, 
Karnataka and Tamilnadu has been completed.  R eports have been finalized and uploaded on the 
website of the department. 
 Aquifer mapping of National Capital Region encompassing an area of 26185 sq.km falling under 
the States/UT of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Delhi has been completed and ground water 
management plan has been prepared.   
 9146 number of Vertical Electrical Sounding (VES) and 383  number of bore -hole logging have 
been conducted. 
 2842 number of ground water exploration wells have been constructed.  

 
93 
 
 89651 ground water samples have been analyzed. 
Financial performance in respect of Aquifer Mapping during XII Plan, as on 31 st December, 2015 is 
given at Annexure-III.  
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
The Committee note that as per the 4 th Minor Irrigation Census (2006 -07), the total number of 
water bodies used for Minor Irrigation in the country was 523816, of which the number of water bodies in 
use and not in use are 443688 and 80128 respec tively.  The Committee were informed that the data on 
the number of ponds is not available separately.  The Committee also note the reply of the Ministry that 
inventorization of water bodies is feasible and in order to collect the details of water bodies, the Ministry of 
Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation has planned to undertake census of all 
water bodies in the country.  Noting the importance of water bodies for their potential to recharge ground 
water resources, the Committee recomme nds the Ministry to initiate urgent steps to complete 
inventorization of water bodies and also complete the exercise of undertaking census of water bodies, 
being planned by the Ministry, within a definite time -frame.  The Committee are surprised to find th at even 
the data on number of ponds is not available separately with the Ministry, and they desire that a 
comprehensive assessment in this regard also is an imperative need to be made at the earliest.   Further, 
the Committee are of the view that no program me/ scheme has been initiated by either the Union or State 
Government for desilting water bodies, which are in fact facing encroachments from human settlements as 
well as plants/weeds etc.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that new initiatives in this r egard be 

 
94 
 
taken up by the Ministry for launching special programme for upkeep, maintenance and restoration of 
water bodies, especially in those areas which fall under the Dark Blocks, with sufficient budgetary 
allocation for its proper implementation.  Furt her, steps should be taken so that extraction of water from 
water bodies is limited only upto certain permissible level in order to guarantee the sustainable level of 
water bodies.  The Committee further recommends strong measures need to be taken by the G overnment 
to undertake survey of the water bodies encroached upon all over the country and steps be initiated for 
removal of all encroachment therefrom.  Noting that the extraction of ground water has not been regulated 
effectively which has led to serious  decline in the ground water levels in many parts of the country, the 
Committee also desire that to restrain unnecessary use of ground water for irrigation and drinking 
purposes, installation of water meters should be made mandatory on the principle of ‘Be neficiary Pays’ in 
all tube -wells across the country.  In the Dark Blocks, special irrigation functional schemes should be 
introduced and farmers should be incentivized to grow more water efficient crops and adopt water efficient 
irrigation techniques like drip irrigation, sprinkler irrigation, etc. to reduce water consumption in agriculture 
and people should also be encouraged to adopt and apply water efficient technologies and re -use of waste 
water. 
Reply of the Government 
As regards the mandatory meterin g on principle of  'Beneficiary Pays' to all tube wells across the 
country, it is submitted that at present one SLP  is pending in Hon'ble Supreme Court of India (SLP No. 
20888 of 2015: Ramesh Ailawadi Vs UOI and Others) on pricing of ground water. The matt er being sub -
judice and also,  being an issue falling under State subject, it is proposed to send a letter to all the 
States/UTs from M/o WR, RD&GR for taking action as per the observations of Standing Committee. A 
Draft letter is this regard would be submitted to MOWR, RD & GR. 

 
95 
 
As informed, Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare is already implementing 
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) with the vision of extending the coverage of irrigation 
‘Har Khet Ko Pani’ and improving wat er use efficiency ‘More Crop Per Drop’ in a focused manner and to 
expand cultivable area under assured irrigation and improve on-farm water use efficiency. 
The matter of keeping water bodies encroachment free comes under the purview of concerned 
State Gove rnments.  However, Secretary (WR, RD & GR)  vide letter dated 26.02.2016 has issued an 
advisory to the States for keeping water bodies free from encroachment, removing encroachment of 
existing water bodies and rejuvenate those water bodies, which have been encroached, in mission mode. 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 18 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Para No. 24) 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation have informed that as per 
online ‘Integrated Managem ent Information System’ (IMIS), as on 18 th May, 2015 States have reported 
63,282 water quality -affected rural habitations (Arsenic -1482, Fluoride-11309, Salinity-16289, Iron-32020, 
Nitrate-2182) in the country.  Further, as reported by the States on online IMIS of the Ministry, heavy / toxic 
metals have been found in nearly 8862 rural in habitations, of which Punjab, Assam and West Bengal are 
the most affected States in terms of concurrence of emerging contaminants in drinking water sources.  In 
this connection, the Committee further note that excessive intake of Fluoride and Arsenic in drinking water 
poses serious health hazards especially in quality affected rural habitations .  The Committee, therefore, 
desire that a concerted national programme be launche d by the Ministry for the 63282 water quality 
affected rural habitations.  They also desire that a new initiative may be taken up for those 8862 rural 
habitations which are facing contamination of heavy / toxic metals, especially for the States of Punjab, 
Assam and West Bengal, which are the most affected in terms of occurrence of emerging contaminants in 
drinking water sources.   The Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation have advised all States to go in for 

 
96 
 
surface water based, piped water supply PWS) for  providing safe drinking water in this water quality 
affected areas and these States have been advised to provide community water purification plants.  The 
Committee are pleased to note that most State Governments have shifted their schemes towards surface  
water based piped water scheme, especially in water quality affected areas.  The Committee are also 
happy to note that in Fluoride affected Karnataka, they have installed 1320 reverse osmosis (RO) plants 
whereas in the State of Punjab, 1876 RO Plants have  been installed for providing safe water for drinking 
and cooking purposes.  The Committee, therefore, desire the Government to tackle the problem of drinking 
water in the rural areas on war footing and make all out efforts for provision of piped water sup ply to 
maximum rural areas in the country, wherever feasible.  The Committee further recommend to incentivize 
the worst affected States of Assam and West Bengal to go in for installation of RO plants as we done in 
Punjab and Karnataka.  They also recommend  that special steps be taken by the Ministry in coordination 
with the Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation to promote community water purification plants in the 
water quality affected rural habitations all over country and desire to be apprised accordingly.  
Reply of the Government 
In each of the State, where cluster water supply is being provided through ground water sources, 
Regional Offices of Central Ground Water Board being Member of State Level Source Selection 
Committee (SLSSC) recommends necessary remedial measures if required.  
As reported by the States on Integrated Management Information System (IMIS) of Ministry of 
Drinking Water & Sanitation (MoDWS), as on 03.02.2016, there are 60,953 water quality affected rural 
habitations in the Country which are yet to be provided safe drinking water as below: 
Total 
water 
quality 
affected 
habitations 
Fluoride 
affected 
habitations 
Arsenic 
affected 
habitations 
Nitrate 
affected 
habitations 
Iron 
affected 
habitations 
Salinity 
affected 
habitations 

 
97 
 
60,953 11,414 1,312 2,212 30,740 15,275 
 
The above figure indicates that 2,329 water quality affected habitations have been tackled by the 
States from the previously submitted data by the Ministry (reported at IMIS, as on 18.05.2015).  
Furthermore, MoDWS has taken the  issue of heavy/toxic metals contamination reported on the website of 
the Ministry with the States.  The States were advised to check the data and delete the erroneous figures. 
Accordingly, States have revised the number of habitations affected with heavy/ toxic metals to previously 
reported figure of 8,862 to 5,862 (as on 03.02.2016) as per the revised laboratory records entered into 
IMIS for the year 2015 -16. However, if the laboratory reports of all financial years is taken into cognizance 
since 2009-10, the total number of heavy/toxic metals affected habitations are 16,094. 
MoDWS has prepared a Strategy Plan to provide safe drinking water to 90% of the rural population 
of the Country preferably through surface water based piped water supply schemes by the  year-2022 as a 
long-term sustainable solution, subject to availability of funds.  The Strategy Plan to tackle water quality 
affected habitations is as below: 
Long term sustainable solution:  Since Piped Water Supply (PWS) schemes based on safe water source s, 
is the sustainable solution, MoDWS has advised the States to cover all water quality affected habitations 
with PWS schemes, preferably based on surface water as sources. 
In addition, World Bank assisted projects are presently being implemented in 4 Low Income States 
(Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Assam & Jharkhand), for which the funds are provided through World Bank.  Water 
quality affected habitations are also prioritized under this project. 
Short Term solution:  Since commencement of large PWS schemes take abo ut 4-5 years, and the people 
living in these affected habitations cannot be put to risk of consuming contaminated water, the Ministry has 
advised all the States to install Community Water Purification Plants (CWPPs) in all water quality affected 
habitations prioritizing Arsenic and Fluoride affected habitations, as a short term measure to provide 8 -10 
litres per capita per day (lpcd) of water (meant for drinking and cooking purposes only). 
States are tackling water quality affected habitations by implementa tion of PWS schemes (as long 
term measure) or by installation of CWPPs (as short term measures) with the funds available under the 

 
98 
 
National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP).  However, as the funding for NRDWP was reduced 
substantially in 2014 -15, ins tallation of new CWPPs in different water quality affected habitations was 
found to be difficult with the available funds under NRDWP.  The matter was taken at the higher level.  
Since Arsenic and Fluoride in drinking water are the most hazardous elements from health point of view, it 
was decided that NITI Aayog would provide Rs. 1000 crore to the States having Arsenic and Fluoride 
affected rural habitations as below: 
1.   Rs. 800 crore for installation of CWPPs for providing 8 -10 lpcd of safe drinking wate r meant for 
drinking and cooking purposes in 19 States having Arsenic and Fluoride affected rural habitations. This 
would be an interim measure till PWS schemes are commissioned in these habitations. CWPPs to be 
installed by the funds provided by NITI Aayo g should, preferably, be commissioned by July, 2016 and 
Operation & Maintenance would rest with the State Governments.  Allocation to the affected States is 
based on population affected in these States. 
2.   Rs. 200 crore would be provided for PWS schemes in water quality affected habitations with a specific 
funding pattern having internal and external monitoring and certain administrative expenses of NITI 
Aayog.  Since Rajasthan has the largest number of Fluoride affected habitations and West Bengal has 
the largest number of Arsenic affected habitations in the Country, special focus has been given to 
prioritize/cover the problems in these States.  NITI Aayog and MoDWS discussed with the Principal 
Secretaries of the States and identified such surface water b ased PWS schemes which require only 
last mile connectivity.  It was decided that by provisioning of certain funds for this purpose, large 
number of Arsenic and Fluoride affected habitations would be covered. Based on the proposal to be 
submitted by the Sta tes of Rajasthan and West Bengal, NITI Aayog will release funds so that the 
Arsenic and Fluoride affected habitations are tackled, preferably, by March, 2017. 
Funds to be provided by NITI Aayog would be in addition to the funds to be provided as 100% 
Central assistance to the States. This would be one time additional Central assistance. The fund to be 
provided by NITI Aayog would not be a part of the NRDWP funds. However, the schemes would be 
monitored jointly by NITI Aayog and MoDWS. 
Comment of the Committee 

 
99 
 
(Please see Para No. 30 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

 
100 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
The Committee note the reply of the Ministry that the prop osal to bring ‘Water’ in the Concurrent 
List of the Constitution has been opposed by most of the States and the proposal did not find favour with 
the two Commissions on Centre -State relations chaired by Justice R.S. Sarkaria (1983 -88) and Justice 
M.M. Punc hhi (2007 -10).  However, the Committee believe that the subject of water needs to be dealt 
within a consultative manner, taking into consideration the overall national perspective, given the fact that 
the country will be facing acute water crisis in the ne ar future especially on the ground water front.  In view 
of the need to adopt a holistic approach for tackling the problem in a comprehensive and equitable 
manner, the Committee  therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation contained in the 10 th Report and 
16th Report (15th Lok Sabha ) and 4 th Report (16th Lok Sabha) and urge the Government to initiate earnest 
efforts to build national consensus to bring the subject of ‘Water’ in the Concurrent List of the Constitution 
after undertaking necessary consultations with the States with a view to evolving a comprehensive national 
plan of action for better conservation, development and management of  water, including ground water.  
Reply of the Government 
The matter regarding bringing ‘Water’ in the Concurrent List has been raised from time to time. 
There has been growing demand by the professionals and civil society to bring ‘Water’ in the Concurrent 
List, primarily to ensure national perspective on water management and to avoid inter -State disputes and 
the tendencies of the State Governments to use more water (in excess of justified needs, through efficient 
use) only to claim more apportionment of water in inter -State rivers.  However, the proposal to bring 
‘Water’ in Concurrent List has been opposed by most of the States. 

 
101 
 
 The matter regarding making ‘Water’ a Union/Concurrent List Subject was examined by the two 
Commissions on Centre State Relations chaired by Justice R.S. Sarkaria (1983 -88) and Justice M.M. 
Punchhi (2007-10). The said proposal did not find favour with either of the two Commissions.  
 The matter requires extensive deliberations with the States and other stakeholders so that a 
broader consensus emerges in the matter.  
 However, Ministry of Water Resources, RD & GR had constituted a Drafting Comm ittee headed by 
Dr. Y.K. Alagh, on 3 rd July, 2012 for Drafting of National Water Framework Law. The Committee submitted 
its report in May, 2013.  The Salient features of the draft National Water Framework Bill are at Annexure-
V. 
 Further, Ministry of Water  Resources, RD & GR had constituted a Drafting Committee under the 
Chairmanship of Justice T.S. Doabia (Retd.) to study the activities that are required for optimum 
development of river basin and changes required in the existing River Board Act, 1956 for a chievement of 
the same.  The Committee submitted is Report in November, 2012 and has prepared a Draft River Basin 
Management Bill.  The salient features of the draft River Basin Management Bill recommended by the 
Committee are given at Annexure-VI. 
 The Draft National Water Framework Law and the draft River Basin Management Bill are under 
examination in this Ministry in consultation with different stakeholders.  A Committee has been constituted 
under the Chairmanship of Dr. Mihir Shah to examine the draft N ational Water Framework Law and the 
draft River Basin Management Bill. 
 The objectives of better conservation, development and management of water are sought to be 
achieved through the Draft National Water Framework Law and the draft River Basin Management Bill. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
The Committee observe from the reply of the Central Pollution Control Board that industries 
responsible for ground water as well as surface water pollution fall broadly in the categories of slaughter 

 
102 
 
houses, distilleries, pulp and paper, tanneries, textiles, chemicals and dyeing industries.  The CPCB had 
undertaken a comprehensive assessment of 88 industrially polluted areas in the country based on the 
Comprehensive Environmental Pollution Index (CEPI) out of which 43 in dustrial clusters in sixteen States 
have been classified as critically polluted areas (CPAs) with CEPI scores of 70 and above.  So far, 3 
rounds of environmental quality monitoring (Air, Surface Water and Ground Water) have been undertaken 
by CPCB (in 2009 , 2011, 2013) at a total cost Rs. 21.43 lakh, Rs. 78.34 lakh and Rs. 56.00 lakh during 
2009, 2011 and 2013 respectively.  The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation have also informed that directions have been issued by the C PCB to all the State Pollution 
Control Board (SPCBs) of 43 CPAs for installation of Continuous Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Stations 
and Continuous Water Quality Monitoring Stations in each of the 43 CPAs.  The Committee are of the firm 
opinion that there is a need to keep a strict vigil on polluting activities of industrial establishments in the 24 
CPAs, especially those located in the Dark Blocks Zones.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry in coordination with the Central Pollution Con trol Board of the Ministry of Environment, Forests & 
Climate Change, devise an effective mechanism to identify CPAs located in Dark Block areas and also to 
take steps to minimize and control the dumping of industrial waste into surface water as well as 
underground aquifers in these area.  Noting that comprehensive remedial action plan for the 43 identified 
critically polluted industrial clusters was prepared by SPCBs, the Committee would like the Ministry to 
strictly pursue with the CPCB/SPCBs for effective  implementation of the comprehensive remedial action 
plan in order to reduce and minimize ground water pollution in the Dark Blocks zones.  Further noting that 
three rounds of environmental quality monitoring have been carried out by the CPCB through reput ed 
environmental labs in 2009, 2011 and 2013, the Committee desire that such monitoring activity by the 
CPCB be undertaken on an annual basis in those 24 CPAs.  The Committee also desire that the Ministry 

 
103 
 
keep tab on CPCB to ensure that its directions to S PCBs concerned of the 43 CPAs regarding installation 
of Continuous Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Stations and Continuous Water Quality Monitoring Stations 
are duly complied with by the SPCBs.  The Committee will like to be informed about further action ta ken in 
this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Water Resources, RD & GR has written several letters and D.O letters to Central 
Pollution Control Board (CPCB), but their Action Taken Report is still awaited.  A copy of this Action Taken 
Report is being endorsed to CPCB for necessary action. 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 24 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Para No. 26) 
The Committee note the reply of the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation re garding the deteriorating ground water quality in Greater NOIDA, that as per the order 
dated 14.05.2015 of the National Green Tribunal (NGT), the Uttar Pradesh Pollution Control Board 
(UPPCB) has filed a status report in NGT, wherein, violation by eight in dustries has been detected about 
‘No Objection Certificate (NOC)’ issued by the CGWA in the Bisrakh Block of Greater NOIDA. They also 
note that the NGT has issued ‘show cause notices’ returnable by 15.07.2015, as to why these industries 
should not be close d and that further action shall be taken up on directions of the NGT after it has 
considered the replies from the eight industries at the next hearing on 15.07.2015.  The Committee further 
note that as per ground water sampling carried out by the CGWB duri ng 2013-14 in Chapraula Industrial 
Area, Bisrakh block, of Gautam Budhh Nagar district,  heavy metals above permissible limits were 
reported in respect of iron (from all samples), aluminum (Roopvas), lead (Khera Chauganpur and Durai 

 
104 
 
Taalpur) and nickel (Ch era Chaunganpur).  The Committee desire that early remedial steps be taken by 
the Ministry in coordination with the Ministries of Drinking Water & Sanitation, Environment, Forests& 
Climate Change to address the issue of contamination of ground water with h eavy metals in Greater 
NOIDA and apprise the Committee accordingly.  They also desire to be apprised of the further action taken 
by the government in respect of the eight industries which violated the ‘No Objection Certificate (NOC)’ of 
CGWA while undertak ing extraction of ground water in the Bisrakh Block of Greater NOIDA.  Noting the 
serious situation arising out of the ground water contamination / pollution in many parts of the country, the 
Committee further recommend that the adverse impact of ground wa ter pollution in India be studied and 
documented in detail and corrective measures as warranted therein initiated by the Government.  The 
Committee also recommend the Government to seriously consider constituting of a single, centralized 
agency at the earl iest, which would be mandated to curb, control and eliminate ground water 
contamination/ pollution in the country.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific steps 
taken in this direction.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Environment, Fo rests and Climate Change (MoEFCC) has constituted a High Power 
Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri TSR Subramanian, Ex -Cabinet Secretary to generate 
mechanism for addressing the pollution issues. The committee will be apprised of the specific steps ta ken 
in this direction by MoEFCC on the basis of High Power Committee report along with the 
recommendations. 
The matter is sub -judice and ‘show cause notice’ has since been given by the Hon’ble NGT to 
these industries.  The concerned industries are in proce ss of filing their reply before the Hon’ble NGT in 
responses to the ‘show cause notice’.   Since the Hon’ble NGT is taking action, CGWA is not taking any 
separate action. The final outcome of the matter would be intimated to the Committee.  

 
105 
 
CGWB periodicall y monitors ground water quality of shallow aquifers on a regional scale, once 
every year mainly for geo-genic parameters. 
CGWB also carried out water quality studies in all the 88 industrial clusters identified by Central 
Pollution Control Board (CPCB). Th e studies indicated that in most of the cases excess concentration of 
few chemical constituents beyond norms prescribed by Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) are present.  In 
Uttar Pradesh, ground water pollution studies were undertaken in 12 industrial clus ters at Ghaziabad, 
Noida, Kanpur, Agra, Varanasi -Mirzapur, Moradabad, Aligarh, Ferozabad, Mathura, Meerut, Bulandshahr -
Khurza, Singrauli. 
In Ghaziabad, the study was undertaken in Sahibabad industrial area which includes medicine/ 
Pharmacy, textile, bevera ges, iron & steel, casting & printing.  A number of dyeing units also exist in the 
area.  It was found that in few locations Electrical Conductivity, Total Hardness, Ca, Mg, NO 3 and metals 
like Fe, Mn and As were above the permissible limits. 
In the NOIDA industrial belt industries like Automobiles, IT services, Electronics, Electrical, Paints 
are dominant.  Ground water pollution study undertaken here showed that only a few samples were found 
to be contaminated with Chlorine (Cl), Iron (Fe) and Lead (Pb) a bove permissible limits.  The reports were 
circulated to concerned State Departments. 
As informed, the Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation monitors drinking water quality through the 
States and provide funds to the States under National Rural Drinking Water Programme (NRDWP) for 
treatment of contaminated drinking water for supply of safe drinking water to the rural population.  
Taking note of the observations of Hon’ble Members of the Committee on findings of CGWB on 
presence of some toxic heavy metals i n ground water in some villages near Chapraula Industrial Area of 
Bisrakh Block of Gautam Budh Nagar district, a D.O letter has been written by Joint Secretary (Water) to 
the Principal Secretary, Rural Development, Government of Uttar Pradesh to look into the problem and 
send an updated status of the extent of ground water contamination along with the remedial measures 
taken to mitigate the problem.  The Ministry is awaiting the reply from the State Government of Uttar 
Pradesh and will furnish the same immediately after the reply is received. 
Comment of the Committee 

 
106 
 
(Please see Para No. 36 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                   HUKUM SINGH,  
26 November, 2016                                                                          Chairperson,  
05  Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)                     Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
 

 
107 
 
ANNEXURE – I 
 
DETAILS OF FUNDS RELEASED & INCURRED ON ARTIFICIAL RECHARGE PROJECTS BY CGWB DURING 
VARIOUS PLANS 
(Rs.  In Lakh) 
S.No. State VIII IX X XI Plan XII Total 
Funds Released as 
Spill Over of Artificial 
Recharge Projects 
Sanctioned During XI 
Plan 
Funds 
Released 
1 Andhra Pradesh   130.44 130.02  260.46 
2 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
 20  409.377 83.73 513.107 
3 Assam  63.5    63.5 
4 Bihar  5.84  67.21 28.8 101.85 
5 Chhattisgarh    150.40 108.45 258.85 
6 Delhi 43.58 92.23  30.41 13.029 179.249 
7 Goa      0 
8 Gujarat  20.05  221.368 65.282 306.7 
9 Haryana  107.44    107.44 
10 Himachal  81.65  165.14 84.882 331.672 
11 Jammu & Kashmir  78.96  91.277 45.419 215.656 
12 Jharkhand  17.95  133.943 72.013 223.906 
13 Karnataka 44.116 43.3 86.64 447.02 141.071 762.147 
14 Kerala 31.55 88.18  77.604 4.05 201.384 
15 Madhya Pradesh 11.765 45.58 116.83 633.376 99.504 907.055 
16 Maharashtra 101.6 76.63  15.15  193.38 
17 Manipur      0 
18 Meghalaya  20.32    20.32 
19 Mizoram  28    28 
20 Nagaland  116.43  141.34 82.8 340.57 
21 Odisha  1493.29  325.04 139.32 1957.65 
22 Punjab 5.76 361.68  110.46  477.9 
23 Rajasthan  121.31  235.055 107.702 464.067 
24 Sikkim      0 
25 Tamil Nadu 15 163.59 223.15 514.35 12 928.09 
26 Telangana 2.12 51.82  307.674 135.712 497.326 
27 Tripura      0 
28 Uttar Pradesh  137.05  2502.43 451.684 3091.164 
29 Uttarakhand  1.87    1.87 
30 West Bengal 1.375 149.63  111.09  262.095 
31 Andaman & 
Nicobar Island 
 12.92    12.92 

 
108 
 
S.No. State VIII IX X XI Plan XII Total 
Funds Released as 
Spill Over of Artificial 
Recharge Projects 
Sanctioned During XI 
Plan 
Funds 
Released 
32 Chandigarh 2.2 60.76  543.221 231.3 837.481 
33 Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
     0 
34 Daman and Diu      0 
35 Lakshadweep  19.85    19.85 
36 Puducherry      0 
 TOTAL 259.066 3479.83 557.06 7362.955 1906.748 13565.659 
 

 
109 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
 
MASTER PLAN FOR ARTIFICIAL RECHARGE TO GROUND WATER 
 
S.No. State Status 
1 Andhra Pradesh Not Implemented 
2 Bihar Not Implemented 
3 Chhattisgarh Under consideration for Implementation 
4 Delhi Under consideration for Implementation 
5 Goa Not Implemented 
6 Gujarat The Master Plan of Artificial Recharge to the Ground Water -2013 was distributed to 
Gujarat Water Resources Development Corporation (Govt. of Gujarat). A “Project 
task force was prepared by GWRD C for   Managed Aquifer Recharge   and it was 
submitted  Government of   Gujarat which is under consideration.  The task force 
comprising of Technical experts was constituted by GOG to prepare First 
Approximation Report for ground water recharge in 6 major riv er basins and the task 
force recommended construction of 15678 percolation tanks ,22607 check dams, 
14712 recharge tube wells and 42000   modifications to dug wells costing Rs 2756 
crores to recharge 1643 mcm water land the implementation of the report is u nder 
active consideration. 
7 Haryana Not Implemented 
8 Himachal Pradesh Not Implemented 
9 Jammu & Kashmir Not Implemented 
10 Jharkhand Not Implemented 
11 Karnataka i). Department of Mines and Geology, Govt. of Karnataka has spent about Rs. 1529/ - 
lakhs   
(ii). Minor Irrigation Department, Govt. of Karnataka has spent about Rs. 9,899/ - lakhs for 
constructing artificial recharge structures like Check Dams, Percolation Ponds,   Gokattes, 
etc  
12 Kerala Not Implemented due to non availability of funds Being Used as guide for  
the Implementation of AR/RWH ongoing Projects 
13 Madhya Pradesh  The Chief Engineer (Bodhi), constituted a  co -ordination committee for finalizing 
Master Plan of Artificial Recharge to Ground Water of M.P. The divisional Ground 
Water survey units of Water Resources Department were directed to submit 
proposal based on the Master Plan . 
The SE, Ground Water Survey, Water Resources Department,Govt of MP has 
informed that a proposal for artificial recharge to groundwater in and around Baza da 
Zone of Burhanpur district is prepared in consultation with CGWB Bhopal and 
submitted to Chief Engineer for its approval . Some more proposals are also awaited 
from field officers. As soon as proposals received from field officers, it  discuss the 
same with CGWB officers also before finalizing them.  
14 Maharashtra Not Implemented 
15 NER states Not Implemented 
16 Odisha Not Implemented 
17 Punjab Not Implemented 
18 Rajasthan Not Implemented 
19 Sikkim Not Implemented 

 
110 
 
20 Tamil Nadu Not Implemented 
21 Uttar Pradesh Uttar Pradesh Govt. has prepared Comprehensive Policy for Ground Water 
Management, Rain Water Harvesting & Ground Water. T he policy highlights the 
Master Plan of CGWB. 
22 Uttarakhand Not Implemented 
23 West Bengal Certain artificial recha rge structures are being constructed by PHED, Govt. of West 
Bengal utilizing the guidelines provided in Master Plan 
24 Andaman & 
Nicobar Island 
Recommendation of CGWB  as per master plan is being considered for implementation in 
A & N Islands as stated by APWD 
25 Chandigarh Not Implemented 
26 Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 
Not Implemented 
27 Daman and Diu Being implemented 
28 Lakshadweep Not Implemented 
29 Puducherry Not Implemented 
 

 
111 
 
ANNEXURE – III 
 
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE IN RESPECT OF AQUIFER MAPPING UNDER GR OUND WATER 
MANAGEMENT AND REGULATION DURING XII PLAN (2012-17) (As on 31st December, 2015) 
 
(Rs. in Crore) 
S.No. Years Expenditures 
 
1. 2012-13 Rs 118.64 
2. 2013-14 Rs 83.17 
3. 2014-15 Rs 125.42 
4. 2015-16  
(till 31st December, 2015) 
Rs 76.54 
 

 
112 
 
ANNEXURE – IV 
 
STATUS OF GROUND WATER MONITORING STATIONS (MARCH, 2015) 
S.No. Name of the State/UT Number of Ground Water Monitoring Stations 
  DW PZ Total  
1 Andhra Pradesh 772 109 881 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 29 0 29 
3 Assam 402 60 462 
4 Bihar 631 33 664 
5 Chhattisgarh 843 268 1111 
6 Delhi 20 96 116 
7 Goa 102 49 151 
8 Gujarat 809 390 1199 
9 Haryana 481 483 964 
10 Himachal Pradesh 112 0 112 
11 Jammu & Kashmir 256 32 288 
12 Jharkhand 407 20 427 
13 Karnataka 1483 383 1866 
14 Kerala 1369 269 1638 
15 Madhya Pradesh 1134 348 1482 
16 Maharashtra 1541 219 1760 
17 Manipur 13 10 23 
18 Meghalaya 56 4 60 
19 Nagaland 26 5 31 
20 Odisha 1583 98 1681 
21 Punjab 169 744 913 
22 Rajasthan 734 377 1111 
23 Tamil Nadu 819 532 1351 
24 Telangana 360 376 736 
25 Tripura 58 9 67 
26 Uttar Pradesh 940 185 1125 
27 Uttarakhand 43 126 169 
28 West Bengal 855 886 1741 
 UT    
1 Andaman & Nicobar 108 2 110 
2 Chandigarh 1 24 25 
3 Dadra & Nagar Haveli 12 0 12 
4 Daman & Diu 11 5 16 
5 Pondicherry 11 7 18 
TOTAL 16190 6149 22339 
# State of Mizoram and Sikkim and UT of Lakshadweep do not have Monitoring wells. 

 
113 
 
ANNEXURE – V 
SALIENT FEATURES OF DRAFT NATIONAL WATER FRAMEWORK BILL 
(1) The draft National Water Framework Bill proposes to establish an umbrella statement of general pri nciples 
governing the exercise of legislative and/or executive (or devolved) powers by the Centre, the States and the 
local governing bodies, which should lead the way for essential legislation on water governance in every 
State of the Union and devolution of necessary authority to the lower tiers of government to deal with the local 
water situation.  
(2) It proposes eighteen Basic Principles for Water Management to bring different State legal interventions within 
a framework of governing principles and alignment of existing legislations both at the Central as well as State 
level to conform to the principles and provisions of this Bill. 
(3) It proposes that every individual should have a right to a minimum quantity of potable water (not less than 25 
litres per capita per day) for essential health and hygiene and within easy reach of the household, which may 
be provided free of cost to eligible households, being part of pre-emptive need. 
(4) It proposes establishment of an independent statutory Water Regulatory Authority by every State for ensuring 
equitable access to water for all and its fair pricing on volumetric basis, for drinking and other uses such as 
sanitation, agricultural and industrial. 
(5) It proposes that all water resources projects conform to the River Basin Ma ster Plan to be prepared, 
applicable efficiency benchmarks and take into account all social and environmental aspects in addition to 
techno-economic considerations. 
(6) It proposes that the groundwater be protected, conserved and regulated through appropriate laws and by 
adequate and efficient measures using precautionary approach, with active participation of Community Based 
Institutions. 
(7) It proposes conformance to the Service Level Benchmarks for water supply, sanitation, solid waste 
management and storm water drainage, as may be prescribed. 

 
114 
 
(8) It proposes that Industries either withdraw only the make up water or have an obligation to return treated 
effluent to a specified standard back to the hydrologic system and to file annual ‘Water returns’. 
(9) It proposes that  the appropriate Government take all possible measures to synergise and integrate different 
development schemes including schemes for water conservation, sanitation and improvement of water quality 
at Panchayat or Municipality level, as the case may be, and further at sub basin and basin level. 
(10) It proposes that a High Powered Committee be set up at the Centre and in each State for coordination and 
policy support mechanism between different agencies dealing with water etc.

 
115 
 
ANNEXURE – VI 
SALIENT FEATURES OF DRAFT RIVER BASIN MANAGEMENT BILL 
(1) The Draft River Basin Management Bill proposes establishment of separate River Basin Authorities for 
regulation and development of waters for twelve major inter-State river basins in the country. 
(2) It proposes principles of p articipation, cooperation, equitable and sustainable management, conjunctive use, 
integrated management, public trust doctrine and demand management for governing river basin 
development, management and regulation. 
(3) It proposes a two -tier structure for a Ri ver Basin Authority, consisting of a Governing Council comprising, 
inter-alia, of Chief Ministers of riparian States and an Executive Board comprising, inter -alia, of Secretaries of 
riparian States, charged with the technical and implementation powers for the Governing Council decisions.  
(4) It proposes each River Basin Authority should prepare a River Basin Master Plan for the inter -State river 
basin under its jurisdiction on the principles of Integrated Water Resources Management. 
(5) It proposes that the Govern ing Council follow persuasion, conciliation and mediation as means to resolve 
disputes, whenever any dispute or difference arises between two or more State Governments with respect to 
any recommendation given by the River Basin Authority or the refusal or neglect of any State Government to 
undertake any measures in pursuance of the River Basin Master Plan or Schemes.  
(6) It provides for referral of dispute(s) for resolution under the Inter State River Water Disputes Act, 1956, when 
the Governing Council fails to determine the issue(s) or resolve the water dispute(s) or where the State 
Governments disagree with the decision tendered by such Governing Council. 
(7) It proposes that the River Basin Authority be empowered to have its own funds and requires them to prepa re 
Annual Report to be laid before both Houses of Parliament.  
(8) It proposes that the Central Government may give directions and make Rules for effective implementation of 
the provisions of the Bill. It also proposes that every River Basin Authority be empowered to make regulations 
for discharging its powers and functions etc. 

 
116 
 
*** 
 
  
 
 

 
117 
 
ANNEXURE-VII 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES (2016 -17) HELD ON 
WEDNESDAY, 23 NOVEMBER 2016 
 
 
  The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1510 hours in Committee Room 'C', Ground Floor, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
 
PRESENT 
 
 
  
Shri Hukum Singh  –  Chairperson 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
32. Shri Radheshyam iswas 
33. Shri Sudhir Gupta 
34. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
35. Shri Vijaysinh Mohite Patil 
36. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
37. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah 
38. Smt. V. Sathyabama 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
39. Shri Harshvardhan Singh Dungarpur 
40. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
41. Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
42. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
43. Shri Sanjay Seth 
44. Shri A.V. Swamy  
45. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar    - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Rita Jailkhani    - Director 
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar   - Additional Director 
 
  

 
118 
 
 
-2- 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.   Thereafter, 
the Committee took up for consideration and adoption (a) Draft Report on Action Taken by Government on 
the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Fifth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on the subject 
“Review of Ground Water Scenario, need for a comprehensive policy and measures to a ddress problems 
in the country - with particular reference to (i) Dark Blocks; and (ii) Contamination of underground water by 
certain industries”; and (b) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the  Ninth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2016 -17) of 
the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation.  After some deliberations, the 
Committee adopted the aforesaid two draft Reports without any modification.   
3. The Committee also authorized the Chair person to present these two Reports to both the Houses 
of Parliament in the current Winter Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 

 
119 
 
ANNEXURE – VIII 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTH REPORT  
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE  
  
(i)  Total number of Observations/ Recommendations    27 
 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations  which have been accepted    
by the Government  
 
Para Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23 and 27 
 
Total : 16 
           Percentage    : 59.25%  
  
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations  which the Committee do  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
 
Para Nos. 12, 14 and 25 
 
Total : 03  
         Percentage : 11.11 % 
 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies    
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Para Nos. 2, 8, 10, 16 and 24 
 
         Total : 05  
                Percentage  : 18.51 % 
 
(v) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which final reply 
 of the Government are still awaited 
 
Para Nos. 19, 22 and 26 
  
         Total : 03 
          Percentage   : 11.11% 
  
 