STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
                                (2016-2017) 
 
 
 
                              SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION  
 
 
 
REPAIR, RENOVATION AND RESTORATION OF WATER BODIES – ENCROACHMENT ON 
WATER BODIES AND STEPS REQUIRED TO REMOVE THE ENCROACHMENT AND RESTORE 
THE WATER BODIES 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Tenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources} 
 
 
 
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
March, 2017 / Phalguna,1938 (Saka) 
 
15 

 
FIFTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
 
(2016-2017) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
 
 
REPAIR, RENOVATION AND RESTORATION OF WATER BODIES – ENCROACHMENT ON 
WATER BODIES AND STEPS REQUIRED TO REMOVE THE ENCROACHMENT AND RESTORE 
THE WATER BODIES 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Tenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources} 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.03.2017 
     Laid in Rajya Sabha on 16.03.2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March, 2017 / Phalguna,1938 (Saka) 

WRC NO. 20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2016 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson , Standing Committee on Water Resources (201 6-2017) having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Fifteenth Report on the 
Action Taken by Go vernment on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Co mmittee on Water Resources  on the subject “Repair, 
Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies – Encroachment on water bodies and steps required to 
remove the encroachment and restore the water bodies”.  
2. The Tenth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on  
02 August, 2016.  The replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report 
were received on 29 November, 2016. 
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and adopted by 
the Committee at their sitting held on 14 March, 2017. 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Tenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Annexure-III. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                HUKUM SINGH, 
8 March, 2017                                                          Chairperson,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
17 Phalguna, 1938 (Saka)          Standing Committee on Water Resources 
  
 
 
 
(v) 
 

CONTENTS 
 
 
     
Page  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016-17) …………………………………  (iii)  
 
INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
 
CHAPTER I -      Report        1 
  
       
CHAPTER II - Observations / Recommendations which have been 
  accepted by the Government ……………………………… -- 24 
            
CHAPTER III - Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
  not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies .. -- 43 
  
CHAPTER IV    - Observations / Recommendations in respect of which  
 replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
 the Committee ……. ………………………………………… -- 44 
 
CHAPTER V    - Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
 Replies of the Government are still awaited ………………. -- 51 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I. Draft Guidelines for conservation and Protection of Water Bodies --- 54 
 
II. Minutes of the Sixth sitting of the Committee held on 14.03.2017 --- 60 
 
III. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the   --- 62 
 Observations / Recommendations contained in the 
 Tenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
 
  
   
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2016-17) 
  
 
  
  Shri Hukum Singh  -  Chairperson 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Radheshyam Biswas 
3. Shri Devusinh Jesingbhai Chauhan 
4. Shri Sudhir Gupta@ 
5. Shri Prakash B. Hukkeri* 
6. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
7. Shri Mohanbhai Kundariya# 
8. Shri Maganti Murali Mohan 
9. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
10. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
11. Shri Subhash Patel 
12. Shri Sanjaykaka Ramchandra Patil 
13. Shri Vijaysinh Mohite Patil 
14. Smt. Aparupa Poddar 
15. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
16. Shri S. P. Y. Reddy 
17. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah 
18. Smt. V. Sathyabama 
19. Shri Lallu Singh 
20. Shri Liladharbhai Vaghela 
21. Smt. Dimple Yadav 
 
        RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
23. Shri Harshvardhan Singh Dungarpur 
24. Mir Mohammad Fayaz 
25. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
26. Shri Sanjiv Kumar 
27. Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
28. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
29. Shri Sanjay Seth 
30. Shri A.V. Swamy  
31. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
 
32.   
 
_______________________________________________________________________________ 
@ Nominated w.e.f. 19.10.2016. 
* Nominated w.e.f. 23.11.2016. 
# Nominated w.e.f. 19.10.2016. 
 
(iii) 

 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.  Shri Shiv Kumar   -  Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Rita Jailkhani  -  Director 
3.  Shri Kushal Sarkar  -  Additional Director 
4.  Smt. Shanta Banerjee Datta -  Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources deals with the Action 
Taken by the Government on the observations / recommendations contained in their Tenth 
Report (16th Lok Sabha)) on the subject “Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies – 
Encroachment on water bodies and steps required to remove the encroachment and restore 
the water bodies” which was presented to Lok Sabha on 2 nd August, 2016.    Action Taken 
Notes received from the Government in respect of all the 19 observations / recommendations of 
the Committee, have been categorized as under: 
 
(i) Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II): 
 
 Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 18 and 19                      (Total – 13) 
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III): 
 
Para Nos. NIL                        (Total – NIL) 
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
 
Para Nos. 7, 9, 14, 16 and 17          (Total – 05) 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V): 
 
 Para No. 6           (Total – 01) 

2 
 
2. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of the 
observations / recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
(A) Census of Water Bodies 
Recommendation (Para No. 1 to 3) 
3. The Committee noted that the total number of water bodies in India, as per India Water 
Resources Information System (WRIS) portal wa s 7,98,908 including temporary water bodies 
such as in salt -pan, abandoned quarries, temporary industrial ponds, lagoons, bays, etc. They 
further noted that India – WRIS had reported largest number of Water bodies in Chattis hgarh 
i.e. 1, 04,716 followed by West Bengal. Excluding  temporary water bodies, there we re 6, 
35,661 water bodies. The Committee further noted that the Ministry had maintained database of 
only those water bodies which were being provided Central assistance under the scheme of 
Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of water bodies, thus confining its monitoring role to 
only such water bodies. The Committee were further informed that besides mapping of water 
bodies through the satellite, at present, t he information on water bodies wa s being collected in 
Minor Irrigation (MI) census, covering both surface and ground water structures. Till now, four 
MI census ha d been conducted in the years 1986 -87, 1993 -94, 2000 -01 and 2006 -07. The 
Committee were concerned to note that the total number of water bodies ha d declined from 5, 
56,601 in 3rd MI census to 5, 23,816 as reported in 4th (MI) census. They observe d that 5th MI 
census had been initiated with reference year 2013 -14 and in this census, information on all 
water bodies of rural areas was being collected directly by adding an item in village schedule. 
4.  In this context, the Committee further note d that as per the information received from 
various States and Union Territories (UTs) there was an increase in total number of water 
bodies in States such as Madhya Pradesh, Telangana, Arunachal Pradesh, Rajasthan, 

3 
 
Mizoram, Tripura and Odisha during the last 10 years, which was mainly due to the 
construction of new tanks, check dams, etc. Whereas, the States such as Andhra Pradesh, 
Manipur and Kerala ha d registered a decrease in total number of water bodies as a result of 
human activities such as encroachment, unplanned urbanisation, industrialisation, heavy 
siltation, deficiency in proper management of water bodies, change in land use patterns, etc. 
Also, so me States and Union Territories (UTs) such as Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka, Andaman 
and Nicobar Islands, Tamil Nadu and Punjab ha d reported no change in number of water 
bodies during the same period, whereas no such study ha d been made in the States of West 
Bengal, Nagaland and UT of Lakshadweep. 
The Committee note d with concern that the Ministry ha d not conducted any separate 
survey / study exclusively on water bodies revealing their condition, increase/ decrease in their 
number, their status of encroachment, etc. However, the Committee also took  note of the fact 
that the Secretary, MoWR,RD and GR ha d issued an advisory to States to collect information 
about the status of encroachment of water bodies. 
5.  The Committee were distressed to note that although having a pivotal role in 
management of water resources, the Central Ministry ha d made no efforts to keep itself abreast 
of the ground situation with regard to state of water bodies in the country. This was evident from 
the fact that in the past, so far the  Ministry had made no efforts to compile information on water 
bodies covering such aspects as their total number, increase / decrease, their status in terms of 
shrinkage, dried / vanished, change in land use in catchment areas of water bodies and 
encroachment, etc. Such informatio n was not readily available in the database created by the 
satellite mapping. Further the data collected through MI census covers only those water bodies 
which are in rural areas / villages and therefore does not offer a comprehens ive picture. For 

4 
 
such vital information, the Ministry is dependent upon State Governments who do not conduct 
periodical surveys / study encompassing such aspects as evident from the scattered 
information received from various States and Union Territories ( UTs). The Committee were of 
the view that there wa s an imperative need to create a Central database on water bodies. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend ed that in order to enable an objective assessment of water 
bodies and their condition, it should be mad e mandatory to build a database incorporating 
information from States. The Committee did  not accept the plea that the Ministry wa s unable to 
maintain a comprehensive database on water bodie s as the subject of ‘water’ came  under the 
purview of State Governm ents. Having noted that the State Governments ha d been requested 
to provide information on status of encroachment of water bodies through an advisory issued by 
the Secretary, MoWR, RD and GR, the Committee were of the opinion that collection of such 
information should be done on a regular basis to enable the Ministry to have its own repertoire 
of data, facilitating an objective policy making and the appropriate intervention required at 
different intervals. Therefore, as recommended in their 9th Report, the Committee reiterated the 
Ministry to initiate steps to complete the exercise of undertaking census of water bodies, within 
a definite time -frame. The Committee also desire d to be apprised of the information collected 
from the States on status of encroachment of water bodies within three months of presentation 
of this Report.Reply of the Government 
6. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
“The planning, execution and maintenance of water resources project comes under the 
purview of concerned State Government. This Ministry provides technical and financial 
assistance to State Governments to encourage sustainable development and efficient 
management of water resources through various schemes and programmes. However, 
as recommended by the Standing Committee it is now proposed to have a detailed 
census of all the water bodies in the next Minor Irrigation Census  (VI) by MoWR, RD & 
GR as field current minor irrigation census is almost complete. However, even in current 
census (V) information on number of water bodies  (irrespective of whether they are 

5 
 
being used for irrigation or for any purpose)  in village s-rural areas is being collected . 
Further, for expanding the scope of Census to urban areas, views of concerned State 
Government Departments and other Central Line Ministries will be taken during the 
preparatory work of VI Census. 
 
Secretary (MoWR, RD & GR) vide D.O. letter dated 26.02.2016 request ed to 
take several measures for protection of water bodies including encroachment issue. The 
information from the States are awaited in this regard. The States have been again 
requested to intimate the status on the number of water bodies and its encroachm ent 
vide D.O. letter dated 07.11.2016 from Secretary (MoWR, RD & GR) to the Chief 
Secretaries of the States. The matter would be pursued further with the States to 
expedite the information.” 
 
7. The Committee observe that the census of water bodies in the country is 
proposed to be conducted by the Ministry during the next Minor Irrigation (MI) census as 
the current MI census (V) is almost complete.  Further in order to enable census of water 
bodies located in  the urban areas, views of concerned State Government Departments 
and other line Ministries are proposed to be taken during the preparatory work of VI th MI 
census.  The  Committee do not find the reply of the Ministry  satisfactory as no 
information has been giv en on concrete action taken to hold census of water bodies.  In 
their view, postponing the work of conducting census to next  MI census will only delay 
the process which is crucial for understanding the gravity of the problem  in respect of 
water bodies, the ir condition , extent of work to be undertaken and taking appropriate 
remedial measures for the same.  In fact, the Committee  are of the opinion that instead 
there should be separate census of water bodies which can be initiated urgently to build 
a central database encompassing all aspects such as size, area, water quality, siltation , 
etc.  Further the census should be conducted for both the urban and rural water bodies. 
 The Committee also notice that the States have not furnished any information on 
water bodies despite being requested by the Ministry on 26 February, 2016.  They note 
that the same has been again requested on 07.11.2016.  The Committee feel that while 

6 
 
the State Governments have not come forward in submitting the information, the 
Ministry has also failed to actively persuade the matter.  They would, therefore, advise 
the Ministry to be more proactive in persuading States to collect and share the 
information besides initiating process for conducting separate census.  They desire that 
the work of  undertaking census of water bodies should be initiated without any further 
delay and completed within a definite time frame. 
(B) Impact of Encroachment on Water Bodies 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
8. The Committee observe d that encroachment on water bodies had been a major cause 
of recent floods witnessed in many parts of the country viz. flash floods of Mumbai in 2005, 
severe flood in Uttarakhand in 2013, intense flood situation in Jammu and Kashmir in 2014 and 
severe flood in Chennai in 2015. They f urther note d that besides natural factors, human 
induced causes like unscientific development and land use pattern especially human activities 
in flood plain zones and estuarine areas of river, encroachment of natural drainage channels 
and water bodies, so cio-economic conditions, deforestation, increasing human and cattle 
population pressure are other contributing factors in creation of natural calamities such as flood. 
The Committee found that lack of seriousness and complacency o n the part of the Governme nt 
could not be more conspicuous than the fact that even after circulation of flood plain zoning bill 
in 1975 to States with a view to prevent encroachment of river bed, State Governments ha d 
failed to enact laws on flood plain zoning - which could have pl ayed a key role in tackling the 
problem of encroachment. So far, only the States of Manipur, Uttarakhand, Rajasthan and 
Maharashtra, had passed law on flood plain z ones and river regulation zones.  The Committee, 

7 
 
therefore, desire d that State Governments s hould be sensitised to hasten the legislation in 
order to put a check on  human activities on the catchment areas and natural drainage channel 
of water bodies, flood plain zones and estuarine areas of river.Reply of the Government 
9. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
“Secretary (MoWR, RD & GR) vide D.O. letter dated 26.02.2016 requested to take several 
measures for protection of water bodies including encroachment issue. The information is 
awaited. States have been again req uested vide D.O. letter dated 07.11.2016 to intimate 
the proposed action by them on the following point: 
The water bodies may be includ ed in land records of State Government  so that action 
against the encroachers can be taken and a check on human activitie s on th e 
catchment areas and natural drainage channel of water bodies, flood plain zones and 
estuarine areas of river be fruitfully implemented.  
 
Detailed guidelines have been prepared in this regard which are being circulated to the 
States for necessary actions at their end.” 
 
10. The Committee are disappointed with the reply furnished by the Ministry as it 
appears to be repetitive, without any reflection on specific measures taken to impress 
upon State Governments to enact the legislation s on flood pla in zones and river 
regulation zones.  The  Committee feel that the delay in enactment of such law has been 
due to laxity on the part of both the State as well as Central Government s.  The Ministry 
has not been able to persuade States to enact the law for prot ection of river banks and 
flood plains with its consequent effect on aggravating problem of floods in many parts 
of the country .  The recurrence of floods in major cities almost every year is a clear 
indication of the gravity of the problem, compounded by the fact that global warming is a 
reality now, with extreme changes in climate being observed everywhere and posing a 
serious challenge to policymakers.  Therefore, it is high time that the Ministry takes 
urgent measures to prevent the human induced causes  such as encroachment of water 

8 
 
bodies and to protect rivers and water bodies , which have the potential to act as crucial 
outlets for absorbing flood water in cities and villages. 
(C) Action against encroachers 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
11. The Committee observe d that few States had  come forward informing their existing 
mechanism to prevent encroachments. While States such as Assam and Manipur ha d enacted 
laws enabling action against encroachers / encroachment on water bodies, other States viz. 
Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Telangana ha d furnished information on administrative 
machinery vested with powers to take action in case of encroachments. However, the 
Committee express ed their displeasure over the fact that the Central Government ha d 
shrugged off any responsibility in the matter by stating that urban development, storm water 
drainage and land use master planning, etc. were State subjects. Also Central Government / 
Ministry had no role to play in matters of maintenance and upkeep of water bod ies including 
tackling of encroachments which come under the purview of Urban Local Boards, Land revenue 
and Water Resources / Irrigation Departments under the State Governments. The Committee, 
however, deprecated such approach on the part of the Ministry which amounts to passing on 
the responsibility and being a mere spectator of the problem which pose d a serious challenge 
to the policy making and management of water resources.  They were of the view that even 
though the matter was under direct administrat ive control of State and local Government, the 
Central Government c ould play a guiding and supportive role. Taking cognisance of the 
directions of courts with regard to measures to be taken for prevention of encroachment on 
water bodies, the Ministry shoul d formulate a model directive / guideline impressing upon 
States to execute the same. They desired to be apprised of such measure, if any, being taken / 

9 
 
to be taken by the Government. Also, the Committee desired to be apprised of the information 
collected by the Ministry on various aspects of encroachments, following advisory issued to the 
States.Reply of the Government 
12. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
“Ministry of Water Resource s, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation is in the 
process of framing a model directive/ guidelines based on the direction of courts. In this 
context, ‘Draft guidelines for Conservation and Protection of Water Bodies’  (copy 
enclosed) have been circulated to the Central Ministries and State/UTs for their 
comments/views. The same will be finalized based on the views.” 
 
13. The Committee are pleased to find that a draft Guidelines for the conservation 
and protection of water bodies have  been formulated to tackle the problem of 
encroachment on water bodies on the lines of directions  and measures suggested by 
the Courts.  They note that the draft Guidelines have included several measures which, if 
implemented, will prove very effective in reducing the problem of encroachment.  They 
further, note that the draft Guideline s have been circulated to the Central Ministries and 
States / Union Territories for the ir comments / views.  However, th is implementation 
seems to be far away , as the process  is still going on.  They would therefore, strongly 
recommend that all the formalities / procedures should be completed within a time frame 
so that Guidelines are implemented soon by the States.  The Committee further note with 
utter distress that the Mini stry has not furnished any information on various aspects of 
encroachment on water bodies such as its extent, type i.e. whether residential and 
commercial, action taken / proposed to be taken against encroach ers etc. for which 
advisory was issued to the States.  They, therefore, desire the Ministry to take immediate 
steps to collect the relevant information from the States / UTs and furnish the same to 
the Committee at the earliest. 
(D) Monitoring mechanism for prevention and removal of encroachments from water    
bodies 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
14. The Committee note d that under the RRR scheme, monitoring mechanism ha d been 
instituted in the local bodies at three levels viz. Water User Association (WUA) at the Gram 

10 
 
Panchayat Level, Cascade Association (CA) and WUA Federation at the Block level. The 
monitoring of water bodies by local bodies ha d been effective and successful in preventing 
encroachments in many States and UTs such as Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Gujarat, 
Manipur, Rajasthan, Tripura, Odisha,  Andaman and Nicobar islands and Tamil Nadu. The 
Committee further note d that Manipur and Andaman and Nicobar islands ha d included NGOs, 
prominent social workers and user agency in monitoring mechanism while Odisha ha d a 
provision for fine and penalty for encroachers. However, the Committee note d with concern the 
fact that local bodies ha d not succeeded in preventing encroachments in Madhya Pradesh due 
to policy of appeasement and lack of determination to remove encroachment, as admitted by 
the State of Madhya Pradesh in their written submission.  The Committee apprehended that this 
factor might have indirectly influenced action against  encroachers elsewhere as well. While the 
role of local bodies in monitoring at local level  cannot be denied, the Committee were of the 
view that involvement of user communities and  fixing of responsibility c ould make it more 
effective and better serve the purpose. Community  participation / involvement of user 
communities could  ensure better vigilance and negate the  possibility of connivance with 
encroachers. The Committee also fel t that there was a need to  maintain proper coordination 
between police and the elected representatives like village  Sarpanch or Pradhan and Nagar 
Palika Chairman. They, therefore, recommend ed to refurb ish the existing monitoring 
mechanism by including user communities, fixing responsibility of  concerned officials and penal 
provisions against encroachers along with proper  coordination in activities of various agencies 
of the Government. The Committee felt that although, Water may be a State subject, 
encroachment of water bodies ha d a definite impact  on the environment and reduce d the 
capacity of accumulation of water which is very  precious to the country as a whole. Therefore, 

11 
 
the Committee strongly recommended the Ministry to issue appropriate guidelines in this 
regard. 
15. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
“Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation is  in the 
process of framing a model directive/ guidelines based on the direction of courts. In this 
context, ‘Draft guidelines for Conservation and Protection of Water Bodies’ ( copy 
enclosed) have been circulated to the Central Ministries and State/UTs for their 
comments/views. The same will be finalized based on the views.” 
 
16. The Committee not e that no specific reply / information has been given with 
regard to the concerns raised by them regarding monitoring of water bodies and 
measures to strengthen the  monitoring mechanism.  They further note that although the 
draft Guidelines for conservation and protection of water bodies , based on directions 
given by Courts in the matter include various positive and proactive measures to protect 
water bodies, revamping of existing monitoring mechanism by including user 
communities and fixing of responsibilities clearly have not been emphasised.  The 
Committee are of the  view that the monitoring mechanism needs to be restructured by 
including water user communities and ensuring fixing of responsibility so as to make it 
more effective and en sure better upkeep.  Therefore, they recommend the Ministry to 
incorporate in Guidelines, the revamped monitoring mechanism.  Further, it should also 
be embedded in existing RRR scheme  to provide for the better monitoring of water 
bodies covered under the scheme. 
(E) Awareness campaigns to prevent encroachment on water bodies 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
17. The Committee observe d that several initiatives ha d been taken by the State 
Governments to increase awareness among people about the need for conserving water 

12 
 
bodies. As submitted by some of the States and UTs, the Committee noticed that awareness 
campaigns and public sensitisation were being carried out by involving NGOs, audio 
broadcasts, etc. The MoWR,RD and GR ha d organised ‘Jal Manthan’ and ‘India Water Week’ 
to spread awareness about conservation and maintenanc e of water bodies. Recently, a 
campaign called ‘Jal Kranti’ ha d been launched where two villages in all districts of the country 
had been selected to increase awareness on the issue. While taking note of the measures 
taken so far to increase awareness amon g people, the Committee were of the view that the 
intensity of the awareness campaigns needed  to be increased with much bigger exposure in 
media, both electronic, print and others. Beside the need for saving water, a precious natural 
resource should also b e somehow made a part of school curriculum and university education. 
The Committee were also of the view that the Ministry should involve local representatives such 
as Members of Parliament and State legislatures to spread the message and educate people in  
their constituency, on the need for protection and conservation of water bodies. The Committee 
further desired to be apprised of the funds allocated and spent on the awareness campaigns 
during the last three years. 
18. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied follows: - 
a) “A letter has been issued to Ministry of Human Resource Development on 
23.05.2016 requesting for issuing necessary instructions to include the subject 
“Water Management” as a subject in the selected universities/engineering 
Colleges/management Institutes. 
 
b) It has been decided that the process of selection of Jal Grams under Jal Kranti 
Abhiyan will be done with the consent of concerned Member of Parliament (MP) and 
also the consent of local MP will be taken for already identified Jal Grams under the 
Jal Kranti Abhiyan.  
 
c) Apart from various regular activities/programmes like Painting Competition, 
organization of national / international seminars viz, Jal Manthan, Bhujal Manthan, 
India Water Week etc., some new initiatives have been taken by the Ministry like 
National essay competition stated from 2015 -16 and proposal for the same is under 

13 
 
consideration in 2016 -17 also. Radio Jingles are also being developed by NFDC. 
Once developed, these Jingles will be broadcast through ALL India Radio and other 
appropriate mediums. These newly inducted programmes will certainly provide an 
impetus to the ongoing efforts of the Ministry towards awareness campaigns. 
 
d) Fund allocated and fund spent in last 3 years are as below:” 
Amount in crore  
Year  BE RE Expenditure 
2013-14 40.00 20.00 16.489 
2014-15 30.00 18.00 16.53 
2015-16 10.00 4.84 5.92 
 
19. The Committee note that the Ministry has taken several initiatives viz. inclusion of 
the subject of ‘water management’ in selected universities / engineering colleges / 
management institutes, selection of ‘Jal Grams’ under Jal Kranti Abhiyaan with  the 
consent of concerned MPs, holding of National Essay Competition, airing of radio j ingles 
etc. to intensify and broaden the awareness among masses on t he need for protecting 
water bodies.  While appreciating these measures, the Committee would like to know the 
number of Jal Grams selected  (State/UT-wise) so far and activities taken therein to 
spread the awareness thereabout. 
20. With regard to utilisation of funds, the Committee are surprised  to find that the 
Ministry has not been able to fully spend the budgetary provisions on awareness 
programmes during the last three years inspite of reducing allocations every year on 
this Head which indicate s poor emphasis given on awareness activities among the 
masses of the country - which are crucial for the success of the initiatives taken for the 

14 
 
revival and conservation of water bodies.  They, therefore, desire to be apprised of the 
reasons for lower allocations and expenditure under this Head 
 
(F) Impact assessment of RRR scheme implemented during XI and XII Plan 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
21. The Committee notice d that the Ministry ha d not furnished any information regarding 
impact assessment of the RRR scheme implemented during XI Plan, with replies submitted by 
the Ministry - giving details of the outcome of Pilot scheme of RRR, launched during X Plan 
period. They further observe d that for the implementation of the scheme during XII Plan, it ha d 
been envisage d that the State Governments would  evaluate the scheme by involving 
independent agencies including IIMs and IITs. The Central Government would  thereafter 
evaluate and assess the im pact through independent agencies to be identified by the Ministry. 
However they noted with concern that so far, no State Government except Odisha ha d started 
the process of appointing an independent agency for concurrent evaluation of the sch eme in XII 
Plan. The Committee we re distressed to note that proper evaluation of the outcome of RRR 
scheme implemented during XI Plan wa s not yet quantified in terms of important parameters 
like increase in storage capacity, recharge capacity, additional irrigation pot ential created and 
increase in drinking water supply, etc. While expressing their anguish over the indifferent 
attitude shown by respective Governments in  the matter, the Committee recommend ed that 
independent agencies to be identified both by the Centre a nd State Governments for the 
purpose, should be selected and assigned the task without any further delay to enable an 
objective analysis of the performance of the scheme and evaluate proper utilisation of the funds 
spent so far. The Committee, therefore, r ecommended the Government to apprise them about 
the measures taken for impact assessment of the scheme implemented during XII Plan, 

15 
 
including independent agencies identified, if any, their role, function and stipulated time period 
for submission of Evaluat ion Report, etc. The Committee, however, desired to be apprised of 
the outcome of the evaluation of the scheme (encompassing all the aspects, stated before) 
implemented during XI Plan within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
22. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
“Secretary (WR, RD & GR) vide D.O. letter dated 07.11.2016 has requested State 
Governments to ensure concurrent evaluation of the water bodies under RRR of water 
bodies scheme. Further CWC has  also been requested for preparation of 
TOR/EOI/RFP for evaluation study for taking up the same.” 
 
23. The Committee are distressed to note that the Ministry has not taken any 
proactive measures to speed up the process of impact assessment of (Repair, 
Renovation and Restoration) RRR scheme implemented during XI and XII Plan.  The 
Ministry has taken up the issue with the States now (vide D. O. letter dated 07.11.2016) 
despite a suggestion made in this regard in the  Committee Report three months back.  
This shows the ca sual attitude of the Government in this regard.  However, the 
Committee would like to reiterate the necessity of such assessment of an important 
scheme under which a huge amount of fund is being spent.  This is crucial for evaluatio n 
of the effectiveness of RRR scheme in the revival and protection of water bodies - which 
in turn would help to generate additional irrigation potential,  water supply for domestic 
uses and  increase in ground water storage capacity , etc.  The Committee wou ld, 
therefore, reiterate t hat utmost measures should be taken for impact assessment of the 
scheme both at the Central and States levels and the details thereof be furnished to 
them within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
 

16 
 
(G) Creation of new water bodies under the Scheme of RRR 
Recommendation (Para No.16) 
24. The Committee observed that of late, the State Governments had taken some initiatives 
in creating new water bodies under programmes such as Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guaranttee Act (MGNREGA). There ha d also been an increase in total number of 
water bodies in States of Madhya Pradesh, Telangana, Arunachal Pradesh, Rajasthan, 
Mizoram, Tripura and Odisha during the last 10 years mainly due to construction of new tanks, 
check dams, etc. The Committee fe lt that creation of new water bodies wa s a we lcome move 
and could be integrated into the ambit of existing scheme of RRR, which would also make good 
of the loss of the water bodies as a result of encroachment, especially in t he urban areas.  
They, therefore, recommend ed the Ministry to review the scheme by incorporating this aspect 
and accordingly change the nomenclature of the Scheme from “Repair, Renovation and 
Restoration of water bodies” to “Repair, Renovation, Restoration  and Creation of water bodies”. 
They desired that the Ministry should take urgent steps in this direction with thrust on creating 
new water bodies in the urban areas w here problem of encroachment had  assumed enormous 
proportion. In this regard they further  recommended issuing appropriate guidelines/revise the 
existing guidelines under intimation to the Committee.Reply of the Government 
 
25. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
“The RRR of Water Bodies scheme has been formulated to  repair, renovate and restore 
the existing traditional water bodies.” 
26. The Committee note with utter dissatisfaction the terse reply furnished by the 
Ministry on the issue of creation of new water bodies under Repair, Renovation and 
Restoration of Water Bodies (RRR)  scheme by simply stating the fact that the scheme of 

17 
 
RRR of water bodies has been formulated to repair, renovate and restore the existing 
traditional water bodies.  It is silent about reviewing the existing scheme or any rationale 
in this re gard.  They further observe that the draft guideline for the conservation and 
protection of water bodies have included the issue of creation of water bodies by 
advising States to explore the possibility of creation of new water bodies - in addition to 
the maintenance of old water bodies.  The  Committee think that the scope of RRR can 
also be widened by bringing into its fold the creation of new water bodies to compensate 
for the lost ones. The  Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should incorporat e 
the creation of new water bodies under the RRR scheme to give an impetus to the efforts 
for creation along with restoration, maintenance and protection of water bodies.  
Accordingly, they reiterate issuing appropriate guidelines / revise the existing gui delines 
under RRR scheme and apprise the same to the Committee at the earliest. 
(H) Release of funds under RRR Scheme 
Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
27. The Committee noticed that the Central Government had not released its share of funds 
for the second installment to the State Government of Odisha, due to which work on water 
bodies had suffered in the State which in turn, ha d rendered completion of work by scheduled 
date of 31 March, 2017 difficult. They were informed by the Special Secretary during evid ence 
that reason for non release of funds was non - allocation of sufficient funds for the purpose. The 
Committee express ed displeasure over the fact that the Ministry had  failed to anticipate the 
demands for funds from different States under the RRR scheme, resulting in delay in 
disbursement of funds. They therefore, strongly recommended that necessary steps be taken to 
not only ensure sufficient allocation of funds/grant but also their timely disbursal so that the 

18 
 
projects under the scheme of RRR did  not suffer. The Committee fel t that there might be many 
other States which were languishing for funds. They, therefore, recommend ed the Ministry to 
provide information on tota l number of encroachment free water bodies, State -wise, which had 
submitted their request for release of funds in the second phase indicating the amount and the 
action taken by the Ministry from time to time to release the funds for the period ending 30 
June, 2016.Reply of the Government 
28. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows:  
“For ongoing water bodies under RRR of Water Bodies scheme, further Central 
Assistance (CA) is released on submission of proposal by the State Government, with 
the approval of State Level Sanctioning Committee (SLSC) as per the requirement of 
PMKSY,  along with the Utilization Certificate of the  previous CA released, budget 
provision for the current year, corresponding State share release, physical and financial 
progress of the individual water bodies  and the status of concurrent evaluation to be 
done by the States year-wise during the period of funding .   
All the water bodies included under RRR scheme are free from encroachment.  
During 2016-17, the proposals in this regard have been received from Odisha and 
Rajasthan for release of central share . The pro posals have been examined and 
comments of MoWR, RD & GR regarding utilization certificates of the previous central 
share released, budget provision, State share release d, approval of SLSC have been 
communicated to the States. The compliances are awaited.  The state have been 
requested to expedite the same for release of funds.” 
 
29. The Committee note that for ongoing water bodies covered under Repair, 
Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of water bodies scheme, further Central Assistance 
(CA) is released on  the submission of proposal  by the State Government with the 
approval of State Level Sanctioning Committee (SLSC) as per the requirement of 
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana (PMKSY) along with the utilisation Certificate for 
the previous CA released, budge t provision for the current year, corresponding State 
share release, physical and financial progress of the individual water bodies and the 
status of concurrent evaluation to be done by the States year -wise during the period of 
funding.  They observe that the States of Odisha and Rajasthan have requested for 

19 
 
release of Central Assistance for the ongoing work s on water bodies covered under 
RRR.  The proposals have been examined and comments of the Ministry regarding 
utilisation certificates of the p revious central share released, budget provision, State 
share released, approval of SLSC have been communicated to the States. 
 The Committee find the replies to be evasive as there is no mention of any 
measure to ensure timely disbursal of sufficient funds for wat er bodies covered under 
RRR.  The replies simply state the procedure to be followed for releasing CA without 
furnishing any reason for non allocation of funds , which has resulted in undue delay in 
completion of work in States such as Odisha.  Further, no information has been provided 
on total number of encroachment free water bodies for which States have been 
requested for release of funds and amount of funds released by the Ministry so far. 
30. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that necessary steps shoul d be taken to 
ensure sufficient and timely allocation of funds so that the implementation of projects 
under the scheme of RRR do not suffer.  They would also recommend the Ministry to 
provide information on total number of encroachment free water bodies, S tate-wise, 
which have submitted their request s for release of funds in the second phase indicating 
the amount and the action taken by the Ministry from time to time to release the funds 
for the period ending 31 March, 2017. 
(I) Pollution of water bodies 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
31. The Committee were distressed to note that water quality in water bodies, which had 
been traditionally playing a major role as an alternative source for catering to dome stic and 

20 
 
agricultural needs, had been deteriorating. The condition of water bodies ha d degraded due to 
their negligence and poor maintenance. From the information submitted by Central Pollution 
Control Board (CPCB), the Committee observe d that as many as 132 lakes, tanks and ponds 
had been identified with very poor water quality scattered over the States of Andhra Pradesh, 
Gujarat, Odisha, Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Chattisgarh, Tamil Nadu, 
West Bengal, Assam, Rajasthan, Goa, Kerala, Bihar, Tripura and Jammu and Kashmir. Further, 
the main reason for water pollution in water bodies was stated to be sewage and waste water 
disposal into water bodies, as a result of increased human habitations around th e water bodies. 
The Committee fou nd that the c ondition of villages in Punjab was particularly pathetic as most 
of the ponds there were overflowing with accumulation of waste water, leading to flooding of 
street drains / ch annels, which ultimately created  health hazards. Similar problems ha d been 
encountered in States of Madh ya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Tripura and Kerala in the urban 
areas. They f ound that this fact ha d been admitted by the Special Secretary, MoWR, RD and 
GR, who emphasised that much work wa s yet to be done to improve water quality. The 
Committee were concerne d to note that at present, the treatment capacity of Sewage 
Treatment Plants (STPs) wa s only 23,000 million ltrs. per day as against 62,000 million ltrs. 
sewage being generated per d ay in the country. Thus, there wa s a requirement of additional 
Rs. 2 to 2. 5 lakh crore to fill this gap as informed by the representative of the Ministry of 
Environment, Forests and Climate Change. Therefore, urgent steps were needed to be taken in 
this di rection. However the Committee we re of the view that besides creating addi tional 
treatment capacity there was a need to minimise waste generation by adopting eco -friendly 
methods of waste disposal, development of sewage infrastructure in rural areas, adoption of 
alternative waste disposal techniques and appropriate tariffs on us es of water for different 

21 
 
purposes. The Committee, therefore, desire d to be apprised of the measures taken in this 
regard along with year -wise details of projects undertaken, funds allocated and spent, targets 
fixed and achieved in respect of sewage treatment during the last three years, year-wise. 
32. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows:  
“As intimated by CPCB, they have made a nationwide survey through questionnaire to 
the State secretaries, municipal corporations, State water boards, municipalities, public 
health engineering department, pollution  control boards and also other concerned 
agencies to obtain information/data on water supply, waste water generation, collection, 
treatment and disposal in Class-I cities, metropolitan cities and Class -II towns. Based 
on the information a report on “Status  of Water Supply, Wastewater Generation and 
Treatment in Class -I Cities & Class -II Towns of India” under CUPS series no. 
CUPS/70/2009-10 was published . CPCB reported that out of 38 ,254 MLD of sewage 
generated by Class- I citites and Class-II towns , only 11,787 MLD has been treated. 
CPCB reassessed sewage generation and treatment capacity for Urban 
Population of India for the year 2015. The sewage generation estimated is 61,948 MLD 
and sewage treatment capcity developed so far is 23,277 MLD. 
Based on the above study, CPCB has issued directions u/s 181(b) of Water 
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 vide letter dated 21.04.2015 to all State 
Pollution control Board/Pollution Control Communities to make mandatory for 
local/urban bodies to set up S TPs of adequate capacity and provide underground 
sewerage system to cover the entire local/urban areas and to bridge the treatment gap.” 
33. The Committee note that in a nationwide survey carried out in 2009 -10, the 
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) r eported that out of 38,254 Million Litres per day 
(MLD) of sewage generated by Class -I cities and Class -II towns, only 11,787 MLD of 
sewage w as treated .  Further in a n assessment carried out in 2015 for urban areas, 
sewage treatment capacity has been esti mated at 23,277 MLD as against 61,948 MLD of 
sewage generated.  The CPCB vide letter dated 21.04.2015 has issued direction under 
Section 181(b) of water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 to all State 
Pollution Control Board / Pollution Contro l Committees to make it mandatory for local / 
urban bodies to set up Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs) of adequate capacity and 
provide underground sewage system to cover the entire local / urban areas and to 
bridge the treatment gap.  However, the  Committee find that no information has been 

22 
 
furnished with regard to sewage generation and treatment in the rural areas.  Further no 
information has also been furnished with regard to measures for minimising waste 
generation, eco friendly methods of waste disposal a nd development of sewage 
infrastructure in the rural areas etc.  Also, no information has been furnished with regard 
to total amount of fund s allocated and spent on sewage treatment projects during the 
last three years.  The Committee would, therefore, des ire to be apprised of the specific 
measures taken in this regard along with details of projects undertaken, funds allocated 
and spent, targets fixed and achieved in respect of sewage treatment during the last 
three years, year-wise. 
(J) Siltation problem in water bodies 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
34. The Committee note d with serious concern that a large number of water bodies (7,153 
as per 4th MI Census) ha d dried up. However , the causes for such drying had  not been 
assessed by the Ministry, as the subject of ‘water’ c ame under the domain of State 
Governments. Since this wa s a very important aspect of information on the condition of water 
bodies in the country, the Committee believe d that such information needed to be collected and 
form part of the database on water bodies. The Committee further recommended the Ministry to 
furnish a detailed report on this issue covering such aspects as total no. of dried/vanished water 
bodies, causes, remedial action taken, etc. by each of the State Governments and Union 
Territories- within three months of presentation of this Report. 
35. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
“As recommended by the Standing Committee it is proposed to have a detailed Census 
of water bodies in the next Minor Irrigation Census (VI) by MoWR, RD & GR with the 
consent of  State Governments as field work of current minor irrigation census (V) is 

23 
 
almost complete. Collection of information from the field in the Census of different 
aspects like dried -up water bodies, its causes etc. can be finalized after due 
consultation with concerned State Government Departments and  other Central Line 
Ministries.” 
 
36. The Committee observe that the Ministry has agreed to conduct a detailed census 
of water bodies in the country along with next Minor Irrigation (MI) census (VI) as field 
work of current MI Census (V) is almost complete.  However, as stated earlier at para no. 
8 of this Report, the Committee do not concur with the view that water body census 
should be clubbed with MI Census.  They strongly believe that a separate exercise needs 
to be started at the earliest to carry out water body census as this information is crucial 
to formulate any policy for the protection of water bodies.  The Committee would, 
therefore, recommend the Ministry to take urgent action in the matter and apprise them 
accordingly.  Further, they would recommend the Ministry to collect informat ion on total 
number of dried / vanished water bodies, causes, remedial measures taken , etc.  from 
the State / Union Territory Governments and furnish the same to them within three 
months of presentation of this Report. 
  

24 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (No. 1 to 3) 
Census of Water Bodies 
The Committee note that the total number of water bodies in India, as per India Water 
Resources Information System (WRIS) portal is 7,98,908 inclu ding temporary water bodies 
such as in salt -pan, abandoned quarries, temporary industrial ponds, lagoons, bays, etc. They 
further note that India – WRIS has reported largest number of Water bodies in Chattishgarh i.e. 
1, 04,716 followed by West Bengal. Exc luding temporary water bodies, there are 6, 35,661 
water bodies. The Committee note that the Ministry maintains database of only those water 
bodies which are being provided Central assistance under the scheme of Repair, Renovation 
and Restoration (RRR) of water bodies, thus confining its monitoring role to only such water 
bodies. The Committee have been further informed that besides mapping of water bodies 
through the satellite, at present, the information on water bodies is collected in Minor Irrigation 
(MI) census, which covers both surface and ground water structures. Till now, four MI census 
have been conducted in the years 1986 -87, 1993 -94, 2000 -01 and 2006 -07. The Committee 
are concerned to note that the total number of water bodies has declined from 5 , 56,601 in 3rd 
MI census to 5, 23,816 as reported in 4th (MI) census. They observe that 5th MI census has 
been initiated with reference year 2013-14 and in this census, information on all water bodies of 
rural areas is being collected directly by adding an item in village schedule. 
In this context, the Committee further note that as per the information received from 
various States and Union Territories (UTs) there is an increase in total number of water bodies 
in States as Madhya Pradesh, Telangana, Arunac hal Pradesh, Rajasthan, Mizoram, Tripura 

25 
 
and Odisha during the last 10 years, which is mainly due to the construction of new tanks, 
check dams, etc. Whereas, the States such as Andhra Pradesh, Manipur and Kerala have 
registered a decrease in total number o f water bodies as a result of human activities such as 
encroachment, unplanned urbanisation, industrialisation, heavy siltation, deficiency in proper 
management of water bodies, change in land use patterns, etc. Also, some States and Union 
Territories (UTs) such as Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Tamil Nadu 
and Punjab have reported no change in number of water bodies during the same period, 
whereas no such study has been made in the States of West Bengal, Nagaland and UT of 
Lakshadweep. 
The Committee note with concern that the Ministry has not conducted any separate 
survey / study exclusively on water bodies revealing their condition, increase/ decrease in their 
number, their status of encroachment, etc. However, the Committee also tak e note of the fact 
that the Secretary, MoWR,RD and GR has issued an advisory to States to collect information 
about the status of encroachment of water bodies. 
The Committee are distressed to note that although having a pivotal role in 
management of water resources, the Central Ministry has made no efforts to keep itself abreast 
of the ground situation with regard to state of water bodies in the country. This is evident from 
the fact that in the past, so far the Ministry has made no efforts to compile information on water 
bodies covering such aspects as their total number, increase / decrease, their status in terms of 
shrinkage, dried / vanished, change in land us e in catchment areas of water bodies and 
encroachment, etc. Such information is not readily available in the database created by the 
satellite mapping. Further the data collected through MI census covers only those water bodies 
which are in rural areas / v illages and therefore does not offer a comprehensive picture. For 

26 
 
such vital information, the Ministry is dependent upon State Governments who do not conduct 
periodical surveys / study encompassing such aspects as evident from the scattered 
information received from various States and Union Territories (UTs). The Committee are of the 
view that there is an imperative need to create a Central database on water bodies. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that in order to enable an objective assessment of water  
bodies and their condition, it should be made mandatory to build a database incorporating 
information from States. The Committee do not accept the plea that the Ministry is unable to 
maintain a comprehensive database on water bodies as the subject of ‘wat er’ comes under the 
purview of State Governments. Having noted that the State Governments have been requested 
to provide information on status of encroachment of water bodies through an advisory issued by 
the Secretary, MoWR, RD and GR, the Committee are o f the opinion that collection of such 
information should be done on a regular basis to enable the Ministry to have its own repertoire 
of data, facilitating an objective policy making and the appropriate intervention required at 
different intervals. Therefo re, as recommended in their 9th Report, the Committee reiterate the 
Ministry to initiate steps to complete the exercise of undertaking census of water bodies, within 
a definite time -frame. The Committee also desire to be apprised of the information collect ed 
from the States on status of encroachment of water bodies within three months of presentation 
of this Report. 
Reply of the Government 
The planning, execution and maintenance of water resources project comes under the 
purview of concerned State Governmen t. This Ministry provides technical and financial 
assistance to State Governments to encourage sustainable development and efficient 
management of water resources through various schemes and programmes. However, as 

27 
 
recommended by the Standing Committee it is now proposed to have a detailed census of all 
the water bodies in the next Minor Irrigation Census (VI) by MoWR, RD & GR as field current 
minor irrigation census is almost complete. However, even in current census (V) information on 
number of water bodi es (irrespective of whether they are being used for irrigation or for any 
purpose) in villages-rural areas is being collected. Further, for expanding the scope of Census to 
urban areas, views of concerned State Government Departments and other Central Line  
Ministries will be taken during the preparatory work of VI Census. 
Secretary (MoWR, RD & GR) vide D.O. letter dated 26.02.2016 requested to take 
several measures for protection of water bodies including encroachment issue. The information 
from the States are awaited in this regard. The States have been again requested to intimate 
the status on the number of water bodies and its encroachment vide D.O. letter dated 
07.11.2016 from Secretary (MoWR, RD & GR) to the Chief Secretaries of the States. The matter 
would be pursued further with the States to expedite the information. 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (No. 4) 
Need for uniform classification of water bodies 
From the information supplied by various States about the present system of classification of 
water bodies, the Committee find that there is no uniformity in their classification / 
categorisation. While States such as Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh have  classified 
water bodies on the basis of total area covered, others, such as Arunachal Pradesh, Punjab, 
Tripura and Kerala, etc. have classified them according to the type of water bodies viz. lakes, 

28 
 
ponds, etc. Further Uttar Pradesh and Manipur has classi fied them on the basis of their location 
in rural, urban and hill areas while some of the North eastern States such as Sikkim, Nagaland, 
Mizoram and Meghalaya have no system of classifying water bodies. The Committee find that 
although the National Remote Sensing Centre has classified the water bodies, it is not clear as 
to whether the Ministry has adopted the same. The Committee are therefore, of the considered 
opinion that the Ministry should devise its own classification system, uniformly applicable to a ll 
the water bodies in the country, thereby ensuring better administration and monitoring of 
upkeep of water bodies in all the States. They, therefore, recommend the Ministry to look into 
this aspect also while preparing a comprehensive database and apprise them accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
MoWR, RD &  GR is in the process of evolving a uniform classification system for the 
water bodies in the country and in this context, CWC has been requested to evolve uniform 
classification as per the guidelines of RRR of water bodies based on the spread area of wate r 
body, category and ownership.  
Recommendation (No. 5) 
Measures for restoring perishing water bodies 
The Committee also note with concern that as per 4th MI census, out of 5,23,816 water 
bodies, 80,128 water bodies were not in use and 18,485 water bodies were never used, as a 
result of which 1.95 million hectare of irrigation potential was lost. They obse rve that to revive 
and restore these water bodies, a scheme of Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of 
water bodies was launched in Xth Plan as a pilot scheme which was later launched as a full -
fledged scheme in XI Plan and has been extended in XII Pla n as well. They further note that 
Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change (MoEF and CC) has been running a 

29 
 
scheme of National Wetland Conservation Programme (NWCP) since 1987 for conservation of 
identified wetlands. For conservation / restorati on of polluted and degraded lakes in the urban 
and semi urban areas, the MoEF and CC has been providing assistance to States under the 
National Lake Conservation Programme (NLCP). They also note that State Government of 
Telangana has launched ‘Mission Kaka tiya’ in the year 2014 -15 for restoration of 46,531 water 
bodies which will restore irrigation potential of 9.87 lakh hectares. Besides, the Ministry of Rural 
Development (MoRD) has renovated a large number of water bodies under the Mahatma 
Gandhi National  Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS). Also, the Ministry of 
Urban Development (MoUD) has launched a scheme called “Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and 
Urban Transformation (AMRUT)” in June, 2015 under which rejuvenation of water bodies is 
being taken up as one of the objectives for augmenting drinking water supply and recharge of 
ground water and so far Central Assistance of Rs. 1,818.34 crore has been released to the 
States under this scheme.  
While commending all the measures initiated by various Mi nistries viz. MoWR, RD and 
GR, MoEF and CC, MoRD and MoUD aimed at reviving and conserving water bodies and lakes 
in both the rural and urban areas, the Committee find that the number of schemes run by 
different Ministries happen to be too many . They are, therefore, of the opinion that in the 
absence of any cohesive and effective policy measures to prevent encroachments, such 
schemes individually will have a minimal effect for the desired purpose. Therefore, a well 
coordinated approach is the need of the ho ur while formulating policies to prevent 
encroachment and rejuvenate water bodies. Instead of multiple schemes, there should be one 
scheme with inter -ministerial and inter -departmental coordination to make it a success. The 
Committee would, therefore, reco mmend the Ministry to study the feasibility of merging such 

30 
 
schemes and evolve a single comprehensive scheme and apprise them of the findings 
thereabout. They would also like to be apprised of the outcome of ongoing schemes in terms of 
total number of wate r bodies revived and their benefits in terms of total area of lost irrigation 
potential realised, ground water recharging capacity achieved thereby and prevention of 
encroachment, etc. during the last five years, year-wise. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation is in the 
process of exploring the possibilities of merging the schemes of other ministries regarding 
restoration of water bodies. In this context, MoRD, MoUD and MoEF & CC have been 
requested for their views. Meanwhile, discussions have also been held with MoRD regarding 
convergence of various activities and guidelines have been prepared by them for convergence 
of various activities of DOLR and this Ministry with works being carried out under M GNREGS. 
Focus has been kept in the over exploited and critical blocks in respect of ground water.  
In XI Plan, 3341 water bodies have been included under RRR of water bodies scheme 
and works of 2801 water bodies have been completed.  About 2.053 lakh ha ir rigation potential 
have been revived in addition to the restoration of storage revival and ground water recharge.  
In XII Plan, 1354 water bodies have been included under RRR of water bodies scheme. 
Out of which works of 429 water bodies have been completed .  About 0.2574 lakh ha irrigation 
potential has been revived in addition to the restoration of storage revival and ground water 
recharge. 
 
 

31 
 
Recommendation (No. 8) 
Action against encroachers 
 
8. The Committee observe that few States have come forward informing their existing 
mechanism to prevent encroachments. While States such as Assam and Manipur have enacted 
laws enabling action against encroachers / encroachment on water bodies, other State s viz. 
Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Telangana have furnished information on administrative 
machinery vested with powers to take action in case of encroachments. However, the 
Committee express displeasure over the fact that the Central Government has shrug ged off any 
responsibility in the matter by stating that urban development, storm water drainage and land 
use master planning, etc. are State subjects. Also Central Government / Ministry has no role to 
play in matters of maintenance and upkeep of water bodies including tackling of encroachments 
which come under the purview of Urban Local Boards, Land revenue and Water Resources / 
Irrigation Departments under the State Governments. The Committee, however, deprecate 
such approach on the part of the Ministry w hich amounts to passing on the responsibility and 
being a mere spectator of the problem which pose serious challenges to the policy making and 
management of water resources. They are of the view that even though the matter is under 
direct administrative control of State and local Government, the Central Government can play a 
guiding and supportive role. Taking cognisance of the directions of courts with regard to 
measures to be taken for prevention of encroachment on water bodies, the Ministry should 
formulate a model directive / guideline impressing upon States to execute the same. They 
would like to be apprised of such measure, if any, being taken / to be taken by the Government. 
Also, the Committee would like to be apprised of the information collected by  the Ministry on 
various aspects of encroachments, following advisory issued to the States. 

32 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation is in the 
process of framing a model directive/ guidelines based on the direction of courts. In this 
context, ‘Draft guidelines for Conservation and Protection of Water Bodies’ (copy enclosed) 
have been circulated to the Central Ministries and State/UTs for their comments/views. The 
same will be finalized based on the views. 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (No. 10) 
Judicial directions / guidelines on the issue of encroachment and their implementation 
in different States 
 
As per the information received from various States, the Committee note that the Courts 
have given directions for the prevention of encroachment to several States viz. Andhra 
Pradesh, Telangana, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Manipur, Rajasthan, Tripura, Kerala, Ka rnataka 
and Tamil Nadu. The Committee note that in case of Andhra Pradesh, the Supreme Court has 
observed that “material resources of the Community like forests, tanks, ponds, hillock, 
mountain, etc. are nature’s bounty. They maintain delicate ecological b alance. They need to be 
protected for healthy environments to enable enjoyment of quality life, which is the essence of 
the guaranteed right under Article 21 of the Constitution.” Expressing their full agreement to the 
views of the Supreme Court, the Commi ttee emphasise adoption of effective policy measures 
and urgent action to protect and preserve water bodies. 
With regard to compliance of the directions, they find that except Tamil Nadu, all other 
States have taken action and are at different stages of co mpliance. Further the Special 

33 
 
Secretary, MoWR, RD and GR has accepted the need for having a study on the impact of these 
directions. The Committee, therefore, desire that as agreed by the Special Secretary on the 
need to have a study on the impact of such direction in reducing encroachments, saving and 
protecting water bodies, the Ministry should initiate such study without further delay to enable 
assessment of the impact of judicial intervention and effectiveness of measures suggested on 
protecting water bodies and apprise them of the findings thereof at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
As recommended by the Standing Committee it is now proposed to have a detailed 
study on the impact of directions of Hon’ble Supreme Court and High Court in reducing 
encroachments, saving and protecting water bodies. In this context, States have been 
requested for the information. Further, while taking up the next census work, the issue will be 
pursued with the States.  
Recommendation (No. 11) 
Awareness campaigns to prevent encroachment on water bodies 
The Committee observe that several initiatives have been taken by the State 
Governments to increase awareness among people about the need for conserving water 
bodies. As submitted by some of the States and UTs, the Comm ittee notice that awareness 
campaigns and public sensitisation are being carried out by involving NGOs, audio broadcasts, 
etc. The MoWR,RD and GR has organised ‘Jal Manthan’ and ‘India Water Week’ to spread 
awareness about conservation and maintenance of w ater bodies. Recently, a campaign called 
‘Jal Kranti’ has been launched where two villages in all districts of the country have been 
selected to increase awareness on the issue. While taking note of the measures taken so far to 
increase awareness among peo ple, the Committee are of the view that the intensity of the 

34 
 
awareness campaigns needs to be increased with much bigger exposure in media, both 
electronic, print and others. Beside the need for saving water, a precious natural resource 
should also be someh ow made a part of school curriculum and university education. The 
Committee are also of the view that the Ministry should involve local representatives such as 
Members of Parliament and State legislatures to spread the message and educate people in 
their constituency, on the need for protection and conservation of water bodies. The Committee 
would further like to be apprised of the funds allocated and spent on the awareness campaigns 
during the last three years. 
Reply of the Government 
a) A letter has been iss ued to Ministry of Human Resource Development on 
23.05.2016 requesting for issuing necessary instructions to include the subject 
“Water Management” as a subject in the selected universities/engineering 
Colleges/management Institutes. 
b) It has been decided th at the process of selection of Jal Grams under Jal Kranti 
Abhiyan will be done with the consent of concerned Member of Parliament (MP) and 
also the consent of local MP will be taken for already identified Jal Grams under the 
Jal Kranti Abhiyan.  
c) Apart from  various regular activities/programmes like Painting Competition, 
organization of national / international seminars viz, Jal Manthan, Bhujal Manthan, 
India Water Week etc., some new initiatives have been taken by the Ministry like 
National essay competition stated from 2015-16 and proposal for the same is under 
consideration in 2016 -17 also. Radio Jingles are also being developed by NFDC. 
Once developed, these Jingles will be broadcast through ALL India Radio and other 

35 
 
appropriate mediums. These newly induc ted programmes will certainly provide an 
impetus to the ongoing efforts of the Ministry towards awareness campaigns. 
d) Fund allocated and fund spent in last 3 years are as below 
Amount in crore  
Year  BE RE Expenditure 
2013-14 40.00 20.00 16.489 
2014-15 30.00 18.00 16.53 
2015-16 10.00  5.92 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para Nos. 19 & 20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (No. 12) 
Inclusion of water bodies as a part of Town Planning 
The Committee have been informed that in Ahmedabad, protection of water bodies has 
been achieved through their inclusion in town planning. The Committee feel that this provision 
can be very effective and can be emulated by other States as well with strict penal provisions 
against violators. Accordingly, the  Committee recommend that maintenance of water bodies’ 
should be included as integral part of the town planning process. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Ministry should take up this matter with the Ministry of Urban Development and 
the State Governments. 
 
 
 
 

36 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation vide letter 
dated 17.10.2016 has requested Ministry of Urban Development for consideration of the 
recommendation of Standing Committee on the aspec t of inclusion of water bodies as integral 
process of town planning . Further, Secretary (WR, RD & GR) vide D.O. letter dated 07.11.2016 
has also requested State Governments to consider the maintenance of water bodie s as a part 
of town planning. 
Recommendation (No. 13) 
Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies scheme – Implementation 
issues 
 
The Committee observe that the scheme of RRR, which was launched as a pilot 
scheme in X Plan and introduced as a full scale scheme in XI Plan, has been continued during 
XII Plan. This scheme aims to increase availability of water by restoring and rejuvenat ing 
decaying water bodies. They notice that during XII Plan, 10,000 water bodies (9000 in rural and 
1000 in urban areas ) have been planned to be revived and restored with Central assistance of 
Rs. 6,235 crore and respective State share of Rs. 3,765 crore creating an additional irrigation 
potential of 6.235 lakh hectares. Further water bodies in villages which are covered under 
Sansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY) are being given priority for coverage under the scheme. 
They also notice that so far 1,342 water b odies of 9 States at an estimated cost of Rs. 
1013.428 crore has been approved for inclusion under RRR. Further under this scheme, 
Special category States {North Eastern States including Sikkim, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu 
and Kashmir, Uttarakhand and undivide d Koraput, Bolangir and Kalahandi (KBK) districts of 
Odisha} are being provided Central Assistance of 90% of the total cost of work with balance 
10% being borne by State Governments and for Non -special category States, the Central 

37 
 
assistance of 50% is provided, with States sharing balance 50%. In this regard, the Committee, 
in their 16th Report on “Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of water bodies” presented 
on 27.11.2012, during 15th Lok Sabha, had recommended to increase the Central share from 
50% to 75% in case of Non Special category States also, to incentivise them to submit 
proposals for including more water bodies under the scheme, which was accepted by the 
Government, as submitted in the action taken notes. However, the Committee express their  
astonishment over the fact that the same has not yet been implemented in XII Plan despite this 
issue being a prominent factor for inability of States to undertake works under the scheme. 
They are also constrained to note that despite being aware of the ma jor shortcomings in the 
implementation of RRR scheme in XI Plan, such as water bodies having water spread area of 
less than 5 hectares being ineligible rendering the scheme rarely implemented in hilly areas 
and North Eastern States and inability of the Sta tes to find water bodies in the rural areas 
whose catchment areas have already been treated under Integrated Watershed Management 
Programme (IWMP), no efforts/measures have been made to address these issues while 
launching the scheme in XII Plan. The Commi ttee apprehend that with these issues/ difficulties, 
still persistent, the completion of work on 10,000 water bodies within XII Plan period may prove 
to be an uphill task. The Committee would, therefore, like to know the status of the works / 
projects undertaken so far and measures taken to complete the work within the stipulated time 
period i.e. by end of XII Plan. They would also like to be apprised of the measures taken, if any 
or proposed to be taken by the Government to resolve these issues/problems/di fficulties 
regarding the implementation of the RRR scheme. 
 
 
 
 

38 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Central Government has accepted the 14th Finance Commission’s recommendation to 
devolve 42 per cent of the divisible pool to states during 20015 -16 to 2019 -20, against 
32 per cent suggested by the previous commission. 
 Ministry of Finance vide letter dated 28.10.2015 has intimated the funding pattern of 
centrally sponsored schemes. Accordingly, in PMKSY, funding pattern is 60:40 for 
general category States and 90:10 for N orth-Eastern States and 3 Hilly States between 
the Centre and the States. Further, in case of the scheme/sub -scheme where existing 
funding pattern is less than the new funding pattern, existing funding pattern will 
continue.  Accordingly, the funding patte rn for RRR of Water bodies scheme is being 
followed.  
 From 2015-16, with the launch of PMKSY, RRR of water bodies scheme has become a 
part of PMKSY. As per the requirement of PMKSY, the proposals under RRR of Water 
Bodies scheme, has to be part of the Dist rict Irrigation Plan (DIP)/State Irrigation Plan 
(SIP) and to be approved by the State Level Sanctioning Committee (SLSC) to received 
central assistance.  
Recommendation (No. 15) 
Effectiveness of measures taken under RRR scheme to address problem of 
encroachment 
 
The Committee note that a condition, that the State Government has to declare 
boundary of the water body through Government order, has been imposed on release of 
second installment of funds under RRR for completion of work on the water body. They notice 
that pursuant to this condition, the State Government of Odisha has declared boundary of 760 
water bodies, the State Government of Andhra Pradesh has begun the process of demarcating  

39 
 
boundary of 342 water bodies, Manipur has defined boundaries in respect of 4 water bodies, 
Uttarakhand has declared boundaries for 8 water bodies and Tamil Nadu has defined boundary 
for 154 water bodies, covered under RRR. The Committee further note that this condition has 
proved to be an effective deterrent in prevention of encroachment as stated by State 
Governments of Manipur, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand, Karnataka, Odisha, Andhra Pradesh and  
Telangana. While appreciating the measure taken by the Central Mi nistry to keep water bodies 
covered under RRR, encroachment free, which has also proved effective, the Committee desire 
that the Ministry should not limit its role to such water bodies only. Although primary 
responsibility to protect water bodies lies with  the State Governments, the Committee, desire 
that the Ministry should play a more active role and impress upon State Governments by 
stressing the need for involving the user communities, provision for strict action against 
encroachers and fixing the responsibility of concerned officials, etc. in the form of a guideline for 
better monitoring of all the water bodies of States and Union Territories. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Secretary (MoWR, RD & GR) vide D.O. letter dated 26.02.2016 requested to take several  
measures for protection of water bodies including encroachment issue. The information is 
awaited. States have been again requested vide D.O. letter dated 07.11.2016 to intimate the 
proposed action by them on the following point; 
 State government should in volve user communities for keeping the water bodies 
encroachment free. State should issue appropriate guidelines and take strict action 
against the encroachers. Further, the responsibility of the concerned officials in this 
regard may also be fixed. 
 

40 
 
Recommendation (No. 18) 
Pollution of water bodies 
The Committee are distressed to note that water quality in water bodies, which were 
traditionally playing a major role as an alternative source for catering to domestic and 
agricultural needs, has been deteriorating. The condition of water bodies has degra ded due to 
their negligence and poor maintenance. From the information submitted by Central Pollution 
Control Board (CPCB), the Committee observe that as many as 132 lakes, tanks and ponds 
have been identified with very poor water quality scattered over th e States of Andhra Pradesh, 
Gujarat, Odisha, Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Chattisgarh, Tamil Nadu, 
West Bengal, Assam, Rajasthan, Goa, Kerala, Bihar, Tripura and Jammu and Kashmir. Further, 
the main reason for water pollution in water b odies is stated to be sewage and waste water 
disposal into water bodies, as a result of increased human habitations around the water bodies. 
The Committee find that the condition of villages in Punjab is particularly pathetic as most of the 
ponds there are  overflowing with accumulation of waste water, leading to flooding of street 
drains / channels, which ultimately creates health hazards. Similar problems have been 
encountered in States of Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Tripura and Kerala in the urban 
areas. They find that this fact has been admitted by the Special Secretary, MoWR, RD and GR, 
who emphasised that much work is yet to be done to improve water quality. The Committee are 
concerned to note that at present, the treatment capacity of Sewage Treatm ent Plants (STPs) 
is only 23,000 million ltrs. per day as against 62,000 million ltrs. sewage being generated per 
day in the country. Thus, there is a requirement of additional Rs. 2 to 2.5 lakh crore to fill this 
gap as informed by the representative of t he Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate 
Change. Therefore, urgent steps are needed to be taken in this direction. However the 

41 
 
Committee are of the view that besides creating additional treatment capacity there is a need to 
minimise waste generation by adopting eco-friendly methods of waste disposal, development of 
sewage infrastructure in rural areas, adoption of alternative waste disposal techniques and 
appropriate tariffs on uses of water for different purposes. The Committee, therefore, desire to  
be apprised of the measures taken in this regard along with year -wise details of projects 
undertaken, funds allocated and spent, targets fixed and achieved in respect of sewage 
treatment during the last three years, year-wise. 
Reply of the Government 
  
As intimated by CPCB, they have made a nationwide survey through questionnaire to 
the State secretaries, municipal corporations, State water boards, municipalities, public health 
engineering department, pollution control boards and also other concerned age ncies to obtain 
information/data on water supply, waster water generation, collection, treatment and disposal in 
class-I cities, metropolitan cities and Class -II towns. Based on the information a report on 
“Status of Water Supply, Wastewater Generation and  Treatment in Class -I Cities & Class -II 
Towns of India” under CUPS series no. CUPS/70/2009 -10 was published. CPCB reported that 
out of 38254 MLD of sewage generated by Class- I citites and Class-II towns , only 11787 MLD 
has been treated. 
CPCB reassessed s ewage generation and treatment capacity for Urban Population of 
India for the year 2015. The sewage generation estimated as 61948 MLD and sewage 
treatment capcity developed so far is 23277 MLD. 
Based on the above study, CPCB has issued directions u/s 181(b ) of Water (Prevention 
and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 vide letter dated 21.04.2015 to all State Pollution control 
Board/Pollution Control Communities to make mandatory for local/urban bodies to set up STPs 

42 
 
of adequate capacity and provide underground sewerage system to cover the entire 
local/urban areas and to bridge the treatment gap.  
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 33 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (No. 19) 
Siltation problem in water bodies 
The Committee note with serious concern that a large number of water bodies (7,153 as 
per 4th MI Census) have dried up. However, the causes for such drying have not been 
assessed by the Ministry, as the subject of ‘water’ comes under the domain of State 
Governments. Since this is a very important aspect of information on the condition of water 
bodies in the country, the Committee believe that such information need to be collected and 
form part of the database on water bodies. The Committee further recommend  the Ministry to 
furnish a detailed report on this issue covering such aspects as total no. of dried/vanished water 
bodies, causes, remedial action taken, etc. by each of the State Governments and Union 
Territories- within three months of presentation of this Report. 
Reply of the Government 
  
As recommended by the Standing Committee it is proposed to have a detailed Census 
of water bodies in the next Minor Irrigation Census (VI) by MoWR, RD & GR with the consent of 
State Governments as field work of current  minor irrigation census(V) is almost complete. 
Collection of information from the field in the Census of different aspects like dried -up water 
bodies, its causes etc. can be finalized after due consultation with concerned State Government 
Departments and other Central Line Ministries.  
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 36 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

43 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
NIL 
  

44 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMETN HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (No. 7) 
Impact of encroachment on Water Bodies 
 
The Committee observe that encroachment on water bodies has been a major cause of 
recent floods witnessed in many parts of the country viz. flash floods of Mumbai in 2005, severe 
flood in Uttarakhand in 2013, intense flood situation in Jammu and Kashmir in  2014 and severe 
flood in Chennai in 2015. They further note that besides natural factors, human induced causes 
like unscientific development and land use pattern especially human activities in flood plain 
zones and estuarine areas of river, encroachment o f natural drainage channels and water 
bodies, socio -economic conditions, deforestation, increasing human and cattle population 
pressure are other contributing factors in creation of natural calamities such as flood. The 
Committee find that lack of seriousn ess and complacency on the part of the Government 
cannot be more conspicuous than the fact that even after circulation of flood plain zoning bill in 
1975 to States with a view to prevent encroachment of river bed, State Governments have 
failed to enact law s on flood plain zoning - which could have played a key role in tackling the 
problem of encroachment. So far, only the States of Manipur, Uttarakhand, Rajasthan and 
Maharashtra, have passed law on flood plain zones and river regulation zones . The Committee, 
therefore, desire that State Governments should be sensitised to hasten the legislation in order 
to put a check onhuman activities on the catchment areas and natural drainage channel of 
water bodies, flood plain zones and estuarine areas of river. 
 
 
 

45 
 
Reply of the Government 
Secretary (MoWR, RD & GR) vide D.O. letter dated 26.02.2016 requested to take several 
measures for protection of water bodies including encroachment issue. The information is 
awaited. States have been again requested vide D.O. letter dated 07.11.2016 to intimate the 
proposed action by them on the following point; 
 The water bodies may be included in land records of State Govt so that action against 
the encroachers can be taken and a check on human activities on th catchment areas  
and natural drainage channel of water bodies, flood plain zones and estuarine areas of 
river be fruitfully implemented.  
Detailed guidelines have been prepared in this regard which are being circulated to the 
States for necessary actions at their end. 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (No. 9) 
Monitoring mechanism for prevention and removal of encroachments from water bodies 
The Committee note that under the RRR scheme, monitoring mechanism has been 
instituted in the local bodies at three levels viz. Water User Association (WUA) at the Gram 
Panchayat Level, Cascade Association (CA) and WUA Federation at the Block level. The 
monitoring of water bodies by local bodies has been effective and successful in preventing 
encroachments in many States and UTs such as Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Gujarat, 
Manipur, Rajasthan, Tripura, Odisha, Andaman and Nicobar islands and Tamil Nadu. The 
Committee further note that Manipur and Andaman and Nicobar islands have included NGOs, 
prominent social workers and user agency in monitoring mechanism while Odisha has a 

46 
 
provision for fine and penalty for encroachers. However, the Committee note with conc ern the 
fact that local bodies have not succeeded in preventing encroachments in Madhya Pradesh due 
to policy of appeasement and lack of determination to remove encroachment, as admitted by 
the State of Madhya Pradesh in their written submission. The Commi ttee apprehend that this 
factor may have indirectly influenced action against encroachers elsewhere as well. While the 
role of local bodies in monitoring at local level cannot be denied, the Committee are of the view 
that involvement of user communities and fixing of responsibility can make it more effective and 
better serve the purpose. Community participation / involvement of user communities can 
ensure better vigilance and negate the possibility of connivance with encroachers. The 
Committee also feel that there is a need to maintain proper coordination between police and the 
elected representatives like village Sarpanch or Pradhan and Nagar Palika Chairman. They, 
therefore, recommend to refurbish the existing monitoring mechanism by including user 
communities, fixing responsibility of concerned officials and penal provisions against 
encroachers along with proper coordination in activities of various agencies of the Government. 
The Committee feel that although, water may be a State subject, encroachment of water bodies 
has a definite impact on the environment and reduces the capacity of accumulation of water 
which is very precious to the country as a whole. Therefore, the Committee strongly 
recommend the Ministry to issue appropriate guidelines in this regard. 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation is in the 
process of framing a model directive/ guidelines based on the direction of courts. In this 

47 
 
context, ‘Draft guidelines for Conservation and Protection of Water Bodies’ (copy enc losed) 
have been circulated to the Central Ministries and State/UTs for their comments/views. The 
same will be finalized based on the views. 
Recommendation (No. 14) 
Impact assessment of RRR scheme implemented during XI and XII Plan 
The Committee notice that the Ministry has not furnished any information regarding 
impact assessment of the RRR scheme implemented during XI Plan, with replies submitted by 
the Ministry - giving details of the outcome of Pilot scheme of RRR, launched durin g X Plan 
period. They further observe that for the implementation of the scheme during XII Plan, it has 
been envisaged that the State Governments will evaluate the scheme by involving independent 
agencies including IIMs and IITs. The Central Government wil l thereafter evaluate and assess 
the impact through independent agencies to be identified by the Ministry. However they note 
with concern that so far, no State Government except Odisha has started the process of 
appointing an independent agency for concurr ent evaluation of the scheme in XII Plan. The 
Committee are distressed to note that proper evaluation of the outcome of RRR scheme 
implemented during XI Plan is not yet quantified in terms of important parameters like increase 
in storage capacity, recharge  capacity, additional irrigation potential created and increase in 
drinking water supply, etc. While expressing their anguish over the indifferent attitude shown by 
respective Governments inthe matter, the Committee recommend that independent agencies to 
be identified both by the Centre and State Governments for the purpose, should be selected 
and assigned the task without any further delay to enable an objective analysis of the 
performance of the scheme and evaluate proper utilisation of the funds spent so  far. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to apprise them about the measures taken 

48 
 
for impact assessment of the scheme implemented during XII Plan, including independent 
agencies identified, if any, their role, function and stipulated time p eriod for submission of 
Evaluation Report, etc. The Committee would, however, like to be apprised of the outcome of 
the evaluation of the scheme (encompassing all the aspects, stated before) implemented during 
XI Plan within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
Secretary (WR, RD & GR) vide D.O. letter dated 07.11.2016 has requested State 
Governments to ensure concurrent evaluation of the water bodies under RRR of water bodies 
scheme. Further CWC has also been requested  for preparation of TOR/EOI/RFP for evaluation 
study for taking up the same. 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (No. 16) 
Creation of new water bodies under the Scheme of RRR 
The Committee observe that of late, the State Governments have taken some initiatives 
in creating new water bodies under programmes such as Mahatma Gandhi National Rural 
Employment Guaranttee Act (MGNREGA). There has also been an increase in total number o f 
water bodies in States of Madhya Pradesh, Telangana, Arunachal Pradesh, Rajasthan, 
Mizoram, Tripura and Odisha during the last 10 years mainly due to construction of new tanks, 
check dams, etc. The Committee feel that creation of new water bodies is a we lcome move and 
can be integrated into the ambit of existing scheme of RRR, which would also make good of the 
loss of the water bodies as a result of encroachment, especially in the urban areas. They, 
therefore, recommend the Ministry to review the scheme b y incorporating this aspect and 

49 
 
accordingly change the nomenclature of the Scheme from “Repair, Renovation and Restoration 
of water bodies” to “Repair, Renovation, Restoration and Creation of water bodies”. They desire 
that the Ministry should take urgent steps in this direction with thrust on creating new water 
bodies in the urban areas where problem of encroachment has assumed enormous proportion. 
In this regard they further recommend issuing appropriate guidelines/revise the existing 
guidelines under intimation to the Committee. 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Reply of the Government 
 
The RRR of Water Bodies scheme has been formulated to repair, renovate and restore 
the existing traditional water bodies. 
Recommendation (No. 17) 
Release of funds under RRR Scheme 
The Committee notice that the Central Government has not released its share of funds 
for the second installment to the State Government of Odisha , due to which work on water 
bodies has suffered in the State which in turn, has rendered completion of work by scheduled 
date of 31 March, 2017 difficult. They were informed by the Special Secretary during evidence 
that reason for non release of funds is non - allocation of sufficient funds for the purpose. The 
Committee express displeasure over the fact that the Ministry has failed to anticipate the 
demands for funds from different States under the RRR scheme, resulting in delay in 
disbursement of funds. They therefore, strongly recommend that necessary steps be taken to 
not only ensure sufficient allocation of funds/grant but also their timely disbursal so that the 
projects under the scheme of RRR do not suffer. The Committee feel that there may be many 

50 
 
other States, which are languishing for funds. They, therefore, recommend the Ministry to 
provide information on total number of encroachment free water bodies, State -wise, which have 
submitted their request for release of funds in the second phase indicati ng the amount and the 
action taken by the Ministry from time to time to release the funds for the period ending 30 
June, 2016. 
Reply of the Government 
 
For ongoing water bodies under RRR of Water Bodies scheme, further Central 
Assistance (CA) is released on submission of proposal by the State Government, with the 
approval of State Level Sanctioning Committee (SLSC) as per the requirement of PMKSY,  
along with the Utilization Certificate of the  previous CA released, budget provision for the 
current year, corresponding State share release, physical and financial progress of the 
individual water bodies  and the status of concurrent evaluation to be done by t he States year-
wise during the period of funding .   
All the water bodies included under RRR scheme are free from encroachment.  During 
2016-17, the proposals in this regard have been received from Odisha  and Rajasthan for 
release of central share. The proposals have been examined and comments of MoWR, RD & 
GR regarding utilization certificates of the previous central share released, budget provision, 
State share release, approval of SLSC have been communi cated to the States. The 
compliances are awaited. The state have been requested to expedite the same for release of 
funds. 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para Nos. 29 & 30 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 

51 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation (No. 6) 
Extent of Encroachment on Water Bodies 
The Committee observe that at present the subject of encroachment on water bodies 
and removal thereof comes under the jurisdiction of State Government. The State and local 
administration regulate the development activities along the water bodies through th eir master 
plans for flood plains. They further note that in order to discourage encroachment of water 
bodies covered under RRR scheme, the Ministry has put the condition that Central assistance, 
under the scheme of RRR will be released, only after the Sta te Government declares their 
boundary, thereby removing possibility of encroachment. However the Committee are unhappy 
to note the grim situation with regard to maintenance and upkeep of water bodies which 
incidentally, also happen to be the major sources of water supply for various uses. They find 
that the States of Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Nagaland, Manipur, Punjab, 
Rajasthan, Tripura, Assam, Kerala, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu have candidly accepted that 
water bodies in these States have b een encroached mainly for construction activities, 
agricultural purposes, slum habitations and commercial activities. The Committee are further 
deeply concerned to note the pathetic state of water bodies in National Capital Territory of 
Delhi, where as man y as  2015 water bodies have been fully encroached upon and 89 water 
bodies have been converted into parks. Further out of 971 existing water bodies, 346 have 
dried up. The Committee are of the considered view that lack of enforcement of existing laws 
and poor maintenance of land records in both the rural and urban areas have resulted in 

52 
 
rampant encroachment and thereby violating the sanctity of the land records, a fact admitted by 
the Special Secretary of the Ministry. 
Further the Committee observe with co ncern that while the State Government of Uttar 
Pradesh has informed that there has been no encroachment on its water bodies falling under 
the department of irrigation, during the last 10 years, the records in the Ministry of Urban 
Development shows that as  many as 99 urban water bodies have been encroached in this 
State, followed by 44 in Tamil Nadu, 26 in Haryana, 10 -12 in Assam and 7 in Uttarakhand. Also 
the information on the status of encroachment of water bodies under the purview of Revenue 
Department of the State Government of Uttar Pradesh has not yet been furnished to the 
Committee. Noting that the MoUD has issued an advisory for including water bodies as 
“municipal assets” in land records, the Committee express their displeasure over the fact that 
no State has maintained such record declaring water bodies as municipal assets.  They, 
therefore, desire that the MoWR, RD and GR in conjunction with MoUD vigorously pursue the 
State Governments to include water bodies in land records so that they are immedi ately able to 
take action against the encroachers and thereby get such water bodies free from the 
encroachment. Besides, monitoring by local bodies should be strengthened to check 
encroachment on water bodies and consequent change in land use. Local bodies  should 
maintain strict vigil on any change in land use in violation of land records in both the rural and 
urban areas. They also desire to be apprised of the status of encroachment on all water bodies 
in Uttar Pradesh along with action taken against such encroachers. 
Reply of the Government 
Secretary (MoWR, RD & GR) vide D.O. letter dated 26.02.2016 requested to take several 
measures for protection of water bodies including encroachment issue. The information is 

53 
 
awaited. States have been again requested vide D.O. letter dated 07.11.2016 to intimate the 
proposed action by them on the following points; 
 The water bodies may be included in land records of State Govt so that action against 
the encroachers can be taken and a check on human activities on the cat chment areas 
and natural drainage channel of water bodies, flood plain zones and estuarine areas of 
river be fruitfully implemented.  
 State governments should involve user communities for keeping the water bodies 
encroachment free. State should issue appro priate guidelines and take strict action 
against the encroachers. Further, the responsibility of the concerned officials in this 
regard may also be fixed. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                HUKUM SINGH, 
8 March, 2017                                                          Chairperson,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
17 Phalguna, 1938 (Saka)          Standing Committee on Water Resources 
  
 

Annexure – I 
 
DRAFT GUIDELINES FOR CONSERVATION AND PROTECTION OF WATER BODIES 
 
1.0 INTRODUCTION 
 
In recent times, Srinagar and Chennai have been affected by severe floods causing 
considerable loss to life and property.  One of the major reasons for the same was 
encroachment of water bodies and lack of proper maintenance and drainage channels. The 
Courts have taken note of this in many States and have issued strict directions for proper 
maintenance of these water bodies.  
 
The following guidelines have been isuse3d to the States to ensure that  
1.1 In India, tanks/ponds and lakes have traditionally played a n important role in 
conserving water for meeting various needs of the communities  like domestic, 
irrigation, industrial, ecological etc . Further, water bodies help in recharging 
ground water, tourism and cultural activities to name a few. Besides 
conserving water, water bodies  works as sponge and help in attenuating the 
flood peaks in the rivers.  
 
1.2 Many water bodies have gone into disuse because of the development of 
ground water irrigation systems, inadequate maintenance, encroachments, 
illegal diversion of land for construction purpose, etc. Encroachment of water 
bodies and their inlets creates ecol ogical imbalance leading to flooding due to 
reduced capacity of water bodies and rain water discharging into the seas as 
runoff.  
 
1.3 It is generally observed that the neglecting periodical desilting in water bodies 
and the inlet channels results gradual  reduction of the storage capacity of 
water bodies. When the flow into the tanks reduces, encroachment gradually 
starts, first in the form of dumping garbage’s and later as a disposal site for 
wastes followed by planting of vegetables and trees, forming bu nds and other 
activities which led to encroachment .  
 
1.4 In this backdrop, it has been strongly felt that there is a urgent need for 
operational guidelines for regular upkeep of water bodies and also to prevent 
their encroachment. 

 
2.0 NATIONAL WATER POLICY (2012) 
 
National Water Policy (2012) adopted by MoWR, RD & GR stipulates; 
 
2.1 Conservation of rivers, river corridors, water bodies should be undertaken in a 
scientifically planned manner through community participation. The storage 
capacities of water bodies and  water courses and/or associated wetlands, the 
flood plains, ecological buffer and areas required for specific aesthetic 
recreational and/or social needs may be managed to the extent possible in an 
integrated manner to balance the flooding, environment and  social issues as 
per prevalent laws through planned development of urban areas, in particular.  
 
2.2 Encroachments and diversion of water bodies (like rivers, lakes, tanks, ponds, 
etc.) and drainage channels (irrigated area as well as urban area drainage) must 
not be allowed, and wherever it has taken place, it should be restored to the 
extent feasible and maintained properly. 
 
2.3 Urban settlements, encroachments and any developmental activities in the 
protected upstream areas of reservoirs/water bodies, key aquifer recharge areas 
that pose a potential threat of contamination, pollution, reduced recharge and 
those endanger wild and human life should be strictly regulated.  
 
2.4 Sources of water and water bodies should not be allowed to get polluted. 
System of third  party periodic inspection should be evolved and stringent 
punitive actions be taken against the persons responsible for pollution.  
 
2.5 The water resources infrastructure should be maintained properly to continue 
to get the intended benefits. A suitable percentage of the costs of infrastructure 
development may be set aside along with collected water charges, for repair 
and maintenance. Contract for construction of projects should have inbuilt 
provision for longer periods of proper maintenance and handing over  back the 
infrastructure in good condition.  
 
 
 
 

3.0 LEGAL INSTRUMENTS 
 
3.1 Article 51A(g) of Constitution of India stipulates “It shall be the duty of every 
citizen of India, to protect and improve the natural environment including 
forests, lakes, rivers and wild  life, and to have compassion for living 
creatures”. 
 
3.2 Water bodies may be designated as a designated as a separate land use 
classification that is legally tenable. It should be done in parallel with the 
Protected Areas as defined under the Environment Prot ection Act and the 
Forest Protection Act to prevent their encroachment and destruction. 
 
3.3 Several State Government s enacted laws in order to protect water bodies, 
directed, removal of the encroachments and issued stringent guidelines as to 
how, such encroachment should be removed from water bodies and in such 
circumstances for removal of encroachment on water bodies . However, all the 
States have not made laws in this regard and may frame appropriate laws. 
 
3.4 There are many legislations/guidelines by various authorities in respect of 
preservation of water bodies which may be considered as appropriate while 
formulating laws as given below; 
 
(a)  WildLife (Protection) Act, 1972 
(b)  Indian Forest Act, 1927 
(c) Forest (Conservation ) Act, 1980 
(d) Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 
(e) Advisory on Conservation and Restoration of water bodies in Urban Areas 
(August, 2013) by MoUD 
(f) National Lake Conservation Plan of MoEF & CC. 
 
4.0 WATER CONSERVATION & MAINTENANCE  
 
4.1 Water bodies play an important role in water conservation. Scientific 
management of silt deposition and effluent discharge, operation and 
maintenance of water bodies ensures the water bodies to continue its role in 
long run.  State Governments need to promote the scientific management of 

water bodies by providing adequate funds.   States may utilise the available 
funds in different schemes like MGNREG, NLCP, etc . Further State 
Governments need to explore the possibility of creation of new water bodies in 
addition to the maintenance of old water bodies.  
 
4.2 Catchment area treatment like afforestation, storm water drainage 
management, silt traps etc may be undertaken. 
 
4.3 Government of Telengana is impleme nting water conservation schemes 
through Mission Kakatiya wherein approximately 50000 old water bodies are 
being revived for water conservation. Other States may explore the possibility 
of creation or revival of water bodies for water conservation  in similar pattern 
as may be required as per local needs. 
 
4.4 Traditionally water bodies were created to harvest the rainwater locally and 
use it locally by proper annual maintenance of the tanks by the community 
itself. Abandoning this concept of maintenance by the community has 
contributed to the growth of encroach ment. State should form Water Users 
Associations and hand over the water bodies to them for their day to day  
maintenance.  
 
4.5 Stakeholder participation and capacity building may be used as an important  
instrument for better management of water bodies. 
 
4.6 Local authorities may adopt safe and environment friendly management 
practices in the periphery of water bodies.  Local authorities may plant trees 
with thick canopy cover in the sp ace to extent possible and  have the 
ornamental shrubs in between them  as may be appropriate. Green belt may be 
developed to control odour and noise in view of the residences nearby the 
water bodies. 
 
4.7 During dry season other activities may not be allowed or wherever certain 
provisions in this regard have been made, should be strictly regulated so that it 
does not amount to encroachment.   
 

4.8 The inlet and outlet of the water body may be identified and need to be 
monitored at a frequent interval. Any obstruction in the inlet and outlet should 
be recorded and be removed. 
 
5.0 PREVENTION OF ENCROACHMENT 
 
5.1 Proper monitoring system may be established so that there is no encroachment 
of water bodies. Further, e arly detection of encroachments is desirable. 
Therefore, State Government may include all the water bodies in their land 
records.  
 
5.2 State may prepare comprehensive long term scheme for the purpose of 
removal of encroachments situated in the water bodies and the time frame.  
Monitoring agency for the water bodies must be certified.  
 
5.3 State government may take stern action against the lan d grabbers who have 
sold the lands in the water bodies to innocent purchasers, which would act as a 
deterrent. The survey numbers of the lands in various water bodies in question 
may be notified and the Registration Department concerned may not to 
register any transaction in respect of such lands falling under the water bodies.  
 
5.4 It is generally observed that multiple agencies are involved in implementation 
of provision of laws for eviction of encroachment in a timely manner . Instead 
of multiple agencies, a  single agency/unit may be empowered for eviction 
related works. 
In this regard, Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs) for lake management and 
conservation have also been set up in many parts of the country, such as, Bhoj 
Wetland Authority for the  restoration a nd management of Bhoj wetlands in 
Madhya Pradesh, Chilka Development Authority (CDA) in Orissa for the 
Chilka Lake, Loktak Development Authority (LDA) for Loktak lake in 
Manipur, Lake Development Authority Bangalore (Karnataka) for Bangalore 
lakes, J&K Lak es and Waterways Development Authority for Jammu and 
Kashmir Lakes, Hyderabad Urban Development Authority for Hyderabad 
lakes in Andhra Pradesh, East Kolkata Wetlands Management Authority for 
the conservation and management of a large number of waterbodies  in district 
24 Pargana in West Bengal and Jal Vikas Samiti in Udaipur (Rajasthan). 

These Special Purpose Vehicle are playing an important role in the protection 
and management of water bodies in India. As the legislation does not give the 
responsibility f or management of water bodies to a specific agency, these 
Special Purpose Vehicles are empowered to enforce provisions of the 
legislation. For example, Jammu and Kashmir Lake and Waterways 
Development Authority has the powers to grant or not to grant permi ssions for 
construction and has enforcement powers against illegal activities in the entire 
catchment area of Dal Lake. All States may consider formation of SPVs on the 
above lines as may be appropriate. 
 
5.5 Even after the encroachments from the water bodies are removed as per the 
policy decision of the State Government, the respective District Collectors 
may keep a close watch over such water bodies and in case of any fresh 
encroachment thereon, the district collectors may take prompt action. 
 
5.6 The State may prepare a comprehensive and short term scheme with time 
frame for the purpose of preventing discharge of un treated effluent into the 
water bodies. Polluters may be held responsible as per laws prevailing.  
 
5.7 State Government may take necessary steps for declaring the water body 
boundary through a Government order and to ensure removal of 
encroachments in the water body spread area/water body boundary 
 
6.0 EVALUATION 
 
6.1 Evaluation studies on different aspects such as, water storage, sil tation, water 
quality, flora and fauna etc. should be carried out by State Government 
periodically to ensure long life of water bodies.  
 
6.2 Remote sensing technique may be utilised by the States for periodic 
monitoring of the status of water bodies.  

ANNEXXURE - II 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2016-17) HELD ON 14 MARCH, 2017 
  
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1515 hours in Committee Room 'C', Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  
Shri Hukum Singh – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Radheshyam Biswas 
3. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
4. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
5. Shri Subhash Patel 
6. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
7. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah 
8. Smt. V. Sathyabama 
9. Shri Liladharbhai Vaghela 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
11. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
12. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
13. Shri A.V. Swamy  
14. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
 
15.   
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Rita Jailkhani    - Director 
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar   - Additional Director 
 
  

 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chair person welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.   
Thereafter, t he Committee took up for consideration (a) Thirteenth Report on the subject 
“Indigenous and Modern forms of Water Conservation – Techniques and Practice s”; (ii) 
Fourteenth Report on the subject “Review of the Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme 
(AIBP)”; (iii) Fifteenth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Tenth Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the  Committee on 
“Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies – Encroachment on water bodies and 
steps required to remove the encroachment and restore the water bodies”; and (iv) Sixteenth 
Report on “Demands for Grants (2017-18) of Ministry of Water Resources, River Development 
and Ganga Rejuvenation.  After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the aforesaid four 
draft Reports without any modification.   
3.   x x x x x x x x x 
4. The Committee then authorized the Chair person to present the above Four Reports to 
both the Houses of Parliament in the current Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 

1 
 
ANNEXURE III 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TENTH REPORT  
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE  
  
(i)  Total number of Observations/ Recommendations    19 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations  which have been accepted    
by the Government  
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 18, and 19 
 
Total : 13 
           Percentage    : 68.42%  
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations  which the Committee do  
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
Para Nos. NIL 
 
Total : NIL  
                Percentage : NIL 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies    
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Para Nos. 7, 9, 14, 16 and 17 
 
         Total : 05  
                Percentage  : 26.32 % 
(v) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which final reply 
 of the Government are still awaited 
Para No. 6 
  
         Total : 01 
          Percentage   : 5.26% 