 
19 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2016-2017) 
                 
         
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
                 
         
                 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA 
REJUVENATION 
 
         
         
THE INTER-STATE RIVER WATER DISPTUES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017 
         
         
NINETEENTH  REPORT 
  
 
         
            
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
August, 2017 / Shravana,1939 (Saka) 

 
 
 
NINETEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2016-2017) 
          
(SIXTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND  
GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
                 
         
THE INTER-STATE RIVER WATER DISPTUES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017 
  
         
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.08.2017 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 10.08.2017 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
         
August, 2017 / Shravana,1939 (Saka) 

 
 
W. R. C.  No. 26
 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
         
        © 2017 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha  
(Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 
 

 
CONTENTS  
Sl.No.           Pg. No. 
 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016-2017) (iii) 
 
 INTRODUCTION (v) 
PART – I 
 
REPORT 
 
 CHAPTER I  
A Background   1 
B Drawback in ‘The Inter-State River Water Disputes Act, 1956’ 2 
C Chronology of events in bringing ‘The ISRWD (Amendment) Bill, 2017’ 3 
D Introduction of The Inter-State River Disputes Bill, 2017’ in Lok Sabha  4 
E Amendments proposed by ‘The Inter-State River Water Disputes (Amendment), Bill 2017’ –  in Brief  4 
F Consultation with State Governments / UTs / other Ministries 6 
 CHAPTER II  
 CLAUSE-BY-CLAUSE EXAMINATION 
 
10 
I Statement of Objects and Reasons  10 
II Clause I : Short title and commencement  11 
III Clause 2 : Amendment of section 2 11 
IV Clause 3 : Substitution of new sections 4, 4A, 4B, 4C and 4D for Section 4  12 
IVA Establishment of Inter-State River Water Disputes Tribunal  16 
IVB Disputes Resolution Committee (DRC)  18 
IVC Composition of Tribunal  22 
IVD Benches of Tribunal  25 
V Clause 4 :  Amendment of Section 5  28 
VI Clause 5 - Substitution of new Sections 5A and 5B for 5A 29 
VIA Appointment of Assessors  29 
VIB Filling of vacancies, temporary, absence, etc.  31 
VIC Removal / Resignation of Chairperson and other Members of Tribunal and Benches  32 
VII Clause 6 - Substitution of new section for section 6  33 
 Decision of Bench of Tribunal binding on parties 33 
VIII Clause 7 - Substitution of new section for section 9A  38 
 Maintenance of Data Bank and information  38 
IX Clause 8 – Substitution of new section for section 10  42 
 Terms and Conditions of service of members and assessors  42 
X Clause 9 – Substitution of new Section 12 and 12A for Section 12  42 
 Dissolution of Bench  42 
XI Clause 10 – Amendment of Section 13  43 
XII Clause 11 – substitution of new Section for Section 14  44 
 Matters relating to the Ravi and Beas Water Tribunal (RBWT)  44 
XIII Financial Implication  47 
PART – II 
 
OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
48-67 
ANNEXURES 
 
Annexure – I Details of the Tribunals functioning under the 1956 Act and details of the Chairmen 
and Members of the Tribunals. 
68 
Annexure – II Comments of the Ministries consulted. 71 
Annexure – III The Inter-State River Water Disputes Act, 1956 (as modified upto 6th August, 2002) 76 
Annexure – IV The Inter-State River Water Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 2017. 86 
Annexure – V The Inter-State River Water Disputes Act, 2017. 95 
Annexure – VI Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the Committee (2016-17) held on 16 June, 2017 103 
Annexure – VII Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee (2016-17) held on 30 June, 2017 106 
Annexure – VIII Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee (2016-17) held on 10 July,2017 110 
Annexure – IX Minutes of the Tenth Sitting of the Committee (2016-17) held on 8 August, 2017 114 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2016-17) 
  
 
  
  Shri Hukum Singh  -  Chairperson 
 
     MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Radheshyam Biswas 
3. Shri Devusinh Jesingbhai Chauhan 
4. Shri Sudhir Gupta@ 
5. Shri Prakash B. Hukkeri* 
6. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
7. Shri Mohanbhai Kundariya# 
8. Shri Maganti Murali Mohan 
9. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
10. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
11. Shri Subhash Patel 
12. Shri Sanjaykaka Ramchandra Patil 
13. Shri Vijaysinh Mohite Patil 
14. Smt. Aparupa Poddar 
15. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
16. Shri S. P. Y. Reddy 
17. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah 
18. Smt. V. Sathyabama 
19. Shri Lallu Singh 
20. Shri Liladharbhai Vaghela 
21. Smt. Dimple Yadav 
 
        RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
23. Shri Harshvardhan Singh Dungarpur 
24. Mir Mohammad Fayaz 
25. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
26. Shri Sanjiv Kumar 
27. Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
28. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
29. Shri Sanjay Seth 
30. Shri A.V. Swamy  
31. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
 
 
 
_______________________________________________________________________________ 
@ Nominated w.e.f. 19.10.2016. 
* Nominated w.e.f. 23.11.2016. 
# Nominated w.e.f. 19.10.2016. 
 
(iii) 

 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.  Shri Shiv Kumar   -  Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Rita Jailkhani  -  Director 
3.  Shri Kushal Sarkar  -  Additional Director 
4.  Smt. Rinky Singh  -  Sr. Committee Assistant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2016-2017) having been  
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present th e Nineteenth Report on 
“The Inter-State River Water Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 2017.” 
 
2. The Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on 14.03.2017 and was referred by th e Hon’ble 
Speaker to the Standing Committee on Water Resources on 25.05.2017 for examination and Report.  
 
3. During the examination of the Bill, the Committee took oral evidence of the represen tatives of 
the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Gagna Rejuvenation and Central Wa ter 
Commission on 16.06.2017, 30.06.2017 and 10.07.2017.  The Committee a lso sought written 
information on various aspects of the Bill from the Ministry including the consulta tion held by the 
Ministry with various State Governments / UTs, other Ministries, etc. 
 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report on the Bill at their sittin g held on       
08.08.2017. 
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry of Water 
Resources, River Development and Gagna Rejuvenation and Central Water Commission, who 
appeared before the Committee and placed their considered views and also for furnishing wr itten 
notes and information as desired by the Committee - in connection with the examination of the Bill.  
The Committee also wish to express their thanks for furnishing valuable inputs and offering  
suggestions on the Bill. 
 
6. For facilitation of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendatio ns of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Part-II of the Report.  
  
 
NEW DELHI                               HUKUM SINGH, 
04 August, 2017
                                     Chairperson, 
13 Shravana, 1939(Saka)              Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
 
(v) 
 

REPORT  
CHAPTER I 
A. Background  
1.1 India is blessed with many rivers. There are 20 major Inter-State River Basins in Indi a. 
Most of the major rivers in India are inter-State in character having catchments / watershe ds in 
two or more States. Sharing of water amongst riparian States has  always been an issue of 
contention. Often water disputes arise amongst the basin States with regard to the use , 
distribution or control of the waters - in respect of these Inter-State Rivers/River valleys or i n the 
interpretation of the terms of any agreement relating to the use, distribution or control of such 
water or in the implementation of any such agreement. Inter-state river water disputes are on 
the increase on account of increase in water demands in various Sectors. The shar ing of Inter-
State River waters is either through concurrence of the States or through adjudication  of 
disputes through Tribunals.  
 
1.2 The Constitutional provisions with respect to Water are as follows: 
(i) Article 246, Seventh Schedule List- I - Union List, at Entry 56: ‘Regulation 
and development of inter-State rivers and river valleys to the extent to which 
such regulation and development under the control of the Union is declared 
by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest’. 
 
(ii) List- II – State List, at Entry 17: ‘Water, that is to say, water supplies, 
irrigation and canals, drainage and embankments, water storage and water 
power subject to provisions of entry 56 of List-I.’ 
 
(iii) Article 262 : (1) –‘Parliament may, by law, provide for the adjudication of any 
dispute or complaint with respect to the use, distribution or control of waters 
of, or in , any inter-State river or river valley.’ 
 
(2) – “Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may by law provide 
that neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall exercise jurisdiction in 
respect of any such dispute or complaint as is referred to in clause (1).” 
 
 

2 
 
1.3 For adjudication of disputes relating to waters of Inter-State Rivers and River valleys 
‘The Inter-State River Water Disputes Act, 1956 ’ ( The ISWRD Act, 1956), was originally 
enacted by the Parliament in 1956, under Article 262 of the Constitution of India.   In view of the 
Sarkaria Commission recommendations, the said Act w as Amended and the amendments 
came into force from  6 th August, 2002.  The Amendments included time frame for constitution 
of the Inter-State Water Disputes Tribunals as also the time limit for the Tribun als to give their 
Awards .  The details of the Tribunals functioning under the 1956 Act and details of Cha irmen 
and Members of those Tribunals are given at Annexure-I. 
 
B. Drawback, in ‘The Inter-State River Water Disputes Act, 1956’ 
 
1.4 According to the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation (M/o WR, RD and GR), a review of the functioning of the system of Tri bunals 
under the ISRWD Act, 1956 reveals following drawbacks: 
(i)  There is no strict time limit for conclusion of adjudication by a Tribun al. Under 
the provision of Section 5(2) of the Act, a Tribunal is required to give its Repor t  
within a maximum period of five years. Further, under Section 5(3) of the Act, 
one year time limit has been fixed for giving further Report . Neverthel ess, 
under the provisions thereto, the Central Government may extend the period 
indefinitely, till the Report  is submitted. The tenure of a Tribunal also gets 
extended indefinitely, as more explicitly mentioned in the Annexure-II. The 
Cauvery Water Disputes Tribunal (CWDT) (setup in June, 1990) and Ravi Beas 
Water Tribunal (RBWT) (setup in April, 1986) have now come to a standstill 
because of legal hurdles. However, expenditure continues to be incurred on 
maintenance of their staff and other infrastructure/logistics. 
 
(ii)  At present there is no time limit for publishing the Report  of a Tribuna l under 
Section 6 of the Act. 
 
(iii)  Under the present system, there is no upper age limit for the Chai rman and 
other Members of a Tribunal. They continue as long as a Tribunal exists or t ill 
they cease to function owing to death, permanent disability or resignation. 
 
(iv)  As per Section 5(A) of the present Act, if for any reason a vacancy ( other than 
a temporary absence) occurs of the Chairman or any other Member of a 
Tribunal, such vacancy shall be filled by a person to be nominated in this behal f 
by the Chief Justice of India and the investigation of the matter referred to the 

3 
 
Tribunal may be continued by the Tribunal only after the vacancy is filled  up. 
The process of nomination of new Chairman / Member of the Tribunal thus 
requires considerable time which results in delay in the work of the Tribunal. 
 
(v)  Considerable time is taken for a Tribunal to establish itself and  start working. 
This problem is compounded by the lack of General Pool Accommodation for 
the locating the Tribunal." 
 
1.5 Further as regards the tendency of the Tribunals to prolong the issuance of final  Award , 
under ‘The ISWRD Act, 1956’, the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation during evidence on 16.06.2017, furnished  details of the time taken so f ar by the 
Tribunals before the Committee as follows: 
 (i) Godavari WDT   –  11 years, 3 months 
 (ii) Krishna W DT-I    –   7 years, 1 month 
 (iii) Narmada WDT    –  10 years, 2 months 
 (iv) Ravi-Beas WDT  –  31 years till now. 
(v) Cauvery WDT    –  27 years till now. 
 
C. Chronology of events in bringing ‘The ISRWD (Amendment) Bill, 2017’
 
1.6 The chronology of events in drafting, vetting, and approving of ‘The Inter-State River 
Water Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 2017’ is as follows: 
(i)  Draft cabinet Note was circulated for Inter-Ministry consultations on 
16.11.2011 
(ii)  After vetting by Ministry of Law and Justice (MoLJ), the Cabinet Not e was 
approved by the Minister (WR).Then it was referred to PMO and Cabinet 
Secretary for their comments on 31.08.2012. 
(iii)  PMO on 9.11.2012 directed the Ministry that matter required further scrutiny 
and consultations before it is taken up by Cabinet. 
(iv) A meeting of irrigation Secretaries of States/UTs was held on 21.1.2013. 
(v) The draft was modified and circulated to the States/ UTs for their comments 
in February, 2013. 
(vi) The comments received from States/UTs were compiled in the draft 
amendment Bill and same along with the Cabinet Note was sent to Mo LJ in 
July, 2013. 
(vii) Modified draft B ill was received from Mo LJ for confirmation of the MoWR on 
24.02.2014. 
(viii) The same was approved by Hon’ble Minister (W R, RD and GR) and same 
along with draft Cabinet Note was sent to MoLJ. 
(ix) MoLJ with the approval of their Hon’ ble Minister (Land J) sent the vetted draft 
Cabinet Note and the Amendment bill, 2014 to MoWR,RDand GR. 

4 
 
(x) The draft Note for the Cabinet was  circulated to the concerned Ministries and 
the PMO on 14.1.2015. 
(xi) A meeting of officials of MoLJ and MoWR, RD and GR held on 16 th July, 
18/19/20th Oct, 2015 to discuss necessary Amendments in the draft Bill. 
(xii) The draft Amendment B ill accordingly modified and approved by Hon’ble 
Minister for Law and Justice. 
(xiii) Draft Cabinet Note was circulated again to the concerned Central Ministries 
on December. 
(xiv) On direction of PMO, NITI Aayog took Inter-State Secretary level meeting 
along with representatives of concerned Central Ministries on 28.01.2016. 
(xv) PMO forwarded copy of comments received from NITI Aayog on 11.04.20 16. 
(xvi) Draft Cabinet Note submitted to Cabinet secretariat and PMO on 4.7.2016. 
(xvii) Final Cabinet Note was submitted to Cabinet Secretariat on 17.8.2016. 
(xviii) PMO directed to present the Cabinet Note to group of Ministers. 
(xix) Meanwhile with consent of PMO a proposal of further changes in draft Bill 
was submitted to MOLJ.  GOM approved the Bill. 
(xx) The vetted draft Bill approved by the Hon’ble Minister of Law and Justice was 
received on 3.11.2016. 
(xxi) Cabinet Note was sent for consideration of the Cabinet on 06.12.2016. 
(xxii) Cabinet Note was approved on 07.2.2017. 
 
[Ref: pg. 39 to 43 of PPT] 
 
D. Introduction of The Inter-State River Water Disputes Bill, 2017 ’ in Lok Sabha
 
1.7 ‘The Inter -State River Water Disputes Bill, 2017 ’ was introduced in Lok Sabha on 
14.03.2017.  The Speaker, Lo k Sabha, referred the said Bill to the Standing Committee on 
Water Resources on 24.05.2017 for detailed examination and Report. 
E. Amendments proposed by ‘The Inter -State River Water Disputes (Amendment), 
Bill 2017’ – in Brief 
 
1.8 ‘The Inter-State River Water Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 2017 ’ seeks to amend ‘The 
Inter-State River Water Disputes Act, 1956’ and address es the drawbacks witnessed in 
resolving Inter-State River water disputes under the 1956 Act.  The Amendments proposed , by 
the Ministry, in the ISRWD Act, 1956 are: 
(i) There shall be established a single Tribunal, for adjudication of inter-State river 
water disputes, to be called the Inter-State River Water Disputes Tribunal, in place 
of multiple Tribunals. 
 
(ii) All existing Tribunals shall stand dissolved and the water dispute pending 
adjudication before such existing Tribunals shall stand transferred to the T ribunal. 

5 
 
The Chairmen and other Members of the existing Tribunals who have attained the 
age of 70 years as on the date of commencement of the Inter-State River Water 
Disputes (Amendment ) Act, 2016 shall cease to hold office on the expiry of t hree 
months from the date of such commencement. 
 
(iii) As and when any request under Section 3 of the Act is received from any 
State 
Government in respect of any water dispute, the Central Government shall set up 
a Dispute Resolution Committee (DRC), consisting of relevant Members from 
such relevant fields, as deems fit, for resolving dispute amicably. The DRC shall 
try to resolve dispute by negotiations within a period of one year which may be 
extended to a further period of six months. The DRC shall submit a Report 
containing the stand taken by each State Government, views of Members on such 
stand and all relevant facts, information and data. 
 
(iv) Any dispute which cannot be settled by negotiations shall be referred by 
Central Government by notification, to the Tribunal for its adjudication within a 
period of three months from the date of receipt of Report of DRC. 
 
(v) The Tribunal shall consist of one Chairperson and one Vice-Chairperson and 
not more than six other Members, to be nominated by Chief Justice of India from 
amongst persons who at the time of such nominations are Judges of the Supreme 
Court or a High Court. 
 
(vi) The Chairman and other Members of the existing Tribunal (other than 
Members who have ceased to hold office under the third proviso of Section 4) 
shall be nominated by the Chief justice of India as Chairperson, Vice Chairperson 
and Members of the Tribunal and they shall continue as Members of the Tribunal  
till they attain the age of 70 years. 
 
(vii) The Chairperson shall hold office for a period of five years or till  he attains the 
age of 70 years, whichever is earlier. The term of office of Vice Chairperson and 
other Members of the Tribun al shall be co-terminus with the adjudication of water 
dispute and they shall cease to hold office upon dissolution of the Bench by the 
Central Government on the recommendation of the Chairperson. 
 
(viii) The jurisdiction of the Tribunal may be exercised by the Benches thereof. The 
Chairperson may constitute a Bench with three Members, out of which the senior 
most Member shall preside over the Bench. Provided that a Member of a Bench 
may also be a Member of another Bench. 
 
(ix) The Benches of the Tribunal shall ordinarily sit at New Delhi or at such other 
places as the Chairperson may decide. 
 
(x) When a dispute is referred by the Government, it shall be assigned by the 
Chairperson of the Tribunal to a Bench of the Tribunal for adjudication. 
 
(xi) The Bench of the Tribunal, before investigating the water dispute referred t o it, 
shall take into consideration the Report  submitted by DRC. 
 
(xii) The Bench of the Tribunal shall forward to the Central Government its detailed 
Report , under Section 5(2) of the Act, setting out the facts as foun d by it and 

6 
 
giving its decision on such dispute within a period of two years extendable by not 
exceeding one year in case of unavoidable circumstances. 
 
(xiii) The Bench of Tribunal shall forward its ‘Further Report ’, under Section 5(3) 
of the Act, to the Central Government in one year extendable by a period of not 
exceeding six months. 
 
(xiv) The Central Government may, appoint two experts serving in the Central 
Water Engineering Service not below the rank of Chief Engineer as Assessors for 
each dispute to advice the Bench on the proceedings before it. 
 
(xv) The term of Assessors appointed shall be co-terminus with the adjudication of 
the dispute and they shall cease to be Assessors after the dispute is adjudicated 
and final Report is forwarded to the Central Government. 
 
(xvi) In the event of occurrence of vacancy in the office of the Chairperson by 
reason of death, resignation or otherwise, the Vice-Chairperson shall act as the  
Chairperson until the date on which a new Chairperson is nominated. 
 
(xvii) When any Member of a Bench of the Tribunal is unable to discharge his 
functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause, the Chairperson may 
assign the work of such Member to any other Member of the Tribunal till such 
Member resumes his work. 
(xviii) The decision of the Bench of Tribunal shall be final and binding on the 
parties to the dispute and shall have the same force as an order or decree of t he 
Supreme Courts. 
 
(xix) The Central Government shall appoint or authorise an agency to maintain a 
data-bank and information system at the national level for each river basin, which 
shall maintain data containing such particulars and in such manner, as may be 
prescribed. 
 
(xx) After any water dispute assigned to a Bench of the Tribunal is adjudicated 
and it submits its decision or Report, the Central Government shall, on the 
recommendation of Chairperson, dissolve that Bench. The Members of that Bench 
(excluding Chairperson) shall vacate their respective offices. However, in case, if 
any Member of that bench is also Member of another bench of the Tribunal which 
is still adjudicating a water dispute, he shall continue to be the Member of such 
Bench. 
 
(xxi) The balance work of the ‘Ravi-Beas Water Tribunal ’ shall be dealt by the 
Bench of Tribunal to whom that dispute may be assigned. 
 
(xxii) The Central Government, may, by notification in the official Gazette, make 
rules to carry out the purposes of the Act. 
 
 
F. Consultation with State Governments / UTs / other Ministries
 
 
1.9 Besides taking oral evidence of the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development 
and Ganga Rejuvenation, the Committee also obtained written replies to the list of impo rtant 

7 
 
points which the Committee deemed fit for detailed examination of the Bill in the Mi nistry. On 
being asked by the Committee about the comments / views of the States/UTs as obtained b y 
the Ministry on the proposed ‘The Inter-State River Water Disputes (Amendment) Bill 2017’, the 
Ministry furnished the following information before the Committee: 
Table 1:   Details of the States/UTs who have offered/not offered their 
views/comments or have ‘No’ objection at all  on the proposed ‘The 
ISRWD (Amendment) Bill, 2017’. 
 
Sl. 
No 
States/UTs who have 
submitted their 
views/comments –   
Clause-wise 
States/UTs who have not 
offered any comment 
States/UTs who have ‘No’ 
objection at all on the 
proposed “The ISRWD 
(Amendment) Bill, 2017 
1. Bihar  Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands 
Chhattisgarh 
2. Telangana Arunachal Pradesh Nagaland 
3. Punjab Assam Haryana 
4. Maharashtra Jammu and Kashmir Jharkhand 
5. Goa Manipur Mizoram 
6. Kerala NCT of Delhi Sikkim 
7. Karnataka Puducherry Tripura 
8. Rajasthan Uttar Pradesh West Bengal 
9. Madhya Pradesh Uttarakhand Meghalaya 
10. Andhra Pradesh Chandigarh  
11. Odisha Dadra and Nagar Haveli  
12. Tamil Nadu Daman and Diu  
13. Himachal Pradesh Lakshadweep  
14. Gujarat   
 
 
 
1.10 Commenting on ‘The Inter -State River Water Disputes (Amendment) Bill 2017’ the 
Government of Tamil Nadu has stated that the Amendments proposed by the Government of 
India in the Draft Bill may kindly be dropped as there is no need to establish a perman ent Inter-
State River Water Disputes Tribunal for the following reasons: 
(i) As designated Water Disputes Tribunals are already functioning, the establish ment 
of a Permanent Tribunal will be impracticable and ineffective. 

8 
 
(ii) River Basins differ widely in terms of total availability, utilization and the  nature of 
use of water, besides other socio-economic conditions and parameters that need to be 
considered in allocating water resources. 
(iii) Each River Basin is unique and disputes that arise are complex. 
 
 
1.11 Responding to comments of the Government of Tamil Nadu, the Ministry stated: 
“The objection of Government of Tamil Nadu may not be acceptable. The purpose of 
amendment to existing ISRWD Act, 1956 is to further streamlining the adjudication of 
inter-State river water disputes by constituting a standalone Tribunal with permanent 
establishment and permanent office space and infrastructure so as to obviate the 
need to set up a separate Tribunal for each water dispute which is invariably a time-
consuming process.” 
 
 
1.12 When the Committee desired to know about the efforts made by the Ministry to brin g all 
the State/UT Governments on board on the standalone Tribunal, who did not respond to Bill at 
all, the Ministry in their written reply stated: 
“At the outset, it is pointed out that under Article 262 of the Constitution the 
Parliament has the power to make this law. Though it is not essential, extensive 
consultations were held with States on the proposed Bill as abundant precaution and 
to keep States on Board. The proposed Inter-State River Water Disputes Bill was 
circulated to all States/UTs for their comments/views vide letter dated 27.12.2012, 
followed by a reminder dated 07.01.2013. Subsequently, then Secretary (WR) held a 
meeting of Irrigation Secretaries of States/UTs on 21.01.2013 to discuss the issue. 
The proceedings of this meeting was again shared with all the States/UTs vide letter 
dated 06.02.2013 for furnishing their comments/views. Further, in accordance to the 
directions of PMO, NITI Aayog prepared a brief note on the Amendments proposed 
to the existing Inter-State River Water Disputes (ISRWD) Act, 1956 and circulated to 
States/UTs in November, 2015 for their comments. This was followed by a 
consultative Inter-State Secretary Level meeting along with representatives of 
concerned Central Ministries on 28.01.2016 under the Chairmanship of Chief 
Executive Officer, NITI Aayog. The provisions of the Bill were discussed threadbare 
in the meeting. Thus sufficient efforts were made to bring all parties on Board.” 
 
1.13 The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation also 
circulated the draft Cabinet note, including the draft Bill to the concerned Ministries for seeking 
their views/comments. The comments of the Ministries consulted are given at Annexure II .  
The Ministry, in this regard, informed the Committee that all the line Ministries and NITI Aayo g 
have supported the Bill. In this regard, the Ministry have further stated that the procedures of 

9 
 
processing of Cabinet Note requires that a copy of the final note is only required to be shared 
with those Ministries on the basis of whose suggestions some changes were required in the 
draft Bill. Besides, as none of suggestions from Central Ministries mandated any change in t he 
Bill, it was not required to share the final copy of the Draft Cabinet Note/Bill with them. 
 
1.14 ‘The ISWRD Act, 1956’ (as amended upto 6 th August, 2002) is at ANNEXURE III and 
‘The ISRWD (Amendment) Bill, 20 17’ is at Annexure IV.  After incorporating the provisions of 
‘The ISRWD (Amendment) Bill, 2017’ the amended ISRWD Act, 1956 would read as provided 
at Annexure V. 

10 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
CLAUSE-BY-CLAUSE EXAMINATION BY THE COMMITTEE 
I. Statement of Objects and Reasons: 
2.1 The S tatement of Objects and Reasons of ‘The ISRWD (Amendment) Bill, 2017’ as 
furnished by the Ministry is as follows: 
“On account of increase in demand for water by the States, the inter-State river water 
disputes are on the rise.  Though the Inter-State River Water Disputes Act, 1956 ( 33 
of 1956) provides for a legal framework to address such disputes, it suffers from 
many drawbacks.  Under the said Act, a separate Tribunal has to be established for 
each inter-State river water disputes.  Only three out of eight Tribunals have made 
Awards which are accepted by the States.  Though the Cauvery and Ravi Beas 
Water Disputes Tribunals have been in existence for over 26 and 30 years 
respectively, they have not been able to make any successful Award till date.  
Further, there is no provision in the Act fixing time limit for adjudication by  a Tribunal 
or for any upper age limit for the Chairman or a Member of a Tribunal.  There is no  
mechanism for continuation of work on occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the 
Chairman or a Member of a Tribunal nor is there a time limit for publishing t he Report 
of the Tribunal.  All these drawbacks are causing delay in the adjudication of water 
disputes. 
 
2.  The Inter-State River Water Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 2017 seeks to streamline 
the adjudication of inter-State river water disputes and make the present legal and 
institutional architecture robust.  The Bill proposes to introduce a mechanism to 
resolve the water dispute amicably by negotiations through a Disputes Resolution 
Committee, to be established by the Central Government consisting of experts from 
relevant fields, before such dispute is referred to the Tribunal. 
 
3.    The proposed Bill further seeks to provide for a single standing Tribunal ( with 
multiple Benches) instead of multiple Tribunals, which shall consist of one 
Chairperson, one vice-Chairperson and not more than six Members.  While the ter m 
of office of the Chairperson is five years or till he attains the age of seven ty years, 
whichever is earlier, the term of office of Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the 
Tribunal shall be co-terminus with the adjudication of the water disputes.  It is also 
proposed that the Assessors, who provide technical support to the Tribunal, shall  be 
appointed from amongst experts serving in the Central Water Engineering Service 
not below the rank of Chief Engineer.  The total time period for adjudication of a 
water dispute has been fixed at a maximum of four and half years.  The decision of 
the Bench of the Tribunal shall be final and binding on the States concerned, with no 
requirement of its publication in the Official Gazette. 
 
4.    The proposed Bill also seeks to provide for transparent data collection system at 
the national level for each river basin and for this purpose, an agency to mai ntain 
databank and information system shall be appointed or authorized by the Central 
Government. 

11 
 
 
5.    The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.” 
II. Clauses I 
: Short title and commencement  
2.2 Clause I (1) and (2), which provides for short title and commencement of ‘The ISRWD 
(Amendment) Bill, 2017, read as follows: 
“1. (1) This Act may be called the Inter-State River Water Disputes (Amendment) 
Act, 2017. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.” 
 
III. Clause 2 
: Amendment of Section 2  
2.3 Clause 2, which seeks to amend Section 2 of the ISRWD 1956 Act, reads as follows: 
“2. In the Inter-State River Water Disputes Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act), in Section 2, - 
(i) for clause (a), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:- 
(a) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Inter-State River Water Disputes 
Tribunal referred to in Section 4B; 
(aa) “existing Tribunal” means a Water Disput es Tribunal constituted prior to the 
date of commencement of the Inter-State River Water Disputes (Amendment) Act, 
2017; 
(ab) “Member” means a Member of the Inter-State River Water Disputes Tribunal 
and includes the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson; 
(ac) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette; 
(ad) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(ii) for Clause (b), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:- 
‘(b) “ Tribunal” means the Inter -State River Water Disputes Tribunal established 
under Section 4; 
(ba) “Vice-Chairperson” means the Vice -Chairperson of the Tribunal referred to in 
Section 4B;” 
 
2.4 The Government of Bihar, Kerala, Karnataka, Odisha, Rajasthan, Telangana, Madhya 
Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh have accepted the amendment proposed vide Clause 2 in the 
proposed Bill, 2017.  However, the Government and Punjab has stated that ‘Inter-State River’ 
should be clearly defined to cover only the Riparian States i.e. the States, through the territories 
of which the river flows. 
 

12 
 
2.5 In response to the comments of the Government of Punjab, the Ministry have stated 
that the suggestion of Government of Punjab cannot be accepted because Article 262 of the 
constitution of India which empowers the Parliament to make law on the subject or Section 2 of 
ISRWD Act, 1956 which defines what “water dispute” is, does not distinguish between Riparian 
& Non-Riparian State.  Further, the Central Government does not intend to amend the de finition 
of “water dispute” in the existing Act. 
 
2.6 On being asked by the Committee for the reason for not accepting the recommend ation 
of the Government of Punjab, the Ministry, in their written reply, submitted:  
“x…x..x…x… While the position of the State of Punjab on applicability of the Act to 
the Riparian States may not be agreed to, as on date except for Ravi Beas Water  
Tribunal (RBWT) the party states to any of the existing Tribunals are basin States 
only.” 
 
IV. Clause 3 
: Substitution of new Sections 4, 4A, 4B, 4C and 4D for Section 4  
2.7 Clause 3, which provides for (i) establishment of Inter-State River Water Disputes 
Tribunal, (ii) Dispute Resolution Committee, (iii) Composition of Tribunal (iv)  Term of Office and 
(v) Benches of Tribunal by substitution of new Sections 4, 4A, 4B, 4C and 4D for Secti on  4, 
have been dealt in the following paragraphs. 
 
2.8 The response of the State Governments / UTs along with the comments of the Ministry 
of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation on the clause 3 are: 
Table 2 : Comments of State Governments/UTs , on Clause 3, and the response of 
the M/o WR,RD and  GR thereto. 
 
Comments of the State Governments/UTs Response of the MoWR,RDand GR 
Government of Bihar 
In time bound manner, duration should be followed 
strictly. Section 4C (1) (b): Multiple Memberships 
should be avoided. Section 4D (2): Concerned State 
representative should be included in the Dispute 
Resolution Committee. Central Government should 
share its Report s with State Government for their 
opinion. 
The recommendation for Tribunals to be 
multidisciplinary bodies presided over 
by a judge is acceptable. In fact the 
water Tribunals constituted under 
ISRWD Act consists of a Chairman 
nominated in this behalf by Chief 
Justice of India from  amongst the 
persons who at time of such 
nominations are Judge of a Supreme 
Court or a High Court. Thus, the 

13 
 
Tribunal is already presided over by a 
Judge. Further, the Act provides that the 
Central Government may in consultation 
with the Tribunal appoint two or more 
persons as Assessors to advice the 
Tribunal in the proceeding before it. 
Thus, a provision exist for appointment 
of Assessors who are experts drawn 
from various fields as per the requisition 
of the Tribunal. Further, mere 
Amendments in ISRWD Rules, 1959 will 
suffice, hence no modification in this 
regard is required within Act.  
 
Government of Goa 
To reconsider Section 4 of the proposed 
Amendment Bill to Inter State River Water Disputes 
Act, 1956 to exclude the Mahadayi Water Dispute 
Tribunal that had already progressed with 
substantial business from the purview of the 
proposed amendment. 
 
Objection of Goa may not be agreed to 
as the Chairman Tribunal will assign the 
work initially to existing Members only. 
Government of Kerala 
4, 4A, 4B (1) and  (2) and 4C (2) can be  accepted.  
4 C (1) b: Members of bench shall not be from party 
States. Section 4(D)(1) may be modified as follows: 
“As and when any request under Section 3 is 
received from State 
Government in respect of any water dispute, the 
Central Government shall set up a Dispute 
Resolution Committee, consisting of competent 
Members from such relevant fields, as it deems fit, 
for resolving the dispute amicably within a period of 
three months from the date of receipt of the request 
under sub-Section (1) and Members of the 
Committee shall not be from party States. Section 
4(D)(2): The proposed Amendments in Section 4(D) 
(2) may be accepted. The following may be added 
as a Sub-Section of 4(D) (2):- “The Dispute 
Resolution Committee shall hear all the party States 
orally and shall receive written submissions from 
them during negotiations before submitting its 
Report . 
Section 4(D)(3): Can be Accepted 
 
Objection of Kerala on Dispute 
Resolution Committee may also be not 
agreed to as the sufficient time of 6 
months is required to study the case 
and get the Report  finalized on basis of 
inputs from the State Governments. 
Government of Karnataka 
(i) Neither the establishment of the permanent 
Government of Karnataka objection to 
age of 70 years to Chairman and 

14 
 
Tribunal nor the continuation of the Chairman and 
Members of the existing Tribunals until they reach 
the age of 70 years, is unjustified. However, it is 
advisable that – if a provision is made for extending 
the services of the Chairman and Members of the 
existing Tribunals for some period not exceeding two 
years for completing the adjudication of water 
dispute referred to the Bench. But, no extension be 
given to Chairman or Members who have crossed 
the age of 80 years of age. 
(ii) The constitution of DRC is consistent with 
modern trends in the adjudication of water disputes. 
However, there must be a specific provision for 
hearing of States by the DRC before submitting its 
Report . Further, there must be provision for appeal 
or reference to the Supreme Court for the aggrieved 
State to 
challenge the Report  of the DRC. (iii) The 
Chairman, Vice Chairman or Member of the 
permanent Tribunal should be barred from hearing 
or deciding the water disputes, if he or 
she was or is an inhabitant of a party State, unless 
the opposite party State(s) expressly consents. (iv) 
The composition of the Tribunal should be multi-
disciplinary. 
 
Member is also not acceptable as MoL 
& J already bringing a legislation for 
unified age of Chairman and  Members 
of all the Tribunals and the current 
proposal is in line of that only.   
 
Government of Rajasthan 
Section 4 and 4 A – In general, the amendment may 
be accepted but in case of Ravi-Beas, the Tribunal 
has given its decision for sharing of water among 
partner States. States have already given their 
objections on the decision of the Tribunal . 
Meanwhile, Punjab Termination of Agreements Act, 
2004 passed by Punjab Assembly has been referred 
to the Hon’ble Supreme Court. The bench of this 
Tribunal cannot have further hearings and give final 
decision. Since the Ravi-Beas Tribunal has already 
given its decision, therefore, there is no need of the 
separate Bench for this issue. The Ravi-Beas 
Tribunal should continue and on other issues, 
the amendment may be accepted. Section 4B (1) 
and  4 B (2) – Agreed. Section 4C (1) (a) – Since the 
Ravi Beas Trib unal has already given its decision, 
therefore, there is no need of the separate Bench for 
this issue. The Ravi-Beas Tribunal should continue 
and on other issues, the amendment may be 
accepted. Section 4C (1) (b) – The constitution of 
As far as objection from Government of 
Rajasthan is concerned, the matter will 
be transferred to a Bench, which will 
further decide the matter as currently 
neither Chairman nor Members are 
there in the Ravi and Beas Water 
Tribunal. And the Chairman/Members of 
the Tribunal/Bench will be decided / 
nominated by Chief Justice of India as 
per the Act. 

15 
 
the Bench should be such that the Member of the 
Bench should not belong to the States among which 
disputes arise. Section 4 (C) (2) – Agreed Section 
4D (1) – The matters related to sharing of remaining 
waters of interstate rivers among the States only be 
referred to Tribunal for adjudication. The existing 
agreements for sharing of waters of interstate rivers 
among States should not be reopened by Tribunal . 
Chairman, Central Water Commission or his 
representative may be permanent invitee in the 
proceedings of Tribunal for providing technical 
inputs. Section 4D (2) and  4 D (3) – Agreed 
 
Government of Telangana 
Section 4 and provisions below it – Acceptable, 
Provided: 
(1) Disputes which are new disputes having not 
been referred earlier, can be gone into and decided. 
(2) The disputes which had been referred to the 
previous Tribunal but remained undecided or had 
not been settled finally. (3) Disputes which had been 
referred earlier but have been decided in part or 
partially leaving the remaining part undecided. It may 
be in relation to the substance or the subject matter 
of the dispute. (4) Disputes decided in part in 
reference to time factor namely upto some period of 
time where after at the instance of the any party it 
can be referred again considering the significant 
material changes on account of a long interval of 
time, resulting in new facts, circumstances and 
developments coming into existence having material 
effect on the merit of the case namely equitable 
distribution of the water. It may be equated with a 
new dispute. Section 4A, 4B, 4C and provisions 
below them – Acceptable Section 4D (1), 4D(2) and 
4D(3) This Section needs to be modified. In view of 
Government of Telangana, the dispute resolution 
Committee should also be a permanent body. Its 
constitution should not wait for receiving references 
from the State Government. It is also proposed that 
the assessors be associated with the Tribunal 
should also be involved in the proceedings of the 
dispute resolution Committee. In case a dispute is 
not resolved within a period of six months, the matter 
should invariably be referred to the Tribunal . 
Involvement of assessors in the proceedings of 
dispute resolution Committee will lead to their better 
-- 

16 
 
appreciation of facts and relative positions of 
contending States. 
 
Government of Madhya Pradesh 
The permanent Tribunal should not have all 
Members from judiciary but from varied related 
fields. The permanent Tribunal may be headed by a 
serving or retired Supreme Court 
judge with Members having experience in the field of 
(a) administration, (b) water resources projects, (c) 
sociology, (d) economic development, and € finance, 
etc. A mechanism needs to be put in place to 
provide quick and effective remedy in case of failure 
to abide by the Award  of a Tribunal and/or Inter-
state agreement. An overseeing body under the 
permanent Tribunal could be considered towards 
this end. 
-- 
Government of Andhra Pradesh 
Section 4- Accepted; except the first provision below 
4(1) which needs to be modified as below: Provided 
that any dispute settled by a Tribunal, prior to the 
establishment of the Tribunal under sub Section (1); 
shall not be re-opened; 
-- 
 
2.9 The reason for making various changes / Amendments vide Clause 3, as provided by 
the Ministry, are : 
“4 - Constitution of a single Tribunal with different benches as envisaged in the 
proposed 
amendment will result in about 25% reduction in staff and the consequent 
reduction in expenditure. 
4A (1) to (4) - This provision has been kept for carrying out effective negotiations  
as first tier of Dispute Resolution through Dispute Resolution Committee. 
4B - These provisions are kept for implementation of proposed changes in the Act  
4C (1) to (2) - Age limit is provided to check anomaly in the existing Act wherein 
no age limit is provided and the Chairman/Members of the Tribunal continue till 
they wish or resign or in the event of death. 
4D - These provisions are kept for implementation of proposed changes in the Bill. 
Explanation: A new Tribunal with permanent establishment and its own permanent 
office space and infrastructure will obviate the need for establishing a separate 
Tribunal for each water dispute, a process which has invariably been found to be 
time consuming.” 
 
IV (A). Establishment of Inter-State River Water Disputes Tribunal
 

17 
 
2.10 For establishment of Inter-State River Water Dispute Tribunal Clause 3 reads as 
follows: 
“For Section 4 of the principal Act, the following Sections shall be substituted, 
namely:-  
‘4. With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification , 
appoint, there shall be established a Tribunal, to be called the Inter-State River 
Water Disputes Tribunal, for the adjudication of water disputes: 
Provided that on and from the date of establishment of the Tribunal, all existing 
Tribunals shall stand dissolved and the water disputes pending adjudication before 
such existing Tribunals shall stand transferred to the Tribunal: 
Provided further that the Chairmen and other Members of the existing Tribunals 
who have attained the age of seventy years as on the date of commencement of 
the Inter-State River Water Disputes (Amendment) Act, 2017 shall cease to hold 
office on the expiry of three months from the date of such commencement: 
Provided also that a dispute which has already been adjudicated and settled by an 
existing Tribunal prior to the date of commencement of the Inter-State River Water 
Disputes (Amendment) Act, 2017 shall not be re-opened.” 
 
2.11 The Ministry, in their Background note, have also stated that the new Tribunal with 
permanent establishment and its own permanent office space and infrastructure wi ll obviate the 
need for establishing a separate Tribunal for each water dispute, a process which has 
invariably been found to be time-consuming. 
 
2.12 The Committee desired to know as to why the Chairmen and other Members of the 
existing Tribunals, who have attained the age of seventy years as on the date of 
commencement of ‘The Inter-State River Water Disputes (Amendment) Act, 2017 ’ have been 
asked to leave the office with immediate effect, instead only after the expiry of thr ee months 
from the date of such commencement.  To this, the Ministry, in their written reply, stated: 
“Three months were provided for transition from existing set-up to the proposed set-
up wherein records etc can be transferred from existing Tribunals to Standalone 
Tribunal. 
Further, it is now proposed to keep age limit for Chairperson to be 70 years and that 
of Vice-Chairperson / Members to be 67 years to keep it harmony of the provisions 
under Finance Act, 2017.” 
 
 
2.13 The Committee when further asked the Ministry to clarify as to which office the 
Chairmen and other Members of the existing Tribunals will continue to hold during th ose 3 
months i.e. as a Member of the Tribunal under ‘The ISWRD Act, 1956’ or the proposed ‘ The 

18 
 
ISWRD (Amendment) Act 2017’ particularly during the time from the date of establishment of 
the new Tribunal when all the existing Tribunals would stand dissolved and the Water  Disputes 
pending adjudication before such existing Tribunals would be transferred to the new Tr ibunal, to 
this, the Ministry, in their written reply, stated: 
“As on date of notification of the new Tribunal, existing Tribunals shall stand  
dissolved, they will hold office on notional basis in the new Tribunal. They a re 
expected to participate in the transition during these 3 months from existing set-up  to 
the proposed set-up wherein records etc ., can be transferred from existing Tribunals 
to Standalone Tribunal.” 
 
Clause 3 (cont:)  
IV B. Disputes Resolution Committee (DRC)  
2.14 A Disputes Resolution Committee (DRC) has been envisaged in the proposed Section 
4A under Clause 3 of the Bill, 2017, which reads as follows: 
“4A. (1) As and when any request under Section 3 is received from any State 
Government in respect of any water dispute, the Central Government shall set up 
a Disputes Resolution Committee, consisting of Members from such relevant 
fields, as it deems fit, for resolving the dispute amicably. 
 
(2) The Disputes Resolution Committee shall try to resolve a water dispute by 
negotiations within a period of one year which may be extended to a further period 
of six months and submit its Report  to the Central Government. 
 
(3)  The Report submitted by the Disputes Resolution Committee shall contain 
details of- 
  (a) the stand taken by each State Government during negotiation; 
  (b) the views of Members of the Committee on such stand; and 
 (c) all relevant facts, information and data relating thereto. 
(4) Any water dispute which cannot be settled by negotiations shall be referred by the  
Central Government, by notification, to the Tribunal for its adjudication within a period of 
three months from the date of receipt of the Report  under sub-Section (2).” 
 
 
2.15 The two levels of Dispute Resolution, as provided by the Ministry, are as follows:  
“First Level – Dispute Resolution Committee (DRC) 
Immediately on receipt of complaint under Section 3 received from any State 
Government, the Central Government shall set up a Dispute Resolution Committee, 
consisting of Members from such relevant fields, as it deems fit, for resolving the 

19 
 
dispute amicably.” (The composition of DRC will be as per Rules made under this 
Act) 
Timeline- The DRC shall try to resolve a water dispute by negotiations within a period 
of one year which may be extended to a further period of six months and submit its 
Report  to the Central Government. (Maximum 1year, 6months) 
 
Second Level - Adjudication by Bench of Tribunal 
Any water dispute which cannot be settled by negotiations shall be referred by 
Central Government, by notification, to the Tribunal for its adjudication within a peri od 
of three months from date of receipt of Report of DRC. (Maximum 3months) 
On receipt of a reference from the Central Government, the Chairperson shall 
assign such dispute to a Bench of the Tribunal to its adjudication. 
The Bench of the Tribunal will consider the Report of the DRC, investigate the water 
dispute and forward to the Central Government its detailed Report and decision on 
such dispute within a period of two years . Provided that if the Report  cannot be 
given within a period of two years for any unavoidable reasons, the Central 
Government may extend such period to a further period not exceeding one year . 
(Maximum 3 years) 
If, upon consideration of the decision of the Tribunal, the Central Government or any 
State Government is of opinion that anything therein contained requires explanation 
or that guidance is needed upon any point not originally referred to the Trib unal, the 
Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, within 3 months 
from date of the decision, again refer the matter to the Tribunal for further 
consideration, and on such reference, the Bench of the Tribunal concerned may 
forward to the Central Government a further Report  within one year from dat e of 
such reference giving such explanation or guidance as it deems fit and in such a 
case, the decision of the Tribunal shall be deemed to be modified accordingly.  
Provided that the Central Government may extend the period of one year to a further  
period not exceeding six months. (Maximum 1 year, 6months).” 
 
2.16 When asked for the Ministry’s opinion on having a Three-tier mechanism for dispute 
resolution where DRC would be at the first tier, the Tribunal at the second tier and an Appellate 
Tribunal as the third and the final tier so that dispute reaches finality pending any further 
appeal, the Ministry, in their written reply, stated: 
“To give effect to above provisions of the Constitution, it is provided under Section 6 
of the Principal Act, that the decision of the Bench of the Tribunal shall be f inal and 
binding on the parties to the dispute and shall have the same force as an or der or 
decree of the Supreme Court. Thus having an Appellate Tribunal may go against the 
spirit of the provision of  the Constitution. 
 
Further, it is felt that there is no need for Three- tier mechanism as Hon’ble Supreme 
Court in Civil Appeals  of 2007 filed by Cauvery basin States has noted that a 
decision of Tribunal can be challenged before it by invoking Article 136 of the 

20 
 
Constitution. The relevant extract from judgement dated 9.12.2016 of Hon’ble 
Supreme Court is reproduced below 
65. In this context, the term ‘adjudication’  becomes extremely significant.  In 
Black’ Law Dictionary (6th Edn.) at p. 42 ‘ adjudication’ is defined as: 
‘Adjudication — The legal process of resolving a dispute. The formal giving or 
pronouncing a judgment or decree in a court proceeding; also the judgment or 
decision given. The entry of a decree by a court in respect to the parties in a 
case. It implies a hearing by a court, after notice, of legal evidence on the 
factual issue(s) involved. 
66. The purpose of referring to the aforesaid definition is to arrive at the 
conclusion that once a water dispute, as follows Article 262(1) read with 
provisions of the 1956 Act is adjudicated by the Tribunal, it loses the nature of 
dispute.  A person aggrieved can always have his remedy invoking the 
jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution of India.   We have not a 
scintilla of doubt in our mind that the founding fathers did not want the Award  
or the final order passed by the Tribunal to remain immune from challenge.  
That is neither the express language of Article 262(1) nor it impliedly so 
states.  Thus, the contention of the Union of India with regard to 
maintainability of the appeal by special leave under Article 136 of the 
Constitution of India on this score stands repelled.” 
 
 
2.17 When further asked about the experience of DRC for resolving Inter-State River wate r 
disputes, the Ministry, in their written reply, stated: 
“There have been instances in the past where negotiations have led to non referral of 
inter-State river water dispute to a Tribunal. It may be noted that Government of Bihar 
had requested in the year 2013 to MoWR, RD and GR for constitution of a Tribunal 
under Section-3 of Inter-State River Water Dispute (ISRWD) Act, 1956 to settle the  
Sone River water dispute among the co-basin States. Inter-State meetings on Sone 
river dispute were held under chairmanship of the Chairman, CWC with the officials 
of Governments of co-basin states and it was finally concluded that the two states 
U.P and Bihar would meet periodically and try to solve the issues bilaterally. MoWR, 
RD and GR has informed CWC that there is no imminent need for referring the 
matter to Tribunal under ISRWD Act, 1956. Inter-State river water sharing issues 
solved through negotiations have resulted in sharing of river waters between UP and 
MP on Betwa and Ken rivers, between MP, UP and Bihar in Bansagar (Sone) and 
Upper Yamuna river waters, etc. 
 
Many inter-State river water sharing matters have been settled by 
negotiations/agreements like Betwa River, Bansagar etc.” 
 
2.18 Adding further on this issue, the Ministry, in their post-evidence reply further clarified 
that in a recent case of Sone River Dispute, negotiations were successfully coordinated by 
Chairman, CWC and there was no need to set-up Tribunal. 

21 
 
 
2.19 When the Committee asked the Ministry to categorically clarify the position as obtaining  
about the composition of DRC, the Ministry, in their written reply, stated that it  is proposed to 
provide the same in ISRWD Rules which would be framed as part of S ub-ordinate Legislation 
under the proposed ISRWD Act. 
 
2.20 Responding to the concern of the Committee regarding the composition of DRC 
comprising of only technical Members, the Secretary, MoWR, RD and GR, during evidence 
held on 30.06.2017 submitted: 
“One suggestion which has been made is that we sh ould not only have the dispute 
resolution mechanism which we had proposed in this, the advice is that the dispute 
resolution mechanism has become too technical.  There are only engineering parts, 
data and other aspects.  If possible, it should be a political process where people at 
the level of Chief Minister and others are involved and relevant people in the 
Government are involved so that, politically also, an effort is made to get cons ensus.  
It was a suggestion in the last meeting also.  So, the DRC process should be 
widened a little.  While the DRC gives all the data and technical advice, an effort 
should be made at the political level also to get a consensus between the disputing 
States.  I think that is something which we need to look at.” 
 
2.21 On being asked by the Committee as to who would decide regarding the Members of 
the DRC, the Ministry, in their written reply, stated: 
“As per the Bill, Central Government has to decide on the composition of DRC. 
Accordingly Ministry of Water Resources, River development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation after careful examination will decide on the composition of DRC. It is 
proposed to provide the composition of DRC in ISRWD Rules that would be framed 
as part of sub-ordinate legislation under the proposed ISRWD Act so that there is no 
ambiguity and fit persons are made Members of the DRC.” 
 
2.22 Further, when enquired about the existence of any Constitutional provision/Law which 
mandates that all the Members of such body / Tribunal should be judges of Supreme Court / 
High Court, the Ministry, in their written reply, submitted before the Committee: 
“There are no such provisions. Though CIC or CVC handles administrative matters, 
the Inter-State Water Tribunals essentially deal in serious techno-judicial matters. 
The water disputes referred to the Tribunals are not purely technical matters but  
involve ascertaining validity of the inter-state water sharing agreements arrived at in 

22 
 
the past on account of various factors such as being very old, change in the partie s 
due to territorial changes, being in conflict with other provisions of the Acts enacted 
by the  Parliament etc. All Tribunals in the past have necessarily dealt with such 
issues. On technical matters the Tribunals are assisted by two or more Assessors 
who are expert in the field of water resources.” 
 
 
2.23 Responding to the concern raised by the Committee regarding the transparency in the 
entire process of adjudication particularly in collecting data, role of CWC or DRC, Rep ort of 
DRC, etc., the Secretary, Ministry of during evidence held on 30.06.2017 submitted that it will 
be in the public domain. 
2.24 Further, the Ministry during evidence held on 16.06.2017 also stated that the basic 
principles of Helsinki / Berlin Rules can guide the Disputes Resolution Committee (DRC).  In 
this regard, the Committee have also been informed that the basic doctrine accepted by 
Helsinki/Berlin rules is that every Basin State is entitled to a reasonable and equitable share in 
the beneficial uses of the waters of a trans-boundary basin. When asked to clarify furt her, the 
Ministry, in their written reply, have stated that it will not be mandatory for the  DRC to follow the 
guidelines of the Helsinki/Berlin rules while settling the disputes, but the Berlin rules can guide 
the DRC/Tribunals in coming to a fair Assessment /Awards.  
 
2.25 In addition, as regards the International practices being followed for resolving  of water 
disputes the Ministry, in their post-evidence reply, have stated that this can be taken into 
account by Dispute Resolution Committee. 
Clause 3 (cont:)
  
IV C. Composition of Tribunal  
2.26 Clause 3 provides for the composition of the Tribunal, as proposed under new Se ction 
4B, which reads as follows: 
“4B. Subject to the provisions of Section 12, the Tribunal shall consist of a 
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and not more than six Members to be nominated 

23 
 
in this behalf by the Chief Justice of India from amongst persons who at the time 
of such nomination are Judges of the Supreme Court or of a High Court: 
 
Provided that the Chairmen and other Members of the existing Tribunals (other 
than Members who have ceased to hold office under second proviso to Section 4) 
shall be nominated by the Chief Justice of India as Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson 
and Members of the Tribunal and they shall continue as such, subject to th e 
provisions of Section 4C.” 
 
2.27 When asked to provide justification for making only one person i.e. Chief Justice of 
India as the sole authority for nominating the Chairperson, Vice-Chairpers on and other 
Members of the Tribunal, instead of having  a comprehensive body / panel of Member s on the 
line of Central Information Commission (CIC) / Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) for doing 
so, the Ministry, in their written reply, stated: 
“The selection of CIC or CVC cannot be compared with the selection of Chairpe rson, 
Vice-chairperson and Members of the Tribunals as they are required to perform 
judicial functions and the judgement pronounced by them is to have an effect of a 
Supreme Court Decree as per provision of Article 262(2) of the Constitution.  This 
provision exists in the exiting ISRWD Act also wherein the Chairman and Members of 
the Tribunals are nominated by Chief Justice of India (CJI) . The Ministry agrees that 
the CJI should not be the sole person to nominate Chairperson/ Vice-
Chairperson/Members of th e Tribunal.  The Ministry is open to suggestion of 
selecting the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Members from a panel provided by 
the Ministry of Law and Justice (MoLJ) from among serving judges of the Supreme 
Court or High Court. For each position, it is suggested that MoLJ may forwar d three 
nominations and one among them is selected.” 
 
 
2.28 The Ministry further, in their post-evidence reply, elaborated on the subject as follows: 
“The Chairperson and Members of the Tribunal are required to be appointed fr om 
amongst the sitting judges of Supreme Court /  High Court. Accordingly, there wa s a 
provision of their nomination by Chief Justice of India. However, the suggestion for 
having a Collegium can also be accepted.” 
 
2.29 Elaborating further on the Tribunal, the representative of the Ministry, durin g an 
evidence held on 10.07.2017, submitted : 
“We also are acceptable to the idea that experts assist the Tribunal in case the 
Tribunal wants certain information on agriculture, economics or how livelihood an d 
Rand R is af fected……x……x…..x…..x…. The Tribunal can be assisted by Rand R, 
CWC assessor and also environment.” 
 

24 
 
 
2.30 When asked for the rationale for having all the Members of the Tribunal as Judges of 
Supreme Court / High Courts, the Ministry, in their written reply, stated: 
“Article 262(1) of the Constitution provides that Parliament may, by law, provide for 
the adjudication of any dispute or complaint with respect to the use, distribution or 
control of the waters of, or in, any inter-State river of river valley. 
 
The water disputes are referred to the Tribunals for adjudication when dispute s 
cannot be resolved through other methods like agreements or negotiations. Under 
present set-up, Chairman and two  Members who at the time of nomination are sitting 
judges of the Supreme Court or of a High Court and may continue after retirement 
adjudicate on the matter with support of renowned advocate hired by party States. 
The water disputes referred to the Tribunals are not purely technical matters but  
involve ascertaining validity of the inter-state water sharing agreements arrived at in 
the past on account of various factors such as being very old, change in the partie s 
due to territorial changes, being in conflict with other provisions of the Acts enacted 
by the  Parliament etc. All Tribunals in the past have necessarily dealt with such 
issues. As they are required to perform judicial functions and the judgement 
pronounced by them is to have an effect of a Supreme Court decree as per provision 
of Article 262(2) of the Constitution, it is essential to have Members from Supreme 
Court / High Courts.  On technical matters the Tribunals are assisted by two or more 
Assessors who are expert in the field of water resources/agriculture. Besides party 
States also  hire renowned experts as witness, and as standing technical personal to 
guide and facilitate  their advocates in explaining and presenting their cases bef ore 
the Tribunals.” 
 
 
2.31 The Ministry, in their written reply, have also suggested for having that an 
Administrative Officer to act as the Secretary to the Tribunal who would not be below the rank 
of the Joint Secretary to the Government of India.  Elaborating further it has been stated that h e 
would be the bridge between the MoWR, RD and GR and the Tribunal and shall be responsible  
for all administrative and non-judicial matters of the Tribunal. He will be supported by adequate 
administrative staff provided by the Ministry and the functions, powers and appointment of the 
Administrative Officer shall be elaborated in the Rules framed under this Act. 
 
 
 

25 
 
Clause 3 (Cont:) 
IV D. Benches of Tribunal
 
2.32 With respect to the Benches of Tribunal, the proposed new Section 4D under Clause 3 
reads as follows: 
“4D.(1) Subject to other provisions of this Act, –– 
 
(a) the jurisdiction of the Tribunal may be exercised by the Benches thereof; 
(b) the Chairperson may constitute a Bench with three Members, out of 
which the senior-most Member shall preside over the Bench. 
Provided that a Member of a Bench may also be a Member of another 
Bench 
Explanation.–– For the purposes of this Clause , the term “senior -most 
Member” means that a Judge of the Supreme Court shall always be senior 
to a Judge of a High Court and their seniority shall be determined from the 
date of their respective appointment as the Judge of the Supreme Court or 
of a High Court. 
 
(2) The Benches of the Tribunal shall ordinarily sit at New Delhi or at such 
other places as the Chairperson may decide.” 
 
2.33 When the Committee asked to clarify whether the proposed number of staff will be able 
meet the requirement especially in view of the fact that multiple Benches are proposed to be  
formed under the new single Tribunal. In this context,  the Ministry, in t heir written reply, 
provided details of the existing combined Staff strength of the 5 Tribunals and Staff strength  i n 
the Proposed Tribunal which is reproduced as follows: 
Table 3: The Existing combined Staff strength of the 5 Tribunals and Staff 
strength in the Proposed Tribunal 
 
Sl. 
No.  Name of the Post 
No. of Posts in Krishna, 
Cauvery,  Ravi Beas Mahadayi 
and Vanshadhara Water 
Disputes Tribunal** 
No. of Post in 
Proposed Tribunal 
1 Chairperson 5 1 
2 Vice Chairperson (1) / Member (6) 10 7 
3 Assessor 10 10 
4 Registrar 5 1 

26 
 
5 Assistant Registrar 5 3 
6 Executive Engineer 6 5 
7 Principal Private Secretary 15 8 
8 Court Master 10 4 
9 Section Officer 4 3 
10 Private Secretary 12 11 
11 Administrative Officer 4 1 
12 Assistant  11 5 
13 Personal Assistant 5 8 
14 Driver 3 8 
15 Upper Division Clerk 2 5 
   107 80 
 
 
2.34 Further, the Committee sought clarification regarding sharing / recruitment of new staff 
for the Tribunal / Benches in case multiple Benches come into existence simultaneously.  
Responding to this, the Ministry, in their written reply, stated that the above staff is proposed 
considering 5 Benches. However, in case more than 5 Benches are required at one time 
following additional staff per Bench may be required: 
(i) Assessor -2 
(ii) Executive Engineer -1 
(iii) Private Secretary-2 
 
2.35 The Committee asked about the staffing pattern of the new Tribunal in case, at any 
given point, if all Benches cease to be in existence and only the Chairperson remain in position 
of the Tribunal. The Ministry, in their written reply, clarified that the staffi ng pattern would be 
elaborated in the Rules made under this Act and it would depend on the load and dema nd on 
the Tribunal. The Rules will also cater to the minimum work load and skeletal staff. They further 
stated that the proposed staffing pattern is as follows: 

27 
 
Table 4 : Staffing pattern of the new Tribunal in case all Benches cease to be in  
existence 
 
Sr. 
No. Name of the Post Scale 
No. of Post 
Proposed in 
New Tribunal 
1 Chairperson 90000 1 
2 
Vice-Chairperson (1) / 
Member (6 nos) 
80000 / 90000 * 0 
3 Assessor 
HAG 67000-79000 /PB-4 (37400-
67000)+GP-10000/- 
0 
4 Registrar PB-3 (15600-39100) +GP-7600/- 1 
5 Assistant Registrar PB-3 (15600-39100) +GP-6600/- 3 
6 Executive Engineer PB-3 (15600-39100) +GP-6600/- 0 
7 
Principal Private 
Secretary 
PB-3 (15600-39100) +GP-6600/- 1 
8 Court Master PB-3 (15600-39100) +GP-6600/- 0 
9 Section Officer PB-2 (9300-34800) +GP-4800/- 3 
10 Private Secretary PB-2 (9300-34800) +GP-4800/- 1 
11 Administrative Officer PB-3 (15600-39100) +GP-5400/- 1 
12 Assistant  PB-2 (9300-34800) +GP-4200/- 5 
13 Personal Assistant PB-2 (9300-34800) +GP-4200/- 3 
14 Driver PB-1 (5200-20200) +GP-1900/- 1 
15 Upper Division Clerk PB-1 (5200-20200) +GP-2400/- 5 
    Total 25 
 
The Tribunal can consolidate on information and data base of the Awards given for 
use in future disputes.” 
 
 
 

28 
 
2.36 Responding to a query whether the same Bench will adjudicate upon only one dispu te 
or more than one, the Ministry, in their written reply, stated: 
“One Bench will adjudicate one dispute but Member of One Bench can also be 
Member of other Bench. After any water dispute assigned to a Bench of the Tribunal 
is adjudicated and it submits its decision or Report, the Central Government shall 
dissolve that Bench.” 
 
2.37 To a query by the Committee as to whether there is provision of any majority in the 
Bench to come to a decision. The Ministry, in their written reply, stated that the provision of 
majority decision already exists in the Act and the same is proposed to be continued. 
V. Clause 4 :
  Amendment of Section 5  
2.38 Clause 4 seeks to amend Section 5 of the Act and it reads as follows: 
“In Section 5 of the principal Act, –– 
 
(a) for sub-Sections (1) and (2), the following sub-Sections shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
 
(1) On receipt of a reference in respect of any water dispute from the 
Central Government, the Chairperson shall assign such dispute to a Bench of the 
Tribunal to its adjudication. 
 
(2) The Bench of the Tribunal shall, before investigating the water dispute 
referred to it under sub-Section (1), take into consideration the Report  su bmitted by 
the Disputes Resolution Committee under sub-Section (2) of Section 4A, and 
forward to the Central Government its detailed Report  setting out the facts as found 
by it including on yield, efficiency in the use of water and such other matters as may 
be prescribed, and giving its decision on such dispute within a period of two years: 
 
Provided that such Report shall also provide for the distribution of water 
during distress situations arising from shortage in the availability of water in such  
manner as may be prescribed: 
 
Provided further that if th e Report  cannot be given within a period of two 
years for any unavoidable reasons, the Central Government may extend such 
period to a further period not exceeding one year.”; 
 
(b) in sub-Section (3), ––  
(i) for the words “on such reference, the Tribunal may”, the words “on 
such reference, the Bench of the Tribunal concerned may” shall be 
substituted; 

29 
 
(ii) for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, namely: - 
 
Provided that the Central Government may extend the period of one year to 
a further period not exceeding six months.” 
 
2.39 The reason for making changes / Amendment vide Clause 4, as furnished to the 
Committee by the Ministry, are as follows: 
“Effective and efficient management of water resources is the ultimate objective of 
the process and it is imperative to mention it in the statute itself.  
Most of the water disputes arise due to utilization of inter-State River water during  
distress situations and thus, disputes referred to the Tribunal needs to be ex amined 
from this point of view as well.” 
 
VI. Clause 5
 - Substitution of new Sections 5A and 5B for 5A 
VI A. Appointment of Assessors 
2.40 For appointment of Assessors Clause 5 provides for new Section 5A, in ‘The ISRWD 
(Amendment) Bill, 2017’, which reads as follows: 
“5A. (1) The Central Government may appoint two experts serving in the 
Central Water Engineering Service not below the rank of Chief Engineer as 
assessors for each water dispute to advise the Bench in the proceedings before it. 
 
(2) The term of the assessors appointed under sub-Section (1) shall be co-
terminus with the adjudication of the dispute and they shall cease to be assessors 
after the dispute is adjudicated and the final Report  is forwarded to the Central 
Government.” 
 
2.41 The reason for making changes / amendment vide Clause 5, as provided by the 
Ministry, are: 
“Major work of the Tribunal, related to adjudication of disputes, is already taken care 
of while giving Award  under Section 5(2) of the Act. Further reference under Secti on 
5(3) thus needs to be made time-bound.” 
 
2.42 The response of the Government of Bihar, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Karnataka, 
Rajasthan and Telangana on Clause 5 along with the comments of the Ministry thereto have 
been given below:  
 

30 
 
Table 5: Comments of the States/UTs, on Clause 5, and response of the Ministry thereto 
Comments of the State Governments/UTs Response of the MoWR,RDand GR 
Government of Bihar and Andhra Pradesh 
Accepted 
Government of Kerala 
Clauses 5 (a) (1), 5 a (2) ; 5 (b) (1), 5 
b (2) can be accepted.
 
Section 5(A): Proposed new Sections 5A (1) 
and 5A (2), which specify the method of 
appointment of assessors, can be accepted 
subject to the condition that they are not from 
the party States. 
Section 5(B): Section 5B (1), (2) and (3) deal 
with the method of filling vacancies (other than 
a temporary absence) of Chairperson, Vice-
Chairperson, and other Members and can be 
accepted. 
Government of Karnataka 
The assessors should be appointed in 
consultation with the concerned States. 
Government of Rajasthan 
Section 5A (1) – The assessors should not 
belong to the States among which disputes 
arise 
Government of Telangana 
Section 5 A (1) – The role of Assessors under 
Section 4 (3) of the ISRWD Act, 1956 be 
extended in the adjudication process to all the 
technical matters and the studies made by the 
Assessors shall be made available to party 
States to express their views and comments 
for better transparency in adjudication of water 
disputes. 
The recommendation regarding Assessors 
should not be from the party States may not 
be agreed to. As per the Act, the Assessors 
would be appointed by the Central 
Government on recommendation of the 
Tribunal i.e. on recommendation of Chairman 
of the Tribunal. Further, as per the Act, the 
function and responsibility of the Assessors is 
to advise the Tribunal in respect of deposition 
of the witnesses of the party States mainly on 
technical issues. Assessors have to examine 
all the technical aspects of the Statement of 
cases filed by the party states and all other 
related documents. As such, Assessors are 
already entrusted to deal with all the technical 
matters related to proceeding of a Tribunal. 
The decision has to be taken on that basis by 
Chairman/Members of the Benches which 
give its decision on basis of their discretion 
and are happen to be neutral. 
 
 
2.43 Responding to the aforesaid suggestion by the Government of Rajasthan, the Ministry 
have stated that the recommendation regarding Assessors should not belong to the Party 
States may not be agreed to. However, latter in their post-evidence reply, the Ministry have also  
submitted that a provision can be inserted in the ISRWD Rules for Assessor not t o be domicile 
for party States. 
 

31 
 
2.44 As regards the experience/exposure of Assessors to be appointed in the Tribunal the 
Ministry, in their post-evidence reply, have submitted that the Assessors are proposed to be 
experts from Central Water Engineering Services not below the rank of Chief Engineer . These 
officers have a rich experience / exposure in the related matters. 
Clause 5 (Cont:) 
 
VI B. Filling of vacancies, temporary, absence, etc.
 
2.45 For filling of vacancies, temporary, absence, etc. , Clause 5 provides for new                  
Section 5B, in ‘The ISRWD (Amendment) Bill, 2017, which reads: 
“5B.(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, if for any reason, a vacancy 
(other than a temporary absence) occurs in the office of the Chairperson, Vice- 
Chairperson or any other Member of the Tribunal, such vacancy shall be filled by 
a person to be nominated in this behalf by the Chief Justice of India in accordance 
with Section 4B. 
 
(2) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the 
Chairperson by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the Vice- 
Chairperson shall act as the Chairperson until the date on which a new 
Chairperson, nominated in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such 
vacancy, enters upon his office. 
 
(3) When any Member of a Bench of the Tribunal is unable to discharge 
his functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause, the Chairperson may 
assign the work of such Member to any other Member of the Tribunal till such 
Member resumes his work.” 
 
2.46 The reasons for making the changes / amendment in Section 5A, by substituting new 
Section 5A and 5B in the proposed Bill, 2017, as furnished to the Committee by th e Ministry are 
as follows: 
“Effective and efficient management of water resources is the ultimate objective of 
the process and it is imperative to mention it in the statute itself. 
 
Most of the water disputes arise due to utilization of inter-state river water during 
distress situations and thus, disputes referred to the Tribunal needs to be examined 
from this point of view as well.  
 

32 
 
These provisions are kept to ensure faster and timely adjudication of water disputes 
and establish a robust institutional architecture for the purpose. 
 
Major work of the Tribunal, related to adjudication of disputes, is already taken care 
of while giving Award  under Section 5(2) of the Act. Further reference under Secti on 
5(3) thus needs to be made time-bound. 
 
These provisions are kept for implementation of proposed changes in the Act.” 
 
 
2.47 On being questioned by the Committee about the envisaged implications of the 
change/Amendment proposed to be made under Clause 5, the Ministry stated: 
“Adjudication of disputes referred to the Tribunal with reference to Effective an d 
Efficient management of water resources and utilization of water during distress 
situations would make the Award of the Tribunal more palatable to the party States 
which in turn would facilitate easier implementation of the Award  by the Tribunal. 
 
This will result in effective implementation of new provisions proposed in the Bill.” 
 
 
2.48 When the Committee, in particular, asked for the prescribed timeline for re placing the 
temporary Member with that of appointing a regular or permanent Member, the Ministry, in their 
written reply have stated that they are open to the suggestion that the perso ns should be 
nominated by the Ministry of Law and Justice (MoLJ) and the filling up of the vacan cy should be 
done within three months. 
 
VI C. Removal / Resignation of Chairperson and other Members of Tribunal and 
Benches 
 
2.49 While observing that “The ISRWD (Amendment) Bill, 2017” does not contain any 
provision regarding the ‘Resignation / Removal’ of Chairperson and other Members of the 
Tribunal and the Benches to be formed under the Tribunal, the Committee specifically desired 
to know the Ministry’s view in this regard.  To this, the Ministry in their written reply have 
submitted before the Committee: 
“The Ministry supports the proposal for “removal” of the Chairperson/Vice -
Chairperson/Member on account of ‘ill-health, incapacity or non-performance ’. The 

33 
 
Clause of “removal’ may be added as there are strict timelines in the Bill for 
adjudication and Members have to be subject to discipline. The authority which 
appointed them be empowered to remove them.” 
 
VII. Clause 6 - Substitution of new Section for Section 6
 
Decision of Bench of Tribunal binding on parties 
 
2.50 Clause 6 of the proposed Bill, 2017 provides for the decision of the Bench of the  
Tribunal to be binding on the parties and it reads as follows: 
“For Section 6 of the principal Act, the following Section shall be substituted, 
namely:– 
 
6. The decision of the Bench of the Tribunal shall be final and binding on th e 
parties to the dispute and shall have the same force as an order or decree of the  
Supreme Court.” 
 
2.51 The reasons forwarded by the Ministry for substitution of a new Section for Section 6 in 
the proposed bill, 2017, which makes decision of the Bench of the Tribunal binding o n the 
parties, are: 
“It has been  observed over period of time that, at times the Central Government is 
refrained, through Court intervention, from publishing final Award  given by Tribunals 
in the Official Gazette, which in turns prevents implementation of the Award  and the 
water dispute technically remained unresolved.” 
 
2.52 The Committee asked about the envisaged implications of the changes/Amendment 
made under Clause 6. The Ministry have stated that this will result in effective impleme ntation 
of the Awards given by the Tribunal. 
2.53 The comments / views expressed by the State Governments / UTs on Clause 6 of the 
proposed Bill, 2017 along with the response of the Ministry thereto are reproduced below: 
Table 6: Comments / views expressed by the State Governments / UTs, on                   
Clause 6, along with the response of the Ministry thereto. 
 
Comments of the State Governments/UTs Response of the MoWR,RDand GR 
Government of Bihar and Rajasthan 
Accepted 
The recommendation regarding 
appeals to the 

34 
 
Government of Kerala 
This amendment states that the decision of the 
Bench of the Tribunal shall be final and binding on 
the party States to the dispute and shall have the 
same force as an order or decree of the Supreme 
Court. It is true that the Tribunal is appointed by 
the Supreme Court. But it cannot prevent the 
party States from approaching Supreme Court f or 
redressing genuine grievances, if any.   Hence, 
provision is to be given in the amended principal 
Act permitting the aggrieved party State to seek 
redressal by the Supreme Court. A Sub-Clause to 
this effect may be included in the proposed 
Amendment: If an aggrieved party State to the 
dispute finds the Award  of the Tribunal 
unacceptable on genuine grounds of error 
committed on the face of records and / or 
on misconduct of the Members of the Tribunal , 
the party State can approach the Supreme Court 
for justice. 
Government of Odisha 
If any of the contesting parties or States is not 
satisfied with the Judgment order passed by the 
Tribunal, the concerned party State may be 
allowed to appeal before the Hon ’ble Supreme 
Court. 
Government of Telangana 
The decision of bench of the Tribunal 
shall come into force only after expiry of the 
process of seeking clarifications under Section 5 
(3) of the Act (for the Report  of the Tribunal). 
Government of Punjab 
The proposal as per the amended bill to dispense 
with the publication of the decision of the Tribunal 
in official gazette by the Central Government is 
not as per the sound principles of jurisprudence. 
Rather, the provision of grant of an official hearing 
to all stakeholders by the Central Government 
with regard to the finding of the Tribunal before 
taking a decision to publish or not to publish the 
decision of the Tribunal in the official gazette 
should be incorporated. 
(b) Appeal to the Supreme Court against the 
decision of the Tribunal should be prescribed 
under the statute. 
Government of Andhra Pradesh 
Section 6- To be modified as follows: The 
Supreme Court may not be agreed to. 
At present, the Act puts a bar of 
jurisdiction of Supreme Court and 
other Courts in respect of any water 
dispute which may be referred to a 
Tribunal under this act. Further, Article 
262(2) of the Constitution of India 
provides that neither the S.C. nor any 
other Court shall exercise jurisdiction 
in respect of any such dispute or 
complaint as referred to in Article 
262(1). The Tribunals are intended to 
provide timely adjudication of the 
water disputes referred to them. If the 
matter is to be referred to the 
Supreme Court which is already 
heavily burdened and may take a 
much longer time for adjudication of 
these disputes then the whole purpose 
of setting up these Tribunals would be 
defeated. 

35 
 
decision of the Bench of the Tribunal shall be final 
and binding on the parties to the dispute and shall 
be given effect to by them and shall have the 
same force as an order or decree of the Supreme 
Court. Where the decision means the decision of 
Bench of the Tribunal after its adjudication under 
5(3) and in case no reference petition filed by 
party State or Government of India within 
stipulated period of 3 months , the decision under 
Section 5(2). 
 
 
2.54 As regards the finality of the Award of the proposed Tribunal, few States like Punjab, 
Andhra Pradesh, Kerala and Odisha have proposed for having a provision to appeal against the 
decision of the Tribunal for redressing genuine grievances.  However, the Ministry have not 
agreed to this suggestion. 
2.55  When the Committee desired the Ministry to substantiate their stand, the Ministry, in 
their written reply, have submitted: 
“The stand of Ministry is consistent to the provisions in the Constitution wherein 
Article 262(2) of the Constitution of India provides that neither the Supreme C ourt nor 
any other Court shall exercise jurisdiction in respect of any such dispute or complai nt 
as referred to in Article 262(1). 
 
Ministry wants to bring some finality in the Inter- State river water disputes. We don’t 
want the litigation to go endlessly.” 
 
2.56 The Committee desired to know about the situation wherein the Tribunal would t ake 
time to settle the dispute beyond the stipulated period prescribed in this provision of the Bill.  To 
this, the Ministry, in their written reply have stated that there does not exist any such p rovision 
in the Bill and the Bench of the Tribunal has to complete the adjudication within stipulated time. 
2.57 The Committee thereafter desired to have information about the precedents relating to 
the success of implementation of the Award s  given by the past Tribunals, the Ministry, in their 
written reply, have stated that so far work of 3 Tribunals have been completed in totality and  the 
status of the implementation of the Awards  is as follows:  

36 
 
Table 7: Status of the implementation of the Awards by the previous Tribunals 
 
S.  
No  
Name of 
Tribunal  
Create
d on  
States concerned  Present 
Status  
Outcome 
1.  Godavari 
Water 
Disputes 
Tribunal  
April, 
1969  
Maharashtra, 
Andhra Pradesh, 
Karnataka, 
Madhya Pradesh 
and  Orissa  
Award  
given on 
July, 1980  
Riparian States 
are following the 
allocations as 
per Award  
2  Krishna Water 
Disputes 
Tribunal -I  
April, 
1969  
Maharashtra, 
Andhra Pradesh 
and Karnataka  
Award  
given on 
May, 
1976  
Allocations as 
per Award  
followed by 
riparian States 
3  Narmada 
Water 
Disputes 
Tribunal 
Octobe
r, 1969  
Rajasthan, 
Madhya Pradesh, 
Gujarat and 
Maharashtra  
Award  
given on 
December,  
1979  
Basin 
Developments 
activities / 
Institutions  
(NCA, SSCAC), 
taken up as per 
Award . 
 
2.58 On being asked for the provision to deal with the situation where the States/UTs fail to 
abide by the Award  of the Tribunal , on this quite pertinent issue, the Ministry, in their written 
reply have submitted before the Committee: 
“They can be persuaded to abide by the Award. Party States are expected to abide 
by the Awards or else it amounts to breakdown of the Constitutional Machinery. 
There are provisions in the constitution to deal with such eventuality.” 
 
2.59 The Committee desired to know about the ramifications in case, of re-organisat ion of 
the States/UTs involved in the original disputes, for which a Bench of the Tribunal had given its 
Award and accepted by the un-bifurcated / parent States. The Ministry on this issue, in their 
written reply have submitted: 

37 
 
“With respect to other States they are required to abide by such Awards. With respect 
to each other provision generally exists in the State Reorganisation Acts where water 
resources are also divided along with land, as in case of A.P. Reorganisation Act and 
U.P. Reorganisation act. Any residual issues they can decide based on mutual 
agreement or can request Central Government to establish Tribunal/Bench under the 
ISRWD Act.” 
 
2.60 When the Committee further desired to know about the Constitutional 
provision/mechanism which would entitle the States to approach the Supreme Court for the  
review of an Award  of the Tribunal or make an appeal against it (including SLP), t he Ministry, 
in their written reply have stated: 
“Though Section 262(2) of the Constitution debars, the Supreme Court no r any other 
court shall exercise jurisdiction in respect of any such dispute or complaint under 
ISRWD Act, the Supreme Court has been exercising its jurisdiction under Articles 
131 (Original Jurisdiction) and 136 (Grant SLP) of the Constitution for considerin g the 
matters related to Award s  on inter-State rivers.” 
 
2.61 On being asked by the Committee as to how the aforesaid two conflicting provisions of 
the Constitution can be reconciled so that a finality can be given to the Award  of t he Tribunal 
without Supreme Court entertaining any Review Petition or Special Leave Petition (SLP), th e 
Ministry in this connection, in their written reply have submitted before the Committee: 
“This issue has been under consideration of Attorney General of India. However, n o 
fool-proof mechanism has so far been suggested. Supreme Court has taken different 
view on its jurisdiction to entertain Civil Appeals at different points of time.” 
 
2.62 The Committee, thereupon, asked the Ministry to elaborate upon the Agency which 
would be responsible for the implementation of the Award , the Ministry in their wr itten reply 
have submitted: 
“The Awards are to be given effect to by the party States. There is also a provision 
under Section 6A in the Act, the Central Government may, by Notification in the 
Official Gazette, frame a scheme or schemes whereby provision may be made for all 
matters necessary to give effect to the decision of a Tribunal. The Central 
Government expects party States to be responsible legal entities.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

38 
 
VIII. Clause 7 - Substitution of new Section for Section 9A 
Maintenance of Data Bank and information 
 
2.63 Clause 7 of the proposed Bill, 2017, which seeks for maintenance of Data Bank and 
information, reproduced below:  
“For Section 9A of the Principal Act, the following Section shall be substituted , 
namely:- 
9A. (1) The Central Government shall, for the purposes of maintaining a data bank 
and information system at the national level for each river basin, appoint or 
authorize an agency which shall maintain data relating to water resources, land, 
agriculture and such other matter, containing such particulars and in such manner, 
as may be prescribed.” 
 
(2) As and when required by the Central Government, the State Government shall 
make available the data relating to any of the matters referred to in sub-Section 
(1) to the Central Government or to the agency appointed or authorised under 
sub-Section (1) 
 
(3) The Central Government or the agency referred to in sub-Section (1) shall  
have powers to summon and verify any data, record or other relevant information 
received from the State Government.” 
 
2.64 The response of the States/UTs on Clause 7 of the proposed Bill along with the remarks 
of the Ministry thereto are reproduced below: 
Table 8: Comments / views expressed by the State Governments / UTs, on              
Clause 7, along with the response of the Ministry thereto. 
 
Comments of the State Governments/UTs Response of the MoWR, RD and GR 
Government of Rajasthan, Telangana, and 
Andhra Pradesh 
Accepted 
Government of Bihar 
Section 9A (1) 
Data management should be provided only to 
Government or public sector agency or data can 
be managed by IWRIS and SWRIS. 
Section 9A (2) 
The Centre should share its data bank with the 
State in mutual term. The State shall make 
available data as per requirement. 
Government of Kerala 
Section 9A(1) : 
As the name implies, the Inter State River Water 
Disputes Act is for resolving disputes concerning 
The recommendation regarding data 
bank as proposed under Section 9-A to 
be a Government functionary is 
acceptable. In 
fact, National Data Informatics Centre 
(NDIC) is proposed to be created under 
Nation Hydrology Project (NHP) under 
Central Government Plan Scheme and 
thus, Central Government would be the 
custodian. 

39 
 
interstate river waters. Hence it is to be clearly 
stated that the data bank proposed in Section 
9A(1) pertains specifically to that of interstate 
rivers and basins. Section 9A(1) shall be 
modified as follows: “The Central Government 
may, for the purpose of maintaining a data bank 
and information system at the national level for 
each interstate river basin/river, appoint or 
authorize an agency which shall maintain data 
relating to water resources, land, agriculture and 
such other matter of interstate river 
basins/rivers, containing such particulars and in 
such manner, as may be prescribed. 
Government of Odisha 
Section 9 (A) (1): Agency shall function  under 
MoWR. The States should have the 
discretionary power not to share such data, 
which may lead to public outrage/ law and order 
situation. 
Section 9 (B) (2):Same as above, as for Section 
9 (A) (1) 
Section 9 (B)(3):Same as above, as for Section 
9 (A)(1) 
Government of Madhya Pradesh 
The draft proposes for maintenance of data 
bank and information system by the 
Central Government. However, the provision 
makes it obligatory on States to 
collect, compile, maintain and provide data, and 
summon State Governments towards this end. 
This interferes with subjects allotted to the 
States under the State List in the Constitution. 
Summoning State Governments under the law is 
not a noble idea. It needs to be appreciated that 
States are not subordinate bodies to the Central 
Government. 
Government of Punjab 
Agency for maintenance of data bank as 
proposed under Section 9-A should be a 
Government functionary. The provision of sub 
Section 3, which gives the right to the Union 
Government to rework the States ’ data so that 
the Union’s data will become authoritative, is not 
acceptable. 
 
 

40 
 
2.65 On being asked by the Committee to elaborate upon the data monitoring mechanism 
and its verification process, the Ministry, in their written reply, have stated: 
“The water availability data is mostly collected by CWC and to a small level by 
States. The utilization data is mostly available with States. If there is any discrepancy 
in any data, it may result in non-equitable allocation of water. It is therefore very 
important that any authority which is responsible for data, should be able to ensure 
that any data which is to be utilized by Tribunal is authentic and correct. Hence thes e 
provisions have been kept in the Bill. The details of monitoring mechanism, etc are 
required to be prescribed in the ISRWD Rules as part of sub-ordinate legislation.” 
 
 
 
2.66 Informing the Committee regarding the overall supervisory Authority over the data Bank 
and information system the Ministry, in their written reply, further stated: 
“As per provisions of the Bill, Central government is required to appoint or authorize  
any agency for this purpose. The Central Government will authorize CWC, Central 
Ground Water Development Board, IITs, IISc, National Institute of Hydrology for this 
purpose.” 
 
2.67 When the Committee sought clarification as to whether all the disputes will be s ettled on 
the basis of empirical data to be provided by the Data Bank only or any other parameters wou ld 
be considered as well, the Ministry, in their written reply, submitted before the Committee: 
“The water disputes referred to the Tribunals are not purely technical matters but 
involve ascertaining validity of the inter-state water sharing agreements arrived at in 
the past on account of various factors such as being very old, change in the partie s 
due to territorial changes, being in conflict with other provisions of the Acts enacte d 
by the  Parliament etc. All Tribunals in the past have necessarily dealt with such 
issues. On technical matters the Tribunals are assisted by two or more Assessors - 
who are experts in the field of water resources. The data provided by the A uthorized 
agency will help in providing the just Awards acceptable to party States.” 
 
 
2.68 Responding to the concern raised by the Committee regarding Water Disputes arising 
due to non-availability of correct water availability data, the Ministry, in t heir post-evidence 
reply, have submitted: 
“The water disputes arise due to various factors; important among them being 
apprehension by one State about executive and  legislative  actions being taken or 
proposed to be taken by other State in alleged violation of provision of existing inter-

41 
 
state agreement or decision of the Tribunal or detrimental to the existing projects of 
that State. Further disputes arise due to reorganisation of an existing State into two 
or more States, due to extensive territorial changes brought about by general 
reorganisation of States. Also aspirations of existing basin States for undertaking 
developmental activities in the basin is also a cause for water disputes.  
However, to adjudicate a river water dispute, the importance of correct availability of 
water data cannot be overemphasized. Mindful of this, a provision exists in the Bill 
(Clause 9A) where an agency will be authorised to maintain data bank and 
information system relating to each river basin including water availability data. It is 
proposed to update water availability data every 10 years.” 
 
 
2.69 In this regard, the former Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources, River Development 
and Ganga Rejuvenation, during the evidence held on 30.06.2016, also informed the 
Committee: 
“Disputes are always on the quantum of water sharing. Whatever be the yield of the 
river, unless we have correct data of rainfall, the contribution of each catchment  in 
the river, the geomorphology, the hydrology and the yield, we cannot do it. The DRC 
will have all these data. And taking into account the yield and the contribution by 
different States, once it passes order, the quantity will significant ly get reduced. 
Thereafter, the Tribunal will have only a small role to adjudicate. The most impor tant 
thing in this entire process is that as to how you collect data which is transparent an d 
which is irrefutable. What has been provided for in the amendment is the online 
collection of data so that nobody disputes. So, data collection becomes the most 
important thing.  
 
One very important point has been raised is that we do not have a River Basin 
Authority today. We have the River Board Act of 1956 which unfortunately is 
recommendatory in nature. Today, what the Secretary is saying and what has been 
supported by Shri Mahapatra is to give a legal status to that so that it is abl e to 
implement the Award  and it is also able to resolve disputes at the local level.” 
 
 
2.70 Adding to this, the Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and 
Ganga Rejuvenation, during the evidence held on 30.06.2016, submitted before the Committee: 
“We need to work on River Basin Authorities.  There should be a River Basin 
Authority, which takes care of disputes at the local level.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 

42 
 
IX. Clause 8 – Substitution of new Section for Section 10 
Terms and Conditions of service of Members and Assessors 
2.71 Clause 8 of the proposed Bill, 2017, which provides for terms and conditions of service 
of Members and assessors, reads as follows: 
“For Section 10 of the principal Act, the following Section shall be substituted, 
namely:- 
10. The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of 
service of, the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, other Members and assessors 
shall be such as may be prescribed.” 
 
2.72 When asked by the Committee for the criteria to be followed in prescribing the Salary 
and Allowances for the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, other Members and assessors, the 
Ministry, in their written reply, have stated: 
“This is required to be provided under ISRWD Rules (sub -ordinate legislation). 
Presently service rules for Chairman and Members provide that if they have retir ed 
from Supreme Court, rules applicable to Supreme Court Judges would apply. If they 
have retired from High Court, the rules applicable to High Court Judge would apply. 
In case of Assessors, rules applicable to Government of India Officers of equivalent 
rank would be applicable. The same is proposed to be continued.” 
 
X. Clause 9 – Substitution of new Section 12 and 12A for Section 12
 
Dissolution of Bench 
2.73 Clause 9 of the proposed Bill, 2 017, which provides for ‘Dissolution of Bench’ , reads as 
follows: 
“For Section 12 of the principal Act, the following Sections shall be substituted, 
namely:- 
“12. (1) After any water dispute assigned to a Bench of the Tribunal is adjudicated 
and it submits its decision or Report , the Central Government shall, on the 
recommendations of the Chairperson, dissolve that Bench. 
(2) Upon dissolution of the Bench under sub-Section (1), the Members of that 
Bench (excluding Chairperson) shall vacate their respective offices: 
Provided that where a Member of a Bench is also a Member of another Bench, 
such Member shall continue as a Member of such other Bench.” 
 
 

43 
 
2.74 As regards the aforesaid Clause 9 of the proposed Bill, 2017 the Ministry have informed 
that it has been accepted by all the States/UTs. 
2.75 The Committee desired to know, if the same Member is also the Member of another 
Bench then how will he/she be able to do to justify the term of time allocation to each Bench . 
On this issue,  the Ministry, in their written reply, submitted:  
“It is felt that in case of Members, the adjudication of only one dispute leave them 
with lot of spare time. Generally hearing takes place only for 3 to 5 days in a month of 
one dispute. As in Courts, they can be involved in more than one case (Disputes).” 
 
XI. Clause 10 – Amendment of Section 13
 
2.76 Clause 10 seeks to amend Section 13 of the Principal Act and it reads as follows: 
“In Section 13 of the Principal Act, in Sub-Section (2), for Clauses (a) to (f), the following 
Clauses shall be substituted, namely:- 
(a) the form and the manner in which a complaint as to any water  dispute may be 
made by any State Government under Section 3; 
(b) the other matters, and the manner of providing for distribution of water during 
stress situations arising from shortage in the availability of water under sub 
Section (2) of Section 5; 
(c) the other matters in respect of which the Tribunal may be vested with the 
powers of a civil court under Clause (d) of sub-Section (1) of Section 9; 
(d) the procedure to be followed by the Tribunal under sub-Section (4) of Sec tion 
9; 
(e) the other matters in respect of which data is to be maintained, the particulars  
thereof, and the manner of maintaining such data under sub-Section (1) of Section 
9A; 
(f) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of 
service of, the Chairperson under Section 10; 
(g) the allowances or fee payable to, and other   terms and conditions of service 
of, the Vice-Chairperson, other Members and assessors under Section 10; 
(h) the manner in which the staff of the dissolved Bench shall be dealt with under 
sub-Section (1) of Section 12A; 
(i) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.” 
 
2.77 The reason put forward by the Ministry for making changes / Amendment vide Clause 
10 is that this provision has been kept for effective implementation of new provi sions proposed 
in the Bill. 

44 
 
 
2.78 The response of the States/UTs on Clause 10 along with the remarks of the Ministry 
thereto are reproduced below: 
Table 9: Comments / views of the State Governments/UTs, on Clause 10, along with 
the response of the Ministry thereto. 
 
Comments of the State Governments/UTs Response of the MoWR, RD and GR 
Government of Rajasthan 
Accepted 
Government of Bihar 
Clause 13 (2) (h) – need to be discussed 
Government of Kerala 
Section 13(1) may be modified as follows for 
definiteness: “The Central Government, after 
consultation with the State Government, shall 
notify the Award  in the Official Gazette and 
make rules to carry out the purpose of the Act 
within a period of six months from the date of 
receipt of the Tribunal Award . 
Government of Telangana 
Section 13 (2) – Acceptable 
The experience in River Board Act, 1956 
that River Basin organization be created 
after consultation with States is very bad. 
So far no RBO could be created. Hence, 
the discussion/ consultation with the 
State Government before officially 
notifying the Award  will never reach to 
its logical end if conflicting views of the 
States emerged. Hence, not agreeable. 
 
 
XII. Clause 11 – Substitution of new Section for Section 14
 
Matters relating to the Ravi and Beas Water Tribunal (RBWT) 
2.79 Clause 11 of the proposed Bill, 2017, which is related to the Ravi and Beas Water 
Tribunal, reads: 
“For Section 14 of the principal Act, the following Section shall be substituted, 
namely:- 
14. The Ravi and Beas Waters Tribunal constituted prior to the date of 
commencement of the Inter-State River Water Disputes (Amendment) Act, 2017 
shall stand dissolved and the water disputes pending adjudication before it shall 
stand transferred to the Tribunal:  
Provided that the concerned Bench shall proceed to deal with such dispute from 
the stage at which it was so transferred.” 
 
2.80 While noting that as per Clause 3 of the proposed Bill, 2017 all the existing Tribu nals 
would stand dissolved and the Water Disputes pending adjudication before such existing 
Tribunals would be transferred to the Tribunal, the Committee desired to know t he reasons for 

45 
 
having a separate Clause (ii) for the Ravi and Beas Water Tribunal.  To this, the Mi nistry, in 
their written reply have stated as under: 
“The Ravi Beas Water Tribunal (RBWT) was not established as per usual provisions 
of Inter Sate Disputes Act wherein the Tribunals are established after requests are 
received from the State Government(s). But it was established to give effect to 
Punjab Settlement. And accordingly, a separate provision was inserted in year 1980 
as Clause No. 14 of the Act. The same has been continued and accordingly finding 
mention in the present Bill also.” 
 
2.81 When asked to clarify the exact position of Ravi and Beas Water Tribunal (RBWT) an d 
the Award  given by it, the Ministry, in their written reply, have submitted before the Committee 
as follows: 
“RBWT has given its Report and decision under Section 5(2) in April, 1987. 
Clarification/explanation sought from the Tribunal under Section 5(3) of the said Act 
by the party States. The Report on the same is yet to be given. Presidential 
Reference 1 of 2004 was made on the Punjab Termination of Agreements Act, 2004. 
The Hon’ble Supreme Cour t has pronounced the judgement on Presidential 
Reference in negative. Further, Government of Haryana has filed IA No. 6 of 2016  in 
OS No. 6 of 1996 in the matter. The matter is sub-judice.” 
 
 
2.82 Adding further on the Ravi Beas Water Tribunal (RBWT), the Ministry, in their w ritten 
reply, stated: 
“The Ravi Beas Water Tribunal (RBWT) was established to give effect to Punjab 
Settlement, where one of the beneficiary State was Rajasthan though it is not a 
strictly a riparian State. Though Ravi and Beas rivers are not mutual tributaries to  
each other, but tributaries to a larger river Indus which is considered to have its 
drainage area in the State of Rajasthan. After enactment of amended ISRWDT Act, 
the dispute pending before RBWT shall also stand transferred to a Bench of the 
Tribunal. And if we accept the change proposed by Punjab that ‘party States’ be 
replaced by ‘riparian States’, a doubt may be raised about claims of Rajasthan under 
RBWT Award .” 
 
2.83 The response of the States / UTs on Clause 11 along with the Mini stry’s remark s 
thereto are reproduced as under: 
 
 

46 
 
Table 10 : Comments / views of the State Governments/UTs, on Clause 11, along 
with the response of the Ministry thereto. 
 
Comments of the State Governments/UTs Response of the MoWR,RD and GR 
Government of Bihar, Telangana, Andhra 
Pradesh 
No comments to offer 
Government of Kerala 
Substitution of new Section for Section 14: 
Time limit for finalizing the Award  by the new 
Tribunal constituted, to which the pending 
adjudication as per the Inter State River Wate r 
Disputes Act 2015 is entrusted, shall be 
specified. 
Government of Rajasthan 
Section 14 – In general, the amendment 
may be accepted but in case of Ravi-Beas, the 
Tribunal has given its decision for sharing of 
water among partner States. 
States have already given their objections 
on the decision of the Tribunal. 
Meanwhile, Punjab Termination of Agreements 
Act, 2004 passed by Punjab 
Assembly has been referred to the Hon ‟ble 
Supreme Court. The bench of this Tribunal 
cannot have further hearings and give final 
decision. Since the Ravi Beas Tribunal has 
already given its decision, therefore, there is no 
need of the separate Bench for this issue. The 
Ravi-Beas Tribunal should continue and on 
other issues, the amendment may be accepted. 
Government of Punjab 
The State of Punjab supports the dissolution of 
Ravi-Beas Waters Tribunal. 
However, the concerned Bench of the Tribunal 
under the amended Bill should consider the 
matter under fresh Terms of 
Reference and not from the stage at which it 
was left by the Ravi-Beas Waters 
Tribunal. 
The proposal/suggestion of Govt. of 
Rajasthan/Punjab is not agreeable. The 
dissolution of Ravi and Beas Water 
Tribunal is being done to transfer the 
disputes to a new Bench, as no 
Chairman and Members are currently 
there, further no new terms of reference 
can be given to Ravi and Beas Bench 
till the Ravi and Beas Water Tribunal is 
closed u/s 12 of the ISRWD Act, 1956. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

47 
 
XIII. FINANCIAL IMPLICATION 
2.84 The ‘Financial Memorandum’  as provided in ‘The ISRWD (Amendment) Bill, 2017 is as 
follows: 
“Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to substitute new Sections 4, 4A, 4B, 4C and 4D for 
Section 4 of the Inter-State River Water Disputes Act, 1956.  The proposed Section 4 
seeks to establish a single standing Inter-State River Water Disputes Tribunal with 
multiple Benches, which shall initially be constituted by merging of existing five 
Tribunals.  As existing premises with necessary furniture are already available, no 
new premises or furniture are required for establishing the office of the new Standi ng 
Tribunal.  Therefore, no non-recurring expenditure would be involved. 
 
It is proposed to establish a single standing Tribunal with multiple Benches, instead 
of multiple Tribunals, by merging existing five Tribunals.  The new Tribunal shall 
consist of one Chairperson, one Vice-Chairperson and not more than six Members .  
Further, after the new Tribunal is established, the 107 sanctioned posts in the 
existing Tribunals are proposed to be reduced to 80 posts.  Therefore, on 
establishment of proposed new Tribunal, the estimated annual recurring expenditure 
is likely to be reduced from existing Rs.8 Crore to Rs.5.5 Crore, thereby saving 
Rs.2.5 Crore per annum. 
The Bill, if enacted, therefore, does not involve any recurring or non-recurring 
expenditure.” 
 
 
2.85 As regards the financial implications caused due to ‘The ISRWD (Amendment) Bill, 
2017’, the Ministry during their evidence on 16.06.2017 submitted before the Committee as 
follows: 
“(i)  The existing accommodation / infrastructure / vehicles of the Tribunals is 
proposed to be utilised for New Proposed Standing Tribunal. 
(ii) Existing 107 sanctioned posts of Tribunals will come down to 80. 
(iii) There would be overall saving in proposed set-up. ” 
 

48 
 
 
Part II 
Observations / Recommendations 
Genesis of the Bill 
1. ‘The Inter-State River Water Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 2017’ (The ISRWD 
Bill, 2017) was introduced in Lok Sabha on 14.03.2017 and the Speaker, Lok Sabha  
referred the said Bill to the Standing Committee on Water Resources on 24.05.20 17 for 
detailed examination and Report .  The proposed Bill seeks to amend ‘The Inter -State 
River Water Disputes (ISRWD) Act, 1956’ by addressing some of its drawbacks viz.            
(i) Absence of upper age limit for the Chairman and other Members of a Tribunal             
(ii) Absence of strict time limit for conclusion of any Tribunal’s work . i.e. under Section 
5(3) of the Act, there is no maximum time limit upto which Central Government can 
extend the term of the Tribunal for giving a further Report for explanation and  guidance 
(iii) Absence of time limit for publishing the Report of a Tribunal  by t he Government 
under section 6 of the Act (iv) Considerable time is taken for a Tribunal to establish itself 
and start work  (v) The tenures of the Tribunals tend to get extended indefinitely for 
sundry reasons (vi) On occurrence of a vacancy matter referred to the T ribunal will be 
taken up by the Tribunal after the vacancy is filled leading to considerable delay an d                
(vii) No thrust on data collection of yield, its correlation with rainfall, exis ting use, their 
efficiency levels as also there being no provision for e-flows and contribution of a state 
to Hydrology.     
The Committee note that the proposed ISRWD Bill, 2017 seeks to streamline the 
adjudication of inter-State river water disputes and make the present legal and 
Institutional architecture robust.  The Bill proposes to introduce a mechanism to resol ve 

49 
 
the water disputes amicably by negotiations through a Disputes Resolution Committee 
before such dispute is referred to the Tribunal.  The Bill also seeks to provide for a 
single standing Tribunal (with multiple Benches) instead of multiple Tribunals and the 
proposed Tribunal shall consist of one Chairperson, one Vice-Chairperson and not more 
than six Members.     The term of office of the Chairperson is five years or till she/he 
attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier, and the term of offi ce of Vice-
Chairperson and other Members of the Tribunal, shall be co-terminus with adjudication 
of the water disputes.  The Bill also proposes that there shall be the post of Assessors to 
provide technical support to the Tribunal who shall be appointed from amongst experts 
serving in the Central Water Engineering Service and shall not be below the rank of 
Chief Engineer.  The total time period for adjudication of a water dispute by the T ribunal 
has been fixed at a maximum of four and half years and the decision of the Bench of the 
Tribunal shall be final and binding on the States concerned and removing requirement of 
publication of its decision in the Official Gazette.  The Bill also seeks to provide for 
transparent data collection system at the National level for each river basin an d for this 
purpose, an agency to maintain databank and information system shall be appointed  or 
authorized by the Central Government. 
The Committee note that before introducing the ISRWD Bill, 2017 in Lok Sabha, 
the Ministry have circulated the Draft Cabinet Note to the Central Ministries concer ned 
and to all States/UTs for seeking their comments.  The Ministry have also sent it  to PMO, 
NITI Aayog, etc. and have got it vetted by the Ministry of Law and Justice.  I t was 
approved by the Minister of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation and finally after modifications the Cabinet Note was approved on 
07.02.2017 and then introduced in Lok Sabha on 21.03.2017.   

50 
 
Against this backdrop, the Committee, while appreciating the initiatives and 
efforts taken by the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation to bring the ISWRD Bill, 2017, recommend the Ministry to be very 
meticulous in finalising the ISRWD Bill, 2017 particularly because it is envisaging a 
National Tribunal for resolving all the Inter-State River Water disputes. The Minis try 
should also incorporate the changes/modifications suggested by this Committee and 
take care of the lacunae observed and highlighted in the following paragraphs of this 
Report so as to make the Bill fool-proof. The Committee would like to be appr ised about 
the changes incorporated and desire to have the copy of the final modified ISRWD Bill, 
2017 before it is laid again in the House. 
 
 
Clause 2:
 Amendment of Section 2  
 
2. The Committee note that Clause 2 of the proposed ISRWD (Amendment) Bill, 2017 
seeks to amend Section 2 of the Principal Act of 1956 by substituting / ins erting the 
definitions for (a) Chairperson, (aa) existing Tribunal, (ab) Member, (ac) noti fication, (ad) 
prescribed, (b) Tribunal and (ba) Vice-Chairperson.  The Committee also note that t he 
proposed Bill contains both the terms ‘Chairperson’ and ‘Chairmen’.  Further, the 
Committee have been informed that while offering its comment on this Clause, the  
Government of Punjab has suggested for clearly defining the term ‘Inter -State River’ so 
as to cover only the Riparian States i.e. the States through the territor ies of which the 
river flows.  The Committee note that, responding to the view of Government of Punjab, 
the Ministry have stated that while the position of the State of Punjab regarding 
applicability of the term only to the Riparian States may not be agreed to because  as on 

51 
 
date, except for the Ravi Beas Water Tribunal (RBWT), the party States  to any of the 
existing Tribunals are Basin States only. With regard to the usage of two different  terms 
for the same post the Committee recommend the Ministry to ensure usage of s ame and 
uniform terminology throughout the proposed Bill as well as to use gender neutral ter ms 
in all the places possible.  For instance, the term ‘Chairperson’ should be used 
throughout the Bill instead of the term ‘Chairmen’ which has been used in Clause 3 of  
the Bill.  The Committee also recommend the Ministry to have a relook at all the 
definitions and the terminologies used in the proposed Bill so as to have an impeccable  
Bill leaving no vagueness either in the usage or definition of the terms. 
 
 
Clause 3:
 Substitution of new Sections 4, 4A, 4B, 4C and 4D for Section 4  
Clause 3 of the ISRWD (Amendment) Bill, 2017 provides for (i) Establish ment of 
Inter-State River Water Disputes Tribunal, (ii) Dispute Resolution Committe e, (iii) 
Composition of Tribunal (iv) Term of Office and (v) Benches of Tribunal by subst itution 
of new Sections 4, 4A, 4B, 4C and 4D for Section  4 of the Principal Act.  Each of  the new 
Section proposed under Clause 3 have been commented upon in the following 
paragraphs. 
 
Establishment of Inter-State River Water Disputes Tribunal
 
 
3. The Committee note that Clause 3 of the Bill, 2017 seeks for establishment of 
Inter-State River Water Tribunal. On and from the date of establishment of the new 
Tribunal, all the existing Tribunals shall stand dissolved and the water disputes pending 
adjudication before such existing Tribunals shall stand transferred to the new Tribunal.   
The Committee also note that, under this Clause, the Chairperson and other members of 

52 
 
the existing Tribunals who have attained the age of Seventy years, as on the date of 
commencement of the Inter-State River Water Disputes (Amendment) Act, 2017, shall  
cease to hold office on the expiry of three months from the date of such commencement.  
The Ministry, in this regard, during deliberations have proposed to keep age limit  for 
Chairperson as 70 years while for the Vice-Chairperson and other Members as 67 years 
so as to have harmony of the provisions under the Finance Act, 2017.  Further,  with 
regard to the three month time given for the Chairperson and Members to leave the 
office, the Committee have been informed that  they are expected to participa te in the 
transition from existing set-up to the proposed set-up wherein records etc. can be 
transferred from the existing Tribunals to the proposed stand alone Tribunal.  As 
regards the office that the Chairmen and other Members of the existing Trib unals will 
continue to hold during the three month transition period the Committee note that t hey 
will hold office on notional basis in the new Tribunal.  The Committee, however, do no t 
agree with this contention of the Ministry.  According to them, it would not serve any 
public interest by retaining, even notionally, the Chairpersons and the Members of th e 
existing tribunals, which would stand dissolved on and from the date of the 
establishment of the new Tribunal, who otherwise do not have the requisite qualification  
/ eligibility for holding offices in the changed set up.  Under the Inter-State River Water 
Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 2017 , the Ministry have proposed for having a post of 
‘Administrative Officer’ to act as the Secretary of the Tribunal .  With the dissolving of the 
existing tribunals, their Records and properties would become property of the ne w 
Tribunal and a transition from the present to the new dispensation is expected to be 
smooth which would be facilitated by the Administrative Officer of the new Tribunal.  The  
Committee, therefore, recommend that provision for 03 months ‘notional’ retention of 

53 
 
the non-eligible Chairperson, Members of the existing Tribunals should be deleted f rom 
the Bill and Clause No. 3 of the Bill in this regard modified suitably.  Furthe r, regarding 
limiting of age for Chairperson as 70 years and for the Vice-Chairperson and other 
Members as 67 years, the Committee endorse the change proposed by the Ministry and 
recommend the Ministry to adhere to the proposed amendments to the new Section 4 
under Clause 3.   
 
Clause 3 (cont:)
 
Disputes Resolution Committee (DRC) 
 
4. The proposed Section 4A ( 1) to ( 4) under Clause 3 of the Bill, 2017 envisages a 
‘Disputes Resolution Committee’ (DRC), to resolve the water disputes amicably by 
negotiations, before such dispute is referred to the Tribunal.  With regar d to the 
composition of DRC, the Committee note that the proposed Section 4A (1) entails that as 
and when any request under Section 3 is received from any State Government in respect 
of any water dispute, the Central Government shall set up a Disputes Resolution  
Committee, consisting of members from such relevant fields, as it deems fit, for 
resolving the dispute amicably. The Committee are also given to understand that the 
composition of DRC will be provided under the ISRWD Rules - which would be framed as 
part of Sub-ordinate Legislation under the proposed ISRWD Act, 2017 .  Considering that 
this provision has been kept for carrying out effective negotiations through Disput e 
Resolution Committee, which would act as first tier of dispute resolution, the Committee  
are of the firm opinion that the composition of the Disputes Resolution Committ ee needs 
to be prescribed in the Act itself so that no lacuna is left at this initial st age of dispute 
resolution.  For this, the Committee recommend that the Disputes Resolution Commit tee 

54 
 
should consist of a Chairperson and three Members (as experts) along with one Member 
each from the States who are party to the dispute. The Chairperson can be a 
serving/retired Bureaucrat not below the Rank of Secretary preferably having e xperience 
in the relevant fields or the Water sector. The four Members can be  (i ) One expert from 
Social Science sector, but not below the rank of Engineer- in-Chief,  (ii) One expert from 
technical background working/having experience in the Water sector (iii) One exper t / 
eminent person from civil society, working in the Water sector and (iv) One member 
each to be nominated by respective States who are party to the dispute.   For the sake of 
transparency, the Committee also recommend that  findings of the DRCs should be 
brought invariably in the public domain through Electronic and Print Media and for this 
purpose, if required a new Clause can be added under the Section mentioned ahead. 
 
 
5. The Committee note that under the proposed Section 4A(4), if any water dispute 
cannot be settled by negotiations then it shall be referred by the Central Gove rnment, by  
a Notification, to the Tribunal for its adjudication within a period of three months from 
the date of receipt of the Report under Sub-section (2).  With regard to the time period 
for referring the dispute to the Tribunal, the Committee are of the view that in cas e the 
water dispute cannot be settled by negotiations, then, the time period of t hree months  
may be reduced to one month.  Further, taking into cognizance the experience of 
Disputes Resolution Committee so far in resolving Inter-State River water disputes, 
wherein many Inter-State river water sharing matters have been settled by 
negotiations/agreements like Bansagar, Betwa and Ken rivers, etc including the recent 
case of the Sone River Dispute where negotiations were successfully coordinated and 
there was no need to set-up Tribunal, the Committee appreciate its role and significa nce 

55 
 
as the first tier of dispute resolution and recommend the Ministry to cont inue putting 
efforts for minimal referral of disputes to the Tribunal.  Besides, the  Committee,   while 
appreciating the fact  that the basic principles of Helsinki / Berlin Rules ca n guide the 
Disputes Resolution Committee while settling the disputes, recommend for foll owing 
other well establish National and International best practices for resolving th e water 
disputes. 
 
Clause 3 (Cont:)
 
Composition of Tribunal 
6. The Clause 3 of the ISRWD B ill, 2017, which provides for the ‘Composition of the 
Tribunal’ by substitution of new Section 4B, states that subject to the provision of  
Section 12, the Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and not more  
than six members to be nominated by the Chief Justice of India from amongst persons 
who at the time of such nomination are Judges of the Supreme Court or of a High  Court.  
On being specifically enquired by the Committee about the reason for making only one 
person i.e. Chief Justice of India as the sole Authority for nominating the Cha irperson, 
Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the Tribunal, the Committee have been 
informed that this provision also exists in the existing ISRWD Act, 1956.  However, the  
Ministry have also informed the Committee that they are open to having a ‘Collegium’ for 
nominating them.  In addition to the Composition of the Tribunal, the Ministry have as 
well proposed for having a post of ‘Administrative Officer’ to act as the Secretary of  the 
Tribunal and who would be not below the rank of Joint Secretary.  The proposed 
‘Administrative Officer’ would act as the bridge between the Ministry of Water 
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation and the new Tribunal and 

56 
 
she/he shall be responsible for all the administrative and non-judicial matters to be dealt 
with by the Tribunal. It is also proposed that the ‘Administrative Officer’ will be  
supported by adequate administrative staff provided by the Ministry and the fu nctions, 
powers and appointment of the Administrative Officer shall be elaborated in t he Rules 
framed under the ISRWD Act, 2017.  The Committee endorse the proposal of the Ministry  
for having an Administrative Officer, not below the rank of Joint Secret ary, Ministry of 
Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, to act as a bridg e 
between the Ministry and the Tribunal. Further, while noting the provisions of the Bil l, 
2017 for nominating the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members, the 
Committee are of the well considered opini on that having a ‘Panel  / Collegium’ for 
nominating / selecting the Chairperson / Vice-Chairperson / Members of the Tri bunal 
would not only make the Tribunal more comprehensive and inclusive in nature but also 
give it a look of a balanced body.  The Committee, therefore, recommend for having a 
‘Collegium of four Members’, for selecting the Chairperson/Vice -Chairperson/members 
of the Tribunal, comprising of (i) The Prime Minister or his nominee (ii) The Chi ef Justice 
of India or his nominee from Judges of Supreme Court,  (iii) The Leader of Opposi tion 
and (iv) The Minister of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation. 
The Committee also recommend following as the Composition of the new Tribunal: 
“The Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson, Vi ce-Chairperson and not more 
than six members wherein the Chairperson would be the sitting Supreme Court 
Judge to be nominated by the Chief Justice of India and the Vice-Chairperson 
would be a sitting Supreme Court Judge/High Court Judge, also to be nominated 
by Chief Justice of India.  The other six members shall have expertise in the 
Water sector.  Out of the six members at least 3 should have sufficient  
experience / be an expert from water related field and remaining three members 
of the Tribunal can be (i) a senior Bureaucrat, having expertise/experience i n 

57 
 
water related field (ii) an expert from social sciences background and (iii) an 
expert on Hydrology. 
 
 
Clause 3 (Cont:)
 
Benches of Tribunal 
7. The proposed new Section 4D (1), under Clause 3 of the ISRWD Bill, 2017 states 
that subject to the provision of the Act, the jurisdiction of the Tribunal may be exercised 
by the Benches. It also states that the Chairperson may constitute a Bench with t hree 
Members out of which the Senior-most Member shall preside over the Bench prov ided 
that a Member of a Bench may also be a Member of another Bench.  Further, under                  
Section 4D (2) the Benches of the Tribunal shall ordinarily sit at New Delhi or at such 
other places as the Chairperson may decide.  The Committee note that the staff of the 
proposed Tribunal has been reduced from 107 (the combined Staff Strength of the 5  
Tribunals) to 80 (the proposed staff of the Tribunal) and this would cater to the 
requirement of the Benches to be formed under the new Tribunal.  On seeking 
clarification from the Ministry regarding sharing of staff of the Tribunal /  Benches in 
case the multiple Benches come into existence simultaneously, the Committee have 
been informed that in case more than 5 Benches are required at one point in time,  then, 
the additional staff per Bench may be required which will include two Assessors, one 
Executive Engineer and two Private Secretary. While appreciating a slimmer staff 
strength proposed for the new Tribunal, the Committee recommend that sufficient staff 
should be provided for proper data collection, management and analysis.  Further, with  
respect to the Composition of the Benches of the Tribunal, the Committee endors e the 
new Section 4D(1) which states that the Chairperson may constitute a Bench with three  
members, out of which the Senior-most member shall preside over the Bench. 

58 
 
 
 
Clause 4 – Amendment of Section 5
 
8. The Committee note that Clause 4 of the ISRWD Bill, 2017 seeks to amend 
Section 5 – which covers ‘Adjudication of Water disputes’ under the ISRWD Act, 1956.  
The Committee note that in the existing ISRWD Act, 1956 under Section 5 (2) a Tribunal 
investigates the matter referred to it and forward its Report to the Ce ntral Government 
within a period of three years and in case the decision cannot be given for unavoidable 
reasons, then, the Central Government may extend the period not ex ceeding two years. 
Further, if the decision of the Tribunal is again referred to the Tribunal  u nder               
Section 5(3) the Tribunal may forward to the Central Government a further repo rt within 
one year from the date of such reference - provided that the period of one year within 
which the Tribunal may forward its Report to the Central Government may be extended 
by the Central Government, for such further period as it considers necessary. Thus, t he 
Committee note that under Section 5(2) of the 1956 Act, a Tribunal is r equired to give its 
Report within a maximum period of six years. Nevertheless, under the provisions 
thereto, the Central Government may extend the period indefinitely, till the Report is 
submitted. It is therefore, apparent that no strict time limit was there for conclusion of 
adjudication by a Tribunal under the 1956 Act .  The Committee further note that in ‘The 
ISRWD Bill, 2017’ the aforesaid period has been reduced to two years and one year 
respectively and under the new Section 5(3), on further referral the Cent ral Government 
may extend the period for one year, further extendable not beyond six months.  Whil e 
noting and appreciating the effort of the Ministry to reduce the time period f or 
adjudication to four and half years, the Committee  find that effectively it would take six 
years (DRC 1 year and 6 months and Tribunal 4 years and 6 months) before the final 

59 
 
verdict is given on a dispute.  The Committee are of the opinion that even six years ’ 
period is too long er under the given circumstances, especially when the DRCs would 
have already deliberated on the issues extensively and their Report (materials on 
record)  will be the very basis on which the Tribunal would adjudicate upon the 
dispute(s).  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the time period for adjudication 
of Water disputes by the Tribunal should further be reduced to a maximum of two years.  
Further, the Committee are of the firm opinion that the findings / conclusion o f the 
Tribunal / Benches cannot be classified as ‘Report’ as has been done in the Bill, since i t 
is the culmination of a judicial process - which has to come out in the form of an ‘Order’ 
or ‘Award’.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the expression ‘Report’ should 
be substituted with a suitable judicial word / terminology which would bring the decision 
of the Tribunal / Benches o n the same footing as the decree of  a Court.  The Committee 
also recommend the Ministry to ensure timely implementation of the decision / Award 
once it is made. 
 
 
Clause 5 – Substitution of new Section 5A and 5B for 5A
 
Appointment of Assessors 
9. The Committee note that for the appointment of Assessors, new Sections 5A and 
5B will be substituted for Section 5A of the ISRWD Act, 1956.  The proposed Se ction 
5A(1) states that the Central Government may appoint two experts, serving in the 
Central Water Engineering Service not below the rank of Chief Engineer, as Assessors 
for each water dispute to advise the Bench in the proceedings before it.  Section 5A(2) 
provides for the term of Assessors appointed under sub-Section (1) which shall be co -

60 
 
terminus with the adjudication of the dispute and they shall cease to be Assessor s after 
the dispute is adjudicated and the final Report is forwarded to the Central Government. 
The Committee note that some of the States Governments like Bihar, Andhra Pradesh, 
and Kerala have accepted this Clause.  However, State of Kerala and Rajasthan have 
stated that Assessors should not belong to the States which are party to the disput es,  
whereas the Government of Karnataka has stated that the Assessors should be 
appointed in consultation with the concerned States.  The Committee, while appreciating 
the role to be played by the ‘Assessors’ as envisaged in the Bill in advising the Tribunal 
in the proceedings, feel that the Ministry/Government should be cautious in appointing 
the Assessors so as to maintain the trust and faith of the States in the adjudication.  The 
Committee also recommend that to avoid conflict of interest, the ‘Assessors’ should not 
belong to the States which are party to a particular dispute. 
 
Clause 5 (Cont:)
 
Filling of vacancies, temporary, absence, etc 
10. The Committee note that the Clause 5 pr ovides for new Section 5B for ‘Filling of 
vacancies, temporary, absence, etc. and Section 5B(1) states that if a vacancy (other 
than a temporary absence) occurs in the office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson or 
any other Member of the Tribunal, such vacancy shall be filled by a person to be  
nominated in this behalf by Chief Justice of India in accordance with Section 4B.  
Further, if the office of the Chairperson falls vacant due to death / resignat ion / 
otherwise, then, the Vice-Chairperson will act as the Chairperson until the date f or 
nominating a new Chairperson.  With regard to the timeline for replacing the tempor ary 
Member with that of appointing a regular of permanent Member, the Ministry informed  
that they are open to the suggestion for person being nominated by the Ministry of Law 

61 
 
and Justice for filling up the vacancy within three months. The Committee, in this 
regard, recommend that even for filling up the vacancies (other than a temporar y 
absence) of the Chairperson / Vice-Chairperson or any other Member s, the same Panel / 
Collegium (as suggested at Para 6 of Part II of this Report), which had initially nominated 
/ selected  them, should also select / nominate the persons for filling up of such 
vacancies.  The Committee further recommend that it should be done on Top Priori ty 
basis in order to ensure that no time is wasted in the process.  Hence, instead of waiting 
for three months for filling up the vacancies, the Committee recommend that it should 
be done within one month of the post falling vacant. 
 
Removal / Resignation of Chairperson and other Members of Tribunal and Benches
 
 
11. The Committee note that “The ISRWD (Amendment) Bill, 2017” does not contain 
any provision regarding the ‘Resignation / Removal’ of Chairperson and other M embers 
of the Tribunal and the Benches to be formed under it.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend th at the Ministry should add a provision in the Bill to address the issue.  
The Panel / Collegium which initially selected / nominated them should also be vested 
with the powers for such removals whenever the situation warranted so.   The Committee 
feel that this Clause holds immense significance in addressing the cases of ill-he alth / 
incapacity / non-performance of the Chairperson / Vice-Chairperson / Member (s) of the 
Tribunal / Benches.  
 
 
 
 
 

62 
 
Clause 6 – Substitution of new Section for Section 6 
Decision of Bench of Tribunal binding on parties 
 
12. The Committee note that Clause 6 of the Bill, 2017, provides for subst ituting 
Section 6 of the Principal Act (ISWRD Act, 1956) wit h a new Section 6, which entails that 
the decision of the Bench of the Tribunal shall be final and binding on the parties to the 
dispute and shall have the same force as an order or decree of the Supreme Court .  
About the provision to deal with the situation where the States / UTs fail to abide by the 
award of the Bench / Tribunal, the Ministry have informed that they can be persu aded to 
do so. Besides, the Party States are expected to abide by the Awards or else it amounts 
to breakdown of the Constitutional Machinery and there are provisions in the 
constitution to deal with such eventuality.  The Committee note that thoug h          
Section 262 (2) of the Constitution debars the Supreme Court or any other Court  to 
exercise jurisdiction in respect of any such dispute or complaint under ISRWD Act, yet  
the Supreme Court has been exercising its jurisdiction under Articles 131 (Original 
Jurisdiction) and 136 (Grant SLP) of the Constitution for considering the matte rs related 
to Awards given on inter-State river water disputes.    The Committee, therefore, endorse 
this Clause - which seek giving finality to the Award of the Tribunal so as to avo id the 
endless litigation on the disputes.   However, the Committee would refrain from 
interpreting any Constitutional Provision in this regard. 
 
 
 
 

63 
 
Clause 7 – Substitution of new Section for Section 9A 
Maintenance of Data Bank and Information 
13. The Committee note that the Clause 7 of the proposed Bill, 2017, which seeks t o 
substitute Section 9A(1) to (3) for Section 9 of Principal Act, prov ides that the Central 
Government shall, for the purposes of maintaining a data bank and information system 
at the national level for each river basin, appoint or authorize an agency which shall 
maintain data relating to water resources, land, agriculture and such other matter, 
containing such particulars and in such manner, as may be prescribed and the data 
relating to any of the matter referred in Section 9A(1) shall be provided by the State 
Government to the Central Government or to the agency appointed or authorised.  
Besides, under Section 9A (3) the Central Government or the agency referr ed to in              
Sub-section(1) shall have powers to summon and verify any data, record or other 
relevant information received from the State Government.  The Committee note t hat 
responding to the Bihar Government’s suggestion that the Data Management should be 
done only by the Government functionary or a Public Sector Agency the Ministry have 
proposed National Data Informatics Centre (NDIC) to be created under the National  
Hydrology Project (under the Central Government plan scheme) so as to make the 
Central Government as the custodian.  The Committee also note that the Central 
Government will authorise CWC, CGWB, IITs, IISC, National Institute of Hydrology, et c. 
with overall supervisory authority for the Data Bank and information system.  Furt her, 
the Committee are given to understand that the details of the monitoring mechanism, 
etc. are required to be prescribed in the ISRWD Rules as part of Sub-ordinate legislation. 
The Ministry have also informed that there is no River Basin Authorities today and for 
the present there exists only the River Board Act of 1956 for the purpose which i s 

64 
 
recommendatory in nature.  On the issue of authenticity of local data and related 
matters, the Committee have also been informed that there is a need to work on Ri ver 
Basin Authorities so as to take care of disputes at the local level. While consider ing that
 
data holds immense significance as a vital input in resolution of the inter-State River 
dispute, the Committee recommend the Ministry to have a fool-proof Data Management 
and Information System so that the data utilised by the Tribunal is authentic,  correct and 
irrefutable. Further, the Committee strongly recommend that this is high time to work on 
River Basin Authorities and in this regard, the Committee would like to reiterate the ir 
recommendation made in the Sixteenth Report (16 th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants 
(2017-18) wherein the Committee had deplored the delay in the formation of River Basin 
Authority, and had strongly recommended to establish the same at the earliest which 
has not been the case so far.  
 
 
 
Clause 8 – Substitution of new Section for Section 10
 
Terms and Conditions of Service of Members and Assessors 
14. The Committee note that Clause 8 of the Bill, 2017 provides for Section 10 and it  
states that the Salary and Allowances payable to, and the other terms and condition s of 
service of, the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, other Members and Assessors shall be 
such as may be prescribed under the ISRWD Rules (Sub-ordinate legislation).  The 
Committee, while endorsing the change proposed under this Clause recommend the 
Ministry to amend it further in accordance with the changes suggested by the m 
regarding the Composition of Dispute Resolution Committee and the Tribunal. 
 

65 
 
Clause 9 –  Substitution of new Section 12 and 12A for Section 12  
Dissolution of Bench 
15. Clause 9 of the proposed Bill, 2017, which provides for ‘Dissolution of Bench’ by 
Substitution of new Section 12 and 12A for Section 12, states that after any  water 
dispute assigned to a Bench of the Tribunal is adjudicated and it submits its decisio n or 
Report, the Central Government shall, on the recommendations of the Chairperson, 
dissolve that Bench. Upon dissolution of the Bench under Section 12 (1), the Members of 
that Bench (excluding Chairperson) shall vacate their respective offices provided tha t 
where a Member of a Bench is also a Member of another Bench, such Member shall 
continue as a Member of such other Bench. The Committee, note that the staffin g 
pattern would be elaborated in the Rules to be made under this Act. The Committee 
while endorsing and appreciating the change/modification done through Clause 9 of the 
ISRWD Bill, 2017 opine that there should be fixed time frame within which the 
Government should dissolve the Benches after the Chairperson recommends for doing 
so. 
 
Clause 10 – Amendment of Section 13
 
16. Clause 10 of the Bill seeks to substitute Clauses (a) to (f) of sub-se ction (2) of 
Section 13 relating to power to make Rules.  The proposed Amendments seek to provide 
for rule making powers in respect of – 
(i) the other matters and the manner of providing for distribution of water 
during stress situations  arising from shortage in the availability of water; 
(ii) the other matters of which data is to be maintained, the particulars such 
data shall contain and the manner in which such data shall be maintained; 
and 
(iii) the manner in which the staff of the dissolved Bench shall be dealt with. 
 

66 
 
With regard to Section 13, relating to power to make Rules, the Committee have 
been informed that the matters in respect of which the Rules may be made are generally 
matters of procedure and administrative details and it is not practicable to provid e for 
them in the Bill itself and the delegation of legislative power is, therefo re, of a normal 
character for the purpose .  The Committee, however, recommend that the Rules should 
be framed in consonance with the sense of the Committee which have been made 
known to the Ministry during the meetings on the Bill and observations / 
recommendations made in this Report. 
 
Clause 11 – substitution of new Section for Section 14
 
Matters relating to the Ravi and Beas Water Tribunal (RBWT) 
17. Clause 11 of the proposed Bill, 2017, relates to the Ravi and Beas Water  Tribunal, 
and it states that the Ravi and Beas Waters Tribunal constituted prior to th e date of 
commencement of the Inter-State River Water Disputes (Amendment) Act , 2017 shall 
stand dissolved and the water disputes pending adjudication before it shall stand 
transferred to the Tribunal: Provided that the concerned Bench shall proce ed to deal 
with such dispute from the stage at which it was so transferred.   The Committee note 
that ‘The Ravi Beas Water Tribunal (RBWT) ’ was not established as per the usual 
provisions of The ISRWD Act, 1956, instead it was set up for giving effect to the Punjab 
Settlement in which one of the beneficiary State (Rajasthan) was not strictly a Ripar ian 
State.  The Committee , therefore, recommend that the Ravi Beas Water Tribunal may be 
considered as a standalone case and this may not be used as an alibi for deviating from 
the provision of the proposed ISRWD Act, 2017. 
 

67 
 
Financial Implications 
18. The Committee note, from the Financial Memorandum of ‘T he ISRWD 
(Amendment) Bi ll, 2017’,  that forming single standing Inter-State River Water Disputes 
Tribunal with multiple Benches, would not involve any recurring or non-recurring 
expenditure.  The Committee also note that after the new Tribunal is established, the 107 
sanctioned posts in the existing Tribunals are proposed to be reduced to 80 posts.  
Therefore, on establishment of proposed new Tribunal, the estimated annual recurring 
expenditure is likely to be reduced from existing Rs.8 Crore to Rs.5.5 Crore, thereby 
saving Rs.2.5 Crore per annum.   Notwithstanding the claim made in the Financial 
Memoranda of the ‘The ISRWD (Amendment) Bill, 2017’ , the Committee apprehend that 
the proposed new Section 4D under Clause 3 -  which gives power to the Chairperson of 
the Tribunal to take decision regarding the Benches of the Tribunal to sit at any oth er 
places other than New Delhi, may entail additional burden on the exchequer in setting 
up such establishments.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should 
take a fresh look on this aspect and calculate the extent of savings or extra expenditure 
accordingly. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                               HUKUM SINGH, 
04 August, 2017
                                     Chairperson, 
13 Shravana, 1939(Saka)           Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 

Annexure- I 
Details of Tribunal functioning under ISRWD Act, 1956 which are presently 
functional 
S. 
NO. 
RIVER(STATES) DATE OF 
CONSTIT-
UTION 
DATE OF AWARD 
1 Ravi and Beas (Punjab, 
Haryana, Rajasthan) 
April, 1986 Yet to be given 
2 Cauvery (CWDT) (Kerala, 
Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, 
Puducherry) 
June, 1990 Report and decision under section 5(2) 
of the ISRWD Act 1956 given on 
5.2.2007. Further Report under 5(3) 
awaited. 
3 Krishna(KWDT) 
(Maharashtra, Andhra 
Pradesh, Karnataka) 
April, 2004 Report and decision under 5(2) and 
under section 5(3) of the Act given on 
30.12.2010 and 29.11.2013 
respectively. Supreme Court in its 
order dated 16.9.2011, directed that 
till further order, decision taken by the 
Tribunal on references filed by States 
and Central Government shall not be 
published in the official Gazette. 
Matter is sub-judice. Term of the 
Tribunal has been extended w.e.f. 1 st 
August, 2014 to address the terms of 
reference as contained in section 89 of 
Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 
2014  
4 Vansadhara(VWDT)  
(Orissa, Andhra Pradesh) 
Feb.,2010 Report and decision not given by the 
Tribunal. Vansadhara Water Disputes 
Tribunal in its Interim Order dated 
17.12.2013 has directed to constitute a 
3-member Protem Supervisory Flow 
Management and Regulation 
Committee on River Vansadhara to 
implement its Order. State Govt. of 
Odisha has filed Special Leave to 
Appeal (Civil) No.3392 of 2014 with 
regard to the Vansadhara Water 
Disputes Tribunal Judgement dated 
17.12.2013. The matter is sub-judice. 
5 Mahadayi (Goa, Karnataka, 
Maharashtra) 
Nov.,2010 Report and Decision not given by the 
Tribunal u/s 5(2) of ISRWD Act, 
1956. 
 

Note :-. In the case of Ravi – Beas Water Tribunal, after submission of the report by 
the Tribunal u/s 5(2) of the Act, a further report was to be given by it within a period of one 
year. Meanwhile, Govt. of Punjab passed the Punjab Termination of Agreement Act, 2004 
and a Presidential reference was made to the Supreme Court on 22.7.2004 on the validity of 
the Punjab Termination of Agreement Act, 2004. 
 In the case of Cauvery Water Disputes Tribunal (CWDT), after submission of report 
u/s 5(2) of the Act on 5.2.2007 the party states and the Central Govt. sought further 
clarification from the Tribunal. Meanwhile, party states filed Special Leave Petitions in the 
Supreme Court against the report and decision dated 05.02.2007. The Supreme Court has 
granted leave and the matter is subjudice before the Supreme Court. CWDT ordered that 
applications under section 5(3) of the Act should be listed for orders after disposal of the 
appeals by the Supreme Court. 
The term of both these Tribunals are being extended from time to time.  
  

Annexure-I (Contd.) 
Details of Chairmen and Members of the Tribunals 
 
S.No. Name Designation Date of 
Appointment 
Date of 
Birth 
Appx. Age 
as on 
1.1.2016 
Location 
Ravi & Beas Waters Tribunal  
1. Vacant Chairman     
East Block, 
R.K.Puram, 
New Delhi 
2. Vacant Member    
3. Justice Sh.M.Y. 
Eqbal 
Member 10.06.2003 13.02.1951 65  yrs 
Cauvery Water Disputes Tribunal  
4 Vacant Chairman     
JanpathBha
wan, 
New Delhi 
5 Justice Sh.N.S. 
Rao 
Member 02.06.1990 04.01.1932 84 yrs 
6 Justice Sh. 
SudhirNarain 
Member 07.01.2003 10.07.1941 75(+) yrs 
Krishna Water Disputes Tribunal  
7 Justice Sh. 
Brijesh Kumar 
Chairman 02.04.2004 10.06.1939 77(+) yrs Trikut, 
Bhikaji 
Kama Place, 
New Delhi 
8 Justice Sh. B P 
Das 
Member 21.01.2013 15.11.1950 66(+) yrs 
9 Justice Ram 
Mohan Reddy 
Member 21.10.2015 06.06.1954 62 (+)yrs 
Vansadhara Water Dispute Tribunal  
10 Dr. Justice 
Mukundakam 
Sharma 
Chairman 30.03.2011 18.09.1946 70(+) yrs. Mohan 
Singh Place, 
Connaught 
Place, New 
Delhi  
11 Justice Sh. 
Ghulam 
Mohammad 
Member 08.05.2012 06.04.1950 66(+) yrs 
12 Justice Sh. 
B.N.Chaturvedi 
Member 24.02.2010 02.10.1947 69(+) yrs 
Mahadayi Water Dispute Tribunal  
13 Mr. Justice 
J.M.Panchal 
Chairman 16.11.2010 06.10.1946 70(+) yrs JanpathBha
wan, 
New Delhi 
14 Mr. Justice 
P.S.Narayana 
Member 16.11.2010 13.07.1948 68 (+)yrs 
15 Mr. Justice 
Viney Mittal 
Member 16.11.2010 09.12.1948 67(+) yrs 
 
 

COMMENTS OF MINISTRIES CONSULTED 
S. 
No. 
Comments of the Ministries consulted  
(Draft Cabinet Note circulated vide letters dated 
21.12.2015 and 03.06.2013 
Response of the Ministry of Water 
Resources, River Development and 
Ganga Rejuvenation 
1. 
 
Ministry of Home Affairs –  
Inter State Council Sectt. and  North Block, New Delhi 
(comments vide letter dated 29.8.2013 & 1.3.2016) 
 
i) Sharing of water will always be an issue between 
States.  A far sighted/wise approach would be to 
recognize the same, and provide for resolving these 
disputes as they arise.  A conciliatory approach does not 
work in these matters.  Inter-StateRiver Boards may be 
put in place wherever States agree – or it can be 
provided for by law.  Principles for sharing flows 
between the upper riparian and the lower riparian States 
may be laid down in the Inter-States Water Disputes 
Act.  It will also be useful if there is a provision for 
appeal against the decisions of the Tribunal.  The 
Supreme Court could have the Appellate Jurisdiction.  
In such a case, the decision of the Tribunal will be 
deemed to be final only if the appeal has been disposed 
of or if no appeal is filed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ii) Tribunal should be made a multidisciplinary body, 
presided over by a Judge.  It should follow a more 
participatory and conciliatory approach; 
 
iii)   Reference to a Tribunal should invariably be linked 
with constitution of Inter-State River Boards charged 
with an integrated watershed approach towards inter-
State rivers. 
i) There is a provision for reconsideration of 
the final report of the Tribunal. As per 
section 5(3) of the Act  if upon 
consideration of the decision of the 
Tribunal, the Central  Government or   any 
State  Government is  of opinion  that 
anything therein contained requires 
explanation or that guidance is  needed 
upon any point not originally referred to the 
Tribunal, the Central  Government or the 
State Government, as the case may be, 
within three  months from the date of the 
decision, again refer the matter to the 
Tribunal  for further consideration, and on 
such   reference, the  Tribunal may  forward 
to the  Central Government  a further report   
within one   year  from  the date of such  
reference giving such  explanation or 
guidance as it deems fit and in such  a case,  
the  decision  of the  Tribunal  shall be   
deemed  to  be   modified accordingly. To 
avoid the unnecessary delay it is proposed 
that The decision of the Tribunal given 
under section 5(2) and section 5(3) of the 
Act shall have the same force as an order 
or decree of the Supreme Court with 
immediate effect. 
Further, in case of disputes relating to 
waters, Article 262 provides: 
  
Parliament may by law provide for the 
adjudication of any dispute or complaint 
with respect to the use, distribution or 
control of the waters of, or in, any inter-
State river or river valley. 
  
Notwithstanding anything in this 
Constitution, Parliament may, by law 
provide that neither the Supreme Court nor 
any other court shall exercise jurisdiction in 
respect of any such dispute or complaint as 
is referred to in Clause (1). 
 
ii) As per section (3) of the Act, The 
Central Government may, in consultation 
with the Tribunal,         appoint two or more 
persons as assessors to advise the Tribunal   
in the proceedings before it. 
 
iii) Central Govt has constituted a 

Committee to give its recommendation for 
amendments in existing River Board 
Act,1956, if any, for effective 
implementation of the River Board 
Act,1956 
2. Ministry  of Law & Justice –  
(comments vide letter dated 27.12.2015) 
Deptt. of Legal Affairs, and Legislative Department 
 
Ministry of Law & Justice has suggested some 
modification in the Draft Note and prepared a draft bill 
for bringing change in the existing ISRWD Act, 1956 
on proposals made by MoWR in the Cabinet Note. 
 
The modification suggested by the MoLJ 
has been incorporated in the Cabinet Note 
3. Ministry of Finance –Deptt of Expenditure 
(comments vide letter dated 17.7.2013) 
 
(i) As per the existing Section 9(3) of the Act, a 
Decision of the Tribunal may contain directions as to 
the Government by which the expenses of the Tribunal 
and any costs incurred by any State Government in 
appearing before the Tribunal are to be paid, and may 
fix the amount of any expenses or costs to be so paid, 
and so far as it relates to expenses or costs, may be 
enforced as if were an order made by the Supreme 
Court.  This provision may be continued after the 
Standing Tribunal is set up. 
 
ii)  As regards the upper ceiling w.r.t. the age up to 
which a Chairman/Member will hold office, 
consultation with DOP&T is advised. 
 
 
iii) Since 27 posts in various grades would  stand 
abolished once the enactment is effected, the Note 
for the Cabinet may also bring out how the surplus 
employees would be adjusted.  The increases 
proposed in the existing strengths of Peons, Drivers, 
and UDCs are not supported and the number may be 
reviewed accordingly. 
 
iv)  Further, the Inter-State Water Disputes Rules, 
1959 do not specifically provide for HAG level 
status pay to Assessors.  At present an Assessor can 
be a serving/retd.  Government servant or even a 
non-official appointed on part-time basis on dail y 
remuneration for the actual days spent on the 
Tribunal/Bench. As per Annex.VI, there are at 
present 10 Assessors for the existing Tribunals.  
Similar number of Assessors has been proposed for 
the New Tribunals.  Since the requirement of 
Assessors would depend on the number of disputes 
referred to the New Tribunal & the ISWD Rules at 
present provide for flexibility in this regard. The 
need to have 10 full time Assessors is not felt 
justifiable.  M/o WR may consider having a 
 
 
 
i) The said provision i.e. Section 9 (3) of the 
Act being continued. 
 
ii) The service conditions of the 
Chairperson/Vice-Chairperson and 
Members of the Tribunal, who are serving 
judges of Supreme Court and High Courts, 
as the case may be, at the time of their 
nomination, are governed by the 
Department of Justice, Ministry of Law & 
Justice (MoL&J). The proposal has been 
vetted by MoL&J therefore the consultation 
with DOP&T is not required necessary.  
 
iii) The appointment are being made in the 
Tribunal either on re-employment, 
outsourcing or deputation, as per its 
requirement for an year or till the life of the 
Tribunal or till further order, whichever is 
earliest. Therefore, there will be no need to 
adjust the surplus employees; their services 
will ceased to exist on the day of 
Notification of the New Tribunal. 
 
iv) As per Section 4(3) of the Act, the 
Central Government may, in consultation 
with the Tribunal,         appoint two or more 
persons as assessors to advise the Tribunal   
in the proceedings before it. And as per 
Section (10) of the Act, the Chairman and 
other members of a Tribunal and the 
assessors shall be entitled to receive such 
remuneration, allowances or fees as may be 
prescribed.  
 
There are at present 10 posts of Assessors 
for the existing Five Tribunals.  Similar 
number of Assessors has been proposed for 
the New Tribunals. But once a dispute has 

flexibility in this regard and have mix of full and 
part-time Assessors as provided for under the 
present Rules, within the overall limit/ceiling of ten.  
Further, there seems no apparent justification 
available for having Assessors in HAG pay. M/oWR 
may, however, consider having full- time Assessors 
in Director/Joint Secretary level. 
 
v) The financial implications may be shown in the 
form of a Financial Memorandum duly indicating (a) 
the quantum of fund requirement; (b) nature of 
Funds viz. Plan/Non- Plan’ (c) Sections/clauses in 
the bill entailing implications; (d) source of revenue, 
if any, and (e) the source from which the expenditure 
liability on account of the proposed legislation 
would be met. 
been finally adjudicated by the Tribunal, the 
Assessor associated with that dispute shall 
cease to be the Assessor and also as per 
ISRWD Rule 1959 an Assessor who has 
attained the age of 67 years shall cease to be 
Assessor of Tribunal. 
 
 Further as per amendment in ISRWD 
Rule,1959 (15 th July,2010) Section(5) “A 
person, not being a serving or a retired 
Government servant, appointed as a whole-
time Assessor by a Tribunal, shall be paid 
such salary as may be determined keeping 
in view his status, experience and 
qualifications provided that such salary, 
shall not be more than the maximum of the 
scale of pay of the post or Rs. 80,000/-, 
whichever is less and he shall be entitled to 
draw such allowances as are admissible to a 
Government servant of the first grade on 
such a pay.” and as per Section (6)  of the 
Rule “A person appointed as an Assessor on 
part-time basis (whether a retired 
Government servant or a non-official) shall 
be paid such remuneration on a daily basis 
for the actual days spent on the Tribunal's 
work as may be determined keeping in view 
his status, experiences and qualifications. 
Provided that part-time Assessor shall cease 
to hold the post on attaining the age of 67 
years. 
 
It is now proposed (under Section 4D of the 
Act) that , the Central Government may, in 
consultation with the Tribunal appoint two 
persons as assessors for each dispute to 
advise the Bench in the proceedings before 
it: Provided that
 the assessors associated 
with the dispute shall cease to be assessors, 
once the dispute for which they are 
appointed after the dispute was adjudicated 
and finally reported to the Central 
Government.”. 
 
v) As per Section 9(3) of the Act,  A 
decision of the Tribunal may contain 
directions as to the Government by which 
the expenses of the Tribunal and any costs 
incurred by any State Government in 
appearing before the Tribunal are to be 
paid, and may fix the amount of any 
expenses or costs to be so paid, and so far 
as it relates to expenses or costs, may be 
enforced as if it were an order made by the 
Supreme Court. 

4.  Planning Commission, YojanaBhawan, New Delhi 
(comments vide letter dated 7.8.2013) 
1.  The Ministry of Law and Justice circulated a draft 
Cabinet Note in January, 2009 along with a draft Bill on 
Uniformity in tenure, retirement age etc. of 
Chairpersons/Presidents/Members of various Tribunals 
and other Statutory Authorities.  The Ministry of Water 
Resources was of the view that a Tribunal constituted 
under the ISRWD Act,1956 is for specific water 
disputes and of ad-hoc in nature.  The chairman and 
members of the Tribunal covered under this Act are 
governed by the ISWD Rules 1959 and the tenure and 
retirement age etc. are decided as per this Act.  Hence, 
these posts are not to be included under the Cabinet 
Note of MoLJ.  This view of Ministry of Water 
Resources would require now fresh clarification as the 
proposed Tribunal is a NewTribunal and opinion of M/o 
Law and Justice is to be taken. 
 
2.  There are number of water disputes those are not  
being referred to central Government for adjudication 
such as MullaPeriyar Dam between Tamil Nadu and 
Kerala, Babli barrage between Maharashtra and Andhra 
Pradesh, Palar river dispute between Tamil Nadu and 
Andhra Pradesh etc.  However, these disputes are 
directly moving to the Supreme Court by the party 
States.  It would be proper if all disputes are being 
addressed by the NewTribunal instead of burdening the 
Supreme Court.  Some such provision is also needed in 
the proposed amendments. 
 
3. The draft Cabinet Note containing the amendments 
has been forwarded to the Planning Commission second 
time.  The earlier amendments were for limiting the 
upper age limit of the Chairman and Members of the 
Tribunal to 72 years. (now proposed as 70 years) and 
the time frame for seeking the clarification on the 
Award of the Tribunal is maximum of three years 
which is now proposed to be scaled down to a year and 
half.  We agree with the proposed changes. 
 
 
The opinion of the Ministry of Law & 
Justice (Legal affairs and Legislative Deptt 
both) has been taken in this regard and the 
Cabinet Note has been approved by both the 
Departments of the Ministry of Law & 
Justice. 
5. Ministry of Urban Development, NirmanBhawan, 
New Delhi(comments vide letter dated 18.6.2013) 
 
MoUD does not support the proposal to locate the New 
Water Disputes Tribunal at Delhi.  With a view to 
reduce congestion in the Capital, the Union Cabinet in 
its meeting held on 13.6.1957, had decided that 
irrespective of whether it requires office or residential 
accommodation through Government auspices, no new 
office of the Central Government or semi-Government 
organization should be established in Delhi without the 
express approval of the Cabinet given on the 
recommendation of the CCA.  This decision of the 
Cabinet was reiterated in 1973.  Further, the Standing 
Committee, Ministry of Urban Development  in its 
Presently, there are five Water disputes 
Tribunals namely, Ravi-Beas Water 
Tribunal(RBWT), Krishna Water  Disputes 
Tribunal (KWDT), Cauvery  Water  
Disputes Tribunal (CWDT)Mahadayi Water  
Disputes Tribunal (MWDT) and 
Vanshadhara Water  Disputes Tribunal 
(VWDT) are existing wherein offices of 
four Tribunals namely, KWDT, MWDT, 
CWDT and RBWT have been provided by 
MoUD only.  The office of VWDT has 
been provided by MoWR on rent basis from 
NDMC.  Therefore, the offices of all the 
five Tribunals wherein Court Rooms and 
chambers of Chairman & 2 Members of  

recommendations as contained in para 19 of their 29 th 
Report (14 thLokSabha) have stated that “the 
Government should be very strict when negotiating 
with new proposals regarding office space in Delhi as 
well as other Metropolitan cities where land use has 
reached the saturation point.  The Committee have also 
showed its dissatisfaction that the 
Ministries/Departments have not furnished their 
consolidated up- to-date requirement of GPOA to the 
Ministry of Urban Development and have desired that 
the concern of the Committee should be brought to the 
notice of Cabinet Committee on Accommodation to 
whom the different offices approach for allotment of 
GPOA…..”  It is also stated that  issue relating to 
providing accommodation at Ghitorni (New Delhi) both 
official and residential to 
Commissions/Committees/Tribunals/Autonomous and 
Statutory Bodies, Regulatory Authorities etc. has come 
up before the Competent Authority in its recent meeting 
and the Competent Authority has directed that all 
concerned Ministries/Departments may make concrete 
plans along with appropriate budgetary provisions for 
utilizing the space/residential accommodation to such 
organization in Ghitorni.  Otherwise, the Ministry of 
Water Resources may locate the proposed New Water 
Dispute Tribunal in one of the satellite towns of Delhi 
like Ghaziabad, NOIDA, Faridabad, Gurgaon etc.  It is 
also mentioned here that as per present policy, 
Autonomous/Statutory bodies, Tribunals, Commissions 
etc. are not eligible for allotment of General Pool 
accommodation.  As such, even if the proposal to locate 
the New Water Dispute Tribunal at Delhi, is approved, 
it would not be eligible for allotment of General Pool 
accommodation.” 
each Tribunal are already available 
alongwith the office of staff of these 
Tribunals.  Since as per current proposal 
there are only 8 members proposed and the 
New Tribunal will initially be constituted 
by merger of the existing 5 Tribunals, no 
new premises will be required from MoUD 
for establishing office of the new Standing 
Tribunal. 
6. Department of Personal & Training (comments vide 
letter dated 1.2.2016) 
The age of superannuation in respect of Supreme Court 
Judge is 65 years. Hence, it is suggested that the upper 
age limit of Chairman may be kept as 68 years. 
The service conditions of the Chairperson / 
Vice-Chairperson and Members of the 
Tribunal, who are serving judges of 
Supreme Court and High Courts, as the case 
may be, at the time of their nomination, are 
governmed by the Department of Justice, 
Ministry of Law & Justice (MoL&J). The 
proposal has been vetted by MoL&J 
therefore the change in upper age is not 
required necessary. 
 

 As introduced in Lok Sabha 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No 46 of 2017
 
 
 
THE INTER-STATE RIVER WATER DISPUTES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 
2017 
 
^ 
BILL 
 
further to amend the Inter-State River Water Disputes Act, 1956 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows- 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Inter-State River Water Disputes 
(Amendment) Act, 2017. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.  
Short title and 
commencement 
33 of 1956 
 
 
 
 
10 
2. In the Inter-State River Water Disputes Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as 
the principal Act), in section 2,- 
    (i) for clause (a), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:- 
           `(a)”Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Inter -State River Water                     
Disputes Tribunal referred to in section 4B; 
 
(aa) “existing Tribunal” means a Water Disputes Tribunal constituted prior 
to the date of commencement of the Inter-State River Water Disputes 
(Amendment) Act, 2017; 
(ab) “member” means a member of the Inter -State River Water Disputes 
Tribunal and includes the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson; 
(ac) “notification’” means a notification published in the Official Gazette; 
(ad) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(ii) for clause (b), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:- 
‘(b) “Tribunal” means the Inter -State River Water Disputes Tribunal 
established under section 4; 
(ba) “Vice -Chairperson” means the Vice -Chairperson of the Tribunal 
referred to in section 4B.” 
Amendment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
Substitution of 
new sections 4, 
4A, 4B, 4C and 
4D for section 4 
3. For section 4 of the principal Act, the following  sections shall be substituted, 
namely:- 
 
Establishment 
of Inter-State 
River Water 
          ‘4. With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification, appoint, there shall be established a Tribunal, to be called the 
15 
 
 

Disputes 
Tribunal 
Inter-State River Water Disputes Tribunal, for the adjudication of water 
disputes: 
 
          Provided that on and from the date of establishment of the Tribunal, all 
existing Tribunals shall stand dissolved and the water disputes pending 
adjudication before such existing Tribunals shall stand transferred to the 
Tribunal: 
 
         Provided further that the Chairmen and other members of the existing 
Tribunals who have attained the age of seventy years as on the date of 
commencement of the Inter-State River Water Disputes (Amendment) Act, 
2017 shall cease to hold office on the expiry of three months from the date of 
such commencement: 
 
         Provided also that a dispute which has already been adjudicated and 
settled by an existing Tribunal prior to the date of commencement of the Inter-
State River Water Disputes (Amendment) Act, 2017 shall not be re-opened. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
Disputes 
Resolution 
Committee 
        4A. ( 1) As and when any request under section 3 is received from any 
State Government in respect of any water dispute, the Central Government 
shall set up as Disputes Resolution Committee, consisting of members from 
such relevant fields, as it deems fit, for resolving the dispute amicably. 
 
        (2) The Disputes Resolution Committee shall try to resolve a water dispute 
by negotiations withhin a period one year which may be extended to a further 
period of six months and submit its report to the Central Government. 
 
        (3) The report submitted by the Disputes Resolution Committee shall 
contain details of- 
 
(a) the stand taken by each State Government during negotiation; 
(b) the views of members of the Committee on such stand; and 
(c) all relevant facts, information and data relating thereto. 
 
        (4) Any water dispute which cannot be settled by negotiations shall be 
referred by the Central Government, by notification, to the Tribunal for its 
adjudication within a period of three months from the date of receipt of the 
report under sub-section (2) 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
Composition of 
Tribunal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
        4B.   Subject to the provisions of section 12, the Tribunal shall consist of a 
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and not more than six members to be nominated 
in this behalf by the Chief Justice of India from amongst persons who at the 
time of such nomination are Judges of the Supreme Court or of a High Court: 
 
        Provided that the Chairmen and other members of the existing Tribunals 
(other than members who have ceased to hold office under second proviso to 
section 4) shall be nominated by the Chief Justice of India as Chairperson, 
Vice-Chairperson and Members of the Tribunal and they shall continue as such, 
subject to the provisions of section 4C. 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        4C.(1) The Chairperson shall hold office for a period of five years or till 
he attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier. 
 
        (2) The term of office of the Vice-Chairperson and other members of the 
Tribunal shall be co-terminus with the adjudication of the water dispute and 
Term of office 

10 they shall cease to hold office upon dissolution of the bench under sub-section 
(2) of section 12: 
         Provided that no member shall hold office after he has attained the age of 
seventy years. 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
        4D.(1) Subject to other provisions of this Act,— 
 
(a) the jurisdiction of the Tribunal may be exercised by the Benches 
thereof; 
(b) the Chairperson may constitute a Bench with  three members, out 
of which the senior-most member shall preside over the Bench: 
 
Provided that a member of a Bench may also be a member of another 
Bench. 
 
Explanation.–– For the purposes of this clause, the term “senior-most 
member” means that a Judge of the Supreme Court shall always be senior to a 
Judge of a High Court and their seniority shall be determined from the date of 
their respective appointment as the Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High 
Court. 
 
        (2) The Benches of the Tribunal shall ordinarily sit at New Delhi or at 
such other places as the Chairperson may decide. 
Benches of 
Tribunal 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
4. In section 5 of the principal Act, –– 
        (a) for sub-sections (1) and (2), the following sub-sections shall be 
substituted, namely:― 
 
“(1) On receipt of a reference in respect of any water dispute from the 
Central Government, the Chairperson shall assign such dispute to a Bench of 
the Tribunal to its adjudication. 
 
(2) The Bench of the Tribunal shall, before investigating the water 
dispute referred to it under sub-section (1), take into consideration the report 
submitted by the Disputes Resolution Committee under sub-section (2) of 
section 4A, and forward lo the Central Government its detailed report setting 
out the facts as found by it including on yield, efficiency in the use of water and 
such other matters as may be prescribed, and giving its decision on such dispute 
within a period of two Years: 
 
Provided that such report shall also provide for the distribution of water 
during distress situations arising from shortage in the availability of water in 
such manner as may be prescribed: 
 
Provided further that if the report cannot be given within a period of two 
years for any unavoidable reasons, the Central Government may extend such 
period to a further period not exceeding one year.”; 
 
(b) in sub-section (3), –– 
 
(i) for the words “on such reference, the Tribunal may”, the words “on 
such reference, the Bench of the Tribunal concerned may” shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:― 
 
Amendment of 
section 5 

“Provided that the Central Government may extend the period of one 
year to a further period not exceeding six months.”. 
Substitution of 
new sections 
5A and 5B for 
section 5A. 
Appointment of 
assessors 
5. For section 5A of the principal Act, the following sessions shall be 
substituted namely:- 
 
“5A. (1) The Central Government may appoint two experts serving in the 
Central Water Engineering Service not below the rank of Chief Engineer as 
assessors for each water dispute to advise the Bench in the proceedings before 
it. 
 
(2) The term of the assessors appointed under sub-section (1) shall be co-
terminus with the adjudication of the dispute and they shall cease to be 
assessors after the dispute is adjudicated and the final report is forwarded to the 
Central Government. 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
Filling of 
vacancies, 
temporary 
absence etc. 
5B.(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, if for any reason, a vacancy 
(other than a temporary absence) occurs in the office of the Chairperson, Vice-
Chairperson or any other member of the Tribunal, such vacancy shall be filled 
by a person to be nominated in this behalf by the Chief Justice of India in 
accordance with section 4B. 
 
(2) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the 
Chairperson by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the Vice-
Chairperson shall act as the Chairperson until the date on which a new 
Chairperson, nominated in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill 
such vacancy, enters upon his office. 
 
(3) When any member of a Bench of the Tribunal is unable to discharge 
his functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause, the Chairperson may 
assign the work of such member to any other member of the Tribunal till such 
member resumes his work.”. 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
Substitution of 
new section for 
section 6 
 
Decision of 
Bench of 
Tribunal 
binding on 
parties 
6. For section 6 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:––  
 
“6. The decision of the Bench of the Tribunal shall be final and binding 
on the parties to the dispute and shall have the same force as an order or decree 
of the Supreme Court.”. 
25 
Substitution of 
new section for 
section 9A 
7. For section 9A of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely: –– 
“9A. (1) The Central Government may, for the purposes of maintaining a 
data bank and information system at the national level for each river basin, 
appoint or authorise  an agency which shall maintain data relating to water 
resources, land, agriculture and such other matter, containing such particulars 
and in such manner, as may be prescribed.   
(2) As and when required by the Central Government, the State 
Government shall make available the data relating to any of the matters 
referred to in sub-section (1) to the Central Government or to the agency 
appointed or authorised under sub-section (1). 
(3) The Central Government or the agency referred in sub-section (1) 
shall have powers to summon and verify any data, record or other relevant 
information received from the State Government.”. 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 

Substitution of 
new section for 
section 10 
 
Terms and 
conditions of 
service of 
members and 
assessors. 
8. For section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely: –– 
 
“10. The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and 
conditions of service of, the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, other members 
and assessors shall be such as may be prescribed.” 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
9. For section 12 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
 
“12. (1) After any water dispute assigned to a Bench of the Tribunal is 
adjudicated and it submits its decision or report, the Central Government shall, 
on the recommendations of the Chairperson, dissolve that Bench. 
 
            (2) Upon dissolution of the Bench under sub-section (1), the members 
of that Bench (excluding Chairperson) shall vacate their respective offices: 
 
            Provided that where a member of a Bench is also a member of another 
Bench, such member shall continue as a member of such other Bench. 
 
12A. (1) Upon the dissolution of a Bench of the Tribunal under section 
12,  the staff of such dissolved Bench shall be,– 
 
                    (i) made available to any other Bench, if so required; or  
                    (ii) repatriated to their parent cadre,  
in such manner as may be prescribed. 
 
           (2) The assets and properties of the dissolved Bench shall be transferred 
to the Central Government or to the concerned State Government which 
provided such assets and properties.”. 
Substitution of 
new sections 12 
and 12A for 
section 12. 
Dissolution of 
Bench 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Staff and assets 
of dissolved 
Bench 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
35 
10. In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for clauses (a) to (f), 
the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:– 
 
             “(a) the form and the manner in which a complaint as to any water        
dispute may be made by any State Government under section 3; 
 
              (b) the other matters, and the manner of providing for distribution of 
water during stress situations arising from shortage in the availability of water 
under sub section (2) of section 5; 
 
             (c) the other matters in respect of which the Tribunal may be vested 
with the powers of a civil court under clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 9; 
 
            (d) the procedure to be followed by the Tribunal under sub-section (4) 
of section 9; 
 
           (e) the other matters in respect of which data is to be maintained, the 
particulars thereof, and the manner of maintaining such data under sub-section 
(1) of section 9A; 
 
          (f) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and 
Amendment of 
section 13 

 conditions of service of, the Chairperson under section 10; 
 
         (g) the allowances or fee payable to, and other   terms and conditions of 
service of, the Vice-Chairperson, other members and assessors under section 
10; 
 
         (h) the manner in which the staff of the dissolved Bench shall be dealt 
with under sub-section (1) of section 12A; 
 
         (i) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.”. 
Substitution of 
new section for 
section 14 
 
Matters relating 
to Ravi and 
Beas Water 
Tribunal 
11. For section 14 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:- 
      
“14. The Ravi and Beas Waters Tribunal constituted prior to the date of 
commencement of the Inter-State River Water Disputes (Amendment) Act, 
2015 shall stand dissolved and the water disputes pending adjudication before 
it shall stand transferred to the Tribunal: 
 
           Provided that the concerned Bench shall proceed to deal with such 
dispute from the stage at which it was so transferred.”. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
  

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
On account of increase in demand for water by the States, the inter-State river water 
disputes are on the rise.  Though the Inter-State River Water Disputes Act, 1956 (33 of 1956) 
provides for a legal framework to address such disputes, it suffers from many drawbacks.  Under 
the said Act, a separate Tribunal has to be established for each inter-State river water disputes.  
Only three out of eight Tribunals have made awards which are accepted by the States.  Though 
the Cauvery and Ravi Beas Water Disputes Tribunals have been in existence for over 26 and 30 
years respectively, they have not been able to make any successful award till date.  Further, there 
is no provision in the Act fixing time limit for adjudication by a Tribunal or for any upper age 
limit for the Chairman or a Member of a Tribunal.  There is no mechanism for continuation of 
work on occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairman or a Member of a Tribunal nor 
is there a time limit for publishing the report of the Tribunal.  All these drawbacks are causing 
delay in the adjudication of water disputes. 
2.  The Inter-State River Water Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 2017 seeks to streamline the 
adjudication of inter-State river water disputes and make the present legal and institutional 
architecture robust.  The Bill proposes to introduce a mechanism to resolve the water dispute 
amicably by negotiations through a Disputes Resolution Committee, to be established by the 
Central Government consisting of experts from relevant fields, before such dispute is referred to 
the Tribunal. 
3.    The proposed Bill further seeks to provide for a single standing tribunal (with 
multiple Benches) instead of multiple tribunals, which shall consist of one Chairperson, one 
vice-Chairperson and not more than six Members.  While the team of office of the Chairperson is 
five years or till he attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier, the term of offic e of 
Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the Tribunal shall be co-terminus with the adjudication 
of the water disputes.  It is also proposed that the Assessors, who provide technical support to the 
Tribunal, shall be appointed from amongst experts serving in the Central Water Engineering 
Service not below the rank of Chief Engineer.  The total time period for adjudication of a water 
dispute has been fixed at a maximum of four and half years.  The decision of the Bench of the 
Tribunal shall be final and binding on the States concerned, with no requirement of its 
publication in the Official Gazette. 
4.    The proposed Bill also seeks to provide for transparent data collection system at the 
national level for each river basin and for this purpose, an agency to maintain databank and 
information system shall be appointed or authorized by the Central Government. 
5.    The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
UMA BHARTI 
New Delhi; 
The 1st March, 2017 

  
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to substitute new sections 4, 4A, 4B, 4C and 4D for 
section 4 of the Inter-State River Water Disputes Act, 1956.  The proposed section 4 seeks to 
establish a single standing Inter-State River Water Disputes Tribunal with multiple Benches, 
which shall initially be constituted by merging of existing five Tribunals.  As existing premises 
with necessary furniture are already available, no new premises or furniture are required for 
establishing the office of the new Standing Tribunal.  Therefore, no non-recurring expenditure 
would be involved. 
 It is proposed to establish a single standing tribunal with multiple Benches, 
instead of multiple tribunals, by merging existing five tribunals.  The new Tribunal shall consist 
of one Chairperson, one Vice-Chairperson and not more than six Members.  Further, after th e 
new Tribunal is established, the 107 sanctioned posts in the existing tribunals are proposed to be 
reduced to 80 posts.  Therefore, on establishment of proposed new tribunal, the estimated annual 
recurring expenditure is likely to be reduced from existing Rs.8 Crores to Rs.5.5 Crores, thereb y 
saving Rs.2.5 Crore per annum. 
 The Bill, if enacted, therefore, does not involve any recurring or non-recurring 
expenditure. 

MEMORANDUM REGARING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
 Clause 10 of the Bill seeks to substitute clauses (a) to (f) of sub-section (2) of section 13 
relating to power to make rules.  The proposed amendments seeks to provide for rule making 
powers in respect of – 
(i) the other matters and the manner of providing for distribution of water during 
stress situations  arising from shortage in the availability of water; 
(ii) the other matters of which data is to be maintained, the particulars such data shall 
contain and the manner in which such data shall be maintained; and 
(iii) the manner in which the staff of the dissolved Bench shall be dealt with. 
The matters in respect of which the rules may be made are generally matters of procedure 
and administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself.  The 
delegation of legislative power, therefore, of a normal character.  

 

Proposed Inter State River Water Disputes Act, 2017 
(incorporating changes as proposed in Inter State River Water Disputes Amendment Bill, 2017) 
 
 An Act to provide for the adjudication of disputes relating to waters of inter-State 
rivers and river valleys. 
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:- 
 
 
 1. .(1) This Act may be called the Inter-State River Water Disputes (Amendment) 
Act, 2017. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, 
bynotification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement 
 2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- 
`(a)”Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Inter -State River Water                     
Disputes Tribunal referred to in section 4B; 
 
(aa) “existing Tribunal” means a Water Disputes Tribunal constituted prior to 
the date of commencement of the Inter-State River Water Disputes (Amendment) 
Act, 2017; 
(ab) “member” means a member of the Inter -State River Water Disputes 
Tribunal and includes the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson; 
(ac) “notification’” means a notification published in the Official Gazette; 
(ad) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
‘(b) “Tribunal” means the Inter -State River Water Disputes Tribunal 
established under section 4; 
(ba) “Vice-Chairperson” means the Vice -Chairperson of the Tribunal referred 
to in section 4B.” 
(c) "water dispute" means any dispute or difference between two or more State 
Governments with respect to-- 
(i) the use, distribution or control of the waters of, or in, any inter-State river 
or river valley; or 
(ii) the interpretation of the terms of any agreement relating to the use, 
distribution or control of such waters or the implementation of such 
agreement; or 
(iii) the levy of any water rate in contravention of the prohibition contained in 
section 7. 
Definitions 
 3.  If it appears to the Government of  any State  that a water dispute with the  
Government of another State has arisen or is likely to arise by reason of the fact 
that the interests of the State, or of any of the inhabitants  thereof, in the  waters of 
an  inter-State river or river valley have been, or are likely to be, affected  
prejudicially by- 
(a) any executive action or legislation taken or passed, or proposed to 
be taken or passed, by the other State; or 
(b) the failure of the other State or any authority therein to exercise any 
of their powers with respect to the use, distribution or control of such waters; 
or 
(c) the failure of the other State to implement the terms of any 
agreement relating to the use, distribution or control of such waters; the State 
Government may, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, request the 
Central Government to refer the water dispute to a Tribunal for adjudication.  
Complaints by 
State Governments 
as to water disputes 

 
 4. With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification, 
appoint, there shall be established a Tribunal, to be called the Inter-State River 
Water Disputes Tribunal, for the adjudication of water disputes: 
 
Provided that on and from the date of establishment of the Tribunal, all existing 
Tribunals shall stand dissolved and the water disputes pending adjudication 
before such existing Tribunals shall stand transferred to the Tribunal: 
 
Provided further that the Chairmen and other members of the existing Tribunals 
who have attained the age of seventy years as on the date of commencement of 
the Inter-State River Water Disputes (Amendment) Act, 2017 shall cease to 
hold office on the expiry of three months from the date of such commencement: 
 
Provided also that a dispute which has already been adjudicated and settled by 
an existing Tribunal prior to the date of commencement of the Inter-State River 
Water Disputes (Amendment) Act, 2017 shall not be re-opened. 
        4A. ( 1) As and when any request under section 3 is received from any 
State Government in respect of any water dispute, the Central Government 
shall set up as Disputes Resolution Committee, consisting of members from 
such relevant fields, as it deems fit, for resolving the dispute amicably. 
 
(2) The Disputes Resolution Committee shall try to resolve a water dispute by 
negotiations withhin a period one year which may be extended to a further 
period of six months and submit its report to the Central Government. 
 
(3) The report submitted by the Disputes Resolution Committee shall contain 
details of- 
 
(a) the stand taken by each State Government during negotiation; 
(b) the views of members of the Committee on such stand; and 
(c) all relevant facts, information and data relating thereto. 
 
(4) Any water dispute which cannot be settled by negotiations shall be referred 
by the Central Government, by notification, to the Tribunal for its adjudication 
within a period of three months from the date of receipt of the report under sub-
section (2) 
4B.   Subject to the provisions of section 12, the Tribunal shall consist of a 
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and not more than six members to be nominated 
in this behalf by the Chief Justice of India from amongst persons who at the 
time of such nomination are Judges of the Supreme Court or of a High Court: 
 
Provided that the Chairmen and other members of the existing Tribunals (other 
than members who have ceased to hold office under second proviso to section 
4) shall be nominated by the Chief Justice of India as Chairperson, Vice-
Chairperson and Members of the Tribunal and they shall continue as such, 
subject to the provisions of section 4C. 
4C.(1) The Chairperson shall hold office for a period of five years or till he 
attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier. 
 
(2) The term of office of the Vice-Chairperson and other members of the 
Tribunal shall be co-terminus with the adjudication of the water dispute and 
Constitution of 
Tribunal 

they shall cease to hold office upon dissolution of the bench under sub-section 
(2) of section 12: 
Provided that no member shall hold office after he has attained the age of 
seventy years. 
4D.(1) Subject to other provisions of this Act,— 
 
(a) the jurisdiction of the Tribunal may be exercised by the Benches 
thereof; 
(b) the Chairperson may constitute a Bench with  three members, out 
of which the senior-most member shall preside over the Bench: 
 
Provided that a member of a Bench may also be a member of another 
Bench. 
 
Explanation.–– For the purposes of this clause, the term “senior-most 
member” means that a Judge of the Supreme Court shall always be senior to a 
Judge of a High Court and their seniority shall be determined from the date of 
their respective appointment as the Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High 
Court. 
  
(2)The Benches of the Tribunal shall ordinarily sit at New Delhi or at such 
other places as the Chairperson may decide. 
 
  
5.(1) On receipt of a reference in respect of any water dispute from the Central 
Government, the Chairperson shall assign such dispute to a Bench of the Tribunal 
to its adjudication. 
 
(2) The Bench of the Tribunal shall, before investigating the water dispute referred 
to it under sub-section (1), take into consideration the report submitted by the 
Disputes Resolution Committee under sub-section (2) of section 4A, and forward 
lo the Central Government its detailed report setting out the facts as found by it 
including on yield, efficiency in the use of water and such other matters as may be 
prescribed, and giving its decision on such dispute within a period of two Years: 
 
Provided that such report shall also provide for the distribution of water during 
distress situations arising from shortage in the availability of water in such manner 
as may be prescribed: 
 
Provided further that if the report cannot be given within a period of two years for 
any unavoidable reasons, the Central Government may extend such period to a 
further period not exceeding one year. 
 
(3)  If, upon consideration of the decision of the Tribunal, the   Central  
Government or   any State  Government is  of opinion  that anything therein 
contained requires explanation or that guidance is  needed upon any point not 
originally referred to the Tribunal, the Central  Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be, within three  months from the date of the 
decision, again refer the matter to the Tribunal  for further consideration, and on 
such reference, the Bench of the Tribunal concerned may  forward to the  Central 
Government  a further report   within one   year  from  the date of such  reference 
giving such  explanation or guidance as it deems fit and in such  a case,  the  
decision  of the  Tribunal  shall be   deemed  to  be modified accordingly: 
Adjudication of 
water disputes 

        Provided that the Central Government may extend the period of one year to a 
further period not exceeding six months  
 
 (4) If the members of the Tribunal differ in opinion on any point, the point shall 
be decided according to the opinion of the majority. 
 
 5A. (1) The Central Government may appoint two experts serving in the Central 
Water Engineering Service not below the rank of Chief Engineer as assessors for 
each water dispute to advise the Bench in the proceedings before it. 
 
(2) The term of the assessors appointed under sub-section (1) shall be co-terminus 
with the adjudication of the dispute and they shall cease to be assessors after the 
dispute is adjudicated and the final report is forwarded to the Central Government. 
 
5B.(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, if for any reason, a vacancy (other 
than a temporary absence) occurs in the office of the Chairperson, Vice-
Chairperson or any other member of the Tribunal, such vacancy shall be filled by 
a person to be nominated in this behalf by the Chief Justice of India in accordance 
with section 4B. 
 
(2) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the 
Chairperson by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the Vice-Chairperson 
shall act as the Chairperson until the date on which a new Chairperson, nominated 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon his 
office. 
 
(3) When any member of a Bench of the Tribunal is unable to discharge his 
functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause, the Chairperson may assign 
the work of such member to any other member of the Tribunal till such member 
resumes his work.” 
Filling of vacancies 
  
6. The decision of the Bench of the Tribunal shall be final and binding on the 
parties to the dispute and shall have the same force as an order or decree of the 
Supreme Court 
 
 
 
 
Ddecision of 
Tribunal 
 6A. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 6, theCentral Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, frame a scheme or schemes whereby 
provision may be madefor all matters necessary to give effect to the decision of 
aTribunal. 
Power to make 
schemes to 
implement 
decisions of 
Tribunal 
 (2)  A scheme framed under sub-section (1) may provide for -  
(a) the establishment of any authority (whether described as such or as a 
committee or other body) for the implementation of the decision or 
directions of the Tribunal; 
 (b) the composition, jurisdiction, powers and functions of   the authority, 
term of office and other conditions of service of, the procedure to be follow-
by, and the manner of filling vacancies among, the members of the 
authority; 
(c) the holding of a minimum number of meetings of the authority every 
year, the quorum for such meetings and the procedure thereat; 
(d) the appointment of any standing, ad hoc or other committees by the 
authority; 
 

(e) the employment of a Secretary and other staff by the authority, the pay 
and allowances and other conditions of service of such staff; 
(f) the constitution of a fund by the authority, the amounts that may be 
credited to such fund and the expenses to which the fund may be applied; 
(g) the form and the manner in which accounts shall be kept by the 
authority; 
(h) the submission of an annual report by the authority of its activities. 
(i) the decisions of the authority which shall be subject to review; 
(j) the constitution of a committee for making such review and the procedure 
to be followed by such committee; and 
(k) any other matter which may be necessary or proper for the effective 
implementation of the decision or directions of the Tribunal. 
 (3) In making provision in any scheme framed under sub-section (1) for the 
establishment of an authority for giving effect to the decision of a Tribunal; the 
Central Government may, having regard to the nature of the jurisdiction, powers 
and functions required to be vested in such authority in accordance with such  
decision and all other relevant circumstances, declare in the said scheme that such 
authority shall, under the name specified in the said scheme, have capacity to 
acquire, hold and dispose of property, enter into contracts, sue and be sued and do 
all such acts as may be necessary for the proper exercise and discharge of its 
jurisdiction, powers and functions. 
(4) A scheme may empower the authority to make, with the previous approval of 
the Central Government, regulations for giving effect to the purposes of the 
scheme. 
(5) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to, 
amend, or vary, any scheme framed under sub-section (1). 
(6) Every scheme framed under this section shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything contained in any law for the time being in force (other than this Act) or 
any instrument having effect by virtue of any law othr than this Act. 
(7) Every scheme and every regulation made under a scheme shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two 
or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the scheme or the regulation or both Houses agree that 
the scheme or the regulation should not be made, the scheme or the regulation 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that scheme or 
regulation. 
 
 7.(1) No State Government shall, by reason only of the fact that any works for the 
conservation, regulation or utilization of water resources of an inter-State river 
have been constructedwithin the limits of the State, impose, or authorize the 
imposition of, any seigniorage or additional rate or fee by whatever name called) 
in respect of the use of such water by any other State or the inhabitants thereof. 
(2)  Any dispute or difference between two or more State Governments with 
respect to the levy of any water rate in contravention of the prohibition contained 
in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be a water dispute. 
Prohibition of levy 
of seigniorage, etc.  8.  Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3 or section 5, no reference   
shall be  made to a  Tribunal  of any dispute thatmay   arise  regarding any  matter  
which   may  be referred toarbitration under the  River Boards Act, 12 [1956].                          
Bar of reference of 
certain disputes to 
Tribunal 
 9. (1) The Tribunal shall have the same powers as are vested ina civil court under Powers of Tribunal 

the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respectof the following matters, namely:- 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents and 
material objects; 
 (ba) requisitioning of any data, as may be required by it. 
(c) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or for 
local investigation; 
(d) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
 
(2)  The Tribunal may require any State Government to carry out, or permit to be 
carried out, such surveys and investigation as may be considered necessary for the 
adjudication of any water dispute pending before it.  
(3)  A decision of the Tribunal may contain directions as to the Government by 
which the expenses of the Tribunal and any costs incurred by any State 
Government in appearing before the Tribunal areto be paid, and so far as it relates 
to expenses or costs, may be enforced as if it were an order made by the Supreme 
Court. 
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act and any rules that may be made 
hereunder] the Tribunal may, by order, regulate its practice and procedure. 
 
 9A. ( 1) The Central Government may, for the purposes of maintaining a 
data bank and information system at the national level for each river basin, 
appoint or authorise  an agency which shall maintain data relating to water 
resources, land, agriculture and such other matter, containing such particulars and 
in such manner, as may be prescribed.   
(2) As and when required by the Central Government, the State Government 
shall make available the data relating to any of the matters referred to in sub-
section (1) to the Central Government or to the agency appointed or authorised 
under sub-section (1). 
(3) The Central Government or the agency referred in sub-section (1) shall have 
powers to summon and verify any data, record or other relevant information 
received from the State Government. 
 
Maintenance of 
data bank and 
information 
 10. The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of 
service of, the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, other Members and Assessors shall 
be such as may be prescribed. 
Allowances or fees 
for Chairman and 
other members of 
Tribunal and 
assessors 
 11.  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, neither the Supreme 
Court nor any other court shall have or exercise jurisdiction in respect of any water 
dispute which may be referred to a Tribunal under this Act. 
Bar of jurisdiction 
of Supreme Court 
and other courts 
 12. (1) After any water dispute assigned to a Bench of the Tribunal is adjudicated 
and it submits its decision or report, the Central Government shall, on the 
recommendations of the Chairperson, dissolve that Bench. 
 
 (2) Upon dissolution of the Bench under sub-section (1), the members of that 
Bench (excluding Chairperson) shall vacate their respective offices: 
 
            Provided that where a member of a Bench is also a member of another 
Bench, such member shall continue as a member of such other Bench. 
 
12A. (1) Upon the dissolution of a Bench of the Tribunal under section 12,  the 
Dissolution of 
Bench 

staff of such dissolved Bench shall be,– 
 
                    (i) made available to any other Bench, if so required; or  
                    (ii) repatriated to their parent cadre,  
in such manner as may be prescribed. 
 
           (2) The assets and properties of the dissolved Bench shall be transferred to 
the Central Government or to the concerned State Government which provided 
such assets and properties. 
 13. (1) The Central Government, after consultation with the State Governments, 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of 
this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, 
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely;- 
(a) the form and the manner in which a complaint as to any water        dispute may 
be made by any State Government under section 3; 
 
(b) the other matters, and the manner of providing for distribution of water during 
stress situations arising from shortage in the availability of water under sub 
section (2) of section 5; 
 
            (c) the other matters in respect of which the Tribunal may be vested with 
the powers of a civil court under clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 9; 
 
            (d) the procedure to be followed by the Tribunal under sub-section (4) of 
section 9; 
 
           (e) the other matters in respect of which data is to be maintained, the 
particulars thereof, and the manner of maintaining such data under sub-section (1) 
of section 9A; 
 
          (f) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and 
conditions of service of, the Chairperson under section 10; 
 
         (g) the allowances or fee payable to, and other   terms and conditions of 
service of, the Vice-Chairperson, other members and assessors under section 10; 
 
         (h) the manner in which the staff of the dissolved Bench shall be dealt with 
under sub-section (1) of section 12A; 
 
(i) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed. 
Power to make 
rules 
 (3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of 
thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid] both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the 
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as 
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
 
 
 14.The Ravi and Beas Waters Tribunal constituted prior to the date of Constitution of 

commencement of the Inter-State River Water Disputes (Amendment) Act, 2015 
shall stand dissolved and the water disputes pending adjudication before it shall 
stand transferred to the Tribunal: 
 
           Provided that the concerned Bench shall proceed to deal with such dispute 
from the stage at which it was so transferred 
Ravi and Beas 
Waters Bench 
   
 

Annexure VI 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2016-2017) HELD ON FRIDAY, 16 JUNE, 2017 
 
The Committee sat from 1 500 hours to 1615 hours in Committee Room ͚D͛, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
              Shri Hukum Singh –  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Radheshyam Biswas 
3. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
4. Shri Mohanbhai Kundariya  
5. Dr. Abhijit Mukherjee 
6. Shri Subhash Patel 
7. Smt. Aparupa Poddar 
8. Smt. V. Sathyabama 
9. Shri Lallu Singh 
10. Shri Liladharbhai Vaghela  
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
11. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
12. Shri Harshvardhan Singh Dungarpur 
13. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
14. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
15. Shri A.V. Swamy 
16. Shri Pradeep Tamta  
      
SECRETARIAT
 
 
1. Shri Kushal Sarkar  - Additional Director 

2 
 
 
 
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Water Resource, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation 
 
1. Dr. Amarjit Singh, Secretary (WR,RD&GR) 
2. Sh. Shashi Shekhar, Retd. Secretary (WR,RD&GR) 
3. Sh. Sanjay Kundu, JS(PP) 
 
Central Water Commission 
 
1. Sh. Narendra Kumar, Chairman (CWC) 
2. Sh. S. Masood Hussain, Member (WP&P) 
3. Sh. Navin Kumar, Chief Engineer (IMO) 
4. Sh. B.P. Pandey, Director(ISM- I) 
5. Sh. Mannu J. Upadhayay, DC(BM) 
 
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee - convened to have briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of 
Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation - in connection with 
the examination of  ͞The IŶter-State River Water Disputes ;AŵeŶdŵeŶtͿ Bill, ϮϬϭϳ͟.    
 
2. The Chairperson, then, welcomed the representatives of the Ministry.  
Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry made a power-point presentation 
highlighting various aspects of the Bill which inter-alia
 covered the chronology of 
events involved in drafting and introduction of the  aforesaid Bill in the Lok Sabha, 
constitutional provisions related therewith, ͚The IŶter-State River Water Disputes 
;ISRWDͿ Act, ϭ9ϱϲ͛, status of the 8 Tribunals formed under the ISRWD Act, ϭ9ϱϲ͛, 
the drawbacks in th e ISRWD 1956 Act, financial implications in forming the new 
Tribunal; etc. The representatives of the Ministry also elaborated about the 
proposed aŵeŶdŵeŶts iŶ ͚The ISRWD Bill, ϮϬϭϳ͛ to take care of th e drawbacks  in 
͚The ISRWD Act, ϭ9ϱϲ͛ which inter-alia included there bei ng no strict time limit for 
conclusion of adjudication by a Tribunal, also no time limit for publishing the Report 
of a Tribunal under section 6 of the Act, as also there being no upper age limit for 
the Chairman and other Members of a Tribunal for timely issue of an Award and 
Delay in filling up the vacancy and nomination of new Chairman / Member of the 
Tribunal, etc. 

3 
 
 
 
3. The Chairperson initiated the discussion by seeking clarification regarding 
appointment of the members to the Tribunal only from judiciary background and 
authorising only the Chief Justice of India to nominate the Head and other members 
of the Tribunals.  He raised concern regarding giving finality to the Award by the 
Tribunal especially when there ha ve been instances where the Supreme Court had 
taken cognizance of the cases, which were finalized by the earlier Tribunals.  The 
Committee also desired to know about the precedents regarding acceptance of the 
decision of the Dispute Resolution Committee (DRC), etc. Regarding the 
composition of the new Tribunal, the Committee felt that instead of having all 
Judges Tribunal, there is a need to have selection process as it is in Vigilance 
Commission and Information Commission with active involvement of Parliament, 
the Executive and the Judiciary as the issues involved in settling river water disputes 
are very complex and emotive in nature and being so there would require domain 
experts in the relevant fields besides the Judges.   The Chairperson also expressed 
concern over the unending process of adjudication of the Inter-State River Water 
disputes and stated that at some stage there should be timely finality to the 
disputes and there should not be injustice to any of the States/UTs .  Taking note of 
the drawbacks in the existing set-up of adjudication in the Inter-State River Water 
Disputes, the Committee emphasised the need to have a perfect mechanism in 
place. Further, in view of the significance of the Bill the Committee were of the 
considered opinion that the Bill should be discussed threadbare.  Taking note of the 
concerns of the Chairperson and the Committee, the Secretary of the Ministry of 
Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation (M/o WR, RD & GR) 
also felt that these aspects need to be looked into carefully and addressed in right 
earnest.   
 
4. The Chairperson appreciated the Ministry for presenting the details of the 
Amendment Bill.  He also emphasized to have more detailed and fruitful discussion 
on ͚The Inter- State River Water Disputes ;AŵeŶdŵeŶtͿ Bill, ϮϬϭϳ͟ in the next 
meetings.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept on record. 
 
The Committee then adjourned
 

Annexure-VII 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2016-2017) HELD ON FRIDAY, 30 JUNE, 2017 
 
The Committee sat from 11 00 hours to 1230 hours in Committee Room No. ͚139͛, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Abhijit Mukherjee – Acting Chairperson 
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Radheshyam Biswas 
3. Shri Devusinh Jesingbhai Chauhan 
4. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
5. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
6. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya  
7. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
8. Shri Subhash Patel 
9. Shri Sanjay (Kaka) Ramchandra Patil 
10. Smt. Aparupa Poddar 
11. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
12. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah 
13. Smt. V. Sathyabama 
14. Shri Lallu Singh 
15. Shri Liladharbhai Vaghela 
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
16. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
17. Shri Harshvardhan Singh Dungarpur 
18. Mir Mohammad Fayaz 
19. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
20. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
21. Shri A.V. Swamy 
22. Shri Pradeep Tamta  
      
SECRETARIAT
 
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Rita Jailkhani  - Director 
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar  - Additional Director 
 

2 
 
 
 
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Water Resource, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation 
 
1. Dr. Amarjit Singh, Secretary (WR,RD&GR) 
2. Sh. Shashi Shekhar, Retd. Secretary (WR,RD&GR) 
3. Sh. Sanjay Kundu, JS(PP) 
4. Sh. Pradeep Kumar, Member (RBM) 
5. Sh. Navin Kumar, Chief Engineer (IMO) 
6. Sh. B.P. Pandey, Director(ISM- I) 
7. Sh. Virendra Sharma, SJC(BM) 
 
Central Water Commission 
 
1. Sh. Narendra Kumar, Chairman (CWC) 
2. Sh. Ashwin Pandya, Retd. Chairman (WP&P) 
 
At the outset, the Committee, i Ŷ the aďseŶĐe of HoŶ͛ďle ChairpersoŶ, Đhose 
Shri Abhijit Mukherjee as the acting Chairperson under Rule 258(3) of the Rules of 
Procedure. Thereafter, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation                             
(M/o WR, RD and GR) - in connection with examination of ͞The IŶter-State River 
Water Disputes ;AŵeŶdŵeŶtͿ Bill, ϮϬϭ7͟  and to have Clause- by-Clause discussion 
on the said Bill.   
 
2. The Chairperson, then, welcomed the representatives of the M/o WR, RD 
and GR.  The Secretary of the M/o WR, RD and GR thereafter furnished replies to 
the queries of the Committee, which were raised in the previous sitting of the 
Committee  held on 16.06.2017 on the subject aŶd he agreed with the Coŵŵittee͛s 
concern for having a comprehensive mechanism/panel for appointing 
Chairperson/Members of the proposed single Tribunal as also the need for 
strengthening and widening the composition of Dispute Resolution Committee 
(DRC) by having members from both Technical and Non-Technical background s 
particularly the domain experts from the relevant fields concerning the water sector 
as also other social sciences, et c. The Secretary, of the Ministry , also emphasised on 
the need for having River Basin Authorities. 

3 
 
 
 
 
3. The Committee began the deliberations on the issue of appointing a Judge as 
the Chairperson and other Members of the Tribunal. Thereafter, the discussions 
largely covered the issues which were discussed during the previous sitting of the 
Committee, which inter-alia included: 
 
(i) The composition of the new Tribunal - to include domain experts in the 
relevant fields besides the judges; 
 
(ii) The selection procedure for Chairperson / Member of the Tribunal  to be 
on the lines of Vigilance Commission/ Information Commission i.e. with 
active participation of Parliament, the Executive and the Judiciary all the 
three organs of the State; 
 
(iii) Upper age limit for the Chairman and other Members of a Tribunal; 
 
(iv) Unending process of adjudication of the Inter-State River Water disputes 
and need for strict adherence to a time frame for conclusion of 
adjudication and settling the dispute by the Tribunal; 
 
(v) Giving finality to the Award by the Tribunal and ensuring unchallenged 
implementation of the same; etc. 
(vi) Making public the Report of the Dispute Resolution Committee(s). 
 
4. However, in response to a specific query regarding the finality to the Award 
given by the Tribunal under Article 262 the Secretary, the M/o WR, RD and GR, 
stated that actually as per the Article 262(2) of the Constitution the award of the 
proposed Tribunal would be the final one .  The representative of the Ministry 
further clarified that t he Supreme Court, however, under Article 142 have the 
Appellate jurisdiction to look into everything and review them and as a result 
thereof many of the awards are currently under review. In this context, the 
representative of the M/o WR, RD and GR  further quoted the Articles 131 to 139 of 
the Constitution of India and jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of India under them 
in regard to the disputes, etc. 
 
5. Thereafter, the Committee delved in detail about the importance of data 
collecting/monitoring mechanism in regard to the matter as also the verification 
process thereof along with the role of the Central Water Commission as also the  M/o 
WR, RD and GR in dispute resolution. Some Members also expressed concern over the 
continuation of the ongoing works on certain River Basins while the Inter-State River 
Water disputes are being adjudicated by the Tribunals.  While discussin g the issue, the 

4 
 
 
 
Committee felt that there was a need for formation of River Basin Authorities and 
should be considered on an urgent basis which was also endorsed by the Secretary of  
the Ministry. The Chairperson, stressed over the need for addressing all the concerns 
expressed by the Committee in the proposed Bill to the extent possible.   Taking 
note of all the concerns of the Chairperson and the Committee, the Secretary of the 
M/o WR, RD & GR agreed that there is a need to have a fool-proof mechanism for 
settling the Inter-State River Water disputes. 
 
6. The Chairperson appreciated the Ministry for further enlightening the 
Committee on the proposed clauses of the Amendment Bill in great detail .   He also 
thanked the Ministry for expressing their view in a free and frank manner and 
replying to the queries raised by the Members of the Committee.  
 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept for record.  
The Committee then adjourned
 

Annexure VIII 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2016-2017) HELD ON MONDAY, 10 JULY, 2017 
 
The Committee sat from 1130 hours to 1 300 hours in Committee Room No. ͚139͛, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Hukum Singh – Chairperson 
 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Sudheer Gupta 
3. Shri Prakash Babanna Hukkeri 
4. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
5. Shri Mohanbhai Kalyanji Kundariya 
6.  Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
7. Shri Subhash Patel 
8. Smt. Aparupa Poddar 
9. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
10. Smt. V. Sathyabama 
11. Shri Lallu Singh 
  
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
12. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
13. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
14. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
15 Shri A.V. Swamy 
16. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
      
SECRETARIAT
 
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Kushal Sarkar  - Additional Director 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
 
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Water Resource, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation 
 
1. Shri. Sanjay Kundu, JS(PP) 
2. Dr. B. R. K. Pillai, Comissioner (CAD&WM) 
3. Shri. S. Masood Husain, Member (WP&P) 
4. Shri. Pradeep Kumar, Member (RBM) 
5. Shri. Navin Kumar, Chief Engineer (IMO) 
6. Shri. B.P. Pandey, Director(ISM-I) 
7. Shri. Virendra Sharma, SJC(BM) 
 
Central Water Commission 
 
1. Shri. Narendra Kumar, Chairman (CWC) 
2. Shri. Ashwin Pandya, Retd. Chairman (WP&P) 
 
 
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to take further oral evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation                             
(M/o WR, RD and GR) - in connection with the examination of ͚The Inter-State River 
Water Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 2017 ͛ and to have a Clause-by-Clause discussion 
on the said Bill. 
 
2. The Chairperson, then, welcomed the representatives of the M/o WR, RD 
and GR.  Thereafter, the representative of the M/o WR, RD and GR furnished 
clarification to the following issues raised by the Committee in the previous sitting 
of the Committee held on 30.06.2017:  
 
i. Need for two level or three level Dispute Resolution mechanism; 
ii. Need for having a comprehensive mechanism/panel for appointing 
Chairperson and Members of the proposed single Tribunal; 
iii. Need for having a provision for removal of the Chairperson/Member; 
iv. Need for having an Administrative Officer of the rank of Secretary, as a 
part of the tribunal, to look after the administrative machinery of the 
tribunal; 
v. Need for strengthening and widening the composition of Dispute 
Resolution Committee (DRC); etc. 

3 
 
 
 
 
3. The Committee thereafter began the deliberations by seeking clarification 
from the Ministry as to why experts cannot be the Members of the Tribunal as well 
as the difference between the proposed Tribunal and other Tribunals like National 
Green Tribunal (NGT), Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT), Armed Forces Tribunal, 
etc. Further, emphasising on the significance of data in settling the Inter-State 
Water disputes, the Committee discussed the need for forming River Basin 
Authorities (RBAs) for more pragmatic functioning of the DRC and the Tribunal. 
4. Thereafter, the Committee deliberated in detail on the time limit for the 
setting up of the Dispute Resolution Committee (DRC) by the Government as well as 
defining the composition of DRC in the Proposed Bill, 2017 itself.   The Committee 
also discussed the stake of Riparian and Non-Riparian States in the inter-State river 
water disputes and Clause 11 - which provides for the formation  of the Ravi and 
Beas Water Tribunal. 
 
5. Subsequently, the Committee  sought clarification regarding the time limit 
for referring the dispute to the Central Government under Clause 3 of ͚The ISRWD 
(Amendment) Bill, 2017, which reads as under:
 
“4(A) (1).....X..X...X.. 
(2).....X..X...X.. 
(3).....X..X...X.. 
(4) Any water dispute which cannot be settled by negotiations 
shall be referred by the Central Government, by notification, to 
the Tribunal for its adjudication within a period of three months 
from the date of receipt of the report under sub-section (2)’.”  
6. Then, the Chairperson raised the issue of the usage of the word ͚Report͛ 
instead of the word ͚Order͛/ ͚JudgeŵeŶt͛ by the DRC/Tribunal under Clause 3 and 
Clause 4 of the proposed Bill, 2017.  Responding to this the representatives of the 
M/o WR, RD and GR submitted that they will suitably modify the relevant Clauses.
 
 
7. Thereafter, the discussions largely revolved around the following issues: 
 
i. The composition of the new Tribunal -   to have all members from 
judiciary or to include domain experts from the relevant fields; 
 

4 
 
 
 
ii. The selection procedure for Chairperson / Members of the Tribunal  to be 
on the lines of Vigilance Commission/ Information Commission i.e. with 
active participation of Parliament, the Executive and the Judiciary all the 
three Organs of the State; 
 
iii. Need for having strict adherence to a time frame for conclusion of 
adjudication and settling the dispute by the Tribunal in the light of 
unending process of adjudication of the Inter-State River Water disputes; 
iv. Implementing the Report of the Tribunal – Centre͛s information in the 
process. 
 
 
v. Giving finality to the Award by the Tribunal and ensuring unchallenged 
implementation of the same; etc. 
vi. Constitutional provisions of challenging the award / decree of the 
Tribunal in the Supreme Court and ramifications. 
 
 
8. Concluding the discussion, the Chairperson drew attention of the Ministry to 
some of the related and very relevant issues viz. Poor condition of the Rivers, 
significance of the ground water, importance of maintaining Water bodies for 
recharge of ground water, etc. The Chairperson also appreciated the Ministry for 
enlightening the Committee on the proposed Clauses of the Amendment Bill.   He 
then thanked the Ministry for expressing their view in a free and frank manner and 
replying to the queries raised by the Members of the Committee.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
 A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept for record. 
 
The Committee then adjourned
 

CONFIDENTIAL 
Annexure IX 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2016-17) HELD ON 8 AUGUST, 2017 
  
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1515 hours in Committee Room No. 1 , First 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, Extension Building, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT
 
  
Shri Hukum Singh – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Radheshyam Biswas 
3. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
4. Shri Maganti Murali Mohan 
5. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
6. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
7. Shri Sanjaykaka Ramchandra Patil 
8. Smt. Aparupa Poddar 
9. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
10. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah 
11. Shri Lallu Singh 
 
 RAJYA SABHA  
 
12. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
13. Shri Harshvardhan Singh Dungarpur 
14. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
15. Shri Sanjay Seth 
16. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Rita Jailkhani    - Director 
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar   - Additional Director 
 
 
  

 
-2- 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.   
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration (a) Seventeenth Report  on Action Taken 
by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth 
Report on Demands for Grants (2017-18) of Ministry of Water Resources, River Development 
and Ganga Rejuvenation; (ii) Eighteenth Report on Action Taken by the Governmen t on the 
Observations / Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report on ‘Indigenous and 
Modern forms of Water Conservation – Techniques and Practices’; and (iii) Nineteenth Report 
on ‘The Inter-State River Water Disput es (Amendment) Bill, 2017 ’.  After some deliberations , 
the Committee adopted the aforesaid three draft Reports without any modification.   
3. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to present the above three Reports to 
both the Houses of Parliament in the current Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned
 
 