STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
                                (2016-2017) 
 
 
 
                              SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION  
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2017-18) 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Sixteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources} 
 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
August, 2017 /   Shravana,1939 (Saka) 
 
17 

 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
 
(2016-2017) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2017-18) 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Sixteenth Report on Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the Ministry of Water 
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation} 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on    10.08.2017 
     Laid in Rajya Sabha on     10.08.2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2017 /    Shravana,1939 (Saka) 

WRC NO.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2017 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 
 

CONTENTS 
 
 
     
Page  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016-17) …………………………………  (iii)  
 
INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
 
CHAPTER I -      Report        1 
  
       
CHAPTER II - Observations / Recommendations which have been 
  accepted by the Government ………………………………  27 
             
CHAPTER III - Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
  not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ..  59 
  
CHAPTER IV    - Observations / Recommendations in respect of which  
 replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
 the Committee ……. …………………………………………  60 
 
CHAPTER V    - Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
 Replies of the Government are still awaited ……………….  68 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I. Office order dated 8 May, 2017     69 
       
  
II. Rehabilitation work Awarded Under DRIP Project   70 
  
 
III. Minutes of the Tenth Sitting of the Standing Committee   107 
 held on 08.08.2017 
 
IV. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the   109 
 Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
 Sixteenth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2016-17) 
  
 
  
  Shri Hukum Singh  -  Chairperson 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Radheshyam Biswas 
3. Shri Devusinh Jesingbhai Chauhan 
4. Shri Sudhir Gupta@ 
5. Shri Prakash B. Hukkeri* 
6. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
7. Shri Mohanbhai Kundariya# 
8. Shri Maganti Murali Mohan 
9. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
10. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
11. Shri Subhash Patel 
12. Shri Sanjaykaka Ramchandra Patil 
13. Shri Vijaysinh Mohite Patil 
14. Smt. Aparupa Poddar 
15. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
16. Shri S. P. Y. Reddy 
17. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah 
18. Smt. V. Sathyabama 
19. Shri Lallu Singh 
20. Shri Liladharbhai Vaghela 
21. Smt. Dimple Yadav 
 
        RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
23. Shri Harshvardhan Singh Dungarpur 
24. Mir Mohammad Fayaz 
25. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
26. Shri Sanjiv Kumar 
27. Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
28. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
29. Shri Sanjay Seth 
30. Shri A.V. Swamy  
31. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
 
32.   
 
_______________________________________________________________________________ 
@ Nominated w.e.f. 19.10.2016. 
* Nominated w.e.f. 23.11.2016. 
# Nominated w.e.f. 19.10.2016. 
 
(iii)  

 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.  Shri Shiv Kumar   -  Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Rita Jailkhani  -  Director 
3.  Shri Kushal Sarkar  -  Additional Director 
4.  Smt. Shanta Banerjee Datta -  Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv)  

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2016-2017) having 
been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the 
Seventeenth Report on the Action Taken by Go vernment on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report ( Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Co mmittee on Water Resources  on Demands for Grants (2017 -18) of  the 
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation.  
2. The Sixteenth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on  16 March, 2017 .  The replies of the Government to all the 
recommendations contained in the Report were received on 20 June, 2017. 
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered 
and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 08 August, 2017. 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report ( Sixteenth Lok Sabha ) of the 
Committee is given in Annexure-IV. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                HUKUM SINGH, 
04  August, 2017                                           Chairperson, 
13  Shravana, 1939 (Saka)                    Standing Committee on Water Resources 
  

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources deals with the Action Taken by the Government on 
the observations / recommendations contained in their Sixteenth Report (16th Lok Sabha)) on the Demands for 
Grants (2017-18) of the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation” , which was 
presented to Lok Sabha on 16 March, 2017. Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of all 
the 23 observations / recommendations of the Committee, have been categorized as under:  
(i) Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government (Chapter II):  
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 17, 19, 20, 21, 22 and 23   
                                (Total – 19) 
 
(ii) Observations / Rec ommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies (Chapter III):  
Para Nos. NIL            (Total – NIL) 
  
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV):  
Para Nos. 13, 15, 16 and 18            (Total – 04)  
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still awaited 
(Chapter V):  
Para Nos. NIL             (Total – NIL)  
 2. The Committee wi ll now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of the observations / 
recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.  
(A) Maximum use of Water through ‘Per drop more crop’ 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 3. The Committee noted that under the Command Area Development and Water Management (CAD&WM) 
programme, ‘per drop more crop’ was being emphasised through micro irrigation and Participatory Irrigation 
Management (PIM).  They observed that Culturable Command Area (CCA) had been successfully doubled 
through micro irrigation in Karnataka.  The Committee believed that there should be more emphasis on micro 

2 
 
irrigation to save water use in agriculture which is the largest (approximately 80 percent) user of water.  In this 
regard, they appreciated the commit ment of the Ministry to bring 72 lakh ha. area under micro irrigation out of 
which 7 lakh ha. was proposed to be covered by December, 2019.  They further found that the Ministry had 
proposed to raise the existing target of mandatory 10 percent of area unde r micro irrigation in the CAD&WM 
scheme to 30 percent.  However the Committee were of the view that all these measures were still in proposal 
stage and yet to be implemented.  Therefore concrete action needed to be undertaken on an urgent basis so as 
to en sure efficient use of water in agriculture along with increase in the coverage of irrigated area.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommended the Ministry to take appropriate measures in this matter at the earliest in 
consultation with the Ministry of Agricultu re in a time bound manner to achieve the laudable objectives of “ per 
drop more crop” under PMKSY.  They desired to be apprised of the details of the action plan in this regard.  
4. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
“Ministry has initiated the enhancement of Micro Irrigation with the Command Area Development 
and Water Management (CAD&WM)  scheme. The approved guidelines for implementation of 
CAD works of 99 prioritised AIBP projects, with a provision of coverage of 10% of CCA in each 
project, have been circulated among States. Farmers can also avail the assistance under Per 
Drop More Crop beyond prescribed coverage under CAD&WM guidelines. Further, the draft 
EFC Note on new proposed 'Incentivisation Scheme for Bridging Irrigation Gap (ISBIG)' is under 
examination in Ministry of Finance. Ministry of Finance has advised to circulate the draft EFC 
Note to Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers' Welfare, Ministry of Rural Development and NITI 
Aayog, and this is under process. 
Department of Agriculture Cooperation & Farmers Welfare is laying importance on efficient use 
of water for agriculture and emphasis for higher coverage of Micro Irrigation. During 2015 -16, an 
area of 5.72 lakh ha. was brought under Drip and Sprinkler irrigation against the target of 5 lakh 
ha. During 2016-17 higher targets were set for Micro Irrigation and till the end of February, 2017 
about 6.5 lakh ha. have been reported to have been covered under Micro Irrigation. It is 
expected to cover about 8 lakh ha. during 2016-17. Increasing trend for higher coverage of Micro 
Irrigation is being ensured and it is targeted to cover about 1.2 million ha. during 2017-18. 
Besides, with a view to provide impetus to micro irrigation in the country, the Union Finance 
Minister, in his b udget Speech 2017 -18 has announced creation of a dedicated Micro Irrigation 
Fund to be instituted with NABARD with an initial corpus of Rs.5000 crore for encouraging public 
and private investments in modern irrigation methods such as sprinkler and drip irr igation as also 
water use enhancing practices to realize the objective of ‘Per Drop More Crop’.” 
 

3 
 
5. The Committee are happy to note that  the Ministry has initiated measures to incentivize 
alternative methods of irrigation such as  mandatory coverage of 10 percent of Culturable Command 
Area under micro irrigation in each of the 99 prioritised projects of Accelerated  Irrigation Benefits 
Programme (AIBP).   Further farmers have been allowed to  avail the assistance under ‘Per Drop More 
Crop’ beyond mandatory coverage under  the Command Area Development and Water Management 
(CAD&WM) guidelines. Also draft EFC note for ‘Incentivisation Scheme for Bridging Irrigation Gap 
(ISBIG)' has been sent to the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers' Welfare, Ministry of Rural Deve lopment 
and NITI Aayog as advised by the Ministry of Finance . The Committee further  observe that the 
Department of Agriculture Cooperation & Farmers Welfare is emphasising greater coverage of micro 
irrigation with a target to cover about 1.2 million ha. ar ea under it during the year 2017 -18. They also 
note that a dedicated Micro Irrigation Fund has been proposed to be instituted with NABARD with an 
initial corpus of Rs.5000 crore for encouraging public and private investments in modern irrigation 
methods su ch as sprinkler and drip irrigation as also water use enhancing practices to realize the 
objective of ‘Per Drop More Crop’. 
However the Committee believe that large scale application of Micro Irrigation methods is yet to be 
achieved. In this connection, the Committee would like to know the outcome of mandatory coverage of 
10 per cent of Culturable Command Area in the 99 Priority Projects indentified under the AIBP in terms 
of the extent of total area covered so far under Micro Irrigation in these projects . Further they also 
desire to be apprised of the total area covered under micro irrigation out of the targeted 1.2 million ha. 
during 2017-18. Having noted that  the proposed ISBIG scheme is still at the conceptual stage  i.e. the 
Expenditure Finance Committee ’s (EFC) Note for implementation of the ISBIG scheme is being 
discussed, they  would like to recommend the Government to expedite the process to enable its 
implementation at the earliest. Further, although creation of a Micro Irrigation Fund with a corpus of Rs. 
5000 crore was  declared in the Budget 2017 -18, the Ministry has not clarified as to how this fund is 

4 
 
being utilised/ proposed to be utilised for propagating Micro Irrigation in their reply .  They, therefore, 
recommend the Ministry to clearly spell o ut the modus operandi for utilisation of the Micro Irrigation 
Fund. They would also like to be apprised of the details of investments made, if any and expenditures 
made so far from this fund to promote the Micro Irrigation methods.  
(B) Central Ground Water Board 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
6. The Committee note d that Central Ground Water Board (CGWB), a multidisciplinary scientific 
Organisation had been entrusted with the responsibility to develop and disseminate technologies, monitor and 
implement nationa l policies for the scientific and sustainable development and management of ground water 
resources.  Further, the Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) ha d been constituted as per the orders of the 
Supreme Court of India under sub section (3) of Section of  the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 - for the 
purpose of regulation and control of ground water management and development.  They observe d that 
allocation for CGWB ha d been raised by Rs. 68.20 crore to Rs. 240 crore in BE 2017 -18 as compared to BE 
2016-17 to provide for enhancement of salary and related component as a result of implementation of 7 th Pay 
Commission Report and shifting of salary component from Plan to Non Plan allocation.  They further observe d 
that as on 31 January, 2017 the Board had incurred an expenditure of Rs. 161.27 crore.  Further, the Board had 
so far compiled data on ground water resources over 8.89 lakh sq. Km. area, prepared aquifer maps for 5.20 
lakh sq. Km. area, carried on 58 inspections of ground water in various States and  Union Territories and 
prepared 113 Ground Water Year Book.  They also notice d that the proposal for strengthening and restructuring 
of CGWB was being examined .  However ground water situation in the country is at an alarming stage and 
despite all the meas ures and efforts made by the Board so far, it has not been able to effectively manage and 
regulate the use of ground water - which is fast depleting as a result of over drawl and contamination/ pollution. 
 As per the Ministry’s own admission, there was a serious need for strengthening the Board both in terms 
of manpower and equipment as also closer coordination with the State Governments.  Further State Ground 

5 
 
Water Departments also need ed to be strengthened with domain specialists.  The Committee, therefor e, 
recommended the Ministry to impress upon the State Governments to take desired steps for strengthening the 
State Ground Water Departments in whose collaboration, the Board c ould effectively manage and develop 
ground water resources.  The Committee were also concerned by the fact that the CGWA was not able to 
monitor and control the use of ground water by various industries as it was not equipped   with adequate 
manpower to carry out these activities.  The Committee were, therefore, of the view that there  was an urgent 
need to overhaul the structure of CGWB so as to enable it to function in a more effective manner.  Therefore, 
they recommend ed the Ministry to initiate immediate steps to restructure and modernise the Board to infuse 
more expertise by recruitment of specialists in the field and use of advance equipment.  Further, the Committee 
were of the view that in order to strengthen monitoring and regulation by CGWA, it was imperative to completely 
separate CGWA from the CGWB (including the Management of  Authority and Board) with clear demarcation of 
their activities to enable it to function in an independent manner.  Therefore, the Ministry should take utmost 
measures to address the issue of inadequate manpower so as to ensure better monitoring of use of  ground 
water and its contamination by the CGWA.  They desired to be apprised of the details of action taken in this 
regard at the earliest. 
7. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
“Ministry of Water Resources , RD & GR had consti tuted a Committee to revise the Model 
Groundwater Bill. The Committee in the revised Model Groundwater (Sustainable Management 
Bill), 2017 has emphasised that for effective implementation of the provisions of the ground 
water legislations in the State, the  State Ground Water Departments need to be adequately 
strengthened.  Therefore, the Committee had requested the Ministry to emphasise the issue of 
Strengthening the Groundwater Departments while circulating the Model Groundwater 
(Sustainable Management) Bi ll, 2017 to the States. The Model Bill has been submitted to NITI 
Aayog for concurrence. After getting the concurrence of NITI Aayog and approval of Minister 
(WR, RD&GR) it will be circulated to the States for adoption. 
As regards restructuring of Central Ground Water Board (CGWB), Ministry of Water 
Resources, RD & GR had constituted a Committee on restructuring the Central Water 
Commission and Central Ground Water Board under the Chairmanship of Dr. Mihir Shah, former 
Member, Planning Commission.  The Comm ittee has recommended for restructuring of Central 
Ground Water Board and Central Water Commission in view of the present challenges in the 
Water Sector.  The report of the Committee is under consideration of the Ministry. 

6 
 
As the Central Ground Water Autho rity (CGWA) has been constituted vide orders of the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court, legal opinion has been sought as to whether CGWA can be completely 
separated from CGWB. However, with a view to improve the functioning and performance of 
Central Ground Water Autho rity(CGWA), Ministry of WR, RD & GR has appointed separate 
Chairman for Central Ground Water Authority and Central Ground Water Board.  Further, a 
Committee under Member Secretary, CGWA has been constituted to critically examine the 
guidelines and suggest suitable changes or modifications. 
Ministry has directed that two Regional Directors of CGWB will assist Chairman CGWA 
in addition to their existing responsibilities. Deployments from CGWB on replacement basis by 
way of transferring officers who have completed 3 years tenure in CGWA is being considered.”   
 
8. The Committee note that the allocation for the Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) had been 
raised by Rs. 68.20 crore to Rs. 240 crore in the Budget (2017 - 18) mainly for the enhancement of salary 
and related components as per the recommendation of the 7th Pay Commission. The Committee further 
observe that the issue of strengthening of State Ground Water Departments has been emphasised in 
the revised Model Groundwater (Sustainable Management Bill), 2017 , which has been submitted to NITI 
Aayog for their concurrence after which it will be circulated to the States for adoption.  The Committee 
also observe that  restructuring of CGWB is yet to be initiated as the Report of the committee on 
restructuring the Cent ral Water Commission (CWC) and Central Ground Water Board (CGWB), headed 
by Dr. Mihir Shah is under consideration of the Ministry.  With regard to separation of Central Ground 
Water Authority (CGWA) from CGWB , the Committee find that the Ministry has sought  legal opinion on 
this issue as the CGWA was constituted vide orders of the Hon’ble Supreme Court.  However, the 
Ministry has appointed separate Chairman for CGWA and  CGWB to improve the functioning and 
performance of CGWA.  The Committee also note that t wo regional directors of CGWB will assist the 
Chairman, CGWA - in addition to their existing responsibilities.  Further CGWB will deploy officers who 
have completed 3 years tenure in CGWA by way of transferring them to CGWA. A committee has also 
been constituted under the Member Secretary, CGWA to critically examine the guidelines and suggest 
suitable changes or modifications. 

7 
 
While taking note of the measures initiated by the Ministry for better management of ground 
water resources, the Committee feel that fast implementation of required changes is the pivotal issue to 
be addressed . In this connection, the Committee are surprised to note that while the increased 
allocation of Rs. 240 crore for CGWB has been mainly kept for the enhancement of salary and related  
components, nothing has been mentioned with regard to allocation of funds for 
activities/works/programmes/schemes of the Board in th e Ground Water Sector. They therefore desire 
that the Ministry should apprise the Committee  about the expenditure made in t his sector so far 
(head/activity/works/programmes/schemes wise).  The Committee  also desire that the Ministry should 
make utmost efforts to implement the revised Model Groundwater (Sustainable Management Bill), 2017 . 
The Committee would like to be apprised  of the developments so far made in this regard.  Further 
keeping in view the alarming situation of ground water resources, the Committee are of the opinion that 
there is an urgent need to restructure and modernise the concerned regulatory bodies viz. CGWB  and 
CGWA to prevent the excessive use of ground water resources.  Having noted that the Report of the 
committee on restructuring the Central Water Commission (CWC) and Central Ground Water Board 
(CGWB) is still under consideration, the Committee express th eir anguish over the lackadaisical 
approach of the Ministry. They, therefore, recommend the Ministry to initiate measures for 
implementations of  the recommendations  contained therein  expeditiously. The Committee are also 
disappointed to note that no concre te action has so far been taken to strengthen the manpower of the 
CGWA except for the proposed transferring of a few officers from CGWB. As CGWA has been entrusted 
with the crucial task of control, management and development of ground water resources by wa y of 
regulating its extraction and monitoring, the Committee recommend that strengthening its manpower 
should be given topmost priority. The Committee would like to be apprised of the measures  taken/ 
proposed to be taken in this regard. 
 

8 
 
(c) National Water Mission 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
9. The Committee note d that the National Water Mission (NWM) was approved during the year 2011  with 
the main objective of conservation of water, minimizing wastage and ensuring its more equitable distribution 
both acro ss and within States through integrated water resources development and management.  
Implementation of   various activities by NWM  include d carrying out Baseline studies, Formulation of State 
Specific Action Plans (SSAPs), HRD &Capacity Building activitie s, Establishment of demonstration projects and 
setting up of National Bureau of Water Use Efficiency (NBWUE).  The Committee note d that as compared to the 
BE allocation of Rs. 25 crore for the year   2016 -17, the RE allocation was Rs. 5 crore where as the actual 
utilisation was only Rs. 3.50 crore.  About the reasons for under utilisation of resources, the Ministry ha d 
informed that the implementation of NWM through outsourcing and redeployment was a time consuming 
process and lack of adequate staff was a h indrance in achieving the goals envisaged.  The Committee also 
noted that for the year 2017 -18, Rs. 15 crore ha d been allocated and various activities were proposed to be 
taken up during this financial year which inter -alia include d (i) Preparation of Stat e Specific Action Plans for 
Water sector -9 States/UTs, (ii) Human Resource Development and Capacity Building -25 programmes, (iii) 
Baseline Studies -21 water resources projects, (iv) Implementation of Pilot/ Demonstration projects and 
Improving Water Use Eff iciency Projects-5, (v) Organising Regional Conventions of Water User Associations, 
(vi) Undertaking NWM -Industry association collaborative activities to improve Water User Efficiency.  Further, 
with regard to establishment of National Bureau of Water Use Efficiency (NBWUE), during examination of DFG 
(2013-14), the Committee had been informed that it would be operational in the year 2013-14, however, it was a 
matter of concern that even after more than 3 years the NBWUE was yet to be set up and made functio nal.  
While recollecting the apprehension made in the 3 rd Report on DFG (2015 -16), wherein it had been observed 
that with the slow pace of work, the actual implementation will not take place even after decades, the 
Committee deplore d the lackadaisical atti tude of the Ministry.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 

9 
 
recommended the Ministry to form the NBWUE within this financial year as it would go a long way in meeting 
the objectives of National Water Mission (NWM).  The Committee also recommend ed the Ministry to have  a 
permanent solution for having adequate staff in the National Water Mission (NWM) directorate so that there was 
no further delay in achieving the goals of National Water Mission (NWM) due to informal arrangements, 
outsourcing and redeployment of staff. 
10. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows:- 
“Observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted. The proposal is being 
reconsidered as part of Integrated Water Management Efforts. A holistic review of the scheme 
including in relation to National Bureau of Water Use Efficiency (NBWUE) is being undertaken 
as appraisal and approval process for the remaining period of 14 th Finance Commission period. 
Regarding recurring manpower problem at NWM, the Ministry is formulating a rev ised 
manpower / consultants policy for attracting the best talent adequately for the Mission with 
attractive packages. Once it is finalised, NWM will go for new selection process.” 
 
11. The Committee note with utter displeasure the concise reply furnished by the Ministry with 
regard to the implementation of the scheme of the National Water Mission (NWM). They note with great 
concern that the proposal for establishing the National Bureau of Water Use Efficiency (NBWUE)  is 
being reconsidered as a part of Inte grated Water Management Efforts  and NWM scheme will be 
reviewed during appraisal and approval process  in the remaining period of the 14th Finance 
Commission. The Committee further note that the Ministry is formulating a revised manpower / 
consultants policy for attracting the best talent for the Mission with attractive packages . The Committee 
find that the Ministry, instead of fast resolution of problems and making the scheme  of NWM  fully 
operational, is delaying the process by initiating a review of the sc heme. They feel that with such state 
of affairs, their earlier apprehension regarding formation of  National Bureau of Water Use Efficiency  
(NBWUE), stated in their third Report on Demands for Grants (2015 -16) may become a reality. While 
disapproving such attitude on the part of the Ministry , the Committee reiterate that the setting up of 
NBWUE should be given top priority and the Ministry should make sincere efforts to form it at the 

10 
 
earliest. They would like to be apprised of the details of action taken i n this regard. Further the revised 
manpower policy should be finalised at  the earliest to resolve the issue of staff crunch at the NWM 
directorate - which has hindered the achievement of the goals of NWM. 
(D) River Basin Management 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
12. The Committee note d that the scheme of River Basin Management (RBM) consist ed of two broad 
components namely Investigation of Water Resources Development Scheme (IWRDS) and Brahmaputra 
Board.  IWRDS was being implemented by (a) National Water Dev elopment Authority (NWDA) and (b) Central 
Water Commission (CWC).  The NWDA ha d completed 137 water balance studies of basins/sub -basins and 
catchments up to 71 diversion points, toposheet studies of 74 reservoirs and of 37 link alignments, storage 
capacity studies of reservoirs, 32 pre -feasibility studies, 16 feasibility studies and 4 Detailed Project Report 
(DPR) towards the implementation of inter -linking of rivers in the country.  In addition, 36 Pre -Feasibility Report 
and 2 Detailed Project Report ha d also been completed for Intra -State Link proposals of State Government.  
Responding to a specific query regarding problems encountered in implementation of activities / works under 
this scheme, the Ministry ha d informed that the most important challenge in  the Inter Linking of Rivers (ILR) 
Programme was achieving consensus of concerned State Governments on various link projects.  The 
Government was, however, pursuing the Interlinking of River programme in a consultative manner and ha d 
called Special Committ ee on ILR chaired by Hon’ble Minister (WR,RD&GR). Views and observations on the 
Interlinking of Rivers Programme ha d been received from various State Governments, experts and other 
stakeholders in the meetings of the Special Committee for Interlinking of R ivers (ILR).  This special Committee 
would consider all such observations appropriately while planning and formulating the ILR projects.  While 
acknowledging the larger vision of inter linking of rivers the Committee recommend ed the Ministry to come out 
with the Report of Special Committee on ILR at the earliest.  The Committee desire d to be apprised about the 
action taken on the recommendations of the aforesaid Special Committee on ILR. 

11 
 
13. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows:- 
“Under the National Perspective Plan (NPP) for water resources development through inter 
basin transfer of water prepared by this Ministry , NWDA has identified 30 links (16 under 
Peninsular Component & 14 under Himalayan Component) for preparation of Feasibil ity Reports 
(FRs). After survey and investigations, FRs of 14 links under Peninsular Component and 2 links 
in the Himalayan component have been prepared. 
Based on the concurrence of concerned States, four priority links for preparation of 
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) have been identified viz; Ken -Betwa link project Phase -I & II, 
Damanganga-Pinjal link, Par-Tapi-Narmada link and Mahanadi-Godavari link. The DPRs of Ken-
Betwa Phase I & II, Daman -Ganga-Pinjal, Par -Tapi-Narmada have been prepared and shared 
with the respective States. The DPR of Ken -Betwa link project Phase -I has been accepted by 
the Advisory Committee of MoWR, RD & GR and its statutory clearances  have been offered . 
The Techno-economic clearance of the DPR of Ken -Betwa Link Phase -I has been accorded in 
July, 2016 subject to environment, wildlife and forest clearances from MoEF & CC.   Further, as 
the Ken-Betwa link project was declared as National Project in 2009 and the project will benefit 
the drought prone areas of Bundelkhand region in Ut tar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh, a 
cabinet proposal to consider funding pattern of 90% by the Central Government and 10% by the 
State Governments against prevailing sharing pattern of 60:40 between Centre and States is 
being pursued by the Ministry.  
As directed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court vide its judgment dated 27.02.2012 in the Writ 
Petition (Civil) No. 512 of 2002 on ‘Networking of Rivers’ along with Writ Petition No. 668 of 
2002, a Committee called “Special Committee on Interlinking of Rivers” has been  constituted 
under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of Water Resources for the implementation of 
Interlinking of Rivers programme vide Gazette Notification dated 23rd September, 2014.  
Twelve meetings of the Special Committee for Interlinking of Rivers (ILR) have been held 
so far and the last meeting was held on March 08, 2017 at New Delhi. Irrigation/Water 
Resources Ministers of various States along with their Secretaries attended the meetings. Views 
and observations on the Interlinking of Rivers Progr amme have been received from various 
State Governments, experts and other stakeholders in the meetings of the Special Committee 
for Interlinking of Rivers (ILR). The Special Committee is considering all the 
suggestions/observations appropriately while planning and formulating the ILR projects.  
The Committee, after considering the views of all the stakeholders, is proceeding ahead 
to expedite the objectives of the interlinking of rivers as per terms of reference. Vigorous efforts 
have been taken up for gene rating consensus with development of alternative plans and also 
setting out road maps for implementation of mature projects. 
In the first meeting of the Special Committee for Interlinking of Rivers (ILR) held on 
17.10.2014, it was decided to constitute four specific sub-committees:  
i. Sub-committee for comprehensive evaluation of various studies/reports (Sub -Committee - I). 
Seven meetings of Sub -committee-I have been held so far. The last meeting was held on 
26.07.2016;  
ii. Sub-Committee for system studies for i dentification of most appropriate alternate plan (Sub -
Committee - II). Ten meetings of Sub -committee-II have been held so far. The last meeting was 
held on 03.03.2017;   

12 
 
iii. Sub-Committee for Restructuring of National Water Development Agency (Sub -committee – III) 
has completed the assigned task   and submitted its report to the Ministry of Water Resources, 
RD&GR on 21.09.2015; and  
iv. Sub-committee for consensus building through negotiations and arriving at agreement between 
concerned States (Sub -committee – IV). Two meetings of Sub -committee – IV have been held 
so far and the last meeting was held on 30.10.2015. 
The Special Committee for Interlinking of Rivers (ILR)  has not submitted any report so far. 
However, the status on progress report and constitution of “S pecial Committee on Interlinking of 
Rivers” in compliance of Hon’ble Supreme Court judgment dated 27.02.2012 in the matter Writ 
Petition (Civil) No. 512 of 2002: ‘Networking of Rivers’ along with Writ Petition No. 668 of 2002 
were reviewed by the Cabinet in the meetings held on 18.11.2015 and 15.11.2016. 
Constitution of Task Force for Interlinking of Rivers (2015) 
The Union Cabinet while approving the constitution of Special Committee for ILR in its 
meeting held on 24th July, 2014 directed that a committee comprising of experts be constituted 
to look into the issues relating to inter linking of rivers. In compliance to the direction of Union 
Cabinet, MoWR, RD & GR vide O.M. dated 13th April, 2015 has constituted a Task Force for 
Interlinking of Rivers (TF -ILR) under the Chairmanship of Shri B.N.Navalawala, Chief Advisor, 
MoWR, RD&GR. Task Force will assist the Special Committee for ILR and MoWR, RD & GR 
regarding the implementation of ILR Programme.  
Seven meetings of the Task Force have been held so far and last meeting was held on 
11.05.2017.”  
 
14. The Committee observe that National Water Development Agency (NWDA) has identified 30 links 
- 16 under Peninsular Component & 14 under Himalayan Component for preparation of Feasibility 
Reports (FRs) under the National Perspective Plan (NPP) for water resources development throug h inter 
basin transfer of water . They further note  that after survey and investigations, FRs of 14 links under 
Peninsular Component and 2 links in the Himalayan component have been prepare d. Further four 
priority links for the preparation of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) have been identified viz; Ken -Betwa 
link project Phase -I & II, Damanganga -Pinjal link, Par -Tapi-Narmada link and Mahanadi -Godavari link  
based on the concurrence of concer ned States. They also note that the DPR of Ken -Betwa link project 
Phase-I has been accepted by the Advisory Committee of MoWR, RD & GR and its statutory clearances 
have been offered . However t he Committee are surprised to note  that though  a Committee calle d 
“Special committee on Interlinking of Rivers” had been constituted under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble 
Minister of Water Resources , River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation  for the implementation of 

13 
 
Interlinking of Rivers programme, in pursuance of the dir ections of  the Hon’ble Supreme Court , no 
Report has so far been submitted by the Special Committee so far. They further observe that the Union 
Cabinet while approving the constitution of Special Committee for ILR, had constituted a Task Force for 
Interlinking of Rivers (TF -ILR) to look into the issues rela ting to inter linking of rivers  which has held 
seven meetings so far. Keeping in view the importance of inter linking of rivers in addressing the issues 
of water deficient regions of the country, the Commi ttee desire that the Government should complete 
the consultations and deliberations with the concerned States in a time bound manner and come out 
with a target oriented action plan for implementation of inter linking of rivers projects. 
 (E) Formation of River Basin Authority 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
15. The Committee note d that the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation had constituted a Drafting Committee under the Chairmanship of Justice T.S. Doabia (Retd.) to 
study the  activities that are required for optimum development of river basin and changes required in the 
existing River Board Act, 1956 for achievement of the same. The Committee had submitted its Report in 
November, 2012 and has prepared a Draft River Basin Manag ement (RBM) Bill. The Draft RBM Bill proposes to 
establish a River Basin Authority for regulation and development of waters of an Inter -State River Basin or any 
specified part thereof and further makes it clear that different Authorities shall be establish ed for different Inter -
State River Basin. The Bill also makes provision for the creation of a separate River Basin Authority for a sub -
basin within an Inter -State River Basin.  The Committee ha d been informed that the draft River Basin 
Management Bill was under examination by the MoWR, RD and GR - in consultation with different stakeholders.  
While deploring the delay made in formation of River Basin Authority, the Committee strongly recommend ed to 
establish the same at the earliest.   
 

14 
 
16. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows:- 
“A Committee of ‘Group of Officers’ – has been constituted by the Ministry of WR,RD & GR to 
examine in detail the report of Doabia Committee and to suggest possible changes required in 
the draft River Basin Ma nagement Bill to make  it implementable. This Committee has held one 
meeting so far.”  
 
17. The Committee note that the Ministry has constituted a Group of Officers to examine in detail the 
Report of Justice T.S.  Doabia Committee and suggest changes in the  River Basin Management Bill 
drafted by the  said committee. However the Committee  express their displeasure ov er the fact that 
despite a Report about the formation of River Basin Authority and formulation of Draft River Basin 
Management Bill, the Ministry has not been able to take any concrete steps for establishing the River 
Basin Authorities - which has a significant role to play in integral management of river water resources.  
Taking note of the fact that the proposed formation of River Basin Authority i s still being studied, the  
Committee again recommend the Ministry to wind up the process of deliberation and consultation on 
the draft River Basin Management Bill at the earliest in order to facilitate an early formation of  River 
Basin Authorities for each major river of the country . They further desire to be apprised of the findings 
of the Group of officers constituted for the purpose and action taken thereon. 
(F) Ground Water Management and Regulation 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
18. The Committee observe d that the scheme of Ground Water Management and Regulation has been 
implemented during XII Plan with four components of National Aquifer Management (NAQUIM), technological 
upgradation, particularly Ground Water Management and ongoing activities.  They f ound that an allocation of 
Rs. 500 crore had been made in the year 2017 -18 for this Scheme despite actual expenditure of only Rs. 95.63 
crore in the previous year.  Although main reasons for underutilization of funds were stated to be the constraints 
in outsourcing the work of Data Generation for aquifer mapping last year, the Committee were concerned to 

15 
 
note that the Ministry ha d not been able to utilise the budgetary allocation under this Scheme, as was evident 
from the trend of allocation and expenditure o f the last five years.  They observe d that an internal mechanism 
had been proposed to be set up to monitor physical and financial progress of various activities/ works during the 
current year, besides preparation of standard documents.  They also observe d that proposed work components 
for the year 2017 -18 included Data Generation for aquifer mapping, which could not be completed in previous 
year.  While collection of data was an important input for identifying the dimensions of the problem, the 
Committee were   perturbed to find that no tangible benefit ha d been noticed on the ground to improve the 
water availability in over exploited blocks / dark zones of the country.  The Committee notice d that the data 
generated will be used for identification of areas f or inclusion under the National Ground Water Improvement 
Scheme, which was proposed to be implemented with a corpus of Rs. 6000 crore.  Under this scheme 
measures were proposed to be taken to recharge the ground water in areas where there was a possibility to do 
the same and alternative sources of drinking water w ould be provided to those areas where the ground water 
quality had been severely affected due to underground pollution and contamination.  The Committee were of 
the view that despite lot of grandio se schemes being implemented/   proposed to be implemented and crores of 
rupees being spent, the ground water situation ha d not improved.  Rather the problem ha d gone from bad to 
worse.  Therefore, the Committee  were of the view that supply of alternative source of drinking water should be 
given top priority and immediate measures should be taken towards this in coordination with the Ministry of 
Drinking Water and Sanitation.  The Ministry c ould also involve the Members of Parliament and State 
Legislatures in coordinating activities of various Departments to help the people in the affected areas such as in 
West Bengal, Bihar, Western Uttar Prad esh, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh, etc.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommended the Government to take target oriente d measures in this regard and apprise them of the details 
of such action plan within three months of presentation of this report. 
 
 

16 
 
19. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows:- 
“In order to ensure sustainable withdrawal and effective utilization of ground water, including for 
drinking water supply, and its management a committee has been constituted with Secretary 
(WR, RD&GR) as convenor and Secretaries of Ministries of Rural Development, Drinking Water 
and Sanitation, Panchayati Raj, Agriculture & Farmers Welfare and Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change. 
Further, Central Ground Water Board is actively involved in the State Government 
endeavours for supply of drinking water.  Statewise details are as follows; 
West Bengal 
Central Ground Water Board is constantly maintaining liaison with the different departments 
of Central and State Govt., Universities, Municipalities and NGOs’ etc. in West Bengal for 
providing technical guidance, interchanging ideas regarding ground water related probl ems and 
comments on proposed sources of Public Health Engineering Department ( PHED) for water 
supply in rural areas. Central Ground Water Board was/is specially associated with the following 
Committees specially related to supply of drinking water -   
 State Level Scientific Source Finding Committee for Adequacy of Source and State Level 
Project/Scheme Sanctioning Committee. Different drinking water supply schemes are approved 
by this committee. 
 Core Committee of Arsenic Task Force, Govt. of West Bengal.  
 Committee of Arsenic Task Force, Kolkata Municipal Corporation, Kolkata.  
 Core Committee of Fluoride Task Force, Govt. of West Bengal. 
 Drinking Water Scarcity in drought affected areas of West Bengal. 
Bihar 
Central Ground Water Board  is actively involved in  the various drinking water supply 
activities of the States like ‘Har Ghar Nal Ka Jal’ PHED etc.  Besides, Central Ground Water 
Board has constructed 28 high discharge arsenic free deep tubewells in arsenic  affected areas 
of Bihar and handed over to PHED, Govt. of Bihar.  CGWB also envisaged constructing 40 deep 
tubewells in arsenic affected Brahmpur block, Buxar district, Bihar for drinking purposes which 
will be handed over to PHED, Govt. of Bihar.  
Karnataka 
Regional Director, CGWB is the Chairman of th e State Technical Agency (STA) which is 
responsible for clearing the technical aspects of the Schemes for Drinking Water Supply from 
surface water sources for piped water supply schemes in areas where there is short supply in 
ground water, and quality issues. 
Further, Regional Director, CGWB, SWR, Bengaluru is also a Member of the SLSSC 
(State Level Scheme Sanctioning Committee).  SLSSC is clearing the schemes received from 
STA after technical clearance.  Principal Secretary, Rural Development & Panchayat R aj 

17 
 
Department (RD&PR), Govt. of Karnataka is heading the SLSC.  A representative from Ministry 
of Drinking Water and Sanitation, Govt. of India is also a Member of SLSSC, apart from 
members from other State and Central Departments.  
Andhra Pradesh  
Regional Director, Central Ground water Board is a Member of the State Level Scheme 
Sanctioning Committee (SLSSC), which approves all the drinking water Schemes of the State. 
Principal Secretary to the Government, Panchayatraj & Rural Water Supply is the Chairman  of 
the Committee and Dy. Adviser (Water Quality), Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation, 
Government of India along with other Expert Members from line Departments are Members of 
the Committee.  
As per the priority of the Government for sanction of Schem es in cluster of Over -
Exploited and quality affected areas, Multi-Village Supply ( MVS) schemes from transporting 
water from major reservoirs/surface sources are being considered. 
In all the meetings, the Board is laying stress on sustainability of drinking  water Schemes 
through construction of appropriate rain water harvesting structures. Further, as a Member of the 
Committee, the Board is involved in deliberations and suggestions in finalization of the drinking 
water schemes being implemented in the State from time to time. 
Western Uttar Pradesh 
Central Ground Water Board, Northern Region, is one of the members of State Level 
Scheme Scanning Committee (SLSSC) for National Rural Drinking Water Supply Programme 
(NRDWSP) constituted under the Chairmanship of t he Principal Secretary, Rural Development, 
Government of UP. The meetings of the Committee for approval of various drinking water supply 
schemes in the State are convened regularly by the Executive Director, State Drinking Water 
and Sanitation Mission and attended by officers of CGWB.  Representative of CGWB provide 
required technical inputs in respect of schemes discussed during the meetings. 
 
Copy of the Ground Water Year Books issued by CGWB, Northern Region annually is 
provided to UP Jal Nigam, the Depa rtment responsible for supply of drinking water in Uttar 
Pradesh State. In addition, copies of the compiled data of Ground Water monitoring  being 
carried out by CGWB 4 times a year are also provided to UP Jal Nigam. The Department utilizes 
the data in preparing its water supply schemes.” 
 
20. The Committee note that the Ministry has again formed a committee for the sustainable 
withdrawal and effective utilization of ground water. They further observe the works/activities being 
undertaken/carried out by the Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) in the States of West Bengal, Bihar, 
Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Western Uttar Pradesh for addressing the ground water issues. 
However the Committee cannot help to point it out  that these States are still reeling under the severe 

18 
 
problem of contamination of ground water in  the absence of alternative sources of drinking water. The  
Committee find that despite various measures taken by the Ministry/CGWB to alleviate the water related 
woes, the ground reality continues to be pathetic and no tangible impact has been seen so far.  They are 
further distressed to note that the reply furnished by the Ministry does not indicate any measure for 
involving local representatives viz. Members of Parliament and State Legislatures in coord inating 
activities of various Departments to help the people in the affected areas . The Committee therefore 
reiterate that the Ministry should devise immediate, target oriented measures to resolve the problem of 
ground water and its contamination. They wou ld also like to be apprised of the details of works 
undertaken and expenditure made under the scheme of Ground Water Management and Regulation  till 
date and its State-wise impact made/likely to be made in the affected areas of the country. 
(G) Namami Gange –National Ganga Plan 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
21. The Committee observe d that basic thrust  of ‘Namami Gange’ programme , set up during the Union 
Budget 2014-15 to undertake Ganga rejuvenation and conservation by amalgamating all the existing measures 
by 2020, was abatement of pollution in the river through measures such as interception, diversion and treatment 
of waste water, rehabilitation and amalgamation of existing Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs), Common Effluent 
Treatment Plants (CETPs) for major in dustrial clusters, interventions on rural sanitation, solid waste / pious 
refuse management, sewerage network, etc.  They note d that under this programme, a total expenditure of Rs. 
2440.50 crore ha d been made in the last three years.  Further total expend iture by National Mission for Clean 
Ganga was Rs. 4,321.05 crore, out of Rs. 20,000 crore approved by the Cabinet.  While appreciating the 
ambitious programme of Namami Gange, which aim ed at cleaning and rejuvenating Ganga by December, 
2020, the Committee were concerned to note that the implementation of this programme ha d not been able to 
keep pace due to changes in policy with regard to preparation of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) by States and 
model for implementation of projects.  Now the DPRs ha d been revised with the main focus on Infrastructure 

19 
 
and Development and Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs) - which would be implemented through hybrid annuity 
based public private partnership (PPP) model.  The Committee f ound that currently 5 CPSUs ha d initiated 
Condition Assessment and Feasibility Study (CA&FS) for all 118 towns.  However, the details of CPSUs 
entrusted with this work had not been furnished.  The Committee therefore, desire d to be apprised of the details 
of 5 Central Public Sector Undertakings (CP SUs), which ha d been selected to prepare CA and FSs including 
the status of such studies and further preparation of DPRs.  They would also like to know the number of STPs 
selected on hybrid annuity based PPP model and the status of work on these projects.  
22. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows:- 
“Five CPSUs, namely Water & Power Consultancy Services (WAPCOS), Engineers India 
Limited (EIL), National Building Construction Corporation (NBCC), National Project Construction 
Corporation (NPCC) and Engineering Project India Limited (EPIL) have been engaged for 
preparation of condition assessment and feasibility studies. Initially 113 towns were allotted to 
them, which has been reduced to 108. Among them CA&Fs reports for 106 towns have bee n 
received. CPSU wise distribution of the CA&FS reports are detailed below: 
NATIONAL MISSION FOR CLEAN GANGA  (CPSU WISE) 
Abstract of 118 Towns identified Along the River Ganga 
S. 
No.  
State Original 
Work 
Order 
Class of Town Total 
Towns 
After 
Revision 
CA&FS 
Received 
Pen
ding I II III IV V VI 
1 WAPCO
S 
13 0 0 3 3 3 4 13 13 0 
2 EIL 38 16 12 8 2 0 0 38 38 0 
3 NBCC 19 15 0 4 0 0 0 19 19 0 
4 NPCC 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 
5 EPIL 42 28 7 2 0 0 0 37 35 2 
Total 113 59 20 17 5 3 4 108 106 2 
 
Till date following STP projects have been taken up in Hybrid Annuity based PPP model: 
Two STPs in Haridwar with a total capacity of 82 MLD (68 MLD for Jagjeetpur and 14 
MLD at Sarai); AA&ES issued, tenders invited. Last date of tender submission is 2nd June 2017.  
One STP at Ramana Varanasi, with a capacity of 50 MLD; AA&ES issued, tenders invited, last 
date of tender submission is 29th May 2017. 
One STP at Mathura, with capacity of 92 MLD is being forwarded for Third Party Appraisal. 

20 
 
Few more projects will also be taken u p under hybrid annuity based PPP model based upon 
response received for the above mentioned projects.”  
 
23. The Committee note that 5 Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) viz. Water & Power Consultancy 
Services (WAPCOS), Engineers India Limited (EIL), Nation al Building Construction Corporation (NBCC), 
National Project Construction Corporation (NPCC) and Engineering Project India Limited (EPIL) have 
been assigned the task of  preparing Condition Assessment and Feasibility Studies (CA&FS) in respect 
of 108 towns. CA&FS reports have been received in case of 106 towns.  However they note with utmost 
concern that so far only 4 Sewage Treatment Plant ( STP) projects (2 at Haridwar, 1 at Varanasi and 1 at 
Mathura) have been taken up. They further note that few more proj ects are expected to be taken up 
under hybrid annuity based Public Private Partnership ( PPP) model. However keeping in view the slow 
pace of work, the Committee are constrained to believe that the targeted completion of cleaning of 
Ganga river by December,  2020 may remain unaccomplished.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Ministry should fast track the projects under hybrid annuity based PPP model  to ensure cleaning of the 
river expeditiously. They would also like to be apprised of the details of the  total expenditure incurred 
by the National Mission for Clean Ganga so far (head wise) and outcome achieved thereby. 
(H) Installation of STPs 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
24. The Committee further observe d that establishment of STPs had  been targeted to be  completed by 
September, 2018 as per the milestones set under the Namami Gange programme.  But as of now, sewage 
treatment capacity of only 1,017 mld. ha d been created and further treatment capacity of 1 ,187 mld was under 
construction / at approval stage, leaving a gap of 2,618 mld.  The Committee ha d serious apprehension that 
corresponding capacity c ould be created in the remaining one and half years.  They, therefore, recommend ed 
that as resolved by National Ganga River Basin Authority (NGRBA), the work o f setting up STP projects should 

21 
 
be completed expeditiously to meet the target of cleaning Ganga by 2020.  In order to achieve this, the 
Committee recommend ed that installation of STPs should be closely monitored with monthly submission of 
progress report based on actual ground level implementation progress town wise for all the 118 towns situated 
on the bank of river Ganga.  In addition to taking up establishment of STPs on a war footing manner, the 
Committee also emphasised the need to focus on minimizing  waste generation and disposal of waste in 
alternative eco -friendly manner.  The Committee believe d that awareness programmes should be initiated to 
publicize the use of electric crematoria to increase its acceptance among masses. 
25. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows:- 
“Recommendation of Hon’ble Standing Committee has been noted for compliance.  
In this regard, in order to make faster and effective implementation of projects, Project 
Management Consultants (PMCs) are being appoin ted for effective supervision of works on 
ground at the state and centre level. At state level PMCs are hired mostly for works specific or 
town specific for necessary reporting of projects along with information and photographs of 
actual progress of works.  
In addition, for effective monitoring of projects, Tata Consulting Engineers (TCE) has been 
selected to support NMCG along with regular submission of monthly progress reports to capture 
actual implementation of work on ground. 
The aspect of awareness abo ut Electric Crematoria has been covered along with other 
communication activities.  However, specific communication activities will be carried out to 
popularize and increased use of Electric Crematoria.” 
 
26. The Committee note that installation of Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs) is being supervised by 
Project Management Consultants (PMCs) at the State and Centre level. The State level PMCs have been 
assigned the work of reporting the progress of projects along with information and photographs of 
actual progress of work. The Committee further observe that Tata Consulting Engineers (TCE) has been 
selected for monitoring of projects with regular submission of monthly progress reports to capture 
actual implementation of work at ground level. While appreciating these measures taken by the Ministry 
to oversee the progress of work at ground level, the Committee would like to know the outcome of such 

22 
 
monitoring in terms of identifying bottlenecks, timely adoption of remedial measures, faster 
implementation of STP projects,  additional treatment capacity created thereby etc. 
(I) Monitoring mechanism 
Recommendation (Para No. 21) 
27. The Committee further observe d that selection, monitoring of STP projects to be operated on hybrid 
annuity based PPP model and release of p ayments to them, ha d been proposed to be done on the basis of 
certification / recommendation of independent agencies like IITs and local Governments.  Further, Real Time 
Water Quality Monitoring (RTWQM) system ha d been proposed to be created at every outle t of the project.  
They found that out of 113 RTWQM stations targeted to be installed by 2020, so far only 5 RTWQM stations 
had been installed and further 31 such stations were expected to be installed by March, 2017.  All this, again 
demonstrated the sluggish manner in which the mammoth task of cleaning Ganga ha d been progressing.  They 
further observed that concerns of misappropriation of funds, monitoring of all projects and regular submission of 
reports w ould be addressed by appointing Project Managemen t Consultant - for which Tata Consult ing 
Engineers ha d been selected.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of the monitoring 
mechanism created for overseeing the success of different projects in cleaning the river.  They also desire d that 
the monitoring reports should be uploaded in public domain as an important feedback / information about the 
success of ongoing operation for cleaning Ganga.  The Committee therefore, recommend ed to make it 
compulsory for monitoring agency to submit its monitoring report every three months, which should be uploaded 
on Ministry website for an objective assessment of the programme by all the stakeholders including general 
public. 
28. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows:- 
“For effective monitoring of projects, a Management Information system (MIS) is being created 
to capture information pertaining to ongoing, in -pipeline and completed projects, where the main 
dashboard page is demarcated into: 

23 
 
 Physical and financial progress of various  projects of NMCG like Sewage Management (STP 
project, Sewage Network Project), Development of Ghat and crematoria, Bio Diversity Projects 
etc., along with stages of projects i.e. completed, ongoing or inpipeline projects; 
 Physical progress will be monitor ed by mapping the project milestones with projects and month 
wise progress will be updated.  
 Completed Projects will be measured with the effluent parameters to check whether the STP s 
are functioning effectively conforming to the Norms.  
 Also the priority projects along the main stem of Ganga and hotspots can be easily tracked and 
their present conditions can also be captured; 
 Apart from these the MIS will also ensure monthly progress status updates with e -mail alerts to 
concerned stakeholders and escalation matrix will be provided. 
 Automated Report Generation facility will be provided;  
 Actual site photograph uploading facility will be provided to verify the monthly percentage of 
physical progress mentioned in system.  
 Application will provide information about the held up and delayed projects. 
 All information will be captured in graphical representation as well as on database mode. 
 The monthly progress report would be available on the website of NMCG.” 
 
29. The Committee are happy to note  that a Management  Information system (MIS) is being created 
to capture information pertaining to ongoing, in -pipeline and completed projects, wherein both physical 
and financial progress will be monitored.  The Committee, however find that no specific time frame has 
been mentioned as to when the MIS is going to be functional. They would therefore, recommend that 
MIS should be created at the earliest to help flow the desired information to the concerned policy 
makers so that objectives of Ganga cleaning and its rejuvenation are achieved at the earliest. 
(J) Brahmaputra Board 
Recommendation (Para No. 23) 
30. The Committee ha d been informed that in order to make the functions of the Brahmaputra Board more 
effective, the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Re juvenation was considering 
restructuring of the Brahmaputra Board since 2004 for putting up an altogether new set up under a new Act of 
Parliament.  However, due to certain constraints, envisaged in setting up a new organisation in place of the 
existing Brahmaputra Board, it was felt by the Ministry that an attempt be made to make the Brahmaputra Board 

24 
 
more effective and efficient within the ambit of the existing Act.  The Committee were also told that all the works 
such as execution of drainage development  scheme, Preparation of Master Plans, Preparation of DPR of 
drainage development schemes, Multipurpose Projects and Protection of areas from floods of Brahmaputra 
river would be continued during 2017-18.  Special emphasis would also be laid on the protection of Majuli Island 
from floods and erosion and it w ould be undertaken with financial assistance from the Ministry of Development 
of North Eastern Region. 
Going through the figures for the year 2011 -12 to 2016 -17 made available to them on Budgetary 
allocation and expenditure for Brahmaputra Board, the Committee f ound that there had  been nearly 100% 
utilization of funds by the Brahmaputra Board, all these years.  However, despite this achievement, the 
Committee expressed their dissatisfaction over this and a lso dr ew attention of the Ministry to the fact that 
virtually the ineffective performance of the Board in resolving various problems in the North East States Board 
was due to the Board being run from Delhi as Senior Officers of the Board were stationed in Delhi.  On this, a 
representative of the Ministry had admitted that at present the Board was Guwahati centric and 95% of the 
works taken up by the Brahmaputra Board relate d to Assam.  The Secretary, MoWR,RD and GR also had 
candidly stated that the Senior O fficers of the Board should be stationed in North Eastern States instead of 
being stationed in Delhi.  While the Committee felt that the Brahmaputra Board is supposed to look after the 
entire North Eastern Region, it ha d failed in its objectives for cateri ng to the requirement of other States of the 
Region except Assam. 
The Committee fe lt unhappy with the lopsided Assam centric activities of the Brahmaputra Board and 
concentration of its top officers in Delhi.  The Committee, therefore, recommend ed that the officers and Staff of 
the Board should be stationed in an appropriate manner in all the North Eastern States depending on the 
requirements, by revisiting the priorities in taking up projects and chalking out strategy and programmes in order 
to give impetu s to activities regarding water management in all the States of NE Region as per the Board’s 
mandate. 

25 
 
31. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows:- 
“In order to make the Brahmaputra Board administratively and operationally more efficie nt within 
the ambit of existing Act by revamping its technical and non -technical cadre, an elaborated 
exercise was conducted by this Ministry and discussions were made in a meeting held on 
06.02.2017. In the meeting it was felt that Brahmaputra Board may o pen Regional Offices in 
each State of North East, including a separate office at Majuli Island. Based on the discussion, a 
minutes of the meeting was issued vide letter dated 13.02.2017 wherein probable cadre 
restructuring of the Brahmaputra Board was ment ioned and Br. Board was requested to take a 
final decision in the matter. Accordingly, the matter  was taken up as the agenda of the Board 
Meeting of Brahmaputra Board held on 11.04.2017.  It has been decided to open Regional 
offices in all 8 North East St ates and North Bengal to be heeded by either a Deputy Chief 
Engineer or Superintending Engineer.  The technical & non -technical cadre has been made 
pyramidical and robust.  The new structure proposes the footprints of Brahmaputra Board in all 9 
States to take up planning, execution, Flood Protection & Anti-erosion works. 
The additional charge for the post of Vice -Chairman, Brahmaputra Board has been 
assigned to Shri P.M. Scott, Chief Engineer, B&BBO, Central Water Commission, Shillong. 
Shri Iltaf Hussain ha s been promoted as Secretary and Shri C.M. Das has been 
promoted as Chief Engineer (Level-II) in Brahmaputra Board. Both these officers are stationed at 
Headquarter of Brahmaputra Board at Guwahati. 
Central Water Commission was requested to post four offic ers of Central Water 
Engineering Services cadre against the vacant posts in Br. Board on loan basis. In response, 
CWC vide their Office Order dated 1st March, 2017 have posted Shri Asit Chaturvedi and Ms. 
Jyotika Pegu in the Brahmaputra Board on loan basis.  
The advertisement for filling up the posts of General Manager and Chief Engineer (Level -
I) in Brahmaputra Board has been published in Employment News dated 25-31 March, 2017. 
The State Governments of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Mizoram, Meghalaya, Nagalan d, 
Sikkim and West Bengal has been requested to recommend name of suitable officers for 
appointment as Financial Adviser in Brahmaputra Board on loan basis vide letters dated 
16.11.2016, 13.12.2016 and 11.01.2017. 
The Recruitment Rules in respect of posts of Chairman, Vice -Chairman and Financial 
Adviser in Brahmaputra Board have been approved by Department of Personnel & Training and 
forwarded to the Legislative Department, M/o Law & Justice for the vetting. The process of 
regular appointment will be initiated as and when the Recruitment Rules are notified.” 
32. The Committee observe that the Ministry has proposed to improve the functioning of the 
Brahmaputra Board by opening Regional offices in each State of the North East including a separate 
office at Majuli island. They note that in the Board meeting held on 11 April, 2017 it has been decided to 
open Regional offices in all the North East States and North Bengal which will be headed by either a 
Deputy Chief Engineer or Superintending Engineer. Th ey also n ote that the additional charge for the 

26 
 
post of Vice –Chairman, Brahmaputra Board has been assigned to Chief Engineer, Brahmaputra and 
Barak Basin Organisation, Central Water Commission. Further the Central Water Commission has been 
requested to post four o fficers of Central Water Engineering Services cadre against the vacant posts in 
Brahmaputra Board on loan basis. Also, the State Governments of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, 
Mizoram, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Sikkim and West Bengal has been requested to recommend n ames of 
suitable officers for appointment as Financial Adviser in the Brahmaputra Board. Recruitment Rules for 
appointment to the posts of Chairman, Vice Chairman and Financial Adviser, ha ve been approved by 
the Department of Personnel and Training and sen t to the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and 
Justice for vetting. 
The Committee find that though the Ministry has initiated certain steps for improving the 
operations of the Board, these are only stop gap measures. The Recruitment Rules for filling  up the 
posts of higher officials viz. Chairman, Vice Chairman and Financial Adviser have not yet been finalised. 
Also it is not clear as to when the Regional Offices of the Board are going to be set up. The Committee , 
therefore, recommend the Ministry to act in a time bound manner to restructure and revamp the 
functioning of the Board to enable it to resolve the problems of entire North east region in a more 
holistic manner. 

27 
 
Chapter -  II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation  (Para No. 1)  
Analysis of Demands for Grants 
  The Committee observe that an amount of Rs. 6,887 crore (net of recoveries) has been allocated in the Budget 
2017-18 - in respect of the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation (MoWR,RD&GR).  
In addition, the Ministry has been allowed to borrow an amount of Rs. 9,020 crore from the National Bank for Agriculture 
and Rural Development (NABARD) under Long Term Irrigation Fund (LTIF) for expenditure under Pradh an Mantri Krishi 
Sinchai Yojana (PMKSY) – Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP) and Polavoram project.  They further note 
that as compared to the last financial year (2016 -17), there is an increase of Rs. 289.91 crore in Revenue section and 
Rs. 395.88 crore in Capital section of the budget, showing a total increase of Rs. 685.79 crore in 2017 -18.  However the 
Committee find it intriguing to note that while the budget allocations have always been kept at higher level, they have 
been invariably reduced at RE stage during the last five years except for the year 2015 -16.  The Committee note that as 
claimed by the Ministry, the reduction in Budget allocation by Rs. 1,445.71 crore in 2016-17 at RE stage did not affect the 
implementation of various schemes and projects as the same were financed through borrowings from NABARD resulting 
in actually increasing the budget to Rs. 12,937 crore.  However, the Committee find the tall claims of the Ministry in this 
regard hollow as despite there being no dearth of funds, the Ministry should not forget that the same has been arranged 
through borrowing, which ultimately results in future burden on the Ministry.  Therefore, while expressing their 
apprehension on borrowings as it will result in creation of debt and also  additional provisions have to be made for 
servicing the same in future.  Therefore, the Committee recommend the Ministry to manage the finances prudently so 
that it does not add to future obligations / commitments of the Ministry.  The Committee, however,  would like to be 
apprised of the details of servicing the debt including the time period fixed and interest to be paid thereon along with 
principal. 
Reply of the Government 
Observations of Hon’ble Committee in relation to prudent management of finances  have  been noted. The 
arrangement is intended for focussed prioritised projects ripe for completion for accelerated benefit. The assured funding 

28 
 
through NABARD for 99 prioritised projects is to ensure their timely completion and avoid time and cost overrun.   As the 
borrowings have been approved by the  Ministry of Finance, adequate provisions for timely repayment of debt to 
NABARD will be provided in the Budget under the PMKSY.  A strict monitoring mechanism is put in place to ensure just -
in-time release to the State Governments so that there is no idling of borrowed funds.  The tenor of the debt is 15 years 
with three years moratorium and interest rates will vary as per the cost of borrowing of NABARD. The State share 
borrowed at the request of the State Governments will be lent directly to the States by NABARD at 6% and the difference 
between the actual cost of borrowing is to be borne by the Central Government.  
Details of Principal borrowed in FY -2016-17 and FY -2017-18 from NABARD and interest repayments m ade till 
31.5.2017 on such loan including details of outgoes on account of servicing of bonds are given below: 
(i) Loan borrowed from NABARD 
Financial Year 2016-17 
Sr. No. Loan from NABARD for Amount (Rs. in crore) 
1 99 prioritized projects under PMKSY 3336.88 
2 Polavaram Project 2414.16 
 TOTAL 5751.04 
 
Financial Year 2017-18 (so far) 
Sr. No. Loan from NABARD for Amount (Rs. in crore) 
1 99 prioritized projects under PMKSY NIL 
2 Polavaram Project NIL 
 TOTAL NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 

29 
 
(i) Interest payment to  NABARD 
Financial Year 2016-17 
Sr. No. Interest payment to NABARD for  Amount (Rs. in crore) 
1 Principal  amount 44.66 
2 Servicing of Bonds NIL 
 TOTAL 44.66 
 
Financial Year 2017-18 
Sr. No. Interest payment to NABARD for Amount (Rs. in crore) 
1 Principal  amount 80.53 
2 Servicing of Bonds 17.95 
 TOTAL 98.48 
 
(O.M. No. G-11015/8/2016- Budget, Dated : 16.06.2017) 
 
Recommendation  (Para No. 2)  
Utilisation of Budgetary Resources. 
  The Committee observe that the percentage of utilisation of RE allocations by the Min istry during the last five 
years has been constantly improving except the year 2016 -17 when it came down marginally i.e. from 97.6% to 93.58%.  
However, there has been a constant reduction in allocations of funds at RE stage, a fact, always  highlighted by  the 
Committee in their  earlier Reports on Demands for Grants.  They note that last year, the curtailing of funds has been 
compensated by loans from NABARD as the requirement of Rs. 9,799.63 crore in RE 2016 -17 (higher than BE allocation 
of Rs. 6,201.21 c rore) demanded by the MoWR,RD and GR was not allocated by the Ministry of Finance.  The 
Committee   feel that the Ministry has not been able to project its Budgetary Estimates accurately - which results in 
anomaly in allocation of funds at RE and BE stages .  Keeping in view the pressing need for higher allocation of funds to 
meet various challenges in the water sector, the Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry should rejig its internal 

30 
 
mechanism and procedures to project its budgetary requirements correctly so as to improve utilisation of budget 
allocations projected initially.  
Reply of the Government 
Ministry had made all efforts to optimise utilisation of funds allocated and against BE 2016 -17 of Rs.5500 crore, 
an expenditure of Rs.2215.28 crore( 40.28%) was incurred till 30.09.2017. However, post monsoon season the trend 
improved and expenditure of Rs.3712.73 crore (67.50%) was incurred till 30.11.2017. Against RE 2016 -17 ceiling of 
Rs.4755.50 crore, a total expenditure of Rs.4691.48 crore was booked, which is 98.65% of the RE allocations.   
While every care is taken to project realistic requirement of funds and after detailed consultations with all the 
wings of the Ministry, the reduction at RE stage sometimes is mandated because of overall resour ce position of the 
Government.  The budget estimates for the year 2017-18 have been prepared taking into consideration proposed outputs 
and outcomes of the Schemes/Projects. Recommendation made by Hon’ble Committee in relation to improvement of 
utilisation against BE allocations have been noted. It is expected that trend of expenditure in the months of April and May, 
2017 would improve with approval of regular budget 2017 -18 before onset of financial year and removal of ‘Vote on 
Account’ restrictions from FY 2017-18 will lead to better financial performance in FY 2017-18.  
(O.M. No. G-11015/8/2016- Budget, Dated : 16.06.2017) 
 
Recommendation  (Para No. 3) 
New Budgeting Exercise 
  The Committee note that since 2017 -18, budget has been classified under Revenue  and Capital sections, which 
will give a clear picture of physical and financial progress achieved in respect of various programmes/ schemes 
implemented by the Ministry. They further note that all Establishment Expenditure has been separated from expenditu re 
on programmes / schemes enabling better assessment of productive expenditure.  The Committee hope that with 
advancing of budget preparation exercise and changes in budgetary classifications, the Ministry would be able to not 
only, minimise the wasteful expenditure but utilise the available funds in a more judicious and productive way.  They 
further hope that with the above changes in budget making process, the Ministry would be in a better position to assess 

31 
 
the future needs and make more realistic proje ction of Budgetary Estimates thereby reducing the gap between Budget 
and Revised Estimates. 
Reply of the Government 
The observations of the Committee are noted.   
A regular monitoring mechanism is in place in the Ministry and that has helped in better util isation of allocated funds as 
has also been appreciated by the Committee.  
(O.M. No. G-11015/8/2016- Budget, Dated : 16.06.2017) 
 
Recommendation  (Para No. 4) 
PMKSY(HKKP) - Budget Allocation and Expenditure 
  The Committee find that Pradhan Mantri Krishi S inchai Yojana (PMKSY) was introduced in 2015 -16 to enable 
fast completion of ongoing major and medium irrigation projects including National Projects.  Har Khet Ko Pani (HKKP) is 
one of the components of PMKSY which seeks to provide water to every field th rough such sub components and as (i) 
Creation of new water resources through minor irrigation (both surface and ground water); (ii) Repair, restoration and 
renovation of water bodies; (iii) Strengthening carrying capacity of traditional water resources; (i v) Construction of rain 
water harvesting structures (Jal Sanchay); (v) Command area development; (vi) Strengthening and creation of 
distribution network from source to the farm; (vii) Improvement in water management and distribution system for water 
bodies to take advantage of the available sources which is not tapped to its fullest capacity driving benefits from low 
hanging fruits; (viii) At least 10% of the command area to be covered under micro/precision irrigation; (ix) Diversion of 
water from source of different location where it is plenty to nearby water scarce areas; (x) Lift irrigation from water bodies 
/rivers from low elevation to supplement requirement beyond Integrated Water Resource Management Programme 
(IWMP) and Mahatma Gandhi National Rural E mployment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) irrespective of irrigation 
command; (xi) Creation and rejuvenation of traditional water storage systems like Jal Mandir (Gujarat); Khatri, Khul 
(H.P.); Zabo (Nagaland) 40 Eri, Oranis (Tamil Nadu); Dongs (Assam) Katas, B andhas(Orissa and M.P.) etc. at feasible 
location. 

32 
 
 The Committee further note that under this Scheme, a budgetary allocation of Rs. 1,450 crore has been provided 
for the year 2017 -18 as against Actual Expenditure of Rs. 420 crore in the previous year.  Th ey further note from the 
Ministry’s submission that there is a requirement of Rs. 2000 crore for servicing of interest component of NABARD loans 
and Rs 1200 crore for completion of ongoing schemes of Surface and Minor Irrigation and Repair Renovation and 
Restoration of Water bodies, to be completed in the targeted year 2017 -18 i.e. by the end of XII Plan.  While expressing 
concern over the availability of sufficient funds for completion of projects by the end of 2017 -18 (last year of XII Plan), the 
Committee apprehend that there is possibility of these projects being spilled over subsequent years.  They, therefore, 
recommend the Ministry to prepare a schedule for completion of the projects within a fixed time frame so that the desired 
objectives of the scheme of HKKP are achieved within a fixed time period.  They would like to be apprised of the details 
in this regard along with irrigation potential created under this scheme since 2015-16. 
Reply of the Government 
During 2015-16, umbrella scheme of Pradhan Man tri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) was launched  with an 
aim to enhance physical access of water on farm and expand cultivable area under assured irrigation, improve on farm 
water use efficiency, introduce sustainable water conservation practices etc.  With the launch of PMKSY, Acceleration 
Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP) was subsumed in it and now Major and medium irrigation/multipurpose irrigation 
(MMI) projects are being funded under PMKSY -AIBP.  Central Assistance of Rs. 2 ,327.8 crore was released a nd 
potential of 4.64 Lakh Ha. was reported to be created  through AIBP projects during 2015-16. 
During 2016 -17, 99 on -going AIBP  projects have been identified in consultation with States  which could be 
completed by December, 2019 including CAD works. A s pecial funding mechanism has been created through borrowing 
from NABARD which could be utilized by the Central and State Governments to bridge the requirement of funds for 
completion of the 99 priority projects.  23 major/medium ongoing AIBP  projects were identified to be completed by 2016-
17 (Irrigation Potential of 14.53 Lakh Ha.) and another 31 projects by 2017 -18 (Irrigation Potential of 12.95 Lakh Ha.) and 
the balance 45 projects were identified to be completed by December, 2019 (Potential Utilization of 48.54 Lakh Ha.).   
During 2016-17, Rs. 10010 cr. has been made available through LTIF/budget for these prioritized projects and 
Polavaram.  This includes Central share of Rs. 6 ,676 cr.(AIBP-Rs. 3308, CAD -Rs.854 and Polavaram -Rs. 2,514)  and 
Rs. 3,334 as State share. 21 projects having irrigation potential of 5.22 lakh Ha. are likely to be completed by June,  2017 

33 
 
and another 31 projects having potential of 17.53 Lakh Ha. by  June,2018.  The balance 47 projects with irrigation 
potential of 53.28 Lakh are likely to be completed by December, 2019.  
In relation to the identified 99 projects, both Acceleration Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP) and Command 
Area Development & Water Management (CADWM) works are being undertaken from funds under Long Term Irriga tion 
Funds (LTIF) being borrowed from NABARD with a view to complete the projects in a time bound manner.  Accordingly, 
no budgetary allocation was made under CADWM programme, which was earlier being implemented as a sub -
component of PMKSY-HKKP. No budgetary allocation has been proposed for CAD works during 2017-18, too.  
CADWM  works are being undertaken from funds under Long Term Irrigation Funds (LTIF) being borrowed from 
NABARD with a view to complete the projects in a time bound manner.  Accordingly, no budgetary allocation was made 
under CADWM programme, which was earlier being implemented as a sub -component of PMKSY-HKKP. No budgetary 
allocation has been proposed for CAD works during 2017-18, too.  
In case of Command Area Development (CAD) works, the la nd for construction of field channels is to be 
voluntarily provided by the farmers, and this activity invariably gets linked with the assurance of water supply reflected in  
terms of completed canal works. Hence a time lag of about 12 months with respect to  creation of irrigation potential is 
expected in completion of CAD works. At the start of 99 prioritized projects, only about 37 projects were included under 
CADWM program and the DPRs for balance projects were required to be prepared and processed afresh;  and some 
added delay on this account has come into effect in case of early phased projects. The updated target for creation of 
irrigation potential (through AIBP component) is 21 projects by June 2017, 31 projects by June 2018, and 45 projects by 
December 2019; and considering the time lag indicated above, the envisaged target for utilization of irrigation potential 
(through CADWM implementation) is 27 projects by December 2018, 28 projects by December 2019, and 44 projects by 
December 2020. 
Presently, Har Khet Ko Pani (HKKP) component of PMKSY, has the following schemes: 
SMI Scheme 
                SMI scheme is targeted to be completed in two year time excluding the year of inclusion. In XII Plan 5 ,651 SMI 
schemes have been included and works in 3 ,270 schemes have been reported to be completed. The balance schemes 
are targeted to be completed by 2018-19 i.e.  beyond  XIIth Plan, subject to the availability of fund. 

34 
 
                In 2015-16, Rs. 601.93 crore has been released as Central Assistance and Rs. 148 crore has been released in 
2016-17 for SMI schemes.   As per the information submitted by the State Government, 1.065 lakh hectares irrigation 
potential has reported to be created in 2015 -16. The potential created in 2016 -17 is yet to be submitted by  the State 
Governments. 
RRR of Water Bodies Schemes 
                RRR scheme are targeted to be completed in two year time excluding the year of inclusion. In XII Plan 1 ,354 
numbers of water bodies have been included and works in 464 water bodies have reported to be completed. The balance 
schemes are targeted to be completed by 2018-19 i.e.  beyond XIIth Plan, based on the availability of fund. 
                In 2015-16, Rs. 161.18 crore has been released as Central Assistance.   As per the information subm itted by 
the State Governments, 0.257 lakh hectare irrigation potential has reported to be created in 2015 -16. During 2016-17, no 
budget was available for this. However, States may have made expenditure on the same as the scheme was continuing. 
Details of such expenditure and potential created during 2016 -17 have been sought and would be made available once 
the proposals are received during current year.  
(O.M. No. G-11015/8/2016- Budget, Dated : 16.06.2017) 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
Maximum use of Water through ‘Per drop more crop’ 
  The Committee note that under the Command Area Development and Water Management (CAD&WM) 
programme, ‘per drop more crop’ is being emphasised through micro irrigation and Participatory Irrigation Management 
(PIM).  They observ e that Culturable Command Area (CCA) has been successfully doubled through micro irrigation in 
Karnataka.  The Committee believe that there should be more emphasis on micro irrigation  to save water use in 
agriculture which is the largest (approximately 80 percent)  user of water.  In this regard, they appreciate the commitment 
of the Ministry to bring 72 lakh ha. area under micro irrigation out of which 7 lakh ha. is proposed to be covered by 
December, 2019.  They further find that the Ministry has propose d to raise the existing target of mandatory 10 percent of 
area under micro irrigation in the CAD&WM scheme to 30 percent.  However the Committee are of the view that all these 
measures are still in proposal stage and yet to be implemented.  Therefore concr ete action need to be undertaken on an 

35 
 
urgent basis so as to ensure efficient use of water in agriculture along with increase in the coverage of irrigated area.  
The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to take appropriate measures in this matter a t the earliest in 
consultation with the Ministry of Agriculture in a time bound manner to achieve the laudable objectives of “ per drop more 
crop” under PMKSY.  They would like to be apprised of the details of the action plan in this regard. 
Reply of the G overnment  
 
Ministry has initiated the enhancement of Micro Irrigation with the Command Area Development and Water 
Management (CAD&WM)  scheme. The approved guidelines for implementation of CAD works of 99 prioritised AIBP 
projects, with a provision of cover age of 10% of CCA in each project, have been circulated among States. Farmers can 
also avail the assistance under Per Drop More Crop beyond prescribed coverage under CAD&WM guidelines. Further, 
the draft EFC Note on new proposed 'Incentivisation Scheme for  Bridging Irrigation Gap (ISBIG)' is under examination in 
Ministry of Finance. Ministry of Finance has advised to circulate the draft EFC Note to Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers' 
Welfare, Ministry of Rural Development and NITI Aayog, and this is under process. 
Department of Agriculture Cooperation & Farmers Welfare is laying importance on efficient use of water for 
agriculture and emphasis for higher coverage of Micro Irrigation. During 2015 -16, an area of 5.72 lakh ha. was brought 
under Drip and Sprinkle r irrigation against the target of 5 lakh ha. During 2016 -17 higher targets were set for Micro 
Irrigation and till the end of February, 2017 about 6.5 lakh ha. have been reported to have been covered under Micro 
Irrigation. It is expected to cover about 8 lakh ha. during 2016-17. Increasing trend for higher coverage of Micro Irrigation 
is being ensured and it is targeted to cover about 1.2 million ha. during 2017-18. 
Besides, with a view to provide impetus to Micro Irrigation in the country, the Union Finan ce Minister, in his 
budget Speech 2017-18 has announced creation of a dedicated Micro Irrigation Fund to be instituted with NABARD with 
an initial corpus of Rs.5000 crore for encouraging public and private investments in modern irrigation methods such as 
sprinkler and drip irrigation as also water use enhancing practices to realize the objective of ‘Per Drop More Crop’. 
(O.M. No. G-11015/8/2016- Budget, Dated : 16.06.2017) 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 5 of Chapter – I of the Report) 

36 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
Central Ground Water Board 
  The Committee note that Central Ground Water Board (CGWB), a multidisciplinary scientific Organisation has 
been entrusted with the responsibility to develop and disseminate technologies, monitor and impleme nt national policies 
for the scientific and sustainable development and management of ground water resources.  Further, the Central Ground 
Water Authority (CGWA) has been constituted as per the orders of the Supreme Court of India under sub section (3) of 
Section of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 - for the purpose of regulation and control of ground water 
management and development.  They observe that allocation for CGWB has been raised by Rs. 68.20 crore to Rs. 240 
crore in BE 2017-18 as compared to BE 2016-17 to provide for enhancement of salary and related component as a result 
of implementation of 7 th Pay Commission Report and shifting of salary component from Plan to Non Plan allocation.  
They further observe that as on 31 January, 2017 the Boar d has incurred an expenditure of Rs. 161.27 crore.  Further, 
the Board has so far compiled data on ground water resources over 8.89 lakh sq. Km. area, prepared aquifer maps for 
5.20 lakh sq. Km. area, carried on 58 inspections of ground water in various St ates and Union Territories and prepared 
113 Ground Water Year Book.  They also notice that the proposal for strengthening and restructuring of CGWB is 
currently under examination.  However ground water situation in the country is at an alarming stage and d espite all the 
measures and efforts made by the Board so far, it has not been able to effectively manage and regulate the use of 
ground water - which is fast depleting as a result of over drawl and  contamination/ pollution. 
 As per the Ministry’s own admi ssion, there is a serious need for strengthening the Board both in terms of 
manpower and equipment as also closer coordination with the State Governments.  Further State Ground Water 
Departments also need to be strengthened with domain specialists.  The Co mmittee, therefore, recommend the Ministry 
to impress upon the State Governments to take desired steps for strengthening the State Ground Water Departments in 
whose collaboration, the Board can effectively manage and develop ground water resources.  The Co mmittee are also 
concerned by the fact that the CGWA is also not able to monitor and control the use of ground water by various industries 
as it is not equipped   with adequate manpower to carry out these activities.  The Committee are, therefore, of the v iew 
that there is an urgent need to overhaul the structure of CGWB so as to enable it to function in a more effective manner.  
Therefore, they recommend the Ministry to initiate immediate steps to restructure and modernise the Board to infuse 

37 
 
more expertise by recruitment of specialists in the field and use of advance equipment.  Further, the Committee are of the 
view that in order to strengthen monitoring and regulation by CGWA, it is imperative to completely separate CGWA from 
the CGWB (including the Mana gement of Authority and Board) with clear demarcation of their activities to enable it to 
function in an independent manner.  Therefore, the Ministry should take utmost measures to address the issue of 
inadequate manpower so as to ensure better monitoring of use of ground water and its contamination by the CGWA.  
They would like to be apprised of the details of action taken in this regard at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Water Resources River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation had constituted a Committee to revise 
the Model Groundwater Bill. The Committee in the revised Model Groundwater (Sustainable Management Bill) , 2017 has 
emphasised that for effective implementation of the provisions of the ground water legislations in the State, t he State 
Ground Water Departments needs to be adequately strengthened.  Therefore, the Committee had requested Ministry to 
emphasise the issue of Strengthening the Groundwater Departments while circulating the Model Groundwater 
(Sustainable Management) Bil l, 2017 to the States . The Model Bill has been submitted to NITI Aayog for concurrence. 
After getting the concurrence of NITI Aaayog and approval of Minister (WR, RD&GR) it will be circulated to the States for 
adoption. 
As regards restructuring of Central Ground Water Board (CGWB), Ministry of Water Resources, RD & GR had 
constituted a Committee on restructuring the Central Water Commission and Central Ground Water Board under the 
Chairmanship of Dr. Mihir Shah, former Member, Planning Commission.  The Comm ittee has recommended for 
restructuring of Central Ground Water Board and Central Water Commission in view of the present challenges in the 
Water Sector.  The report of the Committee is under consideration of the Ministry. 
As the Central Ground Water Autho rity has been constituted vide orders of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, legal 
opinion has been sought as to whether CGWA can be completely separated from CGWB. However, with a view to 
improve the functioning and performance of Central Ground Water Authority(CG WA), Ministry of WR, RD & GR has 
appointed separate Chairman for Central Ground Water Authority and Central Ground Water Board.  A copy of the order 

38 
 
issued in this regard is enclosed as Annexure-I. Further, a Committee under Member Secretary, CGWA has been  
constituted to critically examine the guidelines and suggest suitable changes or modifications. 
Ministry has directed that two Regional Directors of CGWB will assist Chairman CGWA in addition to their 
existing responsibilities. Deployments from CGWB on re placement basis by way of transferring officers who have 
completed 3 years tenure in CGWA is being considered.   
(O.M. No. G-11015/8/2016- Budget, Dated : 16.06.2017) 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
National Water Framework Law 
  The Committee observe that the draft National Water Framework Law prepared by Dr. Mihir Shah Committee 
was circulated among the States and Union Territories to elicit their views and suggestions, after which  the legislation is 
proposed to be enacted by Parliament.  They further observe that while many States such as Rajasthan and Madhya 
Pradesh have agreed with the proposed law with certain amendments, a few other States such as Tamil Nadu and 
Punjab have rai sed objections.  They further notice that the Secretary MoWR, RD and GR has issued a letter on 
20.01.2017 to all the Chief Secretaries requesting them to support the Bill for facilitating early enactment of the law.  
However, taking into account the fact t hat considerable time has elapsed in the consultation process, the Committee 
desire that the Ministry should engage with State Governments more vigorously to resolve the contentious issues and 
clear the apprehensions of the States in this regard to enable early  enactment of the bill. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation is regularly pursuing with the State 
Governments for seeking their cooperation for early enactment of the National Water Framework B ill. Among the 
States/Union Territories who have furnished comments on the draft National Water Framework  Bill, 2016, Governments 
of Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh have supported the Bill with some suggestions/comments. However, Governments of 
Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Punjab and Odisha have opposed the Bill.  

39 
 
Chief Secretaries of all States/Administrators of all Union Territories have been requested to support the Bill vide 
letter of  Secretary (WR, RD & GR) dated 20.01.2017. Further, Hon’ble Minister (WR, RD & GR) , vide letter dated 
14.03.2017 to the Chief Minister of the all States/ UTs has also requested to support the National Water Framework Bill 
of the States/UTs to enable our country to ensure sustained water security and to protect our water resource for fut ure 
generations. Hon’ble Minister (WR, RD & GR) has also requested the Chief Ministers for passing suitable resolutions in 
their State Assemblies in support of the Bill.  
Further, this Ministry is proposing a meeting with the Irrigation/Water Resources Min isters of all States/UTs for 
soliciting their views on the Bill and also for making consensus in favour of the Bill.  
 
(O.M. No. G-11015/8/2016- Budget, Dated : 16.06.2017) 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
  Further, while noting the various laudable features o f the proposed law such as protection, conservation, 
regulation and management of water as a vital and stressed natural resources, right to sufficient quantity of safe water for 
life, States to hold water resources as a common heritage and public trust, ef forts for rejuvenating rivers for ensuring (a) 
Aviral Dhara; (b) Nirmal Dhara and (c) Swach Kinara, integrated river basin development and management and 
implementation of a Water Security Plan, etc. - the Committee are astonished to find that the draft bi ll does not speak of 
any measure for protection of river banks/ anti erosion  measures which is a serious problem endangering the river banks 
and associated problem of floods and submergence. The Committee therefore, recommend the Government to 
incorporate the suggested changes so as to make the proposed law more comprehensive and effective to resolve the 
challenges faced at the ground level.      
Reply of the Government 
The draft National Water Framework Bill seeks to provide an overarching national legal framework with principles 
for protection, conservation, regulation and management of water as a vital and stressed natural resource. The draft Bill 
has inter -alia made provision that rejuvenation efforts on conservation and restoration of the river basin, integrating 

40 
 
participatory watershed management and recycle-reduce-and-reuse principles, recognizing that healthy river systems are 
essential for sustainable development which indirectly includes protection of river basins / anti erosion measures.  
However, recommendation of the Hon’ble Standing Committee for making specific provisions for protection of 
river banks / anti erosion measures in the Bill has been noted and would be included in subsequent deliberations in this 
regard.  
(O.M. No. G-11015/8/2016- Budget, Dated : 16.06.2017) 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
Farakka Barrage Project 
  The Committee observe that Farakka Barrage Project was commissioned in 1975 for  the preservation and 
maintenance of the Kolkata port and for increasing the navigational depth  of the Bhagirathi – Hooghly waterway.  They 
further observe that budget allocations under this Head was kept at Rs. 143.40 crore in 2016 -17 (BE), which has been 
raised to Rs. 155 crore in BE (2017-18).  However, the expenditure envisaged for the year 2016-17 could not be made as 
the work of replacement of 35 gates under phase – II and repair of PSC road bridge, etc.  could not be awarded.  During 
the last 4 years, 42 gates of Farakka Barrage have been replaced, with maximum no. of gates replaced in the yea r 2014-
15 and 2015 -16.  The Committee find that the work of replacement of gates is not being done in a time bound manner 
and after picking up the pace for two years, the work is again being taken up at a slow pace with rare possibility of the 
work getting  finished by the XII Plan.  The Committee are surprised and disappointed to note that no work could be 
started under Phase –II of work despite the whopping budgetary allocation made for this purpose during the year 2016 -
17.  The general apathy of the Government towards upkeep and maintenance for Farakka Barrage is also reflected in the 
casual approach to the problem of staff crunch.  Despite the project facing severe shortage of staff to carry out the 
actives and projects in a time bound manner, the proposa l for increasing manpower   is still under consideration and no 
concrete steps have been taken in this direction as yet.  The Committee are distressed to note such state of affairs in 
Farakka Barrage Project despite their earlier recommendations contained in 3rd Report on Demands for Grants (2015-16) 
to undertake the replacement of gates in a time bound and target oriented manner and fix the responsibility for laxity in 
the matter in addition to taking immediate measures for recruitment of more technical ma npower.  The Committee, 

41 
 
therefore, strongly recommend to prepare action plan and initiate the work of replacing gates of the Farakka Barrage on a 
war footing to complete it by the end of the targeted year 2017-18. 
Reply of the Government 
Farakka  Barrage   Project  was  commissioned in 1975  for  the  preservation and maintenance of the  Kolkata  
Port  and for  increasing the  navigational depth   of  the   Bhagirathi  -   Hooghly   waterway.  The  Farakka   Barrage 
Project  (FBP) is having  total   123 gates,  including  11 Gates  of Canal  Head Regulator,  which  regulates   the  flow  in 
Farakka  Feeder  canal  from  river Ganga.     On different occasions, Nine (09) nos.  of  new Gates   were  installed   to  
replace   old  gates,   since  the   old  Gates were  either  badly  damaged   or washed  out due to  wear  and tear. 
Considering  the  fact  that  the gates  have  served  their  economical li fe  since   1975;   based   on  the   
recommendation   of  Technical  Advisory Committee   of  FBP (TAC-FBP), it was  decided   in the  XII   Plan to  take   up 
the  work  of replacement    of all the  old Gates  of FBP with  new Gates  in a  phased  manner, considering   the  
quantum  of work  and working  conditions in field. Accordingly,   the  installation   of 33 new Gates  in Phase-I   has been 
successfully   completed    by  FBP   and  a  total   of  42  new  Gates have   been   installed    so   far   by   FBP  
Authority    including   9  nos   gates installed  earlier. 
The   work   of replacement    of  G ates  at  this  scale  has been  taken  up by  FBP authority  for  the  first  time  
in XII Plan and the completion   of  installation    work  was  delayed    mainly  due  to  adverse   working   conditions    at  
site,   which include -   limited    working    space   for   movement    of   cranes   and   people  involved  in the  work;  and 
that installation   works  are  to  be executed   above the  flowing   water   of  river  Ganga  requiring   extra   care  for  
movement   of man  and  machinery.  Also ,  due  to  road -cum-rail  bridge   on one side  of the  FBP Gates,  the  access  
for the  moving  cranes  is available only from  one side  i.e. the  river  side. 
The  work   of  installation    of 35  new  Gates   in Phase -II    has  been  awarded   and  the  same  is  under  
progress. After  its completion,   work  of Phase -III   will be taken  up by FBP Authority, and;   with   the   available    
resources/manpower    of   FBP and   experience gained  while  installation    of  33  Gates   in Phase -I,   replacement    
of all  the FBP Gates   is now scheduled  for completion by the year  2020-21. 
(O.M. No. G-11015/8/2016- Budget, Dated : 16.06.2017) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
  The Committee also notice that there is lack of coordination in the functio ning of Farrakka Barrage Authority and 
State Barrage Authority, which results in unplanned release of water breaching the embankments due to overflow of 
water.  Consequently lots of village and agricultural land nearby get submerged under the river without  any possibility to 
recover them again.  The Committee, therefore , recommend that an in -depth study should be made about the reasons 

42 
 
for breaching of the embankments due to over flow of water and other factors leading to submergence of agricultural land 
nearby and immediate solutions to the problem of the flooding in the adjoining areas of Farakka Barrage could be arrived 
at the earliest.  Further the Ministry should, in particular, look into the aspect of desiltation and breaching of 
embankments due to mo vement of ships in the barrage and take appropriate measures to arrest the same.  The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the details of measures taken in this regard within three months of presentation of 
this Report.   
Reply of the Government 
 Farakka  Barrage   Project  was  commissioned  in 1975  for the  preservation and  maintenance of the  Kolkata  
Port  and  for  increasing   the  navigational depth   of  the   Bhagirathi   -   Hooghly   waterway.    Accordingly, the Ganga 
water is relea sed from FBP reservoir into Farakka Feeder Canal fo r the stated   purpose.  During  flood  season  the  
releases   into  feeder   canal are  limited   to  40,000   cusec,  which  is the  maximum  capacity of  feeder canal  and  
accordingly,  any  extra   inflows   o f  river   Ganga   are   releas ed towards its downstream side i.e, into river Ganga. 
Advice of Govt of West Bengal is also considered while making release into Feeder Canal from FBP reservoir. 
 Further, during  the  period  of  1 st January  to  31st  May e very  year, the  releases   into  Feeder   Canal  are   
made  as  per  provis ions   of  Ganga Water  Treaty - 1996  with  Bangladesh,  and  during  this  period   also  the  
releases   never  exceed  40,000  cusec. 
The FBP Feeder   Canal  is a 33.38  Km lon g earthen   (unlined)  canal and it is also  a part  of National  Water   
Way  No.-1   (NW-1),    from  Allahabad to   Haldia.    Accordingly,     this   canal    is   also    used   for    movement     of 
ships/vessels   by  the Ministry   of  Shipping,   which  is  one  of  the   reasons   for damages   caused  to the  banks  of 
Feeder  Canal. 
 
On    the     request      of    Ministry     of    Water     Resources,      River Development   and   Ganga   
Rejuvenation   (MoWR,  RD  &GR),   Ministry   of Sh ipping   is  planning  to  restore   the  banks  of  feeder   canal  in its  
critical reaches.   In  this  regard,   Ministry  of  Shipping   has  assured   MoWR, RD & GR that  any  such damages   will  
be repaired   by  Ministry  of Shipping from  their   own  resources.       A  Detailed   Project   Report   (DPR)  is  under 
preparation     by  Ministry  of  Shipping   which   includes   such  bank   protection/restoration works   on Feeder   Canal  
of  Farakka  Barrage.  This  DPR is being  prepared by  Ministry   of  Shipping   in consultation    with  FBP Authority    
and  Government of West Bengal. 
(O.M. No. G-11015/8/2016- Budget, Dated : 16.06.2017) 
 
 

43 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement Project (DRIP) 
  The Committee note that Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement Project (DRIP) is being implemented in 7 States 
of Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Uttarakhand and Jharkhand to rehabilitate and improve 
identified dams and develop appropriate institutional me chanism for the safe operation and maintenance of all large 
dams in participating States.  The Committee observe that in addition to dam safety, the matter of strengthening 
institutional set up for national level dam safety surveillance and guidance is als o being taken up in the Central Water 
Commission (CWC).  The total cost of the project has been estimated at Rs. 2100 crore, out of which 80 percent is being 
financed by World Bank while balance 20 percent will be financed by respective State Governments a nd the MoWR,RD 
& GR.  The project has become effective from 18 April, 2012 and is scheduled to be completed in six years.  However, 
the Committee find that even after a lapse of five years, the Actual Expenditure under the Project, so far, has been 
meager, a fact admitted by the Ministry, due to reasons such as complex preparatory requirements and limited capacity 
of implementing agencies.  Further they find that finalization of rehabilitation proposal for each of dam to be taken under 
DRIP required various  studies, investigation and dam safety expert inspections and suggestions, which took a 
considerable time.  However all these procedures are stated to have been completed now and works have been awarded 
on 186 dams amounting to Rs. 1,388 crore.  So far a t otal expenditure of Rs. 558 crore has been made till December, 
2016.  Further Rs. 160 crore has been provided in the Budget allocation for the current year for CWC for over all 
coordination and supervision and Damodar Valley Corporation for rehabilitation of its three dams namely Maithon, Konar 
and Panchet. 
 The Committee are distressed to note that the project has not taken off properly at the initial stage due to various 
issues, which has delayed its implementation.  Although work has started now on a fas t track, the Committee apprehend 
the completion of the project may get delayed as the implementation work has just begun.  They therefore, recommend 
the Ministry to speed up the work so that the project is completed by 2018, as assured by the Secretary.  T hey further 
desire to be apprised of the details of the  dams along with action taken in respect of each of them under the DRIP so far.  
They would also like to know, in particular, the details of initiatives taken under the Project to strengthen instituti ons and 
the capacity building of officials / staff for safe operation and maintenance of large dams. 

44 
 
Reply of the Government 
In  view  of  the  initial   delays  due  to  complex   preparatory    phase  of  the  project,   most  of  the 
rehabilitation  wor ks could  be awarded   for implementation  only  during   last  one  year.  Since, implementation of  
some  of  the  awarded   works  will  extend  beyond  the  scheduled  completion period  of the  project  (i.e. June 2018), 
an in-principle approval for t ime  extension of two  years has been given by the Government and recommended   for 
consideration of the World  Bank.  Final approval  is expected shortly. 
There is a considerable  progress  in the  award  of works  in last one year.   Rehabilitation   wor ks have been 
awarded to 191 dam project costing  Rs. 1500 crore and the total  committed   amount  is Rs. 1700  crore  as on  date.  
Expenditure   incurred   till  date  is Rs. 770  crore.  A  list  of  works awarded  for each dam for  its rehabilitation   is 
annexed as Annexure-II. 
Dam Safety Institutional   Strengthening   of the State Dam Safety Organisations  of participating S tates and  
Central  Dam  Safety  Organisations  is one  of  the  important   components   of  this project.     Under  this  com ponent,   
training   in  dam  safety   related   subjects,  concepts   and techniques   were  undertaken   by Central  Project  
Management   Unit  to  utilize  the  expertise available within  the  country  and with  the  Consultant  engaged for  
assisting CWC in managing the  project.  So far, 74 trainings in which  about 2,571 engineers and officials have been 
trained. Further  40 officers  have  been  sent  under  two  batches  to  Deltares,  Netherlands  and  USBR (USA) for  two  
international   study  to urs  for  exposure  of  international   dam  safety  practices. These programs   were   received   
well   b y the   participants    who   were   benefitted    by the knowledge  and experience  of the  faculty.  To provide  a 
forum  for  sharing of knowledge   and experience  of dam safety  professionals  covering  non -DRIP States, three  
National  Dam Safety Conferences  have been organized  on yearly  basis, first  at lIT Madras  (2015), second at IISc, 
Bangalore (2016) and third at lIT Roorkee (2017).  Fourth is planned in Kerala in January 2018. 
In addition  to the above, 6 nos. of exposure visit to Japan covering  about  40 DRIP officials  have been 
organized  by the  World  Bank to  give the  exposure  in the  areas of dam safety,  seismic preparedness,  
instrumentation,    institutional   arrangement,   sedimentation   etc.  Under  DRIP, 7 institutes   namely  lIT,  Madras,  N IT 
Rourkela,  NIT Calicut,  CWRDM  Cochin,  MANIT  Bhopal, MNNIT Allahabad,  College of  Engineering  Trivandrum,   
Anna  Universit y    and IISc. Bangalore have   been   shortlisted    for   strengthening    and   enhancing   their    
capabilities    to   provide consultancy  in various dam safety related  topics and provide  training  for  the S tate 
Government officials.  So far, MoUs have been signed with Indian Institute of Sciences, Bangaluru and IIT, Madras.  
(O.M. No. G-11015/8/2016- Budget, Dated : 16.06.2017) 
 
 
 

45 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
  The Committee further observe that the legislation on Dam safety has been delayed by a considerable time, 
despite their Report on the Bill, way back in 2011.  They note that currently, the National Dam Safety Bill, 2016 is being 
prepared and consultation with States is going on.  They, therefore, recommend the Ministry to wind up the process  at 
the earliest and take speedy measures for its enactment. 
Reply of the Government 
The proposal for enactment of Dam Safety Bill is under consideration in the Ministry to provide robust legal and 
institutional framework for Dam Safety for the Central and the State Governments. 
The Ministry introduced the Dam Safety Bill, 2010 in Parliament on 30th August, 2010 under Article 252 of the 
Constitution, which was subsequently referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Water Resources for 
examination. The Parliamentary Standing Committee submitted the recommendations vide its Seventh Report on Dam 
Safety Bill, 2010 in the Parliament in August, 2011 and subject to its recommendations and observations, the Standing 
Committee has recommended passing of the  Bill by the Parliament. The observation and recommendations of the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Water Resources were examined by this Ministry and accordingly a new Bill was 
prepared incorporating the recommendations/suggestions of the Standing Committee. 
  However, the said Bill lapsed on the dissolution of 15th Lok Sabha. As a fresh resolution of two States was 
required under Article 252 of the Constitution for introducing the Bill, in view of the bifurcation of the State of Andhra 
Pradesh, the process for enactment of Dam Safety Bill under Article 252 could not be taken up by this Ministry. 
Further, considering the limitation of the Dam Safety Bill (2010) in terms of its initial applicability to the two States 
of Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal and the Union Territories only, the Ministry explored the possibilities available under 
the Constitution of India for ensuring national level applicability of the Bill in consultation with Ministry of Law & Justic e 
(MoL&J). Accordingly, new draft Dam Safety Bill, 2016 has been prepared with nationwide applicability of the Bill.  
  As per instructions of NITI Aayog in this regard, the Bill has been circulated to all the States and Union Territories 
on 09.08.2016 for fresh consultation. In  the meantime, 37th Meeting of National Committee on Dam Safety (NCDS) was 
held on 17 & 18th February, 2017. In accordance with the comments received from various States and outcome of the 
37th Meeting of NCDS, some ch anges in the Bill are envisaged. The Bill has been approved b y MoL&J.  The Ministry is 
shortly bringing a Note for consideration of the Union Cabinet for approval to introduce the “Dam Safety Bill, 2017” in the 
Parliament.   
(O.M. No. G-11015/8/2016- Budget, Dated : 16.06.2017) 
 

46 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
River Basin Management 
  The Committee note that the scheme of River Basin Management (RBM) consists of two broad components 
namely Investigation of Water Resources Development Scheme (IWRDS) and Brahmaputra Board.  IWRDS is being 
implemented by (a) National Water  Development Authority (NWDA) and (b) Central Water Commission (CWC).  The 
NWDA has completed  137 water balance studies of basins/sub -basins and catchments up to 71 diversion points, 
toposheet studies of 74 reservoirs and of 37 link alignments, storage cap acity studies of reservoirs, 32 pre -feasibility 
studies, 16 feasibility studies and 4 Detailed Project Report (DPR) towards the implementation of inter -linking of rivers in 
the country.  In addition, 36 Pre -Feasibility Report and 2 Detailed Project Report have also been completed for Intra -
State Link proposals of State Government.  Responding to a specific query regarding problems encountered in 
implementation of activities / works under this scheme the Ministry has informed that the most important challeng e in the 
Inter Linking of Rivers (ILR) Programme is achieving consensus of concerned State Governments on various link 
projects.  The Government is, however, pursuing the Interlinking of River programme in a consultative manner and have 
called Special Committee on ILR chaired by Hon’ble Minister (WR,RD&GR).  Views and observations on the Interlinking 
of Rivers Programme have been received from various State Governments, experts and other stakeholders in the 
meetings of the Special Committee for Interlinking  of Rivers (ILR).  This special Committee would consider all such 
observations appropriately while planning and formulating the ILR projects.  While acknowledging the larger vision of 
inter linking of rivers the Committee recommend the Ministry to come out  with the Report of Special Committee on ILR at 
the earliest.  The Committee desire to be apprised about the action taken on the recommendations of the aforesaid 
Special Committee on ILR. 
Reply of the Government 
Under the National Perspective Plan (NPP) fo r water resources development through inter basin transfer of 
water prepared by this Ministry , NWDA has identified 30 links (16 under Peninsular Component & 14 under Himalayan 
Component) for preparation of Feasibility Reports (FRs). After survey and invest igations, FRs of 14 links under 
Peninsular Component and 2 links in the Himalayan component have been prepared. 
Based on the concurrence of concerned States, four priority links for preparation of Detailed Project Reports 
(DPRs) have been identified viz; K en-Betwa link project Phase -I & II, Damanganga -Pinjal link, Par -Tapi-Narmada link 

47 
 
and Mahanadi-Godavari link. The DPRs of Ken -Betwa Phase I & II, Daman -Ganga-Pinjal, Par-Tapi-Narmada have been 
prepared and shared with the respective States. The DPR of Ken -Betwa link project Phase -I has been accepted by the 
Advisory Committee of MoWR, RD & GR and its statutory clearances  have been offered . The Techno -economic 
clearance of the DPR of Ken -Betwa Link Phase -I has been accorded in July, 2016 subject to environm ent, wildlife and 
forest clearances from the Ministry of Environment , Forest and Climate Change (MoEF & CC).    Further, as the Ken -
Betwa link project was declared as National Project in 2009 and the project will benefit the drought prone areas of 
Bundelkhand region in Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh, a cabinet proposal to consider funding pattern of 90% by the 
Central Government and 10% by the State Governments against prevailing sharing pattern of 60:40 between Centre and 
States is being pursued by the Ministry.  
As directed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court vide its judgment dated 27.02.2012 in the Writ Petition (Civil) No. 512 
of 2002 on ‘Networking of Rivers’ along with Writ Petition No. 668 of 2002, a Committee called “Special Committee on 
Interlinking of Rivers” has been constituted under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister of Water Resources for the 
implementation of Interlinking of Rivers programme vide Gazette Notification dated 23rd September, 2014.  
Twelve meetings of the Special Committee for Interl inking of Rivers (ILR) have been held so far and the last 
meeting was held on March 08, 2017 at New Delhi. Irrigation/Water Resources Ministers of various States along with 
their Secretaries attended the meetings. Views and observations on the Interlinking  of Rivers Programme have been 
received from various State Gov ernments, experts and other stakeholders in the meetings of the Special Committee for 
Interlinking of Rivers (ILR). The Special Committee is considering all the suggestions/observations appropri ately while 
planning and formulating the ILR projects.  
The Committee, after considering the views of all the stakeholders, is proceeding ahead to expedite the 
objectives of the interlinking of rivers as per terms of reference. Vigorous efforts have been t aken up for generating 
consensus with development of alternative plans and also setting out road maps for implementation of mature projects. 
In the first meeting of the Special Committee for Interlinking of Rivers (ILR) held on 17.10.2014, it was decided t o 
constitute four specific sub-committees:  
v. Sub-committee for comprehensive evaluation of various studies/reports (Sub -Committee - I). Seven meetings of 
Sub-committee-I have been held so far. The last meeting was held on 26.07.2016;  
vi. Sub-Committee for system studies for identification of most appropriate alternate plan (Sub -Committee - II). Ten 
meetings of Sub-committee-II have been held so far. The last meeting was held on 03.03.2017;   
vii. Sub-Committee for Restructuring of National Water Development Agency ( Sub-committee – III) has completed 
the assigned task   and submitted its report to the Ministry of Water Resources, RD&GR on 21.09.2015; and  
viii. Sub-committee for consensus building through negotiations and arriving at agreement between concerned 
States (Sub-committee – IV). Two meetings of Sub -committee – IV have been held so far and the last meeting 
was held on 30.10.2015. 

48 
 
The Special Committee for Interlinking of Rivers (ILR)  has not submitted any report so far. However, the status on 
progress report and constitution of “Special Committee on Interlinking of Rivers” in compliance of Hon’ble Supreme Court 
judgment dated 27.02.2012 in the matter Writ Petition (Civil) No. 512 of 2002: ‘Networking of Rivers’ along with Writ 
Petition No. 668 of 2002 were reviewed by the Cabinet in the meetings held on 18.11.2015 and 15.11.2016. 
Constitution of Task Force for Interlinking of Rivers (2015) 
The Union Cabinet while approving the constitution of Special Committee for ILR in its meeting held on 24th July, 
2014 directed t hat a committee comprising of experts be constituted to look into the issues relating to inter linking of 
rivers. In compliance to the direction of Union Cabinet, MoWR, RD & GR vide O.M. dated 13th April, 2015 has 
constituted a Task Force for Interlinking of Rivers (TF -ILR) under the Chairmanship of Shri B.N.Navalawala, Chief 
Advisor, MoWR, RD&GR. Task Force will assist the Special Committee for ILR and MoWR, RD & GR regarding the 
implementation of ILR Programme.  
Seven meetings of the Task Force have been held so far and last meeting was held on 11.05.2017.  
 
(O.M. No. G-11015/8/2016- Budget, Dated : 16.06.2017) 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 Recommendation (Para No. 17) 
National River Conservation Programme (NRCP) 
  The Committee observe that under the Central Sector scheme of the National River Conservation Programme 
(NRCP), 85 projects, including ongoing Externally Aided Projects (EAP), World Bank projects and Japan International 
Cooperation Agency (JICA) projects, have been sanctioned with a total estimated cost of Rs. 8,240.68 crore.  However, 
so far only 35 projects have been completed and the remaining 50 projects are scheduled to be completed by the year 
2020.  They also note that the project cost unde r this programme is being shared between the Centre and the State 
Governments on 70:30 basis for World Bank funded projects and on 85:15 basis for JICA assisted projects.  They further 
note with utmost concern that the actual utilisation of funds under thi s programme has not been satisfactory.  From the 
allocation and expenditure incurred in the last year, the Committee find that there was a substantial reduction in 
allocation at RE stage as demand for funds were not forthcoming due to slow progress of the projects.  They observe that 
principal reasons affecting the implementation of projects under this programme are delay in tendering process, 
retendering, non availability of land, legal issues, natural calamities, delay in permission from local authorities  for road 

49 
 
cutting, crossing, local festivals, higher fund requirement, pending cabinet approval from the State Government etc.  
While expressing their regret over the poor implementation of this programme which aims at rejuvenation of rivers, the 
life line for people in this country,  the Committee believe that there is an urgent need to change the mindset to give this 
programme a top priority.  Today, water has become a stressed natural resource due to changes in global climate and 
massive pollution making  it further scarce.  In such circumstance, it is high time that cleaning and rejuvenation of rivers 
are undertaken at a rapid pace to provide for water security to the masses, as also enunciated in the proposed National 
Water Framework Law.  The Committee,  therefore, recommend the Ministry to give a big thrust to this programme by 
coordinating with State Governments to remove the procedural bottlenecks and administrative hurdles so that projects 
are completed by the targeted period of 2020.   
Reply of the Government 
Recommendation of Hon’ble Standing Committee has been noted for compliance.  
Towards, ensuring better coordination with the State Government and removing procedural bottlenecks, action has 
already been initiated. Few of the important initiatives taken up are:  
Cabinet has approved “The River Ganga (Rejuvenation, Protection and Management) Authorities Order, 2016” 
which lays down a new institutional structure for policy and implementation in fast track manner and empowers National 
Mission for Clean  Ganga to discharge its functions in an independent and accountable manner through an order under 
the Environment Protection Act, 1986 (29 of 1986). 
Formation of State Ganga Committees in each of the Ganga bank states has been initiated. In three of the 5 
main stem Ganga States, State Ganga Committees have been notified. 
Creation of the District Ganga Committees in each of the Ganga Banks Districts has been initiated. 
For better supervision and faster implementation of projects, Project Management Consultan ts have been 
appointed. At state level, PMCs are hired mostly for supervision of works, and for r eporting on actual progress of projects 
along with detailed information and photographs.  Tata Consulting Engineers (TCE) has  been appointed for supporting 
NMCG besides regular submission of monthly progress reports to capture actual implementation of works on the ground. 
Regular monthly meeting with concerned State Departments are being taken up to push the project 
implementation in a faster mode and bottleneck s like delay in tendering, retendering, land availability, legal issues are 
being sorted out.  

50 
 
In recent months, due to streamlining efforts, projects which were getting delayed by over two years due to 
tendering processes have now been awarded, details given in table 1.1 below: 
Table1.1: Projects Awarded to Contractor Since February 2017 
S.No State Name of Project Project Component Amount (Rs in Crore) 
1 Bihar Beur STP project 43 MLD (23 MLD new+20 
MLD renovation) STP 
77.85 
2 Bihar Beur Sewerage 
Network 
180 km long network 398.40 
 
Table1.1: Projects Awarded to Contractor Since February 2017 (cont’d) 
S.No State Name of Project Project Component Amount (Rs in Crore) 
3 Bihar Saidpur STP and 
Adjoining Network 
60 MLD STP and 55km of 
adjoining network 
188.19 
4 Bihar Saidpur Network 172 Km long network  431.22 
5 Bihar Karmalichak STP 37 MLD STP capacity 73.61 
  Total  1169.27 
 
Similarly, due to delayed tendering process by the State Governments, very high bids were received. Revised 
estimates for such proje cts are also being prepared and approved. In March 2017, revised AA&ES issued for 2 projects 
as per details given in table 1.2. 
Table 1.2:Revised AA&ES issued in March 2017 
S.No State Name of Project Facility to be provided Amount (Rs in Crore) 
1 Uttarakhand Muni-Ki-Reti* I&D works and STP of 12.5 
MLD 
80.45 
2 Bihar Karmalichak 
Sewerage Projects 
96.54 km of sewer network 277.42 
  Total  357.87 
 *The project mode has been changed. 
 
In March 2017, two meetings of Executive Committee of NMCG were held in wh ich projects worth Rs .2326.18 
Crore were approved. These projects will facilitate in creating 188 MLD STP capacity along with 
upgradation/rehabilitation of 626 MLD STP capacity in the states of Uttarakhand, Bihar, Jharkhand and Delhi. 

51 
 
(O.M. No. G-11015/8/2016- Budget, Dated : 16.06.2017) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 19) 
  With regard to implementation of projects for mitigation of pollution in the river, the Committee note the recent 
orders of the National Green Tribunal to stop cleaning work in segment -B, Phase-I (Haridwar to Unnao stretch) of river 
Ganga as the data provided by the State Governments and other agencies on the actual number of industries / drains 
and the quantum of effluent load was not consistently satisfactory - which could have affected desi gning of the project.  
Taking cognizance of this order, the Committee believe that a proper mechanism need to be instituted to quantify the 
amount of pollution in the selected part of the river before finalising  the projects on its bank to ensure that the  money 
does not go waste and projects are operated successfully.  The Committee desire to be apprised of the details of action 
taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
Recommendation of Hon’ble Standing Committee has been noted for compliance.  
Towards ensuring proper management of pollution abatement in the selected stretch of river Ganga (Segment-B , Phase-
I (Haridwar to Unnao) following actions are taken up: 
 Condition Assessment and Feasibility Studies (CA&FS) have been conducted by M/s EIL, which as sesses the existing 
treatment capacities in respective towns, various drains and untreated sewage being discharged into the river. Apart from 
that, detailed project reports prepared by State agencies have also measured sewage flow in drains using scientifi c 
methods. Both the CA&FS and DPRs estimate the sewage generation based on population figure. 
 Based upon the finding of the CA&FS, the gap in treatment capacity are assessed.  
 DPRs prepared for the selected town in this stretch are being examined based upo n the finding of CA&FS study and 
accordingly only the necessary projects are taken up.  
 This mechanism is being adopted for taking up projects in other stretches of river Ganga as well. 
 The quantum of pollution load reaching river Ganga is resulting from d ifferent cities/towns as well as industries located 
either on main stem of river Ganga and its tributaries or from drains outfalling into river Ganga which carries the 
pollutants. A mechanism has been evolved to assess the quantum of pollutants reaching ri ver Ganga by monitoring the 
outflow/effluents/parameters from these establishments and treatment plants established therein. Following mechanism 
has been established: 

52 
 
 To estimate the quantum of effluent load from industries, Online Effluent Monitoring Stat ions (EMS) have been installed 
in 577 out of 760 Gross Polluting Industries (GPIs), 135 GPIs have been closed and 15 exempted (GPIs required to 
install EMS are 610). Real time reports are available at dashboard from 384 such installations. Online monitorin g of data 
facility has been made available at  PMO, MoWR, RD & GR, CPCB, State and SPCBs. 
 To estimate the quantum of municipal wastewater load, manual water quality monitoring is being done at 110 stations. 
Real-time water quality monitoring at 71 stations are planned, out of which 44 stations have already been operationalized 
in Phase – I.   
 
(O.M. No. G-11015/8/2016- Budget, Dated : 16.06.2017) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 20) 
Installation of STPs 
  The Committee further observe that establishment of STPs ha s been targeted to be completed by September, 
2018 as per the milestones set under the Namami Gange programme.  But as of now, sewage treatment capacity of only 
1,017 mld. has been created and further treatment capacity of 1187 mld is under construction / at approval stage, leaving 
a gap of 2,618 mld.  The Committee have serious apprehension that corresponding capacity can be created in the 
remaining one and half years.  They, therefore, recommend that as resolved by National Ganga River Basin Authority 
(NGRBA), the work of setting up STP projects should be completed fast to meet the target of cleaning Ganga by 2020.  
In order to achieve this, the Committee recommend that installation of STPs should be closely monitored with monthly 
submission of progress re port based on actual ground level implementation progress town wise for all the 118 towns 
situated on the bank of river Ganga.  In addition to taking up establishment of STPs on a war footing manner, the 
Committee would also like to emphasise the need to f ocus on minimizing waste generation and disposal of waste in 
alternative eco-friendly manner.  The Committee believe that awareness programmes should be initiated to publicize the 
use of electric crematoria to increase its acceptance among masses. 
Reply of the Government 
Recommendation of Hon’ble Standing Committee has been noted for compliance.  

53 
 
In this regard, in order to make faster and effective implementation of projects, Project Management Consultants (PMCs) 
are being appointed for effective supervisi on of works on ground at the state and centre level. At State level PMCs are 
hired mostly for works specific or town specific for necessary reporting of projects along with information and 
photographs of actual progress of works.  
In addition, for effectiv e monitoring of projects, Tata Consulting Engineers (TCE) has been selected to support 
NMCG along with regular submission of monthly progress reports to capture actual implementation of work on ground. 
The aspect of awareness about Electric Crematoria has been covered along with other communication activities.  
However, specific communication activities will be carried out to popularize and increased use of Electric Crematoria. 
(O.M. No. G-11015/8/2016- Budget, Dated : 16.06.2017) 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 26 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 21) 
Monitoring Mechanism 
  The Committee further observe that selection, monitoring of STP projects to be operated on hybrid annuity based 
PPP model, and release of payments to  them, have been proposed to be done on the basis of certification / 
recommendation of independent agencies like IITs and local Governments.  Further, Real Time Water Quality Monitoring 
(RTWQM) system has been proposed to be created at every outlet of the project.  They find that out of 113 RTWQM 
stations targeted to be installed by 2020, so far only 5 RTWQM stations have been installed and further 31 such stations 
are expected to be installed by March, 2017.  All this, again is demonstrative of the sluggis h manner in which the 
mammoth task of cleaning Ganga has been progressing.  They further observe that concerns of misappropriation of 
funds, monitoring of all projects and regular submission of reports will be addressed by appointing Project Management 
Consultant - for which Tata Consultancy Engineers has been selected.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
details of the monitoring mechanism created for overseeing the success of different projects in cleaning the river.  They 
also desire that the monitoring reports should be uploaded in public domain as an important feedback / information about 
the success of ongoing operation for cleaning Ganga.  The Committee would therefore, recommend to make it 

54 
 
compulsory for monitoring agency to submit its mo nitoring report every three months, which should be uploaded on 
Ministry website for an objective assessment of the programme by all the stakeholders including general public. 
Reply of the Government 
For effective monitoring of projects, a Management Infor mation system (MIS) is being created to capture 
information pertaining to ongoing, in-pipeline and completed projects, where the main dashboard  
page is demarcated into: 
 Physical and financial progress of various projects of NMCG like Sewage Management (ST P project, Sewage Network 
Project), Development of Ghat and crematoria, Bio Diversity Projects etc., along with stages of projects i.e. completed, 
ongoing or inpipeline projects; 
 Physical progress will be monitored by mapping the project milestones with pr ojects and month wise progress will be 
updated.  
 Completed Projects will be measured with the effluent parameters to check whether the STP s are functioning effectively 
conforming to the Norms.  
 Also the priority projects along the main stem of Ganga and hotspots can be easily tracked and their present conditions 
can also be captured; 
 Apart from these the MIS will also ensure monthly progress status updates with e -mail alerts to concerned stakeholders 
and escalation matrix will be provided. 
 Automated Report Generation facility will be provided;  
 Actual site photograph uploading facility will be provided to verify the monthly percentage of physical progress mentioned 
in system.  
 Application will provide information about the held up and delayed projects. 
 All information will be captured in graphical representation as well as on database mode. 
 The monthly progress report would be available on the website of NMCG. 
 
(O.M. No. G-11015/8/2016- Budget, Dated : 16.06.2017) 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 29 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 

55 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 22) 
Ghat Works for beautification of river fronts 
  The Committee are concerned to notice that as against an outlay of Rs. 100 crore in BE 2016 -17, an amount of 
only Rs. 67 crore was spent under this Head during the year 2016-17.  They note that projects for river front development 
has been taken up in 7 towns of Kedarnath, Haridwar, Delhi, Allahabad, Kanpur, Varanasi and Patna.  However, projects 
in case of Kedarnath and Varanasi are yet to be ta ken under this Head.  The Committee observe that non -availability of 
No Objection Certificates from State Governments is the main reason for the slow progress of the projects for 
beautification of Ghats.  The Committee are of the considered view that speci al initiatives are needed to be taken in 
consultation with the concerned State Governments to speed up the projects in the selected States specially for the 
aforesaid purpose. 
Reply of the Government 
Recommendation of Hon’ble Standing Committee has been noted for compliance.  
Towards expediting the progress of work following actions have been taken up:  
 A pollution abatement and ghat development works has been taken up at Kedarnath with an investment of Rs 3.65 
Crore. The facilities to be developed would in clude (i) Pollution abatement works; (ii) Ghat development works; (iii) 
Change room -2 nos; (iv) Chatris-4 nos. No specific NOC is needed for this project; 
 For Varanasi DPR prepared and is under the Third Party Appraisal.  
 For Haridwar, Kanpur and Patna NO Cs have been received and work started. In Patna, 68% construction work has 
completed, in Kanpur 40% work completed; 
 For Delhi and Allahabad, regular meeting are been conducted with the State Government/SPMG to ensure early issue of 
NOC. 
 Further periodical meetings are conducted with the CPSUs and SPMGs of all the states to remove all the bottlenecks and 
timely completion of the works. 
(O.M. No. G-11015/8/2016- Budget, Dated : 16.06.2017) 
 
 

56 
 
Recommendation (Para No.23) 
Brahmaputra Board 
  The Committee have been informed that in order to make the functions of the Brahmaputra Board more effective, 
the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation is considering restructuring of the 
Brahmaputra Board since 2004 for putting up an altogeth er new set up under a new Act of Parliament.  However, due to 
certain constraints, envisaged in the setting up a new organisation in place of the existing Brahmaputra Board, it was felt 
by the Ministry that an attempt be made to make the Brahmaputra Board more effective and efficient within the ambit of 
the existing Act.  The Committee were also told that all the works such as execution of drainage development scheme, 
Preparation of Master Plans, Preparation of DPR of drainage development schemes, Multipurp ose Projects and 
Protection of areas from floods of Brahmaputra river will be continued during 2017 -18.  Special emphasis will also be laid 
on the protection of Majuli Island from floods and erosion and it will be undertaken with financial assistance from the 
Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region. 
Going through the figures for the year 2011 -12 to 2016-17 made available to them on Budgetary allocation and 
expenditure for Brahmaputra Board, the Committee find that there has been nearly 100% utilizat ion of funds by the 
Brahmaputra Board, all these years.  However, despite this achievement, the Committee expressed their dissatisfaction 
over this and also draw attention of the Ministry to the fact that virtually the ineffective performance of the Board in 
resolving various problems in the North East States Board is being run from Delhi as Senior Officers of the Board are 
stationed in Delhi.  On this, a representative of the Ministry admitted that at present the Board is Guwahati centric and 
95% of the works taken up by the Brahmaputra Board relate to Assam.  The Secretary, MoWR,RD and GR also candidly 
stated that the Senior Officers of the Board should be stationed in North Eastern States instead of being stationed in 
Delhi.  While the Committee felt that  the Brahmaputra Board is supposed to look after the entire North Eastern Region, it 
has failed in its objectives for catering to the requirement of other States of the Region except Assam. 
The Committee feel unhappy with the lopsided Assam centric activit ies of the Brahmaputra Board and 
concentration of its top officers in Delhi.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the officers and Staff of the Board 
should be stationed in an appropriate manner in all the North Eastern States depending on the requirements, by revisiting 

57 
 
the priorities in taking up projects and chalking out strategy and programmes in order to give impetus to activities 
regarding water management in all the States of NE Region as per the Board’s mandate. 
Reply of the Government 
In order  to make the Brahmaputra Board administratively and operationally more efficient within the ambit of 
existing Act by revamping its technical and non -technical cadre, an elaborated exercise was conducted by this Ministry 
and discussions were made in a meeti ng held on 06.02.2017. In the meeting it was felt that Brahmaputra Board may 
open Regional Offices in each State of North East, including a separate office at Majuli Island. Based on the discussion, 
a minutes of the meeting was issued vide letter dated 13. 02.2017 wherein probable cadre restructuring of the 
Brahmaputra Board was mentioned and Br. Board was requested to take a final decision in the matter. Accordingly, the 
matter  was taken up as the agenda of the Board Meeting of Brahmaputra Board held on 11 .04.2017.  It has been 
decided to open Regional offices in all 8 North East States and North Bengal to be heeded by either a Deputy Chief 
Engineer or Superintending Engineer.  The technical & non -technical cadre has been made pyramidical and robust.  The 
new structure proposes the footprints of Brahmaputra Board in all 9 States to take up planning, execution, Flood 
Protection & Anti-erosion works. 
The additional charge for the post of Vice -Chairman, Brahmaputra Board has been assigned to Shri P.M. Scott, 
Chief Engineer, B&BBO, Central Water Commission, Shillong. 
Shri Iltaf Hussain has been promoted as Secretary and Shri C.M. Das has been promoted as Chief Engineer 
(Level-II) in Brahmaputra Board. Both these officers are stationed at Headquarter of Brahmaputra Board at Guwahati. 
Central Water Commission was requested to post four officers of Central Water Engineering Services cadre 
against the vacant posts in Br. Board  on loan basis . In response, CWC vide their Office Order dated 1st March, 2017 
have posted Shri Asit Chaturvedi and Ms. Jyotika Pegu in the Brahmaputra Board on loan basis.  
The advertisement for filling up the posts of General Manager and Chief Engineer (Level -I) in Brahmaputra 
Board has been published in Employment News dated 25-31 March, 2017. 
The State Governments of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Mizoram, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Sikkim and West 
Bengal has been requested to recommend name of suitable officers for appointment as Financial Adviser in Brahmaputra 
Board on loan basis vide letters dated 16.11.2016, 13.12.2016 and 11.01.2017. 
The Recruitment Rules in respect of posts of Chairman, Vice -Chairman and Financial Adviser in Brahmaputra 
Board have been approved by Department of Personnel & Training and forwarded to the Legislative Department, M/o 
Law & Justice for the vetting. The process of regular appointment will be initiated as and when the Recruitment Rules are 
notified. 

58 
 
(O.M. No. G-11015/8/2016- Budget, Dated : 16.06.2017) 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 32 of Chapter – I of the Report) 

59 
 
Chapter – III 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies 
 
  NIL 

60 
 
 
Chapter – IV 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been accepted 
by the Committee  
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 National Water Mission 
  The Committee note that the National Water Mission (NWM) was approved during the year 2011.  The main 
objective of the National Water Mission is conservation of water, minimizing wastage a nd ensuring its more equitable 
distribution both across and within States through integrated water resources development and management.  
Implementation of   various activities by NWM  include carrying out Baseline studies, Formulation of State Specific Ac tion 
Plans (SSAPs), HRD &Capacity Building activities, Establishment of demonstration projects and setting up of National 
Bureau of Water Use Efficiency (NBWUE).  The Committee note that as compared to the BE allocation of Rs. 25 crore for 
the year   2016 -17 the RE allocation was Rs. 5 crore where as the actual utilisation was only Rs. 3.50 crore.  About the 
reasons for under utilisation of resources, the Ministry has informed that the implementation of NWM thorough 
outsourcing and redeployment is a time co nsuming process and lack of adequate staff is a hindrance in achieving the 
goals envisaged.  The Committee also note that for the year 2017 -18 Rs. 15 crore has been allocated and various 
activities are proposed to be taken up during this financial year whi ch inter-alia include (i) Preparation of State Specific 
Action Plans for Water sector -9 States/UTs, (ii) Human Resource Development and Capacity Building -25 programmes, 
(iii) Baseline Studies -21 water resources projects, (iv) Implementation of Pilot/ Demon stration projects and Improving 
Water Use Efficiency Projects -5, (v) Organising Regional Conventions of Water User Associations, (vi) Undertaking 
NWM-Industry association collaborative activities to improve Water User Efficiency.  Further, with regard to establishment 
of National Bureau of Water Use Efficiency (NBWUE), during examination of DFG (2013 -14), the Committee were 
informed that it will be operational in the year 2013 -14, however, it is a matter of concern that even after more than 3 
years the NBWUE is yet to be set up and made functional.  While recollecting the apprehension made in the 3 rd Report 
on DFG (2015-16), wherein it was observed that with the slow pace of work, the actual implementation will not take place 
even after decades, the Committee deplore the lackadaisical attitude of the Ministry.  The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend the Ministry to form the NBWUE within this financial year as it would go a long way in meeting the objectives 

61 
 
of National Water Mission (NWM).  The Committe e also recommend the Ministry to have  a permanent solution for 
having adequate staff in the National Water Mission (NWM) directorate so that there is no further delay in achieving the 
goals of National Water Mission (NWM) due to informal arrangements, outsourcing and redeployment of staff. 
Reply of the Government 
Observations of the Hon’ble Committee have been noted. The proposal is being reconsidered as part of 
Integrated Water Management Efforts.  A holistic review of the scheme including in relation to National Bureau of Water 
Use Efficiency (NBWUE) is being undertaken as appraisal and approval process for the remaining period of 14 th Finance 
Commission period. 
Regarding recurring manpower problem at NWM, the Ministry is formulating a revised manpower / c onsultants 
policy for attracting the best talent adequately for the Mission with attractive packages. Once it is finalised, NWM will go 
for new selection process. 
(O.M. No. G-11015/8/2016- Budget, Dated : 16.06.2017) 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation Para No. 15 
  The Committee note that the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation had 
constituted a Drafting Committee under the Chairmanship of Justice T.S. Doabia (Retd .) to study the activities that are 
required for optimum development of river basin and changes required in the existing River Board Act, 1956 for 
achievement of the same. The Committee submitted its Report in November, 2012 and has prepared a Draft River Basin 
Management (RBM) Bill. The Draft RBM Bill proposes to establish a River Basin Authority for regulation and 
development of waters of an Inter -State River Basin or any specified part thereof and further makes it clear that different 
Authorities shall b e established for different Inter -State River Basin. The Bill also makes provision for the creation of a 
separate River Basin Authority for a sub -basin within an Inter -State River Basin.  The Committee have been informed 
that the draft River Basin Management Bill is under examination by the MoWR,RD and GR - in consultation with different 
stakeholders.  While deploring the delay made in formation of River Basin Authority, the Committee strongly recommend 
to establish the same at the earliest.   

62 
 
Reply of the Government 
A Committee of ‘Group of Officers’ – has been constituted by the Ministry of WR,RD & GR to examine in detail 
the report of Doabia Committee and to suggest possible changes required in the draft River Basin Management Bill to 
make  it implementable. This Committee has held one meeting so far.  
(O.M. No. G-11015/8/2016- Budget, Dated : 16.06.2017) 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
Ground Water Management and Regulation 
  The Committee observe that the scheme of Ground Water Management and Regulation has been implemented 
during XII Plan with four components of National Aquifer Management (NAQUIM), technological upgradation, particularly 
Ground Water Management and ongoing acti vities.  They find that an allocation of Rs. 500 crore has been made in the 
year 2017-18 for this Scheme despite actual expenditure of only Rs. 95.63 crore in the previous year.  Although main 
reasons for underutilization of funds are stated to be the cons traints in outsourcing the work of Data Generation for 
aquifer mapping last year, the Committee are concerned to note that the Ministry has not been able to utilise the 
budgetary allocation under this Scheme, as is evident from the trend of allocation and expenditure of the last five years.  
They observe that an internal mechanism has been proposed to be set up to monitor physical and financial progress of 
various activities/ works during the current year, besides preparation of standard documents.  They al so observe that 
proposed work components for the year 2017 -18 includes Data Generation for aquifer mapping, which could not be 
completed in previous year.  While collection of data is an important input for identifying the dimensions of the problem, 
the Co mmittee are   perturbed to find that no tangible benefit has been noticed on the ground to improve the water 
availability in over exploited blocks / dark zones of the country.  The Committee notice that the data generated will be 
used for identification of  areas for inclusion under the National Ground Water Improvement Scheme, which is proposed 
to be implemented with a corpus of Rs. 6000 crore.  Under this scheme measures are proposed to be taken to recharge 
the ground water in areas where there is a possib ility to do the same and alternative sources of drinking water will be 

63 
 
provided to those areas where the ground water quality has been severely affected due to underground pollution and 
contamination.  The Committee are of the view that despite lot of gran diose schemes being implemented/   proposed to 
be implemented and crores of rupees being spent, the ground water situation has not improved.  Rather the problem has 
gone from bad to worse.  Therefore, in view of the Committee, supply of alternative source of drinking water should be 
given top priority and immediate measures should be taken towards this in coordination with the Ministry of Drinking 
Water and Sanitation.  The Ministry can also involve the Members of Parliament and State Legislatures in coordi nating 
activities of various Departments to help the people in the affected areas such as in West Bengal, Bihar, Western Uttar 
Pradash, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh, etc.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the Government to take target 
oriented measures in this regard and apprise them of the details of such action plan within three months of presentation 
of this report. 
Reply of the Government 
In order to ensure sustainable withdrawal and effective utilization of ground water, including for drinking water  
supply, and its management a committee has been constituted with Secretary (WR, RD&GR) as convenor and 
Secretaries of Ministries of Rural Development, Drinking Water and Sanitation, Panchayati Raj, Agriculture & Farmers 
Welfare and Environment, Forest and Climate Change. 
Further, Central Ground Water Board is actively involved in the State Government endeavours for supply of 
drinking water.  State wise details are as follows; 
West Bengal 
Central Ground Water Board is constantly maintaining liaison with the  different departments of Central and State 
Govt., Universities, Municipalities and NGOs’ etc. in West Bengal for providing technical guidance, interchanging ideas 
regarding ground water related problems and comments on proposed sources of PHED for water s upply in rural areas. 
Central Ground Water Board was/is specially associated with the following Committees specially related to supply of 
drinking water -   
 State Level Scientific Source Finding Committee for Adequacy of Source and State Level Project/Sche me 
Sanctioning Committee. Different drinking water supply schemes are approved by this committee. 
 Core Committee of Arsenic Task Force, Govt. of West Bengal.  
 Committee of Arsenic Task Force, Kolkata Municipal Corporation, Kolkata.  

64 
 
 Core Committee of Fluoride Task Force, Govt. of West Bengal. 
 Drinking Water Scarcity in drought affected areas of West Bengal. 
Bihar 
Central Ground Water Board  is actively involved in the various drinking water supply activities of the States like 
‘Har Ghar Nal Ka Jal’ PHED etc .  Besides, Central Ground Water Board has constructed 28 high discharge arsenic free 
deep tubewells in arsenic  affected areas of Bihar and handed over to PHED, Govt. of Bihar.  CGWB also envisaged 
constructing 40 deep tubewells in arsenic affected Brahmp ur block, Buxar district, Bihar for drinking purposes which will 
be handed over to PHED, Govt. of Bihar.  
Karnataka 
Regional Director, CGWB is the Chairman of the State Technical Agency (STA) which is responsible for clearing 
the technical aspects of the S chemes for Drinking Water Supply from surface water sources for piped water supply 
schemes in areas where there is short supply in ground water, and quality issues. 
Further, Regional Director, CGWB, SWR, Bengaluru is also a Member of the SLSSC (State Level  Scheme 
Sanctioning Committee).  SLSSC is clearing the schemes received from STA after technical clearance.  Principal 
Secretary, Rural Development & Panchayat Raj Department (RD&PR), Govt. of Karnataka is heading the SLSC.  A 
representative from Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation, Govt. of India is also a Member of SLSSC, apart from 
members from other State and Central Departments.  
Andhra Pradesh  
Regional Director, Central Ground water Board is a Member of the State Level Scheme Sanctioning Commit tee 
(SLSSC), which approves all the drinking water Schemes of the State. Principal Secretary to the Government, 
Panchayatraj & Rural Water Supply is the Chairman of the Committee and Dy. Adviser (Water Quality), Ministry of 
Drinking Water & Sanitation, Government of India along with other Expert Members from line Departments are Members 
of the Committee.  
As per the priority of the Government for sanction of Schemes in cluster of Over -Exploited and quality affected 
areas, Multi-Village Supply ( MVS) schemes from transporting water from major reservoirs/surface sources are being 
considered. 
In all the meetings, the Board is laying stress on sustainability of drinking water Schemes through construction of 
appropriate rain water harvesting structures. Further, a s a Member of the Committee, the Board is involved in 
deliberations and suggestions in finalization of the drinking water schemes being implemented in the State from time to 
time. 

65 
 
Western Uttar Pradesh 
Central Ground Water Board, Northern Region, is one of  the members of State Level Scheme Scanning 
Committee (SLSSC) for National Rural Drinking Water Supply Programme (NRDWSP) constituted under the 
Chairmanship of the Principal Secretary, Rural Development, Government of UP. The meetings of the Committee for 
approval of various drinking water supply schemes in the State are convened regularly by the Executive Director, State 
Drinking Water and Sanitation Mission and attended by officers of CGWB.  Representative of CGWB provide required 
technical inputs in respect of schemes discussed during the meetings. 
 
Copy of the Ground Water Year Books issued by CGWB, Northern Region annually is provided to UP Jal Nigam, 
the Department responsible for supply of drinking water in Uttar Pradesh State. In addition, copies of the compiled data of 
Ground Water monitoring  being carried out by CGWB 4 times a year are also provided to UP Jal Nigam. The 
Department utilizes the data in preparing its water supply schemes. 
 
(O.M. No. G-11015/8/2016- Budget, Dated : 16.06.2017) 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 18) 
Namami Gange –National Ganga Plan 
  The Committee observe that ‘Namami Gange’ was set up during the Union Budget 2014 -15 to undertake Ganga 
rejuvenation and conservation by amalgamating all the existing measures by 2020. The basic thrust of this programme is 
abatement of pollution in the river through measures such as interception, diversion and treatment of waste water, 
rehabilitation and amalgamation of e xisting Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs), Common Effluent Treatment Plants 
(CETPs) for major industrial clusters, interventions on rural sanitation, solid waste / pious refuse management, sewerage 
network, etc.  They note that under this programme, a total e xpenditure of Rs. 2440.50 crore has been made in the last 
three years.  Further total expenditure by National Mission for Clean Ganga is Rs. 4,321.05 crore, out of Rs. 20,000 crore 
approved by the Cabinet.  While appreciating the ambitious programme of Nam ami Gange, which aims at cleaning and 
rejuvenating Ganga by December, 2020, the Committee are concerned to note that the implementation of this 
programme has not been able to keep pace due to changes in policy with regard to preparation of Detailed Project  

66 
 
Reports (DPRs) by States and model for implementation of projects.  Now the DPRs have been revised with the main 
focus on Infrastructure and Development and Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs) - which will be implemented through 
hybrid annuity based public private partnership (PPP) model.  The Committee find that at present 5 CPSUs have initiated 
Condition Assessment and Feasibility Study (CA&FS) for all 118 towns.  However, the details of CPSUs entrusted with 
this work has not been furnished.  The Committee th erefore, desire to be apprised of the details of 5 Central Public 
Sector Undertakings (CPSUs), which have been selected to prepare CA and FSs including the status of such studies and 
further preparation of DPRs.  They would also like to know the number of STPs selected on hybrid annuity based PPP 
model and the status of work on these projects. 
Reply of the Government 
Five CPSUs, namely Water & Power Consultancy Services (WAPCOS), Engineers India Limited (EIL), National 
Building Construction Corporation (NBC C), National Project Construction Corporation (NPCC) and Engineering Project 
India Limited (EPIL) have been engaged for preparation of condition assessment and feasibility studies. Initially 113 
towns were allotted to them, which has been reduced to 108. A mong them CA&Fs reports for 106 towns have been 
received. CPSU wise distribution of the CA&FS reports are detailed below: 
NATIONAL MISSION FOR CLEAN GANGA  (CPSU WISE) 
Abstract of 118 Towns identified Along the River Ganga 
S. 
No.  
State Original 
Work 
Order 
Class of Town Total Towns 
After 
Revision 
CA&FS 
Received 
Pending 
I II III IV V VI 
1 WAPCOS 13 0 0 3 3 3 4 13 13 0 
2 EIL 38 16 12 8 2 0 0 38 38 0 
3 NBCC 19 15 0 4 0 0 0 19 19 0 
4 NPCC 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 
5 EPIL 42 28 7 2 0 0 0 37 35 2 
Total 113 59 20 17 5 3 4 108 106 2 
 
Till date following STP projects have been taken up in Hybrid Annuity based PPP model: 
Two STPs in Haridwar with a total capacity of 82 MLD (68 MLD for Jagjeetpur and 14 MLD at Sarai); AA&ES 
issued, tenders invited. Last date of tender submission is 2nd June 2017. 

67 
 
One STP at Ramana Varanasi, with a capacity of 50 MLD; AA&ES issued, tenders invited, last date of tender submission 
is 29th May 2017. 
One STP at Mathura, with capacity of 92 MLD is being forwarded for Third Party Appraisal. 
Few more projects will also be taken up under hybrid annuity based PPP model based upon response received for the 
above mentioned projects.  
(O.M. No. G-11015/8/2016- Budget, Dated : 16.06.2017) 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 

68 
 
Chapter – V 
 
Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the Government is still awaited  
 
  NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                 HUKUM SINGH, 
04  August, 2017                                             Chairperson, 
13  Shravana, 1939 (Saka)                       Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
 
 
 

69 
 
 
Annexure-I 
 

70 
 
Annexure -II 
 Rehabilitation Work Awarded Under DRIP Project 
 
   
 
Name of Dam 
Package 
No. 
Name of Work 
 
 
 
 MPWRD (Madhya Pradesh Water Resource Department) 
 
ARI DAM 1 Remedial Measure Work 
 
ARI DAM 2 Construction of Bituminous approach road 
 
ARNIYA BAHADURPUR 1 Remedial measure work 
 
BARNA 1 Remedial measure drilling and grouting work 
 
BARNA 2 Construction Of Trunion Bridge 
 
BARNA 3 Remedial measure civil works 
 
BARNA 4 Dewatering and Slush removal from stilling basin bucket 
 
BARNA 5 Repair and renovation of EDA 
 
BARNA 6 Construction of Bituminous approach road 
 
BARNA 7 Remedial measure E/M work of Kolar & Barna 
 
BARNA 8 Shotereting the upstream face of Barna Main Dam 
 
BUNDALA 1 Remedial measure civil works 
 
CHANDPATHA 2 Construction of Additional spillway with Design drawing fabricatin & erection etc. 
 
CHANDRAKESHAR 1 Remedial measure civil work 
 
Dholawad Tank (Ratlam) 1 Remedial measure civil & basic facilities work 
 
Dholawad Tank (Ratlam) 2 Electrical & Mechanical Work 
 
Dholawad Tank (Ratlam) 3 Dewatering Works 
 
DUDHI (KUNWAR CHAIN 1 Remedial Measure Work 
 
SAGAR) 
 
  
 
DUDHI (KUNWAR CHAIN 2 Constrction of bituminious approach road 
 
SAGAR) 
 
  
 
DUDHI (KUNWAR CHAIN 3 Electrical & Mechanical Work 
 
SAGAR) 
 
  
 
JIRBHAR 1 Remedial Measure Work 
 
JIRBHAR 2 Renovation of existing bituminous approach road 
 
Kanhargaon Tank(Chhindwara) 1 Remedial Measure civil work 
 

71 
 
KANKERKHEDA 1 Remedial Measure civil work 
 
KANKERKHEDA 2 Construction of bituminious approach road 
 
KHARADI 1 Remedial measure work 
 
KOLAR 1 Remedial Measure Civil Work 
 
KOLAR 2 Basic facilities work Road 
 
KOLAR 3 Dewatering and slush removal from stilling basin bucket 
 
  Restoration of rock toe, seepage drain, nalla clearance, strengthening of main 
 
MAKRODA 1 and subsidiary bund and deflector wall, repair of chute fall, additional bridge on 
 
  spill channel etc. 
 
MARHI 
1 Remedial measure and Basic Facilities work 
 
MOORUM NALLA 1 Remedial measure work 
 
NAHLESARA 1 Remedial measure work 
 
RUTHAI (GOPI KRISHNA 1 Remedial measure work 
 
SAGAR) 
 
  
 
RUTHAI (GOPI KRISHNA 3 Electrical & Mechanical Work 
 
SAGAR) 
 
  
 
SAMPNA 1 Remedial Measure (Civil) Work 
 
SANJAY SAGAR 1 Remedial Measure of Slice -1 
 
SANJAY SAGAR 2 Road Work Slice-2 Remedial work (Civil) 
 
SARATHI 1 Remedial measure and basic Facilities work 
 
TAWA 1 Remedial Measure work of Drilling Grouting 
 
TAWA 2 Renewal of old tar approach road 
 
TAWA 4 Dewatering Works 
 
TAWA 5 Electrical & Mechanical Work 
 

72 
 
 
  Rehabilitation Work Awarded Under DRIP Project 
 
    
 
Name of Dam 
Package  
Name of Work 
 
No. 
 
 
   
 
TAWA 6  Repair and renovation of EDA 
 
THANWER (RAJIVSAGAR) 1  Radial gate Electrical and Mechenical work Slice No.1 
 
    
 
THANWER (RAJIVSAGAR) 2  Remedial measure drilling and grouting work 
 
    
 
THANWER (RAJIVSAGAR) 4  Remedial measure work,Pitching 
 
    
 
UMRAR 1  Remedial measure work and Basic facilities work 
 
UPPER WAIN GANGA 1 
 
Remedial Measure Work 
 
(SANJAY SAROVER) 
 
 
    
 
UPPER WAIN GANGA 2 
 
Construction of bituminous approach road 
 
(SANJAY SAROVER) 
 
 
    
 
UPPER WAIN GANGA 3 
 
Dewatering Works 
 
(SANJAY SAROVER) 
 
 
    
 
UPPER WAIN GANGA 4 
 
Electrical & Mechanical Work 
 
(SANJAY SAROVER) 
 
 
    
 
  OWRD (Orissa Water Resource Department)  
 
    
 
   Renovation to Ashokanalla M I P Dam resectioning toe drain and Surface 
 
ASHOK NALLA 1  drainage arrangement in Banapur Block of Khurdha district under DRIP 2015 
 
   16  
 
BALASKUMPA 1 
 Improvement to Balaskumpa MIP in Khajuripada block of Kandhamal District in 
 
 Odisha under DRIP 
 
   
 
   Improvement to approach road renovation of longitudinal and cross drains of 
 
BALIMELA 1  main earth dam dyke I II and III of Balimela Dam Project under DRIP in the year 
 
   2015 16 
 
   Renovation of Helipad Garden on the Right Flank of M E D of Balimela Dam 
 
BALIMELA 2  Project under DRIP for the year 2015 16 
 
   (Improvement to Eco-tourism). 
 
   Renovation of deep channel erosion near the road on the left of the spillway 
 
BALIMELA 3 
 river sluice block, construction of a toe wall with a single monolithic RCC 
 
 Structure consisting of a cut-off, apron & toe wall to avoid scour & further 
 
   
 
   destruction of the road under DRIP for the year 2016-17. 
 
    
 
BALIMELA 4 
 Repair to AP tunnel, OHPC tunnel, sluice gates and emergency gates of 
 
 Balimela dam project. 
 
   
 
   White ant Treatment of Earth Dam and three nos. of Dyke of Balimela Dam 
 
BALIMELA 5  Project under Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement Project (DRIP) for the year 
 
   2016-17. 
 
   Cleaning of foundation Gallary and Reaming of Drainage holes of Spillway of 
 
BALIMELA 6  Balimela Dam Project under Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement Project 
 
   (DRIP) for the year 2016-17 
 

73 
 
BANKSAL 1 
 Improvement to Banksal Minor Irrigation Project in Jamankira Block of 
 
 Sambalpur District under DRIP 
 
   
 
BHASKEL 1  Improvement to Bhaskel Irrigation project, Ummerkote under DRIP 
 
BHASKEL 2 
 Construction of watch tower cumwatchman shed at Dam site ofBhaskel 
 
 Irrigation Project underDRIP. 
 
   
 
BHASKEL 3  Barbed wire fencing to Downstream ofBhaskel Dam at Umerkote under DRIP 
 
    
 
DAHA 1  Improvement to Daha Irrigation Project under DRIP 
 
DAHA 2  Fixing of Piezometer 
 
DAHA 3  Improvement in presentation and Calibration system of Daha Dam 
 
DAHA 4 
 Supply of wire rope & installation for Radial Gates No. I and No. II of Daha 
 
 Irrigation Project. 
 
   
 

74 
 
 
 Rehabilitation Work Awarded Under DRIP Project 
 
   
 
Name of Dam 
Package 
Name of Work 
 
No. 
 
  
 
DAHA 5 Repair and maintenance of left distributary head regulator, fixing of doors and 
 
windows for watchman shed near left distry Head Regulator. 
 
  
 
DAHA 6 Supply of wire rope & installation for Radial Gates No. III and No. IV of Daha 
 
Irrigation Project. 
 
  
 
DAHA 7 Renovation of turnbuckles with painting of radial gates of Daha Irrigation 
 
Project. 
 
  
 
DAMSAL 1 Renovation to Damsal Res M I P in Kankadahada block of Dhenkanal district 
 
under DRIP 2015 16 
 
  
 
DERJANG 1 Improvement to Derjang Irrigation Project under the DRIP 
 
DERJANG 2 Improvement to Derjang Irrigation Project under the DRIP Package No 02 
 
   
 
DHANEI 1 Improvement to Dhanei Irrigation Project under DRIP 
 
  Providing, fixing, teting and commissioning of electroray digital water level 
 
DHANEI 2 recorder, gauge mark, boards, V-notches and metrological instruments for 
 
  Dhanei dam 
 
DHANEI 3 Instrumentation 
 
HIRAKUD 1 Restoration of disturbed stone packing in the Up stream slope from Rd 1 20Km 
 
To 1 50Km of left Earth Dam under DRIP 
 
  
 
HIRAKUD 2 Restoration of disturbed stone packing from left pavillion to Lunch Ghat of 
 
Hirakud Dam under DRIP 
 
  
 
HIRAKUD 3 Restoration of Down stream apron with cavity filling of left spillway of Hirakud 
 
Dam under DRIP 
 
  
 
HIRAKUD 4 Restoration of disturbed stone packing in the Upstream slope from Rd 240Km 
 
To 3 65Km of right Earth Dam under DRIP 
 
  
 
  Exploratory triple tube NX size core drilling by Hydraulic core drilling rig and 
 
HIRAKUD 5 permeability test for proposed spillway for 6nos of borehole Excluding the 
 
making approach road for transport of Drilling rig and accessories to borehole 
 
  
 
  location 75mtr of 4nos of borehole and 30mtr of 2nos of borehole 
 
   
 
HIRAKUD 6 Under water scanning by ROV 
 
HIRAKUD 11 Restoration of Upstream around right abutment hill by GI crates stone dumping 
 
of Hirakud Dam 
 
  
 
HIRAKUD 14 Laboratory studies for determination of strength and elastic properties from 
 
distress blocks of Hirakud Dam. 
 
  
 
HIRAKUD 15 3D Stress Analysis by FEM………. Of Hirakud Dam 
 
HIRAKUD 16 Studies for Identification of suitable material for repairing of distressed blocks of 
 
Hirakud Dam. 
 
  
 
JHUMUKA 1 Renovation to Jhumuka MIP Surplus channel and approach road in 
 
Bhubaneswar block of Khurda under DRIP 2015 16 
 
  
 
JHUMUKA 2 Renovation of Jhumuka MIP Earth Dam and Balance road work in Bhubaneswar 
 
Block of Khurda District under DRIP 2015 16 
 
  
 
   
 
KALO 1 Improvement of Earth Dam of Kalo Irrigation Project under DRIP 
 
   
 
KALO 2 Supply of peizometer (Casagrande porous tube and sloted type) under DRIP of 
 
Kalo Irrigation Project. 
 
  
 

75 
 
KALO 3 Supply of materials for power supply to 15KVA load of electrification 
 
KALO 4 Redrilling and cleaning of drainage holes and drilling with low pressure cement 
 
grouting to foundation gallery wall of Kalo Irrigation Project. 
 
  
 
KALO 5 Supply of materials for Electrification of Kalo Irrigation Project 
 
KALO 6 Reservoir sedementation assessment of Kalo Reservoirs, Odisha 
 
  Supply of providing, fixing, testing and commissioning of electro ray digital water 
 
KALO 7 level recorder, gauge marks, boards, V-notches and metrological instruments 
 
  etc for Kalo Dam. 
 

76 
 
 
 Rehabilitation Work Awarded Under DRIP Project 
 
   
 
Name of Dam Package Name of Work 
 
No. 
 
  
 
KALO 8 Procurement and installation of 15KVA generator at dam site of Kalo irrigarion 
 
project 
 
  
 
KALO 9 Supply of Computer and its accessories under DRIP of KALO Irrigation Project. 
 
   
 
KALO 10 Supply of Fax and accessories & Wi-Fi Dongle for Division Office under DRIP of 
 
KALO Irrigation Project. 
 
  
 
KALO 11 Supply of Lasor Printr for Division Office under DRIP of KALO Irrigation Project. 
 
   
 
KALO 12 Electrification to Kalo Dam site under DRIP of Kalo Irrigation Project. 
 
KALO 13 Supply of Office Stationaries for Division office under DRIP of Kalo Irrigation 
 
Project. 
 
  
 
KALO 14 Supply of Computer and its accessoties under DRIP of Kalo Irrigation Project. 
 
   
 
KALO 15 Procurement of Xerox Machine accessories for Division Office under DRIP of 
 
Kalo Irrigation Project. 
 
  
 
KALO 16 Advertisement Bill for the work under DRIP of KALO Irrigation Project. 
 
KALO 17 Advertisement Bill for the work under DRIP of KALO Irrigation Project. 
 
NESA 1 Improvement of Nesa Dam of Nesa Irrigation Project under DRIP 
 
   
 
NESA 2 Supply of Piezometre (Casagrande porous tube and sloted type) of Nesa 
 
Irrigation Project. 
 
  
 
NESA 3 Reservoir Sedimetation assessment of Nesa Reservoirs, Odisha State. 
 
  Supply of providing, fixing, testing & commissioning of electroray digital water 
 
NESA 4 level recorder, gauge marks, boards & metrological instruments etc for Nesa 
 
  Irrigation Project. 
 
  Providing, fixing, testing and commissioning of solar genset of 450watt capacity 
 
NESA 5 for power generation and walkway bridge from HR to recorder cabin at Nesa 
 
  irrigation project. 
 
NESA 6 Advertisement bill for the work under DRIP of Nesa Irrigation Project. 
 
NESA 7 Supply of Computer accessories for Division Office under DRIP of Nesa 
 
Irrigation Project. 
 
  
 
PILLASALKI 1 Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement Project for Pilasalki Dam Phulbani 
 
   
 
  Improvement of presentation & calibration system electroray digital water level 
 
PILLASALKI 2 recorder, calibration marks, boards, V-notches and metrological instrument for 
 
  Pillasalki Dam. 
 
PILLASALKI 3 Walkway bridge across spillway of Pillasalki Irrigation Project under Boudh 
 
Irrigation Division, Boudh. 
 
  
 
PITAMAHAL 1 Rehabilitation to Pitamahal Dam 
 
PITAMAHAL 2 Supplying, installing & commissioning of 2nos. 20mtr. High mast lighting system 
 
with 9 nos. 2x400W MH lighting system at dam base of Pitamahal dam 
 
  
 
   
 
PITAMAHAL 3 Improvement in presentation and Caliberation system for Pitamahal Irrigation 
 
Project under Sundergarh Irrigation Division, Sundargarh under DRIP. 
 
  
 
   
 
  Improvement to Rengali Dam under DRIP Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement 
 
RENGALI 1 Project for the year 2015 16 Improvement of Service Road Slope protection to 
 
the left abutment Fixing deep anchor Concreting to scoured plunge pool area 
 
  
 
  of bucket and Skin concreting 
 
RENGALI  Improvement to Rengali Dam under DRIP Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement 
 

77 
 
 2 Project for the year 2015 16 Epoxy Painting to Radial Gates and Grouting to 
 
  2nd Stage Concrete of Piers 
 

78 
 
 
 Rehabilitation Work Awarded Under DRIP Project 
 
   
 
Name of Dam Package Name of Work 
 
No. 
 
  
 
  Improvement to Rengali Dam under DRIP Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement 
 
RENGALI 3 Project for the year 2015 16 Installation of 7Mtr Height Street Lights on the right 
 
approach to Rengali Dam and replacement of 2 x 8nos of fittings and 
 
  
 
  accessories for two nos of Highmast Light at Dam Top of Rengali Dam 
 
   
 
  Improvement to Rengali Dam under DRIP (Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement  
 
RENGALI 4 Project) for the year 2016-17. (Cleaning of Drainage Holes of Foundation 
 
  Gallery by Re-Drilling for removal of calcination of Rengali Dam) 
 
   
 
  Improvement to Rengali Dam under DRIP (Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement  
 
RENGALI 5 Project) for the year 2016-17. (Second Stage Grouting with plaster to Pier No- 
 
  4,5,13 and Grouting to Block no-44 of Rengali Dam) 
 
   
 
  Improvement to Rengali Dam under DRIP (Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement  
 
RENGALI 6 Project) for the year 2016-17. (Extention of Concreting to Scoured Plunge Pool 
 
  area of Bucket (Lower Bucket) of Rengali Dam) 
 
  Improvement to Rengali Dam under DRIP (Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement  
 
RENGALI 7 Project) for the year 2016-17. (Reaming of Vertical Porous Drains of Foundation 
 
  Gallery of Rengali Dam) 
 
RENGALI 8 Supply of FRB 8 - Seater Boat for Rengali Dam 
 
  Improvement to Salandi Dam under DRIP Approach road to Dam parapet wall of 
 
SALANDI 1 masonry dam repair of spillway construction of guard wall compound wall 
 
visitors pindi security room improvement to afflux bundha and slope of earth 
 
  
 
  Dam 
 
  Improvement of Salandi Dam under DRIP Renovation of Electrical utilities 
 
SALANDI 2 including provision for control panel cable and earthing device etc including 
 
  three nos High Mast light for Salandi Dam Hadagarh 
 
  Improvement to Salandi Dam under DRIP Renovation Fabrication Erection 
 
SALANDI 3 Testing and Commissioning of under Sluice Gate No 3 and replacement of Steel 
 
wire rope with 20 Ton capacity turnbuckle including Electrical Repair of 8nos of 
 
  
 
  Radial Gates 
 
SALANDI 4 Providing man power service for security arrangement of Salandi dam at 
 
Hadgarh on contract basis 
 
  
 
SALANDI 5 Automation of 8 nos radial gates by remote sensoring of Salandi dam Hadgarh 
 
   
 
SALANDI 6 Providing man power service for security arrangement of Salandi dam at 
 
Hadgarh on contract basis 
 
  
 
SALANDI 7 Supply & fitting of reflective signaeage board of different offices of salandi canal 
 
division under DRIP. 
 
  
 
SALANDI 8 Supply & fitting of reflective signaeage board of different offices of salandi canal 
 
division under DRIP. 
 
  
 
SALIA 1 Improvement to Salia Irrigation Project under DRIP 
 
  Improvement to Salia Irrigation Project under Dam Rehabilitation Improvement 
 
SALIA 2 Project (DRIP) (Power supply to Salia Irr. Project 25KVA (Including 
 
  Transformer) 
 
SALIA 3 Improvement to Salia Irrigation Project under Dam Rehabilitation Improvement 
 
Project (DRIP) (Removal of all woodly vegetation both the main dam & Dyke) 
 
  
 
   
 
SALIA 4 Improvement to Salia Irrigation Project under Dam Rehabilitation Improvement 
 
Project (DRIP) (Illumination of Salia Dam Project of 400m length) 
 
  
 
   
 

79 
 
  Improvement to Salia Irrigation Project under Dam Rehabilitation Improvement 
 
SALIA 5 Project (DRIP) (Power supply of Salia Irrigation Project LT line with AB Cable 3 
 
  x 35 + 1 x 25 MMSQ of 1.25Km. 
 
SANMACHHAKANDANA 1 Improvement to Sanamachhakandana Dam under DRIP 
 

80 
 
 
 Rehabilitation Work Awarded Under DRIP Project 
 
   
 
Name of Dam Package Name of Work 
 
No. 
 
  
 
  Construction of 1st and 2nd Fall Ogee of Surplus Channel at RD 30M Right and 
 
SANMACHHAKANDANA 2 70M Left of Sanamachhakandana Dam under DRIP at Bansapal Block of 
 
  Keonjhar District 
 
SAPUA 1 Improvement to Sapua Badjore Irrigation project under DRIP 
 
SAPUA 2 Improvement to Sapua Badjore Irrigation project under DRIP Package 02 
 
   
 
SARAFGARH 1 Rehabilitation to Saraphgarh Dam 
 
SARAFGARH 2 Agreement drawn for Mechanical work vide PO No 306 311 etc dtd 20 02 
 
2015 
 
  
 
SARAFGARH 3 Agreement drawn for Mechanical work & P.O. issued 
 
  Supplying, installing & commissioning of 2nos. 20mtr. High mast lighting system 
 
SARAFGARH 4 with 9 nos. 2x400W MH lighting system at dam base of Sarafgarh irrigation 
 
  project. 
 
SARAFGARH 5 Improvement in presentation and Caliberation system for Sarafgarh Irrigation 
 
Project under Sundergarh Irrigation Division, Sundargarh under DRIP. 
 
  
 
   
 
SARAFGARH 6 Supplying, fitting & fixing of lno. 40 KVA Three phase silent type AMF D.G. set 
 
with accessories for Saraphgarh Irrigation Project. 
 
  
 
  Leakage control through body wall of Spillway by drilling grouting including 
 
SATIGUDA (MALKANGIRI) 1 cleaning of porous holes of foundation under DRIP of Satiguda Medium 
 
  Irrigation Project Malkangiri 2015 16 
 
  Improvement to Service Road to Dam Site Construction of new culverts raising 
 
SATIGUDA (MALKANGIRI) 2 of parapet wall and Barbed wire fencing of SIP Satiguda Irrigation Project 
 
  Malkangiri under DRIP for the year 2015 16 
 
  Repair and renovation of stilling basin toe drain improvement to spill channel 
 
SATIGUDA (MALKANGIRI) 3 resectioning of dyke and construction of protection wall near city water tank of 
 
  Satiguda Irrigation Project Malkangiri under DRIP for the year 2015 16 
 
   
 
SATIGUDA (UKP) 1 Dam Rehabilitation improvement project DRIP of Satiguda Dam Upper Kolab 
 
Project Barinipur District Koraput 
 
  
 
  Leakage control through spillway body walls HR structures by Drilling Grouting 
 
SATIGUDA (UKP) 2 and Reaming of VPD and Foundation holes of drainage Gallery of Satiguda 
 
  Dam Upper Kolab Project. 
 
  Supply and installation of 30KVA silent diesel generator set and lighting 
 
SATIGUDA (UKP) 3 arrangement at dam top road Head regulator gates and gallery inside of 
 
  Satiguda dam under DRIP 
 
SUNDAR 1 Improvement to Sundar Irrigation Project under the dam Rehabilitation and 
 
Improvement Project DRIP for the year 2015 16 
 
  
 
SUNDAR 2 Barbed wire fencing to Down Stream of Sundar Dam at Jadamunda 
 
TALSARA 1 Rehabilitation to Talsara Dam 
 
TALSARA 2 Agreement drawn for Mechanical work vide PO No 316, 356, 351 etc dtd 20 02 
 
2015 
 
  
 
TALSARA 3 Agreement drawn for Mechanical work through PO. 5241, 5251 etc and 
 
agreements 
 
  
 
  Supplying, installing & commissioning of 1no. 20mtr. High mast lighting system 
 
TALSARA 4 with 9 nos. 2x400W MH lighting system at dam base of Talasara irrigation 
 
  project. 
 
TALSARA 5 Improvement in presentation and Caliberation system for Talsara Irrigation 
 
Project under Sundergarh Irrigation Division, Sundargarh under DRIP. 
 
  
 
   
 

81 
 
TALSARA 6 Epoxy grouting in the walls of H/R and breast wall of Talsara Dam. 
 
  Improvement to Road communication network improvement of drainage system 
 
UPPER KOLAB 1 and construction of compound wall fencing along the boundary of UK Dam 
 
  Kolabnagar under DRIP. 
 

82 
 
 
 Rehabilitation Work Awarded Under DRIP Project 
 
   
 
Name of Dam Package Name of Work 
 
No. 
 
  
 
UPPER KOLAB 2 Down Stream Protection works on left and right side of spill channel of UK Dam 
 
with Construction of Guard Walls and Stone packing works under DRIP. 
 
  
 
   
 
UPPER KOLAB 3 Renovation and special repair to lighting system for UK Dam under DRIP. 
 
   
 
  Construction of watch tower at vulenerable locations renovation of old damaged 
 
UPPER KOLAB 4 parapets providing hand rails on steps inside drainage gallery and other 
 
  ancilliary works of UK Dam under DRIP. 
 
UPPER KOLAB 5 Beautification of Garden at U K dam under DRIP 
 
UPPER KOLAB 6 Installation of Solar Power station at UK dam under DRIP 
 
UPPER KOLAB 7 Supply and installation of CCTV camera and other accessories for surveillance 
 
under DRIP 
 
  
 
UPPER KOLAB 8 Supply and installation of computer with networking furnitures and other 
 
accessories for control room of UK dam under DRIP 
 
  
 
UPPER KOLAB 9 Sand blasting and painting of 11 nos spillway radial gates Up stream sides only 
 
of UK dam under DRIP 
 
  
 
UPPER KOLAB 10 Change of rubber seals of 11 nos spillway radial gates of UK dam under DRIP 
 
   
 
UPPER KOLAB 11 Improvement to pumping system of inspection gallery of UK Dam under DRIP 
 
   
 
UPPER KOLAB 12 Repair and renovation to radial crest gate gantry crane and hoisting 
 
arrangement of UK Dam under DRIP 
 
  
 
  Treatment to upstream and downstream faces with PICC mortar or equivalent 
 
UPPER KOLAB 13 non shrink mortar & grouting works to eradicate the distress condition of dam 
 
  body wall of Upper Kolab dam under DRIP 
 
UPPER KOLAB 14 Procurement of emergency articles for dam operation and maintenance 
 
   
 
 TNWRD (Tamil Nadu Water Resource Department) 
 
ADAVINAINARKOVIL 1 Civil Works 
 
ADAVINAINARKOVIL 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work 
 
ADAVINAINARKOVIL 3 Electrical 
 
ALIYAR 1 Civil Works 
 
ALIYAR 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work 
 
ALIYAR 3 Electrical 
 
AMARAVATHI 1 Civil Works 
 
AMARAVATHI 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work 
 
AMARAVATHI 3 Electrical 
 
ANAI MADUVU 1 Civil Works 
 
ANAI MADUVU 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work 
 
ANAI MADUVU 3 Electrical - I 
 
ANAIKUTTAM 1 Civil Works 
 
ANAIKUTTAM 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work 
 
ANAIKUTTAM 3 Electrical 
 
BHAVANISAGAR 1 Civil Works 
 
BHAVANISAGAR 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work (Renewal and Repairs Shutter works ) 
 
BHAVANISAGAR 3 Electrical 
 
CHEMBARAMPAKKAM 1 Civil Works 
 
CHEMBARAMPAKKAM 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work 
 
CHEMBARAMPAKKAM 3 Electrical 
 
CHINNAR 1 Civil Works 
 

83 
 
CHINNAR 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work (Repairs and renewal to Head slucie service gate 
 
grooves for horisting arrangements) 
 
  
 
CHINNAR 3 Hydro-Mechanical Work (Repairs to spillway shutter and head sluice) 
 

84 
 
 
 Rehabilitation Work Awarded Under DRIP Project 
 
   
 
Name of Dam Package Name of Work 
 
No. 
 
  
 
CHINNAR 4 Civil Works 
 
CHITTAR I 1 Civil Works 
 
CHITTAR II 1 Civil Works 
 
CHOLAVARAM 1 Civil Works 
 
GATANA 1 Civil Works 
 
GATANA 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work (Repairs & Replacement of shutters with reubber seal 
 
and hoisting) 
 
  
 
GOLWARPATTI 1 Civil Works 
 
GOLWARPATTI 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work (Repairs & Replacement of shutters with reubber seal 
 
and hoisting arrangements ) 
 
  
 
GOLWARPATTI 3 Electrical 
 
GOMUKHINADI 1 Civil & Hydro Mechanical Works 
 
GUNDERIPALLAM 1 Civil Works 
 
GUNDERIPALLAM 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work 
 
GUNDERIPALLAM 3 Electrical 
 
KARIAKOIL 1 Civil Works 
 
KARIAKOIL 3 Electrical 
 
KARUPPANADHI 1 Civil Works 
 
KARUPPANADHI 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work (Repairs & Replacement of shutters with reubber seal 
 
and hoisting arrangements) 
 
  
 
KARUPPANADHI 3 Electrical 
 
KELAVARAPALLI 1 Civil Works 
 
  Hydro-Mechanical Work (Repairs/ Renewal of Spillway Shutters, chequared 
 
KELAVARAPALLI 2 plate of Spillway check bridge, Left main canal, Right main canal Irrigation Gate, 
 
  River sluice, emergency Shutter and Gontry crane) 
 
    
KELAVARAPALLI 3 Electrical 
 
KESARIGULIHALLA 1 Civil Works 
 
  Hydro-Mechanical Work (Renewal and repair of radial shutters LMC sluice 
 
KESARIGULIHALLA 2 shutters, Abutment shutters and value, new emergency shutters and value, new 
 
  emergency shutter works) 
 
KESARIGULIHALLA 3 Electrical 
 
KODAGANAR 1 Civil Works 
 
KODAGANAR 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work (Renewal and Repairs to old vertical shutters, radial 
 
shutters and canal head sluice shutters) 
 
  
 
KODAGANAR 3 Electrical 
 
KODUMUDIYAR 1 Civil Works 
 
KODUMUDIYAR 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work 
 
KODUMUDIYAR 3 Providing additional Electrical arrangements to Kodumudiyar Dam 
 
KRISHNAGIRI 1 Civil Works 
 
  Hydro-Mechanical Work (Repairs/ Renewal of Spilway Shutters, Left Main 
 
KRISHNAGIRI 2 Canal, Right main Canal. Irrigation gates and River Sluice Shutter, Emergency 
 
  Shutte, Gantry Grane arangements) 
 
KRISHNAGIRI 3 Electrical 
 
KULLURSANDAI 1 Civil Works 
 
KULLURSANDAI 2 Electrical (Providing street light arrangements and service connection) 
 
KUTHIRAIYAR 1 Civil Works 
 
KUTHIRAIYAR 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work (Repairs to Spillway shutters,River Sluice Shutter,River 
 
Sluice Emergency Shutter and Gantry Grane) 
 
  
 
KUTHIRAIYAR 3 Electrical 
 

85 
 
LOWER ANICUT 1 Civil Works 
 
LOWER ANICUT 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work (Providing Electrical Motors Fitting and necessary 
 
hoisting arrangement and Repairs and Renowal of Shutters) 
 
  
 
LOWER ANICUT 3 Electrical 
 

86 
 
 
 Rehabilitation Work Awarded Under DRIP Project 
 
   
 
Name of Dam Package Name of Work 
 
No. 
 
  
 
LOWER NIRAR 1 Civil Works 
 
LOWER NIRAR 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work 
 
LOWER NIRAR 3 Electrical 
 
MANIMUKTHANADHI 1 Civil Works 
 
MANIMUKTHANADHI 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work (Providing Additional Spillway Radial Shutters for 10.0 
 
m x 4.47 m for the vent size of 10.0 m x 6.15 m for 3 vents) 
 
  
 
MANIMUKTHANADHI 3 Electrical 
 
MANIMUTHAR 1 Civil Works 
 
MANIMUTHAR 3 Haydro-Mechanical Work (Repairs & Replacement of shutters with reubber seal 
 
and hoisting arrangements ) 
 
  
 
MANIMUTHAR 4 Electrical-I 
 
MANIMUTHAR 5 Electrical-II 
 
MANIMUTHAR 6 Electrical-III 
 
MANJALAR 1 Civil Works 
 
MANJALAR 2 Electrical 
 
MANJALAR 3 Haydro-Mechanical Work ( Rehabilitation and Improvement to Shutters) 
 
   
 
MARUDHANADHI 1 Civil Works 
 
MARUDHANADHI 2 Electrical 
 
MARUDHANADHI 3 Haydro-Mechanical Work 
 
METTUR 1 Civil Works 
 
METTUR 2 Haydro-Mechanical Work 
 
METTUR 3 electrical 
 
MORDHANA 1 Civil Works & Electrical Works 
 
NAGAVATHI 1 Civil Works 
 
NAMBIAR 1 Civil Works 
 
NAMBIAR 2 Supply of goods and hiring machineries to shutter repair work 
 
NAMBIAR 3 Electrical 
 
NOYYAL ATHUPALAYAM 1 Civil Works 
 
NOYYAL ATHUPALAYAM 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work 
 
PALAR PORUNDALAR 1 Civil Works 
 
PALAR PORUNDALAR 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work (Renewal of shutters and Hoisting arrangement) 
 
   
 
PALAR PORUNDALAR 3 Electrical-I 
 
PALAR PORUNDALAR 4 Electrical-II 
 
PAMBAR 1 Civil Works 
 
PAMBAR 2 Haydro-Mechanical Work (Renewal of shutters and Hoisting arrangements) 
 
   
 
PAMBAR 3 Electrical 
 
PARAMBIKULAM 1 Civil Works 
 
PARAMBIKULAM 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work 
 
PARAMBIKULAM 3 Electrical 
 
PERUNCHANI 1 Civil Works 
 
PERUNCHANI 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work (Rehabilitation and Improvements to Shutters) 
 
   
 
PERUVARIPALLAM 1 Civil Works 
 
PERUVARIPALLAM 2 Haydro-Mechanical Work 
 
PERUVARIPALLAM 3 electrical 
 
PILAVUKKAL PROJECT 1 Civil Works 
 
KOVILAR 
 
  
 

87 
 
PILAVUKKAL PROJECT  Hydro-Mechanical Work (Replacement of River sluice and canal sluice shutters 
 
2 and renewal and repair to regulator shutter and emergency shutter and 
 
KOVILAR 
 
 protection grill work) 
 
  
 

88 
 
 
 Rehabilitation Work Awarded Under DRIP Project 
 
   
 
Name of Dam Package Name of Work 
 
No. 
 
  
 
PILAVUKKAL PROJECT 3 Electrical 
 
KOVILAR 
 
  
 
PILAVUKKAL PROJECT 1 Civil Works 
 
PERIYAR 
 
  
 
PILAVUKKAL PROJECT 2 Electrical 
 
PERIYAR 
 
  
 
POIGAIYAR 1 Civil Works 
 
PONNANIYAR 1 Civil Works 
 
POONDI 1 Civil Works 
 
POONDI 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work 
 
POONDI 3 Electrical 
 
POONDI 4 Electrical 
 
RAMANADHI 1 Civil Works 
 
RAMANADHI 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work (Repairs & Replacement of shutters with reubber seal 
 
and hoisting arrangements) 
 
  
 
RAMANADHI 3 Electrical 
 
RED HILLS 1 Civil Works 
 
SATHANUR 1 Civil Works 
 
SATHANUR 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work 
 
SHANMUGANADHI 1 Civil Works 
 
SHOLAYAR 1 Civil Works 
 
SHOOLAGIRICHINNAR 1 Civil Works 
 
SHOOLAGIRICHINNAR 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work 
 
SHOOLAGIRICHINNAR 3 Electrical 
 
SIDDHAMALLI 1 Civil Works 
 
SIDDHAMALLI 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work 
 
SIDDHAMALLI 3 instrumentation 
 
SIDDHAMALLI 4 Conducting Model Study 
 
SOTHUPPARAI 3 Electrical 
 
THIRUMURTHI DAM 1 Civil Works 
 
THIRUMURTHI DAM 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work (Repairs & Replacement of shutters with reubber seal 
 
and hoisting) 
 
  
 
THIRUMURTHI DAM 3 Electrical 
 
THOPPAIYAR 1 Civil Works 
 
THOPPAIYAR 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work (Repairs to shutters) 
 
THOPPAIYAR 3 Electrical 
 
THUMBALAHALLI DAM 1 Haydro-Mechanical Work (Repairs to shutters) 
 
THUNAKADAVU 1 Civil Works 
 
UPPER (TIRPUR) 1 Civil Works 
 
UPPER (TRICHY) 1 Civil Works 
 
UPPER (TRICHY) 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work 
 
UPPER NIRAR WEIR. 1 Civil Works 
 
UPPER NIRAR WEIR. 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work 
 
VADAKKUPAICHAIYAR 1 Civil Works 
 
VADAKKUPAICHAIYAR 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work 
 
VADAKKUPAICHAIYAR 3 Electrical 
 
VAIGAI 1 Civil Works 
 
VANIAR 1 Civil Works 
 
VANIAR 2 Haydro-Mechanical Work (Renewal and Repairs to Radial Shutter, sluice 
 
service shutter and emergency shutter) 
 
  
 

89 
 
VARATTUPALLAM 1 Civil Works 
 
VEERANAM 1 Civil Works 
 
VEERANAM 2 Electrical 
 

90 
 
 
 Rehabilitation Work Awarded Under DRIP Project 
 
   
 
Name of Dam Package Name of Work 
 
No. 
 
  
 
VEMBAKOTTAI 1 Civil Works 
 
VEMBAKOTTAI 2 Electrical 
 
VIDUR 1 Civil Works 
 
VIDUR 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work (Grit Blasting -Painting to shutters & Groove frames) 
 
   
 
VIDUR 3 Electrical 
 
WILLINGTON RESERVOIR 1 Civil Works 
 
WILLINGTON RESERVOIR 2 Hydro-Mechanical Work 
 
   
 
TANGEDCO (Tamil Nadu Generation and Distribution Corporation)  
 
AVALANCHE 1 Civil Works 
 
BUNGHIHALLABUND 1 Civil Works 
 
BUNGHIHALLABUND 3 Geo-tech Investigations 
 
EMERALD 1 Civil Works 
 
ERAVANGALAR 1 Civil Works 
 
GLENMORGAN 1 Civil Works 
 
HIGHWAVYS 1 Civil Works 
 
KADAMBARAI 1 Civil Works 
 
KODAYAR I 1 Civil Works 
 
KUNDAHPALAM 1 Rehabilitation & Improvement Works (Package I) in Kundah Generation Circle 
 
of Nilgiris District. 
 
  
 
KUNDAHPALAM 5 Civil Works 
 
KUNDAHPALAM 6 Consultancy service forTopographycal survey 
 
KUTTIYAR 1 Civil Works 
 
MANALAR 1 Civil Works 
 
MUKURTHI 1 Civil Works 
 
PAPANASAM DIV WEIR 3 Rehabilitation & Improvement Works Excavation/Desilting of reservoir & allied 
 
works (Package III) of Papanasam, Tirunel District 
 
  
 
PERIYAR FOREBAY 1 Civil Works 
 
PORTHIMUND 1 Civil Works 
 
SERVALAR 1 Civil Works 
 
SERVALAR 2 Civil Works 
 
UPPER ALIYAR 1 Civil Works 
 
VANDAL WEIR 1 Civil Works 
 
 KWRD (Kerala Water Resources Department)  
 
   
 
CHIMONI 1 Rehabilitation and improvement of basic facilities of 
 
Chimoni Irrigation Project 
 
  
 
CHIMONI 2 Rehabilitation and Improvement Of Basic facilities of 
 
Chimony Irrigation Project- Chimony dam(Mechanical Works) 
 
  
 
CHULLIAR (GAYATHRI 1 Rehabilitation and improvement of basic facilities of Chulliar Irrigation Project 
 
STAGE II) 
 
  
 
KALLADA (PARAPPAR) 1 Rehabilitation and Basic Facilities of Kallada 
 
Irrigation Project 
 
  
 
  Rehabilitation and Improvement of Basic 
 
KALLADA (PARAPPAR) 2 Facilities of Parappar dam in Kallada Irrigation Project 
 
  (Mechanical Works) 
 
KANJIRA PUZHA 1 Rehabilitation and improvement of basic facilities of Kanhirapuzha Irrigation 
 
Project - Civil Work 
 
  
 
KUTTIYADI (IRRIGN. PROJ.) 1 Rehabilitation and Improvement of basic facilities of 
 

91 
 
  
Kuttiyadi Irrigation Project (Civil works) 
 
  
 
KUTTIYADI (IRRIGN. PROJ.) 3 Renovation of electrical Installation 
 
   
 

92 
 
 
  Rehabilitation Work Awarded Under DRIP Project 
 
   
 
Name of Dam 
Package 
Name of Work 
 
No.  
 
   
 
MALAMPUZHA 1 
  Rehabilitation and Improvement of basic facilities of Malampuzha irrigation 
 
  project 
 
    
 
MALANKARA / 
1 
  Rehabilitation and Improvement of basic facilities of Muvattupuzha valley 
 
MUVATTUPUZHA   Irrigation Project 
 
   
 
MALANKARA / 
2 
  Rehabilitation and Improvements to 
 
MUVATTUPUZHA   the Electrical installation of Malankara Dam 
 
   
 
MEENKARA (GAYATHRI 
1 
  Rehabilitation and improvement of basic facilities of 
 
STAGE I)   Meenkara Irrigation Project 
 
   
 
MEENKARA (GAYATHRI 
3 
  Rehabilitation and Improvement Of Basic facilities of 
 
STAGE I)   Meenkara Irrigation Project(Mechanical Works) 
 
   
 
NEYYAR 1 
  Rehabilitation and basic facilities of Neyyar Irrigation 
 
  Project – Civil works 
 
    
 
NEYYAR 2 
  Rehabilitation and Improvement Of Basic facilities of Neyyar 
 
  Irrigation Project-Neyyar Dam (Mechanical Works) 
 
    
 
PAZHASSI IRRIGATION 
1 
  Rehabilitation and Improvement of basic facilities 
 
PROJECT   of Pazhassi Irrigation Project 
 
   
 
PAZHASSI IRRIGATION 
2 
  Rehabilitation and Improvement of basic facilities ofvPazhassi Irrigation Project- 
 
PROJECT   Pazhassi Barrage(Mechanical Works) 
 
   
 
PEECHI 1 
  Rehabilitation and Improvement of Basic 
 
  facilities of Peechi Irrigation Project (Civil Works) 
 
    
 
PEECHI 3 
  Rehabilitation and Improvement Of Basic facilities of Peechi Irrigation 
 
  Project(Mechanical Works) 
 
    
 
PERIYAR VALLEY BARRAGE 1 
  Rehabilitation and Improvement of Basic Facilities of Bhoothathankettu Barrage 
 
  in Periyar Valley Irrigation Project 
 
    
 
    Rehabilitation and Improvement of Basic Facilities 
 
PERIYAR VALLEY BARRAGE 2   (Hydro-Mechanical works) of Bhoothathankettu Barrage in 
 
    Periyar Valley Irrigation Project in Kerala 
 
PERIYAR VALLEY BARRAGE 3 
  Construction of new bridge for diversion of traffic for safety of old barrage (at 
 
  Bhoothathankettu) 
 
    
 
PERIYAR VALLEY BARRAGE 4   Renovation of electrical installation of Bhoothathankettu barrage 
 
     
 
POTHUNDY 1   Rehabilitation and basic facilities of Pothundy Irrigation Project 
 
POTHUNDY 2 
  Rehabilitation and Improvement Of Basic facilities of 
 
  Pothundy Irrigation Project- Pothundy dam(Mechanical Works) 
 
    
 
    Rehabilitation and improvement of 
 
VAZHANY 1   Basic facilities of Vazhani Irrigation Project 
 
    (Civil Work) 
 
VAZHANY 3 
  Rehabilitation and Improvement Of Basic facilities of 
 
  Vazhani Irrigation Project(Mechanical Works) 
 
    
 
WALAYAR 1   Rehabilitation and improvement of basic facilities of Walayar Irrigation Project 
 
     
 
   KSEB (Kerala State Electricity Board)  
 
IDAMALAYAR 1 
  Rehabilitation including remedial measures and basic facilities of Idamalayar 
 
  HEP(Part I works) 
 
    
 
    Idamalayar Hydro Electric Project-Rehabilitation works-Enhancement of basic 
 
IDAMALAYAR 2   facilities- 
 

93 
 
  
  
 
 
    Renovation of an existing building at Idamalayar 
 
IDAMALAYAR 3   Reaming of foundation drain holes(vertical holes) of Idamalayar dam 
 
IDAMALAYAR 4   Conducting Test blasting (to assist the blast guidance consultancy by M/s NIRM)  
 
     
 
IDAMALAYAR 5 
  Upstream honeycomb/eroded concrete surface treatment surrounding block 
 
  joint 15/16 of Idamalayar Dam for leakage control 
 
    
 
IDAMALAYAR 6   Improvement of road works from IB Junction to Dam top 
 

94 
 
 
 Rehabilitation Work Awarded Under DRIP Project 
 
   
 
Name of Dam Package Name of Work 
 
No. 
 
  
 
IDAMALAYAR 7 Blasting guidance report by M/s NIRM, Bengaluru for the debris removal at the 
 
d/s of Idamalayar dam 
 
  
 
  Construction of a retaining wall and platform for evaporimeter and Rain gauge 
 
IDAMALAYAR 8 station near the renovated Research and Dam safety office building at 
 
  Idamalayar 
 
  Rehabilitation including remedial measures and basic facilities of dams 
 
IDUKKI 1 associated with Idukki Hydro 
 
  Electric Project(Part I) 
 
  Rehabilitation including remedial measures and basic facilities -improvements of 
 
IDUKKI 2 approach roads to Idukki and 
 
  Cheruthoni dams- (Part II –works) 
 
  Rehabilitation including remedial measures and basic facilities -painting the 
 
IDUKKI 3 downstream face of the Idukki dam - 
 
  (Part III –works) 
 
IDUKKI 4 Rehabilitation including remedial measures and basic facilities of Idukki Hydro 
 
Electric Project – Electrification of Idukki dam (Part IV -works) 
 
  
 
IDUKKI 5 Idukki Hydro-Electric Project -Repair of Cracks with Micro fine Cement grout in 
 
Idukki Dam 
 
  
 
IDUKKI 11 High Mast lighting-Cabling at Idukki,Cheruthoni and Kulamavu Dams 
 
  Implementation of remedial measures for the rehabilitation of dams and 
 
KAKKAD 1 improvement of basic facilities under Kakkad Hydro Electric Project (1st Part of 
 
  Works) 
 
KAKKAD 2 Reaming of Internal Drainage System of Moozhiyar Dam under Kakkad Hydro 
 
Electric Project 
 
  
 
KAKKAD 3 Protective roofing to the hoist of radial gates of Moozhiyar Dam 
 
   
 
KAKKAD 4 Construction of Generator room at Moozhiyar Dam premises 
 
KUTTIYADI 1 Rehabilitation including remedial measures and basic facilities of Kakkayam 
 
dam associated with Kuttiady Hydro Electric Project (Part- I) 
 
  
 
  Implementation of remedial measures for the 
 
KUTTIYADI 2 rehabilitation of dams and improvement of basic facilities under Kuttiyadi 
 
  Augmentation Scheme (1st Part of Works) 
 
KUTTIYADI 3 Improvement of basic facilities under Kuttiyadi Augmentation Scheme (Part-II)- 
 
Metalling & Chipping carpet of Replacement Road No.II and Protective works. 
 
  
 
   
 
KUTTIYADI 5 Renovation of Office Building at Kakkayam 
 
KUTTIYADI 6 Rehabilitation including remedial measures and basic facilities of Kakkayam 
 
dam (Part-III)-Pressure washing & pointing on the downstream face of the dam 
 
  
 
   
 
LOWER PERIYAR 1 Rehabilitation including remedial measures and basic facilities of Lower Periyar 
 
dam associated with Lower Periyar Hydro Electric Project(Part-1) 
 
  
 
   
 
  Rehabilitation including remedial measures &basic facilities of Lower Periyar 
 
LOWER PERIYAR 2 Dam associated withLower Periyar HEP (Part –II) Repair of Lower Vent Sluice 
 
  Gate (1 No) and Crest Radial Gates (3 Nos) 
 
NERIAMANGALAM 1 Rehabilitation including remedial measures and basic facilities of dam 
 
associated with Neriamangalam Hydro Electric Project (Part I) 
 
  
 
PALLIVASAL 1 Rehabilitation including remedial measures and improvement of basic facilities 
 
of dams associated with Pallivasal Hydro-Electric Project (Part 1) 
 
  
 
   
 
PANNIYAR 1 Rehabilitation including remedial measures and basic facilities of dams 
 

95 
 
  
associated with Panniar Hydro Electric Project (Part I) 
 
  
 
PORINGALKUTHU 1 Rehabilitation including remedial measures and improvement of basic facilities 
 
of dam associated with Poringalkuthu Hydro-Electric Project (1st Part of works) 
 
  
 
   
 

96 
 
 
 Rehabilitation Work Awarded Under DRIP Project 
 
   
 
Name of Dam Package Name of Work 
 
No. 
 
  
 
PORINGALKUTHU 2 Rehabilitation including renovationn of crest gate (No.4) of Poringalkuthu Hydro- 
 
Electric Project(Part1) 
 
  
 
PORINGALKUTHU 3 Repair work of secondary concrete & I beam of crest gate No.7 of oringalkuthu 
 
dam 
 
  
 
PORINGALKUTHU 4 Rehabilitation including renovation of crest gates (No.1, 2,3,5,6&7)of 
 
Poringalkuthu Hydro Electric Project (Part II) 
 
  
 
  Rehabilitation including remedial measures and basic facilities of dams 
 
SABARIGIRI 1 associated with Sabarigiri Hydro 
 
  Electric Project(Part I) 
 
SABARIGIRI 2 EAP Consultancy 
 
SABARIGIRI 5 Reaming of foundrtion drain holes of Anathode dam under Sabarigiri Hydro 
 
Electric Proiect 
 
  
 
  Visual inspection and Digital Videography of Emergency Gate Section & 
 
SABARIGIRI 9 Elevator Shaft at kakki dam utilizing a Submersible Remotely Operated Vehicle 
 
(ROV) for facilitating the investigation to the impediments in the execution of the 
 
  
 
  repairing & Reconditioning of the left side Hollow Jet Valve of Kakki Dam 
 
   
 
SENGALUM 1 Rehabilitation including remedial measures & basic facilities of Sengulam Dam 
 
associated with Sengulam HEP ( Part –1) 
 
  
 
  Replacement of Sluice valve & repair/replacement of Emergency gate of 
 
SENGALUM 2 Sengulam dam and providing electrically operated new hoisting mechanism for 
 
  the Power tunnel Intake gate. 
 
SHOLAYAR 1 Rehabilitation including remedial measures and basic facilities of dams 
 
associated with Sholayar Hydro Electric Project(Part I Works) 
 
  
 
SHOLAYAR 2 Reaming of Internal Drainage System of Sholayar Main Dam & Flanking dam 
 
under Sholayar HydroElectric Project 
 
  
 
SHOLAYAR 3 Replacement of damaged guides by providing new stainless steel guides for the 
 
emergency gate at Sholayar main dam 
 
  
 
SHOLAYAR 6 Providing underground power cabling system including fixing of Generator 
 
switch , Distribution board..etc at Sholayar dam premises 
 
  
 
 KAWRD (The Karnataka Water Resources Department)  
 
  Grouting the Body, Upstream treatment, reaming and re drilling of the porous 
 
ALMATTI DAM 1 holes /Foundation holes of the Almatti Dam. (Rehabilitation and Improvement 
 
  Works to Almatti Dam under World Bank aided DRIP program. Package-I). 
 
   
 
  Providing treatment to the spillway piers of the Almatti Dam.(Rehabilitation and 
 
ALMATTI DAM 2 Improvement Works to Almatti Dam Under World Bank aided DRIP program. 
 
  Package- II) 
 
  Rectification to existing Rip Rap of upstream earthen embankment of Almatti 
 
ALMATTI DAM 3 Dam(Rehabilitation and Improvement Works to Almatti Dam Under World Bank 
 
  aided DRIP program. Package- III). 
 
  Treatment to the eroded/damaged portion of the Stilling Basin of Almatti Dam. 
 
ALMATTI DAM 4 (Rehabilitation and Improvement Works to Almatti Dam Under World Bank 
 
  aided DRIP program. Package- IV) 
 
   
 
AMARJA DAM 1 Improvements to Dam stilling basin, construction of toe drain etc. 
 
  Treatment to piers, fixing of rubber seals, electrification wiring, repairs to body 
 
BENNITHORA 1 wall, repairs to CC near spillway, improvements road, providing m60 and 
 
  grouting of Bennithora dam 
 
  Treatment of upstream face the dam From level 2166 ft to 2102 ft, Spillway, 
 

97 
 
  
 
BHADRA DAM 1 Spillway Peirs, abutments, Drywells, Reaming of porous holes, foundation 
 
drainage holes, Grouting to Foundation, Body of the dam, Extraction of cores for 
 
  
 
  conducting Permeability test & Repairs to nappe portion of spillway 
 
   
 

98 
 
Rehabilitation Work Awarded Under DRIP Project 
 
Name of Dam 
Package 
Name of Work 
 
 
No.  
 
   
 
  Dewatering of Stilling basin & Repairs to Damaged portion of Stilling basin bed, 
 
BHADRA DAM 2 RCC toe wall, Dividing wall, and R/S River training wall through treatment of 
 
  M60 silica fume concrete.  
 
BHADRA DAM 3 Removal of loose debries from tail channel reconstruction and strengthening of 
 
side protection wall beyond stilling basin upto road bridge of bhadra dam 
 
  
 
    
 
BHADRA DAM 4 
Repairs and Overhauling of Spillway Crest gates, Scouring Sluice gates of 
 
Bhadra Dam.  
 
   
 
  Renovation of Electrical System provided for gantry crane (Ridinger make) of 
 
BHADRA DAM 5 Capacity 75/7.5 tonne & 45/7.5 tonne installed at Bhadra dam including repair to 
 
  mechanical parts rail tracks and hoisting arrangements of gantry crane. 
 
   
 
CHANDRAMPALLI DAM 1 Improvement to rock toe and provision of drainage chute @ d/s etc. 
 
  Asphalting to top bund, constructions of drain along d/s, barbed fencing around 
 
CHICKKAHOLE 1 d/s periphery, construction of security building & Installation of Piezometer, 
 
  Geological investigation and Stability analysis, providing CC tv, for dam 
 
   
 
DEVARABILLIKERE TANK 1 
Providing drains and turfind on d/s of dam and removal of coffer dam on u/s side 
 
and training of mother valley in the d/s  
 
   
 
H.B.HALLI PICKUP 1 Rehabilitation and improvement works to Hagaribommana halli pick up dam 
 
under world bank aided drip programme (PACKAGE) 
 
  
 
HARANGI DAM 1 
Treatment to u/s and d/s face of masonry portion, treatment of spillway piers 
 
and ogee etc.  
 
   
 
  Providing Berm Loading, cross drains, Longitudinal drains, Rock toe and 
 
HEMAVATHY DAM 1 Subsurface drains and Turfing on D/S & Removal of Coffer Dam On Upstream 
 
Side Of Dam, and Training of Mother Valley in the Down Stream Of Dam in 
 
  
 
  between Ch 340 to Ch 510Mtrs of bund of D.B Kere Pickup Project. 
 
   
 
  Providing curtain grouting from ch 5100 to 5300 m on reservoir in seepage zone 
 
  on Upstream side of Dyke No 1, & Reaming of Porous concrete vertical 
 
HIDKAL DAM 1 drainage Holes and foundation Holes of Hidkal Dam from Ch. 8000' to 10000' 
 
  (Rehabilitation and Improvement Works to Hidkal Dam Under World Bank aided 
 
  DRIP program) (Package-1)(KNNL/2015-16/ DA/ WORK_INDENT-17103) 
 
   
 
  Special masonry repairs to upstream side by Poly Ironite Ceramic Cementations 
 
  (PICC) mortar and to arrest leakages & strengthening of dam from Ch : 8500' to 
 
HIDKAL DAM 2 10000', Dewatering & Special repairs to the Stilling Basin of Hidkal Dam by 
 
providing M-60 concrete, (Rehabilitation and Improvement Works to Hidkal Dam 
 
  
 
  Under World Bank aided DRIP program) (Package-2) (KNNL/2015- 
 
  16/DA/WORK_INDENT17104)  
 
  Construction of new office block and dam monitoring station at Hidkal site, & 
 
  Improvements to approach roads of Hidkal Dam, & Providing Barbed wire 
 
HIDKAL DAM 3 fencing to Dyke No.1 and downstream of Hidkal dam. (Rehabilitation and 
 
  Improvement Works to Hidkal Dam Under World Bank aided DRIP program) 
 
  (Package-3) (KNNL/2015-16/ DA/ WORK_INDENT- 17105) 
 
   
 
  Providing New Emergency gate for Irrigation sluice and improvements of 
 
  existing gates, hoist mechanism, and Providing shelter over hoists of sluice 
 
HIDKAL DAM 4 service gates and radial gates (Rehabilitation and Improvement Works to Hidkal 
 

99 
 
   
 
  Dam Under World Bank aided DRIP program) (Package-4) (KNNL/2015- 
 
  16/DA/WORK_INDENT17106  
 

100 
 
 
 Rehabilitation Work Awarded Under DRIP Project 
 
   
 
Name of Dam Package Name of Work 
 
No. 
 
  
 
  Providing and fixing water proofing lighting with water proofing cable 
 
  arrangement to the drainage Gallery of Hidkal Dam and illumination to the main 
 
HIDKAL DAM 5 dam. & Providing illumination arrangement to the LBED RBED and Dyke No.1 of 
 
Hidkal Dam. (Rehabilitation and Improvement Works to Hidkal Dam Under 
 
  
 
  World Bank aided DRIP program) (Package-5)(KNNL/2015-16/ DA/ 
 
  WORK_INDENT-17107) 
 
  Providing, Supplying, Installation, Testing, Training of closed circuit Television 
 
  (CCTV) system for Crest Gates, Dam Entry/Exit, other important and crucial 
 
HIDKAL DAM 6 points, In view of security of Hidkal Dam. (Rehabilitation and Improvement 
 
  Works to Hidkal Dam Under World Bank aided DRIP program) (Package-6) ( 
 
  KNNL/2015-16/ DA/ WORK_INDENT-17108) 
 
   
 
KABINI DAM 1 Improvements to drainage gallery, re-pointing to masonry surface, restoration of 
 
baffles in stilling basin etc 
 
  
 
  REHABILITATION AND IMPROVEMENT WORKS TO KARANJA DAM OF 
 
KARANJA DAM 1 KARANJA PROJECT UNDER WORLD BANK AIDED DRIP PROGRAMME. 
 
(PACKAGE-I CIVIL WORK INCLUDING PROCUREMENT OF PACKAGE-II 
 
  
 
  HYDROMECHANICAL WORKS) 
 
KRISHNA RAJA SAGARA 1 U/s treatment with PICC 
 
DAM 
 
  
 
LOWER MULLAMARI DAM 1 Construction of Cantilever training wall & stilling basin, grouting treatment to 
 
spillway etc. 
 
  
 
  Rehabilitation works of Malaprabha dam by cleaning of porous holes, cleaning 
 
MALAPRABHA DAM 1 of foundation drain holes and providing deep curtain grouting to upstream 
 
  foundation rock of Malaprabha dam under World Bank aided DRIP program. 
 
   
 
  Rehabilitation works by providing upstream surface treatment to masonry 
 
MALAPRABHA DAM 2 section, piers and spillway section upstream and downstream of Malaprabha 
 
  Dam under World Bank aided DRIP program. 
 
  Rehabilitation works by improvements of gates and other electromechanicial 
 
MALAPRABHA DAM 3 components and Improvements to stop-log and gantry crane system of 
 
  Malaprabha Dam under World Bank aided DRIP program. 
 
   
 
  Rehabilitation works of Malaprabha Dam by providing electrification, fencing 
 
MALAPRABHA DAM 4 ,providing and fixing CC camera arrangement to Malaprabha 
 
Dam.(Rehabilitation and Improvements Project(DRIP) works of Malaprabha 
 
  
 
  Dam under World Bank aided DRIP program. 
 
  Rehabilitation works of Malaprabha dam under Infrastructural Development and 
 
MALAPRABHA DAM 5 Institutional Strengthening by providing New office block and Dam monitoring 
 
Station at Malaprabha dam Site (Rehabilitation and Improvement Project DRIP 
 
  
 
  work of Malaprabha dam under World Bank aided DRIP program)’’. 
 
   
 
MALLAGHATTA TANK 1 D/s & U/s slope improvement, extension of waster weir guide wall, energy 
 
dissipation arrangement etc 
 
  
 
  Providing apron concrete below flip bucket and providing roadway drainage, 
 
NARAYANAPUR DAM 1 cross drains, correction to Stone revetment wrap around portion of earthen dam 
 
  of Narayanapur Dam. (Indent No.9654) 
 
  Treatment of second stage honeycombed concrete and honeycombed pier 
 
NARAYANAPUR DAM 2 regions, leaked construction joints of spillway piers of Narayanpur dam and 
 

101 
 
  
bucket portion for vent no’s 1 to 25 of main spillway and A1 to A5 of additional 
 
  
 
  spillway of Narayanpur Dam. (Indent No.9655) 
 
  Treatment of the Upstream Face of Masonry Portion above MDDL including 
 
NARAYANAPUR DAM 3 Reaming, Cleaning and Flushing of Clogged Porous Drain Holes in Masonry 
 
  Section of Narayanapur Dam. (Indent No.9656) 
 

102 
 
 
 Rehabilitation Work Awarded Under DRIP Project 
 
   
 
Name of Dam Package Name of Work 
 
No. 
 
  
 
  Providing Strengthening Measures including Zinc Metalizing to the Corroded 
 
NARAYANAPUR DAM 4 Gate Components of Radial Spillway Gates and Providing 84 Ton Capacity 
 
Gantry Crane with One Set Of Stop log elements to Narayanapur Dam. (Indent 
 
  
 
  No.9657) 
 
UPPER MULLAMARI DAM 1 D/s slope improvement, Graded filter media, casing embankment, stone 
 
pitching etc 
 
  
 
  Providing longitudinal and cross drains for the downstream slopes of earthen 
 
VOTEHOLE DAM 1 dam, Providing semi dense bituminous concrete on road way of dam, Arresting 
 
leakage on left bank, Providing trash racks for Irrigation sluices, Providing 
 
  
 
  barbed wire fencing to Votehole dam under Votehole reservoir project 
 
   
 
VOTEHOLE DAM 2 Providing and installation of piezo meter and automatic water level recorder to 
 
Votehole Dam under World Bank aided DRIP program. 
 
  
 
 UJVNL (Uttarakhand Jal Vidyut Nigam Ltd)  
 
  Complete Automation including Engineering, Design, Supply, Erection, 
 
ASAN BARRAGE 1 Testing & Commissioning of Barrage Control and Monitoring Systems for water 
 
distribution and barrage management at Asan Barrage, Dhalipur (Dehradun) 
 
  
 
  along with AMC for 5 Year 
 
ASAN BARRAGE 2 Work of Painting (Epoxy) of Barrage Gates, Head Regulator Gates and Silt 
 
Ejector Gates at Asan Barrage, Dhalipur, Dehradun 
 
  
 
   
 
ASAN BARRAGE 4 Repair and Overhauling of Hydro Mechanical System of Barrage gates (14 
 
Nos.) and Head Regulator gates (5 Nos.) at Asan Barrage, Dhalipur, Dehradun 
 
  
 
   
 
ASAN BARRAGE 5 Repair of Service Road around Asan Barrage 
 
ASAN BARRAGE 6 Protection works at Upstream and Downstream of Asan Barrage at 
 
Dhalipur,Dehradun 
 
  
 
  De-Silting of Asan Reservoir, tail race channel and D/S of Asan Barrage, 
 
ASAN BARRAGE 7 Construction of temporary diversion bunds at different locations in U/S of Asan 
 
  Barrage at Dhalipur, Dehradun 
 
  Special Repair of Damaged Power Channel Stage IV (from Asan Barrage to 
 
ASAN BARRAGE 8 Intake of Kulhal Power House) And Kulhal Power House Complex during 
 
  proposed Closure 
 
  Civil works and repair of Eroded Surface of Piers and Floor of Asan Barrage 
 
ASAN BARRAGE 9 during 
 
  proposed closure 
 
ASAN BARRAGE 10 Special repair of Silt Ejector Channel Slope and Floor at Yamuna Hydel Scheme 
 
stage IV Asan Barrage 
 
  
 
ASAN BARRAGE 11 Special Repair of Kulhal Power House Intake, By-pass Channel and Down 
 
Stream Channel during proposed Closure 
 
  
 
  Providing and laying Concrete Canvas ( Geosynthetic Composite Mat) for 
 
ASAN BARRAGE 12 repairing of Power Channel of Stage-III from Dakpathar to Dhalipur HEP and 
 
  Stage- IV Asan Barrage to Kulhal HEP at Dhalipur, Dehradun during closure. 
 
   
 
DAKPATHAR BARRAGE 1 Supply & Installation of LED luminaries and high mast at Dakpathar Barrage in 
 
District- Dehradun, Uttarakhand. 
 
  
 
   
 
DAKPATHAR BARRAGE 2 Supply, Installation, Testing and Commissioning of 100 kVA, 01 No. silent DG 
 
Set & AMC (1+3) years at Dakpathar Barrage in District Dehradun, Uttarakhand. 
 
  
 

103 
 
 
 Rehabilitation Work Awarded Under DRIP Project 
 
   
 
Name of Dam Package Name of Work 
 
No. 
 
  
 
  Engineering, Design, Supply, Erection, Testing and Commissioning of the 
 
DAKPATHAR BARRAGE 4 complete automation of barrage control and monitoring systems for water 
 
distribution and barrage management of Dakpathar Barrage in District 
 
  
 
  Dehradun, Uttarakhand. 
 
   
 
DAKPATHAR BARRAGE 5 Epoxy painting of Head regulator, Barrage and Silt Ejector Gates at Dakpathar 
 
Barrage in District- Dehradun. 
 
  
 
   
 
DAKPATHAR BARRAGE 6 Overhauling of Hydro-Mechanical system of Barrage gates at Dakpathar 
 
barrage 
 
  
 
DAKPATHAR BARRAGE 7 Major Overhauling of Barrage gate no. 24 & 25 of Dakpathar barrage in District- 
 
Dehradun through single quotation basis being proprietary in nature. 
 
  
 
   
 
DAKPATHAR BARRAGE 8 Repair of Damaged Panels of Power Channel from Silt Ejector at Dakpathar 
 
upto intake of Dhakrani Power House during closure. 
 
  
 
   
 
DAKPATHAR BARRAGE 9 Repair of Damaged Panels of Power Channel from Dhakrani Power House upto 
 
0.60 km Downstream of Dhakrani Power House during closure 
 
  
 
   
 
  Repair of Damaged Panels of Power Channel from 0.60 km Downstream of 
 
DAKPATHAR BARRAGE 10 Dhakrani Power House upto 2.20 km Downstream of Dhakrani Power House 
 
  during closure. 
 
DAKPATHAR BARRAGE 11 Repair of Damaged Panels of Power Channel from 2.20 km Downstream of 
 
Dhakrani Power House upto Skew Bridge at Dhalipur during closure. 
 
  
 
   
 
DAKPATHAR BARRAGE 12 Repair of Damaged Panels of Power Channel from Skew Bridge Dhalipur to 
 
Intake of Dhalipur Power House during closure. 
 
  
 
   
 
  Consultancy and supervision for Closure Works such as Repair of Damaged 
 
  Panels of Power Channel from Dakpathar to Dhalipur, Silt Ejector from 
 
DAKPATHAR BARRAGE 13 Dakpathar to Kulhal, Repair- maintenance of Dakpathar Barrage, Asan Barrage 
 
  and other associated Works proposed to be carried out from offices of 
 
  Executive Engineer, Project Civil   Maintenance Dhalipur & Dakpathar 
 
   
 
DAKPATHAR BARRAGE 14 Special Repair & maintenance of Silt Ejector Channel of Dakpathar Barrage 
 
   
 
  Special repair of glacis, cracks on piers/abutments., eroded concrete, 
 
DAKPATHAR BARRAGE 15 construction of temporary diversion bunds and other miscellaneous works of 
 
  Dakpathar Barrage, Dehradun 
 
DAKPATHAR BARRAGE 16 Protection works of left side down stream bank of Dakpathar Barrage at 
 
Dakpathar (Dehradun)” 
 
  
 
ICHARI DAM 1 Special Repair & maintenance of Rim Road and other Protection works in 
 
upstream of Ichari Dam. 
 
  
 
ICHARI DAM 2 Special repair of 7 nos. spillway and roller buckets & Repair of downstream left 
 
bank training wall of Ichari Dam. 
 
  
 
ICHARI DAM 3 Inspection and repair of sedimentation chamber of Ichari Dam (Dehradun). 
 
   
 
ICHARI DAM 4 Reaming/ Re drilling of foundation drainage holes of Ichari Dam. 
 
ICHARI DAM 9 Consultancy work for designing of M 60 fibre reinforced silica fume concrete mix 
 
and Supervising its placement During the Execution of Work 
 
  
 
   
 

104 
 
ICHARI DAM 11 Capacity Survey of reservoir of Ichari Dam 
 
ICHARI DAM 14 Supply Installation Testing & Commissioning of 02 nos. of High Mast. 
 
ICHARI DAM 15 Supply of one 6M FRP OBM (Petrol Engine) Boat with Canopy 
 

105 
 
 
 Rehabilitation Work Awarded Under DRIP Project 
 
   
 
Name of Dam Package Name of Work 
 
No. 
 
  
 
ICHARI DAM 16 Automation work & Annual maintenance contract (3 years) of existing dam 
 
monitoring and control system of Ichari Dam in District Dehradun. 
 
  
 
ICHARI DAM 17 Special repair of Hydro Mechanical System. 
 
MANERI DAM 1 Special maintenance & repair of Spillway Glacis no. 03 & 04 including Roller 
 
bucket of Maneri Dam. 
 
  
 
MANERI DAM 2 Construction of down stream Wing Walls of both banks of Maneri Dam. 
 
   
 
  Engagement of NCCBM, Balabhgarh for providing design mix of M60 & M90 
 
MANERI DAM 11 grade concrete with steel fibers and supervision of its quality during execution of 
 
  work. 
 
VIRBHADRA RISHIKESH 1 Repair and restoration of Civil Structures of Pashulok Barrage at Rishikesh. 
 
   
 
VIRBHADRA RISHIKESH 2 Repair of Damaged Lining (Panel) of Power Channel of Chilla HEP from 
 
Chainage 0.00 km to 1.40 km. 
 
  
 
VIRBHADRA RISHIKESH 3 Repair of Damaged Lining (Panel) of Power Channel of Chilla HEP from 
 
Chainage 1.40 km to 4.00 km. 
 
  
 
VIRBHADRA RISHIKESH 4 Repair of Damaged Lining (Panel) of Power Channel of Chilla HEP from 
 
Chainage 4.00 km to Intake of Power House. 
 
  
 
VIRBHADRA RISHIKESH 5 Weather Coat Painting & White Washing Over Civil Structures within Barrage 
 
Premises. 
 
  
 
VIRBHADRA RISHIKESH 6 Providing and laying Concrete Canvas (Geo-synthetic Composite Mat) for 
 
repairing of Power Channel of Chilla HEP at Rishikesh Uttarakhand. 
 
  
 
   
 
VIRBHADRA RISHIKESH 7 River training works of Mundal Nalla at Chilla. 
 
VIRBHADRA RISHIKESH 9 Repair and Restoration of glacis and downstream structures of Pashulok 
 
Barrage at Rishikesh. 
 
  
 
VIRBHADRA RISHIKESH 10 Repair and refurbishment of Power Channel of Chilla HEP near Bin River at 
 
Rishikesh. 
 
  
 
VIRBHADRA RISHIKESH 11 Consultancy & Supervision for civil closure works of Pashulok Barrage & Power 
 
Channel of Chilla HEP. 
 
  
 
  Repair & Maintenance of U/S gate No 01, Head Regulator gates, Silt Ejector 
 
VIRBHADRA RISHIKESH 18 Gates and Stop Log gates groove of Virbhadra Barrage, Pashulok, Rishikesh 
 
  (Closure Work) 
 
VIRBHADRA RISHIKESH 19 Repair, Strengthening and painting of Trash Rack at Head regulator of 
 
Virbhadra Barrage Pashulok, Rishikesh(Closure Work) 
 
  
 

106 
 
 
 Rehabilitation Work Awarded Under DRIP Project 
 
   
 
Name of Dam Package Name of Work 
 
No. 
 
  
 
  DVC (Damodar Valley Corporation) 
 
KONAR DAM 1 Civil Package (1A) 
 
KONAR DAM 2 Civil Package (1C) 
 
KONAR DAM 3 Civil Package (1D) 
 
KONAR DAM 4 Hydromechanical Package (2A) 
 
KONAR DAM 6 Rehabilitation & Improvement of Crest gate, control room, walkway & pip e railing 
 
of Konar 2C (Hydro-mechanical works) 
 
  
 
KONAR DAM 7 Underwater Survey (2F) 
 
KONAR DAM 11 Geo-physical analysis of Konar Dam 
 
KONAR DAM 12 FEM analysis of Konar Dam using Abaqus software 
 
KONAR DAM 13 Geo-physical analysis of Konar Dam - Further Analysis 
 
MAITHON 1 Civil Package (1) 
 
MAITHON 2 Hydromechanical Package (2A) 
 
MAITHON 3 Hydromechanical Package (2D) 
 
MAITHON 5 Hydromechanical Package (2B) 
 
MAITHON 6 Hydromechanical Package (2C) 
 
PANCHET 1 Civil Package (Package-I) 
 
PANCHET 2 Hydromechanical Package (2A) 
 
PANCHET 4 Hydromechanical Package (2C) 
 
PANCHET 5 Underwater Survey (2F) 
 
 

107 
 
ANNEXURE –III     
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES (2016-
17) HELD ON 8 AUGUST, 2017 
  
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to  1515 hours in Committee Room No. 1 , First Floor, 
Parliament House Annexe, Extension Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  
Shri Hukum Singh – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Radheshyam Biswas 
3. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
4. Shri Maganti Murali Mohan 
5. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
6. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
7. Shri Sanjaykaka Ramchandra Patil 
8. Smt. Aparupa Poddar 
9. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
10. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah 
11. Shri Lallu Singh 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
12. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
13. Shri Harshvardhan Singh Dungarpur 
14. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
15. Shri Sanjay Seth 
16. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
 
17.   
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar    - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Rita Jailkhani    - Director 
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar   - Additional Director 
 

108 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chair person welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.   
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration (a) Seventeenth Report on Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report  on 
Demands for Grants (2017 -18) of Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ga nga 
Rejuvenation; (ii) Eighteenth Report on  Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Thirteenth Report on ‘Indigenous and Modern forms of Water 
Conservation – Techniques and Practices’ ; and (iii) Nin eteenth Report on ‘ The Inter -State River 
Water Disp utes (Amendment) Bill, 2017 ’.  After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the 
aforesaid three draft Reports without any modification.   
3. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to present the above three Reports to both 
the Houses of Parliament in the current Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
 

109 
 
ANNEXURE –IV 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS / 
OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTEENTH REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF 
THE COMMITTEE 
(i) Total number of Recommendations/Observations         23  
(ii)  Recommendation/Observations which have been accepted by the Government 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 17, 19, 20, 21, 22 and 23     
     Total - 19  
Percentage 82.61% 
(iii)  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s replies 
Para Nos. NIL              Total - NIL  
         Percentage 0%  
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee  
Para Nos. 13, 15, 16 and 18     
      Total – 04 
  Percentage 17.39 %                                          
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the Government is still 
awaited  
Para Nos. NIL        
                                           Total NIL 
                Percentage 0% 
 