1
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES
(2014-2015)
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION
REVIEW OF GANGA FLOOD CONTROL COMMISSION
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations
contained in the Twenty-First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Water Resources}
SECOND REPORT
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2014/Pausha,1936 (Saka)
2

2
SECOND REPORT
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES
(2014-2015)
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA)
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION
REVIEW OF GANGA FLOOD CONTROL COMMISSION
[Action taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations
contained in the Twenty-First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the
Standing Committee on Water Resources]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 23.12.2014
     Laid in Rajya Sabha on 23.12.2014
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2014/Pausha,1936 (Saka)


3
W. R. C. No.
Price : Rs.
©  2015 By Lok Sabha Secretariat
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (Fourteenth Edition) and 
printed by Jainco Art India, New Delhi – 110005.

4
CONTENTS
Page 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2014-15) ………………………………… (iii)
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………… (v)
CHAPTER I -      Report 1
CHAPTER II - Observations / Recommendations which have been
accepted by the Government ……………………………… 17
CHAPTER III - Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies .. 41
CHAPTER IV    - Observations / Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by
the Committee ……. ………………………………………… 47
CHAPTER V    - Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final
Replies of the Government are still awaited ………………. 50
APPENDICES
I. Minutes of the Sixth sitting of the Standing Committee  
held on 19 December, 2014 ……………………………. 57
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the
Twenty-First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee ……………………………………………….. 59

5
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
WATER RESOURCES (2014-15)
Shri Hukum Singh - Chairperson
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Radheshyam Biswas
3. Shri Devusinh Chauhan
4. Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuria
5. Shri Tariq Hameed Karra
6. Shri Vinod Kumar B.
7. Shri Murali Mohan Maganti
8. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra
9. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
10. Shri Rodmal Nagar
11. Shri Subhash Patel
12. Shri Sanjay Kaka Patil
13. Shri Vijaysinh Shankarrao Mohite Patil
14. Smt. Aparupa Poddar
15. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
16. Shri S. P. Y. Reddy
17. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah
18. Smt. Sathyabama V.
19. Shri Lallu Singh
20. Shri L.K. Vaghela
21. Smt. Dimple Yadav

6
            
RAJYA SABHA
22. Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder
23. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
24.        Smt. Naznin Faruque
25. Shri Sanjiv Kumar
26. Prof. Mrinal Miri
27. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao
28. Shri A.V. Swamy 
29. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A.K. Singh - Joint Secretary
2. Shri S. Chatterjee - Director
3. Smt. Rita Jailkhani - Additional Director
4. Shri Kamal Khurana - Senior Committee Assistant

7
INTRODUCTION
        
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2014-15) having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Second Report on 
Action Taken by Government on the observations / recommendations contained in the Twenty-First 
Report (15th Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water Resources (2013-14) on ‘Review of 
Ganga Flood Control Commission’.
2. The Twenty-First Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on 20 February, 
2014.  The replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were 
received on 30 July, 2014.
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and 
adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 19 December, 2014.
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-First Report (Fifteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-
II.
               
NEW DELHI                                         HUKUM SINGH,
19 December, 2014                                                 Chairperson,       
28 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka)                                 Standing Committee on Water Resources

8
CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources deals with the action taken by 
the Government on the observations/recommendations/contained in the Twenty First Report 
(Fifteenth Lok Sabha) on "Review of Ganga Flood Control Commission" which was presented to 
Lok Sabha on 20 February, 2014.
2. Action taken notes were received from the Government in respect of all the thirty-six 
observations/recommendations of the Committee which have been categorised as follows:-
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:
Para nos. 1,2,4,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,23,25,26, 32,33, and 35  (Total-19)
(ii) Recommendations / Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government's replies:
Para Nos. 5, 8, 9, 22, 29, 31, 34 and 36       (Total-8)
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 3 and 24       (Total-2)
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited:
Para Nos. 6,7,10,11,27,28 and 30       (Total-7)
3. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
the observations/ recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.
A. Long-term Comprehensive Policy
Recommendation (Para No. 1)
4. In their original recommendation, the Committee inter-alia had highlighted the fact 
that the river Ganga plays vital role in providing water for irrigation, drinking, industrial usage, etc., 
for overall development of the people of its basin region. It also provides a perennial source of 
fresh water for agriculture, fisheries and rich bio-diversity. The Committee further referred to a
broad analysis by Reserve Bank of India (RBI)’s data for food grain production during 2000-01 to 

9
2010-11 stating that the food grain output in the Ganga basin during the period was in the range of 
48 to 54 percent of the national food grain production.  Taking note of the important role played by 
the river Ganga in the economic, social, cultural, religious and ecological life of India, the 
Committee had impressed upon the Ministry the need for evolving a long-term comprehensive 
policy and planning to ensure judicious and efficient utilisation of water resources of the river 
Ganga and its tributaries commensurate with the importance the Ganga occupies in the national 
life.  It was recommended that such a policy be evolved after due consultation with the Planning 
Commission and Ministries of Agriculture, Environment and Forests, Energy, Rural Development 
etc. and the riparian States which would serve as mandatory policy guideline for all Ganga basin 
States. The Committee desired to be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry in this regard at 
the earliest.
5. The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, in 
their action taken reply vide their OM No. Z – 17012/4/2013 – Ganga/2166-68 dated 30.07.2014
have stated that they have been constantly endeavouring to persuade the State Governments 
(including Ganga basin States) and other stakeholders for implementation of the National Water 
Policies and to bring about improvements therein for optimal results.  As part of these efforts, the 
Ministry have reviewed and formulated National Water Policy 2012. 
It has been further stated that after a wide consultation with all stakeholders including 
Members of Parliament, Academia, Non-Governmental Organizations, Corporate Leaders and 
Representatives of Panchayati Raj Institutions, the National Water Resources Council (NWRC) 
headed by Hon’ble Prime Minister of India, wherein Planning Commission, various Central 
Ministries and States are also represented, in its sixth meeting held on 28th December, 2012, 
based on the broader consensus that emerged among the States, has adopted the National Water 
Policy-2012 (NWP-2012). The Policy, being comprehensive one, is expected to have long-term 
positive impact on overall development of the country as it also advocates and promotes judicious 
and efficient utilisation of water, meeting ecological needs, and adapting to climate change. 
The NWP-2012 vide Para 16.2 provides for revision/ drafting the State Water Policies in 
accordance with the National Water Policy 2012 keeping in mind the basic concerns and principles 
as also a unified national perspective. Accordingly, the NWP-2012 has been forwarded to all the 
States/UTs and the concerned Ministries/Departments of Central Government for appropriate 
action. All State Water Policies should conform to the National Water Policy -2012. 
As per information available, Himachal Pradesh has revised the State Water Policy and the 
“Himachal Pradesh State Water Policy-2013” has been notified in November, 2013.
6. The Committee appreciate that the Ministry has revised and formulated a 
comprehensive National Water Policy 2012 after wide consultations.  However, it is 
disheartening to note that though the Ministry has been constantly endeavouring to 

10
persuade the State Governments to revise or draft their State Water policies in accordance 
with the NWP-2012 to bring about improvement for optimal result, there is only one State i.e. 
Himachal Pradesh, which has revised and notified its State Water Policy-2013. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation and desire the Ministry to continue
persuasive efforts with the States/UTs in this regard.  
Further, the Committee are also surprised that the Ministry has failed to observe the 
thrust on River Ganga in its recommendation as in the reply furnished by the Ministry there 
is no specific mention with regard to any policy guideline for judicious and efficient 
utilization of Ganga water for all Ganga basin States.  The Committee are aware of the 
recently announced 'Namami Gange' programme and feel that the Ministry should have at 
least provided broad details of the same. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and desire to be apprised of the measures taken in this regard within a 
period of three months.  The Committee further feel that there is an urgent need to frame a
comprehensive National Water Law under the existing distribution of legislative powers 
between the Union and the States and to develop a minimum national consensus on basic 
perceptions, concepts and principles on water, which is the most basic requirement of life.  
The Committee desire to be apprised of the latest status thereon. 
B. National Water Informatics Centre
Recommendation (Para No. 2)
7. While noting that the Ganga is the master drain of the Ganga basin States, the 
Committee, in their original recommendation, had observed that it drains a total catchment area of 
10.68 lakh sq. km., out of which 8.61 lakh sq. km. lies in India which is 26 percent area of our 

11
country. They had noted that as per the National Commission on Integrated Water Resources 
Development and Planning (NCIWRDP), the annual average flow of Ganga basin is 525.02 Billion 
Cubic Metre (BCM). Out of this, the utilizable water resource has been assessed to be around 250 
BCM. The Committee had further noted that the data pertaining to annual flow of river Ganga as 
observed at Farakka site do not establish any statistically significant trends regarding changes 
(increase or decrease) in total annual discharge of river Ganga since 1947. The Committee,
therefore, had desired to be apprised of the State-wise percentage usages of water resource for 
irrigation and hydroelectric power in Ganga basin area. However, they were dismayed that the 
relevant information in this regard was not available with the Ministry. Recognising that an updated, 
authentic and comprehensive data base is a sine qua non for initiating any meaningful 
developmental work in the country, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry should take 
urgent action for compilation of updated, authentic and comprehensive information, State-wise, 
pertaining to usages of water for irrigation, drinking and hydroelectric power, etc., in the Ganga 
basin. The Ministry was also urged to establish a dedicated website on which the above 
information is available so that the same can be accessed by the public at large and stake-holders, 
viz. farmers, planners, economists, meteorologists, etc., in the country.
8. The Ministry in their action taken reply, have stated that the National Water Policy 
2012 vide para 14 stipulates establishing of a National Water Informatics Centre and making all 
hydrological data, other than those classified on national security considerations, available in public 
domain. In this regard, a project namely ‘Generation of Database and Implementation of Web 
enabled Water Resources Information System (India – WRIS)’ had been initiated by the Ministry 
jointly with ISRO in 11th Plan.
Main groups of the database are:
i. Watershed Atlas ii. Administrative layer 
iii. Water Resources projects iv. Thematic layer 
v. Environment data vi. Basin wise Report
Status of Project as on date:
 Three versions of website of INDIA WRIS have been launched so far. The URL of the website 
is www.india-wris.nrsc.gov.in
 River Basin Atlas of India was released on 1st November, 2012 at CWC (HQ). 
 All unclassified data of CWC’s G&D stations has been uploaded at WRIS website recently in 
July 2013 as per Hydro-meteorological Data Dissemination Policy-2013.
 The version 4.0 was launched in March, 2014 and is available in public domain at 1:250000 
scale.
However, since discharge data of Ganga basin is classified one, it has not been put in public 
domain but is released to specific users for specific uses on a case to case basis, according to 
data dissemination policy. Further, despite pursuance, the States including Ganga basin States are 
seen reluctant in providing data on actual water usage.  
To maintain and update such a large volume of water resources data at national level, it has been 
proposed to establish a NATIONAL WATER RESOURCES INFORMATION CENTRE (NWIC) 
during the 12th Plan.

12
9. The Committee appreciate the efforts of the Ministry which have been
initiated jointly with the Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) for establishing
National Water Informatics Centre in the 11 th plan and making all hydrological data, other 
than those classified on national security considerations, available in public domain. 
However, the Ministry has not furnished any information on the steps taken by them in 
pursuing the Ganaga basin States found reluctant in providing data on actual water usage.  
The Committee, therefore, reiterate and recommend that a dedicated website with updated 
relevant information should be made public within a definite time frame so that people in 
general and all major stakeholders could access it.  Further, the Committee are surprised to 
find that though the Ministry has proposed to establish a National Water Information Centre 
(NWIC) during the 12th plan, yet no time frame has apparently been set for its establishment 
and operations.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that speedy and efficacious 
measures should be undertaken in right earnest by the Ministry for making the NWIC
operational during the 12th FY Plan period. The Committee also desire to be apprised of the 
specific action taken towards setting up NWIC in the last two years, since the inception of 
the 12th Plan.  
C. Utilization of Surface Water
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
10. The Committee, in their original recommendation, had noted that only 63.28 BCM of 
the 250.00 BCM of utilisable surface water is presently utilised, indicating that an estimated 186.72 
BCM of the basin’s utilisable surface water is going waste into the sea/neighbouring country which 
could be arrested for utilisation in the country. Further, an additional storage of 7.65 BCM would be 

13
created through projects which are under construction in the Ganga basin. The Committee had 
also noted the Ministry’s reply that water discharge from Ganga basin rivers into the 
sea/neighbouring country in ‘non lean season’ can be arrested with the creation of sufficient 
storages in upper catchment and transferring water from the water-surplus river basins to the 
water-deficit river basins. In this connection, the Ministry had informed the Committee that a 
continuous dialogue was being maintained by the Government of India with Nepal for building 
storage projects in Nepal, given the fact that due to topographical constraints (i.e. flat terrain), 
building storages in the Gangetic plain areas is not feasible. To concretise storage creation in 
Nepal, 5 projects viz. Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project, Sapta Kosi High Dam Multipurpose 
Project, Sun Kosi Storage-cum-Diversion Project, Kamala Dam Project and Bagmati Project have 
been identified by the Ministry. However, the Committee were dismayed to note that these storage 
projects were at conceptualization stage only. Further, whereas annual flood fury is ravaging Uttar 
Pradesh and Bihar year after year causing untold misery to the people, the progress report of the 
Ministry in this regard has been nothing but dismal. Whereas the field investigations for 
Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project have been reported to be completed, the field investigations for 
Sapta Kosi High Dam Multipurpose Project and Sun Kosi Storage-cum-Diversion Project and 
Feasibility Level study of Kamala Dam Project and Preliminary study of Bagmati Project in Nepal 
are still stated to be in progress. Taking due note of the gravity of the annual flood situation in Uttar 
Pradesh and Bihar, the Committee had urged the Ministry to make sustained all-out efforts for 
accelerating the pace of implementation of the storage creation in Nepal. The Committee had also 
recommended that the Ministry/GFCC should draw up, in consultation with the State Governments 
of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, a detailed road-map for completion of each of the above 5 projects 
within given timelines under intimation to them.
11. The Ministry, in their action reply have stated that as mentioned earlier, the survey 
& investigation works and preparation of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) of Sapta Kosi High Dam 
Multipurpose Project, Sun Kosi Storage-cum- Diversion Project, Kamla Dam Project and Bagmati 
Projects are in progress. Some delay in works had been there mainly due to local disturbances and 
political instability in Nepal. The matter had been under discussion in bilateral meetings from time 
to time for early completion of works and finalisation of their DPRs. A Joint Team of Experts (JTE) 
reviews the progress, addresses the issues/ bottlenecks, if any, affecting the progress of the field 
works by way of taking corrective measures required for completion of ongoing field works and 
preparation of DPR and setting targets from time to time. The next meeting of JTE was to be held 
at New Delhi and efforts were on to hold meeting at the earliest.
With regard to Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project, it was to state that, TORs of the 
Pancheshwar Development Authority (PDA) were under finalisation in consultation with concerned 
Ministries. This Ministry had been pursuing the matter through DO letters to MEA and MOF (DOR) 
at Secretary Level. Hon’ble Minister has also taken up the matter through D.O. dated 26.06.14 with 
Hon’ble Prime Minister. However, some information was yet to be received from MOF (DOR). After 
receipt of the same, the matter would be taken to the appropriate platform for approval of TORs. 
The achievements of milestones on these projects depend upon the political situation and law and 
order in project area.

14
The States of Bihar, UP and Uttarakhand were represented in various committees/ bilateral 
mechanisms between India and Nepal appropriately according to their role in the ongoing works of 
these projects. 
12. The Committee note with concern the oft-repeated stand of the Ministry that 
the matter concerning 5 storage creation projects in Nepal to improve the annual flood 
situation in U.P. and Bihar has been under discussion in bilateral meetings between India
and Nepal from time to time.  It has been further informed that a Joint Team of Experts (JTE) 
had been constituted not only to review the progress, but also to address the 
issues/bottlenecks, if any, affecting the progress of the field works and that a meeting of
JTE is due in New Delhi.   The Committee would like to be apprised about the further
progress, project-wise, made till date in respect of Sapta Kosi High Dam Multipurpose 
Project, Sun Kosi Storage-cum-Diversion Project, Kamla Dam Project and Bagmati Projects.
As far as Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project is concerned, the Committee are 
deeply anguished to note the delay even for preliminary procedural requirements like 
finalisation of TORs for PDA and strongly recommend that the Ministry should continue to 
pursue with the concerned Ministries viz., Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of 
Finance (Department of Revenue) at the highest level for early finalization of the project.  
The Committee would like to be apprised about the steps taken in this regard by the 
Ministry.
D. Farakka Barrage
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
13. The Committee, in their original recommendation, had observed that the Farakka 
Barrage is a barrage across the river Ganga, which is about 17 kms. from the Bangladesh border 
near Chapai Nawabganj district. Recently, excess release of water led to flooding in Lalgola block,

15
Murshidabad, West Bengal, which was compounded by the problem of non-maintenance of the 
embankment of the canal which is about 40 kms. long from the Barrage to the Bhagirathi-Hooghly, 
leading to flooding of villages and submergence of huge acres of land. A total of Rs.520.00 lakh 
has been reportedly allocated by the Government for repair and maintenance of the Farakka 
Barrage during XIIth Plan, out of which an expenditure of Rs.135.11 lakh has been incurred so far. 
The Committee had desired the Ministry to make an on-the-spot study expeditiously of the safety, 
reliability and efficiency of the canals and embankments of Farakka Barrage specially in Lalgola 
block to ensure that such flooding do not recur in future. They had recommended for completion of 
the same well before the onset of Monsoon season, so that necessary repair and  maintenance  
works  (if  any)  may  be  taken  up  by  the  concerned departments/organisations in time. The 
Committee thus desired to know the follow-up measures taken in this regard.
14. The Ministry, in their action taken reply have informed about constitution of a Team 
of Experts under the Chairmanship of Member (Planning), Ganga Flood Control Commission vide 
O.M. No. Z-16012/13/2013-Ganga/4179-88 dated 3rd December, 2013 to assess the extent of 
River erosion problem in the Jangipur area of West Bengal. The report had been submitted and is 
placed at an Annexure with the reply.  Farakka barrage Project had already initiated action on 
immediate structural measures likely to be completed before Monsoon, 2014.
15. From the reply of the Ministry, the Committee note that a Team of Experts 
under the Chairmanship of Member (Planning), Ganga Flood Control Commission has been 
constituted to assess the extent of river erosion problem in the Jangipur area of West 
Bengal,  and that their report has since been submitted.  The Committee note that the 
Ministry has initiated action on structural measures, which was likely to be completed 
before Monsoon, 2014.  The Committee would like to be apprised whether the same was 
completed as envisaged, as well as further progress on the matter.
E. Implementation Committees in States
Recommendation (Para No. 15)
16. In their original recommendation, the Committee had noted that the main function of 
the Ganga Flood Control Commission (GFCC) is to prepare Master Plans for flood protection and 
flood management in the Ganga basin States. The GFCC had prepared Master Plans for all the 23 

16
rivers which are tributaries of the Ganga. Notably, the GFCC being an Advisory Commission, the 
execution of all works suggested under the Master Plans has to be carried out by the respective 
State Governments which are required to undertake works including embankments, drainage 
schemes, even town protection works, etc., through the Plan schemes. The Committee were 
dismayed to note that although State Governments are generally formulating flood management 
schemes keeping in view the Comprehensive Master Plans circulated by GFCC to all the 
concerned Ganga basin States for flood management, the information regarding status of 
implementation of Master Plans was not forthcoming from the State Governments despite several 
efforts including several reminders during the meetings of GFCB/GFCC. Besides, although the 
Ministry had requested six severely flood-affected Ganga basin States, namely Bihar, Uttar 
Pradesh, West Bengal, Jharkhand, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand to constitute 
Implementation Committees to ensure time-bound implementation of the recommendations of the 
Comprehensive Plans, yet only the States of Bihar and West Bengal had set up such committees 
so far. Taking note of the tardy pace of execution of the Master Plans by the Ganga basin States, 
the Committee desired the Ministry/GFCC to keep tab on the concerned State Governments 
through frequent meetings, sending written reminders, etc., so that the Master Plans do not remain 
merely on paper in the preserve of the State Governments. Noting that four remaining severely 
flood-affected States had not taken needful action for constituting Implementation Committees, the 
Committee had urged the Ministry/GFCC to pursue vigorously with these States for speedy 
execution of the Master Plans for flood protection and management in Ganga basin States. The 
Ministry may also consider mentioning the names of defaulting States in this regard on the 
websites of both the Ministry and the GFCC so that general public and the stakeholders may also 
bring pressure to bear upon these States so as to expedite implementation of the Master Plans.
17. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated that it had requested six 
severely flood-affected Ganga basin States, viz. Bihar, U.P., West Bengal, Jharkhand, H.P. and 
Uttarakhand to constitute Implementation Committees to ensure time-bound implementation of 
recommendations of Comprehensive Plans. Out of which, Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal 
had constituted Implementation Committees, so far. 
Chairman, Ganga Flood Control Commission had also reportedly requested the remaining 
three States namely, Jharkhand, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand to expedite constitution of 
Implementation Committee to ensure time bound implementation of the recommendations of the 
Comprehensive Plans for Flood Management in the Ganga Basin States vide his D.O. dated 
11.04.2014 to the Principal Secretary/ Secretary of Water Resources Department. The issue was 
also raised in the 45 th meeting of GFCC held on 21 st March, 2014 wherein concerned States were 
requested to expedite the formation of Implementation Committees under intimation to GFCC.
18. The Committee note that out of the six severely flood affected Ganga basin 
States viz., Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Jharkhand, Himachal Pradesh and 
Uttrakhand only the States of Bihar, U.P. and West Bengal have so far constituted 

17
Implementation Committee so as to ensure time bound implementation of recommendations 
of Comprehensive Plans for Flood Management.  They further note that remaining three 
States are being requested to expedite the matter.  In view of the devastating floods in 
Uttrakhand in the recent past, the Committee strongly urge the matter to be pursued 
vigorously at the highest level so as to impress upon the remaining three States 
Governments for expeditious formation of the Implementation Committees so as to achieve 
effective implementation of the Master Plan. The Committee must be apprised of the steps 
taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
F. Embankments in the Ganga Basin States
Recommendation (Para No. 16)
19. The Committee, in their original recommendation, had noted that embankments of 
the length of 17,826 km had been constructed in the Ganga basin States so far. It was further
noted that the details of the cost involved in the construction of embankments had not been 
compiled. Further, the Committee noted that although embankments had certain inherent 
disadvantages, the demand for providing flood embankment has been on the increase and since 
the area behind are protected from frequent flooding, they are available for cultivation during 
Monsoon as well as Rabi seasons. Moreover, embankments protect built-up area in the towns and 
cities. Noting that the total area protected from flood is only 9.40 mha out of the total area of 20.81 
mha liable to floods in the Ganga basin States, the Committee urged the Ministry to extend the 
coverage of flood protection by encouraging the concerned States to construct more embankments 
in the Ganga basin States expeditiously. The Committee also desired the Ministry to furnish within 
3 months of the presentation of this report, the expenditure incurred on the construction of 
embankments so far.
20. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have informed the Committee that the 
subject of embankment falls within the purview of the State Governments. The role of the Ministry 
of Ministry is promotional and advisory in nature.  Accordingly, the FMP schemes are formulated 
and implemented by the State Governments, as per their priorities, keeping techno-economic 
considerations in view, based on trusted and tested practices. However, care is taken at the time of 
appraising DPRs and, if found necessary, new technologies/ construction materials are suggested 
for use. 
The expenditure (Central share) under Flood Management Scheme, which includes 

18
expenditure on construction of embankments, upto 31 st March 2014 has been furnished to the 
Committee, as below:
Consolidated status of State-wise funds released under “Flood Management Programme” 
during XI and XII Plans (up to 31.03.2014)
(Amount in Crore Rs.)
Sl. 
No.
State Funds 
released 
during 
XI Plan
Funds released during XII 
Plan
Total 
Funds 
released 
upto 
31.03.2014
2012-13 2013-14 Total 
(XII Plan
1 Arunachal 
Pradesh
78.77 16.83 16.83 95.60
2 Assam 744.90 2.51 2.51 747.41
3 Bihar 680.79 54.48 88.57 143.05 823.84
4 Chhattisgarh 15.57 3.75 3.75 19.32
5 Goa 9.98 2.00 2.00 11.98
6 Gujarat 2.00 0.00 2.00
7 Haryana 46.91 0.00 46.91
8 Himachal 
Pradesh
165.31 19.92 9.75 29.67 194.98
9 Jammu & 
Kashmir
243.50 39.36 28.29 67.65 311.15
10 Jharkhand 17.07 4.27 4.27 21.34
11 Karnataka 20.00 0.00 20.00
12 Kerala 63.68 0.00 63.68
13 Manipur 65.03 0.95 16.96 17.91 82.94
14 Mizoram 3.40 0.00 3.40
15 Nagaland 28.96 15.45 15.45 44.41
16 Odisha 95.64 0.00 95.64
17 Puducherry 7.50 0.00 7.50
18 Punjab 40.43 0.00 40.43
19 Sikkim 82.86 2.43 2.43 85.29
20 Tamil Nadu 59.82 0.00 59.82
21 Tripura 20.91 0.00 20.91
22 Uttar Pradesh 290.69 45.42 30.48 75.90 366.58
23 Uttarakhand 49.63 53.14 53.14 102.77
24 West Bengal 642.87 9.49 128.81 138.30 781.16

19
Total 3476.21 193.85 379.00 572.85 4049.06
Spilled over works of 
X Plan 89.79 0.00 89.79
Grand Total 3566.00 s 572.85 4138.85
21. Dismayed over the fact that the total area protected from floods is 9.40 mha 
out of total area of 20.81 mha liable to floods in the Ganga basin States, the Committee had 
recommended the Ministry to extend the coverage of flood protection by encouraging the 
States to expeditiously construct more embankments.  Instead of furnishing any 
information on the steps taken to persuade the States to construct more embankments, the 
Ministry has, however, conveniently chosen to remain silent on the pretext that  
embankment falls within the purview of the State Governments and the role of the Ministry 
is promotional and advisory in nature.  The Committee further note from the "Consolidated 
status of State-wise funds released under Flood Management Programme during XI and XII 
Plans (up to 31.03.2014)", furnished by the Ministry, that the funds released to the States of 
Assam and Jharkhand during the 12th Plan are minuscule.  The Committee also observe that 
no fund has been released during the first three years of 12 th five year plan to Gujarat, 
Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Odisha, Puducherry, Punjab, Tamil Nadu and Tripura.  The 
Committee are surprised to note that despite recurrent episodes of devastating floods in
Assam and Jharkhand the funds released for the construction of embankments to these 
States do not commensurate with the damages caused by the floods.  The Committee, 
would like to know reasons for the same and urge upon the Government to impress upon 
the State Governments of these two States to take up construction of embankments 

20
expeditiously and also to fully utilize the funds allocated for the purpose and reiterate their 
recommendation to advise the State Governments to construct more embankments using 
best technology and expertise. The Committee desire to be apprised of the progress in the 
matter.
G. Morphological Studies of Rivers
Recommendation (Para No. 18)
22. The Committee, in their original recommendation, had further noted that a provision 
had been made in the XII th Plan for re-visiting the entire embankments. The longevity and 
durability of vulnerable embankments is proposed to be enhanced by the use of modern geo-
textile/geo-synthetic material/geo-bags etc., which are environment friendly and also provide safety 
against puncture, breaches and erosion. Notably, these techniques had been used in many places 
viz. Malda, Nadia, 24 Pargana districts of West Bengal, works undertaken by Farakka Barrage 
Project on main stem of Ganga and river Swan in Una district of Himachal Pradesh, so that the 
embankments in the country stand strong enough to withstand the ravages  of  the   swelling  
floods  during  the  Monsoon  season  and  the  chances  for embankment  breaches  are  
minimized  and  the  inhabitants  are  protected  from  the unexpected calamity. The  Committee   
therefore, had  recommended   that   the  Ministry/ CWC/ GFCC should immediately take up 
detailed morphological studies of all the rivers in the 11 Ganga basin States and complete this 
exercise within a definite time frame with a view to achieve better results in building, renovating 
and maintaining revetments, spurs and embankments in the area to control and mitigate the 
disaster caused by floods.
23. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have stated that Morphological Studies of 
14 rivers namely Ganga, Sharda, Rapti, Kosi, Bagmati, Yamuna, Bramhaputra, Subansiri, 
Pagladia, Krishna, Tungbhadra, Mahananda, Mahanadi and Tapi were proposed during the 12 th
Plan period at an approved cost of   Rs.27.81 Crore under the “R&D Programme in Water Sector”. 
Out of the above mentioned rivers, 7 rivers namely Ganga, Sharda, Rapti, Kosi, Bagmati, Yamuna 
and Hoogly are Ganga Basin Rivers. In this regard, proposals were obtained from IITs and NITs 
and are under consideration for award of works.           
24. The Committee note that the task of obtaining proposals from IITs and NITs 
for morphological studies of fourteen rivers, out of which, half are Ganga basin rivers is 
reportedly under their consideration for award of works. The Committee are displeased to 

21
note that no specific time frame has been mentioned by the Ministry for finalizing the action 
to be taken in this regard.   The Committee further note that the reply also does not mention 
any time-frame for initiating morphological studies of the remaining seven rivers for which 
expenditure has been approved under the 12 th Plan.  Given the imperative need to achieve 
better results in building, renovating and maintaining revetments and embankments in the 
flood affected areas to control and mitigate the disaster, the Committee strongly 
recommend the Ministry to take proactive steps in this direction. The Committee would also 
like to be apprised of the expenses incurred from the allocated fund of Rs. 27.81 crore for 
morphological studies of the rivers as on date, since the  Twelfth Plan has already reached 
its mid-way.
H. Proper Maintenance of Embankments
Recommendation (Para No. 19)
25. In their original recommendation, the Committee referred to the circulation of Master 
Plans by GFCC to the concerned Ganga basin States wherein afforestation of the embankment 
zones and turfing and plantation to the extent practicable for better reinforcement of soil on 
embankments in all Ganga basin States was emphasised. The Committee had desired that proper 
maintenance of embankments through afforestation in the embankment zones would go a long 
way to increase the longevity and durability of embankments and, therefore, the States should be 
encouraged for embarking on such programmes. Additionally, periodic inspection of the quality and 
strength of embankment should be undertaken by the concerned departments/ agencies and 
updated information sent to the Ministry/GFCC for taking necessary action before the onset of 
Monsoon every year to facilitate timely repair and renovation, where needed. The Committee had 
desired to be apprised of concrete steps taken in this regard.
26. The Ministry, in their action taken reply, have merely stated that as per the extant 
guidelines, the State Governments shall undertake regular maintenance of flood protection works 
before and after each monsoon and even during execution of works. Necessity for proper 
maintenance of embankments is reiterated during inspections and is also emphasised from time to 
time. The matter was reportedly discussed in the 45th meeting of GFCC held on 21st march, 2014.

22
27. The Committee had desired to be apprised about any concrete steps taken to 
ensure better reinforcement and maintenance of embankment zones in all Ganga Basin 
States. However, the Ministry has adopted a casual attitude by furnishing a stereotyped 
reply that the responsibility of the same vests with the respective State Governments, as 
per extant guidelines.  The Committee are not satisfied with the same.  Besides, as the 
matter was discussed in the 45 th meeting of Ganga Flood Control Commission (GFCC) held 
on the 21 st March, 2014, they would like to be apprised of the decisions taken during the 
said meeting on the matters raised by them, if any, within three months of the presentation 
of the Report.  The Committee are also desirous to know if the GFCC has any record of the 
inspections carried out by the Ganga Basin States to ensure quality and strength of the 
embankments, before these issues come up for discussion during their meetings.
I. Expert Committees
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
28. In their original recommendation, the Committee had noted that an Expert 
Committee under the Chairman, Central Water Commission was constituted in July, 2012 for 
scientific assessment of flood-prone areas in the country. Report was awaited although during its 
2nd meeting held on 27 June, 2013, the Expert Committee did finalise the methodology, 
classification and criterion to work out the assessment of flood-prone areas in the country. The 
Committee had hoped that the Expert Committee would expedite its report so that necessary follow 
up action is taken by the Government thereon. The Committee desired to be apprised of the 
outcome thereof.
29. The Ministry, in their action taken reply have stated that as a first step, regional 
committees are to be constituted to achieve the set objectives. These Committees have been 
constituted in four States namely Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal. The other 

23
States were being persuaded for early constitution of the regional committees. In this regard, 
Regional Offices of CWC were in interaction with the Officers of State Governments.
30. The Committee note that the Ministry's reply is silent on the status of the Expert 
Committee report.  Besides, it is a matter of concern that as on date regional committees for 
scientific assessment of flood-prone areas have been constituted only in Odisha, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal.  Obviously the Regional Offices of CWC have not been 
very successful in persuading the State Governments to do the needful.  This calls for 
intervention at the higher level.  Besides, as the Expert Committee has already finalized the 
modalities of assessment of flood-prone areas in June, 2013, the Committee would urge 
the Ministry to undertake rigorous efforts at the highest level in pursuing the rest of the 
States/UTs for early constitution of their respective regional committees within a specific 
time period so as to undertake the assessment based on those modalities. 

24
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Para No.1) 
Importance of Ganga Basin
The Committee observe that two rivers - the Alaknanda and the Bhagirathi, originating from 
the glacial peaks of the Himalayas at an altitude of about 7000 metres, unite near Devprayag, 
Uttarakhand and form the Ganga. The ‘Ganga’ traverses its course of 2,525 kms. (1450 kms. in 
Uttar Pradesh including Uttarakhand, 110 kms. along Uttar Pradesh-Bihar border, 445 kms. in 
Bihar and Jharkhand and 520 kms. in West Bengal) to its outfall into the Bay of Bengal. The Ganga 
plays vital role in providing water for irrigation, drinking, industrial usage, etc., for overall 
development of the people of the region. It also provides a perennial source of fresh water for 
agriculture, fisheries and rich bio-diversity. The Committee further noted that a broad analysis by 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI)’s data for food grain production during 2000-01 to 2010-11 reveals 
that the food grain output in the Ganga basin during the period was in the range of 48 to 54 percent 
of the national food grain production, whereas its catchment area is only 31 percent of the total 
catchment area of all the basins in the country. This fact leaves no doubt in one's mind that the 
Ganga basin is the bread basket of India. Taking note of the important role played by the river 
Ganga in the economic, social, cultural, religious and ecological life of India, the Committee desire 
to impress upon the Ministry the need for evolving a long-term comprehensive policy and planning 
to ensure judicious and efficient utilisation of water resources of the river Ganga and its tributaries 
commensurate with the importance the Ganga occupies in the national life. Such a policy be 
evolved after due consultation with the Planning Commission and Ministries of Agriculture, 
Environment and Forests, Energy, Rural Development etc. and the riparian States which would 
serve as mandatory policy guideline for all Ganga basin States. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of action taken by the Ministry in this regard at the earliest.
Reply of the Government
The Ministry of Water Resources has been constantly endeavouring to persuade the State 
Governments (including Ganga basin States) and other stakeholders for implementation of the 
National Water Policies and to bring about improvements therein for optimal results.  As part of 
these efforts, the Ministry has reviewed and formulated National Water Policy 2012. 
After a wide consultation with all stakeholders including Members of Parliament, Academia, 
Non-Governmental Organizations, Corporate Leaders and Representatives of Panchayati Raj 
Institutions, the National Water Resources Council (NWRC) headed by Hon’ble Prime Minister of 
India, wherein Planning Commission, various Central Ministries and States are also represented, in 
its sixth meeting held on 28th December, 2012, based on the broader consensus that emerged 
among the States, has adopted the National Water Policy-2012 (NWP-2012). The Policy, being 

25
comprehensive one, is expected to have long-term positive impact on overall development of the 
country as it also advocates and promotes judicious and efficient utilisation of water, meeting 
ecological needs, and adapting to climate change. 
The NWP-2012 vide Para 16.2 provides for revision/ drafting the State Water Policies in 
accordance with the National Water Policy 2012 keeping in mind the basic concerns and principles 
as also a unified national perspective. Accordingly, the NWP-2012 has been forwarded to all the 
States/UTs and the concerned Ministries/Departments of Central Government for appropriate 
action. All State Water Policies should conform to the National Water Policy -2012. 
As per information available, Himachal Pradesh has revised the state water policy and the 
“Himachal Pradesh State Water Policy-2013” has been notified in November, 2013.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 6 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No.2)
Utilizable Water Resource, its Usages and Annual Discharge of River Ganga
The Committee note that the Ganga is the master drain of the Ganga basin States. It drains 
a total catchment area of 10.68 lakh sq. km., out of which 8.61 lakh sq. km. lies in India which is 26 
percent area of our country. They also note that as per the National Commission on Integrated 
Water Resources Development and Planning (NCIWRDP), the annual average flow of Ganga 
basin is 525.02 Billion Cubic Metre (BCM). Out of this, the utilizable water resource has been 
assessed to be around 250 BCM. The Committee further note that the data pertaining to annual 
flow of river Ganga as observed at Farakka site do not establish any statistically significant trends 
regarding changes (increase or decrease) in total annual discharge of river Ganga since 1947. The 
Committee desired to be apprised of the State-wise percentage usages of water resource for 
irrigation and hydroelectric power in Ganga basin area. However, they are dismayed that the 
relevant information in this regard is not available with the Ministry. Recognising that an updated, 
authentic and comprehensive data base is a sine qua non for initiating any meaningful 
developmental work in the country, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should take urgent 
action for compilation of updated, authentic and comprehensive information, State-wise, pertaining 
to usages of water for irrigation, drinking and hydroelectric power, etc., in the Ganga basin. The 
Ministry should also establish a dedicated website on which the above information is available so 
that the same can be accessed by the public at large and stake-holders, viz. farmers, planners, 
economists, meteorologists, etc. in the country.

26
Reply of the Government
The National Water Policy 2012 vide para 14 stipulates establishing of a National Water 
Informatics Centre and making all hydrological data, other than those classified on national security 
considerations, available in public domain. In this regard, the project namely ‘Generation of 
Database and Implementation of Web enabled Water Resources Information System (India –
WRIS)’ had been initiated by the Ministry jointly with ISRO in 11th Plan.
Main groups of the database are:
i. Watershed Atlas ii. Administrative layer 
iii. Water Resources projects iv. Thematic layer 
v. Environment data vi. Basin wise Report
Status of Project as on date:
 Three versions of website of INDIA WRIS have been launched so far. The URL of the website 
is www.india-wris.nrsc.gov.in
 River Basin Atlas of India was released on 1st November, 2012 at CWC (HQ). 
 All unclassified data of CWC’s G&D stations has been uploaded at WRIS website recently in 
July 2013 as per Hydro-meteorological Data Dissemination Policy-2013.
 The version 4.0 was launched in March, 2014 and is available in public domain at 1:250000 
scale.
However, since discharge data of Ganga basin is classified one, it has not been put in 
public domain but is released to specific users for specific uses on a case to case basis, according 
to data dissemination policy. Further, despite pursuance, the States including Ganga basin States 
are seen reluctant in providing data on actual water usage.  
To maintain and update such a large volume of water resources data at national level, it 
has been proposed to establish a NATIONAL WATER RESOURCES INFORMATION CENTRE 
(NWIC) during the 12th Plan.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No.4)
Creation of Additional Storage Capacity Through Implementation of RRR Scheme
The Committee note that a storage capacity of 48.68 BCM has been created through the 
completed projects in the Ganga basin and an additional capacity of 7.65 BCM would be created 
through projects under construction in the basin which can be useful for cushioning the floods to 
some extent. The Committee further note that due to flat terrain of the Ganga basin, Ministry does 
not favour building of barrages in the river itself at intervals of about 3-5 km because such 
barrages would create some inundation in the densely populated Gangetic plains. Consequently, 
water bodies viz. lakes and ponds, etc., are considered an option for storing water available locally 

27
mainly during flood season, and hence the Ministry formulated/implemented a pilot scheme 
‘National Project for Repair, Renovation & Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies directly linked to 
Agriculture’ during the X th Plan. The Scheme of RRR works in 10,000 water bodies with a Central 
Assistance of Rs.6,235 crore has been approved for continuation during the XII th Plan. The 
scheme includes comprehensive improvement of water bodies, catchment area treatment and 
capacity building of stake holders and increased availability of drinking water. The Committee 
desire to be apprised of the updated position regarding implementation of RRR Scheme, including 
total physical and financial achievements made Plan-wise and State-wise since X th Plan till 
December, 2013 and the targets for the next two years in Ganga basin States. They also would 
like to know the additional storage capacities created through RRR scheme till December, 2013 for 
flood moderation and cushioning in the Ganga basin States.
Reply of the Government
The scheme of Water Bodies in XII Plan envisages to take up RRR works in 10,000 water 
bodies with a Central Assistance of Rs.6235 crore covering CCA of 6.235 lakh ha. The Scheme is 
a continuous one and has been approved by Cabinet Committee on Economics Affairs on 
20.09.2013 and the new guidelines thereof have been circulated to all the State Governments. All 
the State Governments have been requested to submit the DPRs as per the new guidelines for 
RRR of water bodies in XII Plan-October 2013. Plan-wise progress (cumulative) is given in 
Annexure-4(A, B & C).
Evaluation of the Pilot scheme (X Plan) has been carried out by various agencies like 
Water Technology Centre for Eastern Region, Bhubaneswar and WALAMTARI, Hyderabad, 
CWRDM , Kerala and NRSC Hyderabad. 
The study by Water Technology Centre for Eastern Region, ICAR indicates increase in the 
storage capacity varying from 50% to 80% in Gajapati and Ganjam districts of Odisha and South 
24 Paraganas District of West Bengal. The report from CWRDM indicates that benefits of the 
scheme of RRR of water bodies have percolated, inter-alia, to SC/ST families. The WALAMTARI 
report indicates increase in storage capacity of tanks ranging from 2.6% to 37.76% in Ananthpur 
and 0.80% to 46.75% in Mehboobnagar district of Andhra Pradesh. NRSC evaluation data 
indicates increased utilisation in Annual irrigation.
Recommendation (Para No.12)
Organisation and Manpower Strength of GFCC
The Committee note that the Ganga Flood Control Commission has original sanctioned 
staff strength of 101 personnel comprising 23 Group 'A' Officers, 13 Group 'B' (Gazetted) Officers 
and 65 other supporting staff. The Committee were informed that as on 01 October, 2013 (after 

28
deemed abolition of 32 posts), the sanctioned staff strength has been reduced to 69 comprising 18 
Group 'A' Officers, 04 Group 'B' (Gazetted) Officers and 47 other supporting staff, out of which 
there are 16 vacancies including 4 in Group 'A' Officers, 1 in Group 'B' (Gazetted) Officers and 11 
other supporting staff. The Committee have been further informed that in addition, there are 19 
posts of work-charged establishment. The Ministry in their reply informed that the present 
manpower strength of GFCC is adequate for its smooth functioning or for achieving its objectives 
and mandate. The Committee also note the Ministry's reply that filling up of vacant posts and 
introduction of appropriate capacity building programmes for the officers/staff of GFCC would 
enhance the effectiveness of the GFCC. They, therefore, desire that urgent necessary steps be 
taken for filling up the vacant posts and introduction of appropriate capacity building programmes 
for the officers and staff of the GFCC. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken 
in this regard.
Reply of the Government
All technical posts are cadre posts of Central Water Engineering Services (CWES) having 
its own capacity building mechanism including the aspects related to flood management. 
Therefore, no separate capacity building programme is envisaged for the officers posted in GFCC. 
The postings of Chairman and Members are done by the Ministry of Water Resources, whereas, 
officers below the level of Director are posted/ transferred by Central Water Commission. The 
vacancy position as on 30.04.2014 in respect of technical officers is given below:
Sl. 
No.
Name of the post Sanctioned Filled Vacant
1 Chairman 1 1 -
2 Member 2 2 -
3 Director 4 2 2
4 Dy. Director 8 7 1
5 Assistant Director 8 3 5
6 Assistant Director-II 7 2 5
Total 30 17 13
The vacancies at Director and Dy. Director Level could not be filled up due to shortage of 
personnel at these levels and non-availability of eligible personnel for promotion to these grades 
during 2013-14. However, the proposal for filling up of the vacant posts is, now, being processed 
by the CWC. As regards the posts in the cadre of GFCC, the status is given as below:

29
Sl. 
No.
Name of the post Sanctioned Filled Vacant
1 Administrative  Officer 1 - 1
2 P.S.to Chairman 1 - 1
3 Private Secretary 2 - 2
4 Steno  Grade-I 7 6 1
5 Steno Grade-II 3 1 2
6 Assistant Director (OL) 1 1 -
7 Hindi Translator Grade-II 1 1 -
8 Head Clerk 4 1 3
9 Upper Divisional  Clerk 4 2 2
10 LDC 10 4 6
11 Head Draftsman 1 - 1
12 D/Man Grade- I 6 5 1
13 D/Man Grade-II 1 - 1
14 Jr. Engineer 5 - 5
15 Sr. Computer 1 1 -
16 Jr. Computer 3 3 -
17 Ferro Printer 2 - 2
18 Driver 2 1 1
19 Multi Tasking Staff 16 9 7
Total 71 35 36
For filling up the vacant posts of LDC, the vacancy position has already been 
communicated to Staff Selection Commission through the Ministry of Water Resources. For filling 
of one post of Stenographer Grade-II, which is likely to be vacant after the promotion one of the 
existing Stenographer Grade-II to Stenographer Grade-I, the vacancy has already been 
communicated to Staff Selection Commission through the Ministry of Water Resources. The RRs 

30
of the some posts are under revision as per 6 th CPC and after finalization of revised RRs 
necessary action would be initiated for promotion. Wherever DPC for promotion can be held with 
existing RRs, the action has been initiated.
Recommendation (Para No.13)
Meetings of GFCC
The Committee note the reply of the Ministry that the meetings of GFCC are held regularly 
for interaction among Ganga basin States and that 44 meetings have been held so far, including 
the last meeting held on 12 March, 2013. Considering the gigantic nature of challenges posed by 
the recurrent floods in the Ganga basin, the number of meetings held by GFCC is much too less 
and inadequate. Further, a perusal of the summary record of the 44 th meeting of the Ganga Flood 
Control Commission held on 12 March, 2013 reveals that certain serious loopholes have been 
impeding the works of GFCC, which inter alia include flood management scheme being not 
formulated as per the guidelines of GFCC, non-submission of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) 
according to guidelines, non-submission by Ganga basin States of quarterly physical and financial 
progress report of various schemes being implemented with Central Assistance, etc. The 
Committee urge the Ministry/GFCC to vigorously pursue with the concerned States for plugging the 
loopholes indicated above so that the onerous task of implementation of flood protection and 
management by the Ganga Flood Control Commission is carried out without any let-up or 
hindrances. Further, the Ministry/GFCC needs to strengthen its coordination with the concerned 
State Governments by increasing the frequency of meetings with them, i.e. by holding regular 
meetings atleast twice a year, namely, one meeting before the onset of Monsoon season to chalk 
out detailed coordinated strategies, measures and plan of action for coping with the ensuing 
Monsoon rains for each State of the Ganga basin, followed by another meeting at the end of the 
Monsoon season to review and evaluate the effectiveness of the strategies and measures taken 
during the Monsoon season, and also prepare new or modified strategies/measures as may be 
warranted by the flood trends. The Committee are also of the considered view that apart from other 
meetings and consultations that may be held as per the exigencies of the situation, a separate Cell 
should be created in the Ministry solely for handling the works of liaisoning/ coordination with the 
States so that the Ministry/ GFCC and the concerned States work smoothly and in tandem to 
achieve their declared goals and objectives. The Committee would like to be apprised of action 
taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The issue for holding two regular meetings of GFCC, one meeting before the onset of 
Monsoon season to chalk out detailed coordinated strategies, measures and plan of action for 
coping with the ensuing Monsoon rains for each State of the Ganga basin, followed by another 
meeting at the end of the Monsoon season to review and evaluate effectiveness of the strategies 
and measures taken during the Monsoon season, and also prepare new or modified 

31
strategies/measures as may be warranted by the flood trends was discussed during 45th meeting 
of GFCC held on 21st March, 2014. Member States agreed that GFCC meeting may be held twice 
in a year as per the observation of Parliamentary Standing Committee. The post monsoon meeting, 
accordingly, is likely to be held in November 2014 depending upon the convenience of States.
Implementation of flood protection and management by coordinating amongst the States 
are enjoined in the functions to be discharged by GFCC. The Ganga Wing of the Ministry headed 
by a Commissioner level Officer assisted by Senior Joint Commissioners also provides technical 
and administrative support required by GFCC in discharging such functions. The Wing would 
continue to provide the support to GFCC.
Recommendation (Para No.14)
Financial Position of GFCC
The Committee note that as an organisation of Ministry of Water Resources, the 
expenditure on establishment and activities of Ganga Flood Control Commission is met from the 
allocation made for the Plan scheme 'River Management Activities and Works Related to Border 
Areas'. According to the Ministry, a total expenditure of Rs.20.48 crore was incurred by GFCC from 
the period 2007-08 to 2011-12 whereas during XII th Five Year Plan, a total expenditure of Rs.4.80 
crore during 2012-13 and Rs.2.44 crore (as on 01.10.2013) during 2013-14 had been incurred. The 
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) has approved an amount of Rs. 45 crore for the activities of 
GFCC during the XIIth Five Year Plan against the demand of Rs. 68.80 crore made by the Ministry 
of Water Resources. The Committee were informed about the adequacy of funds to meet the 
expenditure on establishment and to fund the activities of GFCC. The Committee hope that the 
Government will ensure the availability of adequate financial resources with the GFCC so as not to 
hamper its activities for Flood Management in Ganga Basin States. 
Reply of the Government
The provision of Rs.45.00 crore has been proposed for GFCC in the EFC Memo for the 
plan scheme ‘River Management Activities and Works related to Border Areas’ during XII plan 
which appears to be sufficient to meet the expenditure on establishment and current level of 
activities and responsibilities of GFCC. It shall also be ensured that adequate financial resources 
are available to the GFCC so as not to hamper its activities for flood management in Ganga Basin 
States.

32
Recommendation (Para No.15)
Master plans for Flood Protection and Flood Management 
The Committee note that the main function of the Ganga Flood Control Commission 
(GFCC) is to prepare Master Plans for flood protection and flood management in the Ganga basin 
States. The GFCC has prepared Master Plans for all the 23 rivers which are tributaries of the 
Ganga. Notably, the GFCC being an Advisory Commission, the execution of all works suggested 
under the Master Plans has to be carried out by the respective State Governments which are 
required to undertake works including embankments, drainage schemes, even town protection 
works, etc. through the Plan schemes. The Committee are dismayed to note that although State 
Governments are generally formulating flood management schemes keeping in view the 
Comprehensive Master Plans circulated by GFCC to all the concerned Ganga basin States for 
flood management, the information regarding status of implementation of Master Plans 'is not 
forthcoming from the State Governments despite several efforts including several reminders during 
the meetings of GFCB/GFCC'. Besides, although the Ministry requested six severely flood-affected 
Ganga basin States, namely Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Jharkhand, Himachal Pradesh 
and Uttarakhand to constitute Implementation Committees to ensure time-bound implementation of 
the recommendations of the Comprehensive Plans, yet only the States of Bihar and West Bengal 
have set up such committees so far. Taking note of the tardy pace of execution of the Master Plans 
by the Ganga basin States, the Committee desire the Ministry/GFCC to keep tab on the concerned 
State Governments through frequent meetings, sending written reminders, etc. so that the Master 
Plans do not remain mere paper works in the preserve of the State Governments. Noting that four 
remaining severely flood-affected States have not taken needful action for constituting 
Implementation Committees, the Committee urge the Ministry/GFCC to pursue vigorously with 
these States for speedy execution of the Master Plans for flood protection and management in 
Ganga basin States. The Ministry may also consider mentioning the names of defaulting States in 
this regard on the websites of both the Ministry and the GFCC so that general public and the 
stakeholders may also bring pressure to bear upon these States so as to expedite  implementation 
of the Master Plans.
Reply of the Government
MoWR had requested six severely flood-affected Ganga basin States, viz. Bihar, U.P., 
West Bengal, Jharkhand, H.P. and Uttarakhand to constitute Implementation Committees to 
ensure time-bound implementation of recommendations of Comprehensive Plans. Out of which, 
Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal have constituted Implementation Committees, so far. 
Chairman, Ganga Flood Control Commission has also requested the remaining three 
States namely, Jharkhand, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand to expedite constitution of 
Implementation Committee to ensure time bound implementation of the recommendations of the 
Comprehensive Plans for Flood Management in the Ganga Basin States vide his D.O. dated 

33
11.04.2014 to the Principal Secretary/ Secretary of Water Resources Department. The issue was 
also raised in the 45 th meeting of GFCC held on 21 st March, 2014 wherein concerned States were
requested to expedite the formation of Implementation Committees under intimation to GFCC.
Recommendation (Para No.16)
Embankments 
The Committee note that embankments of the length of 17,826 km have been constructed 
in the Ganga basin States so far. The Committee also note that the details of the cost involved in 
the construction of embankments have not been compiled. Further, the Committee note that 
although embankments have certain inherent disadvantages, the demand for providing flood 
embankment has been on the increase and since the area behind are protected from frequent 
flooding, they are available for cultivation during Monsoon as well as Rabi seasons. Moreover, 
embankments protect built-up area in the towns and cities. Noting that the total area protected from 
flood is only 9.40 mha out of the total area of 20.81 mha liable to floods in the Ganga basin States, 
the Committee urge the Ministry to extend the coverage of flood protection by encouraging the 
concerned States to construct more embankments in the Ganga basin States expeditiously. The 
Committee also desire the Ministry to furnish within 3 months of the presentation of this report, the 
expenditure incurred on the construction of embankments so far.
Reply of the Government
The subject of embankment falls within the purview of the State Governments. The role of 
the Ministry of Water Resources is promotional and advisory in nature.  Accordingly, the FMP 
schemes are formulated and implemented by the State Governments, as per their priorities, 
keeping techno-economic considerations in view, based on trusted and tested practices. However, 
care is taken at the time of appraising DPRs and, if found necessary, new technologies/ 
construction materials are suggested for use. 
The expenditure (Central share) under Flood Management Scheme, which includes 
expenditure on construction of embankments, upto 31st March 2014 is given below:
Consolidated status of State-wise funds released under “Flood Management Programme” during XI 
and XII Plans (up to 31.03.2014)
(Amount in Crore Rs.)
S. 
No.
State Funds 
released 
during 
XI Plan
Funds released during XII Plan Total 
Funds 
released
upto 
31.03.2014
2012-13 2013-14 Total (XII 
Plan
1 Arunachal Pradesh 78.77 16.83 16.83 95.60

34
2 Assam 744.90 2.51 2.51 747.41
3 Bihar 680.79 54.48 88.57 143.05 823.84
4 Chhattisgarh 15.57 3.75 3.75 19.32
5 Goa 9.98 2.00 2.00 11.98
6 Gujarat 2.00 0.00 2.00
7 Haryana 46.91 0.00 46.91
8 Himachal Pradesh 165.31 19.92 9.75 29.67 194.98
9 Jammu & Kashmir 243.50 39.36 28.29 67.65 311.15
10 Jharkhand 17.07 4.27 4.27 21.34
11 Karnataka 20.00 0.00 20.00
12 Kerala 63.68 0.00 63.68
13 Manipur 65.03 0.95 16.96 17.91 82.94
14 Mizoram 3.40 0.00 3.40
15 Nagaland 28.96 15.45 15.45 44.41
16 Odisha 95.64 0.00 95.64
17 Puducherry 7.50 0.00 7.50
18 Punjab 40.43 0.00 40.43
19 Sikkim 82.86 2.43 2.43 85.29
20 Tamil Nadu 59.82 0.00 59.82
21 Tripura 20.91 0.00 20.91
22 Uttar Pradesh 290.69 45.42 30.48 75.90 366.58
23 Uttarakhand 49.63 53.14 53.14 102.77
24 West Bengal 642.87 9.49 128.81 138.30 781.16
Total 3476.21 193.85 379.00 572.85 4049.06
Spilled over works of X 
Plan 89.79 0.00 89.79
Grand Total 3566.00 572.85 4138.85
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 21 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No.17)
Maintenance of Embankments of River Bagmati 
The Committee note that a team led by Chairman, GFCC and Member (RM), CWC 

35
inspected the embankment works on river Bagmati in Sitamarhi and Sheohar districts (Bihar) on 27 
November, 2013. The inspection team highlighted several shortcomings in the embankments, 
including absence of maintenance of the embankments since 2008 and made several 
recommendations regarding works required to be undertaken by the concerned authorities in this 
regard. The Committee deplore that the concerned basin State has not taken necessary corrective 
measures keeping in view the disastrous floods in North Bihar caused by a breach in the Eastern 
Afflux Bund of Kosi barrage at Kusaha in Nepal, necessitating works to be taken up for breach 
closure at a staggering Rs.115.00 crore during 2008-2011. The Committee also deplore the 
callousness on the part of the concerned authorities viz. the Ministry/GFCC/State Government of 
Bihar regarding non-maintenance of the embankment on river Bagmati after its completion in 2008 
leading to its deterioration at many locations in view of the fact that there is high level of risk of 
occurrence of similar catastrophe on river Bagmati as it happened on the Kosi river. The 
Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the Ministry/GFCC to take vigorous, timely action for 
implementation of the recommendations of the inspection team led by Chairman, GFCC and 
Member (RM), CWC regarding embankments on river Bagmati so that all necessary works may be 
completed before the onset of ensuing Monsoon. The Committee would like to be apprised about 
the action taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the inspection team led by Chairman, GFCC and Member (RM), 
CWC regarding embankments on the Bagmati have already sent to the State Government of Bihar 
for taking necessary action and implementing the recommendations vide MOWR letter no. 
2/1/2012-Ganga/4547-50 dated 27-12-2013. The matter is being pursued by GFCC with the State 
Government for early implementation of the recommendations and submitting the Action Taken 
Report.
Recommendation (Para No.18)
Renovation and Maintenance of Embankments 
The Committee also note that a provision has been made in the XII th Plan for re-visiting the 
entire embankments again. The longevity and durability of vulnerable embankments is proposed to 
be enhanced by the use of modern geo-textile/geo-synthetic material/geo-bags etc., which are 
environment friendly and also provide safety against puncture, breaches and erosion. Notably, 
these techniques have been used in many places viz. Malda, Nadia, 24 Pargana districts of West 
Bengal, works undertaken by Farakka Barrage Project on main stem of Ganga and river Swan in 
Una district of Himachal Pradesh, so that the embankments in the country stand strong enough to 
withstand the ravages  of  the   swelling  floods  during  the  Monsoon  season  and  the  chances  
for embankment  breaches  are  minimized  and  the  inhabitants  are  protected  from  the 
unexpected calamity. The  Committee   therefore,   recommend   that   the  Ministry/ CWC/ GFCC 
should immediately take up detailed morphological studies of all the rivers in the 11 Ganga basin 

36
States and complete this exercise within a definite time frame with a view to achieve better results 
in building, renovating and maintaining revetments, spurs and embankments in the area to control 
and mitigate the disaster caused by floods.
Reply of the Government
Morphological Studies of 14 rivers namely Ganga, Sharda, Rapti, Kosi, Bagmati, Yamuna, 
Bramhaputra, Subansiri, Pagladia, Krishna, Tungbhadra, Mahananda, Mahanadi and Tapi are 
proposed during the 12 th Plan period at an approved cost of   Rs.27.81 Crores under the “R&D 
Programme in Water Sector”. Out of the above mentioned rivers, 7 rivers namely Ganga, Sharda, 
Rapti, Kosi, Bagmati, Yamuna and hoogly are Ganga Basin Rivers. In this regard, proposals were 
obtained from IITs and NITs and are under consideration for award of works.           
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 24 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No.19)
Aforestation of Embankments Zones and Periodic Inspection of Embankments 
The GFCC had circulated Master Plans to the concerned Ganga basin States wherein 
afforestation of the embankment zones and turfing and plantation to the extent practicable for 
better reinforcement of soil on embankments in all Ganga basin States was emphasised. The 
Committee desire that proper maintenance of embankments through afforestation in the 
embankment zones would go a long way to increase the longevity and durability of embankments 
and, therefore, the States should be encouraged for embarking on such programmes. Additionally, 
periodic inspection of the quality and strength of embankment should be undertaken by the 
concerned departments/ agencies and updated information sent to the Ministry/GFCC for taking 
necessary action before the onset of Monsoon every year to facilitate timely repair and renovation, 
where needed. The Committee would like to be apprised of concrete steps taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government
As per the extant guidelines, the State Governments shall undertake regular maintenance 
of flood protection works before and after each monsoon and even during execution of works. 
Necessity for proper maintenance of embankments is reiterated during inspections and is also 
emphasised from time to time. The matter was also discussed in the 45 th meeting of GFCC held on 
21st march, 2014. 

37
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 27 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No.20)
Execution of Flood Protection Schemes/Works 
The Committee note that for execution of schemes/works, the Technical Committees 
suggest to start the work in December or latest in January, when the water level in the river is low 
for better sustainability of flood protection works. However, most of the times flood protection works 
get delayed due to non-submission of Techno-economically sound proposals, delay in compliance 
of technical observations of GFCC, non-completion of formalities like timely land acquisition, delay 
in submission of Utilisation Certificates and so on by the State Governments. The Committee were 
apprised that the matter was brought to the notice of concerned State Governments at various 
occasions like meetings of GFCB/GFCC besides monitoring visits and through holding meetings 
with concerned officers of State Governments. Further, the Committee note that the GFCC 
prepared compendium of guidelines/specifications, updated the same in January, 2004 and 
circulated to all concerned to follow the same during the implementation of the schemes, which is 
helpful in stabilization of the executed works. However, no specific response/suggestions in regard 
to guidelines/specifications has been received from any State Government. The Committee also 
note the Ministry's reply that there are some deficiencies in information flow regime between the 
Central and State Governments as a result of which a clear picture of Master Plans vis-à-vis their 
implementation is lacking thereby necessitating a need to streamline the same. For ensuring 
speedy execution of flood protection works in Ganga basin States, the Committee recommend that 
:
(a) the Ministry/GFCC impress upon the States through regular correspondence and frequent 
meetings with the concerned officials of the States, the need for taking up flood protection works 
well before the onset of Monsoon; 
(b) the Ministry should insist on strict compliance of guidelines/specifications issued by the 
GFCC for implementation of Schemes by the States; and 
(c) the information flow system between the Ministry/GFCC and the States be streamlined so that 
there is no gap in the flow of information between them. 
Reply of the Government
a) The matter of speedy and timely execution of flood protection and anti-erosion works was 
discussed in the 45 th meeting of GFCC held on 21 st March, 2014, wherein, it was impressed 
upon the States to ensure completion of schemes as per schedule proposed in the DPR of the 

38
scheme in statement FMP-1 while submitting the schemes for inclusion under FMP. The 
States were also requested to submit the flood control/anti-erosion scheme, which were 
required to be implemented before the next session, by 15 th December so that sufficient time 
is available to GFCC for appraisal of schemes and thereafter for execution by the State 
Government.
b) The matter of strict compliance of guidelines/specifications issued by GFCC for 
implementation of schemes by the States was discussed in detail in the 45 th Meeting of GFCC 
held on 21 st March, 2014 and it was impressed upon the states to ensure formulation of 
schemes strictly in accordance with the guidelines of GFCC. States were also advised to make 
use of CWC’s handbook for “Flood Protection, Anti-erosion and River Training Works” which is 
available on the CWC’s web site.
c) For smooth follow up information between the Ministry/GFCC and States, the States have 
been requested to nominate the nodal officers who will be responsible for coordinating with 
GFCC/MOWR for all matters related to schemes in the States as well as for proposals for 
inclusion under FMP. The States were also advised to use e-mail for speedy communication 
for information.     
Recommendation (Para No.21)
Anti Erosion Measures
The Committee note that erosion causes severe damage to soil fertility. Silt discharged due 
to erosion silts up farmlands; chocks lakes, reservoirs and canals; clogs up and raises river beds; 
blocks navigation passes; decreases the benefits of water conservancy facilities; and aggravates 
flood and water logging. All these adversely affect the development of economy and production in 
the country. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to impress upon the State Governments 
the need to check erosion by taking necessary measures on priority basis such as : (i) planting 
trees, bushes, grasses, grass-shrub vegetation, etc. through plantation and also aerial sowing in 
inaccessible terrains; and (ii) taking appropriate engineering measures such as building 
intercepting ditches/check dams/silt-trap and/or construction of bench terraces, etc.
Reply of the Government
Under the Flood Management Programme (FMP) during XII Plan, funds are also provided 
for anti-erosion schemes in critical regions, anti-sea erosion and catchment area treatment. While 
appraising the schemes, provision for plantation is also looked for. In addition, the project 
authorities are impressed upon to take necessary action during monitoring visits. 
During the 45th meeting of GFCC, the matter was discussed and States were requested to 
take necessary measures as recommended by the Hon’ble Committee. 

39
Recommendation (Para No.23)
Implementation of Flood Management Programme under Central Plan 
The Government launched in September 2007 'Flood Management Programme (FMP)' a 
State Sector Scheme under Central Plan with an outlay of Rs.8,000.00 crore for providing  Central  
Assistance  to  the  State  Governments  for  works  related  to  river management, flood control, 
anti-erosion, drainage development, flood-proofing works, restoration of damaged flood 
management works and anti-erosion works in coastal  areas. A total of Rs.3,566.00 crore has been 
released as Central Assistance under this programme as on 31.03.2012. The Committee were 
apprised that the Government has approved continuation of FMP during XIIth Plan with an 
increased outlay of Rs.10,000.00 crore under which projects for catchment area treatment having 
objectives of flood management would also be provided Central Assistance besides the type of 
works funded during XIth Plan. While appreciating the fact that the allocations for FMP has been 
increased from Rs.8,000.00 crore during XIth Plan to Rs.10,000.00 crore during XII th  Plan, the 
Committee note that out of 420 works approved during XI th Plan, only 252 works were completed 
during the same period. Further, although an allocation of Rs.10,000.00 crore has been made for 
XIIth Plan, only Rs.263.71 crore had been released as Central Assistance till 31.10.2013 which 
include Rs.54.48 crore for Bihar, Rs.19.92 crore for Himachal Pradesh, Rs.4.27 crore for 
Jharkhand, Rs.45.66 crore for Uttar Pradesh, Rs.24.25 crore for Uttarakahand and Rs.54.86 crore 
for West Bengal. No funds have been released for Haryana, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, 
Chattisgarh and NCT Delhi which are also part of the Ganga basin States. The Committee also 
note that no new scheme has been approved under Flood Management Programme during XII th
Five Year Plan so far. Noting that as per the projection made by States/UTs, an additional area of 
6.0 mha. is likely to be provided reasonable degree of protection against floods under FMP during 
XIIth Plan, the Committee desire the Ministry to pull up its socks and make renewed efforts for 
effective implementation of Flood Management Programme during XII th Plan. Accordingly, they 
recommend that the Ministry short-list flood management schemes of States/UTs capable of being 
implemented within the XII th Plan period and expedite the release of funds for these schemes for 
achieving better results in this regard.
Reply of the Government
With a view to cover more area, 97 new schemes have been included and approved for XII 
Plan. Details of the same are given in Annexure-3. The inter se priority of the schemes is fixed by 
the States as per their priority based on the degree of the problem.
Recommendation (Para No.25)
Recommendations of 'Working Group on Flood Management and Region Specific Issues' 
The representatives of the Ministry deposed before the Committee that the Union 

40
Government has been making assessment of the adequacy of flood management measures 
through various working groups for specific Five Year  Plans. For XII th Plan, the Government had 
set up 'Working Group on Flood Management and Region Specific Issues' which recommended 
various measures for flood management. When asked to furnish the recommendations of this 
Working Group including the status of implementation thereof, the Ministry was unable to do so. 
The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to furnish the recommendations of the 'Working Group 
on Flood Management and Region Specific Issues' including the up to date status of the 
implementation of each of the recommendations. 
Reply of the Government
The recommendations of the said Working Group are given Section 7 of the Report. The 
same are at Annexure-7. The status on three recommendations is given below:
A) Scientific Assessment of Flood Prone Area in India
The Ministry of Water Resources (MOWR) constituted an Expert Committee for Scientific 
Assessment of Flood Prone Area in India under the Chairmanship of Chairman, CWC; vide OM 
No. 5/19/2012/Ganga/2709-30 dated 20th July, 2012.  The Expert Committee met two times and 
the last meeting was held on 27th June, 2013 at Sewa Bhavan, New Delhi.  
The Expert Committee, during its second meeting finalized methodology, classification & criteria for 
assessment of flood prone areas in the country and decided to constitute Regional committee’s for 
each State/UT with Principal Secretaries of the Water Resources Departments as its Chairman and 
Regional Chief Engineers of CWC as Member-Secretary of the committee. These regional 
committees were tasked to identify, demarcate and classify the Flood Prone Areas based on the 
methodology, classification & criteria as suggested by the Expert Committee within a stipulated 
period of nine months. 
As of now regional committees have been constituted in the four states namely Odisha, 
Andhra Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal and Chief Engineers of the regional offices of CWC are in 
contact with State Governments for constitution of the regional committees in the respective 
State/UT. Member (RM), CWC has also written DO letters to the Chief Engineers of the regional 
offices of CWC to take personnel interest in the matter and ensure notification of regional 
committees at an early date.
B) Flood Plain Zoning
As stated earlier, a model draft bill for flood plain zoning legislation was also circulated by 
the Union Government in 1975 to all the States for implementation of Flood Plain Zoning Approach. 
The status of Flood Zoning Bill is given below:
S.N. State Status / views of State
1 Rajasthan Bill enacted 

41
2 Uttarakhand Bill enacted.  Action are being taken by the State for its 
implementation
3 Uttar Pradesh Enactment kept in abeyance. However, State is taking 
administrative measures to ensure flood plain zoning.  
4 Himachal Pradesh Bill is under consideration.
5 Delhi State has informed that provision of Delhi Development 
Act is sufficient to achieve the objective.
6 Bihar State informed that enactment of bill could not be 
considered in view of large flood affected area. 
7 Haryana Not enacted, The state has informed that necessary 
administrative measures are taken to ensure flood plain 
zoning.
8 Jharkhand State informed that the requirement of bill in Jharkhand is 
not felt
9 Madhya Pradesh State informed that the requirement of bill in MP is not felt
10 West Bengal Under consideration by West Bengal Flood Control Board
11 Chhattisgarh Views awaited
C) Preparation of Digital Elevation Model
In various meetings held in National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) and the 
Annual Conference of Principal Secretaries of Irrigation/Water Resources/Flood Control 
Departments organised by the Ministry of Water Resources and various other forums, need has 
been expressed for availability of topographical maps on 1:10000 scale with contour interval of 0.5 
meter. This would be useful for issuing inundation forecasts and provide information to the local 
authorities about the likely inundated areas during a particular flood. It would also facilitate 
vulnerability mapping in greater detail and help NDMA and State Disaster Management Authorities 
in undertaking disaster management in more effective manner. 
During 12th Plan, it is proposed to take up the work of preparation of topographical maps in 
digital format i.e. Digital Elevation Modelling (DEM) for an area of 200000 sq. Km for the States of 
UP, Bihar and West Bengal. Survey of India has indicated a cost of Rs.400 crore for this work. A 
provision of Rs.400 crore has been made in the revised EFC for Modernisation of Flood 
Forecasting Network of CWC which is under process of approval by the Government of India. 

42
Recommendation (Para No.26)
Flood Forecasting and Flood Preparedness 
According to the Ministry of Water Resources, the flood situation in the country including 
Ganga basin States is monitored by the Central Water Commission every Monsoon. Based on the 
information provided by the CWC, the GFCC prepares weekly summary of flood situation in the 
Ganga basin States. Further, based on the flood information received from the CWC and the 
GFCC, the various agencies like NDMA, Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Defence and the 
officials of State Governments are apprised of the flood situation and trend of rivers during 
emergency meetings of high level inter-ministerial forums like National Executive Committee 
headed by the Home Secretary. The Ministry claimed that there is accuracy of more than 96 
percent in flood forecasting by the CWC, which is comparable with the best international practices. 
At present, the Central Water Commission issues flood forecasts at 87 stations in Ganga basin 
States of Uttarakhand (3), Uttar Pradesh (35), Bihar (32), Jharkhand (5), Madhya Pradesh (1), 
Haryana (1), NCT Delhi (2), West Bengal (8) during Monsoon period every year. The forecasts are 
disseminated to various user agencies namely State Revenue/Civil authorities, Water 
Resources/Irrigation/Flood Control/Disaster Management authorities of respective State 
Governments, and Road and Rail traffic authorities. As emphasized in the National Water Policy, 
2012, flood forecasting is very important for flood preparedness and, therefore, it should be 
expanded extensively across the country specially in the Ganga basin States which are facing 
perennial flood ravages. The Committee recommend that the present flood forecasting 
infrastructure should be modernized using real time data acquisition system and linked to 
forecasting models. The Committee are pleased to note that the Ministry has, during XII th Plan, 
proposed modernization and expansion of its flood forecasting network to include additional 
reservoirs under inflow forecasting network, preparation of Digital Elevation Maps (DEMs) in Uttar 
Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal. They hope and desire completion of these proposals in the near 
future so that tangible improvements are visible in flood forecasting scenario specially in the flood-
prone Ganga basin States.
Reply of the Government
Modernisation of flood forecasting network envisaged installation of telemetry for sensor 
based data acquisition and its real-time transmission for formulation of flood forecasts with the 
objective of improving warning time and accuracy of forecast started in 9 th Plan. A total of 455 
stations have been covered by the end of 11th Plan:
Plan No. of  H.O. sites where 
telemetry installed basins
9th 55 Chambal and Upper Mahanadi basins
10th 168
i) Godavari basin 63 stations 
ii) Krishna basin 41 stations 
iii) Brahmaputra basin 21 stations 
iv) Damodar basin 20 stations 

43
v) Yamuna basin 15 stations 
vi) Mahanadi basin   8 stations 
11th 222
vii) Indus Basin – 04 
viii) Lower Ganga Basin – 18 
ix) Upper Ganga Basin – 45
x) Yamuna Basin – 25 
xi) Narmada Tapi Basin – 76
xii) Mahanadi river Basin – 36
xiii) Brahmaputra Basin – 14
xiv) Godavari Basin – 4 
Augmentation of Telemetry System is proposed to be continued in the 12 th Plan.  Efforts 
are also being made to have Digital Elevation Model (DEM) prepared. During 12th Plan, it is 
proposed to take up the work of preparation of topographical maps in digital format i.e. Digital 
Elevation Modelling (DEM) for an area of 200000 sq. Km for the States of UP, Bihar and West 
Bengal. Survey of India has indicated a cost of Rs.400 crore for this work. A provision has been 
kept in the revised EFC for Modernisation of Flood Forecasting Network of CWC which is under 
process. 
Recommendation (Para No.32)
India-Nepal Co-operation 
The Committee note that in order to contain the flood havoc caused by Nepal-originating 
rivers of the Ganga basin viz. Gandak, Bagmati, Kamla, Kosi, etc., the Government of India has 
taken several measures in agreement with the Government of Nepal which include : (i) regular 
transmission of hydro-meteorological data of sites located in Nepal to India during monsoon for use 
in flood forecasting on Indian side in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar; and (ii) taking up schemes for 
several flood control projects viz. Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project, Sapta Kosi High Dam, 
Storage-cum-Diversion Project in Sun Kosi and a dam coupled with a barrage project in Kamla 
basin in Nepal territory. The Committee further note that a Task Force has reviewed the 
arrangements regarding transmission of Hydro-Meteorological Data and identified key stations in 
Nepal, requirement of modern equipment in order to have more effectiveness in data collection and 
transmission for flood forecasting on Indian side. The Committee therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry take necessary steps for implementing the recommendations of the Task Force and keep 
them apprised in due course. The Joint Standing Technical Committee (JSTC), constituted in 2008 
also needs to meet more frequently to address the problems.
Reply of the Government
The report of the Task Force was discussed in the 4 th meeting of JSTC held on 12-13 
September 2013, wherein, it was agreed that the report prepared by the Task Force on flood 
forecasting activities in the rivers flowing from Nepal to India would be reviewed by the experts of 
both the Governments, and concrete steps would be recommended jointly taking the applicable 

44
new technologies into consideration.  Subsequently, the matter was discussed in the 8 th meeting of 
the India Nepal Joint Committee on Inundation and Flood Management (JCIFM) held on 4-8 
February 2014 and the views of experts from Indian Side were communicated to Government of 
Nepal.  It was decided that the report may be reviewed by the experts of Government of Nepal 
within 3 months.  The expert views of Nepal are awaited.  
India-Nepal Joint Standing Technical Committee (JSTC) meets as often as required 
depending upon the agenda and mutual convenience of two sides.    
Recommendation (Para No.33)
Construction of Embankments in Nepal
The Committee note that an umbrella Committee in the name of Joint Committee on 
Inundation and Flood Management (JCIFM) was constituted in 2009 to implement the decisions of 
JSTC and also monitor the progress of works funded by Government of India in Nepal on various 
rivers flowing down to India and provide guidance to task group(s) and report to JSTC. The 
Committee are pleased to note that the works for construction of embankment in Nepal on rivers 
Kamla, Bagmati and Lalbakeya are under progress and they recommend that the works be 
completed speedily. 
Reply of the Government
The projects for extension of embankment on river Kamla, Bagmati and Lalbakeya are 
presently under implementation by the Department of Water Induced Disaster Prevention, 
Government of Nepal with funding by the Government of India.  The status of implementation of 
important components under these projects, river-wise are given as under:
A) Kamla River Training Project
Description of works Total as 
per DPR
Completed Ongoing Balance
1. Embankment Construction (Km)
a.  Left Bank 34.65 32.55 2.10 -
b.  Right Bank 33.60 32.80 0.80 -
2. Gravelling of top of embankment 
(Km)
a.  Left Bank 34.65 9.00 25.65 -
b.  Right Bank 33.60 8.00 25.60 -
3. Spur / Stud (Nos.) 182 105 54 23
4. Revetment (Km) 14.73 13.56 1.17 -
5. Anti Flood Sluice(Nos.) 28 23 4 1
6. Bridge(Nos.) 5 - - 5

45
B) Bagmati River Training Project
Description of works Total as 
per DPR
Completed Ongoing Balance
1. Embankment Construction (Km)
a.  Left Bank 31.55 31.55 - -
b.  Right Bank 8.45 8.45 - -
2. Embankment Strengthening (Km)
a.  Left Bank 5.10 - 5.10 -
b.  Right Bank 31.78 - 31.78 -
3. Gravelling of top of embankment 
(Km)
a.  Left Bank 46.20 25.85 - 20.35
b.  Right Bank 41.00 24.65 - 16.35
4. Spur / Stud (Nos.) 16 / 100 16 / 48 0 / 6 0 / 46
5. Revetment (m) 1500 1500 - -
6. Anti Flood Sluice(Nos.) 17 12 1 4
7. Bridge(Nos.) 3 - - 3
C) Lalbakeya River Training Project
Description of works Total as 
per DPR
Completed Ongoing Balance
1. Embankment Construction (Km)
a.  Left Bank 30.11 21.00 9.11 -
b.  Right Bank 34.80 23.00 8.20 3.60
2. Gravelling of top of embankment 
(Km)
a.  Left Bank 31.96 5.40 15.60 10.96
b.  Right Bank 37.00 5.40 17.60 14.00
3. Spur / Stud (Nos.) 8  /  205 0  /  90 0  /  43 8  /  72
4. Revetment (m) 4386 4086 200 100
5. Anti Flood Sluice(Nos.) 31 16 12 3
6. Bridge(Nos.) 1 - - 1
7. Irrigation Outlet 1 - - 1
The implementation of works is being monitored by the India Nepal Joint Committee on 
Inundation and Flood Management.  During the 8 th meeting of JCIFM, India insisted for early 
completion of ongoing works on these rivers. 

46
Recommendation (Para No.35)
River Management Activities and Works Related to Border Areas 
The Committee noted that under the Plan scheme ‘River Management Activities and Works 
related to Border Areas’ taken up during XIth Plan period, the Ministry held dialogues with Nepal on 
setting up of Pancheshwar Development Authority (PDA) for finalization of Joint DPR of 
Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project. Terms of Reference (ToR) of the PDA are being finalised in 
the Ministry in consultation with various Ministries including Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) and 
Ministry of Finance (MoF). Further, the joint field investigations for preparation of DPR of Sapta 
Kosi High Dam, Storage-cum-Diversion Project in Sun Kosi and a dam coupled with a barrage 
project in Kamla basin in Nepal territory are being carried out by a Joint Project Office- Sapta Kosi 
Sun Kosi Investigation (JPO-SKSKI). The Committee recommend that the Ministry speedily 
complete finalization of Terms of Reference (ToR) of the Pancheshwar Development Authority 
(PDA) for finalization of Joint DPR of Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project. They also desire that the 
works related to joint field investigations for preparation of DPR of Sapta Kosi High Dam, Storage-
cum-Diversion Project in Sun Kosi and a dam coupled with a barrage project in Kamla basin in 
Nepal territory which are being carried out by a Joint Project Office- Sapta Kosi Sun Kosi 
Investigation (JPO-SKSKI) may be completed within a definite time-frame at the earliest. Noting 
further that about 50 percent of bank protection works on rivers Attrai, Punarbhava, Tangon, 
Nagar, etc. in West Bengal and 50 percent of works on river Feni in Tripura along international 
border with Bangladesh have been completed, the Committee ardently hope that these works may 
be completed fully within this financial year 2013-14. Further, they also observe that out of 
Rs.820.00 crore outlay approved for XI th Plan, the Ministry could achieve an expenditure of only 
Rs.721.14 crore upto 31.03.2012. The Committee, therefore, desire that due pre-planning exercise 
be undertaken by the Ministry and targets for achievements fixed and bottlenecks hampering 
project execution such as R&R issues, land acquisition, non-submission of UCs, etc. be removed 
so that the works/projects taken up under the scheme ‘River Management Activities and Works 
related to Border Areas’ achieve full utilization of its allocated outlay during XIIth Plan.
Reply of the Government
A) TORs of Pancheshwar Development Authority (PDA):
TORs of the Pancheshwar Development Authority (PDA) are under finalisation in consultation with 
concerned Ministries. D.O. letters have been written to MEA and MOF (DOR) at Secretary Level. 
However, some information is yet to be received from MOF (DOR). After receipt of the same, the 
matter would be put to the appropriate authority for approval. The matter is being pursued. 
B) Sapta Kosi High Dam Multipurpose project and Sun Kosi Storage-cum-Diversion scheme by 
JPO-SKSKI:
As mentioned earlier, the survey & investigation works and preparation of Detailed Project Reports 
(DPRs) of Sapta Kosi High Dam Multipurpose Project, Sun Kosi Storage-cum- Diversion Project, 
Kamla Dam Project and Bagmati Projects are in progress. However, there has been some delay in 

47
works mainly due to local disturbances and political instability in Nepal. The matter has been under 
discussion in bilateral meetings from time to time and Government of Nepal has been taking 
necessary steps for early completion of works and finalisation of their DPRs. A Joint Team of 
Experts (JTE) reviews the progress and addresses the issues for completion of ongoing field works 
and preparation of DPR of these projects in its meeting from time to time. 
C) Bank Protection Work on Common / Border Rivers
The bank protection works on Common / Border rivers between India and Bangladesh, namely 
Attrai, Punarbhava, Tangon, Nagar, etc. in West Bengal taken up during the XI Plan have been 
completed.    

48
CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
Role of Inter-Linking of Rivers Programme in Reservoir Creation 
The Committee note that as part of the Inter Linking of Rivers (ILRs) programme, a series 
of reservoirs have been planned to be created in Nepal or in the foothills of the Himalayas. The 
Committee hope that these links would be able to harness the waters of the Ganga and its 
tributaries before going into the sea/neighbouring country and also serve as effective mechanisms 
for flood moderation / cushioning in the Ganga basin States. The Committee further note that 14 
links under Himalayan component of ILR scheme have been identified. While Feasibility Reports 
(Indian portion) of two links have been completed, the Survey and investigation works (Indian 
portion) of 7 links have been completed and the field works of remainder links, except 1 link which 
lies entirely in Nepal, are under progress. The Committee are however, unhappy to note that the 
work on the Kosi-Mechi link which lies entirely in Nepal, could not be initiated for the simple reason 
that it lies entirely in Nepal. They are also dismayed to note that no time-frame/schedule has been 
fixed for completion of Himalayan component of ILR scheme by the Ministry giving the plea that 
ILRs are at conceptualization stage only and that the same would be fixed while finalising their 
Detailed Project Reports (DPRs). Noting further that the Indian Government is in dialogue with 
Nepal and Bhutan through bilateral mechanism for expediting field works for completion of DPRs of
the links involving these countries, the Committee recommend that the implementation of ILRs and 
storage projects in Nepal and Bhutan be taken up with topmost urgency and seriousness  by  the  
Ministry  by  working  out  implementable  time-schedule  for their completion in collaboration with 
the Governments of those countries especially in case of Kosi-Mechi link for which work has not 
been initiated till now.
Reply of the Government
The response of MEA regarding surveys and investigations in Nepal Territory for link 
projects of Himalayan Rivers Development Component of National Perspective Plan for Water 
Resources Development was received vide their letter dated 13.09.2005 wherein MoWR was 
advised to wait for an appropriate and conducive time for these works. The relevant para of the 
MEA’s Letter reads as follows:
“In MEA’s assessment of current political situation in Nepal, this is not the appropriate time to 
carry out survey works for linking of rivers in Nepalese territories. Our focus at the moment could 
be on the linking of Peninsular Rivers”.  
Thereafter, MoWR vide letter dated 17.01.2007 requested MEA to seek permission of 
Government of Nepal for taking up of Survey & Investigation works of ILRs projects. Upon being 

49
reminded by Secretary (WR), MEA on 09.06.2008 observed that, “Due to political instability and 
sensitivities in Nepal, it has not been possible to survey, investigate or collect data in Nepal”.
Further, the Government of India have been making sincere efforts to accomplish the 
ongoing works including preparation of Detailed Projects Reports (DPRs) of storage projects in 
Nepal through bilateral mechanisms with Nepal. Issues causing hindrance in works are taken up in 
the bilateral meetings and also through diplomatic channels from time to time.
  
Recommendation (Para No. 8)
Flooding in Farakka Barrage Areas 
The Committee observe that the Farakka Barrage is a barrage across the river Ganga, 
which is about 17 kms. from the Bangladesh border near Chapai Nawabganj district. Recently, 
excess release of water led to flooding in Lalgola block, which was compounded by the problem of 
non-maintenance of the embankment of the canal which is about 40 kms. long from the Barrage to 
the Bhagirathi-Hooghly, leading to flooding of villages and submergence of huge acres of land. A 
total of Rs.520.00 lakh has been allocated by the Government for repair and maintenance of the 
Farakka Barrage during XII th Plan, out of which an expenditure of Rs.135.11 lakh has been 
incurred so far. The Committee desire the Ministry to make an on-the-spot study expeditiously of 
the safety, reliability and efficiency of the canals and embankments of Farakka Barrage specially in 
Lalgola block of Murshidabad district to ensure that such flooding do not recur in future. They 
would like this work to be completed well before the onset of Monsoon season, so that necessary 
repair and  maintenance  works  (if  any)  may  be  taken  up  by  the  concerned 
departments/organisations in time. The Committee would like to know the follow-up measures 
taken in this regard.
Reply of the Government
MoWR constituted a Team of Experts under the Chairmanship of Member (Planning), 
Ganga Flood Control Commission vide O.M. No. Z-16012/13/2013-Ganga/4179-88 dated 3rd 
December, 2013 to assess the extent of River erosion problem in the Jangipur area of West 
Bengal. The report has been submitted and is at Annexure-6. Farakka barrage Project has already 
initiated action on immediate structural measures likely to be completed before Monsoon, 2014.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter-I of the Report)

50
Recommendation (Para No. 9)
Flood Management in Ganga Basin States 
Taking note of : (i) dire necessity of tackling the recurrent devastations caused by floods 
year after year in the Ganga basin and to alleviate human miseries and also to reduce and 
ultimately eliminate colossal damages to crops, houses and public utilities; and (ii) the provisions of 
the National Water Policy, 2012 for rehabilitation of natural drainage systems, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry/Central Water Commission should in consultation with all the basin 
States chalk out a time-bound, implementable programme of action to identify those drainage 
systems, viz., rivers/streams, canals, etc., which need immediate rehabilitation and adopt 
measures to be taken by the concerned agencies/authorities for their repair and restoration. The 
progress of works undertaken in this regard should be reviewed after every six months.
Reply of the Government
Working Group on Flood Management and Regional Specific Issues for XII Plan 
recommended structural and non-structural measures including drainage improvement for working 
out strategies for flood management. 
Drainage development aspects are effective where flood water stays for long periods due 
to drainage related problems. These schemes are to be formulated by the States.               
In general, this method may not be sustainable in Ganga basin due to prevailing 
characteristics of the drainage system and huge amount of silt coming in Himalayan rivers in 
monsoon season.  Creation of storages in the upper reaches (in Nepal) jointly with flood protection 
works at some reaches downstream in the Ganga basin States namely Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and 
West Bengal may be considered as better proposition.
Recommendation (Para No. 22)
Centrally Sponsored Anti-Erosion Schemes 
The Committee observe that as part of the implementation of the recommendations of Task 
Force 2004, the Union Government had expanded their role in flood sector and during X th Plan it 
had approved the Centrally Sponsored Scheme 'Critical Anti-Erosion Works in Ganga basin States' 
for Rs.305.03 crore and State Sector Scheme 'Critical Flood Control and Anti-Erosion Schemes in 
Brahmaputra and Barak Valley States' for Rs.225.00 crore and under which immediate Short-
Term-I measures as recommended by Task Force 2004, were undertaken. Taking note of the great 
significance of such anti-erosion schemes, the Committee recommend that the Ministry make all 
out efforts for full, effective and speedy implementation of these schemes. The Committee also 
urge the Government to implement and further improve upon these schemes in future. They also 
would like to be apprised of achievements made under the two schemes.

51
Reply of the Government
For effective and speedy implementation of FMP, which inter-alia includes anti-erosion 
works, the Ministry has issued new guidelines for providing central assistance to the States. The 
same have been provided to the State Governments. Under the new guidelines of “Flood 
Management Programme”, critical flood control, river management and anti-sea erosion works in 
the entire country would be covered.  As per the report of XI Plan Working Group on Water 
Resources, an area of 1.78 million hectare (mha) had been provided reasonable degree of 
protection during X Plan, which includes the area benefitted by the works executed under the 
above two schemes. 
Recommendation (Para No. 29)
Monitoring, Evaluation and Appraisal of Flood Management Schemes by GFCC 
The Committee note that Ganga Flood Control Commission (GFCC) monitors all Flood 
Management Schemes in the Ganga basin through site visits and report to the Ministry. The GFCC 
also advises the State Governments and that every ongoing scheme is site-inspected at least once 
in a year. In regard to physical progress of Flood Management Programme (FMP) in the Ganga 
basin, the Ministry informed that as of October, 2013, 97 Schemes had been taken up, out of which 
52 were completed, 04 schemes dropped/withdrawn and 41 Schemes were still under progress 
since 2007-08. Further, giving reasons for poor performance of FMP in the Ganga basin, the 
Ministry attributed the same to availability of limited working season, disputes in land acquisition 
and non-submission of Utilisation Certificates (UCs) by the States in time. The Committee 
recommend that before giving clearance to schemes for Flood Management Programme sent by 
the Ganga basin States, the Ministry should ensure that necessary ground works viz. land 
acquisition, submission of utilization certificates, infrastructural developments , Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement issues, etc. are sorted out by the concerned State Governments before undertaking 
execution of the schemes.  
Reply of the Government
As per the revised guidelines of FMP for XII plan, it is mandatory for the States to submit a 
certificate that, land required for taking up of the scheme is in possession of the State Government. 
The other suggestions of the committee will be duly complied with while according techno-
economic clearance of the scheme being received from the Ganga Basin States.
Recommendation (Para No. 31)
Utilisation Certificates 
The Committee are surprised to observe that UCs for a total amount of Rs.334.54 crore 
were outstanding, viz. Rs.4.56 crore in Uttarakhand, Rs.16.61 crore in Bihar and Rs.313.37 crore 

52
in West Bengal. The Committee in their 17 th Report on Demands for Grants (2013-14) had 
recommended that the UCs from the concerned organizations/departments must be obtained and 
also recommended to consider imposition of fines for inordinate delays in submission of the UCs. 
The Committee reiterate their above recommendation and urge the Ministry to keep strict vigil on 
the implementation/completion of various FMP schemes/projects being funded by Union 
Government and the timely submission of UCs by the concerned State Governments.
Reply of the Government
The Matter is being pursued with the States for expediting submission of UCs. During the 
45th meeting of GFCC held on 21st March 2014, States have been impressed upon to ensure 
timely submission of UCs. The subsequent release of central assistance to a State is linked to 
submission of UCs of fund releases to the State.
Recommendation (Para No. 34)
Indo-Bangladesh Co-operation 
The Committee note that the Indo-Bangladesh Joint Rivers Commission (JRC) was set up 
in 1972 which provides a platform for resolution of common problems related to development 
works on common/border rivers, causing no harm to either side. They also note that 37 meetings of 
JRC have been held so far whose outcome include Ganga Water Sharing Treaty, 1996 with 
Bangladesh. The Committee appreciate the work of JRC for solving common problems related to 
border rivers between India and Bangladesh. Noting that there are still a few common problems 
which defied resolution, viz. sharing of waters of common rivers like Teesta, Feni, etc., the 
Committee would like the Ministry to redouble its efforts for bringing mutually acceptable solution to 
persisting problems between India and  Bangladesh on sharing of waters of common rivers as 
stated above and apprise the Committee about the outcome thereof.
Reply of the Government
The Indo-Bangladesh Joint Rivers Commission (JRC) was set up in November 1972 to 
discuss and sort out the issues related to common/border rivers between India and Bangladesh. 
The setup provides a platform for resolution of common problems related to developmental works 
on common/border rivers, causing no harm to either side. Under the aegis of above Commission, 
the meetings are held at regular interval at various levels to discuss related issues. The decisions 
taken in such meetings are finally ratified by the Commission. 
Efforts are being made to resolve issues related to water sharing of Teesta, Feni Jaldhaka, 
Torsa, Manu, Muhuri, Khowai & Gumti rivers and to arrive at mutually acceptable solutions 
protecting interest of all stake holders.

53
Recommendation (Para No. 36)
Flood Protection Works on Kosi River 
The Committee note that the Kosi High Level Committee (KHLC) was constituted by the 
then Irrigation Department, Government of Bihar in 1978 under the chairmanship of Chairman, 
GFCC to review/examine the protection works already executed on the river and recommend 
protection measures to be taken before the next flood season. They further note that the 
Committee is inspecting every year the protection works taken up on the river and make 
recommendations regarding protection works to be executed by the State Governments on the 
river before the next flood season. However, a breach in the Eastern Afflux Bund at 12 kms. at 
Kusaha, Nepal occurred on 18.08.2008 in Kosi Barrage for which works for breach closure were 
taken up by the Government of India with an expenditure of Rs.115.00 crore during the years 
2008-09, 2009-10 and 2010-11. The Committee also note that the GFCC took a lead role in 
providing technical assistance in the Kosi breach closure works that were carried out in the Eastern 
Afflux bund of Kosi Barrage as well as monitoring of execution of works. No further breaches have 
occurred in the Kosi Barrage since 2008. As short-term measure to avoid recurrence of breaches 
in Kosi Barrage, the KHLC inspects the existing works on Kosi river every year and suggests 
necessary restoration works for implementation by the Government of Bihar. As long-term 
measures, five Multipurpose projects in Nepal are under various stages of finalization/studies. The 
Committee also note the submission of the Government that unless construction of reservoirs, i.e. 
high dams in the upstream of these rivers, is taken up, the flood problem cannot be solved fully. 
Noting that the short-term measure of flood protection works carried out by KHLC have been 
ineffective to solve flood problem, the Committee feel that the focus should be on long-term 
measures for flood control in respect of Kosi river. The Committee also note that the tenure of JPO-
SKSKI has been fixed upto February, 2015 for completing field investigations and preparation of 
DPRs for Sapta Kosi High Dam Multipurpose project and Sun Kosi Storage-cum-Diversion scheme 
at a revised cost of Rs.104.78 crore. The Committee desire to see the works pertaining to field 
investigations and preparation of these DPRs completed within the scheduled time without 
involving any further revision of cost so that the process for execution of these two projects be 
taken up in the near future. The Committee would like to be apprised of further action taken in this 
regard.
Reply of the Government
A Joint Team of Experts (JTE) reviews the progress, addresses the issues/ bottlenecks, if 
any, affecting the progress of the field works by way of taking corrective measures required for 
completion of ongoing field works and preparation of DPR from time to time. The next meeting of 
JTE is to be held at New Delhi and efforts are on to hold meeting at the earliest.
The achievements of milestones of the projects depend upon the political situation and law 
and order at the project site.

54
CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Para No. 3)
Creation of Storages for Increasing Utilization of Water 
The Committee note that only 63.28 BCM of the 250.00 BCM of utilisable surface water is 
presently utilised, indicating that an estimated 186.72 BCM of the basin’s utilisable surface water is 
going waste into the sea/neighbouring country which could be arrested for utilisation in the country. 
Further, an additional storage of 7.65 BCM would be created through projects which are under 
construction in the Ganga basin. The Committee also note the Ministry’s reply that water discharge 
from Ganga basin rivers into the sea/neighbouring country in ‘non lean season’ can be arrested 
with the creation of sufficient storages in upper catchment and transferring water from the water-
surplus river basins to the water-deficit river basins. In this connection, the Ministry informed the 
Committee that a continuous dialogue is being maintained by the Government of India with Nepal 
for building storage projects in Nepal, given the fact that due to topographical constraints (i.e. flat 
terrain), building storages in the Gangetic plain areas is not feasible. To concretise storage creation 
in Nepal, 5 projects viz. Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project, Sapta Kosi High Dam Multipurpose 
Project, Sun Kosi Storage-cum-Diversion Project, Kamala Dam Project and Bagmati Project have 
been identified by the Ministry. However, the Committee are dismayed to note that these storage 
projects are at conceptualization stage only. Further, whereas annual flood fury is ravaging Uttar 
Pradesh and Bihar year after year causing untold misery to the people, the progress report of the 
Ministry in this regard has been nothing but dismal. Whereas the field investigations for 
Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project have been reported to be completed, the field investigations for 
Sapta Kosi High Dam Multipurpose Project and Sun Kosi Storage-cum-Diversion Project and 
Feasibility Level study of Kamala Dam Project and Preliminary study of Bagmati Project in Nepal 
are still stated to be in progress. Taking due note of the gravity of the annual flood situation in Uttar 
Pradesh and Bihar, the Committee urge the Ministry to make sustained all-out efforts for 
accelerating the pace of implementation of the storage creation in Nepal. The Committee also 
recommend that the Ministry/GFCC draw up, in consultation with the State Governments of Uttar 
Pradesh and Bihar, detailed road-map for completion of each of the above 5 projects within given 
timelines under intimation to them.
Reply of the Government
As mentioned earlier, the survey & investigation works and preparation of Detailed Project 
Reports (DPRs) of Sapta Kosi High Dam Multipurpose Project, Sun Kosi Storage-cum- Diversion 
Project, Kamla Dam Project and Bagmati Projects are in progress. Some delay in works has been 

55
there mainly due to local disturbances and political instability in Nepal. The matter has been under 
discussion in bilateral meetings from time to time for early completion of works and finalisation of 
their DPRs. A Joint Team of Experts (JTE) reviews the progress, addresses the issues/ 
bottlenecks, if any, affecting the progress of the field works by way of taking corrective measures 
required for completion of ongoing field works and preparation of DPR and setting targets from 
time to time. The next meeting of JTE is to be held at New Delhi and efforts are on to hold meeting 
at the earliest.
With regard to Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project, it is to state that, TORs of the 
Pancheshwar Development Authority (PDA) are under finalisation in consultation with concerned 
Ministries. This Ministry has been pursuing the matter through DO letters to MEA and MOF (DOR) 
at Secretary Level. Hon’ble Minister has also taken up the matter through D.O. dated 26.06.14 with 
Hon’ble Prime Minister. However, some information is yet to be received from MOF (DOR). After 
receipt of the same, the matter would be taken to the appropriate platform for approval of TORs. 
The achievements of milestones on these projects depend upon the political situation and law and 
order in project area.
The States of Bihar, UP and Uttarakhand are represented in various committees/ bilateral 
mechanisms between India and Nepal appropriately according to their role in the ongoing works of 
these projects.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter-I of the Report)
Recommendation (Para No. 24)
Assessment of Flood Prone Areas by Expert Committee
According to the Ministry, an Expert Committee under the Chairman, Central Water 
Commission was constituted in July, 2012 for scientific assessment of flood-prone areas in the 
country. The Committee were apprised that the report of the Expert Committee was yet to be 
submitted although during its 2 nd meeting held on 27 June, 2013, the Expert Committee finalised
the methodology, classification and criterion to work out the assessment of flood-prone areas in the 
country. The Committee hope that the Expert Committee would expedite its report so that 
necessary follow up action is taken by the Government on the report of the Expert Committee. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome thereof. 
Reply of the Government
As stated, as a first step, regional Committees are to be constituted to achieve the set 
objectives. The Committees have been constituted in the four states namely Odisha, Andhra 

56
Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal. The other States are being persuaded for early constitution of 
the regional committees in the respective State/UT. In this regard, Regional Offices of CWC are in 
interaction with the Officers of State Governments.
Comments of the Committee
(Please see Para No. 30 of Chapter-I of the Report)

57
CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED  
Recommendation (Para No. 6)
Flood-affected Areas and Magnitude of Damage 
The Committee note that devastating flood is a recurring feature in the 11 Ganga basin 
States. The Committee observe that the XII th Plan Working Group of Flood Management and 
Region Specific Issues compiled the maximum flood effected area in the country as 49.815 million 
hectare, out of which flood affected area for Ganga basin States was compiled as 23.728 million 
hectare viz. Bihar (4.986 mha), Jharkhand (0.266 mha), Madhya Pradesh (0.377 mha), 
Chhattisgarh (0.089 mha), Uttar Pradesh (7.34 mha), Uttarakhand (0.002 mha), Delhi (0.458 mha), 
Haryana (1.000 mha), Rajasthan (3.260 mha), Himachal Pradesh (2.870 mha), and West Bengal 
(3.080 mha). Regarding the magnitude of losses caused by recurring floods, the Committee 
observe that between 2000 to 2012, 200.312 million population were affected and a total damage 
of crops, houses and public utilities amounting to Rs.36,744.142 crore has been caused in the 11 
Ganga basin States. The Committee also note that the recurring flood scene in Ganga basin States 
are due to high intensity rains falling in short duration, heavy rains of long duration, high flows from 
upper hilly regions, inadequate river capacity and inadequate river embankments, etc. The Ministry 
could not furnish the information regarding: (i) the average annual rain fall, total cropped area, flood 
prone area and flood protected area in the Ganga basin in 1972 and as on 18.10.2013, and (ii) the 
proportion of the total flood prone area falling under cropped area, saying that the same were being 
collected. Reiterating the need for compiling such a vital information for policy planning and 
programme execution, the Committee recommend that the desired information may be furnished to 
the Committee within  three months of the  presentation of  this  report along with details of relief 
and rehabilitation package given to the flood affected areas in Ganga basin during the last 5 years, 
year-wise.
Reply of the Government
The state-wise data of average annual rainfall supplied by India Meteorological Department 
(IMD) and flood affected area/ cropped area (tentative) in Ganga Basin States in the years 1972 
and 2013 are given in Annexure-1. Figures in respect of flood protected/ benefitted area in 1972 
are as per the report of Rashtriya Barh Ayog published in 1978, whereas, corresponding data for 
2013 is not available. However, figures of benefitted area compiled by the Working Group on Flood 
Management and Region Specific Issues upto March 2011 have been given in the Annexure-1.
The Government of India has constituted State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) in each 
State for providing immediate relief to the people affected by the notified natural disasters. The 
contribution of Centre and State Governments are in the ratio of 75:25 for general category States 

58
and 90:10 for special category States. In case, the State does not have adequate balance in the 
SDRF, additional assistance is provided from National Disaster response Fund (NDRF). At 
present, 12 natural disasters including floods are covered under grant from SDRF/NDRF. However, 
this Ministry does not maintain disaster-wise or district-wise expenditure booked from SDRF. The 
state-wise allocation of State Disaster response Fund (SDRF) by Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) 
during 2010-2015 is at Annexure-5. The information about relief and rehabilitation packages given 
to flood affected areas is being collected from the Ganga basin States and would be provided in 
due course.
Recommendation (Para No. 7)
Scientific Assessment of Flood Prone Areas
The Committee note that the Ministry of Water Resources has constituted an Expert 
Committee for scientific assessment of flood-prone areas in the country and it has also been 
decided to set up Regional Committees for compilation and assessment of State-wise flood-prone 
areas. The Committee would like to see a speedy completion of the process of setting up Regional 
Committees for compilation and assessment of State-wise flood-prone areas. They also desire to 
be apprised about the report of the Expert Committee set up for scientific assessment of flood 
prone areas in the country as and when it is presented. 
Reply of the Government
As stated, regional Committees are to be constituted to achieve the set objectives. The 
Committees have been constituted in the four states namely Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar and 
West Bengal. The other States are being persuaded for early constitution of the regional 
committees in the respective State/UT for speedy completion of the study. As and when more such 
Committees are constituted, same would be brought to notice of the Committee.
Recommendation (Para No. 10)
Role of Global Climate Change in Ganga Basin Flood
The Committee note with alarm that a study made by the Indian Network of Climate 
Change Assessment (INCCA), a network-based scientific programme of Ministry of Environment 
and Forests (MoEF), on the impact of climate change on water resources in four regions of the 
country including the Himalayan region indicated that the flooding could vary from 10 percent to 
over 30 percent of the existing magnitudes in most of the regions by 2030. They also note that the 
Ministry of Water Resources is also currently taking up basin level studies in this regard, and that 
the Central Water Commission (CWC) has taken up two studies, i.e. (i) Inventory and monitoring of 
glacial lakes and water bodies in Himalayas affecting India and (ii) development of snowmelt-runoff 
models with the National Remote Sensing Centre, Hyderabad to which the National Institute of 
Hydrology is providing necessary inputs. The National Water Policy, 2012 underlines the need for 

59
factoring the input of climate change into all projects. The policy also envisages that planning and 
management of water resources structures such as dams, flood embankments, tidal 
embankments, etc., should incorporate coping strategies for possible climate change. The Ministry 
has constituted a Committee to review the guidelines for preparation of Detailed Project Reports 
(DPR) incorporating the aspect of climate change. The Committee therefore recommend that the 
process of reviewing the guidelines for DPRs be completed expeditiously and corrective measures 
taken urgently to ward off or minimise the adverse impact of climate change on the river basin 
systems. 
Reply of the Government
A study on the impact of climate change on water resources has been initiated and the 
parameters governing the impact are yet to be quantified and authenticated. 
Till the factors responsible are suitably incorporated in the guidelines and parameters are 
quantified, the data series as available at or near the project location is studied in establishing the 
water availability and other water related parameters for planning of project, which account for 
variability in the water flow characteristics.  
Recommendation (Para No. 11)
Objectives and Functions of GFCC
The Committee observe that the Ganga Flood Control Commission (GFCC), a subordinate 
office of Ministry of Water Resources was created in 1972 to act as the Secretariat and executive 
limb of the Ganga Flood Control Board (GFCB) and to deal with the floods and its management in 
the Ganga basin States. With its headquarters located at Patna, the mandate of the GFCC 
includes examination of all major and medium flood control, drainage, anti-water logging and anti-
erosion schemes of the Ganga basin States except for the schemes of the States of Haryana, Uttar 
Pradesh and Delhi on the river Yamuna in the reach from Tajewala to Okhla barrage. The 
Committee also note that the GFCC has undertaken studies for assessment of adequacy of 
waterways under the road and rail bridges aimed at determining additional waterways required for 
reducing drainage congestion to a reasonable limit. This study has been completed for all 23 river 
systems in the Ganga basin except the Tidal River System and the Ganga Main Stem. For the 
Ganga Main Stem, the study has been completed for the stretch between Haridwar and outfall. 
These reports have been circulated to the Ganga basin States and the concerned departments of 
the Union and State Governments including the Ministry of Railways for follow up action. The 
Committee desire that the study be undertaken / completed at the earliest in respect of the Tidal 
River System and the remaining part of the Ganga Main Stem as well. They also further desire the 
Ministry to keep a tab on follow up action taken by the concerned Ganga basin States/Departments 
of Union and State Governments including the Ministry of Railways in this regard.

60
Reply of the Government
The study with regard to adequacy of waterways under road and rail bridges in respect of 
tidal river system and remaining part of Ganga Main Stem is being planned and proposed to be 
completed by the end of Financial Year 2015-16. The action required to be undertaken by the 
Ganga Basin States/Departments of Union including the Ministry of Railways on the 
recommendations of the studies already completed was discussed in 45 th Meeting of Ganga Flood 
Control Commission held on 21 st March, 2014. The States were requested to appraise the present 
status vis-à-vis the recommendations.  The same is awaited.  The matter is being actively pursued 
with the states/ other departments for early submission of information.
Recommendation (Para No. 27)
Enquiry into Disastrous Flood of Uttarakhand
The Committee note the reply of the Ministry that the disastrous flood of Uttarakhand in 
2013 was due to combination of one or more factors, i.e. (i) melting rate of glacier being high 
during the period, (ii) unprecedented early, prolonged and heavy to very heavy rainfall in the 
catchment areas, and (iii) occurrence of snowfall prior to rainfall which melted rapidly due to 
rainfall. As per the information of the Ministry, 1,08,653 persons were affected, 580 people killed, 
4,726 houses fully damaged, and 9,470 cattle were lost. Responding to the Committee's query, the 
Ministry further informed that the Central Water Commission had issued timely (water) level 
forecasts to the local administration for the stations located at Rishikesh and Haridwar, besides 
sharing the water-level data of 11 other stations in the State with the State Government. The 
Ministry also claimed that India Meteorological Department (IMD) had issued forecast for heavy 
rainfall in Uttarakhand during 14th to 18th June, 2013. However, the Committee are pained to note 
that in spite of the claims by the Ministry, a disaster of such a magnitude took place in the Ganga 
basin, leaving behind unprecedented destruction and misery in its trail. The Committee are of the 
firm view that with increased efforts and research by India Meteorological Department along with 
stepping up of periodic monitoring of glacial lakes and water bodies in Himalayas by the National 
Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC), Hyderabad, advance information regarding occurrence of such 
natural calamities can be gathered and passed on to concerned authorities in time to avoid or 
minimize the loss of life and property as a result thereof. Notably, the present form of periodical 
monitoring of glacial lakes and water bodies does not help in fast changing weather triggered 
natural catastrophe such as cloud bursts. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry 
should step up its coordination with associated organisations/departments like Central Water 
Commission, India Meteorological Department, National Institute of Hydrology, National Remote 
Sensing Centre (NRSC), etc., for undertaking appropriate research into such climatic phenomenon 
as cloud bursts, rainfall pattern, snow melt pattern, etc., in the Himalayas so that the results may 
be gainfully utilised for making better/more accurate weather predictions thereby helping the 
concerned departments/ organsiations to make advance preparations for natural catastrophe as 
occurred in Uttarakhand. The Committee also note that the Ministry of Water Resources has set up 

61
a Committee under Chairman, GFCC to find out the causes for severe destruction in Uttarakhand 
due to flood and erosion during 16-17 June, 2013 and that the report has already been submitted 
by the Committee. The Committee desire the Ministry to take appropriate action on the 
recommendations of this report and apprise them accordingly.
Reply of the Government
A proposal for monitoring of glacial lakes and water bodies in Himalayan region is under 
formulation in CWC/MoWR. The proposal includes establishing of well-equipped Glacial Lakes 
monitoring Cell in CWC with a view to have better coordination & knowledge sharing amongst the 
expert institutions namely CWC, NRSC, GSI, Ministry of Earth Sciences, India Meteorological 
Department, Survey of India, National Institute Hydrology and National Disaster Management 
Authority etc. CWC would undertake glacial lakes outbursts flood studies and would formulate 
advisory sheets for State Governments and other stakeholders using mathematical modelling 
software e.g. MIKE11 etc. on monthly basis which, later on, will be attempted on weekly basis.
Further, the report of the Committee to find out the causes for severe destruction in 
Uttarakhand due to flood and erosion during 16-17 June, 2013 has been sent to the State 
Government in January 2014 for taking further action on the implementation of the 
recommendations given in the report.  The Committee would be kept apprised of status of action 
taken by State Government thereupon.
Recommendation (Para No. 28)
Flood Plain Zoning
The Committee note that the flood plain zoning measures aim at demarcating zones or 
areas likely to be affected by floods of different magnitudes or frequencies of probability levels and 
specify the types of permissible development in these zones so that whenever the floods actually 
occur, the damage can be minimized. However, although a Model Draft Bill for Flood Plain Zoning 
Legislation was circulated by the Union Government to all the States in 1975 for implementation of 
Flood Plain Zoning approach, only the States of Manipur, Rajasthan and Uttarakhand have 
enacted legislations about Flood Plain Zoning. Regarding the progress of implementation of Flood 
Plain Zoning legislation in Ganga basin States, the Committee note that only the States of 
Uttarakhand and Rajasthan have enacted the Bill. Uttarakhand is taking steps for implementation 
of the Bill while the enactment is kept in abeyance by Uttar Pradesh. Curiously enough, the States 
of Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh and NCT Delhi have not felt the requirement of the Bill, whereas it 
is under consideration in Himachal Pradesh and West Bengal. Besides, the State of Bihar informed 
its inability to enact the Bill in view of large flood-affected area whereas views of Chhattisgarh are 
stated to be awaited. The State of Haryana has not enacted the Bill but informed about the 
necessary administrative measures taken for Flood Plain Zoning. The Committee also note that at 
the 16th meeting of Ganga Flood Control Board (GFCB) held on 16.01.2013, the Hon'ble Union 

62
Minister of Water Resources observed that 'the present draft Bill for Flood Plain Zoning is quite old 
and needs revision'. The Union Minister, therefore, requested the Member States to send their 
suggestions expressing their views within a month or so to enable the same to be considered for 
revising the draft Bill. The Committee further note that at the GFCC meeting held on 12.03.2013, 
the Member States were reminded to send their views in this regard to GFCC at the earliest and 
also that the Ministry has proposed to get Digital Elevation Maps  (DEMs) for flood-affected areas 
of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal in the XII th Plan, which may be used to demarcate 
various flood zones. The Committee therefore, recommend that the Ministry take vigorous steps for 
persuading the remaining States to enact the necessary legislation in this regard without delay. 
Further, the Committee would like the Ministry to coordinate with these State Governments to 
ensure that, pending enactment of legislation in this regard, they take necessary administrative 
measures to prevent further encroachment of areas located in the flood plain zone. The Committee 
also  recommend that apart from Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal, other States of the Ganga 
basin may also be included in the proposed Digital Elevation Maps (DEMs) for the flood-affected 
areas.
Reply of the Government
The matter is being taken up with State Governments for enactment of necessary 
legislation by them and also to have DEM for flood affected areas of Ganga Basin.
As mentioned in reply to para 26 of Part-II, during 12th Plan, it is proposed to take up the 
work of preparation of topographical maps in digital format i.e Digital Elevation Modelling (DEM) for 
an area of 200000 sq. Km for the States of UP, Bihar and West Bengal. Survey of India has 
indicated a cost of Rs.400 crore for this work. A provision of Rs.400 crore has been made in the 
revised EFC for Modernisation of Flood Forecasting Network of CWC which is under process of 
approval by the Government of India. The proposal is yet to be cleared by EFC. Such work may be 
taken up for the other States of Ganga basin later on, depending upon the need and experience 
gained in the three States.
Recommendation (Para No. 30)
Evaluation Study of Flood Management Programme Implemented during XI Plan
The Committee note that the performance evaluation of the schemes operated by the 
Ministry of Water Resources during X th plan for funding of flood/erosion control projects was got 
done through the Indian Institute of Public administration  (IIPA)  and  that  action  for  
performance  evaluation  study  for  Flood Management Programme implemented during XI th Plan, 
has been initiated by the Ministry of Water Resources. The Committee would like to see early 
completion of the study by the Ministry in this regard.

63
Reply of the Government
The outcome of the said study would be made available to the Hon’ble Committee when it 
is completed. 
NEW DELHI;
            19 December, 2014
       28 Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka)
HUKUM SINGH,
Chairman,
Standing Committee on Water Resources.

64
APPENDIX-I
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES              
(2014-2015) HELD ON FRIDAY, 19 DECEMBER, 2014
The Committee sat from 1000 hours to 1030 hours in Committee Room 'E', Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Hukum Singh – Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Devusinh Chauhan 
3. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
4. Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuria
5. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee
6. Shri Murali Mohan Maganti
7. Shri Lallu Singh
8. Shri Rodmal Nagar 
9. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
10. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah 
11. Smt. Sathyabama V. 
12. Shri Vinod Kumar B.
13. Shri Sanjay Kaka Patil 
14. Shri Vijaysinh Shankarao Mohite Patil 
15. Shri L.K.Vaghela

65
      
            RAJYA SABHA
16. Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
17. Prof. Mrinal Miri
18. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
19. Shri A.V. Swamy
20 . Shri Lal Singh Vadodia 
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. K. Singh - Joint Secretary
2. Shri S. Chatterjee - Director
3. Smt. Rita Jailkhani - Additional Director
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee convened for 
consideration and adoption of (i) Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2014-15) of the Ministry of Water 
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation, and (ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations of the Committee contained in the 21 st Report (15 th Lok 
Sabha) on "Review of Ganga Flood Control Commission".
2. Thereafter, the Committee took up the above two draft Reports for consideration.  After some discussion, 
the Committee adopted the Reports with slight modifications/amendments. 
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairman to finalise the Reports in the light of verbal and consequential 
changes arising out of factual verification by the Ministry and to present the Reports to both the Houses of 
Parliament.
The Committee then adjourned

66
APPENDIX II
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction]
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/
OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
TWENTY FIRST REPORT (FIFTEENTH LOK SABHA)
OF THE COMMITTEE
(i) Total number of Recommendations/Observations 36
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which have been 
accepted by the Government
Para Nos. 1,2,4,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,23,25,26,32,33 and 35
Total 19
Percentage 53%
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not  desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies
Para Nos. 5,8,9,22,29,31,34 and 36
Total 8
Percentage 22%
(iv) Recommendations/Observations  in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Para Nos. 3 and 24
Total 2
Percentage 6%
(v) Recommendations/Observations  in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited  
Para Nos. 6,7,10,11,27,28 and 30
Total 7
Percentage 19%