  
 
  
 
7 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2015-16) 
                 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                     
                 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES,  RIVER DEVELOPMENT  AND GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2015-16) 
        [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third 
 Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the  Standing Comm ittee on Water Resources] 
         
         
SEVENTH REPORT 
  
 
         
            
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
December, 2015, /Pausha,1937 (Saka)  

  
 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2015-16)  
          
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES,  RIVER DEVELOPMENT  AND GANGA REJUVENATION 
   
  DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2015-16) 
  
    [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third  Report  
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the  Standing Committee on Water Resources] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.12.2015  
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 22.12.2015 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI  
                 
        December, 2015, /Pausha,1937 (Saka)  
 
 

  
 
WRC No. 38 
         
         
         
         
         
         
        
         
         
Price :  Rs.  
         
         
         
      
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
         
        © 2012 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha  
(Fourteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 

  
 
 
CONTENTS     
Page No.(s) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2015-16)       (iii) 
   
INTRODUCTION           (v)  
CHAPTER I -      Report         
   
CHAPTER II  - Recommendations/Observations which have been acce pted by    22 
  the Government 
             
  
CHAPTER III  - Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire   34 
  to pursue in view of the Government's replies  
           
CHAPTER IV  - Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government  36 
  have not been accepted by the Committee  
     
CHAPTER V  - Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final reply of the Government  42 
   is still awaited        
 
Annexures 
  I  State-Wise Details Of Grant Released And Utili zed In Respect Of 
Minor Irrigation Schemes Under Aibp During Xi Plan 
                   43 
  II State-Wise Details Of Grant Released And Utilized  In Respect Of 
Minor Irrigation Schemes Under Aibp During Xii Plan 
 44 
  III X Plan (Pilot scheme) of  Repair, Renovation and Restoration 
(RRR) of water bodies 
   45 
  IV Details of World Bank assisted Projects on Repair, Renovation and 
Restoration of Water Bodies 
    46 
  V   Details of water bodies taken up for revival,  fund released and number                    52 
   of water bodies completed  under the scheme of R RR during XI Plan as  
   on 31.03.2015         
  
VI   The details of water bodies approved during XI I Plan and their progress   53 
   as on March 2015 
 
VII   Action plan for replacement of Gates of Farak ka Barrage Project   54 
VIII   Indicative Budgetary Outlay & Allocation      55 
 

  
 
 
 
Appendices 
 
I Minutes of the Third sitting of the Committee hel d on 17 December, 2015.  59 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on th e Recommendations / Observations  61 
 Contained In the Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha ) of the Committee 
 

  
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE  STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES (2015-16) 
  
  Shri Hukum Singh  -  Chairperson 
 LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Radheshyam Biswas 
3. Shri Devusinh Jesingbhai Chauhan 
4. Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunpuria 
5. Shri Tariq Hameed Karra 
6. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
7. Shri Maganti Murali Mohan 
8. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
9. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
10. Shri Rodmal Nagar 
11. Shri Subhash Patel 
12. Shri Sanjaykaka Ramchandra Patil 
13. Shri Vijaysinh Mohite Patil 
14. Smt. Aparupa Poddar 
15. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
16. Shri S. P. Y. Reddy 
17. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah 
18. Smt. V. Sathyabama 
19. Shri Lallu Singh 
20. Shri Liladharbhai Vaghela 
21. Smt. Dimple Yadav 
              
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22. Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
23. Shri Anil Madhav Dave 
24.         Smt. Naznin Faruque 
25. Mir Mohammad Fayaz 
26. Shri Sanjiv Kumar 
27. Prof. Mrinal Miri 
28.  Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
29. Shri Amar Shankar Sable 
30. Shri A.V. Swamy  
31. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  

  
 
   
   
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri Shiv Kumar   -  Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Rita Jailkhani  -  Director 
3.  Shri Kushal Sarkar  -  Additional Director 
4.  Smt. Shanta Datta Bannerjee -  Sr. Committee Assis tant 

  
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Re sources (2015-2016) having been authorised by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, pre sent the Seventh Report on the Action Taken by Gove rnment on 
the observations / recommendations contained in the Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee 
on Water Resources (2014-2015) on Demands for Grant s (2015-2016) of the Ministry of Water Resources, R iver 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation.  
2. The Third Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 27 April, 2 015.  
The replies of the Government to all the recommenda tions contained in the Report were received on 04 S eptember, 
2015. 
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and adopted by the 
Committee at their sitting held on 17 December, 2015. 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Governmen t on the observations / recommendations contained i n 
the Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Appendix-II. 
 
    NEW DELHI;                 HUKUM SINGH, 
   17 December, 2015 
                          Chairperson,  
   26 Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka)                    Standing Committee on Water Resources  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

  
 
 CHAPTER I  
REPORT 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Res ources deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations of t he Committee contained in their Third Report 
(Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on "Demands for Grants (2015- 16) of the Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development  and Ganga Rejuvenation",  which was presented to Lok Sabha on 27 April, 2015. 
 2. Action taken notes, received from the Governmen t in respect of all the twelve 
observations/recommendations of the Committee, have been categorised as follows:- 
 (i) Recommendations/Observations which have been a ccepted by the Government: 
  Para nos. 1.33, 1.34, 1.36, 3.5, 4.12, 6.20, 6.21  and 6.22    (Total-8) 
 (ii) Recommendations/ Observations which the Commi ttee do not desire to pursue in  
   view of the Government's replies: 
  Para Nos. 5.10                (Total-1) 
 (iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of w hich replies of the Government  
   have not been accepted by the Committee: 
  Para Nos. 1.35, 2.16 and 2.17             (Total- 3) 
 (iv) Recommendation/Observation in respect of whic h final reply of the Government is  
   still awaited: 
  NIL                (Total-NIL) 
 3. The Committee will now deal with the action tak en by the Government on some of the 
observations/ recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 
  

  
 
A. Budget Allocations and Expenditure Finance Commi ttee (EFC) approvals 
Recommendation (Para No. 1.33) 
 4. The Committee observed that total budgetary all ocation for the year 2015-16 was kept at 
Rs. 6,381.03 crore which indicated a substantial re duction of Rs. 8,994.71 crore as compared to budget ary 
allocations for 2014-15 and showing a reduction of Rs. 1,453.88 crore over the RE of 2014-15. The reas on 
cited for the huge reduction in the allocated funds  at the Revised Estimate stage during 2014-15 was c ited 
to be the non-approval of new Schemes introduced in  the year 2014-15 and Schemes transferred from the 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to the MoWR, RD&GR. Also due to non-submission of 
Project Proposals under the Central Sector Schemes by State Governments, till September 2014, funds 
remained unallocated, resulting in curtailment of f unds at RE stage. However, from the data on budgeta ry 
and revised allocations and actual expenditure incu rred for the last three years, it was observed that  
budgetary estimates were never in conformity with t he actual requirement of funds and, therefore, were  
always scaled down at the RE stage, a fact admitted  by the Secretary during his evidence. Taking 
cognisance of this fact, the Committee had been rep eatedly recommending the Ministry to revisit its 
budgeting exercise. The plea put forth by Ministry in this regard was that the pace of expenditure was  slow 
in the beginning of the year due to non-completion of formalities/procedures. By the time these proced ures 
were in place, the Ministry of Finance revised allo cation. While noting the submission that budgetary 
estimates were based on approvals of EFC/Cabinet no te and works carried forward from the previous 
years, the Committee found that the Ministry had no t been able to resolve the problem of completing 
formalities/procedures/getting approvals in time on  account of which funds remained unutilized for a 
substantial time period. The Committee therefore, r ecommended that Ministry should give serious though t 
to the issue of Schemes/Programmes remaining unimpl emented before making projections for the year 
ahead. They also recommended the Ministry to plan i n advance for launching of Schemes and ensure that 
all procedures/systems were put in place before mak ing budgetary provisions while desiring to be appri sed 
of the details of measures taken in this regard. Th e Committee further recommended that grants given t o 
States viz  the North East Region, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & K ashmir and Uttranchal under Minor 

  
 
Irrigation schemes should be utilised promptly and necessary steps be taken by the Ministry to persuad e 
the State Governments for full utilisation of Grant s/Central assistance to such States specially Jammu  & 
Kashmir. 
  5. The Ministry of Water Resources, River Developm ent  and Ganga Rejuvenation in their 
action taken reply, vide OM. No. 5/3/2015-Bud. Date d 02.09.2015 have stated that they 
have prepared 
Work Plan for the year 2015-16 to monitor timely im plementation of Plan schemes and budgetary provisio n 
of 2015-16.  Further, Hon’ble Minister (WR,RD&GR) h as been  monitoring and reviewing the progress of 
the schemes on weekly basis. 
It has been further stated that the grants released  to States of the North East region, Himachal 
Pradesh, J&K and Uttarakhand and its utilisation du ring XI Plan and XII Plan under Minor Irrigation 
Schemes is enclosed at Annexures-I & II . A total amount of 5191.90 crore and Rs 2721.28 cro re as grant 
have been released during XI & XII Plan respectivel y to these states under MI Schemes. The total 
utilisation was Rs 5755.90 crore and 3215.36 crore respectively during XI & XII Plan - which makes it 
evident that the utilisation of Central grants by these states has been outstanding.  
 
Regarding J&K, total grant and utilisation during X I Plan was 835.18 crore and Rs 927.98 crore 
respectively. During XII Plan, it stands at Rs 263.51 crore and Rs 267.45 crore respectively. 
 
The Ministry have also stated that the recommendati ons of the Committee have been noted for 
compliance. 
 6.  The Committee observe that the Ministry have prepar ed a Work Plan for the year 2015-16 to 
monitor timely implementation of Plan schemes and b udgetary provision of 2015-16.  Further the 
Hon'ble Minister, Ministry of Water Resources, Rive r Development  and Ganga Rejuvenation is also 
monitoring and reviewing the progress of the scheme s on weekly basis. The Committee are happy 

  
 
to note that under the scheme of Minor Irrigation, the States of North East Region, Himachal 
Pradesh and Uttarakhand have made full utilisation of Central Grant of Rs. 5191.90 crore released 
during XI Plan and Rs. 2721.28 crore released durin g XII Plan so far.  The total utilisation of funds 
by these States was Rs. 5755.90 crore during XI Pla n and Rs. 3215.36 crore during XII Plan so far.  
They also appreciate  that the State of Jammu & Kas hmir also registered full utilisation of the funds 
released to the State for the purpose by the Centre during the XI and XII Five year plans. 
 While appreciating the measures taken by the Minis try to ensure full utilisation of budgetary 
allocations, the Committee find that the details of the work plan such as targets of expenditure fixed 
under each Head, progress of expenditure made so fa r and cases of savings/surrender of funds, if 
any, etc. have not been furnished. The Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised of the details 
of the Work Plan for the year 2015-2016 and its imp lementation including its effectiveness in 
reducing the underutilisation of funds so far - in the current financial year. 
 
B.  Data Bank and Information System on Water Resou rces 
Recommendation (Para No. 1.34) 
7. The Committee were informed that the average ann ual water availability in the country as per the 
assessment carried out by the Central Water Commiss ion(CWC) in 1993, is 1,869 billion cubic meters 
(BCM), out of which the utilizable water with conve ntional approach is 1,121 BCM, consisting of 690 BC M 
of surface water - out of which 450 BCM is being ut ilized for various purposes, as per the estimation of 
CWC in 2009. Similarly the Central Ground Water Boa rd (CGWB) also estimated in 2009 that out of the 
431 BCM of replenishable ground water resources, on ly about 243 BCM of ground water were being 
utilized. The Committee further noted that administ rative approval and expenditure sanction for 
reassessment of water availability in 19 basins, ha d been obtained, and CWC was in the process of 
procuring the required hardware and software for th e study at that point in time. The Committee were 

  
 
surprised to find that the current data on availabi lity of water resources was more than 22 years old.  They 
were of the considered view that formulation of pol icy for the development and management of water 
resources, on the basis of such outdated data, cann ot be reliable and is bound to be faulty. The Commi ttee 
desired that assessment of water resources should b e undertaken periodically preferably every five yea rs. 
They also desired that the current exercise for ass essment of water resources should be completed at t he 
earliest and they should be apprised of the action taken in this regard. The Committee further noted that the 
Ministry is preparing fresh EFC proposal for creati on of National Water Information Centre (NWIC) whic h 
will process, organise and provide up-to-date data and information on water resources and allied theme s in 
public domain and develop value added products and services for integrated water resources 
management. The Committee, therefore, recommended the Ministry to initiate concrete steps at the earliest 
for the setting up of NWIC which will serve as pivo tal centre for management of water resource and  
apprise them of the action taken in this regard. 
8. The Ministry of Water Resources, River Developme nt  and Ganga Rejuvenation in their action 
taken reply, vide OM. No. 5/3/2015-Bud. Dated 2.9.2 015 have stated the following with regard to 
assessment of Water Resources: 
 i. One of the strategies (Strategy No. 1.6 a) iden tified for implementation under the 
 Comprehensive Mission Document of National Water M ission is Reassessment of basin wise water 
 situation under present scenario by using latest t echniques. 
 ii. In June, 2010, the National Remote Sensing Cen tre (NRSC) and Central Water 
 Commission  (CWC) jointly initiated pilot studies in Godavari and Brahmani-Baitarani river 
 basins wherein Space  based geo-spatial inputs wer e used to estimate basin-level mean annual 
 water resources.  The pilot study was completed in  June, 2013. 
 iii. A Committee was constituted by MoWR under the  Chairmanship of Chairman, CWC in 
 May 2011 for reassessment of water resources avail ability in all the river basins of the country 

  
 
 using modern technology and GIS inputs.  The Commi ttee comprised of experts from IITs, NIH, 
 IMD, CGWB, NRSC and CWC.  The Terms of Reference o f the Committee were: 
a. Re-assessment of the water resources of the country. 
b. Suggestions for regular mechanism for periodic re-assessment of the water  
 resources. 
 iv. The Committee had suggested some refinements i n the methodology adopted for pilot 
studies  and replicating the studies in another19 r iver basins of India (including Godavari and Brahma ni- 
Baitarani - basins in which pilot studies have been  carried out and excluding area of Inland drainage in 
 Rajasthan, which has negligible water resources). The Committee also desired that periodic 
 reassessment of water resources in India should be  carried out at an interval of 10 years. 
 v.  Accordingly, the CWC submitted a proposal for carrying out the reassessment studies. The 
 proposal is not only for carrying out one time rea ssessment of water resources potential but also to 
 develop infrastructure and capacity within the CWC  for carrying out such studies periodically. 
 vi. MoWR, RD & GR vide their letter dated 30.01.20 15 have conveyed the approval for the 
 study and the process of procurement of the requis ite software/hardware has been initiated.  A one 
 week customized training course has also been orga nized by NRSC for CWC officials in May 2015.  
 Currently hardware procurement is underway. 
National Water Information Centre 
 
 The status of the action taken for setting up of p roposed National Water Information Centre (NWIC) 
during 12 th  plan has been furnished as under: 
(i) A Committee formed under the chairmanship of Additi onal Secretary (WR, RD & GR) for making 
recommendation on structure of NWIC in January 2014 , has recommended its creation as a 
society.  Accordingly, EFC note for creation of the  suggested structure and filling up the posts 
is being circulated. 

  
 
(ii) Once the NWIC has been set up, its operationalizati on will be covered under National Hydrology 
Project.  
 9. The Committee  observe that a Committee headed b y the Chairman, CWC in May 2011 had 
suggested some refinements in the methodology adopt ed for pilot studies in the Godavari and 
Brahmani - Baitarni basins and replicate the studie s in another 19 river basins of India.  It also 
decided that periodic reassessment of the Water res ources in India should be carried out at an 
interval of 10 years.  The Committee further note t hat accordingly CWC has initiated the proposal 
for developing infrastructure and capacity within C WC for carrying out reassessment study and 
periodic assessment of availability of water at an interval of 10 years, which has been approved by 
the Ministry, and process of procurement of requisi te software/hardware for the purpose has 
started.  Regarding the establishment of National W ater Information Centre (NWIC), the Committee 
observe that a EFC note for the creation of structu re and filling up the posts is also being 
circulated.   
 While  appreciating the fact that required steps f or assessment of water resources in the 
country have been taken, the Committee find that th e period by which the study will be completed 
and data will be available to the public has not be en specified.  The Committee are of the 
considered view that CWC should carry out this work  including creation of supporting 
infrastructure and capacity in a time bound manner so as to enable formulation of water 
management policies based on the ground situation.  The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the findings of the study undertaken for the reassessment of water resources in the country. 
10. Expressing serious concern over the slow pace o f work on creation of the NWIC, the 
Committee recommend the Ministry to take the task o f setting up the NWIC with utmost urgency.  
They would also, however, like to be apprised of th e role of the NWIC - in periodic 
estimation/assessment and processing of the data on water resources in the Country. 
 

  
 
C. Under utilisation of funds under River Basin Man agement Scheme 
Recommendation (Para No. 1.35) 
11. The Committee observed that the scheme of River  Basin Management was formulated during the 
year 2013-14 by merging the earlier Schemes of Rive r Basin Organisation and Investigation of Water 
Resources Development. Besides, restructuring of th e CWC and Brahmaputra Board were also under the 
purview of this Scheme. The Committee found that th e budgetary allocations for this scheme reduced by 
more than Rs. 100 crore at the revised stage due to  lower allocation of funds by the Ministry of Finan ce; as 
some aspects of projects such as works pertaining t o the Survey and Investigation of some of the proje cts 
of Inter-linking of Rivers, major and medium irriga tion projects, flood management and anti-erosion, c ould 
not take off due to local hindrances, forest/enviro nment related issues and other administrative reaso ns. 
The Committee were disappointed over the fact that a substantial amount of fund remained unutilised ye ar 
after year due to faulty approach of the Ministry. They were of the considered opinion that a well co-
ordinated approach and proper planning on part of the Ministry was necessary to ensure better utilisation of 
funds. The Committee therefore, recommended the Min istry to identify the area specific problems and 
resolve them in consultation with respective Govern ments so that the proposed projects could be speedi ly 
executed and finished. 
12. The Committee were further unhappy to find that  re-structuring of the CWC had not yet been 
undertaken due to disagreement on some observations of the Ministry of Finance. They observed that after 
deliberations with the Ministry of Finance, the rev ised proposal for re-structuring would be submitted . The 
Committee expressed displeasure with the tardy pace  of execution of the re-structuring exercise, which  is 
crucial for enabling the CWC to discharge its functions for development and management of water resource 
in a holistic manner.  
13. The Ministry of Water Resources, River Developm ent  and Ganga Rejuvenation in their action 
taken reply, vide O.M. No. 5/3/2015-Bud. Dated 2.9. 2015 have stated the following reasons for 
underutilisation of funds under the scheme of River Basin Management:  

  
 
 (i)  Investigation of Water Resources Development Scheme : 
 
Investigation of Water Resources Development Scheme  (CWC) is one of the components under 
12 th  Plan River Basin Management (RBM) Scheme.  An expe nditure of Rs. 14.55 cr was incurred in FY 
2013-14 against an allocation of Rs. 26.80 cr (BE) and Rs. 15.44 cr (RE). 
The BE: 2013-14 has been kept towards activities related to survey, investigation for preparation of 
DPR of water resources projects (ongoing and new pr ojects) as per priorities earmarked in the EFC 
document, which was awaiting approval of CCEA, at t he time when BE proposal were formulated and 
submitted viz., during October 2012.  The provision  for budget was kept for implementation of various 
activities like topographical surveys, geotechnical  investigations, design and special studies as per 
provisions made in scheme expecting that scheme wou ld be approved and significant duration of financia l 
year would be available for implementation of these activities.   
However, the Central Plan scheme was approved in Ap ril 2014 after lapse of FY: 2013-14 leaving 
no time for implementation of proposed activities o n new projects.  Therefore only Survey & Investigat ion 
and preparation of DPR work of ongoing projects wer e carried out.  Accordingly, RE: 2013-14 proposal, 
which was framed in September 2013, was reduced fro m Rs. 26.8 Cr. to Rs. 15.44 Cr. to provide budget 
for ongoing projects only.  The specific problem wh ich led to reduction in budget was only related to non-
approval of plan scheme leading to non-taking up of new schemes for which budget provisions were kept.   
 ii) Restructuring of CWC: 
 The proposal for “Restructuring of CWC” had been se nt to Ministry of Finance.  The 
observation of Ministry of Finance, which were received in April 2014, did not reflect shared vision of 
CWC and MoWR, RD & GR as it completely ignored the requirements for basin level approach for 
integrated water resources management and other fun ctional needs in view of growing challenges.  
The proposal is being revised accordingly, to addre ss the issues raised by MoF and meet the 
genuine needs of CWC.  

  
 
 Further, a note on the need for Institutional Chan ges in Central Sector to deal with the 
Optimal Development of Water Resources in the count ry has been sent to Ministry of Water 
Resources, RD & GR on 04.08.2015.  The Proposed Ins titutional setup will help in optimal and 
sustainable management of Water Resources in the Country.  
 iii)  Brahmaputra Board:  
a) Brahmaputra Board is engaged in the preparation of Master Plan and DPR for projects in 
Brahmaputra Basin. It also takes up works as per th e requirement of the states for flood 
management/ protection works.  
To meet the expenditure of Brahmaputra Board, Grant s are released under River Basin 
Management Scheme of MoWR, RD & GR. Under this sche me there is provision of Rs. 528.00 
crores for Brahmaputra Board during XII Five Year Plan. 
It is proposed to restructure Brahmaputra Board as North East & Brahmaputra River Rejuvenation 
Authority (NEBRRA). This issue was discussed during  7 th  High Powered Review Board meeting 
held on 11.02.2015 at Shillong, Meghalaya and Draft  Bill on NEBRRA was circulated among the 
participants for comments. Comments in favour of fo rmation of NEBRRA have been received from 
all the member-states with some suggestions. The is sues were further discussed in detail in 8 th  
HPRB meeting held on 19.06.2015 at New Delhi. 
b) The Budget allocations and Actual Expenditure under River Basin Management(RBM) in respect of 
“Brahmaputra Board 
” for the last two years are as follows:- 
 (Rs. In crore/Gross)       
Year BE RE Actuals 
2013-14 100.00 85.00 87.92 
2014-15 143.00 80.00 70.06  

  
 
 
Reason for reduction of budget allocation of 2014-1 5 at RE stage is due to vacancy of the six no. 
key statutory posts in the Brahmaputra Board out of  seven posts. Inspite of constant efforts of 
MoWR, RD & GR for filling up these posts, proper re sponse from the eligible applicants has not 
been received.        
 14. The Committee note that the budgetary allocatio n in 2013-14 under the River Basin 
Management (RBM) Scheme, which includes investigati on of  Water Resources Development 
Scheme as also Restructuring of the CWC and the Brahmaputra Board, could not be utilised as EFC 
document was not approved by the CCEA at the time w hen BE 2013-14 proposals were formulated 
and submitted during October, 2012.  The Scheme was  approved in April, 2014 -resulting in non 
implementation of proposed activities in new projects.  The Committee further note that approval of 
the proposal of restructuring of the CWC was delaye d due to certain issues raised by Ministry of 
Finance.  They also note with concern that funds al located to Brahmaputra Board had to be scaled 
down at RE level of 2014-2015 as six Statutory Posts in the Board could  not be filled up. 
 The Committee do not accept the reply of the Minis try regarding underutilisation of funds 
under RBM scheme as the Ministry have furnished dif ferent reasons for the same.  At the time of 
examination of Demands for Grants (2015-16), the Co mmittee were given to understand that works 
pertaining to the survey and investigation of some of the projects of inter-linking of rivers, major 
and medium irrigation projects, flood management an d anti erosion could not take off due to local 
hindrances, forest/environment related issues and o ther administrative reasons.  However, now the 
Ministry have stated that the specific problem whic h led to reduction in budget was only related to 
non-approval of this Plan scheme leading to non-taking up of new schemes for which the budgetary 
provisions were kept.  The Committee would, therefo re, desire that as intimated by the Ministry in 
reply to recommendation no.1.33, (vide para no. 5 o f this Report),  the detailed Work Plan for the 

  
 
year 2015.2016 prepared in respect of Plan scheme o f River Basin Management should be placed 
before them for their perusal. 
15. Further taking note of the fact that proposal f or restructuring of the CWC is being revised in 
the light of observations made by the Ministry of F inance, the Committee reiterate that the exercise 
should be taken up immediately to enable the CWC to  discharge its functions for development and 
management of water resources in a holistic manner.   While expressing displeasure over 
Government apathy in case of the Brahmaputra Board - where as many as six out of seven posts of 
key statutory level are still laying vacant, the Committee desire to be apprised of the reasons for not 
filling them as it seriously hampers the functioning of the Board.   
D. Hydrological Observation Stations/sites 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.16) 
16. The Committee observed that at present there ar e 933 Hydrological Observation (HO) sites in the 
country which are used for various objectives such as assessment of water availability, silt, discharg e, 
water quality, etc. They further noted that as per the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO) guideli nes, 
there should be one HO station on a river covering a catchment area of 1875 square km. This criteria 
changes with terrain, other hydro-meteorological co nditions. The Committee noted that as per the Worki ng 
Group on "Water Database Development and Management " constituted by the erstwhile Planning 
Commission, the existing HO stations are insufficie nt to enable collection of information for achievin g 
various objectives such as assessment of basin- wis e water availability, study of climate change, bett er 
flood forecasting, flood mitigation, reservoir infl ow forecasting, water quality and sediment assessme nt, 
morphological studies, planning and design of water  resources project, assessment  of navigational 
potential for inland water ways etc. Therefore, the Working Group had recommended for the setting up of at 
least 1917 additional HO sites proposed to be under taken over the XII and XIII Plan period, with 800 n ew 
sites covering all rivers of significance during th e XII Plan period. During the year 2014-15, a targe t for the  
setting up of  236 new HO sites and up-gradation of  existing 100 HO sites had been set up to cover 

  
 
additional parameters. However as per the information furnished by the Ministry, only 5 new HO Sites w ere 
proposed to be set up in the year 2012-13, which in dicated a very slow progress of work in the beginni ng. 
This fact was corroborated by the data on budgetary  allocations and expenditure under this Head, which  
showed that allocations were reduced substantially at RE stage during  the years 2013-14 and 2014-15. 
The Committee apprehended that with such a start, t he targets set for up-gradation and expansion of HO  
sites might remain un-accomplished. They, therefore , recommended the Ministry to fast track the projec t 
and take every effort for completion of work within  the scheduled timeframe. They also desired to be 
apprised of the number of new sites opened and up-g raded till March, 2015 and the reasons for slow pac e 
and lesser utilisation of budgetary allocations under this head so far. 
17. The Ministry of Water Resources, River Developm ent  and Ganga Rejuvenation in their action 
taken reply, vide O.M. No. 5/3/2045-Bud. Dated 02.0 9.2015 have stated that Hydrological data observati on 
is specialized work and Central Water Commission (C WC) has been mandated to carry the same on 
national basis.  CWC has developed enough expertise  through its network of hydrological observation 
stations and has got trained manpower for carrying out data observation works.  At present, Central Wa ter 
Commission is having a network of 954 sites on majo r rivers and its tributaries of India including a n etwork 
of 76 exclusive snow and meteorological stations.  During the 12 th  plan, it is proposed to open 800 new 
stations and up gradate 100 existing stations under  DWRIS plan scheme.  Out of this, 177 stations have  
already been opened upto March’2015 and 100 existing sites have been upgraded.   
They have further stated that the main reason for s low pace and lesser utilization of budgetary 
allocation is that the approval for creation of 255 1 additional post of work charged staff required fo r 
carrying out various works of up gradation of sites , up gradation of WQ labs and opening of 800 new si tes 
is under process. In addition, the provision of sup ervisory staff such as Junior Engineer’s, Research 
Assistants etc. proposed in the “Restructuring of CWC”, is also under process. 
18. The Committee note that the working group on "W ater Database Development and 
Management"  constituted by the erstwhile Planning Commission, recommended for the setting up 

  
 
of at least 1917 additional Hydrological Observatio n (HO) sites over XII and XIII Plan periods, with 
800 new sites covering all rivers of significance d uring XII Plan period, as the existing HO stations 
are insufficient to provide necessary information.  However the Committee are unhappy to observe 
the tardy pace of work as regards the creation of n ew HO sites/stations as out of 800 new HO 
stations targeted to be set up, only 177 stations h ave been set up till March, 2015, as against the 
target of 236 new HO sites to be set up in 2014-201 5.  The Committee observe that the delay has 
happened due to lack of sufficient staff.  Disappro ving such a negligent approach on the part of the 
Ministry the Committee desire that urgent measures should be taken to create the required 
additional posts so as to enable the setting up of the desired number of HO sites - within a fixed 
time frame as data from these HO sites are crucial for various water resource management policies. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the concrete steps taken in this direction. 
E. National Bureau of Water use Efficiency 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.17) 
19. The Committee noted that water- use efficiency in the irrigation projects for surface water is 30% , 
for ground water is 55%, for drinking water supply in urban and rural areas the same is 60% and 70% 
respectively and for industries it is 80%, which is  low as compared to international standards of 60% for 
surface water, 75% for ground water, 90% for drinki ng water supply and 95% for industries, as per the 
information provided by the Ministry. They further observed that water use efficiency study of 28 samp le 
major/medium irrigation projects in the four States  of Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab and Harya na 
had revealed average irrigation efficiency of merel y 38%. They deplored the fact that judicious and ef ficient 
water use is still a distant dream, given such a lo w efficiency level in the irrigation sector. The Co mmittee 
believed that more attention needed to be given to irrigation sector and that  there was a need to rep lace 
the outdated system of irrigation with newly design ed/modern irrigation devices. Being endowed with on ly 
4% of global water resources for supporting 18% of total world population residing in India, water sav ing 
should be an important objective in planning the use of this scarce natural resource, the Committee desired 

  
 
that the position regarding the availability of wat er should be improved to increase the availability of water 
in the country from the present level of the total global water resources. The Committee were also of 
considered opinion that while establishing the proposed National Bureau of Water Use Efficiency (NBWUE) 
was a right step in this direction, it was perturbi ng to note that despite EFC's recommendation for th e 
setting up NBWUE in 2013 with Rs. 50 crore allocated in XII Plan towards this, the Organisation had not yet 
seen light of the day. The Committee felt that with  this pace of work, the actual implementation on th e 
ground would not take place even after decades and,  therefore, the Committee strongly recommended to 
expedite the formation of National Bureau of Water Use Efficiency to enable the early execution, adopt ion 
and implementation of measures to achieve the specific standards in water conservation. 
20. The Ministry of Water Resources, River Developm ent  and Ganga Rejuvenation in their action 
taken reply, vide O.M. No.  5/3/2015-Bud.   Dated 0 2.09.2015 have stated that the draft Cabinet Note f or 
establishment of “National Bureau of Water Use Effi ciency (NBWUE)” was approved by the Hon’ble 
Minister (W, RD &GR).  The same has been circulated  to concerned Ministries for their comments vide 
O.M. No. 11/8/2012-NWM dated 12.05.2015. 
21. The Committee are not satisfied with the casual  replies of the Ministry on the crucial issue 
of increasing efficiency in the use of water, as al so in respect of evolving  modern irrigation 
techniques so as to conserve and use water economic ally as recommended by the Committee in 
their earlier Report. The Ministry have also not be en able to furnish any plausible reasons for 
inordinate delay in the setting up of National Bure au of Water Use Efficiency (NBWUE) except for 
the fact that a draft Cabinet note has been circula ted to the concerned Ministry for their comments. 
While strongly disapproving such a quantum of delay , the Committee reiterate their earlier 
recommendation for using modern techniques to enabl e economic use of water in general and in 
particular for the irrigation purpose.  The Committ ee recommend the Ministry to take utmost 
measures towards this and apprise the Committee the reabout.  Further taking note of the current 
pace of work for the establishment of NBWUE, the Co mmittee are again constrained to state that it 
may take decades to set up NBWUE, if expeditious me asures are not taken.  The Committee, 

  
 
therefore, recommend this work to be taken up in a time bound manner so as to make sure that 
higher efficiency in water use is achieved in the c ountry.   They, however, desire to be apprised of 
the  specific measures being taken in this regard.  
F. Ground Water Management and Regulation 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.5) 
22. The Committee noted that the Scheme of Ground W ater Management and Regulation had very 
important objectives for overall development, manag ement and regulation of ground water in the country . 
However, the Committee also observed that actual ex penditure under this Head had constantly fallen sho rt 
of allocated funds since the year 2012-13 on accoun t of late approval of CCEA for outsourcing activiti es for 
data generation. Out of the total allocated funds ( RE) of Rs. 143.00 crore in the year 2014-15, only R s. 
85.91 crore had been spent upto March, 2015. They further noted that the Ministry had made a provision of 
Rs. 163.00 crore only under this head during the cu rrent financial year of 2015-16, for which initial request 
for Rs. 631.00 crore was made. The Committee were g iven to understand that the gap would be met 
through subsequent request for increased allocation. They had been also assured that budgetary allocation 
of Rs. 163.00 crore would be utilised fully towards  meeting the expenditure for regular activities of the 
Board. Additional requirement of funds, to be deman ded later on, would be utilised for implementation of 
proposed activities in the year 2015-16. Keeping in  view the under- utilisation of funds for the last three 
years, the Committee desired that the enhancement o f allocated funds be fully spent in the current yea r so 
that projects/activities will not remain un-impleme nted due to less time remaining in the current fina ncial 
year or procedural bottlenecks. 
The Committee also noted, in this regard that villa ge ponds are major sources of water which, 
however, are being encroached upon by local populac e. The Committee desired that the action may be 
initiated to curb these encroachments by the Government. Noting further the important role played by water 
bodies for replenishing ground water resources in t he country, the Committee desired to be apprised of  the 
total outlays made and the Plan schemes executed, o n-going and being planned by the Government for 

  
 
repair, renovation and restoration of water bodies in different States during the last five years, esp ecially in 
the State of Jammu & Kashmir. The Committee further  desired that unmetered supply of electricity to tu be 
wells be stopped to put a check on the use of elect ricity and waste of water and they strongly 
recommended the Ministry to initiate steps in this regard under intimation to the Committee. 
23. The Ministry of Water Resources, River Developm ent  and Ganga Rejuvenation in their action 
taken reply, vide O.M. No.  5/3/2015-Bud.   Dated 0 2.09.2015 have stated that in order to streamline/ 
expedite the expenditure during 2015-16, quarter-wi se planning for expenditure along with activities h as 
already been prepared and all out efforts are being  made to utilize the allocated funds during this fi nancial 
year. 
It has been further stated that under the Scheme fo r Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of 
water bodies, Government of India have laid a condi tion that the water body which needs central grant for 
its restoration/repair under the central scheme of RRR of water bodies, the state government “needs to  
take necessary steps for declaring the water body b oundary through a Government Order and to ensure 
removal of encroachments in the water body spread a rea/water body boundary before submitting the 
proposal for release of 2 nd  installment”. Further, Ministry of Urban Developme nt (MoUD) has issued 
guidelines for preservation and protection of water  bodies. The copy of the Advisory has been sent to all 
the State Governments for protection of urban water bodies. 
Under the Pilot Scheme on Repair, Renovation and Re storation (RRR), 1098 Water Bodies were 
taken up. Out of which 1085 water bodies were compl eted and 13 water bodies were dropped by 
respective State Govts. An irrigation potential of 0.78 lakh ha was restored. Independent evaluation o f the 
pilot scheme undertaken by various agencies has shown that it has resulted in many positive outcomes like 
increase in storage capacity, increased utilization  of water for irrigation, etc. The progress on the 
implementation of the scheme in each of the states is enclosed as Annexure-III . 
Under the scheme of RRR of water bodies with extern al assistance, 10887 water bodies were 
taken up for restoration in the states of Andhra Pr adesh (3000), Karnataka (1224), Orissa (900) and Ta mil 

  
 
Nadu (5763). The scheme is being processed, monitor ed and funded through Department of Economic 
Affairs, Ministry of Finance. The latest status of the scheme, as received from Department of Economic  
Affairs, Ministry of Finance is enclosed in Annexure-IV. 
Under the scheme of domestic support during XIth Pl an, a total of 3341 water bodies were taken 
up for restoration in 12 states. A total central gr ant amounting to Rs. 917.259 crore was released to 
respective states for completion of works on these water bodies. Out of 3341, the works on 2198 water 
bodies have been completed and an irrigation potent ial of 1.093 lakh ha has been restored till March 2 015 
(Annexure-V).  
The scheme is continued during XIIth Plan at a tota l outlay of Rs. 6235 crore to provide central 
assistance for restoration of about 10,000 water bo dies. Out of 10000 water bodies, 9000 water bodies   in 
rural areas and balance 1000 water bodies in urban areas would be covered. The proposal of water bodie s 
where the Integrated Water Management Programme (IW MP) is implemented would be considered for 
inclusion under the scheme of RRR of water bodies. The central assistance is provided in the form of g rant 
which is 90% of the project cost only in special ca tegory states (NE states, Himachal Pradesh, J&K, 
Uttarakhand and undivided KBK districts of Odisha) as well as projects lying in drought prone area, tr ibal 
area, desert prone area and naxal affected areas an d 25% of the project cost in case of non-special 
category states/areas. Till date, 1057 water bodies at an estimated cost of Rs. 830.6659 crore from 8 states 
have been included for funding and an amount of Rs 103.49 crore has been released to 4 states 
(Annexure-VI). 
It has been further stated that no scheme has been received from State of J&K under this plan 
scheme. 
24. The Committee note that to enable full utilisat ion of funds under the Scheme of Ground 
Water Management and Regulation, a quarter - wise p lan for the expenditure along with activities to 
be taken up, has been prepared by the Ministry.  Ho wever no concrete reply has been furnished 
with regard to utilisation of funds under this sche me, so far.  The Committee further note that in 

  
 
order to remove local encroachments, the Government  has laid down a condition that for the 
receipt of the Central Grant under the Scheme of Re pair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of 
water bodies, the State Government has to take nece ssary steps for declaring the boundary of 
water body through a Government order and ensure re moval of encroachments before submitting 
the proposal for release of second instalment.  Wit h regard to the implementation of the Repair, 
Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies Scheme i n the State of J&K, the Committee note in 
particular that no Scheme has yet been taken up.  T he Committee further find that replies are also 
silent on measures, if any, taken for regulation on  unmetered  supply of electricity to tube wells so 
as to put a check on electricity and wastage of water. 
 While appreciating the preparation of quarterly pl an of expenditure, the Committee would 
like to be apprised of the details of utilisation o f funds under the scheme of Ground Water 
Management and Regulation.  As regards implementati on of the Scheme of RRR of Water bodies in 
the country is concerned, the Committee are constrained to note the fact that no scheme for RRR of 
Water bodies has been taken up in the State of Jamm u & Kashmir.  The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommend the Government to persuade the S tate Governments to initiate proposals in 
this regard.  Further considering the huge amount o f water and electricity being wasted due to 
unmetered supply of electricity to tube wells, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation 
to regulate supply of electricity so as to put an e ffective check on the wastage of electricity and 
water both. 

  
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
Recommendation (Para No.1.33) 
 The Committee observe that total budgetary allocat ion for the year 2015-16 has been kept at Rs. 
6,381.03 crore which indicates a substantial reduct ion of Rs. 8,994.71 crore as compared to budgetary 
allocations for 2014-15 and showing a reduction of Rs. 1,453.88 crore over the RE of 2014-15. The reas on 
cited for the huge reduction in allocated funds at RE stage during 2014-15 is non-approval of new Schemes 
introduced in the year 2014-15 and Schemes transfer red from the Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change to the MoWR, RD&GR. Also due to non- submission of project proposals under Central 
Sector Schemes by State Governments, till September  2014, funds remained unallocated, resulting in 
curtailment of funds at RE stage. However, from the  data on budgetary and revised allocations and actu al 
expenditure incurred for the last three years, it i s observed that budgetary estimates were never in 
conformity with actual requirement of funds and the refore were always scaled down at RE stage, a fact 
admitted by the Secretary during his evidence. Taki ng cognisance of this fact, the Committee have been  
repeatedly recommending the Ministry to revisit its budgeting exercise. The plea put forth by Ministry  in this 
regard is that the pace of expenditure is slow in t he beginning of the year due to non-completion of 
formalities/procedures. By the time these procedure s are in place, the Ministry of Finance revises 
allocation. While noting the submission that budget ary estimates are based on approvals of EFC/Cabinet  
note and works carried forward from the previous years, the Committee find that the Ministry have not been 
able to resolve the problem of completing formaliti es/procedures/getting approvals in time on account of 
which funds remain unutilized for a substantial tim e period. The Committee would, therefore, recommend  
that Ministry give serious thought to the issue of Schemes/Programmes remaining unimplemented before 
making projections for the year ahead. They would r ecommend the Ministry to plan in advance for 
launching of Schemes and ensure that all procedures /systems are put in place before making budgetary 
provisions. The Committee would like to be apprised  of the details of measures taken in this regard. T he 
Committee also recommend that grants given to State s viz  North East Region, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu 
& Kashmir and Uttranchal under Minor Irrigation sch emes be utilised promptly and necessary steps be 
taken by the Ministry to persuade the State Governm ents for full utilisation of Grants/Central assista nce to 
such States specially Jammu & Kashmir. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry has prepared Work Plan for the year 2015-1 6 to monitor timely implementation of Plan 
schemes and budgetary provision of 2015-16.  Hon’bl e Minister (WR,RD&GR) is monitoring and reviewing 
the progress of the schemes on weekly basis. 

  
 
The grants released to States of North East region,  Himachal Pradesh, J&K and Uttarakhand and 
its utilisation during XI Plan and XII Plan under M inor Irrigation Schemes is enclosed at Annexure.-I & II . A 
total amount of 5191.90 crore and Rs 2721.28 crore as grant have been released during XI & XII Plan 
respectively to these states under MI Schemes. The total utilisation was Rs 5755.90 crore and 3215.36 
crore respectively during XI & XII Plan. It is evid ent that the utilisation of central grants by these  states has 
been outstanding.  
Regarding J&K, total grant and utilisation during X I Plan was 835.18 crore and Rs 927.98 crore 
respectively. During XII Plan, it stands at Rs 263.51 crore and Rs 267.45 crore respectively. 
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
   (Please see Para No.6 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
 
  Recommendation (Para No.1.34) 
 The Committee have been informed that the average annual water availability in the country as per 
the assessment carried out by Central Water Commiss ion(CWC) in 1993, is 1,869 billion cubic meters 
(BCM), out of which utilizable water with conventio nal approach is 1,121 BCM, consisting of 690 BCM of  
surface water out of which 450 BCM is being utilize d for various purposes, as per the estimation of CW C in 
2009. Similarly Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) h as also estimated in 2009 that out of the 431 BCM 
of replenishable ground water resources, only about  243 BCM of ground water is being utilized. The 
Committee further note that administrative approval  and expenditure sanction for reassessment of water  
availability in 19 basins, has been obtained, and C WC is currently in the process of procuring the req uired 
hardware and software for the study. The Committee are surprised to find that the current data on 
availability of water resources is more than 22 yea rs old. They are of the considered view that formul ation 
of policy for development and management of water resources, on the basis of such outdated data, can not 
be reliable and is bound to be faulty. The Committe e desire that assessment of water resources should be 
undertaken periodically preferably every five years . They also desire that the current exercise for 
assessment of water resources should be completed a t the earliest and they should be apprised of the 

  
 
action taken in this regard. The Committee further note that the Ministry is preparing fresh EFC proposal for 
creation of National Water Informatics Centre (NWIC ) which will process, organise and provide up-to-da te 
data and information on water resources and allied themes in public domain and develop value added 
products and services for integrated water resource s management. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
the Ministry to initiate concrete steps at the earl iest for setting up NWIC which will serve as pivota l centre 
for management of water resource and  apprise them of the action taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Following steps have been taken for assessment of water resources: 
i. One of the strategies (Strategy No. 1.6 a) ident ified for implementation under the Comprehensive 
 Mission Document of National Water Mission is Reas sessment of basin wise water situation under 
 present scenario by using latest techniques. 
ii. In June, 2010, National Remote Sensing Centre ( NRSC) and Central Water Commission (CWC) 
 jointly initiated pilot studies in Godavari and Br ahmani-Baitarani river basins wherein Space based 
 geo-spatial inputs were used to estimate basin-lev el mean annual water resources.  The pilot study 
 was completed in June, 2013. 
iii. A Committee was constituted by MoWR under the Chairmanship of Chairman, CWC in May 2011 
 for reassessment of water resources availability i n all the river basins of the country using modern 
 technology and GIS inputs.  The Committee comprise d of experts from IITs, NIH, IMD, CGWB, 
 NRSC and CWC.  The ToR of the Committee were: 
c. Re-assessment of the water resources of the country. 
d. Suggestions for regular mechanism for periodic re-assessment of the water resources. 
iv. The Committee suggested some refinements in the  methodology adopted for pilot studies and 
 replicate the studies in 19 river basins of India (including Godavari and Brahmani- Baitarani basins 
 in which pilot studies have been carried out and e xcluding area of Inland drainage in Rajasthan 
 which has negligible water resources). The Committ ee also decided that periodic reassessment of 
 water resources in India should be carried out at an interval of 10 years. 
v.  Accordingly, CWC submitted a proposal for carry ing out the reassessment studies. The proposal is 
 not only for carrying out one time reassessment of  water resources potential but also to develop 
 infrastructure and capacity within CWC for carryin g out such studies periodically. 

  
 
vi. MoWR, RD & GR vide their letter dated 30.01.201 5 has conveyed the approval for the study and 
 the process of procurement of the requisite softwa re/hardware has been initiated.  A one week 
 customized training course has also been organized  by NRSC for CWC officials in May 2015.  
 Currently hardware procurement is underway. 
National Water Information Centre 
 
The status of the action taken for setting up of pr oposed National Water Information Centre (NWIC) 
during 12 th  plan is as under: 
(iii)A Committee formed under the chairmanship of Additi onal Secretary (WR, RD & GR) for making 
recommendation on structure of NWIC in January 2014 , has recommended its creation as a 
society.  Accordingly, EFC note for creation of the  suggested structure and filling up the posts 
is being circulated. 
(iv) Once the NWIC has been set up, its operationalizati on will be covered under National Hydrology 
Project.  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.9 of Chapter-I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Para No.1.36) 
 The Committee note that under the Inter-State Wate r Disputes (ISRWD) Act, 1956, as many as 5 
Inter-State Water Disputes Tribunals, viz.  Cavery Water  Disputes Tribunal (CWDT), Krishna Wa ter 
Disputes Tribunal (KWDT), Vansadhara Water Disputes  Tribunal (VWDT), Mahadayi/Mandavi Water 
Disputes Tribunal (MWDT) and Ravi & Beas Waters Tri bunal (R&BWT) have been constituted by the 
Government and a cumulative expenditure of Rs. 5,54 5.92 crore has been incurred on them till date.  Th e 
Committee further observe that the disputes referre d to the above have not been resolved till date des pite 
incurring such a huge expenditure. The Committee ar e of the view that there is a need to work out a 
solution in order to restrain a huge amount of expenditure on so many inter-State Water Disputes Tribunals. 
The Committee are also convinced that the issue of inter-State water dispute in the country will not b e 
resolved due to the existence of multifarious tribu nal/authorities.  Rather proper solution has eluded  the 
above stated inter-State disputes, till date, altho ugh a total expenditure of Rs. 5,545.92 crore has b een 
incurred so far. The Committee, therefore recommend  that instead of multifarious inter-State Water 
Disputes Tribunal, a single, centralised and effect ive inter-State Water Dispute Tribunal may be creat ed for 
resolving the inter-State water disputes in the cou ntry and concrete steps may be initiated by the 
Government in this direction at the earliest.  The Committee desire to be apprised of action taken in this 
regard by the Government at the earliest. 

  
 
Reply of the Government 
Inter-State River Water Disputes Act, 1956 has alre ady been amended in the year 2002 in 
consultation with the State Governments, whereby ad judication of water disputes by the Tribunals was 
made time-bound. However, the proposal to further a mend Inter State Water Rivers Disputes Act, 1956 to  
set up a Standing (single) Tribunal and to further expedite the adjudication of all inter-state river water 
disputes referred to it is at conceptual stage. 
Recommendation (Para No.3.5) 
The Committee note that the Scheme of Ground Water Management and Regulation has very important 
objectives for overall development, management and regulation of ground water in the country. However,  
the Committee also observe that actual expenditure under this head has constantly fallen short of allo cated 
funds since the year 2012-13 on account of late app roval of CCEA for outsourcing activities for data 
generation. Out of the total allocated funds (RE) o f Rs. 143.00 crore in the year 2014-15, only Rs. 85 .91 
crore has been spent upto March, 2015. They further  note that the Ministry has made a provision of Rs.  
163.00 crore only under this head during the curren t financial year of 2015-16, for which initial requ est for 
Rs. 631.00 crore was made. The Committee have been given to understand that the gap would be met 
through subsequent request for increased allocation . They have been also assured that budgetary 
allocation of Rs. 163.00 crore would be utilised fu lly towards meeting the expenditure for regular act ivities 
of the Board. Additional requirement of funds, to b e demanded later on, would be utilised on 
implementation of proposed activities in the year 2015-16. Keeping in view the under- utilisation of funds for 
the last three years, the Committee desire that the  enhancement of allocated funds be fully spent in t he 
current year so that projects/activities will not r emain un-implemented due to less time remaining in the 
current financial year or procedural bottlenecks. 
  The Committee also note, in this regard that vill age ponds are major sources of water which, 
however, are being encroached upon by local populac e. The Committee desire that an action may be 
initiated to curb these encroachments by the Government. Noting further the important role played by water 
bodies for replenishing ground water resources in t he country, the Committee desire to be apprised of the 
total outlays made and the Plan schemes executed, o n-going and being planned by the Government for 
repair, renovation and restoration of water bodies in different States during the last five years, esp ecially in 
the State of Jammu & Kashmir. The Committee further  desire that unmetered supply of electricity to tub e 
wells be stopped to put a check on electricity and waste of water and they desire the Ministry to init iate 
steps in this regard under intimation to the Committee. 
Reply of the Government 
 

  
 
 In order to streamline/ expedite the expenditure du ring 2015-16 quarter-wise planning for 
expenditure along with activities has already been prepared and all out efforts are being made to util ize the 
allocated funds during this financial year. 
Under the Scheme for Repair, Renovation and Restora tion (RRR) of water bodies, GoI have laid a 
condition that the water body which needs central g rant for its restoration/repair under the central s cheme 
of RRR of water bodies, the state government “needs  to take necessary steps for declaring the water bo dy 
boundary through a Government Order and to ensure r emoval of encroachments in the water body spread 
area/water body boundary before submitting the proposal for release of 2 nd  installment”. Further, Ministry of 
Urban Development (MoUD) has issued guidelines for preservation and protection of water bodies. The 
copy of the Advisory has been sent to all the State Governments for protection of urban water bodies. 
 
Under the Pilot Scheme on Repair, Renovation and Re storation (RRR), 1098 Water Bodies were 
taken up. Out of which 1085 water bodies were compl eted and 13 water bodies were dropped by 
respective State Govts. An irrigation potential of 0.78 lakh ha was restored. Independent evaluation o f the 
pilot scheme undertaken by various agencies has shown that it has resulted in many positive outcomes like 
increase in storage capacity, increased utilization  of water for irrigation, etc. The progress on the 
implementation of the scheme in each of the states is enclosed as Annexure-III . 
 
Under the scheme of RRR of water bodies with extern al assistance, 10887 water bodies were 
taken up for restoration in the states of Andhra Pr adesh (3000), Karnataka (1224), Orissa (900) and Ta mil 
Nadu (5763). The scheme is being processed, monitor ed and funded through Department of Economic 
Affairs, Ministry of Finance. The latest status of the scheme, as received from Department of Economic  
Affairs, Ministry of Finance is enclosed in Annexure-IV. 
Under the scheme of domestic support during XIth Pl an, a total of 3341 water bodies were taken 
up for restoration in 12 states. A total central gr ant amounting to Rs. 917.259 crore was released to 
respective states for completion of works on these water bodies. Out of 3341, the works on 2198 water 
bodies have been completed and an irrigation potent ial of 1.093 lakh ha has been restored till March 2 015 
(Annexure-V).  
 
The scheme is continued during XIIth Plan at a tota l outlay of Rs. 6235 crore to provide central 
assistance for restoration of about 10,000 water bo dies. Out of 10000 water bodies, 9000 water bodies   in 

  
 
rural areas and balance 1000 water bodies in urban areas would be covered. The proposal of water bodie s 
where the Integrated Water Management Programme (IW MP) is implemented would be considered for 
inclusion under the scheme of RRR of water bodies. The central assistance is provided in the form of g rant 
which is 90% of the project cost only in special ca tegory states (NE states, Himachal Pradesh, J&K, 
Uttarakhand and undivided KBK districts of Odisha) as well as projects lying in drought prone area, tr ibal 
area, desert prone area and naxal affected areas an d 25% of the project cost in case of non-special 
category states/areas. Till date, 1057 water bodies at an estimated cost of Rs. 830.6659 crore from 8 states 
have been included for funding and an amount of Rs 103.49 crore has been released to 4 states 
(Annexure-VI). 
It is to state that no scheme has been received from State of J&K under this plan scheme. 
Recommendation (Para No.4.12) 
 The Committee observe that at present there are 17 5 Flood Forecasting stations in the country, of 
which 147 stations are level forecasting stations a nd 28 are inflow forecasting stations. The Committe e are 
happy to note that with the existing network of sta tions, the Central Water Commission (CWC) has been 
able to predict 97.8% of flood situations. However,  while examining the Demands For Grants for the yea r  
2014-15, the Committee found that as there were no Flood Forecasting stations on river Jhelum, CWC 
could not issue any flood warning in the State of J ammu and Kashmir which witnessed severe flood 
situation last year. The Committee are distressed t o find that despite their earlier recommendation ma de in 
1st  Report on Demand For Grants (2014-15) of the MoWR,  RD&GR to take up the modernisation and 
expansion of Flood Forecasting network in a time bo und manner by preparing year-wise action plan, the 
Ministry has failed to make any headway. The main reason for this delay is stated to be non-approval of the 
Scheme so far. The Committee deplore such sorry sta te of affairs and disapprove of the lackadaisical 
approach of the Ministry. They are surprised to fin d that no concrete efforts have been made for exped iting 
the approval process so that work on modernisation and creation of new Flood Forecasting stations coul d 
be started without any delay. They would therefore recommend the Ministry to make an earnest endeavour  
in this direction at the earliest and take a target ed approach for expansion and modernisation of Floo d 
Forecasting network for better preparedness and man agement of flood situation in different parts of th e 
country. Noting further that irrigation is the life line of agriculture sector in Jammu & Kashmir and a lso the 
recent Flood havoc caused in the State, the Committ ee desire the Ministry to take urgent necessary act ion 
for taking up needful works to augment the carrying  capacity of river Jhelum without further delay. Th ey 
would also desire that the Flood Forecasting networ k in the State of Jammu & Kashmir be augmented 
through concrete steps by the Ministry, and the Committee be apprised accordingly. 
Reply of the Government 

  
 
The EFC for the XII Five Year Plan Scheme for Flood  Forecasting (FF) with provisions of 
expansion and modernization of FF network has been held.  Preparatory work of expansion and 
modernization of FF network has also been taken up by CWC.  Implementation of the expansion and 
modernization work will start immediately after final approval of the Plan Scheme. 
MoWR, RD & GR constituted a three-member Group comp rising of Chairman, Central Water 
Commission, Commissioner (Indus) and Director, Nati onal Institute of Hydrology, Roorkee on 18.09.2014,  
to conduct an in depth study and analysis of the recent unprecedented floods in J&K so as to make suitable 
recommendations along with a detailed action plan to deal with such threat in future.  
The recommendations of the Group were under immedia te, short term and long term categories. 
The recommendations include non-structural measures  like flood forecasting and disaster management as 
well as structural measures like channel improvemen t and construction of additional supplementary floo d 
spill channel.  
Based on the above recommendations, CWC has develop ed a rainfall based Flood Forecasting 
model for Ram Munshibag (Srinagar) on Jhelum River utilizing available hydrometeorological and river 
morphological data integrating India Meteorological  Department (IMD) real time data of rainfall as wel l as 
Quantitative Precipitation Forecast for 3 days. The  model will be further calibrated during monsoon 20 15. 
The protocol for forecast dissemination is being fi nalized in consultation with the state government. The 
forecast was planned to be issued from 1st June 201 5. However, in view of heavy to very heavy rainfall  
during last week of March & first week of April due  to Western Disturbances (WD), flood like situation  had 
arisen and CWC issued Flood Forecast based on devel oped model (Rainfall-Runoff plus Hydrodynamic) till 
water level receded below warning level.    
Regarding structural measures, the comprehensive pl an is being formulated by Government of 
J&K to manage the floods effectively covering entir e reach of about 150 km from upstream of Sangam to 
downstream of Baramulla. Under the plan, it is proposed to manage the 1 in 100 years flood of 3260 cumec 
(1,15,000 cusec) at Sangam, as approved by CWC, in two phases. In Phase-I by implementing a 
comprehensive plan to manage floods of the order of  1700 cumec (60,000 cusec) at Padshahi Bag, which 
is about 50 km downstream of Sangam, by way of rout ing flood of 991 cumec (35000 cusec) through city 
reaches of Main Jhelum and 709 cumec (25000 cusec) through existing flood spill channel (FSC). 
The proposal for an estimated cost of Rs. 399.29 Cr  comprising re-sectioning of on field channels 
(OFC), provision for additional waterway, channel i mprovement of Jhelum, dredging of OFC, etc has been  
framed by the state government of J&K. The salient features of the proposal are as under: 
B.C. Ratio    : 1.77:1 

  
 
Schedule of Completion   : 2 years 
Hydrology    : 1 in 100 yrs design flood = 3260 cum ecs  
           = 115000 cusec 
Inter-State aspects   : No 
Inter-national aspects : No, however clearance has been obtained by MoWR  
 from   Indus Water Treaty angle on  20.02.2015 
 
Protected/ Benefitted crop area  : 33,613 ha  
Population Benefitted   : 1,35,000 
Status :The proposal has been found techno economic ally viable by 
CWC. The approval of Technical Advisory Committee ( TAC) of 
Ministry of WR, GR & RD is under process.  
  
Recommendation (Para No.6.20) 
 The Committee note that the work of cleaning river  Ganga has been proposed to be implemented 
through the Schemes of National River Conservation Plan (NRCP) and National Ganga River Basin 
Authority (NGRBA), National Ganga Plan and Ghat wor ks and beautification of river front, for which 
budgetary provisions of Rs. 530.00 crore, Rs. 1500. 00 crore and Rs. 100.00 crore were made in the year  
2014-15. However the Schemes remained dormant as no  expenditure could be incurred for want of 
approvals. This undoubtedly reflects the casual man ner with which the work of cleaning Ganga River has  
been carried out so far. While examining the budget ary provisions for the above schemes during the 
current financial year, 2015-16, the Committee noti ce that allocations have been increased to Rs. 546. 00 
crore in case of NRCP and NGRBA and Rs. 2100.00 crore in case of National Ganga Plan. The Committee 
are, however, astonished that although the details of various components of the Scheme have been 
prepared, no separate allocations have been made as  the Schemes are still in approval stage. During th e 
evidence of the Ministry, the Committee were convin ced that Schemes are expected to get Cabinet 
approvals and will be implemented in the current fi nancial year. However the Committee feel that the 
Government is yet to take the first step towards th e enormous task of cleaning and rejuvenating river 
Ganga. They hope that the Government will work in a  more proactive manner to get the approvals 

  
 
expeditiously and will work with the determination and renewed vigour with which the work of Ganga 
cleaning and rejuvenation was started last year.  
Reply of the Government 
 The Cabinet approved the Namami Gange program on 13 th May, 2015 as an umbrella programme 
to rejuvenate the river Ganga at a total cost of Rs . 20,000 crore for 5 years. The programme integrate s the 
existing programmes of NGRBA and new initiatives. W orks already approved under NGRBA are in 
progress. New projects are being considered for sanction. 
Recommendation (Para No.6.21) 
 The Committee further observe that as compared to budgetary provision there has been less 
expenditure under the externally aided projects under Clean Ganga mission during the last five years. They 
are further perturbed to notice that inspite of spe nding hundreds of crores every year, very little ha s been 
achieved in terms of abatement of pollution of the river. As informed by the Secretary, at present 75%  of 
the pollution is  generated from  municipal waste and 25% from the industrial waste. While the total sewage 
generation is 7,300 million litres per day (mld), a long the 5 basin States on the Ganga main stem, the  
capacity of existing sewage treatment plants (STPs)  for treating this sewage is only 2,126 mld and fur ther 
capacity of 1,188 mld is under construction/approva l stage. By 2018-19, around 2,500 mld of treatment 
capacity is expected to be added on the main stem o f river Ganga. This indicates that there will be a huge 
amount of untreated water, estimated to be 6,334 ml d for 11 Ganga basin States in the IIT report, whic h 
unless properly disposed, will nullify the efforts for cleaning the river in the intervening period. T he 
Committee, therefore, believe that the Government n eed to take concerted action for reduction, diversi on 
and treatment of all kind of  sewage. They feel tha t a comprehensive time-bound and target-oriented pl an 
of action need to be framed in co-ordination with other related Ministries, viz. Drinking Water and Sanitation 
and Environment, Forests and Climate Change. The Co mmittee desire to be apprised of the details of the  
action plan so prepared along  with the targets fixed for implementation.  
Reply of the Government 
 The major activity envisaged to clean Ganga under t he Namami Gange programme is 
development of suitable treatment infrastructure to  prevent untreated waste water entering into the ri ver. 
Other activities proposed include low cost sanitati on/community toilet complexes, electric/improved wo od 
crematoria, river surface and ghat cleaning program me. Once implemented, these activities are expected  
to reduce the flow of untreated wastewater into the  river Ganga to a large extend. Details of activiti es 
envisaged and corresponding funding upto 2020 in accordance with Cabinet approval is at Annexure-VIII.  
Recommendation (Para No.6.22) 

  
 
 With regard to the total expenditure proposed to b e incurred, the Committee were informed that the 
Government proposes to invest around Rs. 20,000 cro re for cleaning river Ganga over a time horizon of 5 
years, spanning upto the year 2020. However, the co nsortium of IITs which has been entrusted to prepar e 
Ganga River basin management Plan has indicated the  requirement of nearly Rs. 74,000 crore for 
development of sewage infrastructure and Rs. 17,400  crore for its operation and maintenance in the nex t 
five years. Given the massive scale of operation re quired for cleaning and rejuvenation of Ganga, the 
Committee hope that availability of funds will not be a limiting factor and adequate funds will be released for 
completion of this programme by 2020 as envisaged by the Government. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Cabinet has already approved the Namami Gange p rogramme at a total cost of Rs. 20,000 
crore for various activities identified for implementation over a period of 5 years.  Hence availability of funds 
for this programme in the said period may not be viewed as a limiting factor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 

  
 
Recommendation (Para No.5.10) 
 The Committee note that Farakka Barrage Project wa s commissioned in the year 1975 for 
preservation and maintenance of Kolkata Port by imp roving the regime and navigability of the Bhagirath -
Hooghly river system. Major areas of operation unde r this project include operation and maintenance of  
main Barrage, maintenance and protection of feeder canal, maintenance and protection of bank and bed o f 
river Ganga in upstream of Farakka Barrage, mainten ance of Farakka township, Khejuriaghat township, 
Jangipur Barrage colony and colony at Kalindi lock,  operation and maintenance of all equipments, vehic les 
and machineries, anti-erosion works in its extended  jurisdiction along the river Ganga from 40km upstr eam 
of Barrage to 80km downstream and on tributaries of  river Ganga in North Bengal. The Committee observe 
that allocations under this project have been reduced by Rs. 65.00 crore respectively at RE 2014-15 and by 
Rs. 50 crore, as compared to provisions kept in BE 2014-15 on account of such factors as limited worki ng 
area for replacement of gates and other hydro-mecha nical components, non availability of sufficient 
strength of technically trained manpower, remote lo cation of the project and overall reduction in allo cations 
of the Ministry. Further, the funds have remained c onstantly under-utilised for the last three years d ue to 
late approval of this Plan Scheme by EFC for XII Pl an in July 2013. The Committee do not concur with t he 
view of the Ministry in this regard. Besides, as in formed to the Committee, despite being approved, 
substantial work in this Plan scheme was not done a nd funds remained under-utilised. This laxity on th e 
part of the Ministry has been highlighted in Audit Reports of CAG. 
 The Committee further notice that work of replacem ent of all the 123 gates was delayed due to 
non-approval of Scheme in XII Plan and therefore, a goal of replacing 55 gates during the period of XII Plan 
has been fixed and the work has started in a phased  manner. However, the Committee's examination has 
revealed that out of the total provision of Rs. 91. 00 crore for repair/replacement of gates kept for X II Plan, 
so far the Ministry has incurred an expenditure of Rs. 3.7135 crore in 2012-13, Rs. 4.3008 crore in 20 13-14 
and Rs. 9.3843 crore in 2014-15, which shows the sl uggish manner in which this work has proceeded. The  
Committee deprecate such attitude of the Ministry i n completion of work. They, therefore, desire that the 
work of replacement of gates should be undertaken i n a time bound and target oriented manner and fix t he 
responsibility for laxity in the matter. They also desire that immediate measures should be taken to r ecruit 
more technical manpower and be apprised accordingly.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Farakka Barrage Project (FBP) is taking all necessa ry action to keep the Gates and other hydro-
mechanical components of Farakka Barrage in satisfactory operating and working condition. FBP has taken 

  
 
action for replacement of distressed gates in phase d manner considering working limitations. Works of 
replacement of 6 old gates were taken up during 201 2-13 and the works has been completed. 
Simultaneously, strengthening of 7 old gates was ta ken up during 2013-14 and the work has been 
completed except painting of gates. During 2013-14,  replacement of 33 old gates were also taken up. Ou t 
of these 33 gates, 15 gates have been replaced by n ew gates during 2014-15 and another 5 gates have 
been fabricated and are ready for erection at site.  Simultaneously, servicing and maintenance of other  
hydro mechanical components, hoists , central drive unit etc. has also been taken up during 2014-15 and is 
in advance stage of completion. In addition 2 sets of stop-log gates have also been procured during 20 14-
15 to meet out any exigency. 
Further proposal for administrative approval and ex penditure sanction of competent authority for 
replacement of remaining gates in a phased manner i s under consideration. A copy of Action plan for 
replacement of Gates of FBP has been prepared and n ecessary action is being taken accordingly subject 
to certain limitations  at Annexure-VII.  
In addition painting of Hoist Bridge and Counter Weights of Farakka Barrage is also being taken up 
shortly. Administrative approval of competent autho rity for construction of Walkway bridge of Farakka 
Barrage has been obtained and tendering process is ongoing. Administrative approval of competent 
authority for rehabilitation of Road Bridge over Fa rakka Barrage as per CRRI report have been obtained  
and further formalities for tendering etc. is in progress. 
At present all the posts at the level of the Genera l Manager and Superintending Engineer are filled 
up. Further, promotion order of 5 Nos. of Assistant  Engineer to Executive Engineers is likely to be is sued 
shortly.   
 

  
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Para No.1.35) 
The Committee observe that the scheme of River Basin Management was formulated during the year 2013-
14 by merging the earlier Schemes of River Basin Or ganisation and Investigation of Water Resources 
Development. Besides, restructuring of CWC and Brah maputra Board are also under the purview of this 
Scheme. The Committee find that the budget allocati ons for this scheme were reduced by more than Rs. 
100 crore at the revised stage due to lower allocat ion of funds by the Ministry of Finance as some asp ects 
of projects such as works pertaining to the Survey and Investigation of some of the projects of Inter- linking 
of Rivers, major and medium irrigation projects, fl ood management and anti-erosion, could not take off  due 
to local hindrances, forest/environment related issues and other administrative reasons. The Committee are 
disappointed over the fact that a substantial amoun t of fund is remaining unutilised year after year d ue to 
faulty approach of the Ministry. They are of the fi rm opinion that a well co-ordinated approach and pr oper 
planning on part of the Ministry can ensure better utilisation of funds. The Committee would, therefor e, 
recommend the Ministry to identify the area specifi c problems and resolve them in consultation with 
respective Governments so that the proposed projects could be speedily executed and finished. 
 The Committee are further unhappy to find that re- structuring of CWC has not yet been undertaken 
due to disagreement on some observations of the Ministry of Finance. They observe that after deliberations 
with the Ministry of Finance, the revised proposal for re-structuring would be submitted. The Committe e 
express displeasure with the tardy pace of executio n of the re-structuring exercise, which is crucial for 
enabling CWC to discharge its functions for develop ment and management of water resource in holistic 
manner.  
Reply of the Government 
i)  Investigation of Water Resources Development Scheme: 
  
 Investigation of Water Resources Development Schem e (CWC) is one of the components under 
12 th  Plan River Basin Management (RBM) Scheme.  An expenditure of Rs. 14.55 cr was incurred in FY 
2013-14 against an allocation of Rs. 26.80 cr (BE) and Rs. 15.44 cr (RE). 
The BE: 2013-14 has been kept towards activities related to survey, investigation for preparation of 
DPR of water resources projects (ongoing and new pr ojects) as per priorities earmarked in the EFC 
document, which was awaiting approval of CCEA, at t he time when BE proposal were formulated and 

  
 
submitted viz., during October 2012.  The provision  for budget was kept for implementation of various 
activities like topographical surveys, geotechnical  investigations, design and special studies as per 
provisions made in scheme expecting that scheme wou ld be approved and significant duration of financia l 
year would be available for implementation of these activities.   
However, the Central Plan scheme was approved in Ap ril 2014 after lapse of FY: 2013-14 leaving 
no time for implementation of proposed activities o n new projects.  Therefore only Survey & Investigat ion 
and preparation of DPR work of ongoing projects wer e carried out.  Accordingly, RE: 2013-14 proposal, 
which was framed in September 2013, was reduced fro m Rs. 26.8 Cr. to Rs. 15.44 Cr. to provide budget 
for ongoing projects only.  The specific problem wh ich led to reduction in budget was only related to non-
approval of plan scheme leading to non-taking up of new schemes for which budget provisions were kept.   
ii) Restructuring of CWC: 
 The proposal for “Restructuring of CWC” had been se nt to Ministry of Finance.  The 
observation of Ministry of Finance, which were received in April 2014, did not reflect shared vision of 
CWC and MoWR, RD & GR as it completely ignored the requirements for basin level approach for 
integrated water resources management and other fun ctional needs in view of growing challenges.  
The proposal is being revised accordingly, to addre ss the issues raised by MoF and meet the 
genuine needs of CWC.  
 Further, a note on the need for Institutional Chan ges in Central Sector to deal with the 
Optimal Development of Water Resources in the count ry has been sent to Ministry of Water 
Resources, RD & GR on 04.08.2015.  The Proposed Ins titutional setup will help in optimal and 
sustainable management of Water Resources in the Country.  
iii) Brahmaputra Board:  
c) Brahmaputra Board is engaged in the preparation of Master Plan and DPR for projects in 
Brahmaputra Basin. It also takes up works as per th e requirement of the states for flood 
management/ protection works.  
To meet the expenditure of Brahmaputra Board, Grant s are released under River Basin 
Management Scheme of MoWR, RD & GR. Under this sche me there is provision of Rs. 528.00 
crores for Brahmaputra Board during XII Five Year Plan. 
It is proposed to restructure Brahmaputra Board as North East & Brahmaputra River Rejuvenation 
Authority (NEBRRA). This issue was discussed during  7 th  High Powered Review Board meeting 
held on 11.02.2015 at Shillong, Meghalaya and Draft  Bill on NEBRRA was circulated among the 

  
 
participants for comments. Comments in favour of fo rmation of NEBRRA have been received from 
all the member-states with some suggestions. The is sues were further discussed in detail in 8 th  
HPRB meeting held on 19.06.2015 at New Delhi. 
    
d) The Budget allocations and Actual Expenditure under River Basin Management(RBM) in respect of 
“Brahmaputra Board 
” for the last two years are given below:- 
 (Rs. In crore/Gross)       
Year BE RE Actuals 
2013-14 100.00 85.00 87.92 
2014-15 143.00 80.00 70.06  
 
Reason for reduction of budget allocation of 2014-1 5 at RE stage is due to vacancy of the six no. key 
statutory posts in the Brahmaputra Board out of seven posts. Inspite of constant efforts of MoWR, RD & GR 
for filling up these posts, proper response from the eligible applicants has not been received.        
Recommendation (Para No.2.16) 
 The Committee observe that at present there are 93 3 Hydrological Observation (HO) sites in the 
country which are used for various objectives such as assessment of water availability, silt, discharg e, 
water quality etc. They further note that as per th e World Meteorological Organisation (WMO) guideline s, 
there should be one HO station on a river covering a catchment area of 1875 square km. This criteria 
changes with terrain, other hydro-meteorological co nditions. The Committee note that as per the Workin g 
Group on "Water Database Development and Management " constituted by the erstwhile Planning 
Commission, the existing HO stations are insufficie nt to enable collection of information for achievin g 
various objectives such as assessment of basin- wis e water availability, study of climate change, bett er 
flood forecasting, flood mitigation, reservoir infl ow forecasting, water quality and sediment assessme nt, 
morphological studies, planning and design of water  resources project, assessment  of navigational 
potential for inland water ways etc. Therefore, the  Working Group has recommended for setting up at le ast 
1917 additional HO sites proposed to be undertaken over the XII and XIII Plan period, with 800 new sit es 
covering all rivers of significance during the XII Plan period. During the year 2014-15, a target for setting up 
236 new HO sites and up-gradation of existing 100 H O sites have been set up to cover additional 
parameters. However as per the information furnishe d by the Ministry, only 5 new HO Sites were propose d 
to be set up in the year 2012-13, which indicates a  very slow progress of work in the beginning. This fact is 

  
 
corroborated by the data on budgetary allocations a nd expenditure under this head which shows that 
allocations were reduced substantially at RE stage during  the years 2013-14 and 2014-15. The Committee 
apprehend that with such a start, the targets set f or up-gradation and expansion of HO sites may remai n 
un-accomplished. They, therefore, recommend the Ministry to fast track the project and take every effort for 
completion of work within the scheduled timeframe. They also desire to be apprised of the number of ne w 
sites opened and up-graded till March, 2015 and the  reasons for slow pace and lesser utilisation of 
budgetary allocations under this head so far. 
Reply of the Government 
Hydrological data observation is specialized work and Central Water Commission (CWC) has been 
mandated to carry the same on national basis.  CWC has developed enough expertise through its network 
of hydrological observation stations and has got trained manpower for carrying out data observation works.  
At present, Central Water Commission is having a network of 954 sites on major rivers and its tributaries of 
India including a network of 76 exclusive snow and meteorological stations.  During the 12 th  plan, it is 
proposed to open 800 new stations and up gradate 10 0 existing stations under DWRIS plan scheme.  Out 
of this, 177 stations have already been opened upto  March’2015 and 100 existing sites have been 
upgraded.   
Reasons for slow pace and lesser utilization of budgetary allocation:  
The main reason for slow pace and lesser utilizatio n of budgetary allocation is that the approval for 
creation of 2551 additional post of work charged st aff required for carrying out various works of up 
gradation of sites, up gradation of WQ labs and opening of 800 new sites is under process. In addition, the 
provision of supervisory staff such as Junior Engin eer’s, Research Assistants etc. proposed in the 
“Restructuring of CWC”, is also under process. 
Recommendation (Para No.2.17) 
 The Committee note that water use efficiency in ir rigation projects for surface water is 30%, for 
ground water is 55%, for drinking water supply in u rban and rural areas is 60% and 70% respectively an d 
for industries is 80%, which is low as compared to international standards of 60% for surface water, 7 5% 
for ground water, 90% for drinking water supply and  95% for industries, as per the information provide d by 
the Ministry. They further observe that water use e fficiency study of 28 sample major/medium irrigatio n 
projects in four States of Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pr adesh, Punjab and Haryana has revealed average 
irrigation efficiency of merely 38%. They deplore t he fact that judicious and efficient water use is s till a 

  
 
distant dream, given such a low efficiency level in  irrigation sector. The Committee believe that more  
attention needs to be given to irrigation sector an d that  there is a need to replace the outdated sys tem of 
irrigation with newly designed/modern irrigation de vices. Being endowed with only 4% of global water 
resources for supporting 18% of total world populat ion residing in India, water saving should be an 
important objective in planning the use of this sca rce natural resource. The renewable water resource 
should be so improved to increase its availability from 4% of global water resources at present. The 
Committee are also of considered opinion that while  establishing the proposed National Bureau of Water  
Use Efficiency (NBWUE) is a right step in this dire ction, it is perturbing that despite EFC's recommen dation 
for setting up NBWUE in 2013 with Rs. 50 crore allo cated in XII Plan towards this, the organisation is yet to 
come up. The Committee feel that with this pace of work, the actual implementation on the ground will not 
take place even after decades and therefore the Com mittee strongly recommend to expedite early 
formation of National Bureau of Water Use Efficienc y to enable adoption of measures to get specific 
standards in water conservation. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The draft Cabinet Note for establishment of “Nation al Bureau of Water Use Efficiency (NBWUE)” 
was approved by the Hon’ble Minister (WR, RD & GR).   The same has been circulated to concerned 
Ministries for their comments vide O.M. No. 11/8/2012-NWM dated 12.05.2015. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation (Para No.NIL) 
 
 
New Delhi;               HUKUM SINGH 
17 December, 2015 
           Chairperson, 
26 Agrahayana, 1937(Saka)               Standing Co mmittee on Water Resources. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure I 
 
  
 
STATE-WISE DETAILS OF GRANT RELEASED AND UTILIZED IN RESPECT OF MINOR 
IRRIGATION SCHEMES UNDER AIBP DURING XI PLAN  
2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 
Sl.  
No.  State Grant 
released Utilized Grant 
released Utilized Grant 
released Utilized Grant 
released Utilized 
 
1 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 47.18 
 37.7311  33.958  37.7311  30.780  34.2000  48.6350  54.0389 
2 Assam 62.148  69.0530  322.7044  358.5600  577.9694  642.1880  356.9030  396.5589 
3 Manipur 49.8070  54.8070  39.5600  44.4440  42.5403  47.2670  40.5000  45.0000 
4 Meghalaya 1.1600  3.7048  24.8009  27.5565  22.5018  25.0020  110.1951  122.4390 
5 Mizoram 34.3430  38.1580  50.7176  56.3528  36.4500  40.5000  51.0921  56.7690 
6 Nagaland 40.510  45.0100  48.5979  53.9976  57.2860  63.6510  70.0000  77.7778 
7 Sikkim 3.240  0.0000  0.000  3.6000  2.6049  2.3440  14.3639  15.9599 

  
 
8 Tripura 8.1000  9.0000  20.5065  22.7850  31.3488  34.8320  0.0000  0.0000 
9 
Himachal 
Pradesh 43.510 
 48.3440  37.5078  41.6750  37.8195  42.0220  32.4000  36.0000 
10 
Jammu & 
Kashmir 105.1851 
 116.8723  297.7547  330.8380  158.0534  175.6149  110.7215  123.0239 
11 Uttrakhand 265.65  295.1660  371.6580  412.9530  127.0063  141.1180  160.0600  177.8444 
  Total 660.8331  717.8462 1247.7658 1390.4930  1124.3604  1248.7389  994.8706 1105.4118 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annexure-II 
 
  
 
STATE-WISE DETAILS OF GRANT RELEASED AND UTILIZED  IN RESPECT OF MINOR 
IRRIGATION SCHEMES UNDER AIBP DURING XII PLAN  
 
2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 
Sl. 
No. State Grant 
released Utilized Grant 
released Utilized Grant 
released Utilized 
Grant 
released 
1 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 54.665 
 60.739  60.000  66.667  14.723  61.136  
2 Assam 414.021  460.023  639.033  880.901  376.775  596.046  82.867 
3 Manipur 0.000  0.000  39.590  22.320  0.000  2.480  12.280 
4 Meghalaya 59.864  66.515  78.637  0.000  0.000    

  
 
5 Mizoram 0.000  0.000  0.000  0.000  0.000    
6 Nagaland 76.991  85.546  55.520  61.689  50.611  56.091  
7 Sikkim 0.000  0.000  4.500  47.789  0.000    
8 Tripura 17.750  19.722  0.000  0.000  0.000    
9 Himachal Pradesh 48.519  53.910  5.400  6.000  27.000  26.070  
10 Jammu & Kashmir 155.240  172.489  108.274  94.960  0.000    
11 Uttrakhand 148.801  165.335  94.019  140.969  96.203  67.9615   
  Total 975.851 1084.279 1084.972 1321.294 565.312 80 9.784 95.147 

  
 
Annexure-III  
  
 
X Plan (Pilot scheme) of  Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of water 
bodies  
  State-wise central assistance released and water bodies taken up/completed under pilot 
scheme is as below:  
S.No.  Name of 
State 
Name of 
District 
No. of water 
bodies 
included 
C A 
released  
( Rs. In 
crore) 
Water 
bodies 
restored 
Water 
bodies 
dropped  
Mahabubnagar 226 24.26 226 0 1 Andhra 
Pradesh Anantpur 52 8.99 52 0 
2 Chattisgarh KabirDham 10 1.68 10 0 
Sabarkantha 17 4.8 17 0 3 Gujarat 
Banaskantha 25 4.35 24 1 
4 H.P. Mandi 13 0.78  13 0 
5 J&K Kupwara 22 2.29 22 0 
Saraikela 22 2.1 22 0 6 Jharkhand 
Palamu 38 6.45 38 0 
Gulbarga 116 26.55 116 0 7 Karnataka 
Banglore Rural 182 28.55 181 1 
Palakkad 10 1.02 10 0 8 Kerala 
Pathanamthitta 13 1.04 11 2 
Takamgarh 5 2.39 5 0 9 Madhya 
Pradesh Shivpuri 65 25.63 65 0 
10 Maharashtra Beed 32 13.83 31 1 
Ganjam 68 9.61 68 0 11 Odisha 
Gajapati 59 4.51 59 0 
Ajmer 4 3.37 4 0 12 Rajasthan 
Pali 1 1.84 1 0 
Sivagangai 8 0.92 7 1 13 Tamil nadu 
Villupuram 38 7.02 37 1 
Uttar Dinajpur 15 3.31 13 2 14 West Bengal 
South 24 
Pargnas  
51 10.61 47 4 

  
 
Nalanda 1 0.27 1 0 15 Bihar 
Jamui 5 1.13 5 0 
Total  15 26 1098 197.30 1085 13 
 

  
 
Annexure-IV  
  
 
Details of World Bank assisted Projects on Repair, Renovation and Restoration of 
Water Bodies  
 
Project 1: Andhra Pradesh and Telangana State Commu nity- Based Tank 
Management  
 
Project Objectives 
: 
 
The project seeks to enable selected tank based pro ducers to improve agricultural productivity, 
and water users associations to manage tank systems  effectively.The project will rehabilitate 
2,100 tanks out of 95,000 tanks in the united Andhra Pradesh (about 45,000 in AP and 50,000 in 
Telangana). 
 
In addition, the project  
• primarily helps in modernizing these tank systems and improving irrigation efficiency, 
• brings in agriculture technologies to improve agriculture productivity and diversity, 
• helps in establishing agri-business supply chain including fishery development, and  
• undertakes extensive canal rehabilitation work 
 
 
Key Project Dates 
: 
 
Effectiveness Date: 27-Jul-2007  
Original Closing Date: 31-Dec-2012   
Revised Closing Date: 31-Jul-2016 
 
Components 
: 
 
• Institutional Strengthening:(Cost $16.40 Million)  
• Minor Irrigation Systems Improvement:(Cost $150.60 Million)  
• Agricultural Livelihoods Support Services:(Cost $25.20 Million)  
• Project Management:(Cost $12.50 Million) 
 

  
 
Progress on Loan Disbursements (figures in USD million)  
 
Project Loan/Credit/TF Status Original 
 Revised  Disbursed Undisbursed Disbursed 
 
P100789  IBRD-48570 Effective  94.50 87.00 68.36 18.64 79% 
P100789  IDA-42910 Effective  94.50 87.02 68.13 19.13 78% 
 
Implementation Status 
: 
The project continues to show good progress in impr oving irrigation efficiency and agricultural 
productivity in the Tank command areas. Consequent upon the state bifurcation, the project 
budget, the past expenditures (including Bank finan cing) and the future expenditures to be 
incurred have been reallocated between Andhra Pradesh and Telangana, and the revised Project 
Agreement, Legal Agreement and Financial Agreement have been signed on 5 March, 2015 and 
shared by the Bank with both state governments and Department of Economic Affairs, 
Government of India. 
 
Progress Indicators 
 
 
Percent increase in productivity (paddy, maize, groundnut, fish).     
 
 Baseline 
(As on 8.2.2008) 
Actual (As on 
30.9.2012) 
Actual (As on 
31.3.2015) 
End Target 
(As on 31.7.2016) 
Value  0% Paddy 33.7% 
Maize 58.8%  
g'nut 21.0%  
Fish 4.46 
Paddy 32.7% 
Maize 47.9%  
g'nut 58.0%  
Fish 244.46 
Paddy      25%  
Maize 30% 
Groundnut 25% 
 Fish       300% 
 
 
Percent increase in cropping intensity   
 

  
 
 Baseline (As on 
8.2.2008) 
Actual (As on 
30.9.2012 ) 
Actual (As on 
31.3.2015 ) 
End Target (As 
on 31.7.2016 ) 
Value Cropping 
intensity - 1.03 
25% 29% 15% increase 
 
Direct project beneficiaries   
 
 Baseline (As on 
8.2.2008) 
Actual (As on 
30.9.2012 ) 
Actual (As on 
31.3.2015 ) 
End Target (As 
on 31.7.2016 ) 
Value 0.00 605052.00 605052.00 -- 
 
Area provided with irrigation and drainage services (in hectare) 
  
 Baseline Actual (As on 
31.3.2013) 
Actual (As on 
31.3.2015) 
End Target (As 
on 31.7.2016) 
Value -- 152759.00 205000.00 250000.00 
 
Percent tank command area irrigated   
 
 Baseline (As on 
8.2.2008) 
Actual (As on 
30.9.2012 ) 
Actual (As on 
31.3.2015 ) 
End Target (As 
on 31.7.2016 ) 
Value 54% 85% 75% 75% 
 
 
*** 
Project 2: Orissa Community Tank Management Project  
 
Project Objectives 
: 
  
The project seeks to enable selected tank based pro ducers to improve agricultural productivity, 
and water user associations to manage tank systems effectively. 
 

  
 
• The project will rehabilitate 324 tanks out of 4000 tanks in the state. 
• The project has a strong livelihood component. 
• Water User Groups are called Pani Panchayats, and 1 15 Tanks have already been 
transferred to them. 
• Extensive capacity building support is envisaged fo r Pani Panchayat members on 
operation and maintenance  
 
Key Project Dates 
 
 
Effectiveness Date: 17-Mar-2009 
Original Closing Date: 31-Aug-2014  
Revised Closing Date: 30-Jun-2016 
 
 
Components 
 
 
Institutional Strengthening:(Cost $4.60 Million) 
Tank Systems Improvements:(Cost $53.70 M) 
Agricultural Livelihoods Support Services:(Cost $9.70 Million) 
Project Management:(Cost $5.10 Million) 
 
Progress on Loan Disbursement 
 (In USD million): 
 
Project Loan/Credit/TF 
 Status Original Revised Disbursed Undisbursed Disbu rsed 
 
P100735 IBRD-75760 Effective 56.00 38.47 13.69 24.7 8 36% 
 
P100735 IDA-44990 Effective 56.00 28.46 13.51 11.81  47% 
 
Implementation Status 
 
 

  
 
Implementation progress and disbursement have incre ased. Disbursements is 40%. All civil 
works contracts, covering the project target area o f 60,000 hectares are under implementation. 
Rehabilitation of 95 minor irrigation schemes has been completed. 
 
Progress Indicators 
 
 
Percentage increase in crop productivity (Paddy, Mustard, G'nut, Veg)   
 Baseline (As on 
01.7.2008) 
Actual (As on 
03.4.2014) 
Actual (As on 
21.12.2014) 
End Target 
(As on 
30.6.2016) 
 
Value 0 Paddy - 20 %  
Mustard - 20% 
Groundnut - 
15%  
Paddy - 20 %  
Mustard - 20%  
Groundnut - 15% 
 
 
Paddy - 25 % 
Mustard - 30% 
Groundnut - 
20%  
 
Area provided with irrigation and drainage services (in hectare)  
 
 Baseline (As on 
01.7.2008) 
Actual (As on 
03.4.2014) 
Actual (As on 
21.12.2014) 
End Target 
(As on 
30.6.2016) 
 
Value 0.00 7600.00 10943.00 60000.00 
 
 
Area provided with irrigation and drainage services - Improved  (In hectare) 
 
 Baseline (As on 
01.7.2008) 
Actual (As on 
03.4.2014) 
Actual (As on 
21.12.2014) 
End Target 
(As on 
30.6.2016) 
 

  
 
Value 0.00 7600.00 10943.00 60000.00 
 
 
Number of Operational water user associations created and/or strengthened  
 
 
 
Baseline (As on 
01.7.2008) 
Actual (As on 
03.4.2014) 
Actual (As on 
21.12.2014) 
End Target 
(As on 
30.6.2016) 
 
Value 0 300 300 374 
 
 
Number of Water users provided with new/improved irrigation and drainage services  
 
 
 
Baseline (As on 
01.7.2008) 
Actual (As on 
20.9.2013) 
Actual (As on 
10.2.2015) 
End Target (As 
on 30.6.2016) 
 
Value 0 30777 32500 149506 
 
 
% Tank command area irrigated  
 
 Baseline (As on 
01.7.2008) 
Actual (As on 
21.12.2014) 
Actual (As on 
10.2.2015) 
End Target (As 
on 30.6.2016) 
 
Value 71 72 75 90 
 
% of middle- and tail-end farmers reporting improved water availability in 
rehabilitated tanks   
 

  
 
 Baseline (As on 
01.7.2008) 
Actual (As on 
21.12.2014) 
Actual (As on 
10.2.2015) 
End Target (As 
on 30.6.2016) 
 
Value 0 29 40 75 
 
 
% farmers in project area adopting improved production techniques   
 
 Baseline (As on 
01.7.2008) 
Actual (As on 
21.12.2014) 
Actual (As on 
10.2.2015) 
End Target (As 
on 30.6.2016) 
 
Value 10 27 33 45 
 
% of tank fishing communities in project area adopting improved 
production/harvesting techniques 
 
 Baseline (As on 
01.7.2008) 
Actual (As on 
21.12.2014) 
Actual (As on 
10.2.2015) 
End Target (As 
on 30.6.2016) 
 
Value 0 45 45 45 
 

  
 
Project 3: Tamil Nadu Irrigation Agriculture Modernization Water-Bodies Restoration 
Management Project 
 
Project Objectives 
: 
 
The project seeks to enable selected sub-basin stak eholders to increase irrigated agriculture 
productivity in a sustainable water resources management framework.  Under the project, 
rehabilitation work in 4931 tanks, 755 anicuts and 8613 km supply channels has been 
completed.  
 
Key Project Dates 
 
Effectiveness Date:09-Apr-2007 
Original Closing Date:31-Mar-2013      
Revised Closing Date:30-Jun-2015 
 
Components 
 
 
(A) Irrigation systems modernization in a sub basin framework:(Cost $282.83 M) 
(B) Agricultural Intensification and Diversification:(Cost $166.23 M) 
(C) Institutional Modernization for Irrigated Agriculture:(Cost $52.69 M) 
(D) Project Management Support:(Cost $8.32 M) 
(E) Water Resources Management:(Cost $5.00 M) 
 
Progress on Loan Disbursement (In USD million): 
 
 
Project Loan/C 
redit/T 
F 
Status Original Revised Disbursed Undisbursed Disbu rsed 
 
P0907 
68 
IBRD 
48460 
Effecti 
ve 
335 335 286.24 48.76 85% 
 
P0907 
68 
IDA 
42550 
Effecti 
ve 
150 150 154.35 0.00 103% 
 
Implementation Status 
 

  
 
 
The revised project implementation plan agreed to a s part of the 9-month extension of Closing 
Date to June 30, 2015 has largely been adhered to. Most of the civil works under the Project 
were completed by March 31, 2015. The work on other  aspects of the Project is also going in 
accordance with the agreed timeframe. Utilization o f outlays under Component B have reached 
99.8% as of June, 2015. Estimated project savings s tand at USD 32 million from the remaining 
loan funds. The Project has been successful in incr easing yields for crops and meeting yield 
targets for most of them. The Project has also been successful in diversifying to high value crops 
away from paddy. At the same time, three consecutiv e years of drought have not allowed the 
investment in tank rehabilitation to demonstrate it s effectiveness in terms of expanding area 
sown. This in turn has had impact on agricultural i ncome in the sub-basins included in the 
Project.  
 
Progress Indicators: 
 
 
Increase in area under micro irrigation (in hectares)  
 
 Baseline (As 
on 9 Apr-
2007) 
Actual (As on 20 
Sept- 2014) 
Actual (As on 01-
June-2015) 
End Target (As 
on 30-Jun-2015) 
 
Value 0.00 41,918 ha 47992 ha 40000 ha 
 
 
 
Irrigation Systems Modernization in a sub-basin framework: 
% of schemes completed within planned time & cost   
 
 
Irrigation Systems Modernization in a sub-basin framework: 
Additional tank systems modernized (Figures in number)  

  
 
 Baseline (As 
on 9 Apr-
2007) 
Actual (As on 30 
Sept- 2014) 
Actual (As on 1-
June-2015) 
End Target (As 
on 30-Jun-2015) 
 
Value 0 tanks 4880 5000  5012  
Date 9 Apr-2007 30 Sept- 2014 1 June-2015 30-Jun-20 15 
 
Increase in crop/animal, fisheries production (thousand tons/yr); Increase in area 
covered by IPM/INM/Organic farming (%); Market information  
 
 Baseline (As on 
9 Apr-2007) 
Actual (As on 1 June-
2015) 
End Target (As on 30-Jun-
2015) 
 
Value 0% Crops 0% 
Milk 0% Fish 
0% 
(IPM/INM/Org 
farming) 
0% marketing 
kiosks 
 
705,400 tons milk; 
14,686 tons fish 
 
4,000,000 tons Crops 
 590,000 tons Milk 
25,000 tons Fish  
25 % (IPM/INM/Org farming)  
200%  marketing 
kiosks 
 
 
Yield of paddy  (figures in percentage) 
 
 Baseline (As on 9 
Apr-2007) 
Actual (As on 
30-Sept-2010) 
End Target (As on 30-Jun-2015) 
 
Value 0 19 30 
 
Yield of maize (figures in percentage) 
 
 Baseline (As on 9 
Apr-2007) 
Actual (As on 30 
Sept- 2010) 
End Target (As on 30-Jun-2015) 
 

  
 
Value 0 23 30.00 
 
Yield of pulses (figures in percentage) 
 
 Baseline (As on 9 Apr-
2007) 
Actual (As on 30 
Sept- 2014) 
End Target (As on 30-Jun-
2015) 
 
Value 0 23 25.00 
 

  
 
Annexure-V 
  
 
Details of water bodies taken up for revival, fund released and number of water bodies completed  under the scheme of RRR during XI Plan as on 31.03.2015 
 
            (Rs. In crore)  
S.No. Name of State  No. of 
Water 
Bodies 
Total 
Project 
cost 
CCA (ha) Committe 
d Central 
Share 
Fund 
released 
during 
2009-10  
Fund 
released 
during 
2010-11  
Fund 
released 
during 
2011-12  
Fund 
released 
during 
 2012-
13 
Fund 
released 
during 
 2013-
14 
Fund 
released 
during 
 2014-
15 
Total  
funds 
released 
 
Funds 
utilized  
No. of 
water 
bodies 
completed 
1 Orissa 1321 254.33 64979 228.89 72.12 75 70.33     27.00 244.45 217.450 1128 
2 Karnataka 427 232.77 8182.19 209.49 74.04 47.47 77.51       1 99.02 177.240 
6 424 
3 Andhra Pradesh 1029 339.69 36673.71 305.72   189         189 47.64  300 
4 Bihar 15 64.45 15718 55.3   25   27.54     52.54 54.0628 14 
5 U.P.(Budelkhan 
d) 28 46.15 29697 41.53   29.08   10.3790     39.459 4 1.3966 28 
6 M.P.(Bundelkha 
nd) 78 41.89 25254 10.47   7.33 2.62       9.95 9.950 72 
7 
Meghalaya 
 Umiam 
Lake(cost 
related to 
irrigation only) 
1 2.83 405 2.54   1.78 0.64       2.42 1.780 
1 
8 Maharashtra 258 135.08 89951 119.34     80.53       80.53 53.47 21 81 

  
 
9 Gujarat 34 17.47 6574 15.72     10.61       10.61  8.3150 23 
10 Chattisgarh 131 122.91 24936 110.61     34.68   37.97   72.65 63.0400 109 
11 Rajsthan 16 11.35 1351.97 7.45     7.07       7. 07 12.1526 15 
12 Haryana 3 40.24 5749 10.06     7.04 2.52     9.5 6 9.560 3 
  Total 3341 1309.16 309470.87 1117.12 146.16 374.66 291.03  40.439 37.97 27.00 917.259 696.05 
97 2198 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
 
Annexure-VI  
  
The details of water bodies approved during XII Plan and their progress as on March 2015 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Although 134 water bodies costing 198.308 cr of Ma dhya Pradesh have been approved by the EC, Govt of MP submitted 
the proposal for 125 water bodies costing Rs 183.2421 crore to MOWR for funding/implementation.  
 
        (Rs. In crore)   
S.No. Name of 
State 
No. of 
Water 
Bodies 
Total 
Project 
cost 
CCA to be 
restored 
(ha) 
Committed 
Central 
Share 
Fund 
released 
during 
2014-15 
Fund 
released 
during 
2015-16  
Total  
funds 
released  
Funds 
utilized  
as on 
March 
2015 
CCA 
Restored 
in Ha 
March 
2015 
1 Orissa 760 361.52 60026 282.73 52.90  52.90 46.35  494 
2 Madhya 
Pradesh 125 183.242 12343 93.006 37.70  37.70   
3 Meghalaya  9 11.43 1096 10.287 2.52  2.52   
4 Manipur 4 65.442 1046.5 58.887 10.36  10.36   
           
  Total 898 621.734  74511.5 444.91 103.48  103.48    

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

   
 
Annexure –VII  
  
 
Action plan for replacement of Gates of Farakka Barrage Project 
 
 
Year  No. of 
Gates 
Installed  
No. of Gates 
proposed to 
be Installed 
Remarks 
Upto 2014-15 23  2 Gates were fabricated by M/S. R.  M. Sinha 
(erected during 2011 and 2014); 6 Gates by 
Texmaco (erected during 2012 to 2014) & 15 
Gates by HTMPPL JV KCL (under Phase-I for 
installation of 33 Gates) 
 2015-16   18 Remaining 18 Gates to be fabricated/ erected by 
HTMPPL JV KCL  
 2016-17   17 2 fabricated Gates (1 by TSPL and 1 b y M/S. R. 
M. Sinha) to be erected and 15 gates are 
proposed to be fabricated/ erected by the new 
agency under Phase-II for installation of 35 gates 
 
 2017-18   20 All 20 gates to be fabricated/ erecte d under 
Phase-II  
 2018-19   15 15 gates are proposed to be fabricate d/ erected 
by the new agency under Phase-III for 
installation of 30 Gates 
 2019-20   15 Remaining 15 Gates are proposed to be  
fabricated/ erected by the new agency under 
Phase-III for installation of 30 Gates 
  23 85   
  Total 108 Excluding Fish Lock Gates (4 Nos.) 
Out of the remaining 96 Gates of Farakka Barrage, w hich includes 11 Gates for Head Regulator, 
the installation schedule for the remaining 85 Gates of Main Barrage is shown in the table above. 
The 11 Gates for Head Regulator shall be fabricated  and replaced subsequently. Replacement of 

   
 
4 Nos. Fish Lock Gates will be taken up in last phase. 
 

   
 
Annexure-VIII  
  
Indicative Budgetary Outlay & Allocation 
Component ‘A’ : Existing Programmes        
            
   Rs. In crore 
Sl. 
No. 
 Nature of project 
Total 
Sanction 
cost  
Cost sharing pattern 
(GoI:State) 
GoI Funds 
released 
Remainin 
g GoI 
liability * 
Expenditur 
e 2014 
  I.       Ongoing works (Non EAP) 
a Sewerage infrastructure projects (Ganga) 1293.63 70:30 530.99 571.49 
b Non Sewerage (including institutional) projects 266.44 
Infrastructure projects 
– 70:30; Institutional 
projects – 100% GoI 
(total a & 
b) 
(total a & 
b) 
c R&D Projects 20.89 100% GoI 16.43 4.46 
d Sewerage infrastructure projects under Ganga 
Action Plan-II 591.05 
100% GoI till 2001& 
for old schemes 70:30 
after 2001( for New 
schemes) 
522.11 68.94 
e Sewerage infrastructure projects under Yamuna 
Action Plan-II 679.88 85:15 426.32 151.58 
f Sewerage infrastructure projects in Haryana on 
Yamuna 217.87 70:30 38.2 114.31 
g Sewerage infrastructure projects (other tributaries)  378.07 70:30 228.2 36.45 
  II.   Ongoing Works (EAP)  
World Bank Assisted Ganga River Basin Project 4604.08 
Institutional Development 600 100% GoI 
Infrastructure investments 6100 70:30 
a 
Project Implementation Support 300 100% GoI 
495.92 
(total 
EAP- 
World 
Bank) 
(total 
EAP- 
World 
Bank)) 
b JICA Assisted GAP-II Project at Varanasi 496.9 85:15 110 317.73 

   
 
c JICA Assisted YAP-III Project at Delhi 1656 85:15 5 1402.6 
  Total (Component ‘A’ : Existing Programmes) 12600.73  2373.17 7271.64 
                                                            Say 12601   7272 
* GOI liability indicated is based on GOI fund releases till 31/12/2014 
Component ‘B’:    New Initiatives 
Objective Programme  Sector Activities Est. 
Budget  
Cost 
Sharing 
Pattern 
GOI 
Share 
Rehabilitation and up-gradation of existing 
sewage treatment plants (STPs) along Ganga. 
Pollution mitigation in open drains through “In 
situ treatment” etc. and other innovative 
methods  
Providing interception & diversion structures, 
STPs & identified essential associated 
interventions / infrastructure critical for 
maintaining water quality standards of Ganga & 
its tributaries in identified locations. 
8000 100:00 
8000 
Sewerage & 
Sanitation 
Rural Sanitation schemes contemplated  for 
improving sanitation and civic amenities in 
identified villages on the banks of river Ganga 
and to develop them as Ganga Grams to arrest 
the flow of pollution into the river and 
supplementing the programme of  Ministry of 
Drinking Water and Sanitation in 1649 number of 
Gram Panchayats located on banks of river 
Ganga (MoDW&S/MoWR, RD & GR) 
1750 - 
1750 
River Front 
Manageme 
nt 
River Front Management and Ghat’s 
developments in selected cities and towns 
including public amenities,  etc 
250 100:00 
250 
Nirmal 
Ganga 
Infrastructu 
re 
Developme 
nt 
Industrial 
Pollution 
Industrial pollution abatement in major industrial 
clusters 1000 100:00 
1000 

   
 
Objective Programme  Sector Activities Est. 
Budget  
Cost 
Sharing 
Pattern 
GOI 
Share 
  Solid Waste 
Manageme 
nt 
Essential Solid Waste Management projects for 
towns / Ghats 50 100:00 
50 
  Misc. interventions aiming at improving flow & 
water availability   
Aviral 
Ganga 
Infrastructu 
re 
Investments    Interventions emerging from final report of 
consortium of IITs & GRBMP recommendations 
100 100:00 
100 
Institutional Development(augmentation of 
project implementation capacities on ground, 
capacity building, setting up of monitoring 
centres and Institutions) 
National Ganga Monitoring Centre    
Support for preparation of Detailed Project 
Reports (DPRs) to keep a shelf of projects ready 
Institutional 
Developme 
nt 
  
Capacity building of urban local bodies  
250 100:00 250 
Research, studies, pilots and training, workshops, 
seminars, publication etc. 
Model interventions for non-point pollution 
mitigation, agricultural runoff etc. 
GIS based data, mapping, spatial analysis for 
Ganga basin and related applications  
Assessment of Special Properties of Ganga Water  
Study of communities depending on Ganga for 
their traditional livelihood  
Special guidelines for sand mining in Ganga 
Program 
Support & 
Sustainabilit 
y 
Research & 
Developme 
nt 
  
Study of possible diversion of a portion of river 
Bhagirathi at a suitable location 
500 100:00 
500 

   
 
Objective Programme  Sector Activities Est. 
Budget  
Cost 
Sharing 
Pattern 
GOI 
Share 
Action Plan for public amenities in rural / urban 
centres on the banks of river Ganga & its 
tributaries. 
 
Habitat 
Improveme 
nt activities 
in Ganga 
Basin 
Safe disposal of flowers and other puja material, 
improved methods of last rites on river banks 
150 100:00 
150 
Conservation of Aquatic life – special attention 
on Dolphin, Turtles and Ghariyals 
Afforestation – Conservation of Flora  
Conservation of wetlands 
 
Ecological 
Sustainabilit 
y 
Bio 
Diversity 
Conservatio 
n 
Other measures for ensuring habitat 
improvement & bio-diversity conservation 
150 100:00 
150 
Media and Communication & public outreach 
activities and strengthening Public Participation 
in Ganga Rejuvenation and Public Awareness. 
100 100:00 
100  Awareness 
Creation 
Ganga Task Force / Ganga Vahini 400 100:00 400 
National & International Workshops, Seminar, 
Symposia, etc. 
National Awards, fellowship programmes 
Public 
Participatio 
n 
Communica 
tion & 
public 
outreach 
activities  Disseminati 
on 
Other measures for strengthening public 
outreach, participation & communication 
Any other activity, which flows from the objectives 
28 100:00 28 
  Total (Component ‘B’ : New Initiatives)  12728    12728 
Gross Total (GOI Liability of Existing Schemes + New Initiatives)- Namami Gange 20000    20000 
 
• The above allocation between components & sub-components and year-wise phasing of 
expenditure is indicative and further re-allocations/re-phasing can be made by the 
NGRBA for optimum utilization of funds and achievement of programme objectives to be 
in consonance with pace of implementation & expenditure. 
 

   
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX - I 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2015-16) HELD ON THURSDAY, 17 DECEMBER 2015 
  
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1515 hours in Committee Room 'C', Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
    
  Shri Hukum Singh – Chairperson  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Radheshyam Biswas 
3. Shri Devusinh Jesingbhai Chauhan 
4. Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunpuria 
5. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
6. Shri Maganti Murali Mohan  
7. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
8. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
9. Shri Rodmal Nagar 
10. Shri Subhash Patel 
11. Shri Sanjaykaka Ramchandra Patil 
12. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
13. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah 
14. Smt. V. Sathyabama 
15. Shri Lallu Singh 
              
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
  

   
 
16. Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
17. Smt. Naznin Faruque 
18. Mir Mohammad Fayaz 
19. Prof. Mrinal Miri 
20.  Shri Amar Shankar Sable 
21. Shri A.V. Swamy  
22. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Rita Jailkhani    - Director 
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar   - Additional Director 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Memb ers to the sitting of the 
Committee.   Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration (a) Draft Report on the 
subject “Review of Ground Water Scenario, need for a comprehensive policy and measures 
to address problems in the country with particular reference to (i) Dark Blocks; and (ii) 
Contamination of underground water by certain indus tries”; (b) Draft Report on Action Taken 
by the Government on the Observations / Recommendat ions contained in the First Report 
(16 th  Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2014-15) of the Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation; and (c) Draft Rep ort on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations / Recommendations co ntained in the Third Report (16 th  Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Minis try of Water Resources, River 

   
 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation.  After some delib erations, the Committee adopted the 
aforesaid three draft Reports without any modification.   
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to  present the above three Reports 
to both the Houses of Parliament in the current Winter Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned  
APPENDIX - II 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS / 
OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRD REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF 
THE COMMITTEE 
  
(i)  Total number of Recommendations/Observations               
12 
 
(ii) Recommendation/Observations which have been accepted     
 by the Government  
 Para Nos.  1.33, 1.34, 1.36, 3.5, 4.12, 6.20, 6.21 AND 6.22 
                       
Total - 8 
                   Percentage 
66.66%  
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee d o 
 not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replie s  
 Para No. 5.10 
                       
Total  - 1 
                   Percentage 
8.33%  
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which repli es    
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committ ee 
 Para Nos. 1.35, 2.16 and 2.17 
                      
Total - 03  

   
 
                      
Percentage 25% 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply 
 of the Government Is still awaited 
 Para Nos. NIL 
                       
Total NIL 
            
Percentage 0% 
 
 