 
1 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
                                (2016-2017) 
 
 
 
                              SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION  
 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2016-17) 
 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Ninth 
Report on 'Demands for Grants (2016-17)' of the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and 
Ganga Rejuvenation} 
 
 
 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
 
 
December, 2016/Agrahayana,1938 (Saka) 
12 

 
2 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
 
(2016-2017) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2016-17) 
 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report on 
'Demands for Grants (2016-17)' of the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation} 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on      08 .12.2016 
     Laid in Rajya Sabha on       08 .12.2016 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
December, 2016/Agrahayana,1938 (Saka) 

 
3 
 
WRC NO.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2016 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
 

 
4 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
      Page  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2016-17) …………………………………  (iii)  
 
INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………………………  (v) 
 
CHAPTER I -      Report        1   
       
CHAPTER II - Observations / Recommendations which have been 
  accepted by the Government ………………………………  47  
            
CHAPTER III - Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do 
  not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ..   79   
CHAPTER IV    - Observations / Recommendations in respect of which  
 replies of the Government have not been accepted by 
 the Committee ……. …………………………………………  84 
 
CHAPTER V    - Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final 
 Replies of the Government are still awaited ……………….  103 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Statement showing progressive expenditure up to  
 March 2016, Non-Plan in respect of CSMRS   104 
II. State-wise statistics of water bodies as per India-WRIS project 105 
III. R&D Schemes under RGI     107 
IV. R&D Studies carried out for NE States    110 
V. Minutes of the Third Sitting of the Standing Committee held 
on 23 November, 2016      113 
VI. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the  
 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Ninth  
 Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee   115 

 
5 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2016-17) 
  
 
  
  Shri Hukum Singh  -  Chairperson 
 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Radheshyam Biswas 
3. Shri Devusinh Jesingbhai Chauhan 
4. Shri Sudhir Gupta 
5. Shri Prakash B. Hukkeri 
6. Shri B. Vinod Kumar 
7. Shri Mohanbhai Kundariya 
8. Shri Maganti Murali Mohan 
9. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
10. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
11. Shri Subhash Patel 
12. Shri Sanjaykaka Ramchandra Patil 
13. Shri Vijaysinh Mohite Patil 
14. Smt. Aparupa Poddar 
15. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
16. Shri S. P. Y. Reddy 
17. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah 
18. Smt. V. Sathyabama 
19. Shri Lallu Singh 
20. Shri Liladharbhai Vaghela 
21. Smt. Dimple Yadav 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
23. Shri Harshvardhan Singh Dungarpur 
24. Mir Mohammad Fayaz 
25. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
26. Shri Sanjiv Kumar 
27. Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
28. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
29. Shri Sanjay Seth 
30. Shri A.V. Swamy  
31. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
 
 
(iii) 

 
6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.  Shri Shiv Kumar   -  Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Rita Jailkhani  -  Director 
3.  Shri Kushal Sarkar  -  Additional Director 
4.  Shri Ginsuanlian Guite  -  Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          (iv)

 
7 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2016 -2017) having been authorised by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Twelfth Report on the Action Taken by Government 
on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Water Res ources on Demands for Grants (2016 -2017) of the Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation.  
2. The Ninth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on  02 May, 
2016.  The replies of the Government t o all the recommendations contained in the Report were received on 03 
August, 2016. 
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and adopted by the 
Committee at their sitting held on 23 November, 2016. 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained 
in the Ninth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Annexure-VI. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                 HUKUM SINGH, 
27 November, 2016                           Chairperson, 
06 Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)                   Standing Committee on Water Resources 

 
8 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in their Ninth Report (16th Lok Sabha) 
on "Demands for Grants (2016-17)”, which was presented to Lok Sabha on 2 May 2016. 
2. Action taken notes were received from the Government in respect of all the 18 Observations / 
Recommendations of the Committee which have been categorised as follows:- 
(i) Observations / Recommendations  which have been accepted by the Government  
(Chapter II): 
Para Nos. 1.22, 1.23, 1.24, 2.25, 2.26, 3.16, 3.17, 4.30, 4.30-A, 4.31, 4.32 and 5.11 
   
(Total - 12) 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government’s replies (Chapter III): 
Para Nos. 1.26 and 2.24 
(Total - 02) 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV):  
Para Nos. 1.25, 2.27, 4.29 and 5.10 
(Total - 04) 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final reply of the Government is still 
awaited (Chapter V): 
Para No. NIL 
(Total - NIL) 
3. The Committee will now deal with the actio n taken by the Government  on some of the 
Observations / Recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs. 

 
9 
 
 
A. Rationalization of Minor Irrigation Statistics scheme 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1.24) 
 
4. As per information furnished to the Committee, the total Bud get Estimates (BE) of the Ministry for 
the year 2016 -17 was Rs. 8764.31 crore comprising of Plan allocation of Rs. 8025.00 crore and Non -
Plan allocation of Rs. 739.31 crore.  The total Budget allocations for 2016 -17 showed an overall increase 
by 27.19% whe n compared to total Budget allocations of Rs. 6381.03 crore during 2015 -16.  The 
Committee also observed that against a total Budget Estimates (BE) of Rs. 6381.03 crore in 2015 -16, the 
figure was increased during the same year by Rs. 1709.35 crore at the R evised Estimate (RE) stage.  
The reason put forth by the Ministry for such a big hike in allocation during 2015 -16 had been the focus 
on completion of identified 46 priority irrigation projects under the Accelerated Irrigation Benefit 
Programme (AIBP) sche me, out of which 23 projects are expected to be completed by March, 2017.  In 
this context, the Ministry stated that the enhanced funding will help the State Governments in completing 
these projects in a time -bound manner.  The Committee hope d and expected that the 23 AIBP projects 
covered under the enhanced Budget allocations during 2016 -17 - would achieve their targeted date of 
completion, i.e. March, 2017 through the concerted efforts of the Ministry / implementing agencies / 
concerned State Governments.   The Committee desired to be apprised of the status of action being 
taken in this regard within three months of the presentation of this Report.  Noting further that frequent 
reductions / increases of Budget allocations at Revised Estimate stage have beco me a norm with the 
Ministry over the last several years, the Committee also recommend ed that before projecting budgetary 
demands, the Ministry undertake some pre -Budget planning and exercises and then only frame 
achievable targets for both the Plan and Non -Plan schemes to have the more realistic and achievable 

 
10 
 
Budget projections in future.  Additionally, prior approval of NITI Ayog, EFC, etc. in respect of schemes to 
be included in Budget proposal each year, as also Rehabilitation and Research issues, land acquisition 
hurdles, NOC etc. should also be sorted out for each of such projects well within the time.  The 
Committee noted in particular that no specific study has been undertaken by the Ministry to avoid drastic 
changes of allocations at RE stage but ef forts have been made to streamline the releases (of funds) to 
the projects under AIBP, CAD, SMI and RRR and that a new funding mechanism through NABARD has 
also been announced, for which, the modalities will be financed during the year.  They also note d that 
implementation of 89 incomplete irrigation projects under AIBP would be fastracked, which will help to 
irrigate 80.6 lakh hectares.  The Committee recommend ed that the Ministry should initiate a study on 
modalities to avoid the recurrent problems of cha nges in Budget alloc ations at RE stage year after y ear.  
The Committee desired also to see a positive outcome on the fastracked implementation of 89 
incomplete AIBP projects during this financial year, 2016 -17 itself.  A report, in this regard, should be 
submitted to the Committee within the next six months. 
5. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied as follows:  
“(1) The Plan allocation for 2015 -16 was of Rs. 3,632 crore and National Clean Energy 
Fund(NCEF) fund of Rs. 2,100 crore exclusively fo r Namami Gange Scheme. In the current year 
2016-17, the actual Plan allocation is Rs.3,025 crore and NCEF fund of     Rs.2,500 crore for 
Namami Gange/National River Conservation Plan (NRCP). The equal amount of Rs. 2,500 crore 
provided for Namami Gange/NRC P has been reflected as under the Major Head 2810 “Transfer 
to NCEF” being Public Account Fund collected by way CESS, is under the administrative control 
of Ministry of Finance. This form of presentation has been introduced in the current year and 
allocation of Rs.2,500 crore is accounted for twice. However, the funds actually available to the 
Ministry for Plan schemes are Rs.5,525 crore against Rs.5,732 crore in the previous year 2015 -
16. 

 
11 
 
(2)  Ministry is taking all necessary steps to avoid the recurrent p roblems in Budget 
allocations at RE state. Presently 2016 -17 is the end of 12th Five Year Plan. On Completion of 
every five years all the Plan schemes are evaluated. In the year 2017 all the schemes/project will 
be evaluated by independent agencies. Thereafter evaluated report will be followed. 
(3) So far as implementation of CAD works of 23 projects prioritised to be completed by 
March, 2017 is concerned, 21 projects are either ongoing or under the process of inclusion under 
Command Area Development Programme.  Proposal of only two projects are awaited as on date. 
(4) During 2015-16 Pradhan  Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) was launched with an 
aim to enhance physical  access of water on farm and expand cultivable area under assured 
irrigation, improv e on farm water use efficiency, introduce sustainable water conservation 
practices etc. Major and Medium  irrigation/multipurpose irrigation projects are being funded 
under PMKSY-AIBP.  
 
The issues related to implementation of projects under PMKSY -HKKP including prioritization of 
projects were deliberated in the committee headed by Sh. Brijmohan Agrawal, Minister (Water 
Resources) of Chhattisgarh. As per the information supplied by concerned States to the 
committee, 99 projects have been identified for comp letion up to 2019-20.  23 projects (Priority-1) 
have been identified to be completed by 2016 -17 and another   31 projects (Priority -II)   have 
been identified to be completed by 2017 -18.  The balance 45 projects (Priority -III) have been 
identified to be completed by 2019-20. 
 
The   completion of above projects is proposed to be done in mission mode. It is proposed to 
establish a Mission with Additional Secretary/Special Secretary in the Ministry of Wate r 
Resources, River Development and  Ganga Rejuvenation ( MoWR, RD & GR) as the Mission 
Director to overlook the entire programme. 
 
Further, keeping in view of the budgetary constraints, it is also being proposed to borrow Central 
share/Assistance (CA) from NABARD as per year wise requirements to complete the abo ve 

 
12 
 
projects. Further the State Governments, if required, may also borrow funds from NABARD for 
the State Share.”                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
 
6. The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that no menti on has been made about 
the Committee’s earlier recommendation for compiling and uploading on the website of the 
Ministry detailed census information / data of all the MI censuses (viz. 1 st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th ) in a 
condensed, user -friendly format (Stat e/UT-wise).  The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
recommendation in this regard so that all the stake -holders / users, i.e. farmers, students, 
academicians, planners, bureaucrats , etc. derive benefits from such information  / data and they 
desire to be  apprised of action taken by the Government within three months of presentation of 
this Action Taken Report.  The Committee also note the efforts being made by the Government 
for completion of the exercise of 5 th Minor Irrigation (MI) Census with the reference year 2013 -14 
being conducted in 34 States / UTs and which is targeted for completion in March, 2017 , viz. over 
77.44% field work 5th MI Census has been completed, online software for data processing of 5 th MI 
Census has been developed and link intimat ed to States / UTs, regular review of progress of 
Census activities like field work / data entry using software , etc. being done by State 
Governments / UTs is being carried out by senior officers of the Ministry, and regular monitoring 
is also done through  Video Conference with States, DO letters, e -mails, etc.  The Committee 
appreciate these efforts of the Ministry, but, however they would further desire that there should 
be no let -up or slackness on this count so that the Census activities are duly comple ted and 
targets are achieved by States / UTs within the stipulated time-frame, i.e. March, 2017. 
B. Inclusion of Water in the Concurrent List  
 

 
13 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1.25) 
7. The Committee note d from the reply of the Ministry that although there ha d been growing 
demand by the professionals and civil society to bring ‘water’ in the Concurrent List of the Constitution, 
the proposal had been opposed by most of the States.  Further, the proposal did not find favour with R. 
S. Sarkaria Commission (1983 -88) an d M. M. Punchhi Commission (2007 -10) which examined the 
Centre-State relations.  The Committee t ook note of the view of the Ministry that the matter requires 
extensive deliberations with the States and other stakeholders so that a broader consensus emerges  in 
the matter.  The Committee also t ook note that the objectives of better conservation, development and  
management of water resources were stated and sought to be achieved through the draft National Water 
Framework Law and the draft River Basin Managemen t Bill - which are currently under examination in 
the Ministry in consultation with different stakeholders.  Further, a Committee ha d been constituted under 
the Chairmanship of Dr. Mihir Shah to examine the draft National Water Framework Law and the draft 
River Basin Management Bill.  The Committee, therefore, recommend ed that the Ministry should 
expeditiously wind up the process of enactment of the draft National Water Framework Law and the draft 
River Basin Management Bill which is at present under examin ation with them.  They also want ed to see 
early outcome of the report of Dr. Mihir Shah Committee in the matter under intimation to them.  In this 
connection, the Committee were, however, of the opinion that the proposed National  Water Framework 
Law would lack teeth if the subject ‘Water’ is not brought under the Concurrent List of the Constitution, for 
the implementation of the proposed Framework Law will require coordinated, consultative action on the 
part of both the Centre and the States.  The Committee , therefore, recommend ed that steps be initiated 
by the Government to again begin the much needed consultations with the States on the issue of 
bringing ‘water’ in the Concurrent List of the Constitution.  Noting the fact that the proposals m ade to this 

 
14 
 
end in the past had been opposed by most of the States, the Committee , however, meanwhile liked to be 
apprised of the names of the States opposing this proposal alongwith their grounds of their opposition.  
8. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied as follows:  
“The Committee constituted by this Ministry under Dr. Mihir Shah to examine the draft National 
Water Framework Bill and the draft River Basin Management Bill has prepared a draft National 
Water Framework Bill, 2016. The draft National Water Framework Bill, 2016 contains several 
provisions for improved management of water resources in the country. The draft National Water 
Framework Bill, 2016 has been circulated to all the State Governments/ Union Territories for 
inviting their comments on the  report. The draft Bill has also been placed on the website of this 
Ministry for obtaining comments thereon from general public.  
2. The draft River Basin Management Bill is presently under consideration of the Mihir Shah 
Committee.  
3. Specific consultations for bringing ‘Water’ in the Concurrent List of the Constitution have 
not been undertaken with the States. However, in the course of conferences with the States, 
suggestion for bringing water in the Concurrent List has by and large not found favour with  the 
States.  
4. The recommendations of the Committee to initiate steps to begin consultations with the 
States on the issue of bringing ‘W ater’ in the Concurrent List of the Constitution has been noted 
for appropriate action.” 
9. The Committee note the rep ly of the Ministry that the Dr. Mihir Shah Committee 
constituted by the Ministry to examine the draft National Water Framework Bill and the draft River 
Basin Management Bill, has prepared a draft National Water Framework  Bill, 2016 which has been 
circulated to all the State Governments / Union Territories for inviting their comments on the 
report besides it ’s being posted on the website of the Ministry for obtaining comments thereon 
from general public.  The Committee also observe that the draft River Basin  Management Bill is 
presently under consideration of the Dr. Mihir Shah Committee.  The Committee desire that the 

 
15 
 
Ministry expeditiously wind up the process of obtaining of comments of the States / Union 
Territories and the general public on the draft Nati onal Water Framework Bill, 2016 through 
concrete initiatives with a view to ensure speedy enactment of an Act in the matter.  They also 
recommend that expeditious action be taken to ensure that the River Basin Management Bill 
being examined by the Dr. Mihi r Shah Committee  is brought to Parliament for speedy legislative 
enactment.  The Committee are disappointed that specif ic consultations for bringing ‘W ater’ in 
the Concurrent List of the Constitution have not been  initiated with the States.  The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to  take up the matter with all the States / UTs individually through 
correspondences and ask for specific comments in the matter in view of the need of the hour as 
many States are now at loggerheads with each other over water sharing passing through their 
territories.  Moreover, the impact of climate change is being  felt by almost all the States o n 
availability of water resources which has become a national issue.   
C. Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.25) 
10. The Committee noted that under the pilot scheme on Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) 
of water bodies initiated in 2005, a total of 1098 water bodies were taken up, out of which 1085 water 
bodies were completed and irrigation potential of 0.78 lakh hectare was restored through Rs. 197.3 crore 
released as Central grant.  After the pilot scheme, two schemes of RRR of water bodies, one with 
domestic support with an outlay of Rs. 1250 crore and another with external assistance with an outlay of 
Rs. 1500 crore, were launched during 12 th Plan.  Under the RRR scheme with domestic support, Rs. 
917.259 crore were released as Grant during 11 th Plan for 3341 water bodies, out of which 2501 were 
completed and 1.195 lakh hectare of irrig ation potential restored.  While noting the Ministry’s reply that 
Rs. 2175 crore was sought for allocation for PMSKY (SMI, CADWM, GW&RRR) during 2016 -17, the 
Committee were surprised to know that only Rs. 500 crore was provided, meaning thereby that alloca tion 

 
16 
 
for RRR scheme would be still much less than adequate.  Further, the little available fund allocated would 
be utilized for only ongoing RRR schemes.  The Committee further note d, in this connection, that a query 
was made by the Committee to the Minist ry as to whether the Government has carried out any survey 
about encroached water bodies in the country, and also whether any stringent action / penalty has been 
proposed for those guilty of willful encroachments of water bodies in the country.  Sadly howe ver, the 
reply of the Ministry in the matter showed  that the Government was putting the onus on the shoulder of 
State Governments on the plea that the works related to water resources development are taken by the 
concerned State Governments and that the Ce ntral Government act as catalyst by providing Central 
Assistance to eligible schemes as per the guidelines.  The Committee want ed the Ministry to take a 
proactive role with regard to RRR of water bodies in the country.  Noting further that the guidelines 
issued in October, 2013 for implementation of the RRR scheme enjoins the State Governments to take 
steps for declaring the water body boundary through a government order and to ensure removal of 
encroachment in the water body before submitting the proposal for release of 2 nd installment of grant for 
the RRR scheme, the Committee recommend ed that the Government keep strict tab on the State 
Governments to ensure that these guidelines are scrupulously complied with by them before release of 
funds or approval of  projects under the RRR scheme.  The Committee also recommend ed that the 
Ministry within three months of presentation of this Report issue common, mandatory guideline to all 
States / UTs enjoining them to identify, record and compile the number of encroach ed water bodies in 
their territories and complete the exercise within a year for purpose of compiling a national database at 
the Centre in this regard.  They further recommend ed that the Ministry vigorously pursue all the 
concerned States / UTs through con sultation, meetings, etc. to ensure that the advisory issued by 
Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation on 26 February, 
2016 is duly complied and the guilty (if any) are punished in case of the encroachments on the water 
bodies.  The Committee also categorically desire d that a scientific study / mapping of water bodies be 
taken up on priority basis by the Ministry and the Committee be apprised of the results of such study / 
mapping. 
 
11. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied as follows:  

 
17 
 
“(i)  In respect of the observation of the Committee for keeping strict tab on the State 
Governments to ensure that the guidelines are scrupulously complied for removal of 
encroachment, it may be mentioned that the guidel ines (2013) of RRR on water bodies 
stipulates for State to take necessary steps for declaring the water body boundary 
through a Government order and to ensure removal of encroachments in the water body 
spread area/water body boundary before submitting the proposal for release of 2nd 
installment of grant for completion of work on the water body under RRR. This is strictly 
followed for releasing central assistance to the States. States submit necessary 
documents/ certificates in this regard before release of 2nd installment.  
(ii) After the pilot scheme, two schemes of RRR of water bodies, one with domestic support 
with an outlay of Rs. 1250 Crore and another with external assistance with an outlay of 
Rs. 3700 Crore, were launched during XIth Plan under the RRR sch eme with domestic 
support, Rs. 917.259 Crore were released as Grant during XIth Plan for 3341 water 
bodies, out of which 2501 were completed and 1.455 lakh hectare of irrigation potential 
restored. 
 
During the XIIth Plan a total of 1354 water bodies from 9  states have been approved for an 
estimated cost of Rs. 1025.8723 crore so far. Out of these 1354 water bodies, Central assistance 
of Rs. 264.67 Crore have been released for 1237 water bodies from 8 states with CCA to be 
restored of 0.94 lakh ha. In the cu rrent financial year 2016 -17, there is target of 1000 water 
bodies to be restored as per the decision taken in the meeting of National Water Mission (NWM).  
 
As regards the query made by the Committee to the Ministry as to whether the Government has 
carried out any survey about encroached water bodies and any stringent action/ penalty to be 
proposed for those guilty of willful encroachments of water bodies in the country, it is again stated 
that these steps are to be taken by the concerned State Govts. only as land, law and order are 
state govt. subject. The Ministry may play a role in assisting the state govt. to conduct the survey 
work and enact laws in preventing the encroachment of waster bodies. 
 

 
18 
 
As per the guidelines issued in October, 2013 for implemen tation of RRR of Water Bodies 
schemes, the State Govts need to take steps for declaring the water body boundary through a 
Government Order (G.O) and to ensure removal of encroachment in water body before 
submitting the proposal for release of 2 nd installment for grant for the RRR scheme. The CWC 
field offices may be directed to keep strict watch on the works being carried out by State Govts. 
so as to ensure that these guidelines are fully complied in letter and spirit before release of funds 
or approval of projects under RRR scheme. For this proper monitoring of the water bodies needs 
to be carried out through remote sensing and CWC field offices. 
 
As regards the issuing of common, mandatory guidelines by the Ministry to all State/ UTs 
enjoining them to iden tify, record and compile the number of encroached water bodies in their 
territories and completing the exercise within a year for purpose of compiling a national database 
at the Centre, this work can be done by the MI (Stat) Wing of MoWR, RD & GR who may i ssue 
these guidelines with the help of CWC and compile a data base as being done with other MI 
schemes. For taking up the scientific study/ mapping of water bodies on priority basis, the MI 
(Stat) Wing need to engage the State Govts. to conduct a survey of  all the water bodies in the 
country along with the MI census. Further, under the India -Water Resources Information System 
(WRIS) project, using satellite imageries of 2009 -10, about 7,98,908 water bodies with minimum 
0.01 hectare area have been mapped usi ng satellite remote sensing technique which includes 
both rural and urban areas. The details of same has been enclosed as Annexure -II. However, for 
further detailed study regarding encroachment in the water bodies and other related issues, a 
census/ survey is to be conducted by State Govts. 
 
As regards the recommendation that Ministry need to vigorously pursue all the concerned States/ 
UTs through consultation, meeting, etc. to ensure that the advisory issued by Secretary, MoWR, 
RD & GR on 26 th February, 2016 is duly complied and guilty (if any) are punished in case of the 
encroachments on water bodies, necessary actions are being taken. 
 
As regards the view of the Committee for Ministry to take a proactive role with regard to RRR of 
water bodies in the coun try, it is to mention that the state govts. are the overall custodians of the 

 
19 
 
water bodies as water is a state subject. The State Govts. plan, execute and maintains the 
various irrigation schemes as per their need and priority. The role of Central Water Co mmission 
is this regard is that of advisory in nature and to facilitate them to prepare and execute the 
projects.  
(iii) MI Stat Wing of Ministry conducts all India Census of Minor Irrigation Structures under 
RMIS which is a component of Development of Water Res ource Information System 
(DWRIS) Plan Scheme.  This Census is conducted every five years so far four census in 
1986-87, 1993-94, 2000-01, 2006-07 have been conducted and 5th MI Census with base 
2013-14 is in progress. 
 
MI Census collects information on num ber of Minor Irrigation Structures of Ground Water and 
Surface Water used for irrigation in rural areas.  There are five type of MI structures namely 
Dugwell, Deep Tubewell, Shallow Tubewell, Surface flow and Surface lift schemes. From Minor 
Irrigation Census information, data on water bodies is indirectly compiled but this information is 
limited to number of water bodies in villages used for minor irrigation. 
 
In the ongoing 5th MI Census an attempt has been made to collect information on number of 
Water Bodies directly in rural areas, by adding an item on Water bodies in the village schedule.  
 
CWC and ISRO under DWRIS have collected information and created a portal under India -WRIS, 
a layer on Water bodies has been developed in which around 8 lakh water bo dies have been 
mapped.  A 16 digit code for these water bodies has been generated.” 
12. The Committee note that the States are being strictly insisted to submit documents / 
certificates before release  of 2 nd installment of grant for completion of work on w ater bodies 
under Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) scheme, in terms of the recommendation of this 
Committee.  However, the Committee are dismayed to see the Ministry is apparently abdicating 
their responsibility about conducting survey about encroa ched water bodies and about the 
question of initiating penalt ies, etc.  / action on those guilty of wilful encroachments of water 

 
20 
 
bodies.  Noting the Ministry’s reply that their Ministry may play a role in assisting the State 
Governments to conduct the surv ey work and enact laws in preventing the encroachment of 
water bodies, the Committee desire that the Ministry make necessary consultations with the State 
Governments on the issue at the earliest and prevail upon them to adopt a universal set of 
guidelines applicable  for encroached water bodies all over the country.  They also recommend 
that stringent penal provisions may be incorporated in such set of guidelines to deter all future 
encroachers.  The Committee also note the Ministry’s reply that MI (Stat.) Wing of Ministry of 
Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation may issue guidelines for compiling 
national database at the Centre on encroached water bodies with the help of Central Water 
Commission (CWC), and they desire that needful action b e taken at the earliest in this regard.  
The Committee note and appreciate that necessary actions are being taken for ensuring due 
compliance of the advisory issued by Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources, River Development 
& Ganga Rejuvenation on 26 Feb ruary, 2016 including punishment of the guilty (if any) in case of 
the encroachments on water bodies.  The Committee desire to be apprised of the details of any 
such action taken so far in the country.  They also desire that the 5 th MI Census being undertaken 
in the country under MI (Stat.) Wing of Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation with the base year 2013 -14 be completed in a time -bound manner, and the 
information about water bodies (including public and private, safe and e ncroached) existing in 
the country (States/UTs wise) be furnished to them. 
D. National Projects 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.27) 

 
21 
 
13. The Committee note d that 16 National Projects ha d been approved by the Government for 
implementation in the country.  Howeve r, although the proposal was approved as early as 2008, only 4 
National Projects apart from Indira Sagar Polavaram Project are presently under execution, viz. 
Gosikhurd Irrigation Project (Maharashtra), Shahpurkandi Dam Project (Punjab), Teesta Barrage Pro ject 
(West Bengal) and Sanju -Nahar Pariyojana Project (Uttar Pradesh), while the remaining 10 National 
Projects have been under appraisal, Detailed Project Report (DPR) stage or under Project Feasibility 
Report (PFR) stage.  The Committee were further distressed to observe that even the 5 National Projects 
reportedly under execution / implementation are at present facing hurdles in their smooth execution due 
to various problems like land acquisition, R and R issue, inter-State disputes etc. due to which at least 3 
of those National Projects had  passed well beyond their targeted date of completion (i.e. March, 2015) 
viz. Goshikhurd Irrigation Project (Maharashtra), Shahpurkandi Dam Project (Punjab) and Teesta 
Barrage Project (West Bengal).  Even for the remai ning National Projects which are under appraisal, 
DPR stage or under Project Feasibil ity Report stage, no targets had  been fixed for their timely / 
scheduled completion, even as the Sanju -Nahar Pariyojna Project is targeted to be completed by March, 
2017.  The Committee recommended that the Ministry should promptly initiate action in consultation with 
the concerned State Governments to sort out the issues / hurdles that have led to 3 National Projects 
failing to meet their targeted date of completion (March , 2015) viz. Gosikhurd Irrigation Project 
(Maharashtra), Shahpurkandi Dam Project (Punjab) and Teesta Barrage Project (West Bengal).  They 
also recommended that concerted efforts should be made by the Ministry to achieve the completion of 
Saryu-Nahar Pariy ojna Project (Uttar Pradesh) in coordination with the State Government of Uttar 
Pradesh - which is targeted by March, 2017.  The Committee further recommend ed that realistic, 
achievable targets be also fixed for timely completion of the remaining National Projects which are at 
various stages of execution appraisal, DPR stage or under PFR stage after addressing all contentious 
issues in consultation with the concerned States, viz. Indira Sagar Polavaram Project (Andhra Pradesh), 
Lakhwar – Vyasi Multipurpose Project (Uttarakhand), Renuka Dam Project (Himachal Pradesh), Ujh 
Multipurpose Project (Jammu & Kashmir), Kishau Multipurpose Project (Himachal Pradesh / 
Uttarakhand), Ken-Betwa Link Project (Madhya Pradesh), Kulsi Dam Project (Assam), Noa -Dihing Dam 
Project (Arunachal Pradesh), Bursar HE Project (Jammu & Kashmir), Gyspa HE Project (Himachal 
Pradesh), 2nd Ravi -Vyas Link Project (Punjab) and Upper Siang Project (Arunachal Pradesh).  The 

 
22 
 
Committee desired to be updated of the action taken in the matter.  The Committee also desired that the 
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar Pranahita – Chevella Project should also be expedited and to this end, necessary 
consultations with the State Government of Telangana be initiated by the Ministry at the earliest to avoid 
cost and time escalations.  The Committee further desired to be apprised of action taken in this regard. 
14. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied as follows:  
“Status of national projects funded under AIBP is  as below: 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of Project State Status 
1. Gosikhurd 
Irrigation Project 
Maharashtra Under Execution (i) Head Work: Almost 
completed (ii) Main & Branch canal:  Almost at 
completion stage (iii) Dy. Minor Water courses: 
About 50% work completed. In respect of 
Gosikhurd project despite completion of head 
works, water is not being impounded upto Full 
Reservoir Level (FRL) due to land acquisition / 
R&R issues which comes under the preview of 
State Govt. Project is included in the list of 99 
prioritised projects for completion in mission mode 
under PMKSY . Target date of completion 
intimated by state is March, 2020. Accordingly 
provisions for funding of this project upto 
completion are being proposed. 
2. Teesta Barrage 
Project 
West Bengal Under Execution: - Main Structures completed.  
Govt. of West Bengal is finding it difficult to 
acquire land for distributaries and minors. The 
State Govt. has not submitted any C.A. proposal 
since last three years and not indicated any 

 
23 
 
priority to complete the same. 
3. Shahpur Kandi 
Project 
Punjab Under Execution: - The St ate of J&K has not 
agreed   to lease the land in its territory to the 
Govt. of Punjab due to certain reservations 
regarding design of project which may not able to 
deliver their share of water. Further, they have 
cited that agreement in this regard has bee n 
terminated by Punjab,  in view of Punjab 
termination Agreement Acts (PTAA) enacted by 
Govt. of Punjab. The issue has been taken up in 
subcommittee of interstate council for resolution 
of issue. Further both the States Punjab and J&K 
have intimated that t hey are in the process of 
sorting out issue by consultation at Chief 
Secretary Level. 
4. Saryu Nahar 
Pariyojana 
Uttar Pradesh Under Execution:  Saryu Nahar Pariyojna is to be 
implemented in three phases. Main diversion 
structure and link canals are alread y complete. 
Components of project under scheme of Natonal 
projects are some of balance works phase -II & 
phase-III of the project which involve construction 
of main Rapti canal. The revised target of 
completion of project is indicated by state is 
March, 201 8. It is one of the priority project and 
funding arrangement for the same are being tied 
up as may be required. 
5. Indira Sagar 
Polavaram 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
Under Execution: An expenditure of Rs.7194 cr. 
has been incurred against approved cost of 

 
24 
 
Project irrigation component of Rs. 13142.05 crore. 
Central assistance of Rs. 850 cr has been 
provided during 2014 -15 & 2015 -16. Further the 
funds required for its completion are being tied up 
to complete it in a time bound manner. Earth work 
on dam has been completed  upto 31% and main 
canals have been completed upto 90%.  
6. Lakhwar Multi 
Purpose Project 
Uttarakhand The revised cost estimate of the Lakhwar project 
at an cost of 3966.51cr (PL2012) has been 
accepted by the TAC of MoWR in its meeting 
dated 14.12.2012 an d investment clearance has 
been granted on 19 th April -2016. Upper Yamuna 
River Board is taking up the matter with the 
concerned States regarding sharing of benefits. 
7. Ujh Multi Purpose 
Project 
J & K DPR is   under appraisal in CWC/CEA. 
Some of the obse rvations are yet to be complied 
by the State Govt. Further, State Government is 
yet to obtain the requisite statuary clearances. 
8. Kishau Multi 
Purpose Project 
H.P. & 
Uttarakhand 
Revised DPR submitted to CWC in 2010 by 
Uttarakhand Jal Vidyut Nigam Limite d (UJVNL). 
Observations / Comments (2011) on DPR yet to 
be complied by Project Authority (PA).  MoU for 
formation of Joint Venture (JV) between GoUK 
and GoHP signed on 20.06.2015. However SPV 
is yet to be formed. 
9. Renuka Dam 
Project 
H. P. Technical clea rance to the revised DPR of the 
project is yet to be accorded. Compliances to 
most of the CWC observations (05/2010) are 

 
25 
 
awaited. In principle forest clearance obtained. 
R&R clearance obtained from Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs The Environment clearance accor ded by 
MoEF in 2009 is under challenge in National 
Green Tribunal (NGT). The NGT has made a 
committee under Principal Chief Conservator of 
forest Himachal Pradesh in this regard.  
10. Noa-Dehing Dam 
Project 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
DPR submitted in Oct, 2014 for  appraisal. 
Compliance to CWC/CEA comments awaited 
from   Project Authorities. 
11. Kulsi Dam Project Assam DPR submitted in September 2014 by 
Brahamputra Board. Compliance to CWC/ CEA 
comments awaited from PA despite reminders. 
Brahmaputra Board has been requested to 
expedite process. 
12. Ken Betwa Link 
Project 
M. P. & U.P. Phase-1 under appraisal in CWC/CEA. Updated 
cost estimate (Rs 17647.40 Cr. Pl -2015-16) 
submitted by PA in Feb 2016. Land for 
compensatory afforestation yet to be identified by 
states. Fresh agreement between UP and MP for 
water balance required. NWDA is taking 
necessary action in this regard. 
13. Bursar Project J & K  NHPC has intimated that the project is financially 
unviable.  
14. Gyspa Project H.P. Work plan furnished for submissio n of DPR by 
May, 2017. S&I works are withheld due to 
persistent resistance from locals to shift the dam 
site to upstream site. 

 
26 
 
15. 2nd Ravi Vyas 
Link Project 
Punjab PFR submitted by Punjab in July 2014 not in 
proper shape and observations sent. The Govt. of 
Punjab further submitted an inspection Note 
(March 2015) stating that project is not technically 
viable. 
16. Upper Siang 
Project 
Upper Siang 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Arunachal 
NTPC submitted PFR to Govt. of Arunachal 
Pradesh in 11/2009. Presently composite 
proposal is under active consideration for 300m. 
Dam Rehabilitation of Yingkiong will be needed. 
 
A High Power Steering Committee under chairmanship of Secretary (Water  Resources, RD & 
GR) has been constituted to review the implementation of National Proje ct. The committee has held 9 
meetings so far Last meeting was held on 26.09.2014. 
 
Pranahitha- Chevella Sujjalla Sravanthi Project : 
An Irrigation Project namely, Pranahitha Chevella was taken up by the erstwhile State of Andhra 
Pradesh in the year 2008 -09 to serve drought prone areas of Telangana region and was proposed to be 
taken up as National Project. In view of certain inter -state issues with Maharashtra and difference in the 
quantum of water availability, the barrage at Medigadda could not be started. 
Now, the Govt. of Telangana has intimated that major design modification for optimum utilization of 
water for Telangana has been carried out while addressing the concerns of Maharashtra. WAPCOS is 
preparing the DPR of the revised project and the project will now comprise of the following two 
components:- 
1 Pranahitha and 2 Kaleshwaram.   DPR is under preparation. It would be examined by CWC once it is 
completed and is submitted by the State Government.” 
 
15. In their recommendation in respect of  16 National Projects approved by the Government 
for implementation in the country, the Committee had recommended for initiation of prompt 

 
27 
 
action in consultation with the concerned State Governments to sort out the issues / hurdles that 
have led to 03 National Projects failing to meet their targeted date of completion (March, 2015) viz. 
Gosirkhud Irrigation Project (Maharashtra), Shahpurkandi Dam Project (Punjab) and Teesta 
Barrage Project (West Bengal).  However, apart from mentioning the taking up of the issue of 
Punjab Termination Agreement Acts (PTAA) with Inter -State Council in respect of Shahpurkandi 
Dam Project, the reply of the Ministry has not spelt out any specific action taken by the 
Government in resolving the bottlenecks hindering the implementation of th e said 03 National 
Projects.  Further, whereas recommendation had been made for concerted efforts to be made by 
the Ministry to achieve the completion of Saryu Nahar Pariyojana Project (Uttar Pradesh) in 
coordination with the State Government of Uttar Prad esh by its targeted schedule (i.e. March, 
2017), the Ministry have sadly informed that the target of completion of the Project has been 
revised to March, 2018.  The Committee disapproved the apathetic attitude of the Government on 
this issue, and they reit erate their recommendation to promptly begin necessary consultations 
with the State Government of Punjab, Jammu & Kashmir, West Bengal and Maharashtra for 
working out a plan of action for completion of these National Projects, viz. Shahpurkandi Dam 
Project (Punjab), Teesta Barrage Project (West Bengal) and Gosirkhud Irrigation Project 
(Maharashtra).  The Committee note from the Ministry’s reply that there are some balance works 
of Phases II & III in respect of Saryu Nahar Pariyojana Project (Uttar Pradesh) which involve 
construction of ma in Rapti Canal, and also that the funding arrangement of this priority National 
Project are being tied up as may be required.  The Committee desire that necessary works for 
construction of Rapti Canal be started forthwith an d the arrangements for funding of the Saryu 
Nahar Pariyojana Project (Uttar Pradesh) be speedily worked out to avoid any further time and 

 
28 
 
cost escalations in this regard.  The Committee also note that DPR for Pranahitha – Chevalla 
Sujjalla Sravanthi Projec t in Telangana comprising two components (viz. Pranahitha and 
Kaleshwaram) is under preparation by W ater and Power Consultancy Services (WAPCOS)  Ltd., 
and they desire that it may be speedily completed so that appraisal and  approval by C entral 
Water Commission may be obtained in time for early commissioning of works.  The Committee 
further desire the Ministry to keep tab on the status the remaining 11 National Projects and 
apprise the Committee of the details of updated position of each of the projects. 
 
 
 
 
E. Budget Allocation for Flood Control and Drainage and Status of Flood Protection Works on 
Common Border Rivers 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.29) 
16. The Committee note d that the Plan allocation for Flood Control for the year 2015 -16 had been  
earmarked at R s. 112.00 crore.  However, it was reduced to Rs. 103.26 crore at the Revised Estimate 
stage for the same financial year and then increased to Rs. 138.37 crore for 2016 -17.  The reason cited 
by the Ministry for this reduction in Budget allocation at the RE stage in 2015 -16 was that the Plan 
scheme for Flood Forecasting was approved in December, 2016 due to which no new activities of 
modernization and expansion of network could be commenced leading to the requirement being reduced 
at RE stage.  For the increa se in Plan allocation in the BE 2016 -17 to Rs. 138.37 crore from Rs. 112.00 
crore in the BE 2015 -16, the Ministry stated that the reason therefor was consideration of the 
requirement of protection works on the common border rivers and funds required for me eting the 
expenditure of newly set up Pancheshwar Development Authority.  The Committee were convinced that 
the inordinate delay in approval of the Plan scheme Flood Forecasting by as late as December, 2016 
which led to reduction in allocation at RE stage in 2015-16, is indicative of the casual approach of the 
Ministry to tackle the persistent issue of reductions of allocations at the RE stage, against which the 

 
29 
 
Committee strongly had been advising the Ministry in their earlier Reports on Demands for Grants  (2011-
12, 2012-13, 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16).  The Committee we re of the opinion that the Ministry had  
not taken the recommendation of the Committee seriously despite their repeated assurances to the 
contrary.  The Committee, therefore, recommend ed that the Ministry make concerted efforts to formulate 
their Budget estimates judiciously through an objectively conducted pre -planning exercise and by 
exercising effective control over its various Offices / Agencies so that no room is left for reduction at t he 
Revised estimate stage in Budget estimates.  They also wanted the Ministry to immediately take concrete 
action to simplify and streamline the process of getting approval of schemes especially under the Head 
Flood Control so as to avoid wastage of manpow er and resources in the frequent process of estimation 
of allocations.  They Committee desire d to be apprised of the outcome of efforts made in regard to flood 
protection works on the common border rivers and progress made regarding the Pancheshwar Dam 
project during 2016-17. 
 
17. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied as follows:  
 
“There are three Plan Schemes being run by this Wing namely: 
1. Flood Management Programme (FMP)- A State Sector Scheme 
2. River management Activities & Works related to B order Areas (RMBA) -Central Sector 
Scheme(100% Grant-in-aid) 
3. Flood Forecasting Scheme-A Central Sector Scheme 
The details of budget allocation during the year 2015-16 are given below: 
Rs. In crore 
S.N. Sector 2015-16 
  Central Sector Scheme BE RE Actual 
1 Flood Forecasting 50.00 35.00 32.93 
2 River Management Activities and Works related to 
Boarder Areas 102.00 240.56 185.52 
3 Farraka Barrage Project 100.00 84.00 72.61 

 
30 
 
4 Flood Management Project 200.00 275.00 264.00 
 
The recommendations of the Committe e have been noted and efforts would be made for judicious 
planning of the estimates to avoid any reduction of budget at      RE stage. The Government has 
already streamlined the processes involved in approval of the schemes and as per the modified 
procedure the schemes costing upto Rs. 1000 crore are approved by the Minister of administrative 
Ministry and Finance Ministry. The schemes costing above Rs. 1000 crore are placed before the 
Cabinet/ Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) for approvals. 
The flood protection works on common border rivers are fully funded under the plan scheme, “River 
Management Activities and Works related to Boarder Areas”. The important such works funded by 
Ministry are mentioned below: 
1. Maintenance of embankments of Kosi and  Gandak projects located in the territory of Nepal - as per 
the bilateral understanding these works are funded by Government of India and the same are 
executed by Government of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh prior to every monsoon. These works have 
proved to quite  useful in providing protection of the embankments, ensuring safety of Kosi and 
Gandak barrages thereby creating a larger degree of protection against floods to the lives and 
properties of the people of India residing in the downstream of the barrages. 
2. Bank protection/ anti-erosion works in West Bengal and Tripura on rivers having common border with 
Bangladesh- The common border rivers between India and Bangladesh face acute problem of 
erosion of river banks and beds which causes loss of land and also endan gers the lives and 
properties of the people residing in concerned areas. Such works are under taken by respective 
country in its territory. On Indian side, such works are executed by Governments of West Bengal and 
Tripura and funded fully by Government of India. 
3. During 12th Plan, bank protection works on river Ravi and Beas in Punjab have also been funded for 
strengthening of the embankments and erosion control. 
India and Nepal had signed the Mahakali treaty in 1996 for integrated development of river Mahak ali 
(known as Sarada in India). As per bilateral understanding reached between the two countries, a 

 
31 
 
joint project office (JPO -PI) was set up in 1999 at Kathmandu which carried out field investigations 
for Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project. After the visit o f Hon’ble Prime Minister of India in August 
2014, the Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project received a catalytic and accelerated momentum and in 
September, 2014, a Pancheshwar Development Authority was set up to finalize the DPR of the 
project and undertake its  implementation. The Draft DPR of the project has been prepared by Water 
and Power Consultancy Services Limited (WAPCOS), which is under examination in PDA and both 
the countries. As per tentative features finalize so far, the project would generate total power of 5040 
MW and provide irrigation in 0.43 mha in both the countries besides the benefit of flood control 
specially in India.” 
18. The Committee observe that the Government has already streamlined the process 
involved in approval of the schemes and ha s assured for making efforts for judicious planning of 
the estimates regarding Budget Allocations on Flood Control and Drainage in order to avoid 
reduction of budget at RE stage in future.  The Committee also note that as per the modified 
procedure, the sc hemes costing upto Rs. 1,000 crore are to be approved by the Minister of 
administrative Ministry and Finance Ministry, whereas the schemes costing above Rs. 1,000 crore 
are placed before the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) for approvals.  The 
Committee would like to see speedy clearances of projects / schemes costing upto Rs. 1,000 
crore which are currently lying with the Ministry (if any) awaiting clearance approval, and inform 
the details of such projects / schemes which have been cleared as a result of implementation of 
the modified procedure till date.  The Committee, however, note that whereas they had asked to 
be updated of the outcome of efforts made in regard to flood protection works on the common 
borders and progress made regarding the  Pancheshwar Dam Project, the Ministry’s reply have 
merely discussed the various projects taken up by the Government  under the Plan scheme, 
“River Management Activities and Works Related to Border Areas”, viz. Maintenance of 

 
32 
 
Embankments of Kosi and Gandak projects in Nepal, Bank protection / anti -erosion works in 
West Bengal and Tripura on the rivers bordering Bangladesh, Bank protection works on rivers 
Ravi and Beas in Punjab, Integrated development of river Mahakali / Sarada, and Pancheshwar 
Multipurpose project.  The Committee are dissatisfied with the half -baked reply o f the Ministry, 
and they desire that complete, detailed and updated information on the a foresaid flood protection 
works on common rivers is furnished to them within one month of the presen tation of this 
Report. 
F. Flood Management Programme  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.30) 
19. As per information provided by the Ministry , flood had  affected during 2012 -14 a total area of 
36.044 Mha. and 45.704 million population, and resulted in damages to t he crops of the value of Rs. 
5368.115 crore, 987940 nos. of houses valued at Rs. 873.261 crores, 202602 nos. of cattle, and public 
utilities valued at Rs. 14640.340 crore.  The total number of human lives lost was 4152 in the same 
period.  In this c onnection, the Committee observ ed that during 11 th Plan, the Government of India 
launched “Flood Management Programme” (FMP) for providing the Central Assistance to the State 
Government under this scheme, during 11 th Plan, the nos. of works approved was 420, for which fund 
amounting to Rs. 3566.00 crore was released.  In comparison, during 12 th Plan, the no s. of works 
approved under FMP wa s only 97 while a tot al fund of Rs. 1057.40 crore had  been released till date.  
The Committee note d that the 12 th Plan is in it s last phase - while the achievements made so far under 
FMP remain meager to say the least.  The Committee, therefore, recommend ed that the Ministry pull up 
their socks and make all -out efforts to increase the achievements under the FMP during 11 th Plan 
through coordinated efforts with the State Governments and other implementing  Agencies.  The 
Committee were however, dismayed to note that the Ministry have not furnished reply regarding short -
term, medium -term and long -term approaches and methods to be ado pted to manage and control 
recurrent floods in the country, and they recommend ed that the relevant information in this regard should 
be submitted to the Committee within three months after presentation of this Report. 

 
33 
 
20. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied as follows:  
“In order to enable the State Governments to undertake the works related to river management, 
flood control, anti -erosion, raising and strengthening the embankments and anti sea erosion the 
Government of India had launched a F lood Management Programme (FMP) in 11 th Plan with an 
outlay of Rs.8,000 crore. During 11 th Plan a total of 420 projects having estimated cost of 
Rs.9,435 crore with central share of Rs. 7,475 crore were approved out of which only Rs.3,477 
crore were released leaving Rs. 3,900 crore as spill over of works for 12 th Plan. During 12 th Plan 
the Cabinet approved continuation of FMP with an outlay of Rs.10,000 crore which included 
Rs.3,900 crore towards spill over works and Rs.6,100 crore towards new works propose d to be 
undertaken during 12 th Plan keep in provision for new works for catchment area treatment for 
attaining flood management in a more effective manner. Due to delay in approval of the FMP, 
changes in process of investment clearance, reduction in the ex tent of Central funding, reduced 
outlays as a result of change in policy of Government of India about devolution of central taxes in 
the light of recommendations of 14 th Finance Commission, the releases under FMP could not be 
done as per demands of the Sta tes. Therefore, during 12 th Plan only Rs. 1,157.08 crore could be 
released towards the spill over works of the 11 th Plan and 97 new works approved during 12 th 
Plan. In order to complete the projects already approved under FMP during 11 th and 12 th Plan 
sufficient funds need to be provided under FMP. 
Short term measures:  The measures which can be completed immediately say within 1 year 
such as closure of breaches, raised platforms, critical anti erosion works fall under this category.   
 
Medium-term Measures:  The measures which can be completed within 2 -3 years like raising & 
strengthening of embankments, anti erosion works, drainage development, etc. fall under this 
category. Such measures also include flood/inundation forecasting under non structural categ ory.     
 
Long-term Measures:  The measures, such as reservoirs, which require more time and i nvolve a 
number of issues to be sorted out before implementing them are categorized as long -term 
measures. Under non structural category, the measures of real time  flood/inundation forecasting 
and flood plain zoning fall under this category”. 

 
34 
 
 
G. Flood Forecasting 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.30-A) 
21. The Committee note d that the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation, through its apex  technical arm, the Central Water Commission (CWC), performs the 
activity of flood forecasting on major rivers and their tributaries in the country, through a network of 175 
flood forecasting stations - which consist of 147 level forecast stations and 28 i nflow forecast stations.  
Regarding the measures taken / proposed to be taken to upgrade, expand and improve flood forecasting 
in India, the Ministry stated that 445 nos. of stations ha d been modernized with telemetry system upto 
11th Plan, and the remaini ng 219 stations of existing flood forecasting network are proposed to be 
modernized.  Additionally, 100 nos. of level / inflow forecasting stations alongwith 310 base stations are 
proposed to be established for various towns and reservoirs / dams in the co untry.  All the stations of 
extended network are to be modernized with telemetry system.  Other measures including development 
of inundation forecast model on pilot basis is also planned for 12th Plan to give information about the 
area likely to be flooded .  The Committee were happy to see the Ministry making ambitious plans for 
achievements during 12th Plan on the flood forecasting front, but at the same point in time they were 
equally surprised to note that the Budget allocation for flood forecasting had to be reduced during 2015 -
16 from Rs. 50.00 crore to Rs. 35.00 crore because of the inability of the Ministry to take up new works of 
establishing 100 new flood forecasting stations due to delayed approval of the scheme by the 
Government as late as Decembe r, 2015.  The Committee want ed the Ministry to make fresh initiatives to 
curb the issue of delays in securing approval for floo d forecasting schemes - which was responsible for 
reduction of allocations at RE stage during 2016 -17 itself and also inform the Committee of the outcome 
of such efforts made.  The Committee, however, recommend ed the Ministry to initiate specific steps to 
achieve the ambitious action plan envisaged for flood forecasting during 12th Plan without any loss of 
time and apprise the Commi ttee accordingly.  Noting that a rainfall -based Flood Forecasting model at 
Ram Munshibag (Srinagar) on river Jhelum ha d been developed by the CWC and made fully functional 
during 2015, the Committee recommend ed that similar models be introduced for other a reas of the 
country facing annual recurrent floods, i.e. Assam, Bihar, West Bengal, Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, 

 
35 
 
Mumbai region etc. as well.  The Committee desired to be apprised of further developments in this regard 
within the next six months. 
 
22. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied as follows:  
 
“The Central Water Commission under the Ministry has been making efforts for development of 
integrated rainfall based run off models. During 12th plan it is proposed to develop Mathematical 
models for inundation forecast for Mahanadi/ Brahmaputra/Kosi/Sabri river basins using the 
Digital Elevation Maps (DEMs) available with NRSC.” 
 
23. The Committee note that due to delay in the approval of Flood Management Programme 
(FMP), changes in process of investm ent clearance, reduction in the extent of Central funding, 
reduced outlays as a result of change in policy of Government of India about devolution of 
Central taxes in the light of recommendations of 14 th Finance Commission, the fund release 
under FMP could not be done as per demands of the States, resulting in fund release of only Rs. 
1,157.08 crore towards the spill over works of 11 th Plan and 97 new works  approved during 12 th 
Plan.  The Committee desire the Ministry to devise innovative steps to streamlin e and speed up 
the release of funds for approved projects under FMP.  They also note that there are several spill 
over projects of 11 th Plan under FMP, and they, therefore, recommend that the Ministry furnish 
the details of such projects (State/UT-wise) along with the reasons for spill over, the total costs of 
projects, the anticipated dates of completion, including the measures taken / being proposed to 
be taken by the Government to accelerate their completion.  The Committee further desire  that all-
out efforts should be made to complete the 97 new works approved under FMP for completion 
during 12 th Plan, with sufficient allocations provided to FMP d uring 12 th Plan.  As regards flood 
forecasting, the Committee also note that the Central Water Commission (CW C) under the 

 
36 
 
Ministry has been making efforts for development of integrated rainfall based run off models, and 
that during 12 th Plan, it is proposed to develop Mathematical models for inundation forecast for 
Mahanadi / Brahmaputra / Kosi / Sabri river basi ns using the Digital Elevation Maps (DEMs) 
available with N ational Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) .  The Committee strongly recommend 
these Mathematical models for inundation forecast for Mahanadi / Brahmaputra / Kosi / Sabri river 
basins using the Digital El evation Maps (DEMs) be developed and completed by CWC during 12 th 
Plan itself.  They also further recommend that necessary steps be taken to curb the frequent 
delays in securing approval for flood forecasting schemes – the factors responsible for reduction 
in allocations at RE stage in the year 2016 -17 and the Committee be apprised regarding the 
outcome of such steps. 
H. River Basin Management 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.31) 
24. The objective of the Plan scheme, ‘River Basin Management’ (RBM) is to provide a forum to all 
the co-basin States for taking up the necessary studies, evaluation, etc. for finding optimum method for 
the development and utilization of water resources within that basin and meeting the aspiration of all the 
stake-holders.  The Budget al location was increased from Rs. 119.00 crore in 2015 -16 (BE) to Rs. 
173.60 crore in 2016 -17 (BE), which, according to the Ministry, was for the preparation of PFRs, FRs & 
DPRs of Inter-State and Intra-State links, survey and investigation, due to increase in the rates of various 
goods and services, purchase of survey & scientific instruments and revisions of rates, enhancement of 
DA/increment and implementation of 7 th Pay Commission Report, etc. and also for taking up flood 
protection in Majuli Island.  The  RBM Plan scheme comprises of two components (i) Investigation of 
Water Resources Development Scheme (IWRDS) and (ii) Brahmaputra Board.  The Committee note d 
that three DPRs of ILR projects, viz. Ken-Betwa Phase I & II, Damanganga – Pinjal, and Pai -Tapi-
Narmada link projects had  been completed alongwith two DPRs of Intra -State links under IWRDS of 
NWDA component.  Under IWRDS of CWC component, DPR of two projects ha d been completed and 

 
37 
 
submitted to the State Governments.  The Committee recommend ed that the details of these projects 
including the time required for completing them, their final status, costs incurred, etc. should be furnished 
to them within 3 months so that these projects do not incur needless time and  cost overruns.  The 
Committee we re convinc ed that the time ha d come for the country to have an Integrated Water 
Management for the entire country which would timely assist in fructifying the ambitious scheme of Inter -
Linking of Rivers (ILRs) being implemented in the country.  The Committee, therefore, recommended that 
the Government create an over -arching National Authority (River Basin A uthority) at the Centre which 
would serve as the apex body for an integrated management of river basins in the country - so as to in 
turn ensure that the ILRs sche me is provided the much -needed impetus - while at the same time the 
process of solution of various Inter -State Disputes on rive waters is simplified and streamlined for the 
lasting benefit to all the concerned parties.  The Committee desired to be kept inf ormed of the 
developments made in this regard. 
25. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied as follows:  
“(i)  Investigation of Water Resources Development Scheme (IWRDS) of NWDA 
component 
The Detailed Project Report of Ken -Betwa link project Pha se-I was completed by NWDA in April, 
2010 and submitted to Govt. of MP and UP in May, 2010.  Detailed Project Report of Ken -Betwa 
link project Phase-II has been completed in January, 2014 and submitted to the concerned States 
Government of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh in January, 2014. The DPR of Damanganga -
Pinjal link has been completed in March, 2014 and submitted to Govt. of Maharashtra and 
Gujarat. The DPR of Par -Tapi-Narmada link project has also been completed in August, 2015 
and submitted to Govt. of Gujarat and Maharashtra. 
 
The Detailed Project Report (DPR) of two Intra -State links of Bihar State viz Burhi Gandak -Noon-
Baya-Ganga and Kosi -Mechi link have been completed in December 2013 and March 2014 
respectively.  
Ken-Betwa link project Phase-I  

 
38 
 
The total cost of the project has been estimated to be Rs. 9,393 crores at 2007 -08 price level. 
The benefit cost ratio for the project works out to 1.56 and the Internal Rate of Return (IRR) is 
12%. As per DPR the construction time of the project is estimated to be eight years. 
Status 
Environment Clearance  
 The proposal was considered by Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC) of   
  MOEF&CC in  its 86th, 88th and 91st  meetings held on 24.8.2015; 26.10.2015   
 and 8-9 February, 2016 respectively at New Delhi for environmental clearance.  
 EAC in its 91st  meeting held on 9th February, 2016 decided to consider the   
  project for Environmental clearance (EC) only after Wild Life Clearance is    
 obtained from National Board of Wild Life (NBWL).  
 NWDA has been advised to submit again the proposal to EAC along with   
  decision of NBWL.  
 The meeting of EAC was held on 02.06.2016. The committee has discussed  
  various points in the meeting and given some suggestions.  
 
 
Wildlife Clearance 
 Wildlife clearance considered by State Wildlife Board of Madhya Pradesh in its  
  meeting held on 22nd  September, 2015 under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble    
 Chief Minister,  Madhya Pradesh and agreed.  
 After clearance of State Wildlife Board of M.P., the proposal of Wildlife   
  clearance along with recommendations of State Wildlife Board, MP was    
 submitted to National Board of Wildlife (NBWL), MoEF, New Delhi on    
 14.12.2016. 

 
39 
 
 Proposal for wild life clearance was duly considered in 37th  meeting of Standing  
  Committee of NBWL chaired by Hon’ble Minister of State (I/C) Environment,   
 Forest and Climate Change held on 26th  February, 2016. 
 Standing Committee, NBWL constituted a Committee comprising    
  representatives of NTCA; Wildlife Institute of India, Dehradun; Dr. R. Sukumar,   
 IISc, Bangalore; Dr. H. S. Singh, Retired PCCF & Member of NBWL,    
 representative of Chief Wildlife Warden, Madhya Pradesh and representative of   
 NWDA.  
 Above Committee visited concerned areas of Panna Tiger Reserve during 8-11  
  April, 2016.  
 Report is being prepared by the members and will be finalised soon.  
 The proposal for wildlife clearance was duly considered during 38th meeting of  
  Standing Committee of NBWL held on 10/05/2016 chaired by Hon’ble  Minister   
 of State(I/C), MoEF&CC in which in principle approval for Wildlife was    
 accorded. 
Forest Land Diversion Clearance 
 NWDA submitted proposal for forest land diversion clearance online & to MoEF  
  & CC.  
 Hard copies of proposal have been submitted to concerned DFOs of State   
  Forest  Department and Collectors.  
 Identification of double the degraded forest land (about 12034 ha) and other  
  associated works are being done by Forest Department, MP. 
Ken-Betwa Link Project Phase – II 
The total cost of the project is estimated as Rs.2282 .94 crores. The benefit cost ratio of the 
project works out to 1.56 and the internal rate of return as 14.87%. As per DPR the construction 
time of the project is estimated to be five years. 

 
40 
 
Environmental Clearance of Lower Orr dam 
 Proposal for environmental clearance of Lower Orr Dam was considered during  
  91st meeting of Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC) of MoEF & CC held on 8th   
 February, 2016. 
  Compliance to issues/observations raised in the meeting  has been submitted  
  to MOEF & CC.  
 Proposal for Environmental Clearance of Lower Orr Dam was  considered again  
  during  93rd meeting of EAC  held on 2nd May, 2016 
 Form-I for diversion of forest land submitted to Collector and DFO, Ashok Nagar  
  and Shivpuri for processing case of forest clearance. 
 Concerned Collector and DFO of Ashok Nagar and Shivpuri submitted Form-I  
  after completing their parts online to APCCF (Land Management), Bhopal for   
 further  processing the case. 
 Complete proposal alongwith recommendations submitted to MoEF&CC by   
  Forest  Department, Government of MP for according forest land diversion    
 clearance. 
 The compliance to the issues/observations have been to MoEF & CC for   
  consideration  of EAC and Environmental Clearance of Lower Orr dam has    
 been accorded in its  meeting held on 2nd  May 2016. 
Damanganga-Pinjal link 
The cost of project is Rs.2746.61 crore.  The B.C. ratio is 1.95. As per DPR the construction time 
of the project is estimated to be seven years. 
Status 
National Water Development Agency (NWDA) has compl eted the DPR of Damanganga -Pinjal 
link in March, 2014 and submitted to Govt. of Maharashtra and Gujarat. It was decided that 
Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM) would be responsible for initiating further 
action for the implementation of the project including statutory clearances.    
 

 
41 
 
The Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM) has submitted the DPR of Damanganga -
Pinjal link project to CWC during January, 2015 for appraisal. The report is under appraisal in 
CWC. The Hon’ble Union Minister (WR,RD&GR) held a meeting with Hon’ble  Chief Minister of 
Maharashtra at Mumbai on 7 th  January, 2015 to expedite the further course of action. Govt. of 
Maharashtra has suggested minor modifications in the planning of the links to make the project 
more attractive and assured full support for the implementing of Damanganga-Pinjal link project. 
 
Par-Tapi-Narmada link 
Total cost of the link project at the price level of year 2014 -15 has been worked out as Rs.9279 
crores. The Benefit Cost ratio of the project h as been assessed to be 1.12 and Internal Rate of 
Return has been computed as 10.43 %. As per DPR the construction time of the project is 
estimated to be seven years. 
 
 
 
Status 
The DPR of Par -Tapi-Narmada link project has been completed by NWDA and submitte d to 
Govts. of Gujarat and Maharashtra in August,2015 and is under examination by both the States. 
Hon’ble Union Minister (WR,RD&GR) has requested the State Govts. of Gujarat and Maharashtra  
to take up the issue of cost, water and power sharing of both Pa r-Tapi-Narmada link project and 
Damanganga-Pinjal link projects for reaching an agreement.  
Burhi Gandak-Noon-Baya-Ganga  link project 
Total cost of the project has been estimated as Rs.4213.75 crore.  The benefit cost ratio of 
project is 1.54. As per DPR the construction time of the project is estimated to be three years.  
Kosi-Mechi link project 
Total cost of the Project has been estimated as Rs. 2903.25 crore.  The benefit cost ratio of 
project is 3.66. As per DPR the construction time of the project is estimated to be five years. 
Status 

 
42 
 
DPRs of 2 links of Bihar (Burhi Gandak -Noon-Baya-Ganga and Kosi – Mechi links) have been 
completed and are under appraisal in Central Water Commission. 
(i) Investigation of Water Resources Development Scheme (IWRDS) of CWC 
component 
CWC has investigated two nos of projects namely, Suntlay and Kirthai II under IWRDS and DPR 
of these project have been completed and submitted to State Government.  The salient features 
of the projects are given below: 
 
1 Name of Project Kirthai Hy dro Electric Project -II 
(J&K) 
Suntaley Hydro Electric 
Project (Sikkim) 
2 Type of Project Hydro Electric ROR Hydro Electric 
3 River Basin Chandra Bhaga (Chenab) Teesta Basin 
4 State  Jammu & Kashmir Sikkim 
5 River Chenab Rangpo Chu 
6 Time required for 
completing of project 
60 months (construction period 
after getting statuary clearance 
and Financial Closure) 
4 
Years (construction 
period) 
7 Proposed/installed 
capacity 
930 MW (6x140+2x35+2x10)MW 2x20 MW 
8 Estimated cost of the 
project (in crores) 
5158.18 a)531.88 with R&R 
b)536.61 without R&R 
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation had constituted a 
Drafting Committee under the Chairmanship of Justice T.S. Doabia (Retd.) to study the activities 
that are required for optimum d evelopment of river basin and changes required in the existing 
River Board Act, 1956 for achievement of the same.  The Committee submitted its Report in 
November, 2012 and has prepared a Draft River Basin Management (RBM) Bill. 
The Draft RBM Bill proposes to establish a River Basin Authority for regulation and development 
of waters of an Inter-State River Basin or any specified part thereof and further makes it clear that 

 
43 
 
different Authorities shall be established for different Inter -State River Basin. The Bill also makes 
provision for creation of a separate River Basin Authority for a sub -basin within an Inter -State 
River Basin.  
The draft RBM Bill also stipulates that a River Basin Authority shall ensure that a River Basin 
Master Plan for river basin devel opment, management and regulation is prepared for the Inter -
State river Basin under its jurisdiction. 
The draft River Basin Management Bill is under examination in this Ministry in consultation with 
different stakeholders.  A committee has also been set up  under Dr. Mihir Shah to examine the 
draft River Basin Management Bill.  The committee is yet to submit its report.    
Further, for providing impact to Interlinking of Rivers scheme,  Ministry has also constituted 
committee  “Special Committee for Interlin king of Rivers” vide Gazette notification dated 
23.09.2014.” 
26. The Committee note from the Ministry’s reply that under Investigation of Water Resources 
Development Scheme (IWRDS) of the Plan scheme, ‘River Basin Management’ (RBM), Detailed 
Project Report s (DPRs) of two Intra -State links of Bihar State, viz. Burhi Gandak -Noon-Baya-
Ganga and Kosi -Mechi link have been completed in December, 2013 and March, 2014  
respectively.  The Committee desire to know the updated status of these two Intra -State links in 
Bihar as also the status of Intra-State links Projects in other remaining States / UTs of the country  
(if any) .  The Committee also note that the Detailed Project Report (DPR) of Ken -Betwa Pink 
Project (estimated cost: Rs. 2282.24 crore) Phases -I & II were completed by National Water 
Development Agency (NWDA) in April, 2010 and January, 2014 respectively, but the Project is still 
awaiting wildlife clearance and environmental clearance respectively from Expert Appraisal 
Committee (EAC) and National Board of W ildlife (NBWL) of Ministry of Environment, Forests & 

 
44 
 
Climate Change (MoEF&CC) .  They also note that the NWDA has completed the DPR of 
Damanganga-Pinjal link project (estimated cost: Rs. 2746.61 crore) in March, 2014 , which is now 
with the Central Water Com mission (CWC) for appraisal.  Further, the DPR of Par -Tapi-Narmada 
link project (estimated cost: Rs. 9279 crore) has been completed by NWDA in August, 2015 and is 
under examination by the Governments of Gujarat and Maharashtra.  The Committee recommend 
that the Government vigorously pursue the above 03 Inter -Linking Rivers (ILRs) projects with the 
concerned State Governments / Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC) / National Board of Wildlife 
(NBWL) so as to remove the hurdles hampering their implementation.   
I. Brahmaputra Board 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.10) 
27. The Committee noted that the Brahmaputra Board under the Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation in order to achieve an integrated implementation of measures for 
the  control of flood and bank erosion, ha d so far prepared 57 Master Plans out of which 49 have been 
approved by Government of India and remaining 8 have been approved by the Board.  Besides, 41 
Drainage Development Schemes (DDS) ha d been identified under these Ma ster Plans, out of which 2 
schemes have been executed and 4 are under execution.  In respect of the flood control and anti -erosion 
measures, the Committee further note d that the Board ha d completed Phase – I of the works of 
protection of Majuli Island at t he cost of Rs. 52.63 crore, while Phase – II and Phase – III, initiated in 
2009, was completed upto 91.96% and targeted to be completed by June, 2016.  The Ministry also 
informed that Phase – I, Phase – II and Phase – III of the works of Avulsion of Brahma putra r iver at 
Dhola-Hatighuli had been completed while works on Phase -IV had been completed by upto 99.8%.  The 
Committee, however, noted that despite the tall claims about works on the flood control and anti -erosion 
undertaken by the Brahmaputra Board, A ssam faced severe flood of unprecedented proportion in 2015 
although an expenditure of Rs. 106.42 crore was incurred by the Board on flood control during the last 3 
years.  The Committee were also distressed to note that out of 5 DPRs for Multipurpose proj ects 
prepared by the Brahmaputra Board in the North -East region, viz. Siang Single Stage, Subansiri Single 

 
45 
 
Stage, Tipaimukh, Pagladiya, and Bairabi, none of these projects have been completed till date.  About 
the periodic monitoring being done by the Gove rnment / Brahmaputra Board regarding the progress of 
works in the 5 Multipurpose projects, the Ministry ha d not furnished any reply - which speak a lot about 
the lackadaisical attitude of the Government / Brahmaputra Board on this vital issue.  The Committ ee, 
therefore, recommend ed that the Ministry institute an appraisal panel to look into the delays in the 
execution of the 5 Multipurpose projects for which the Brahmaputra Board has prepared DPRs and 
apprise the Committee of its findings after fixing respo nsibility for lapses, acts of commission and 
omission on the part of the concerned implementing agencies.  Side by side, the Committee also 
recommended that the Ministry should duly complete the balance works regarding protection of Majuli 
Island (Phase II  & III) by the targeted time, i.e. June, 2016 and also wind up Phase – IV works on 
Avulsion of Brahmaputra river at Dhola -Hatighuli.  They further recommend ed that the Ministry should 
vigorously pursue the progress of the other Multipurpose projects, viz. Noa-Dehing, Kulsi, Simsang, 
Jiadhal and Killing - which are at various stages of appraisal, Survey and Investigation and preparation of 
DPR in the Brahmaputra Board.  The Committee desired to be apprised about the results of action taken 
by the Ministry in this regard within the six months. 
 
28. The Ministry, in its action taken note has replied as follows:  
1.  “As mentioned in the report, Brahmaputra Board spent Rs. 106.42 crore during the year 
2012-13, 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015 -2016 (up-to February, 2016) i n execution of following 
works-  
(Rs. in Crore) 
 
Name  of scheme 
Year Total  
2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16  
(up to Feb.  
2016) 
 
1. Protection of Majuli 
Island Phase-II and III 
26.88 25.63 12.67 9.42 74.60 
2. Avulsion of 
Brahmaputra at Dhola -
Hatighuli Phase-IV 
8.58 13.69 3.42 2.45 28.14 

 
46 
 
3. Protection of Balat 
Village in Meghalaya 
-- 0.13 0.03 2.22 2.38 
4. Protection of 
Mankachar – Kalair-Alga 
International Border area  
-- -- 0.17 1.09 1.26 
Total 35.46 39.45 16.29 15.18 106.38 
All these works are executed on re quest of Government of Assam and approval of Ministry of 
Water resources, RD &GR. In comparison to the vast flood affected area in the State of Assam, Board 
has been entrusted for protection of only in a few locations of the state. In the above locations B oard has 
been able to attain considerable control of floods and erosion. 
  The achievement of Brahmaputra Board in control of flood and erosion in these areas are as 
under: 
(a)  The scheme Protection of Majuli Island from floods and bank erosion was taken up b y 
Brahmaputra Board in January 2004.  Broadly, protection works encompass raising and strengthening of 
embankment, plugging of breaches, casting and laying of permeable RCC porcupines screens, spurs 
and dampeners, construction of boulder spurs, river bank revetment and construction of raised platforms.  
The works were taken up in phases and, Immediate Measure, Phase –I and Emergent works completed 
Works under Phase-II&III will be completed by March 2017. 
Outcome 
As a result of the works executed so far, the total area of Majuli Island has increased by 22.08 sq km 
from the Year 2004 to 2016 as shown in the table below- 
Year Area of Majuli Island (in sq km) Net Area reclaimed (in sq km) 
2004 502.21  
2008 506.37 4.16 
2011 520.26 13.89 
2012 522.73 2.47 
2014 523.88 1.15 
2016 524.29 0.41 
Total land mass gained from 2004 to 2016 22.08 

 
47 
 
(b)  The scheme Avulsion of Brahmaputra at Dhola -Hatighuli was taken up in the year 2004 with the 
objective to divert the rivers Dibang and Lohit to their original courses. Board e xecuted the work in 
phases and completed Phase-I, II, III & IV . 
As mentioned in the report to wind up the work of Phase -IV, Board has completed the work in March 
2016.   
Outcome: 
11 villages under Doomduma Revenue Circle in an area of about 1500 ha got pr otection from 
floods, since the year 2004 onwards, on construction of retirement bund at Hatighuli area on Left bank of 
Lohit river.  
An area of about 900 ha just behind the Tie -bund, on country side, got protection from floods and 
erosion, on construction  of Tie -bund in the year 2003 -04. Cultivation has started, afresh, in the area 
between the Tie-bund and the Ghoramora channel. 
(c) The Phase-I work of the scheme protection of Balat village from erosion of river Umngi in the 
State of Meghalaya for Rs.5.63 cror e was taken up in the year 2013 -14 and completed in the year 2015. 
Most of the erosion affected areas has been protected from this work.  
(d) The scheme protection of MankacharKalair -Alga area which was approved  by Government of 
India in XII Five Year Plan an d taken up actual executive during 2014 -15. Laying of RCC porcupine 
screens has been completed and the bank protection work is in progress.  Due to resistance of general 
public on acquisition of land for construction and inability of civil authority, the p rogress of work has been 
slowed down. However, in persuasions from the contractor, some local people and employees of 
Brahmaputra Board, the bank protection work for 520 m length is in progress. Brahmaputra Board is in 
regular contact of District authority for acquiring the required land. 
Brahmaputra Board undertook preparation of  DPRs of 14 Multipurpose Projects in North -East 
region. The progress of the 5(five) handed over projects  are as under- 
 
Sl. Project Implementing Agency / Organisation / Government 

 
48 
 
No. 
1 Siang Dam 
Project  
(3 dams) 
Handed over to NHPC during the year 2000. NHPC informed that work 
relating to Siang Lower was handed over to M/s Jayprakash Associated 
ltd.(JAL) on 31.03.2009, work relating to Siang Middle was handed over 
to M/s Relian ce Energy Ltd(REL) and for Siang Upper, Government of 
Arunachal Pradesh allocated the work to M/s NTPC in February 2009 for 
preparation of PFR. 
2 Subansiri 
Dam Project 
(3 dams) 
Handed over to NHPC during the year 2000. As stated by NHPC the 
Lower Subansir i is targeted for completion within the year 2017. 
Sunbansiri Middle and Subansiri Upper were handed over to M/s Jindal 
Power Ltd. On 04.02.2011. 
3 Tipaimukh 
Dam Project 
Handed over to NEEPCO and subsequently from NEEPCO to NHPC 
4 Pagladiya 
Dam Project 
The work of Pagladiya Dam project under execution by Brahmaputra 
Board was held up due to non -completion of zirat survey. As per decision 
of 53rd meeting of Brahmaputra Board, all activities were closed from 1st 
June 2013. In the 7th High Powered Review Boa rd meeting held at 
Shillong, it was decided to talk to BTAD by Govt. of Assam. Again, in the 
60th meeting of Brahmaputra Board held at New Delhi it was decided to 
take up the matter with the Hon’ble Chief Minister of Assam.  
5 Bairabi 
Dam 
Project 
Handed o ver to Government of Mizoram. The Government of Mizoram 
allotted the work of execution of Bairabi Dam Project to M/s Sikaria Power 
Ltd., Kolkata on 10.08.2012. It has been intimated by Government of 
Mizoram that Bairabi Dam Project will be completed within seven years. 
 
At present 5 (five) Projects are under different stages of DPR preparation and Survey & 
Investigation. The progress of two National Projects declared by Government of India out of the 5 
multipurpose projects are as under – 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Project Implementing Agency / Organisation / Government 
1 Noa-Dihing Dam 
Project 
The project site is located about 4 km upstream of Miao Town 
in Changlang district of Arunachal Pradesh. The installed 
capacity of the project is estimated at 71 MW with irrigation 
benefit of 8000 ha. The project has been identified as ‘National 
Project’ by Government of India. Preparation of DPR has been 
completed in March 2014 and submitted to MoWR, RD&GR for 
approval. The MoWR,RD&GR forwarded the same to CWC for 
appraisal in coordination with Brahmaputra Board. 
Brahmaputra Board is in a position to implement the 
project after obtaining techno -economic clearances. Board has 
shared the draft DPR with the Government of Arunachal 

 
49 
 
Pradesh to issue NOC for execution of the Noa -Dihing Dam 
Project by Brahmaputra Board. The NOC is awaited. 
2 Kulsi Dam 
Project 
The project site is located near Assam and Meghalaya border. 
The installed capacity of the project is estimated at 55 MW with 
a gross command area of about 26000 ha to provide irrigatio n. 
The project has been identified as ‘National Project’ by 
Government of India. Preparation of DPR completed in June 
2014 and submitted to MoWR, RD&GR for approval. The 
MoWR, RD&GR forwarded the same to CWC for appraisal in 
coordination with Brahmaputra Board. 
Brahmaputra Board is in a position to implement the project after 
obtaining techno-economic clearances. Board has requested the 
Government of Assam and Meghalaya to issue NOC for 
execution of the Kulsi Dam Project. The draft DPR has been 
shared with the concerned state Governments. The NOCs are 
awaited from the State Governments. 
3 Simsang Dam 
Project 
 
 
Under ‘Survey & Investigation’ and DPR preparation. 
Brahmaputra Board has been informed by the Ministry to 
expedite the same.  
4 Jiadhal Dam 
Project 
5 Killing Dam 
Project 
 
29. The Committee are unhappy to note that whereas they had recommended for the Ministry 
to institute an appraisal panel to look into the delays in the execution of the 5 Multipurpose 
projects for which DPRs had been prepared by  the Brahmaputra Board (viz. Siang Dam Project, 
Subansiri Dam Project, Tipaimukh Dam Project, Pagladiya Dam Project, and Bairabi Dam Project), 
however, the reply furnished by the Ministry has made no mention about any initiatives taken in 
this direction.  The Committee deprecate the apathetic attitude of the Ministry regarding the 
recommendation of the Committee, and they strongly advise them to desist from such approach 
in the future.  The Committee, therefore, reiterate its earlier recommendation in this regard so that 
an appraisal panel is set up without any further loss of time to investigate the delays in the 
execution of the stated 05 Multipurpose projects and also apprise the Committee of its findings 

 
50 
 
after fixing responsibility for lapses, acts of co mmission and omission on the part of the 
concerned implementing agencies.  Noting further that the 05 (five) other Multipurpose Projects  
including two National Projects, viz. Noa -Dihing Dam Project and Kulsi Project, and three other 
projects, i.e. Simsang Dam Project, Jiadhal Dam Project, and Killing Dam Project in the North -
East are under various stages of DPR completion, Survey and Investigation and DPR preparation, 
the Committee also recommend that additional efforts be made by the Ministry to accelerate  
completion the related works for these 05 other Multipurpose projects and time-schedules for the 
same be work ed out to facilitate work execution in this regard.  The Committee desire to be 
apprised of initiatives taken by the Ministry regarding these 05 o ther Multipurpose projects of 
North-East region within 03 (three) months of presentation of this Report. 
 

 
51 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1.22) 
 
As per information furnished to the Committee, the total Budget Estimates (BE) of the Ministry for 
the year 2016 -17 is Rs. 8764.31 crore comprising of Plan allocation of Rs. 8025.00 crore and Non -Plan 
allocation of Rs. 739.31 crore.  The total Budget allocations for 2016 -17 showed an o verall increase by 
27.19% when compared to total Budget allocations of Rs. 6381.03 crore during 2015-16.  The Committee 
also observe that against a total Budget Estimates (BE) of Rs. 6381.03 crore in 2015 -16, the figure was 
increased during the same year b y Rs. 1709.35 crore at the Revised Estimate (RE) stage.  The reason 
put forth by the Ministry for such a big hike in allocation during 2015 -16 has been the focus on 
completion of identified 46 priority irrigation projects under the Accelerated Irrigation B enefit Programme 
(AIBP) scheme, out of which 23 projects are expected to be completed by March, 2017.  In this context, 
the Ministry have stated that the enhanced funding will help the State Governments in completing these 
projects in a time -bound manner.  The Committee hope and expect that the 23 AIBP projects covered 
under the enhanced Budget allocations during 2016 -17 - will achieve their targeted date of completion, 
i.e. March, 2017 through the concerted efforts of the Ministry / implementing agencies /  concerned State 
Governments.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the status of action being taken in this regard 
within three months of the presentation of this Report.  Noting further that frequent reductions / increases 
of Budget allocations at Revised Estimate stage have become a norm with the Ministry over the last 
several years, the Committee also recommend that before projecting budgetary demands, the Ministry 
undertake some pre -Budget planning and exercises and then only frame achievable tar gets for both the 
Plan and Non -Plan schemes to have the more realistic and achievable Budget projections in future.  

 
52 
 
Additionally, prior approval of NITI Ayog, EFC, etc. in respect of schemes to be included in Budget 
proposal each year, as also Rehabilitat ion & Research issues, land acquisition hurdles, NOC etc. should 
also be sorted out for each of such projects well within the time.  The Committee note in particular that no 
specific study has been undertaken by the Ministry to avoid drastic changes of all ocations at RE stage 
but efforts have been made to streamline the releases (of funds) to the projects under AIBP, CAD, SMI 
and RRR and that a new funding mechanism through NABARD has also been announced, for which, the 
modalities will be financed during th e year.  They also note that implementation of 89 incomplete 
irrigation projects under AIBP would be fastracked, which will help to irrigate 80.6 lakh hectares.  The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry should initiate a study on modalities to avoid the r ecurrent 
problems of changes in Budget allocations at RE stage year after yrear.  The Committee would also like 
to see a positive outcome on the fastracked implementation of 89 incomplete AIBP projects during this 
financial year, 2016 -17 itself.  A report,  in this regard, should be submitted to the Committee within the 
next six months. 
Reply of the Government 
(1)  The Plan allocation for 2015 -16 was of Rs. 3,632 crore and National Clean Energy 
Fund(NCEF) fund of Rs. 2,100 crore exclusively for Namami Gange Sche me. In the current 
year 2016 -17, the actual Plan allocation is Rs.3,025 crore and NCEF fund of     Rs.2,500 
crore for Namami Gange/National River Conservation Plan (NRCP). The equal amount of Rs. 
2,500 crore provided for Namami Gange/NRCP has been reflecte d as under the Major Head 
2810 “Transfer to NCEF” being Public Account Fund collected by way CESS, is under the 
administrative control of Ministry of Finance. This form of presentation has been introduced in 
the current year and allocation of Rs.2,500 cror e is accounted for twice. However, the funds 
actually available to the Ministry for Plan schemes are Rs.5,525 crore against Rs.5,732 crore 
in the previous year 2015-16. 

 
53 
 
(2)   Ministry is taking all necessary steps to avoid the recurrent problems in Budget allo cations at 
RE state. Presently 2016 -17 is the end of 12th Five Year Plan. On Completion of every five 
years all the Plan schemes are evaluated. In the year 2017 all the schemes/project will be 
evaluated by independent agencies. Thereafter evaluated report will be followed. 
(3)  So far as implementation of CAD works of 23 projects prioritised to be completed by March, 
2017 is concerned, 21 projects are either ongoing or under the process of inclusion under 
Command Area Development Programme.  Proposal of only tw o projects are awaited as on 
date. 
(4)  During 2015 -16 Pradhan  Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) was launched with an 
aim to enhance physical  access of water on farm and expand cultivable area under assured 
irrigation, improve on farm water use efficien cy, introduce sustainable water conservation 
practices etc. Major and Medium  irrigation/multipurpose irrigation projects are being funded 
under PMKSY-AIBP.  
The issues related to implementation of projects under PMKSY -HKKP including 
prioritization of projects were deliberated in the committee headed by Sh. Brijmohan Agrawal, 
Minister (Water Resources) of Chhattisgarh. As per the information supplied by concerned 
States to the committee, 99 projects have been identified for completion up to 2019 -20.  23 
projects (Priority -1) have been identified to be completed by 2016 -17 and another   31 
projects (Priority -II)   have been identified to be completed by 2017 -18.  The balance 45 
projects (Priority-III) have been identified to be completed by 2019-20. 
The   com pletion of above projects is proposed to be done in mission mode. It is 
proposed to establish a Mission with Additional Secretary/Special Secretary in the Ministry of 
Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation (MoWR, RD & GR) as the 
Mission Director to overlook the entire programme. 
Further, keeping in view of the budgetary constraints, it is also being proposed to borrow 
Central share/Assistance (CA) from NABARD as per year wise requirements to complete the 

 
54 
 
above projects. Further the State Go vernments, if required, may also borrow funds from 
NABARD for the State Share. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1.23) 
 
The Committee are encouraged to note the Ministry’s reply that no schemes / projects are 
presently pending in the Ministry for approval of Expen diture Finance Committee (EFC), and that there 
was no problem of under -utilization or non -utilization of funds in any scheme on this count.  The 
Committee further note that during the current year (2016 -17), due to planning and release of additional 
funds by Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation have been able to spend higher budgetary allocations.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that Ministry should keep a strict vigil in this regard so as to make  sure that no scope is left 
for the under -utilization or non -utilization of funds under any scheme as well during the next financial 
year.  The Committee also recommend that the funds are not only allocated on paper but also released 
in time so that the ac tual implementation of the schemes / projects by States / various implementing 
agencies is not hampered in any way. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 All concerned Wings/Division have been instructed for compliance and follow the directions given 
by Parliamentar y Standing Committee in its Ninth report to avoid curtailment of BE which is done by 
Ministry of Finance at RE stage.  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1.24) 
 

 
55 
 
The Committee observe that the Centrally -sponsored Plan scheme of “Rationalization of Minor 
Irrigation Statistics (RMIS)” was launched in 1987 -88 with 100% assistance to the States / UTs - with the 
objective to build up a comprehensive and reliable database in the Minor Irrigation (MI) sector for 
effective planning and policy making.  Under the scheme, the d etailed database on the minor irrigation 
works in the country has been generated through 04 (four) censuses carried out with reference years 
1986-87, 1993-94, 2000-01 and 2006-07 respectively.  The 5th Minor Irrigation census is being conducted 
with reference year 2013-14 in 34 States / UTs, which is targeted for release in March, 2017.  Noting that 
it comprises not only detailed information on dug -wells, tube-wells, surface flow / lift irrigation schemes, 
information on their ownership, social class, holdi ng size of the owner, etc. but also vital information on 
adoption of water and energy conserving devices such as sprinkler and drip irrigation, use of non -
conventional energy sources such as solar pumps, wind mills etc., are collected through Minor irrigat ion 
census exercises, the Committee strongly recommend that the 5 th MI census be completed by its 
targeted date, i.e. March, 2017.  They also desire that the detailed census information / data of all the MI 
censuses (viz. 1 st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th) be compiled in a condensed, user -friendly format (State/UT wise) 
and uploaded on the website of the Ministry for the benefit of all the stake -holders / users, i.e. farmers, 
students, academicians, planners, bureaucrats, etc. and that the Ministry initiate an ach ievable plan of 
action in this regard at the earliest.  The Committee would like to be apprised of further progress made in 
this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
1. Ministry is conducting the 5 th Minor Irrigation (MI) Census with reference year 2013 -14. Overall, 
77.44 % fieldwork of 5th MI Census has been completed at the national level. Field work has been 
completed in 11 States and another 9 States have completed more than 80% of field work.  

 
56 
 
2. Online Software for data processing of 5 th MI Census has been devel oped for the first time and 
link intimated to States/UTs. Data entry has been started by 16 States/UTs using the online 
software. 
3. The State-wise status of 5 th MI Census activities is being monitored regularly. Regular review of 
progress of Census activitie s like field work/ data entry using online software, etc, carried out by 
State Govts/ UT is carried out by senior officers of this Ministry. Regular monitoring is also done 
through Video Conference with States, D.O. letters, emails, etc. 
All efforts are be ing taken to ensure that Census activities are completed by States/UTs within 
stipulated time frame (i.e. March, 2017). 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 6 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.25) 
 
The Committee note that un der the pilot scheme on Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) 
of water bodies initiated in 2005, a total of 1098 water bodies were taken up, out of which 1085 water 
bodies were completed and irrigation potential of 0.78 lakh hectare was restored through  Rs. 197.3 crore 
released as Central grant.  After the pilot scheme, two schemes of RRR of water bodies, one with 
domestic support with an outlay of Rs. 1250 crore and another with external assistance with an outlay of 
Rs. 1500 crore, were launched during 12th Plan.  Under the RRR scheme with domestic support, Rs. 
917.259 crore were released as Grant during 11 th Plan for 3341 water bodies, out of which 2501 were 
completed and 1.195 lakh hectare of irrigation potential restored.  While noting the Ministry’s reply that 
Rs. 2175 crore was sought for allocation for PMSKY (SMI, CADWM, GW&RRR) during 2016 -17, the 
Committee were surprised to know that only Rs. 500 crore was provided, meaning thereby that allocation 
for RRR scheme would be still much less than adequ ate.  Further, the little available fund allocated will 
be utilized for only ongoing RRR schemes.  The Committee further note, in this connection, that a query 
was made by the Committee to the Ministry as to whether the Government has carried out any surve y 
about encroached water bodies in the country, and also whether any stringent action / penalty has been 
proposed for those guilty of willful encroachments of water bodies in the country.  Sadly however, the 
reply of the Ministry in the matter shows that t he Government is putting the onus on the shoulder of State 

 
57 
 
Governments on the plea that the works related to water resources development are taken by the 
concerned State Governments and that the Central Government act as catalyst by providing Central 
Assistance to eligible schemes as per the guidelines.  The Committee want the Ministry to take a 
proactive role with regard to RRR of water bodies in the country.  Noting further that the guidelines 
issued in October, 2013 for implementation of the RRR scheme e njoins the State Governments to take 
steps for declaring the water body boundary through a government order and to ensure removal of 
encroachment in the water body before submitting the proposal for release of 2 nd installment of grant for 
the RRR scheme, t he Committee recommend that the Government keep strict tab on the State 
Governments to ensure that these guidelines are scrupulously complied with by them before release of 
funds or approval of projects under the RRR scheme.  The Committee also recommend t hat the Ministry 
within three months of presentation of this Report issue common, mandatory guideline to all States / UTs 
enjoining them to identify, record and compile the number of encroached water bodies in their territories 
and complete the exercise within a year for purpose of compiling a national database at the Centre in this 
regard.  They further recommend that the Ministry vigorously pursue all the concerned States / UTs 
through consultation, meetings, etc. to ensure that the advisory issued by Sec retary, Ministry of Water 
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation on 26 February, 2016 is duly complied and the 
guilty (if any) are punished in case of the encroachments on the water bodies.  The Committee also 
categorically desire that a scien tific study / mapping of water bodies be taken up on priority basis by the 
Ministry and the Committee be apprised of the results of such study / mapping. 
 
Reply of the Government 
  
(1) In respect of the observation of the Committee for keeping strict tab on th e State Governments to 
ensure that the guidelines are scrupulously complied for removal of encroachment, it may be 
mentioned that the guidelines (2013) of RRR on water bodies stipulates for State to take 
necessary steps for declaring the water body boundar y through a Government order and to 
ensure removal of encroachments in the water body spread area/water body boundary before 
submitting the proposal for release of 2nd installment of grant for completion of work on the water 

 
58 
 
body under RRR. This is strictl y followed for releasing central assistance to the States. States 
submit necessary documents/ certificates in this regard before release of 2nd installment.  
(2) After the pilot scheme, two schemes of RRR of water bodies, one with domestic support with an 
outlay of Rs. 1250 Crore and another with external assistance with an outlay of Rs. 3700 Crore, 
were launched during XIth Plan under the RRR scheme with domestic support, Rs. 917.259 
Crore were released as Grant during XIth Plan for 3341 water bodies, out of w hich 2501 were 
completed and 1.455 lakh hectare of irrigation potential restored. 
 
During the XIIth Plan a total of 1354 water bodies from 9 states have been approved for an 
estimated cost of Rs. 1025.8723 crore so far. Out of these 1354 water bodies, Cent ral assistance of Rs. 
264.67 Crore have been released for 1237 water bodies from 8 states with CCA to be restored of 0.94 
lakh ha. In the current financial year 2016 -17, there is target of 1000 water bodies to be restored as per 
the decision taken in the meeting of National Water Mission (NWM). 
 
As regards to the query made by the Committee to the Ministry as to whether the Government 
has carried out any survey about encroached water bodies and any stringent action/ penalty to be 
proposed for those guilty o f willful encroachments of water bodies in the country, it is again stated that 
these steps are to be taken by the concerned State Govts. only as land, law and order are state govt. 
subject. The Ministry may play a role in assisting the state govt. to cond uct the survey work and enact 
laws in preventing the encroachment of waster bodies. 
 
As per the guidelines issued in October, 2013 for implementation of RRR of Water Bodies 
schemes, the State Govts need to take steps for declaring the water body boundary t hrough a 
Government Order (G.O) and to ensure removal of encroachment in water body before submitting the 
proposal for release of 2 nd installment for grant for the RRR scheme. The CWC field offices may be 
directed to keep strict watch on the works being ca rried out by State Govts. so as to ensure that these 
guidelines are fully complied in letter and spirit before release of funds or approval of projects under RRR 
scheme. For this proper monitoring of the water bodies needs to be carried out through remote sensing 
and CWC field offices. 
 

 
59 
 
As regards to the issuing of common, mandatory guidelines by the Ministry to all State/ UTs 
enjoining them to identify, record and compile the number of encroached water bodies in their territories 
and completing the exercise within a year for purpose of compiling a national database at the Centre, this 
work can be done by the MI (Stat) Wing of MoWR, RD & GR who may issue these guidelines with the 
help of CWC and compile a data base as being done with other MI schemes. For ta king up the scientific 
study/ mapping of water bodies on priority basis, the MI (Stat) Wing need to engage the State Govts. to 
conduct a survey of all the water bodies in the country along with the MI census. Further, under the India -
Water Resources Inform ation System (WRIS) project, using satellite imageries of 2009 -10, about 
7,98,908 water bodies with minimum 0.01 hectare area have been mapped using satellite remote 
sensing technique which includes both rural and urban areas. The details of same has been enclosed as 
Annexure-II. However, for further detailed study regarding encroachment in the water bodies and other 
related issues, a census/ survey is to be conducted by State Govts. 
 
As regards the recommendation that Ministry need to vigorously pursue all  the concerned States/ 
UTs through consultation, meeting, etc. to ensure that the advisory issued by Secretary, MoWR, RD & 
GR on 26 th February, 2016 is duly complied and guilty (if any) are punished in case of the 
encroachments on water bodies, necessary actions are being taken. 
 
As regards the view of the Committee for Ministry to take a proactive role with regard to RRR of 
water bodies in the country, it is to mention that the state govts. are the overall custodians of the water 
bodies as water is a state  subject. The State Govts. plan, execute and maintains the various irrigation 
schemes as per their need and priority. The role of Central Water Commission is this regard is that of 
advisory in nature and to facilitate them to prepare and execute the projects.  
(3) MI Stat Wing of Ministry conducts all India Census of Minor Irrigation Structures under RMIS 
which is a component of Development of Water Resource Information System (DWRIS) Plan 
Scheme.  This Census is conducted every five years so far four census in  1986-87, 1993 -94, 
2000-01, 2006-07 have been conducted and 5th MI Census with base 2013-14 is in progress. 
 

 
60 
 
MI Census collects information on number of Minor Irrigation Structures of Ground Water and 
Surface Water used for irrigation in rural areas.  The re are five type of MI structures namely Dugwell, 
Deep Tubewell, Shallow Tubewell, Surface flow and Surface lift schemes. From Minor Irrigation Census 
information, data on water bodies is indirectly compiled but this information is limited to number of wat er 
bodies in villages used for minor irrigation. 
In the ongoing 5th MI Census an attempt has been made to collect information on number of 
Water Bodies directly in rural areas, by adding an item on Water bodies in the village schedule.  
CWC & ISRO under DWRIS have collected information and created a portal under India -WRIS, a 
layer on Water bodies has been developed in which around 8 lakh water bodies have been mapped.  A 
16 digit code for these water bodies has been generated. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 12 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.26) 
 
The Committee note that Hydrology Project (HP) was implemented during 1996 -2003 with World Bank 
assistance in 9 peninsular States and 6 Central Government Organisations at an estimated cost of about 
Rs. 605 crore for water resources data collection, storage and dissemination.  During 2006 -14, Hydrology 
Project Phase – II was implemented in 13 States and 8 Central organizations at an estimated cost of Rs. 
631.83 crore as a follo w up of HP -I and which focused on increased geographical coverage and 
analytical usage of Hydrological Information System (HIS) created under HP – I.  The Committee note 
that a total of Rs. 94.95 crore was received from the World Bank (IBRD) on Hydrology P roject Phase – I 
between 1996 and 2005 and a total of Rs. 91.58 crore was received for Hydrology Project Phase – II 
between 2006 and 2015.  The Committee are encouraged to further note that HP -I and HP -II had 
achieved several accomplishments in the States and Organizations - where the projects were  

 
61 
 
implemented, viz. (i) establishment and consolidation of modernized and standardized water resources 
measurement system through the procurement and commissioning of innovative hydro -meteorological 
equipment like automatic / digital water level recorders, radar sensors etc., weather / climatic equipment 
like Automatic Weather Stations, Snow Pillows etc, Geophysical equipment like meters, logges etc, water 
quality equipment like Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer s, UV Spectrophotometers etc, IT related 
hardware, software etc. (ii) introduction to applications of latest technology through development of 
software for national level standardized data storage and dissemination, development of various national 
web base d applications like e -GEMS (Ground Water Estimation and Management System), e -SWIS 
(surfaced water information system), e -WQIS (water quality information system), development of Real 
Time Decision Support Systems for Flood Forecasting and Reservoir Operato rs by Bhakra Beas 
Management Board and by Maharashtra Water Resources Department, Development of 13 no. of Real 
Time Water Quality Monitoring Systems in Ganga river basins, application of advanced geophysical 
surveys, including Heliborne survey for aquifer  mapping for the first time in the country etc. (iii) 
establishment of protocols for inter -agency data collection, collation, processing and validation and (iv) 
capacity building through establishment of State and District level data centres, water quality  labs and 
through regular training and workshops etc.  The Committee want the Ministry to keep a tab on the 
implementation of Hydrology Project so that the country derive maximum benefits from it on water 
resources front.  The Committee also note that the Ministry has envisaged to establish a web based 
Management Information System (MIS) for monitoring the physical and financial progress of the 
Hydrology Project - which shall require monthly updation by all the implementing agencies.  Besides, the 
Committee also note that the State and Central implementing Agencies have constituted a Project 
Monitoring Unit (PMU) and also States have finalized the project implementation plans for their 

 
62 
 
respective Agencies.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Minist ry should take up the matter 
with the States in order to have their project implementation plans concretised at the ground level at the 
earliest.  The Committee would like to be apprised of further development in the matter.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
1. The Cabinet has approved National Hydrology Project on 06.04.2016 a Central Sector Scheme 
which envisages establishment of a modern and standardized water resources management system 
that will provide decision support tools to every State/District/Village for:- 
2. Development of Decision Support System (DSS) for real time flood forecasting and reservoir 
operations.  b) River basin assessment and planning of water resources that will help in providing 
dynamic information to farmers about the surface and ground  water for planning their cropping. It is 
also envisaged to establish a National Water Informatics Centre (NWIC) for seamless exchange of 
hydro-met data amongst the State and Central IAs, placing the data on public domain (India – WRIS) 
etc.  
3. The Ministry is already in touch with States/IAs for finalize their PIPs. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.16) 
 
The Committee observe that the Budget allocation for the Plan scheme, Ground Water 
Management & Regulation (GWM&R) during 2016 -17 was increased to Rs. 328.38 c rore from Rs. 
188.00 crore allocated during 2015-16, and Rs. 188.00 crore was also the figure during Revised Estimate 
stage (2015 -16).  The reason attributed by the Ministry for this hike in Budget allocation was for 
“undertaking data generation activities  for aquifer mapping in 8 priority States through outsourcing”.  The 
Committee note that several major achievements have been made under the GWM&R scheme from 
2012-13 to 2015 -16 (as on 29 February, 2016), under which (i) the pilot projects on Aquifer Mappi ng 
covering an area of 3006 sq. km. in the States of Bihar, Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Karnataka and Tamil 

 
63 
 
Nadu have been completed, (ii) Aquifer Mapping has been completed in NCR area in the States of Uttar 
Pradesh, Haryana and Delhi encompassing an area of 26185 sq. km. and Ground Water Management 
Plan have been prepared (iii) 9988 nos. of Vertical Electrical Sounding (VES) and 430 nos. of bore hole 
logging have been conducted (iv) 3037 nos. of ground water exploration wells have been constructed, 
and 98184 ground water samples have been analyzed.  The Committee also note that Aquifer mapping 
area has been reprioritised in 08 States and Bundelkhand region incorporating an area of 5.25 lakh sq. 
km., viz. Haryana, Punjab, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Tel angana, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and 
Bundelkhand areas of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh, for which action plans for each State has 
been prepared.  They further note the Ministry’s reply that under National Aquifer Mapping and 
Management Plan, a total area of 116347 sq. km. has been covered in the last 3 years covering 16 
States, NCT Delhi and area covered under pilot aquifer mapping in parts of the 5 States of Rajasthan, 
Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Bihar.  Given the fact that the ground water lev els in many 
parts of the country are fast depleting and also deteriorating qualitatively to a large extent, the Committee 
see a great potential in Aquifer Mapping as an effective plan component for addressing the depressing 
ground water scenario obtaining in the country.  They, therefore, recommend that the allocation of Rs. 
328.38 crore made in 2016 -17 be fully utilized to achieve optimum results under the Ground Water 
Management & Regulation scheme.  They also recommend that efforts be made by the Ministr y to 
extend the coverage of National Aquifer Mapping and Management Plan from the 16 States, NCT Delhi 
and parts of 05 States as exists during the last 03 years, to the remaining parts of the country - which are 
currently outside Aquifer Mapping.  They fur ther recommend that the latest techniques on Aquifer 
Mapping be roped in and introduced in all priority areas such as critical, semi -critical, over-exploited and 
quality-affected ground water areas in the country for the benefit of all the stake -holders, a nd that the 

 
64 
 
Ministry come up with an action plan to achieve this goal within this financial year, i.e. 2016 -17.  The 
Committee also hope and expect that the Government will make earnest efforts to achieve about 3 lakh 
sq. km. area for Aquifer Mapping envis aged during 2016-17.  While taking note of the submission made 
by the Ministry before the Committee in regard to the inadequacy of the funds for Aquifer Mapping, the 
Committee recommend that the sufficient funds ranging from Rs. 700 to Rs. 800 crore annual ly be made 
available to the Ministry for completing the programme within a span of three years as envisaged by 
them. 
Reply of the Government 
 Against the allocation of Budget of 328.38 Crore made in 2016 -17, Rs.225 crore is of the capital 
Nature expenditure comprising Motor Vehicle (MV), Machinery & Equipment (M&E) and Major Works.  All 
out efforts are being made to utilize the fund within the year 2016-17. 
CGWB proposes to cover Aquifer Mapping in 23 Lakh Sqkm of Mappable area of the country. 
Out of which around 9.0 Lakh Sqkm has been taken up during the period 2012-17. The remaining area of 
about 14 Lakh Sqkm is proposed to be taken up during 2017 onwards. 
Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) has already utilizing latest techniques on Aquifer Mapping 
in priority areas such as critical, semi -critical, over exploited and quality affected ground water areas in 
the country. The latest techniques utilized like Heliborne Dual Moment electromagnetic Survey, 2 D 
Imaging, Ground Trans Electromagnetic Survey etc for  Ge ophysical studies,  Analysis of stable  
environmental isotopes and  latest software like Rock works, ARCGIS, Visual Mod Flow etc for preparing 
Aquifer Maps and Management Plan etc. 
All out efforts are being made to achieve 3 Lakh Sq km area envisaged for A quifer Mapping 
during 2016-17. 
Recommendation (Para No. 3.17) 
 
The Committee note that the Rajiv Gandhi National Training & Research Institute for Ground 
Water (Rajiv Gandhi NGWT&RI) is the only Central Institute of its kind catering the needs not only of 

 
65 
 
Central Ground Water Board but also acting as key resource centre for many of the institutions like Rajiv 
Gandhi Drinking Water Mission, Public Health and Engineering Departments, World Bank – aided 
Hydrology Project in the country and State Groundwater ag encies etc.  A Budget allocation of Rs. 8.00 
crore was made for the financial year 2016 -17 towards Rajiv Gandhi NGWT&RI, which was higher than 
Rs. 7.00 crore allocated in 2015 -16.  The Committee were apprised that during the 12 th Plan, 531 nos. of 
trainings have been imparted in the Institute so far comprising of 44358 trainees.  Further, the Institute is 
implementing a three -tier training programme in view of the capacity building requirements of 
professionals of CGWB, different State and Central Governmen t agencies and other organisations in the 
field of ground water with a special emphasis on the requirements of the National Project on Aquifer 
Management, i.e. Aquifer level, State level and National level.  These trainings are aimed at overall 
capacity bu ilding in ground water sector and creation of a trained workforce for implementation of 
National Project on Aquifer Management for sustainable development of ground water resources.  The 
Committee see a pivotal role for the Rajiv Gandhi NGWT&RI in the comi ng years given the fact that 
groundwater has emerged as a pressing national focus of attention due to the potential water scarcity 
situation likely to be faced by this country in the near future.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
the Government should make earnest efforts to strengthen, equip and modernise the Institute so that it is 
fully equipped to handle the task of capacity building for its trainees in the vital ground water sector and 
for creation of a trained, dedicated workforce for implemen ting National Project on Aquifer Management 
for sustainable development of ground water resources.  The Committee would like to be apprised of 
action taken in this regard at the earliest.  Noting further that the Institute has been taking up R&D 
studies now still in progress, viz. (i) surface water -groundwater interaction through isotope studies, (ii) 
mathematical modelling based approach for sustainability of aquifer system underlying Bemetara block, 

 
66 
 
Chhattisgarh, (iii) per-chlorate contamination in parts of the State of Kerala, and (iv) Artificial intelligence 
in groundwater management, the Committee recommend that these studies be completed in a time -
bound manner.  The Committee also recommend that the challenges faced by the Rajiv Gandhi 
NGWT&RI, i.e. in adequate posting of officers, constraints in Guest Facility due to fund shortage, 
inadequate international exposure to the Institute’s faculty, lack of infrastructure facility, absence of own 
building for office, hostel and Guest House, lack of training an d research policy, etc. be taken up at the 
earliest with the Government for remedial measures to enable the Institute to function smoothly in 
fulfilling its mandate. 
Reply of the Government 
 Actions taken in this regard are as follows:  
a) Rajiv Gandhi Nat ional Ground Water Training & Research Institute (RGNGWTRI) is planning 
proliferation through setting up of Regional Centers. One such proposal has already been initiated by 
acquisition of land at CWPRS campus Pune. Proposals moved for construction of buil ding for an 
estimated cost of Rs.38.4 crore.  
b) RGNGWTRI has plan to setup five center of excellence to boost the R&D activity in the fields of 
Ground Water Modeling, Ground Water quality and contamination, Remote Sensing and GIS for 
Ground Water Studies,  Managed Aquifer Recharge & Rain Water Harvesting, Drilling 
Technology. 
c) Under its training plan, RGI conduct three tier training program to support the NAQUIM. So far 
556 training courses were conducted during XII plan, as per the details given below: 

 
67 
 
 
All the four R&D studies are going on in a time bound manner. The progress is given as annexure 
-III 
Actions taken in this regard are -  
a) A proposal of overseas t raining for 16 officers amounting to 72.0 lakh is under consideration of 
ministry. 
b) New Human Resources policy for CGWB submitted to Ministry. Question/clarification raised 
under preparation.  
c) Restructuring proposal of CGWB includes strengthening of R GNGWTRI, is under consideration 
of Ministry.  
 
 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.30) 
 
As per information provided by the Ministry, flood have affected during 2012 -14 a total area of 
36.044 Mha. and 45.704 million population, and resulted in damages to the crop s of the value of Rs. 
5368.115 crore, 987940 nos. of houses valued at Rs. 873.261 crores, 202602 nos. of cattle, and public 
utilities valued at Rs. 14640.340 crore.  The total number of human lives lost was 4152 in the same 
period.  In this connection, the  Committee observe that during 11 th Plan, the Government of India 
launched “Flood Management Programme” (FMP) for providing the Central Assistance to the State 
Government under this scheme, during 11 th Plan, the nos. of works approved was 420, for which fu nd 
Training 
Year 
 
Tier-I Tier-II Tier-III Total 
Courses 
Conducted 
Person 
trained 
Courses 
Conducted 
Person 
trained 
Courses 
Conducted 
Person 
trained 
Courses 
Conducted 
Person 
trained 
2012-13 32 565 36 1160 100 15640 168 17365 
2013-14 32 486 36 1112 97 12686 165 14284 
2014-15 33 581 50 1611 35 4930 118 7122 
2015-16 34 690 25 825 46 7437 105 8952 

 
68 
 
amounting to Rs. 3566.00 crore was released.  In comparison, during 12 th Plan, the nos. of works 
approved under FMP is only 97 while a total fund of Rs. 1057.40 crore has been released till date.  The 
Committee note that the 12 th Plan is in its last pha se - while the achievements made so far under FMP 
remain meager to say the least.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry pull up their 
socks and make all -out efforts to increase the achievements under the FMP during 11 th Plan through 
coordinated efforts with the State Governments and other implementing  Agencies.  The Committee are 
however, dismayed to note that the Ministry have not furnished reply regarding short -term, medium-term 
and long -term approaches and methods to be adopted to manag e and control recurrent floods in the 
country, and they recommend that the relevant information in this regard should be submitted to the 
Committee within three months after presentation of this Report. 
Reply of the Government 
 In order to enable the State  Governments to undertake the works related to river management, 
flood control, anti -erosion, raising and strengthening the embankments and anti sea erosion the 
Government of India had launched a Flood Management Programme (FMP) in 11 th Plan with an outlay of 
Rs.8,000 crore. During 11 th Plan a total of 420 projects having estimated cost of Rs.9,435 crore with 
central share of Rs. 7,475 crore were approved out of which only Rs.3,477 crore were released leaving 
Rs. 3,900 crore as spill over of works for 12 th Plan. During 12th Plan the Cabinet approved continuation of 
FMP with an outlay of Rs.10,000 crore which included Rs.3,900 crore towards spill over works and 
Rs.6,100 crore towards new works proposed to be undertaken during 12 th Plan keep in provision for n ew 
works for catchment area treatment for attaining flood management in a more effective manner. Due to 
delay in approval of the FMP, changes in process of investment clearance, reduction in the extent of 
Central funding, reduced outlays as a result of cha nge in policy of Government of India about devolution 
of central taxes in the light of recommendations of 14 th Finance Commission, the releases under FMP 
could not be done as per demands of the States. Therefore, during 12 th Plan only Rs. 1,157.08 crore 
could be released towards the spill over works of the 11 th Plan and 97 new works approved during 12 th 

 
69 
 
Plan. In order to complete the projects already approved under FMP during 11 th and 12th Plan sufficient 
funds need to be provided under FMP. 
Short term meas ures:  The measures which can be completed immediately say within 1 year such as 
closure of breaches, raised platforms, critical anti erosion works fall under this category.   
Medium-term Measures:  The measures which can be completed within 2 -3 years like  raising & 
strengthening of embankments, anti erosion works, drainage development, etc. fall under this category. 
Such measures also include flood/inundation forecasting under non structural category.     
Long-term Measures:  The measures, such as reservoi rs, which require more time and involve a 
number of issues to be sorted out before implementing them are categorized as long -term measures. 
Under non structural category, the measures of real time flood/inundation forecasting and flood plain 
zoning fall under this category. 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.30-A) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation, through its apex technical a rm, the Central Water Commission (CWC), performs the 
activity of flood forecasting on major rivers and their tributaries in the country, through a network of 175 
flood forecasting stations - which consist of 147 level forecast stations and 28 inflow foreca st stations.  
Regarding the measures taken / proposed to be taken to upgrade, expand and improve flood forecasting 
in India, the Ministry stated that 445 nos. of stations have been modernized with telemetry system upto 
11th Plan, and the remaining 219 stat ions of existing flood forecasting network are proposed to be 
modernized.  Additionally, 100 nos. of level / inflow forecasting stations alongwith 310 base stations are 
proposed to be established for various towns and reservoirs / dams in the country.  All  the stations of 
extended network are to be modernized with telemetry system.  Other measures including development 
of inundation forecast model on pilot basis is also planned for 12 th Plan to give information about the area 

 
70 
 
likely to be flooded.  The Comm ittee are happy to see the Ministry making ambitious plans for 
achievements during 12 th Plan on the flood forecasting front, but at the same point in time they are 
equally surprised to note that the Budget allocation for flood forecasting had to be reduced  during 2015-
16 from Rs. 50.00 crore to Rs. 35.00 crore because of the inability of the Ministry to take up new works of 
establishing 100 new flood forecasting stations due to delayed approval of the scheme by the 
Government as late as December, 2015.  The  Committee want the Ministry to make fresh initiatives to 
curb the issue of delays in securing approval for flood forecasting schemes - which is responsible for 
reduction of allocations at RE stage during 2016 -17 itself and also inform the Committee of the  outcome 
of such efforts made.  The Committee, however, recommend the Ministry to initiate specific steps to 
achieve the ambitious action plan envisaged for flood forecasting during 12 th Plan without any loss of 
time and apprise the Committee accordingly.  Noting that a rainfall -based Flood Forecasting model at 
Ram Munshibag (Srinagar) on river Jhelum has been developed by the CWC and made fully functional 
during 2015, the Committee recommend that similar models be introduced for other areas of the country 
facing annual recurrent floods, i.e. Assam, Bihar, West Bengal, Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, Mumbai region 
etc. as well.  The Committee would like to be apprised of further developments in this regard within the 
next six months. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Central Water Commission under the Ministry has been making efforts for development of 
integrated rainfall based run off models. During 12 th plan it is proposed to develop Mathematical models 
for inundation forecast for Mahanadi/ Brahmaputra/Kosi/Sabri river basins using the Digital Elevation 
Maps (DEMs) available with NRSC.  
 
Comments of the Committee 

 
71 
 
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.31) 
 
The objective of the Plan scheme, ‘River Basin Management’ (RBM) is to prov ide a forum to all 
the co-basin States for taking up the necessary studies, evaluation, etc. for finding optimum method for 
the development and utilization of water resources within that basin and meeting the aspiration of all the 
stake-holders.  The Budge t allocation was increased from Rs. 119.00 crore in 2015 -16 (BE) to Rs. 
173.60 crore in 2016 -17 (BE), which, according to the Ministry, was for the preparation of PFRs, FRs & 
DPRs of Inter-State and Intra-State links, survey and investigation, due to incre ase in the rates of various 
goods and services, purchase of survey & scientific instruments and revisions of rates, enhancement of 
DA/increment and implementation of 7 th Pay Commission Report, etc. and also for taking up flood 
protection in Majuli Island.  The RBM Plan scheme comprises of two components (i) Investigation of 
Water Resources Development Scheme (IWRDS) and (ii) Brahmaputra Board.  The Committee note that 
three DPRs of ILR projects, viz. Ken-Betwa Phase I & II, Damanganga – Pinjal, and Pai -Tapi-Narmada 
link projects have been completed alongwith two DPRs of Intra -State links under IWRDS of NWDA 
component.  Under IWRDS of CWC component, DPR of two projects have been completed and 
submitted to the State Governments.  The Committee recommend that t he details of these projects 
including the time required for completing them, their final status, costs incurred, etc. should be furnished 
to them within 3 months so that these projects do not incur needless time and cost overruns.  The 
Committee are convi nced that the time has come for the country to have an Integrated Water 
Management for the entire country which would timely assist in fructifying the ambitious scheme of Inter -
Linking of Rivers (ILRs) being implemented in the country.  The Committee, ther efore, recommend that 
the Government create an over-arching National Authority (River Basin Authority) at the Centre which will 
serve as the apex body for an integrated management of river basins in the country - so as to in turn 
ensure that the ILRs schem e is provided the much -needed impetus - while at the same time the process 
of solution of various Inter -State Disputes on rive waters is simplified and streamlined for the lasting 
benefit to all the concerned parties.  The Committee would like to be kept i nformed of the developments 
made in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 

 
72 
 
(i) Investigation of Water Resources Development Scheme (IWRDS) of NWDA component  
The Detailed Project Report of Ken -Betwa link project Phase -I was completed by NWDA in April, 
2010 and su bmitted to Govt. of MP and UP in May, 2010.  Detailed Project Report of Ken -Betwa link 
project Phase -II has been completed in January, 2014 and submitted to the concerned States 
Government of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh in January, 2014. The DPR of Da manganga-Pinjal 
link has been completed in March, 2014 and submitted to Govt. of Maharashtra and Gujarat. The DPR of 
Par-Tapi-Narmada link project has also been completed in August, 2015 and submitted to Govt. of 
Gujarat and Maharashtra. 
The Detailed Project Report (DPR) of two Intra -State links of Bihar State viz Burhi Gandak -Noon-
Baya-Ganga and Kosi-Mechi link have been completed in December 2013 and March 2014 respectively.  
Ken-Betwa link project Phase-I  
The total cost of the project has been estimated  to be Rs. 9,393 crores at 2007 -08 price level. 
The benefit cost ratio for the project works out to 1.56 and the Internal Rate of Return (IRR) is 12%. As 
per DPR the construction time of the project is estimated to be eight years. 
Status 
Environment Clearance  
 The proposal was considered by Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC) of MOEF&CC in its 86 th, 88 th and 
91st  meetings held on 24.8.2015; 26.10.2015 and 8 -9 February, 2016 respectively at New Delhi for 
environmental clearance.  
 EAC in its 91 st  meeting held on 9th February, 2016 decided to consider the project for Environmental 
clearance (EC) only after Wild Life Clearance is obtained from National Board of Wild Life (NBWL).  
 NWDA has been advised to submit again the proposal to EAC along with decision of NBWL.  
 The meeting of EAC was held on 02.06.2016. The committee has discussed various points in the 
meeting and given some suggestions.  
 
 

 
73 
 
Wildlife Clearance 
 Wildlife clearance considered by State Wildlife Board of Madhya Pradesh in its meeting held on 22 nd  
September, 2015 under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Chief Minister, Madhya Pradesh and agreed.  
 After clearance of State Wildlife Board of M.P., the proposal of Wildlife clearance along with 
recommendations of State Wildlife Board, MP was submitted to Nation al Board of Wildlife (NBWL), 
MoEF, New Delhi on 14.12.2016. 
 Proposal for wild life clearance was duly considered in 37 th  meeting of Standing Committee of NBWL 
chaired by Hon’ble Minister of State (I/C) Environment, Forest and Climate Change held on 26 th  
February, 2016. 
 Standing Committee, NBWL constituted a Committee comprising representatives of NTCA; Wildlife 
Institute of India, Dehradun; Dr. R. Sukumar, IISc, Bangalore; Dr. H. S. Singh, Retired PCCF & Member 
of NBWL, representative of Chief Wildlife Warden, Madhya Pradesh and representative of NWDA.  
 Above Committee visited concerned areas of Panna Tiger Reserve during 8-11 April, 2016.  
 Report is being prepared by the members and will be finalised soon.  
 The proposal for wildlife clearance was duly con sidered during 38th meeting of Standing Committee of 
NBWL held on 10/05/2016 chaired by Hon’ble  Minister of State(I/C), MoEF&CC in which in principle 
approval for Wildlife was accorded. 
Forest Land Diversion Clearance 
 NWDA submitted proposal for forest land diversion clearance online & to MoEF & CC.  
 Hard copies of proposal have been submitted to concerned DFOs of State Forest Department and 
Collectors.  
 Identification of double the degraded forest land (about 12034 ha) and other associated works are being  
done by Forest Department, MP. 
 
Ken-Betwa Link Project Phase – II 

 
74 
 
The total cost of the project is estimated as Rs.2282.94 crores. The benefit cost ratio of the 
project works out to 1.56 and the internal rate of return as 14.87%. As per DPR the constructi on time of 
the project is estimated to be five years. 
Environmental Clearance of Lower Orr dam 
 Proposal for environmental clearance of Lower Orr Dam was considered during 91st meeting of Expert 
Appraisal Committee (EAC) of MoEF & CC held on 8th February, 2016. 
  Compliance to issues/observations raised in the meeting  has been submitted to MOEF & CC.  
 Proposal for Environmental Clearance of Lower Orr Dam was  considered again during 93 rd meeting of 
EAC  held on 2nd May, 2016 
 Form-I for diversion of forest la nd submitted to Collector and DFO, Ashok Nagar and Shivpuri for 
processing case of forest clearance. 
 Concerned Collector and DFO of Ashok Nagar and Shivpuri submitted Form -I after completing their parts 
online to APCCF (Land Management), Bhopal for further processing the case. 
 Complete proposal alongwith recommendations submitted to MoEF&CC by Forest Department, 
Government of MP for according forest land diversion clearance. 
 The compliance to the issues/observations have been to MoEF & CC for consideration of EAC and 
Environmental Clearance of Lower Orr dam has been accorded in its meeting held on 2 nd  May 2016. 
Damanganga-Pinjal link 
The cost of project is Rs.2746.61 crore.  The B.C. ratio is 1.95. As per DPR the construction time 
of the project is estimated to be seven years. 
Status 
National Water Development Agency (NWDA) has completed the DPR of Damanganga -Pinjal 
link in March, 2014 and submitted to Govt. of Maharashtra and Gujarat. It was decided that Municipal 
Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM) would be responsible for initiating further action for the 
implementation of the project including statutory clearances.    
The Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM) has submitted the DPR of Damanganga -
Pinjal link project to CWC during January, 2015 for  appraisal. The report is under appraisal in CWC. The 

 
75 
 
Hon’ble Union Minister (WR,RD&GR) held a meeting with Hon’ble  Chief Minister of Maharashtra at 
Mumbai on 7 th  January, 2015 to expedite the further course of action. Govt. of Maharashtra has 
suggested minor modifications in the planning of the links to make the project more attractive and 
assured full support for the implementing of Damanganga-Pinjal link project. 
Par-Tapi-Narmada link 
Total cost of the link project at the price level of year 2014 -15 has been worked out as Rs.9279 
crores. The Benefit Cost ratio of the project has been assessed to be 1.12 and Internal Rate of Return 
has been computed as 10.43 %. As per DPR the construction time of the project is estimated to be seven 
years. 
Status 
The DPR  of Par -Tapi-Narmada link project has been completed by NWDA and submitted to 
Govts. of Gujarat and Maharashtra in August,2015 and is under examination by both the States. 
Hon’ble Union Minister (WR,RD&GR) has requested the State Govts. of Gujarat and Maha rashtra  to 
take up the issue of cost, water and power sharing of both Par -Tapi-Narmada link project and 
Damanganga-Pinjal link projects for reaching an agreement.  
Burhi Gandak-Noon-Baya-Ganga  link project 
Total cost of the project has been estimated as Rs.4213.75 crore.  The benefit cost ratio of 
project is 1.54. As per DPR the construction time of the project is estimated to be three years.  
Kosi-Mechi link project 
Total cost of the Project has been estimated as Rs. 2903.25 crore.  The benefit cost rati o of 
project is 3.66. As per DPR the construction time of the project is estimated to be five years. 
 
Status 
DPRs of 2 links of Bihar (Burhi Gandak -Noon-Baya-Ganga and Kosi – Mechi links) have been 
completed and are under appraisal in Central Water Commission. 
(ii) Investigation of Water Resources Development Scheme (IWRDS) of CWC component 

 
76 
 
CWC has investigated two nos of projects namely, Suntlay and Kirthai II under IWRDS and DPR of 
these project have been completed and submitted to State Government.  The salie nt features of the 
projects are given below: 
1 Name of Project Kirthai Hydro Electric Project -II 
(J&K) 
Suntaley Hydro Electric 
Project (Sikkim) 
2 Type of Project Hydro Electric ROR Hydro Electric 
3 River Basin Chandra Bhaga (Chenab) Teesta Basin 
4 State  Jammu & Kashmir Sikkim 
5 River Chenab Rangpo Chu 
6 Time required for 
completing of project 
60 months (construction period 
after getting statuary clearance 
and Financial Closure) 
4 
Years (construction 
period) 
7 Proposed/installed 
capacity 
930 MW (6x140+2x35+2x10)MW 2x20 MW 
8 Estimated cost of the 
project (in crores) 
5158.18 a)531.88 with R&R 
b)536.61 without R&R 
  Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation had constituted a 
Drafting Committee under the Chairmanship of Justice T.S. Doabia (Retd.) to study the activities that are 
required for optimum development of river basin and changes required in the existing River Board Act, 
1956 for achievement of the same.  The Committee submitted its Report in November, 2012 and has 
prepared a Draft River Basin Management (RBM) Bill. 
The Draft RBM Bill proposes to establish a River Basin Authority for regulation and development 
of waters of an Inter -State River Basin or any specified part thereof and further makes it clear that 
different A uthorities shall be established for different Inter -State River Basin. The Bill also makes 
provision for creation of a separate River Basin Authority for a sub -basin within an Inter -State River 
Basin.  
The draft RBM Bill also stipulates that a River Basin Authority shall ensure that a River Basin 
Master Plan for river basin development, management and regulation is prepared for the Inter -State river 
Basin under its jurisdiction. 

 
77 
 
The draft River Basin Management Bill is under examination in this Ministry in consultation with 
different stakeholders.  A committee has also been set up under Dr. Mihir Shah to examine the draft 
River Basin Management Bill.  The committee is yet to submit its report.    
Further, for providing impact to Interlinking of Rivers scheme ,  Ministry has also constituted 
committee  “Special Committee for Interlinking of Rivers” vide Gazette notification dated 23.09.2014.   
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 26 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.32) 
 
The Com mittee note that under the Central Water Commission (CWC), various activities have 
been carried out since its inception in 1945, including Flood Forecasting and Assistance to State 
Governments in Flood Management, with 176 flood forecasting stations coveri ng 10 major river systems 
including 72 river sub -basins and 17 States; Collection and Analysis of Hydrological Data, through a 
network of 954 hydro -meteorological observation stations throughout the country on all the  major river 
basins to observe water l evel, discharge, water quality, silt etc.; Techno -economic Appraisal of Projects; 
Monitoring of selected projects including those receiving Central assistance; Planning & Design of 
projects; surveys, Investigations and Preparation of Detailed Project Repor t (DPR); Studies on 
Environmental and Socio -economic issues; Studies related to Irrigation Planning and Water 
Management; National Water Resources Assessment; Assistance in Resolution of Inter -State Water 
Disputes; Studies on Dam Safety; Operation of Reser voir; Training and Capacity Building; International 
Co-operation in Water sector etc.  The Committee understand and underline the pivotal role being played 
by the CWC as a premier technical organisation in the field of water resources in the country.  In t heir 3rd 
Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2015-16), the Committee had expressed dissatisfaction 

 
78 
 
over delay in the proposed restructuring of the CWC which, according to the Ministry, was due to 
disagreement on some observations of the Ministry  of Finance.  The Committee now note that in 
September, 2015, the Ministry constituted a Committee under the Chairmanship of Dr. Mihir Shah, Ex -
Member, Planning Commission to undertake a detailed study and make suitable recommendations on 
restructuring of the CWC along with the CGWB by May, 2016, and the Terms of Reference of the 
Committee was reportedly extended upto 10.03.2016.  The Committee recommend that submission of 
the Mihir Shah Committee Report should be hastened so that the restructuring of the C WC will see light 
of the day soon.  The Committee would, however, like to be informed of the progress made in this regard 
within 2 months. 
Reply of the Government 
 The report of the committee has been received and is being examined in the Ministry.  
Recommendation (Para No. 5.11) 
 
 The Committee note that the National Institute of Hydrology (NIH), a Government of India 
Society, under the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation 
established in December, 1978 at Roorkee (Uttarakha nd), is conducting basic applied and strategic 
research in the fields of hydrology and water resources development.  They also note that the NIH 
Centre for Flood Management Studies for Brahmaputra Basin (NIH -CFMS) established in August, 1988 
is engaged in R&D studies related to flood estimation and routing, structural / non-structural measures for 
flood management, integrated management for flood control, hydrological database management 
system, drainage congestion and erosion problems, water quality proble ms, socio -economic aspect of 
flood disaster and technology transfer activities.  Noting further the multifarious R&D studies carried out 
for the North -Eastern States by NIH -CFMS, specially in the States of Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, 

 
79 
 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Manipur, Nagaland and Sikkim, the Committee strongly recommend that sufficient 
funds be allocated by the Ministry to enable the NIH -CFMS to undertake its R&D activities more 
effectively and more widely.  Further, the Ministry should initiate steps so that the results of these R&D 
studies are utilized optimally in such a way that they translate in the flood control, anti -erosion and other 
related water resources development / management in the North-East.   
Reply of the Government 
 Many research studies have bee n carried out by National Institute of hydrology (NIH) in the 
North-East Region in the field of Hydrology and water resources development for utilizing the results of 
these R&D studies in such a way that they translate in the flood control, anti -erosion an d other water 
resources development/ management in North-East.  
 The NIH-Centre for Flood Management Studies for Brahmaputra basin (NIH -CFMS), Guwahati is 
engaged in various R&D studies related to flood estimation and routing, structural/ non structural 
measures for flood management, integrated watershed management for flood control, hydrological data 
base management system, drainage congestion and erosion problems, water quality problems, socio -
economic aspect of flood disaster and technology transfer acti vities. A list of various research studies 
carried out by NIH in the North-East Region in the field of hydrology and water resources development at 
Annexure-IV for utilizing the results of these R&D studies in such a way that they translate in the flood 
control, anti-erosion and other water resources development/ management in the North-East. 

 
80 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE 
IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1.26) 
 
The Committee observe that in some States like Punjab where flood irrigation is prevalent, much 
water has to be extracted for the purpose.  They also note that the Ministry have taken initiatives to adopt 
micro irrigation systems as far as possible for the developme nt of common infrastructure to facilitate the 
use of sprinkler/drip irrigation systems in the command areas of new projects.  The Committee are 
convinced that micro irrigation systems such as sprinkler/drip irrigation are the panacea to the drought -
like situations prevailing in many water -scarce regions specially in the over -exploited, critical and semi -
critical blocks of the country.  The Committee, accordingly, recommend that much concerted efforts are 
needed to be made by the Government at the earliest t o make micro irrigation as a popular movement all 
over the country so as to achieve the goal of efficient use of irrigation water.  The Committee want to be 
apprised of initiatives taken by the Government in this regard within three months of the presentat ion of 
this Report. 
Reply of the Government 
 The new projects included under CADWM programme during XII Plan have to cover at least 10% 
of CCA of each project under micro -irrigation.  The Micro -irrigation component (10%) of a project in 
Punjab with CCA of about 26 thousand hectare has already been approved. Another project of Punjab 
with CCA of about 19.867 thousand hectare has also been approved by the competent authority. In 
addition, a project to cover 100% micro -irrigation of Rajasthan with CCA of 320.1 17 thousand hectare 
has been approved by the competent authority. 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.24) 
  

 
81 
 
The Committee observe that the Budget allocation for Non -Plan expenditure increased from Rs. 
282.09 crore in 2015 -16 (BE) to Rs. 320.51 crore in 2016 -17.  T he reasons attributed by the Ministry to 
this increase was basically due to hike on account of Dearness Allowance, new recruitment, increase in 
cost of procurement of goods and services, accounting for inflation, etc.  The Committee also note with 
dismay t hat the Ministry have not furnished information about the steps taken by them to curb the 
tendency to increase allocations for the Non -Plan expenditure, which is indicative of the casual approach 
of the Ministry towards the issue of proper Budgetary projec tions, allocations and fund utilizations.  The 
Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry make all -out efforts to achieve full utilization of the 
allocation of Rs. 320.51 crore made towards Non -Plan expenditure in 2016 -17 - while at the same time 
making continuous efforts for curbing the general tendency towards increasing expenditure under this 
Head year after year.  They also recommend that concrete steps be taken by the Ministry to avoid drastic 
reduction of Rs. 467.44 crore allocated for Plan expenditure in 2016-17 at RE stage 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(1) The Non-Plan allocation for Central Soil and Material Research Station (CSMRS) - The BE for 
2015-16 was Rs.11.85 Crores which was subsequently enhanced to Rs.11.89 crore. Out of the 
allocated amount, e xpenditure of Rs.11.63 Crore was incurred by the Research Station. Thus, 
the utilization of fund under Non Plan so far is CSMRS concerned was nearly 98%. The unutilized 
amount was mainly on account of Rs.23.62 Lakhs unutilized under the salary head. The 
expenditure statement is at     Annexure-I. 
(2) Sardar Sarovar Construction Advisory Committee (SSCAC) is subordinate office of Ministry of 
Water Resources of temporary nature constituted as per decision of NWDT Award in year 1980.  
The expenditure incurred by th e SSCAC’s Secretariat is borne equally by the four party states of 
Sardar Sarovar Project namely Gujarat, MP, Maharashtra & Rajasthan. Initially, the expenditure is 

 
82 
 
reflected in the Union Budget under the Ministry of Water Resources as “Non -Plan” expenditure which is 
subsequently reimbursed from the participating states in equal proportion. Thus there is no burden on 
Government of India for expenditure to be incurred by SSCAC. 
 The budget allocation is as under.            
(in thousand of Rs.) 
Year BE RE Actual 
Expenditure 
Remarks 
2015-16 10200 8200 7900 1) BE 2015 -16 and BE 2016 -17 are 
almost equal. 
2) The actual expenditure for F.Y. 
2015-16 is less than BE 2015 -16 
due to vacant post. 
3) Further, the expenditure for F.Y. 
2016-17 is likely to increase due to 
propose filling up of vacant post & 
Dearness Allowance.  
2016-17 10000 - - 
 
(3) For Upper Yamuna River Board, Rs. 147.78 lakh was requested for BE 2016 -17 and allocation 
for 2016 -17 is Rs. 175 lakh. The higher provision in the requested BE 2016 -17 was kept for 
enhancement in pay, hike in DA, accounting for inflation and other allowances and filling of the 
sanctioned posts in the UYRB.  
(4) Budget Allocation under Non -Plan for Central Water and Power Research Station (CWPRS)  
Pune during 2015-16 & 2016-17 are as under: 
(Rs Crore) 
Sr No Non Plan 2015-16 2016-17 
1 Salary 55.82 57.54 
2 Non Salary 3.66 4.80 
 Total 59.48 62.34 
 

 
83 
 
From the above table it is seen that under Non Plan – Salary budget is increased by 3% 
as against budget of 2015 -16 and in this year Dearness Allo wance has increased by 12% but 
salary budget has increased marginally. There is also increase in Non salary expenditure such as 
payment of Energy Charges in 2015 -16 which is alone costing Rs 67.00 lakh as these services 
are now costly due to increase in en ergy charges and this office is considered under industrial 
unit and charges are levied as per industrial unit by the state Government. Still all efforts are 
being made to minimize the Non Plan expenditure and avoiding wasteful expenditure by regular 
monitoring expenditure. Budgetary projections are made as per expenditure trends and realistic 
view. 
In the Plan Scheme : R&D Water Sector the Budget Allocation in 2015 -16 was Rs 5.40 
Crore and in the Second supplementary Batch an additional funds under this sc heme amounting 
to Rs 6.25 crore were allotted by re-appropriation and final expenditure during 2015 -16 under this 
scheme was Rs 11.40 crore. Nearly 97% funds were utilized under plan scheme and in the 
current financial year an amount of Rs 11.50 crore has been allotted and necessary steps are 
being taken to utilize the allotted funds. 
(5) For National Institute of Hydrology, the expenditure on account of Salary & allowances of Officers 
and Staff of the Institute is to meet out from the Budget allocation under N on-Plan. The Budget 
allocation (BE), Non -Plan expenditure for 2015 -16 was 15.43 Crore which was increased as Rs. 
19.00 Crore for 2016 -17. The reason for increase in BE for 2016 -17 was mainly due increase in 
salary on a/c of Annual Increments, Dearness Allo wance, anticipating expenditure on a/c of 
implementation of 7 th Pay Commission Report etc. It is assured that Budget allocation made 
towards Non-Plan expenditure for 2016 -17 for Rs. 19.00 Crore will be fully utilized. BE for Plan 
expenditure for 2016 -17 is  Rs. 16.75 Crore. Necessary steps have been taken to avoid any 
reduction of allocation for Plan expenditure at RE stage during the year 2016-17. 
(6) For Central Water Commission, the Non -Plan BE for the year 2015 -16 was 282.09 crore. 
However the same was restr icted to Rs. 265.43 crore at RE stage and entire fund was utilized. 
The provision for the year 2016 -17 has been made as Rs. 320.51 crore at BE stage. It is 
mentioned that the major expenditure under Non -Plan head is towards payment of establishment 
related expenses such as salary, medical, travel etc. and all efforts are made to keep the same 

 
84 
 
as bare minimum. The provisions made at BE stage will be fully utilized. Further instructions has 
been issued to all concerned Directorate implementing Plan Scheme in CWC to ensure full 
utilization of fund at BE stage.   
(7) For Bansagar Control Board, Budget under Non -Plan as BE Rs. 36.00 lakh for financial year 
2015-16 and BE Rs. 40.00 lakh for financial year 2016 -17 is allotted to Bansagar Control Board, 
Rewa. A marginal increase of Rs. 4.00 lakh has been made in the financial year 2016 -17 against 
financial year 2015-16 due to increase in Salary and Dearness allowances of employees. 

 
85 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1.25) 
 
The Committee note from the reply of the Ministry that although there has been growing demand 
by the professionals and civil society to bring ‘water’ in the Concurrent List of the Cons titution, the 
proposal has been opposed by most of the States.  Further, the proposal did not find favour with R. S. 
Sarkaria Commission (1983 -88) and M. M. Punchhi Commission (2007 -10) which examined the Centre -
State relations.  The Committee take note of  the view of the Ministry that the matter requires extensive 
deliberations with the States and other stakeholders so that a broader consensus emerges in the matter.  
The Committee also take note that the objectives of better conservation, development and m anagement 
of water resources are stated and sought to be achieved through the draft National Water Framework 
Law and the draft River Basin Management Bill - which are currently under examination in the Ministry in 
consultation with different stakeholders.  Further, a Committee has been constituted under the 
Chairmanship of Dr. Mihir Shah to examine the draft National Water Framework Law and the draft River 
Basin Management Bill.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should expeditiously 
wind up the process of enactment of the draft National Water Framework Law and the draft River Basin 
Management Bill which is at present under examination with them.  They also want to see early outcome 
of the report of Dr. Mihir Shah Committee in the matter under intimation to them.  In this connection, the 
Committee are, however, of the opinion that the proposed National Water Framework Law will lack teeth 
if the subject ‘water’ is not brought under the Concurrent List of the Constitution, for the implementa tion 
of the proposed Framework Law will require coordinated, consultative action on the part of both the 

 
86 
 
Centre and the States.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that steps be initiated by the Government 
to again begin the much needed consultations with  the States on the issue of bringing ‘water’ in the 
Concurrent List of the Constitution.  Noting the fact that the proposals made to this end in the past have 
been opposed by most of the States, the Committee would, however, meanwhile like to be apprised o f 
the names of the States opposing this proposal alongwith their grounds of their opposition.  
Reply of the Government 
 The Committee constituted by this Ministry under Dr. Mihir Shah to examine the draft National 
Water Framework Bill and the draft River Ba sin Management Bill has prepared a draft National Water 
Framework Bill, 2016. The draft National Water Framework Bill, 2016 contains several provisions for 
improved management of water resources in the country. The draft National Water Framework Bill, 2016  
has been circulated to all the State Governments/ Union Territories for inviting their comments on the 
report. The draft Bill has also been placed on the website of this Ministry for obtaining comments thereon 
from general public.  
2. The draft River Basi n Management Bill is presently under consideration of the Mihir Shah 
Committee.  
3. Specific consultations for bringing ‘Water’ in the Concurrent List of the Constitution have not been 
undertaken with the States. However, in the course of conferences with the States, suggestion for 
bringing water in the Concurrent List has by and large not found favour with the States.  
4. The recommendations of the Committee to initiate steps to begin consultations with the States on 
the issue of bringing ‘water’ in the Co ncurrent List of the Constitution has been noted for appropriate 
action. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 9 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.27) 
 

 
87 
 
The Committee note that 16 National Projects have been approved by the Government for 
implementation in the country.  However, although the proposal was approved as early as 2008, only 4 
National Projects apart from Indira Sagar Polavaram Project are presently under execution, viz. 
Gosikhurd Irrigation Project (Maharashtra), Shahpurkandi Dam Project (Punjab), Teesta Barrage Project 
(West Bengal) and Sanju -Nahar Pariyojana Project (Uttar Pradesh), while the remaining 10 National 
Projects have been under appraisal, Detailed Project Report (DPR) stage or under Project Feasibility  
Report (PFR) stage.  The Committee are further distressed to observe that even the 5 National Projects 
reportedly under execution / implementation are at present facing hurdles in their smooth execution due 
to various problems like land acquisition, R&R i ssue, inter-State disputes etc. due to which at least 3 of 
those National Projects have passed well beyond their targeted date of completion (i.e. March, 2015) viz. 
Goshikhurd Irrigation Project (Maharashtra), Shahpurkandi Dam Project (Punjab) and Teesta B arrage 
Project (West Bengal).  Even for the remaining National Projects which are under appraisal, DPR stage 
or under Project Feasibility Report stage, no targets have been fixed for their timely / scheduled 
completion, even as the Sanju-Nahar Pariyojna Project is targeted to be completed by March, 2017.  The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry should promptly initiate action in consultation with the concerned 
State Governments to sort out the issues / hurdles that have led to 3 National Projects failing to meet 
their targeted date of completion (March, 2015) viz. Gosikhurd Irrigation Project (Maharashtra), 
Shahpurkandi Dam Project (Punjab) and Teesta Barrage Project (West Bengal).  They also recommend 
that concerted efforts should be made by the Ministry to achieve the completion of Saryu -Nahar 
Pariyojna Project (Uttar Pradesh) in coordination with the State Government of Uttar Pradesh - which is 
targeted by March, 2017.  The Committee further recommend that realistic, achievable targets be also 
fixed for timely completion of the remaining National Projects which are at various stages of execution 

 
88 
 
appraisal, DPR stage or under PFR stage after addressing all contentious issues in consultation with the 
concerned States, viz. Indira Sagar Polavaram Project (An dhra Pradesh), Lakhwar – Vyasi Multipurpose 
Project (Uttarakhand), Renuka Dam Project (Himachal Pradesh), Ujh Multipurpose Project (Jammu & 
Kashmir), Kishau Multipurpose Project (Himachal Pradesh / Uttarakhand), Ken -Betwa Link Project 
(Madhya Pradesh), Kul si Dam Project (Assam), Noa -Dihing Dam Project (Arunachal Pradesh), Bursar 
HE Project (Jammu & Kashmir), Gyspa HE Project (Himachal Pradesh), 2 nd Ravi-Vyas Link Project 
(Punjab) and Upper Siang Project (Arunachal Pradesh).  The Committee would like to be u pdated of the 
action taken in the matter.  The Committee would also like that the Dr. B. R. Ambedkar Pranahita – 
Chevella Project should also be expedited and to this end, necessary consultations with the State 
Government of Telangana be initiated by the M inistry at the earliest to avoid cost and time escalations.  
The Committee would further like to be apprised of action taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
Status of national projects funded under AIBP is  as below: 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of Project State Status 
1. Gosikhurd 
Irrigation Project 
Maharashtra Under Execution (i) Head Work: Almost 
completed (ii) Main & Branch canal:  Almost at 
completion stage (iii) Dy. Minor Water courses: 
About 50% work completed. In respect of 
Gosikhurd project despite comple tion of head 
works, water is not being impounded upto Full 
Reservoir Level (FRL) due to land acquisition / 
R&R issues which comes under the preview of 
State Govt. Project is included in the list of 99 

 
89 
 
prioritised projects for completion in mission mode 
under PMKSY. Target date of completion 
intimated by state is March, 2020. Accordingly 
provisions for funding of this project upto 
completion are being proposed. 
2. Teesta Barrage 
Project 
West Bengal Under Execution: - Main Structures completed.  
Govt. of West  Bengal is finding it difficult to 
acquire land for distributaries and minors. The 
State Govt. has not submitted any C.A. proposal 
since last three years and not indicated any 
priority to complete the same. 
3. Shahpur Kandi 
Project 
Punjab Under Execution: - The State of J&K has not 
agreed   to lease the land in its territory to the 
Govt. of Punjab due to certain reservations 
regarding design of project which may not able to 
deliver their share of water. Further, they have 
cited that agreement in this regard  has been 
terminated by Punjab,  in view of Punjab 
termination Agreement Acts (PTAA) enacted by 
Govt. of Punjab. The issue has been taken up in 
subcommittee of interstate council for resolution of 
issue. Further both the States Punjab and J&K 
have intimate d that they are in the process of 
sorting out issue by consultation at Chief 
Secretary Level. 
4. Saryu Nahar 
Pariyojana 
Uttar Pradesh Under Execution:  Saryu Nahar Pariyojna is to be 
implemented in three phases. Main diversion 
structure and link canals ar e already complete. 

 
90 
 
Components of project under scheme of Natonal 
projects are some of balance works phase -II & 
phase-III of the project which involve construction 
of main Rapti canal. The revised target of 
completion of project is indicated by state is 
March, 2018. It is one of the priority project and 
funding arrangement for the same are being tied 
up as may be required. 
5. Indira Sagar 
Polavaram 
Project 
Andhra 
Pradesh 
Under Execution: An expenditure of Rs.7194 cr. 
has been incurred against approved cost  of 
irrigation component of Rs. 13142.05 crore. 
Central assistance of Rs. 850 cr has been 
provided during 2014 -15 & 2015 -16. Further the 
funds required for its completion are being tied up 
to complete it in a time bound manner. Earth work 
on dam has been c ompleted upto 31% and main 
canals have been completed upto 90%.  
6. Lakhwar Multi 
Purpose Project 
Uttarakhand The revised cost estimate of the Lakhwar project 
at an cost of 3966.51cr (PL2012) has been 
accepted by the TAC of MoWR in its meeting 
dated 14.12 .2012 and investment clearance has 
been granted on 19 th April -2016. Upper Yamuna 
River Board is taking up the matter with the 
concerned States regarding sharing of benefits. 
7. Ujh Multi Purpose 
Project 
J & K DPR is   under appraisal in CWC/CEA. 
Some of the observations are yet to be complied 
by the State Govt. Further, State Government is 
yet to obtain the requisite statuary clearances. 

 
91 
 
8. Kishau Multi 
Purpose Project 
H.P. & 
Uttarakhand 
Revised DPR submitted to CWC in 2010 by 
Uttarakhand Jal Vidyut Niga m Limited (UJVNL). 
Observations / Comments (2011) on DPR yet to 
be complied by Project Authority (PA).  MoU for 
formation of Joint Venture (JV) between GoUK 
and GoHP signed on 20.06.2015. However SPV 
is yet to be formed. 
9. Renuka Dam 
Project 
H. P. Technical clearance to the revised DPR of the 
project is yet to be accorded. Compliances to 
most of the CWC observations (05/2010) are 
awaited. In principle forest clearance obtained. 
R&R clearance obtained from Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs The Environment clearan ce accorded by 
MoEF in 2009 is under challenge in National 
Green Tribunal (NGT). The NGT has made a 
committee under Principal Chief Conservator of 
forest Himachal Pradesh in this regard.  
10. Noa-Dehing Dam 
Project 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
DPR submitted in Oct, 2014 for appraisal. 
Compliance to CWC/CEA comments awaited from   
Project Authorities. 
11. Kulsi Dam Project Assam DPR submitted in September 2014 by 
Brahamputra Board. Compliance to CWC/ CEA 
comments awaited from PA despite reminders. 
Brahmaputra Board h as been requested to 
expedite process. 
12. Ken Betwa Link 
Project 
M. P. & U.P. Phase-1 under appraisal in CWC/CEA. Updated 
cost estimate (Rs 17647.40 Cr. Pl -2015-16) 
submitted by PA in Feb 2016. Land for 

 
92 
 
compensatory afforestation yet to be identified by 
states. Fresh agreement between UP and MP for 
water balance required. NWDA is taking 
necessary action in this regard. 
13. Bursar Project J & K  NHPC has intimated that the project is financially 
unviable.  
14. Gyspa Project H.P. Work plan furnished for s ubmission of DPR by 
May, 2017. S&I works are withheld due to 
persistent resistance from locals to shift the dam 
site to upstream site. 
15. 2nd Ravi Vyas 
Link Project 
Punjab PFR submitted by Punjab in July 2014 not in 
proper shape and observations sent. Th e Govt. of 
Punjab further submitted an inspection Note 
(March 2015) stating that project is not technically 
viable. 
16. Upper Siang 
Project 
Upper Siang 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Arunachal 
NTPC submitted PFR to Govt. of Arunachal 
Pradesh in 11/2009. Presently comp osite 
proposal is under active consideration for 300m. 
Dam Rehabilitation of Yingkiong will be needed. 
 
A High Power Steering Committee under chairmanship of Secretary (Water  Resources, RD & 
GR) has been constituted to review the implementation of Nation al Project. The committee has held 9 
meeting so far Last meeting was held on 26.09.2014. 
 
Pranahitha- Chevella Sujjalla Sravanthi Project : 
An Irrigation Project namely, Pranahitha Chevella was taken up by the erstwhile State of Andhra 
Pradesh in the year 2008-09 to serve drought prone areas of Telangana region and was proposed to be 
taken up as National Project. In view of certain inter -state issues with Maharashtra and difference in the 
quantum of water availability, the barrage at Medigadda could not be started. 

 
93 
 
Now, the Govt. of Telangana has intimated that major design modification for optimum utilization of 
water for Telangana has been carried out while addressing the concerns of Maharashtra. WAPCOS is 
preparing the DPR of the revised project and the p roject will now comprise of the following two 
components:- 
1 Pranahitha and 2 Kaleshwaram.   DPR is under preparation. It would be examined by CWC once it is 
completed and is submitted by the State Government.   
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 15 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4.29) 
 
The Committee note that the Plan allocation for Flood Control for the year 2015 -16 was 
earmarked at Rs. 112.00 crore.  However, it was reduced to Rs. 103.26 crore at the Revised Estimate 
stage for the same financial year and then increased to Rs. 138.37 crore for 2016 -17.  The reason cited 
by the Ministry for this reduction in Budget allocation at the RE stage in 2015 -16 was that the Plan 
scheme for Flood Forecasting was approved in December , 2016 due to which no new activities of 
modernization and expansion of network could be commenced leading to the requirement being reduced 
at RE stage.  For the increase in Plan allocation in the BE 2016 -17 to Rs. 138.37 crore from Rs. 112.00 
crore in the  BE 2015 -16, the Ministry stated that the reason therefor was consideration of the 
requirement of protection works on the common border rivers and funds required for meeting the 
expenditure of newly set up Pancheshwar Development Authority.  The Committee are convinced that 
the inordinate delay in approval of the Plan scheme Flood Forecasting by as late as December, 2016 
which led to reduction in allocation at RE stage in 2015 -16, is indicative of the casual approach of the 
Ministry to tackle the persistent  issue of reductions of allocations at the RE stage, against which the 
Committee strongly had been advising the Ministry in their earlier Reports on Demands for Grants (2011 -

 
94 
 
12, 2012-13, 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015 -16).  The Committee are of the opinion that  the Ministry have 
not taken the recommendation of the Committee seriously despite their repeated assurances to the 
contrary.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry make concerted efforts to formulate 
their Budget estimates judiciously thro ugh an objectively conducted pre -planning exercise and by 
exercising effective control over its various Offices / Agencies so that no room is left for reduction at the 
Revised estimate stage in Budget estimates.  They also want the Ministry to immediately take concrete 
action to simplify and streamline the process of getting approval of schemes especially under the Head 
Flood Control so as to avoid wastage of manpower and resources in the frequent process of estimation 
of allocations.  They Committee desire  to be apprised of the outcome of efforts made in regard to flood 
protection works on the common border rivers and progress made regarding the Pancheshwar Dam 
project during 2016-17. 
Reply of the Government 
There are three Plan Schemes being run by this Wing namely: 
 
1. Flood Management Programme (FMP)- A State Sector Scheme 
2. River management Activities & Works related to Border Areas (RMBA) -Central Sector 
Scheme(100% Grant-in-aid) 
3. Flood Forecasting Scheme-A Central Sector Scheme 
The details of budget allocation during the year 2015-16 are given below: 
(Rs. In crore) 
S.N. Sector 2015-16 
  Central Sector Scheme BE RE Actual 
1 Flood Forecasting 50.00 35.00 32.93 
2 River Management Activities and Works related to 
Boarder Areas 102.00 240.56 185.52 

 
95 
 
3 Farraka Barrage Project 100.00 84.00 72.61 
4 Flood Management Project 200.00 275.00 264.00 
 
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted and efforts would be made for 
judicious planning of the estimates to avoid any reduction of budget at      RE stage. The  Government 
has already streamlined the processes involved in approval of the schemes and as per the modified 
procedure the schemes costing upto Rs. 1000 crore are approved by the Minister of administrative 
Ministry and Finance Ministry. The schemes costin g above Rs. 1000 crore are placed before the 
Cabinet/ Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) for approvals. 
The flood protection works on common border rivers are fully funded under the plan scheme, “River 
Management Activities and Works related to B oarder Areas”. The important such works funded by 
Ministry are mentioned below: 
4. Maintenance of embankments of Kosi and Gandak projects located in the territory of Nepal - as per 
the bilateral understanding these works are funded by Government of India and t he same are 
executed by Government of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh prior to every monsoon. These works have 
proved to quite useful in providing protection of the embankments, ensuring safety of Kosi and 
Gandak barrages thereby creating a larger degree of protec tion against floods to the lives and 
properties of the people of India residing in the downstream of the barrages. 
5. Bank protection/ anti-erosion works in West Bengal and Tripura on rivers having common border with 
Bangladesh- The common border rivers betwe en India and Bangladesh face acute problem of 
erosion of river banks and beds which causes loss of land and also endangers the lives and 
properties of the people residing in concerned areas. Such works are under taken by respective 
country in its territory. On Indian side, such works are executed by Governments of West Bengal and 
Tripura and funded fully by Government of India. 
6. During 12th Plan, bank protection works on river Ravi and Beas in Punjab have also been funded for 
strengthening of the embankments and erosion control. 

 
96 
 
India and Nepal had signed the Mahakali treaty in 1996 for integrated development of river Mahakali 
(known as Sarada in India). As per bilateral understanding reached between the two countries, a joint 
project office (JPO -PI) was set up in 1999 at Kathmandu which carried out field investigations for 
Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project. After the visit of Hon’ble Prime Minister of India in August 2014, the 
Pancheshwar Multipurpose Project received a catalytic and accelerated momentum and i n September, 
2014, a Pancheshwar Development Authority was set up to finalize the DPR of the project and undertake 
its implementation. The Draft DPR of the project has been prepared by Water and Power Consultancy 
Services Limited (WAPCOS), which is under examination in PDA and both the countries. As per tentative 
features finalize so far, the project would generate total power of 5040 MW and provide irrigation in 0.43 
mha in both the countries besides the benefit of flood control specially in India. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 18 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5.10) 
 
 The Committee note that the Brahmaputra Board under the Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation in order to achieve an i ntegrated implementation of measures for 
the  control of flood and bank erosion, has so far prepared 57 Master Plans out of which 49 have been 
approved by Government of India and remaining 8 have been approved by the Board.  Besides, 41 
Drainage Development Schemes (DDS) have been identified under these Master Plans, out of which 2 
schemes have been executed and 4 are under execution.  In respect of the flood control and anti -erosion 
measures, the Committee further note that the Board has completed Phase – I of the works of protection 
of Majuli Island at the cost of Rs. 52.63 crore, while Phase – II and Phase – III, initiated in 2009, is 
completed upto 91.96% and targeted to be completed by June, 2016.  The Ministry also informed that 
Phase – I, Phase – II and Phase – III of the works of Avulsion of Brahmaputra river at Dhola -Hatighuli 
have been completed while works on Phase -IV have been completed by upto 99.8%.  The Committee, 

 
97 
 
however, note that despite the tall claims about works on the flood control and a nti-erosion undertaken 
by the Brahmaputra Board, Assam faced severe flood of unprecedented proportion in 2015 although an 
expenditure of Rs. 106.42 crore was incurred by the Board on flood control during the last 3 years.  The 
Committee are also distressed  to note that out of 5 DPRs for Multipurpose projects prepared by the 
Brahmaputra Board in the North-East region, viz. Siang Single Stage, Subansiri Single Stage, Tipaimukh, 
Pagladiya, and Bairabi, none of these projects have been completed till date.  Abo ut the periodic 
monitoring  being done by the Government / Brahmaputra Board regarding the progress of works in the 5 
Multipurpose projects, the Ministry have not furnished any reply - which speak a lot about the 
lackadaisical attitude of the Government / Brahmaputra Board on this vital issue.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry institute an appraisal panel to look into the delays in the 
execution of the 5 Multipurpose projects for which the Brahmaputra Board has prepared DPRs and 
apprise the Committee of its findings after fixing responsibility for lapses, acts of commission and 
omission on the part of the concerned implementing agencies.  Side by side, the Committee also 
recommend that the Ministry should duly complete the balance works regarding protection of Majuli 
Island (Phase II & III) by the targeted time, i.e. June, 2016 and also wind up Phase – IV works on 
Avulsion of Brahmaputra river at Dhola -Hatighuli.  They further recommend that the Ministry should 
vigorously pursue the progr ess of the other Multipurpose projects, viz. Noa-Dehing, Kulsi, Simsang, 
Jiadhal and Killing - which are at various stages of appraisal, Survey and Investigation and preparation of 
DPR in the Brahmaputra Board.  The Committee would like to be apprised abou t the results of action 
taken by the Ministry in this regard within the next six months. 
Reply of the Government 
 

 
98 
 
 As mentioned in the report, Brahmaputra Board spent Rs. 106.42 crore during the year 2012 -13, 
2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-2016 (up-to February, 2016) in execution of following works-  
(Rs. in Crore) 
 
Name  of scheme 
Year Total  
2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16  
(up to Feb.  
2016) 
 
1. Protection of Majuli Island 
Phase-II and III 
26.88 25.63 12.67 9.42 74.60 
2. Avulsion of Brahmaputra 
at Dhola-Hatighuli Phase-IV 
8.58 13.69 3.42 2.45 28.14 
3. Protection of Balat Village 
in Meghalaya 
-- 0.13 0.03 2.22 2.38 
4. Protection of Mankachar –
Kalair-Alga International 
Border area  
-- -- 0.17 1.09 1.26 
Total 35.46 39.45 16.29 15.18 106.38 
All these works  are executed on request of Government of Assam and approval of Ministry of 
Water resources, RD &GR. In comparison to the vast flood affected area in the State of Assam, Board 
has been entrusted for protection of only in a few locations of the state. In th e above locations Board has 
been able to attain considerable control of floods and erosion. 
  The achievement of Brahmaputra Board in control of flood and erosion in these areas are as 
under: 
(a) The scheme Protection of Majuli Island from floods and bank eros ion was taken up by 
Brahmaputra Board in January 2004.  Broadly, protection works encompass raising and 
strengthening of embankment, plugging of breaches, casting and laying of permeable RCC 
porcupines screens, spurs and dampeners, construction of boulder spurs, river bank revetment 
and construction of raised platforms.  The works were taken up in phases and, Immediate 
Measure, Phase –I and Emergent works completed Works under Phase -II&III will be completed 
by March 2017. 

 
99 
 
Outcome 
As a result of the works ex ecuted so far, the total area of Majuli Island has increased by 22.08 sq km 
from the Year 2004 to 2016 as shown in the table below- 
 
(b)  The scheme Avulsion of Brahmaputra at Dhola -Hatighuli was taken up in the year 2004 with the 
objective to divert the rivers Dibang and Lohit to their origin al courses. Board executed the work 
in phases and completed Phase-I, II, III & IV . 
As mentioned in the report to wind up the work of Phase -IV, Board has completed the work in March 
2016.   
Outcome: 
11 villages under Doomduma Revenue Circle in an area of a bout 1500 ha got protection from 
floods, since the year 2004 onwards, on construction of retirement bund at Hatighuli area on Left bank of 
Lohit river.  
An area of about 900 ha just behind the Tie -bund, on country side, got protection from floods and 
erosion, on construction of Tie -bund in the year 2003 -04. Cultivation has started, afresh, in the area 
between the Tie-bund and the Ghoramora channel. 
(c) The Phase-I work of the scheme protection of Balat village from erosion of river Umngi in the 
State of Meghalaya for Rs.5.63 crore was taken up in the year 2013 -14 and completed in the year 2015. 
Most of the erosion affected areas has been protected from this work.  
Year Area of Majuli Island (in sq km) Net Area reclaimed (in sq km) 
2004 502.21  
2008 506.37 4.16 
2011 520.26 13.89 
2012 522.73 2.47 
2014 523.88 1.15 
2016 524.29 0.41 
Total land mass gained from 2004 to 2016 22.08 

 
100 
 
(d) The scheme protection of MankacharKalair -Alga area which was approved  by Government of 
India in XI I Five Year Plan and taken up actual executive during 2014 -15. Laying of RCC porcupine 
screens has been completed and the bank protection work is in progress.  Due to resistance of general 
public on acquisition of land for construction and inability of civ il authority, the progress of work has been 
slowed down. However, in persuasions from the contractor, some local people and employees of 
Brahmaputra Board, the bank protection work for 520 m length is in progress. Brahmaputra Board is in 
regular contact of District authority for acquiring the required land. 
Brahmaputra Board undertook preparation of  DPRs of 14 Multipurpose Projects in North -East 
region. The progress of the 5(five) handed over projects  are as under- 
Sl. 
No. 
Project Implementing Agency / Organisation / Government 
1 Siang Dam 
Project  
(3 dams) 
Handed over to NHPC during the year 2000. NHPC informed that work 
relating to Siang Lower was handed over to M/s Jayprakash Associated 
ltd.(JAL) on 31.03.2009, work relating to Siang Middle was handed over 
to M/s Reliance Energy Ltd(REL) and for Siang Upper, Government of 
Arunachal Pradesh allocated the work to M/s NTPC in February 2009 for 
preparation of PFR. 
2 Subansiri 
Dam Project 
(3 dams) 
Handed over to NHPC during the year 2000. As stated by NHPC the 
Lower Subansiri is targeted for completion within the year 2017. 
Sunbansiri Middle and Subansiri Upper were handed over to M/s Jindal 
Power Ltd. On 04.02.2011. 
3 Tipaimukh 
Dam Project 
Handed over to NEEPCO and subsequently from NEEPCO to NHPC 
4 Pagladiya 
Dam Project 
The work of Pagladiya Dam project under execution by Brahmaputra 
Board was held up due to non -completion of zirat survey. As per decision 
of 53rd meeting of Brahmaputra Board, all activities were closed from 1st 
June 2013. In the 7th High Powered Review Board meeting held at 
Shillong, it was decided to talk to BTAD by Govt. of Assam. Again, in the 

 
101 
 
60th meeting of Brahmaputra Board held at New Delhi it was decided to 
take up the matter with the Hon’ble Chief Minister of Assam.  
5 Bairabi 
Dam 
Project 
Handed over to Government of Mizoram. The Government of Mizoram 
allotted the work of execution of Bairabi Dam Project to M/s Sikaria Power 
Ltd., Kolkata on 10.08.2012. It has been intimated by Government of 
Mizoram that Bairabi Dam Project will be completed within seven years. 
 
At present 5 (five) Projects are under different stages of DPR preparation and Survey & 
Investigation. The progress of two National Projects declared by Government of India out of the 5 
multipurpose projects are as under – 
Sl. 
No. 
Project Implementing Agency / Organisation / Government 
1 Noa-Dihing Dam 
Project 
The project site is located about 4 km upstream of Miao Town 
in Changlang district of Arunachal Pradesh. The installed 
capacity of the project is estimated at 71 MW with irrigation 
benefit of 8000 ha. The project has been identified as ‘National 
Project’ by Government of India. Preparation of DPR has been 
completed in March 2014 and submitted to MoWR, RD&GR for 
approval. The MoWR,RD&GR forwarded the same to CWC for 
appraisal in coordination with Brahmaputra Board. 
Brahmaputra Board is in a position to implement the 
project after obtaining techno -economic clearances. Board has 
shared the draft DPR with the Government of Arunachal 
Pradesh to issue NOC for execution of th e Noa -Dihing Dam 
Project by Brahmaputra Board. The NOC is awaited. 
2 Kulsi Dam 
Project 
The project site is located near Assam and Meghalaya border. 
The installed capacity of the project is estimated at 55 MW with 
a gross command area of about 26000 ha to provide irrigation. 

 
102 
 
The project has been identified as ‘National Project’ by 
Government of India. Preparation of DPR completed in June 
2014 and submitted to MoWR, RD&GR for approval. The 
MoWR, RD&GR forwarded the same to CWC for appraisal in 
coordination with Brahmaputra Board. 
Brahmaputra Board is in a position to implement the project after 
obtaining techno-economic clearances. Board has requested the 
Government of Assam and Meghalaya to issue NOC for 
execution of the Kulsi Dam Project. The draft DPR has been 
shared with the concerned state Governments. The NOCs are 
awaited from the State Governments. 
3 Simsang Dam 
Project 
 
 
Under ‘Survey & Investigation’ and DPR preparation. 
Brahmaputra Board has been informed by the Ministry to 
expedite the same.  
4 Jiadhal Dam 
Project 
5 Killing Dam 
Project 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 29 of Chapter I of the Report) 

 
103 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF THE  
GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
-  NIL - 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                     HUKUM SINGH 
27 November, 2016                                         Chairperson,                 
06 Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)            Standing Committee on Water Resources 
  
 

104 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
STATEMENT SHOWING PROGRESSIVE EXPENDITURE UP TO MARCH 2016, NON-PLAN IN 
R/O CSMRS  
 
(In thousand of rupees) 
 
Unit of Appropriation Major 
Head- 2701 
BE 2015-
2016 
RE 2015-
2016 
Expd. In 
March - 2016 
Progressive 
Expenditure 
Balance 
04.03.01-Salaries 115000 115000 681 112638 2362 
04.03.03- Over time Allow. 20 20 0 17 3 
04.03.06-Medical treatment 850 1250 344 1249 1 
04.03.11- Domestic T.E. 320 320 0 292 28 
04.03.13- Office Expenses 1050 1050 72 982 68 
04.03.17-BCTT 0 0 0 0 0 
04.03.20- Other Admn. Exp. 200 200 0 140 60 
04.03.27- Minor Works 650 650 110 645 5 
4701.80.0002.03. Capital outlay on Medium Irrigation- (Major Head) Gen. 
 
02.03.51- Motor Vehicles  380 380 122 356 24 
02.03.52- Machinery & 
Equipment 30 30 19 19 11 
Total 118500 118900 1348 116338 2562 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 

105 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
STATE-WISE STATISTICS OF WATER BODIES AS PER INDIA-WRIS PROJECT 
Sl. No. State Name Water bodies (no.) 
1 Andhra Pradesh* 35472 
2 Arunachal Pradesh 1212 
3 Assam 14204 
4 Bihar 59600 
5 Chhattisgarh 104716 
6 Chandigarh 1 
7 Daman & Diu 21 
8 Delhi 52 
9 Dadara & Nagar Havelli 3 
10 Goa 418 
11 Gujarat 15261 
12 Himachal Pradesh 206 
13 Haryana 5523 
14 Jharkhand 38739 
15 Jammu & Kashmir 843 
16 Karnataka 53694 
17 Kerala 11876 
18 Lakshadweep 0 
19 Meghalaya 25 
20 Manipur 1591 
21 Madhya Pradesh 65811 

106 
 
22 Maharashtra 39682 
23 Mizoram 494 
24 Nagaland 463 
25 Odisha 90865 
26 Punjab 5770 
27 Puducherry 11 
28 Rajasthan 43841 
29 Sikkim 255 
30 Tamil Nadu 73082 
31 Telangana* 16070 
32 Tripura 131 
33 Uttarakhand 802 
34 Uttar Pradesh 15680 
35 West Bengal 102490 
36 Andaman & Nicobar Island 4 
 Total 798908 
 
Size Range of Water bodies: 0.0102-67536.19 Ha. 
*Figures of AP & Telangana are based on tentative boundary 
 
 
 
 
 
  

107 
 
ANNEXURE – III 
R&D SCHEMES UNDER RGI 
Sl. 
No. 
Title Collaborating 
Organisations 
Progress as on 31.03.2016 
1 Sustainability of 
aquifer systems 
underlying 
Bemetara block, 
Bemetara, 
Chhattisgarh-a 
mathematical 
modelling 
approach. 
RGNGWTRI, 
CGWB, Raipur & 
CGWB, NCCR, 
Raipur 
 Basicdata collection and compilation completed 
 Monthly monitoring for dynamic data of 84 Dug 
wells and 14 Bore wells completed up to March -
2016 
 On site measurements of EC, pH and temperature 
and Collection of 70 ground water sample for 
analysis completed.  
Works plan for 2016-2017 
 Monitoring ground water regime of the study 
area. 
 Study the suitability of water for different 
purposes like drinking, irrigation by analysis of 
different chemical parameters. 
 Development of a conceptual model of the area. 
 Simulation of the ground water flow on finite 
difference based mathematical model. 
 Evolution of an alternative development 
management plans of ground water utilisation. 
 Tests the plans on simulation model. 
 Recommend the optimal plan for 
implementation which is maximum positive 
impact on ground water system. 
Date of Completion of  project -24 months 
2 Stable isotope 
investigations to 
study surface 
water – ground 
RGNGWTRI, 
CGWB, Raipur & 
PRL, Ahmedabad 
 Study area demarcated, historical data on 
ground water level, exploratory wells details of 
the study area have been compiled.Protocols 
of collection of water samples for isotope 

108 
 
water interaction in 
a hard rock terrain 
in parts of Durg 
District, 
Chhattisgarh. 
analysis finalised. 
 The GIS layers of geology, d rainage, surface 
water bodies, village location, topographic 
contours, and road network of the study area 
have been prepared. 
Work plan for 2016-17 
 Ground water level monitoring, collection of 
water samples from surface water bodies and 
ground water struct ures during pre -monsoon 
and post-monsoon periods. 
 Analysis of surface and ground water samples 
for isotopic signature. 
 Collection of rainwater samples and their 
analysis for isotopic signature. 
Date of Completion of  project -24 months 
3 Application of 
Artificial 
Intelligence in 
Ground Water 
Resource 
Evaluation and 
Management 
RGNGWTRI, 
CGWB, Raipur & 
Department of 
Geology & 
Geophysics and 
Department of 
Computer 
Science, IIT -
Kharagpur 
 The study aimed to use innovative 
computational techniques by using art ificial 
intelligence/machine learning tools to simulate 
the prediction by using the existing 
hydrogeological data. 
  It is envisaged to provide long -term prediction 
of groundwater storage, level and its variability 
of Ganga Basin, in response to various 
climatic and water use scenarios. 
 Chalk out the modalities of the Research 
project and its application with the field data. 
 Basic data acquisition and compilation 
completed 
 Project started from 01 -04-2016 with a 
duration of 24 months. 

109 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
4 Assessment of 
Perchlorate 
contamination of 
water resources 
and contaminant 
plume migration in 
the groundwater 
system near Aluva, 
Ernakulum district, 
Kerala 
RGNGWTRI, 
CGWB, Raipur 
and CGWB, KR, 
Trivandrum 
 
 Project proposal for R&D study on perchlorate  
contamination of ground water in Kerala has been 
submitted by Regional director, CGWB, KR, 
Trivandrum. 
 Basic data collection and compilation completed 
 The analysis of the samples is proposed to be 
outsourced. 
 Total duration of R&D study is 18 months.. 

110 
 
ANNEXURE –IV 
R&D STUDIES CARRIED OUT FOR NE STATES 
 Assam 
1. Ground Water quality monitoring and evaluation in and around greater Guwahati (Assam) Part -I: 
Preliminary 
2. Application of HEC2 programme  for water surface profile determination of river Digaru at 
Sonapur, Assam 
3. Ground Water quality monitoring and evaluation in and around greater Guwahati (Assam): Part -II 
Chemical analysis 
4. Ground Water quality monitoring and evaluation in and around  greater Guwahati (Assam) Part-III: 
Trace elements 
5. Ground water quality in Greater Guwahati, Assam with reference to trace elements 
6. Preliminary hydrological investigations of Deepar Beel and strategies for its monitoring and 
management 
7. Crop water requirements for Krishnai Irrigation Project (Medium) of Assam  
8. Raingauge network design for pagaladiya basin 
9. Water balance study of Krishnai river basin according to Thornthwaite’s concept of potential 
evapotranspiration. 
10. Runoff and sediment modeling in a part of Brahmaputra River basin using ANN 
11. Study of sedimentation and useful life of Barapani reservoir using radiometric dating of sediments  
12. Design flood estimation of Krishnai basin  
13. Floodplain delineation and zoning in Burhi Dihing, Brahmaputra using remote sensing and GIS 
14. Floodplain  delineation and risk zoning in Gai River of assam using remote sensing and GIS 
15. Study of shifting of a typical river using remote sensing and GIS techniques, Gabharu, Assam 
16. Hydro-meteorological Aspects of Dudhnai sub -basin 
17. Infiltration Studies at Dudhnai sub-basin 
18. Soil Classification of Dudhbnai representative Basin (Assam/Meghalaya) 
19 Watershed Prioritization of Jiadhal Basin  through R.S & G.I.S. 
20. Estimation of Design Flood using GIUH approach for Jadukata Basin 
21. Estimation of Design Flood for Kulsi Basin using GIUH Approach  
22. Flood Estimation of Jadukata basin with SCS method. 
23. Daily time series analysis of Discharge data of Tributeries of Brahmaputra 

111 
 
24. Dctermination of soil Hydrologic properties and Infiltration Modelling in a Hilly Watershed. 
25. Flash flood Studies ( Jiadhal Basin) 
26. Hydrological Investigations of Dhansiri River Basin: Flood and Erosion Studies. 
27. Hydrological Soil classification of Dudhnai Sub- Basin(Assam/ Meghalaya) Part-I 
28. Hydrological Soil classification of Dudhnai Sub- Basin(Assam/ Meghalaya) Part-II 
29. Implementation of SCS model in Dudhnai Sub- Basin(Assam/ Meghalaya) 
30. Hydrogeomorphological Studies: Dudhnai Sub- Basin(Assam/ Meghalaya) 
 Arunachal Pradesh 
1. Design Flood Estimation for Tenga Dam (Kameng  Hydro -Electric Project , 600 MW) Arunachal 
Pradesh 
2.  Design Flood Estimation for Bichom  Dam (Kameng  Hydro -Electric Project , 600 MW) Arunachal 
Pradesh 
3. Design Flood Estimation for  Kameng  Hydro-Electric Project ( 600 MW), Arunachal Pradesh 
4. Modelling non—point source pollution: Rainfall- runoff  modelling for Dikrong Basin using  AvSWAT 
5. Flood hazard mapping in Dikrong Basin, Arunachal Pradesh. 
6. Design of Rainguage station network for Arunachal Pradesh. 
 Meghalaya 
1. Geomorphological study of Myntdu river basin  
2. Development of Geomorphological instantaneous unit hydrograph for Myntdu- Leska basin 
3. Precipitation network design for Myntdu-Leska basin 
4. Dam break  study of Myntdu Leska dam using DAMBRK model 
5. Rainfall–Runoff Analysis using flood analysis and protection systems (FLAPS) Model 
6. Design Flood estimation of Myntdu-Leska basin (Meghalaya) 
7. Flood Plain Mapping of Phulbari (Meghalaya) area using satellite data 
8. Reservoir sedimentation studies for Barapani reservoir using nuclear technique  
9. Assessment of Water Quality in Meghalaya 
10. Plan for upgradation water Quality imonitoring network for Meghalaya 
11. Acid Mine Drainage in Coal mining areas of Meghalaya 
12. Hydrological soil classification of Dudhnai sub-basin (Assam/Meghalaya) Part-I 
13. Hydrological soil classification of Dudhnai sub-basin (Assam/Meghalaya) Part-II 
14. Hydro meteorological aspects of Dudhnai basin (Assam/Meghalaya) 
15. Infiltration studies of Dudhanai sub-basin  
16. Implementation on SCS Model in Dudhnai sub- basin (Assam/Meghalaya) 
17. Hydrological Soil Classification of Dudhnai  sub- Basin 
18. Hydrogeomorphological studies: Dudhnai sub- basin (Assam/Meghalaya)  
 Mizoram 
1. Tuirial H.E. Project (Mizoram) –Mathematical modelling  for prediction of floods of various return 
periods. 
 Manipur 
1. Loktak Lake Studies 

112 
 
 
 
  
 Nagaland 
1. Network design of raingauge stations for Nagaland 
 Sikkim 
1. Discharge measurement of river Teesta in Sikkim using tracer dilution method 
2. Assessment of Environmental Flow Requirement in River Teesta at Teesta Stage IV Project Site 
3. Chapter for Glacier & Climate Change Commission , Govt of Sikkim 

113 
 
ANNEXURE-V 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES (2016-17) 
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 23 NOVEMBER 2016 
 
  The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 151 0 hours in Committee Room 'C', Ground Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
  
Shri Hukum Singh  – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Radheshyam iswas 
3. Shri Sudhir Gupta 
4. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
5. Shri Vijaysinh Mohite Patil 
6. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
7. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah 
8. Smt. V. Sathyabama 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
9. Shri Harshvardhan Singh Dungarpur 
10. Dr. Bhushan Lal Jangde 
11. Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
12. Shri Ananda Bhaskar Rapolu 
13. Shri Sanjay Seth 
14. Shri A.V. Swamy  
15. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
  
 
  
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar    - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Rita Jailkhani    - Director 
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar   - Additional Director 
 

114 
 
  
-2- 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.   
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption (a) Draft Report on Action 
Taken by Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Fi fth Report 
(16th Lok Sabha) on the subject “Review of Ground Water Scenario, need for a comprehensive 
policy and measures to address problems in the country - with particular reference to (i) Dark 
Blocks; and (ii) Contamination of underground water by cert ain industries”; and (b) Draft Report 
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the 
Ninth Report (16th Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2016 -17) of Ministry of Water 
Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenat ion.  After some deliberations, the Committee 
adopted the aforesaid two draft Reports without any modification.   
3. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to present these two Reports to both the 
Houses of Parliament in the current Winter Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
 
 
 
 

115 
 
ANNEXURE - VI 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE  
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE NINTH REPORT  
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE  
  
(i)  Total number of Observations/ Recommendations          18 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations  which have been accepted    
by the Government  
Para Nos.1.22, 1.23, 1.24, 2.25, 2.26, 3.16, 3.17, 4.30, 4.30-A, 4.31, 4.32 and 5.11 
 
Total : 12 
      Percentage    : 66.66% 
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations  which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies  
Para Nos. 1.26 and 2.24  
Total : 02 
         Percentage : 11.11 % 
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies    
 of the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Para Nos. 1.25, 2.27, 4.29 and 5.10 
         Total : 04 
                Percentage  : 22.22 % 
(v) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which final reply 
 of the Government are still awaited 
Para No. NIL 
         Total : NIL 
          Percentage   : 0% 