1 
 
 
10 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2015-16) 
                 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                                                 
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES,  RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION. 
 
“Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies- Encroachment on Water 
Bodies and Steps Required to Remove the Encroachment and Restore the 
Water Bodies”. 
 
         
TENTH REPORT 
  
 
         
            
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
August, 2016 / Shravana,1938 (Saka) 
  


2 
 
TENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2015-16) 
 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
                         
MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION. 
      
“Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies- Encroachment on Water 
Bodies and Steps Required to Remove the Encroachment and Restore the 
Water Bodies”. 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on    02.08.2016 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on  02.08.2016 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
         
August, 2016/       Shravana,1938 (Saka) 
 


3 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
Part – I 
 
REPORT 
           Page No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2015-2016)       (iii) 
INTRODUCTION           (v) 
 
Chapter – I  Introductory        1 
 
Chapter – II - State of Water Bodies in the country     4 
- Minor Irrigation Census       4 
- Reasons for increase/ decrease in total number of water bodies  5 
- Survey of water bodies by the Ministry     7 
  - Classification of Water Bodies      9 
  - Measures taken to revive perishing water bodies    12 
 
Chapter – III - Encroachment on Water Bodies      16 
  - Extent of encroachment       16 
  - Impact of encroachment on water bodies     21 
- Action against encroachers      24 
  - Monitoring mechanism for prevention and removal of encroachments 26 
(a) Monitoring mechanism under Repair, Renovation and Restoration 26  
(RRR) Scheme 
(b) Monitoring mechanism in different States    26 
(c) Judicial Directions / Guidelines on the issue of encroachment  31 
and their implementation in different States 
(d) Awareness campaigns to prevent encroachment on water bodies 37 
 
Chapter – IV - Scheme of Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies 40 
  - RRR Scheme during XII Plan      41 
   (a) Coverage of the scheme      41 
   (b) Funding pattern       42 
   (c) Implementation of the scheme     43 
   (d) Monitoring mechanism      44 
   (e) Present status of RRR scheme     45 
   (f) Measures to address problem of encroachment   46 
(g) Release of Central Assistance under RRR to encroachment free 49 
 water bodies 
 
Chapter – V - Pollution of water bodies       51 
  - Deteriorating condition of water bodies – Reasons   51 
  - Existing mechanism to monitor water quality in water bodies  52 
  - Siltation in water bodies       54 

4 
 
 
Part – II 
                                                     Observations/ Recommendations    55 
 
 
 
 
Part – III  
Annexures 
 
 I State wise statistics of water bodies as per India-WRIS Project    75 
II State/UT wise information on water bodies      76 
III 4th Minor Irrigation Census (2006-07) State wise list of water bodies   77 
IV Details of Water Bodies taken up for revival, fund released and number of water bodies 79  
 completed under the scheme of RRR during XI Plan. 
V Details of ongoing water bodies of XII Plan under the scheme of Repair, Renovation and 80  
 Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies. 
VI Water Bodies undertaken with External Assistance during XI Plan    81 
VII Details of funds released for wetland conservation projects under National Wetland 82  
 Conservation Programme (NWCP)/ National Plan for Conservation of Aquatic Eco-systems 
(NPCA). 
VIII Details of lake conservation Projects approved under National Lake Conservation   84 
Programme (NLCP)/NPCA. 
IX Expenditure on works under Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment   85 
Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) 
X Status of water bodies included under RRR during XII Plan    86 
XI Advisory issued by the Secretary, MOWR,RD&GR     87 
XII Lakes, Ponds and Tanks having very high value of Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) 90 
  and not meeting the water quality criteria. 
XIII Minutes of the Seventeenth sitting of the Committee held on 26 August, 2015  93 
XIV Minutes of the Fourth sitting of the Committee held on 18 January, 2016   96 
XV Minutes of the Ninth sitting of the Committee held on 26 July, 2016   102 
 
 
 
  

5 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2015-16) 
  
COMPOSITION 
  
  Shri Hukum Singh  -  Chairperson 
 LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Radheshyam Biswas 
3. Shri Devusinh Chauhan 
4. Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuria 
5. Shri Tariq Hameed Karra 
6. Shri Vinod Kumar B. 
7. Shri Murali Mohan Maganti 
8. Shri Sidhant Mohapatra 
9. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
10. Shri Rodmal Nagar 
11. Shri Subhash Patel 
12. Shri Sanjay Kaka Patil 
13. Shri Vijaysinh Shankarrao MohitePatil 
14. Smt. Aparupa Poddar 
15. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
16. Shri S. P. Y. Reddy$ 
17. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah 
18. Smt. Sathyabama V. 
19. Shri Lallu Singh 
20. Shri L.K. Vaghela 
21. Smt. Dimple Yadav 
              
 RAJYA SABHA 
22. Mir Mohammad Fayaz 
23. Shri Sanjiv Kumar 
24.        Shri Mahesh Poddar* 
25.        Shri Amar Shankar Sable 
26.        Shri Sanjay Seth^ 
29. Shri V. Hanumantha Rao 
30. Shri A.V. Swamy  
31. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia 
 
    
* Nominated as a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 25.07.2016. 
 ^ Nominated as a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 25.07.2016. 
 

6 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.  Shri Shiv Kumar   -  Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Rita Jailkhani  -  Director 
3.  Shri Kushal Sarkar  -  Additional Director 
4.  Ms. Shanta B. Datta  -  Senior Committee Assistant 
  

7 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Water Resources ( 2015-16) having bee n authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Tenth Report on “Repair, Renovation and Restoration of 
Water Bodies- Encroachment on Water Bodies and Steps Required to Remove the Encroachment and Restore the 
Water Bodies”. 
2. The Committee initially took up the subject “Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies ” in the 
year 2014-15 for a detailed examination and Report.  The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the 
Ministry  of  Water  Resources , River Development and Ganga Reju venation and Ministry of Environment and 
Forests and Climate Change, and various State Governments on 26 August, 2015.  The Committee again took up 
the same subject in the year 2015 -16 with special emphasis on Encroachment on Water Bodies and Steps Required 
to Remove the Encroachment and Restore the Water Bodies. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of 
the Ministry  of  Water  Resources , River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation  and Ministry of Environment, 
Forests and Climate Change and various State/ Union Territory  Governments on 18 January, 2016. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 26 July, 2016.  
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks  to the officers of the  Ministry  of  Water  Resourc es, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation , Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change, Ministry of Rural 
Development, Ministry of Urban Development and various State/Union Territory  Governments for providing the 
requisite written information a nd for depositions made before the Committee - in connection with examination of the 
subject. 
5. The Committee would like to place on record their sense of deep appreciation for the assistance rendered to 
them by the officers of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee. 
  
 
NEW DELHI                                                      HUKUM SINGH 
 26 July, 2016                                                 Chairperson,                 
4 Shravana,1938(Saka)                                              Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
 

8 
 
  

9 
 
REPORT 
        CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTORY 
 Water is the most prime factor for sustenance of life . It exists in different forms such as 
rainfall, river water, ground water, ponds and lakes etc. Therefore manageme nt of water resources 
call for integrated management of all these components as a system.  As per the information 
available with the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation a bout 
2.7 per cent of the total water available on the  earth is fresh water , of which about 75.2 per cent 
lies frozen in polar regions and another 22.6 per cent is present as ground water. The rest is 
available in lakes, rivers, atmosphere, moisture, soil and vegetation.  
1.2 India has had abundant supply of wate r resources. However from being a water abundant 
country India is gradually progressing towards water scarcity due to increasing population pressure, 
urbanization and uncontrolled growth . At present it  is sustaining 18 per cent of world population 
with 4 per cent of global water resources. Therefore management of water resources has assumed 
great importance. Today availability of water resources is a major issue and is a big challenge 
facing our country.  
1.3 Water bodies are an integral part of fresh water resources. Traditionally, these water bodies 
have played an important role in supply of drinking water, water for domestic needs and agriculture 
purposes etc. besides rivers and ground water. They have been the major source of Minor 
Irrigation (MI) system  for agriculture in India. Minor Irrigation is defined as one with a command 
area of less than 2,000 hectares. There are mainly five types of MI structures  viz. dug wells, 
shallow tube wells, deep tube wells, surface lift systems, and surface flow systems . Except the 
surface flow systems, all others are groundwater structures. Through the ages, these surface flow 
system or water bodies, either natural or man -made such as lakes, tanks, ponds and similar 
structures have sustained the Indian agriculture. In u rban areas also water bodies play an 
important role as a source of drinking water, absorption of flood water and a conduit for ground 
water recharge. 

10 
 
1.4 A "Water Body" is a structure where water from ice -melt, streams, springs, rain or drainage 
of water from residential areas is accumulated or water is stored by diversion from a stream, nala 
or river. The traditional water bodies, known by their different names, such as Bhandaras 
(Maharashtra), phad irrigation (North-western Maharashtra), Khadin and Baolis (Rajasthan), Vav or 
Vavdi (Gujarat), Ahar Pynes (Bihar), Dung or Jumpois (Jalpaiguri district, West Bengal) and Zing 
(Ladakh, Jammu  and  Kashmir) have through the ages been providing sustenance to Indian 
agriculture and have their importance in the overall d evelopment and management of water 
resources in the country. Water bodies are even religiously quite significant. Lakes of India, such 
as Pushkar in Rajasthan, Gurudongmar in Sikkim, and others are renowned for their religious 
importance.   
 
1.5 Water Bodies serve as storage reservoirs in the monsoon-dependent areas of the economy 
where there exist a shorter period of rainfall and a long dry spell with very high deviation of annual 
rainfall. The small storage tanks are called ponds or bundhis which are mostly c ommunity owned. 
The large storage tanks whose command varies from 20 to 2000 hectares are generally 
constructed by the Government Departments or local bodies.   
 
1.6 The Government of India launched the scheme of Repair, Renovation and Restoration 
(RRR) of wat er bodies during X Plan to revive and restore vanishing water bodies resulting in 
major loss of irrigation potential. The scheme was launched as pilot scheme and based on its 
success, a full scale scheme was implemented during XI Plan. Keeping in view the benefits arising 
out of the implementation of the scheme, it was extended to XII Plan as well. During XII Plan, t he 
planned outlay of the scheme is Rs 10,000 crore  and is envisaged to provide Central Assistance 
for restoration of about 10,000 water bodies  (9000 water bodies in rural areas and 1000 water 
bodies in urban areas ) with an earmarked Central outlay of Rs. 6 ,235 crore and respective State 
share of Rs 3,765 crore for the scheme with likely restoration of 6.235 lakh hectare.  
 
1.7 Further the Ministry of  Environment, Forest  and  Climate Change is implementing a 
Centrally Sponsored Scheme of National Plan for Conservation of Aquatic Eco -systems (NPCA) 
since February, 2013 for conservation and management of identified lakes and wetlands in the 

11 
 
country in a  holistic and integrated manner. Under the scheme financial assistance is provided to 
the concerned State Governments for undertaking various activities for conservation of wetlands 
and lakes, which also include a small component of lake front development and beautification, 
especially in urban lakes. 
 
1.8 The Standing Committee on Water Resource (2012 -13) had examined the implementation 
of the Scheme of Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of water bodies in their 16 th Report on 
“Repair, Renovation and Res toration (RRR) of water bodies ”. However encroachment on water 
bodies has become a serious problem, threatening the existence of a large number of water bodies 
and throwing consequent challenges of depleting ground water resource s, occurrence of 
devastating floods in urban areas and water scarcity. In the present Report, the Committee have 
examined the Scheme of RRR with special reference to the problem of encroachment  on water 
bodies and steps required to remove the encroachment and to restore the water bo dies. The 
Committee’s examination of the subject has been dealt with  in the subsequent Chapters of this 
Report. 
 
1.9 During the course of examination of the Subject, the Committee obtained brief/ background 
on the subject from the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation 
and also took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry. Apart from the Ministry, the 
representatives of various State Governments and Union Territories also appeared before the 
Committee to enlighten them on various aspects of the problem. For questions which needed 
further clarifications after evidence, supplementary reply were obtained from the Ministry. 
 
1.10 In this Report, the Committee have dwelled on such issues as state of water bodies in the 
country, encroachment, its extent and impact, implementation of judicial guidelines/directions in the 
matter, the provision for prevention of encroachment under the RRR scheme, pollution of water 
bodies and measures for increasing public awareness, etc. The views of the  Ministry and related 
aspects have been dealt with in succeeding paragraphs i n Part – I of this Report. The 
Observations/Recommendations have been included in Part – II of this Report. 
 

12 
 
  

13 
 
CHAPTER II 
State of Water Bodies in the country 
2.1 The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation    
(MoWR,RD and GR) has undertaken “Generation of Database and Implementation of Web 
Enabled Water Resources Information System in the Country” short named as  India-WRIS. In the 
India-WRIS portal,  a total of 7,98,908 water bodies have been mapped which includes water 
bodies in both rural and urban areas. Each water body has been assigned a unique identification 
number based on latitude and longitude, State, basin etc . For water bodies connected with large 
dams, attribute information is available. Maximum number of water bodies lie in the State of 
Chattisgarh (1,04,716) followed by West Bengal (1,02,490). The list of the “State –Wise Statistics 
of Water bodies as per India -WRIS Project” has been furnis hed at Annexure-I. However National 
Remote Sensing Centre ( NRSC) has submitted the number of water bodies as 6 ,35,661 shown at 
Annexure-II.  
2.2 When asked to explain the glaring differences in total number of water bodies in case of 
States such as Bihar, Jhar khand and West Bengal, as shown in India -WRIS portal and as 
furnished by NRSC, the Ministry, in its supplementary reply explained as under: 
“NRSC has considered Lakes/Ponds, Reservoirs, Tanks and Aquaculture excluding  
the temporary water bodies mapped in the imagery for Salt pan, abandoned 
quarries, temporary industrial ponds , lagoons, bays etc. Whereas in  India-WRIS 
portal, all the temporary water bodies were included.” 
Minor Irrigation (MI) Census 
2.3 MI Census collects information on number of Minor Irr igation Structures of Ground Water 
and Surface Water used for irrigation in rural areas.  There are five type of MI structures namely 
Dugwell, Deep Tubewell, Shallow Tubewell, Surface flow and Surface lift schemes.  Therefore, the 
information related to wa ter bodies in villages used for minor irrigation is also collected. 
Government of India through (MoWR,RD  and GR) has conducted Minor Irrigation census and the 
report of 4 th census on water bodies has been put on the Website of  MoWR,RD  and GR. As per 
the 4 th Minor Irrigation Census, the total number of water bodies in the country was 5,23,816 in 
2006-07 as against 5,56,601 in 3 rd Minor Irrigation Census. 5 th Minor Irrigation census has been 

14 
 
initiated and is ongoing . Census is being conducted with reference year 2013 -14. In the 5 th MI 
Census an attempt has been made to collect information on Water Bodies directly, by adding an 
item on Water bodies in the village schedule.  
  

15 
 
Attribute Information on Water Bodies 
2.4 The Committee were informed that at present att ribute information is available for water 
bodies connected with large dams. However, when asked to specify measures taken to collect 
such information on remaining water bodies, the Ministry in its supplementary repl y stated as 
under: 
“In 5th Minor Irrigation Census, information on number of all water bodies in village 
or rural areas are being considered. Water storage capacity of those water bodies 
which are feeding minor irrigation projects are also being collected in Minor 
Irrigation Census. 5 th Minor Irrigation census is planned to be completed by 2016 -
17.” 
 
Reasons for increase/ decrease in total number of water bodies 
2.5 When asked to furnish reasons for increase or decrease in total number of water bodies 
over the last ten years , the Ministry furnished the following State-wise information in its written 
submission: 
"In Madhya Pradesh, number of water bodies in the last 10 years have increased 
due to construction of tanks under M GNREGS and other State Gov ernment 
sectors. 
 In Andhra Pradesh, the number of wa ter bodies is not increasing. The reason is 
due to not taking up the formation of new water bodies. Due to continuous drought 
and deficit rain fall  prevailing in  last few years , the inflows to the water bodies 
decreased considerably, as such some of the water bodies located very adjacent to 
the habitations were being encroached which leads to decrease in water bodies.  
In Telengana the water bodies in rural areas were increased due to construction of 
new Tanks, Anicuts and Check dams. However the water bo dies in urban areas 
have decreased due to urbanization. 
 In Nagaland the reasons were not assessed.  
Uttar Pradesh has submitted that there has been no change in the number of water 
bodies in last 10 years. 
Total number of water bodies in the State of Manipur is in the decreasing trend due 
to Anthropogenic stress, Unplanned Urbanization / Industrialization, Heavy Siltation, 
and Deficiency in proper management of water bodies.  

16 
 
West Bengal  has submitted that no such studies have been made from this 
department. 
Arunachal Pradesh has submitted that the n umber of water bodies are increasing 
due to area expansion under pisciculture. Improvement in quality is not necessary 
as it is non pollutant.  
Punjab has submitted that earlier there were 18 water bodies. 2 nos  (Thana  and  
Nara Dam) have been created during last 10  years.  There has been no increase 
/decline of village ponds over the last 10 years.  
Rajasthan has submitted that the reasons of increase in new water bodies are 
mainly construction of new check dam s between 2007 and 2010. The details of 
improvement/deterioration in quality do not have any significant change in water.  
Mizoram has submitted that there is slight increase in total number of water bodies 
during the last ten years due to construction of Hydel Projects and rainwater 
harvesting dams. 
Tripura has submitted that there is increase of numbers in last 10  years due to new 
construction.   
Odisha has submitted that the increase in number of water bodies is due to the 
construction of check dams to cater to the need of irrigation. 
Himachal Pradesh  has submitted that the increase in number of water bodies is 
because of construction and development of new water bodies of different types 
and size. 
Lakshadweep  has submitted that the point is not applicable. 
Kerala has submitted that the total no. of water bodies have declined in the State 
due to  
(i) Increase in population and density of population per square kilometer 
(ii) Change in land use pattern 
(iii) Shift from paddy based agriculture to cash crop cultivation 
(iv)  Depletion of ground water 
(v) Rapid Urbanisation 
(vi) Unplanned urbanisation and development activities 
(vii) Boom in construction activity 
Karnataka has submitted that generally there is no decline in total number of 
schemes under the jur isdiction of Water Resources Department (Minor Irrigation) 

17 
 
and some new schemes are being constructed over  the years under different 
programmes subject to availability of grant. Under Rural Development and 
Panchayat Raj Department, there are no new tanks c onstructed. Action is now 
being taken through Karnataka Tank Conservation and Development Authority 
established during 2014 to conduct detailed survey of all the water bodies in the 
State and to restore all the previously existed tanks. 
Andaman and Nicobar islands has submitted that there has been no decline in 
the number of water bodies over  the last 10 years due to encroachment. However, 
increase/decrease due to other reasons are furnished as under: 
(i) New water bodies have been developed to meet the  ad ditional requirement 
 of water for drinking water and irrigation arising due to increase in 
 population. 
(ii) Some of the water bodies mainly, wells in southern group of islands were 
lost due to submergence of coastal area during tsunami on 26.12.2004. 
Tamilnadu has submitted that there is no major increase and deterioration in 
quality in water bodies.” 
Survey of water bodies by the Ministry 
2.6 On being asked about any survey of water bodies carried out by the Ministry in the past, 
the Ministry, in its supplementary reply stated following: 
“Ministry has not conducted survey of water bodies. However, MI Stat Wing 
conducts All India Census of Minor Irrigation Structures under Rationalisation of 
Minor Irrigation Statistics ( RMIS) which is a component of Development of Water 
Resources Information System ( DWRIS) Plan Scheme.  This Census is conducted 
every five years . So far four census in 1986 -87, 1993-94, 2000-01, 2006-07 have 
been conducted and 5th MI Census with base 2013-14 is in progress.” 
 
2.7 On being further asked about any plan of the Ministry to conduct a survey of water bodies 
to have a comprehensive picture of the encroachment free water bodies, the Ministry, in its 
supplementary reply, stated as under: 
“Secretary (WR, RD  and  GR) has issued an advisory to t he States regarding 
encroachment on water bodies. Further, more information on water bodies may be 
available once the report of 5th MI census is completed.” 
 
2.8 In reply to a further query as to whether the Ministry has so far made any effort to collect 
category-wise information on water bodies on their own and maintain a central database on 
different type of water bodies, the Ministry, in its supplementary reply submitted as under: 

18 
 
 
“The works of RRR of Water Bodies comes under purview of concerned State 
Governments, Central Gov ernment provide funds to State for taking up works on 
some water bodies as per availability of funds to encourage them to take up such 
works. This Ministry maintains data base for such water bodies which are proposed 
and provided Central assistance. Further, Minor Irrigation census is also conducted 
for collection of details of tanks providing irrigation. 
Recently CWC has also prepared list of water bodies with unique ID through remote 
sensing for water bodies above 0.01 ha.”  
 
2.9 In this regard, the Committee, while examining the Demands for Grants (2016 -17) of the 
MoWR, RD and GR had observed in their 9 th Report (16 th Lok Sabha) that the “ Government is 
putting the onus on the shoulder of State Governments on the plea that the works rel ated to water 
resources developments are taken by the concerned State Governments and that the Central 
Government act as catalyst by providing Central Assistance to eligible schemes as per the 
guidelines”. They also recommended that the  Ministry, within th ree months of presentation of 9 th 
Report, issue common, mandatory guidelines to all States/UTs enjoining them to identify, record 
and compile the number of encroached water bodies in their territories and complete the exercise 
within a year for purpose of compiling a national database at the Centre in this regard.” 
 
2.10 Further, the Committee in their 5 th Report on “Review of ground water scenario, need for a 
comprehensive policy and measures to address problems in the country with particular reference 
to (i) d ark blocks; and (ii) contamination of underground water by certain industries ” (16th Lok 
Sabha) had recommended the following, urging the Ministry to complete the census of water 
bodies at the earliest: 
“Noting the importance of water bodies for their pote ntial to recharge ground water 
resources, the Committee recommend the Ministry to initiate urgent steps to 
complete inventorization of water bodies and also complete the exercise of 
undertaking census of water bodies, being planned by the Ministry, within a definite 
time-frame.  The Committee are surprised to find  that even the data on number of 
ponds is not available separately with the Ministry, and they desire that a 
comprehensive assessment in this regard also is an imperative need to be made at 
the earliest.”   

19 
 
Classification of Water Bodies 
2.11 In response to a query on different systems of classification of water bodies being followed 
in different States/UTs, the  Ministry submitted the following information in its written submission: 
 "In Madhya Pradesh classification of water bodies are as under: 
 Upto 40 Hectares submergence without irrigation facility are under local 
bodies. 
 Tanks having irrigation less than 40 hectares are also under local bodies 
 Tanks having irrigation more than 40 hectares upt o 2000 hectares are 
classified as minor tanks and are owned by Water Resources 
Department.  
 More than 2000 hectares upto 10,000 hectares are classified as medium 
tanks and are owned by Water Resources Department. 
 More than 10 ,000 hectares are classified as Major reservoirs and are 
owned by Water Resources Department and Narmada Valley 
Development Department.  
In Andhra Pradesh , the tanks are classified in two categories. i.e., Tanks having 
Ayacut greater than 100 Acres and Tanks having Ayacut less than 100 Acres. 
Tanks having Ayacut greater than 100 Acres are 5 ,441 Nos and Tanks having 
Ayacut less than 100 Acres are 35,376 nos.  
In Telengana existing system of classification of water bodies are MI Tanks, 
Anicuts, check dams, percolation tanks, Private Kuntas and Fo rest Department 
Tanks. Details of total number of water bodies are as follows. 
1. MI Tanks above 100 Acres              5,217  
2. MI Tanks below 100 Acres             33,194  
3. Percolation Tanks          5,176    
4. Private Kuntas           1,715   
5. Forest Department Tanks         1,229    
Sikkim has informed that there is no existing system of classification in the State.   
In Nagaland there is no existing system of classification in the State. 
Gujarat has submitted that the classification/ type of water bodies under various 
Departments of the State have been indicated against the each water body in the 
Govt. Gazette published. So far, it required time to distinguish the water bodies 
according to the type (nature of use) as specified in the Gazette and will be 
furnished later on. 
Uttar Pradesh  has submitted that 193 water bodies of Sone organization are 
manmade and 21 water bodies are in rural area and 03 water bodies are in urban 
areas of Betwa organization.  

20 
 
Water bodies in Manipur are classified as rural (17 nos), ur ban (3nos) and hill (3 
nos). All the water bodies are identified with Unique Identification Number.  
Arunachal Pradesh  has submitted classification of water bodies as Lake, Pond 
and Tanks, reservoirs, bells etc.  
Punjab has submitted that water bodies are classified as Dams, Headworks and 
ponds. 
Rajasthan has submitted that water bodies (79 ,527 nos) in Rajasthan have been 
classified in the following manner:- 
 Water Bodies which provide irrigation and are under Water Resources 
Department (913 nos) 
 Water Bodie s which provide irrigation and handed over Panchayti Raj 
Department  (2,526 nos) 
 Rural Tanks/check dams/Anicuts (76,088 nos) 
Mizoram submitted that the State does not have existing system of 
classification/type of water bodies. 
Tripura has submitted the following classification: 
Table 1: Classification of water bodies in Tripura 
 
 
 
Uttarakhand has submitted that there are 2 nos of earthen natural water body 
(village pond type), 2 nos of Minor water bodies and 5 nos of Major water bodies 
under irrigation department of Uttarakhand. 
Odisha has submitted that there are 2 ,944 reservoir project, 1 ,199 diversion weir 
project, 2 barrage projects, 7 creek project and 6,924 check dams. 
Meghalaya has submitted that there is no existing system of classification/type of 
water bodies as survey and mapping are yet to be done. 
Lakshadweep has submitted that the point is not applicable. 
Kerala has submitted that the present classification of water bodies in the State is 
ponds, lakes, inland water bodies and reservoirs. 
Types of Water 
Bodies 
Nos. Area 
(ha). 
Pond 1,48,010 16,016.81 
Mini Barrage    41,780 9,321.89 
River - 1,917.26 
Rivulets -    783.08 
Barrage -    821.77 
Lake -    260.28 
Reservoir - 3,049.34 
Cumulative 
Total 
1,89,790 33,217.43 

21 
 
Karnataka has submitted that the water bodies under Minor Irrigation are classified 
into Tanks, Barrages, Check dams, Vented dams etc., and they are mostly 
constructed for irrigation purpose. 
Andaman and Nicobar islands has submitted -  
(i) Surface source: all types of water bodies in which rain water is stored 
 such as dams, streams, ponds, lakes, rivers etc. 
(ii) All surface sources such as streams, rivers, springs which yield water 
 throughout years 
(iii) Seasonal: all surface source which receives water during rainy season 
 only 
(iv) Underground sources: water bodies formed from underground water 
 sources such as wells, springs etc. 
Tamilnadu has submitted that water bodies are classified as drinking water 
reservoirs (4), other reservoirs (123), tanks having ayacut more than 25 he ctare 
(14,098) and tanks having ayacut less than 25 hectares (25,104)." 
2.12 When further queried as to whether the Ministry has looked into the matter of evolving 
uniform system of classification of water bodies , the Ministry in their supplementary repl y stated as 
under: 
During the mapping of water bodies, NRSC has given following classification: 
               Table 2 : Classification of water bodies 
Sl. 
No. 
Waterbody 
Type 1  Lake/Pond  
2  Reservoir  
3  Tank  
4  Cooling 
Pond  5  Abandoned 
Quarry with 
Water  
6  Ox-bow 
Lake  7  Aquaculture 
Pond  8  Salt Pan  
9  Lagoon  
 
 
Measures taken to revive perishing water bodies 

22 
 
2.13 The Committee w ere informed that o ut of 5,23,816 water bodies in 2006 -07 (as per 4 th 
Minor Irrigation Census),  80,128 water bodies are no t in use  including 18,485 water bodies which 
are permanently not in use which resulted in a loss of 1.95 million hectares of irrigation potential . 
State wise details of water bodies permanently not in use are furnished at Annexure-III. During the 
course of oral evidence of the Ministry, held on 26 August, 2015, a representative of the Ministry 
informed that 15 per cent of the water bodies are non functional/ unused. When a query was raised 
as to why water bodies remained permanently unused, the Ministry sta ted following in its 
supplementary reply: 
“Reasons given by States for water bodies not being in use are; encroachments, 
urbanization, polluted water, non availability of water due to less and erratic rainfall, 
siltation, etc.”  
2.14 Further asked about the measures taken/proposed to be taken to put those water bodies to 
proper use, the Ministry, in its written submission stated: 
i. “During the X Plan, a Pilot Scheme namely “Repair, Renovation and 
Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies directly linked to agriculture was  
launched in January 2005 with an outlay of Rs. 300 crore with 75%  Central 
Assistance by Government of India and 25% by State Government.   1098 
Water Bodies were taken up under the Pilot Scheme, out of which 1085 
water bodies were completed and 13 water bodies were dropped during 
prioritization by States. An irrigation potential of 0.78 lakh ha was restored. 
 
ii. Based on success of the pilot scheme, two schemes of RRR, one with 
domestic support with an outlay of Rs. 1 ,250 crore and other with external 
assistance with an outlay of Rs. 1 ,500 crore were launched during XI Plan. 
Under the scheme of domestic support, a total of 3 ,341 water bodies were 
taken up for restoration in 12 States. The scheme was extended during XII 
Plan also. A total Central grant amounti ng to Rs. 917.259 crore had been 
released to the States for completion of works of water bodies taken up 
during XI Plan and the works on 2 ,501 water bodies have been completed 
and an irrigation potential of 1.19 lakh ha has been restored up to 
31.03.2015. Further during XII Plan, 1,354 additional water bodies have been 
included under this scheme out of which 38 nos have been completed and 
7,606 ha potential has been restored up to 31.03.2015. 
 

23 
 
iii. Under the scheme of external assistance, 10 ,887 water bodies wer e taken 
up for restoration in the States of Andhra Pradesh (3 ,000), Karnataka 
(1,224), Odisha (900) and Tamil Nadu (5 ,763). On completion of the above 
works a potential of 8.22 lakh ha will be restored. 
 
iv. The details of the water bodies taken up during XI P lan, XII Plan and under 
external assistance are given at Annexures-IV, V and VI respectively. 
 
v. (i) The scheme of National Wetland Conservation Programme (NWCP) was 
initiated by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change           
(MoEF and CC) in 1987 with its aim to conserve identified wetlands in the 
country, to prevent their degradation and ensure their wise use for benefit of 
local communities and overall conservation of biodiversity. Under the 
programme, 115 wetlands have been identified, w hich require conservation 
and management initiatives. The activities covered under the programme 
include survey and demarcation,  inventorization of biodiversity , catchment 
area treatment , protection measures , restoration measures , water 
management, biodiversity conservation, sustainable resource development , 
weed control , pollution control, etc. So far, an amount of Rs 146.49 crore 
has been provided for conservation and management of 80 identified 
wetlands in the country. Details of funds released is given at Annexure-VII. 
 
(ii) For conservation/restoration of polluted and degraded lakes in urban 
and semi-urban areas of the country, the M oEF  and CC  is also providing 
assistance to the States under the scheme of National Lake Conservation 
Plan (NLCP). The activiti es covered under NLCP include prevention of 
pollution from point sources by intercepting, diverting and treating the 
pollution load entering the lake, in situ measures of lake cleaning such as 
de-silting, de-weeding, bio-remediation, constructed wetland ap proach, etc. 
depending upon the site conditions, catchments area treatment and lake 
beautification, which may include bunding, fencing,  creation of facilities for 
public recreation and entertainment  and public areas, public awareness 
and public participation and other activities depending upon location specific 
conditions, including the interface with human  population, etc. Based on the 
proposals received from different States, the  MoEF  and CC has sanctioned 
projects for conservation of 63 lakes in 14 Sta tes at a total cost of 
Rs.1,096.09 crore and funds amounting to Rs 631.00 crore have been 
released so far. Work on 33 lakes has been completed. Details are given at 

24 
 
Annexure-VIII. The proposals under the scheme are considered for 
financial assistance based  on prioritization of water bodies in the 
States/UTs, conformity with the guidelines and availability of Plan funds. 
 
(iii) Further, as per the information available with this Ministry, 
Government of Telangana has taken up a programme “Mission Kakaktiya “ 
in the  year 2014 -15 for restoration of 46 ,531 water bodies (MI Tanks, PR 
Tanks, Percolation Tanks, Private Tanks and Forest Tanks) for 
restoration/stabilization of  total irrigation potential of 9.87 Lakh Ha. The 
RRR works of these water bodies are planned to be  completed by the 
Government of Telengana by 2018-19.” 
 
 
2.15 The Committee were also informed by the Ministry about the traditional water bodies which 
have been renovated under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 
(MGNREGA) Programme by t he Ministry of  Rural Development. The details are furnished as 
under: 
Table 3 :Traditional water bodies renovated under MGNREGA 
Year Works completed 
2011-12 1,35,855 
2012-13 1,72,704 
2013-14 1,07,012 
2014-15 99,654 
2015-16 (till 06.01.2016) 54,088 
 
2.16 The Committee were further informed that the Ministry of Urban Development and the 
Ministry of Rural development have allocated huge amounts for rejuvenation of urban and rural 
water bodies. The Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT ) which have 
been launched in June 2015 with the objective to provide urban services i.e., water supply, 
sewerage/septage, drainage, urban transport, green space and parks, rejuvenation of water bodies 
specifically for drinking water supply and recharge of  ground water is one of the eligible 
components for Central assistance as per guidelines. Central assistance approved/released on the 

25 
 
basis of State Annual Action Plans (SAAPs) submitted by 20 States have been approved with total 
Central assistance of Rs. 9,091.70 core under the Mission and Rs. 1 ,818.34 crore has been 
released as 1st installment. 
 
2.17 As per the information provided by Ministry of Rural Development, State/UT-wise details of 
expenditure on renovation of traditional water bodies under MGNREGA Sch eme since 2012-13 till 
18th February, 2016 are given in Annexure – IX. 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
Encroachment on Water Bodies 
3.1 Illegal entry into the defined boundary of the water body for various human activities like 
construction, agriculture etc. has been defined as "encroachment of water bodies". 
3.2 At present the responsibility for the protection of boundaries of water bodies lies with the 
State Governments, as they are the absolute owners of water bodies located in their State. ‘ Water’ 
being a State subject, severa l steps for augmentation, conservation and efficient management to 
ensure sustainability of water resources are undertaken by the respective State Governments. The 
development activities along the water bodies are primarily governed by the local and State 
administration through the master plan which regulates the flood plains.  In this regard, the River 
Regulation Zone enforced by the State Government of Maharashtra in the past have helped in 
regulating the construction activities. 
3.3 In order to supplement th e efforts of the State Governments, Government of India provides 
technical and financial assistance to State Governments to encourage sustainable development 
and efficient management of water resources and Irrigation infrastructure through various schemes 
and programmes namely, “Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP) for major and 

26 
 
medium irrigation projects”, “AIBP for minor irrigation projects” and “Repair, Renovation and 
Restoration of Water Bodies”. Under the Scheme for Repair, Renovation and R estoration (RRR) of 
water bodies, Government of India have laid a condition that the water body which needs Central 
grant for its restoration/repair under the scheme RRR of water bodies, the State Government 
“needs to take necessary steps for declaring the  water body boundary through a G.O. and to 
ensure removal of encroachments in the water body spread area/water body boundary before 
submitting the proposal for release of 2nd installment”. 
Extent of encroachment  
3.4 On being enquired about the type of encroac hments found on water bodies in different 
States/UTs along with period of encroachments, the Ministry in its written submission stated as 
under: 
"In Madhya Pradesh , e ncroachment in water bodies is mostly in urban areas. 
Population pressure is the main reason. 
In Andhra Pradesh , the type of encroachment found on water bodies are 
construction of permanent and temporary structures both for residential and cattle.  
In Telengana generally the water bodies  are encroached by dumping soil in Full 
Tank Level ( FTL) area and also streams/ Nalas encroached by converging the 
stream width by dumping the waste soils due to formation of slum areas. 
In Nagaland construction of residential buildings along the bank of water bodies 
since 1990 is the reason for encroachment. 
Maharashtra informed that the data regarding encroachment was not compiled at 
State level, so currently, data asked is not available. The same  is being called for 
from the field officers and will be compiled in due course. 
Manipur has submitted that there are following types of encroachments -  
 Human settlement/ encroachment. 
 Development of modern amenities/ economic activities. 
 Development of public recreational centres. 
 Reclamation for agricultural activities. 
Arunachal Pradesh has submitted that there is no encroachment reported so far.  
Punjab has submitted that no encroachment has been reported in 20  water bodies. 
However in rural areas, there is a tendency to encroach ponds. Whenever, it comes 

27 
 
to notice of Gram Panchayat/ district Rural Development Agency / Department, the 
encroachment is immediately removed.  
Rajasthan has submitted that the type of encroachments are due to construction, 
and use of land for agricultural purposes i.e., from allotment of Government land.  
Mizoram submitted that t here is no r eport on case of encroachment on water 
bodies. 
Tripura has submitted that there are encroachments in public ponds by boundary 
adjoining land owners. Further, growth of slum habitation in river land in city area is 
a slow continuous process. 
Odisha has subm itted that encroachment of water spread area of water bodies 
have not been brought to notice till now. 
Assam has submitted a note on water bodies. In Assam there are 6 districts under 
Autonomous Councils. In the other 21 districts, an area of approximately  55,811 
hectare is covered by wetland barring rivers, rivulets, springs. Out of this area, 
approximately 7322 hectare is under encroachment.  
In Kerala encroachment on water bodies was mainly for agricultural purpose in 
earlier days. Gradually, the scenari o has changed and people have started 
constructing houses and other commercial establishment along the banks of water 
bodies. Apart from this, people have filled the water bodies particularly for 
commercial activities. 
Karnataka has submitted that encroach ment is found on the periphery of tanks. 
Farmers would have encroached some of the water bodies for agricultural purposes 
and construction of temporary buildings. 
Andaman  and  Nicobar islands  has submitted that none of the sources are 
encroached as per records. 
Tamilnadu has submitted that encroachment is due to crops, huts and semi 
permanent structures." 
3.5 Responding to a specific query on the status of encroachment on water bodies in the State 
of Uttar Pradesh, the Ministry in its supplementary reply, stated: 
“Government of Uttar Pradesh has submitted that there is no encroachment on all 
193 water bodies under Sone organization and 24 water bodies in Betwa 
organization and 40 water bodies in Yamuna Organization under the control of 
department of Irrigation  and  Water Resources. Overall it can be said that there is 
no encroachment on any water body under the subject and under the control of 
Department of Irrigation  and  Water Resources of Uttar Pradesh.” 

28 
 
3.6 During the course of oral evidence held on 18 January , 2016, when the Committee raised 
the issue of massive encroachment on water bodies in the State of Uttar Pradesh, the 
representative of the State Government, deposed before the Committee: 
“Sir, I will submit the information from revenue department because  I basically 
belong to the Irrigation Department. It looks after the ponds and all that. Records 
are maintained by the Revenue Department.”  
3.7 Further asked to provide information  on state of water bodies in Delhi, the Ministry, in its 
supplementary reply, stated: 
“As per the information provided by the Government of NCTof Delhi there are 971 
existing water bodies out of which 346 are dry, 321 are wet. Further, 2015 are fully 
encroached and 89 are converted into Parks. 
 
The Government of Delhi has also inform ed that regular field inspections of water 
bodies sites are being carried out to monitor their existing status/changed status 
and submitted in to the Hon’ble Court.  
Cases are filed against encroachers and old cases are effectively pursued. 
Plantation and Boundary walls are being made on the boundaries of water bodies to 
check encroachments.” 
3.8 Further asked by the Committee to elaborate on condition of dry water bodies of 
Delhi, the representative of the State Government of Delhi, during his evidence held on  18 
January, 2016   submitted: 
“Sir, there is no standing water over there because water table has gone down.  So, 
they are dry.  They are safe because we have made boundaries.  If not boundaries, 
plantations have been done on boundaries.   
There are a few water bodies which are under encroachment also, which took place 
10 years before.  No encroachment has taken place in the recent time.  Under the 
guidance of the Hon’ble High Court, we have constituted a Committee.  Court 
Commissioners and land developmen t agencies use to go over there almost every 
month or so, they make a record of it and submit it to the court.  So, we have a 
complete detail of all the water bodies.  It is a highly populated area in Delhi.  Some 
of these water bodies are really under threat.  That is true.  We cannot say that they 
are not under threat.”    
3.9 While explaining the reasons for encroachment  on water bodies in the country , the Special 
Secretary, during his evidence elaborated further: 

29 
 
“All this information is available in the vi llage  record as to which land is earmarked 
for a pond. But it is a question of illegal encroachment on that area. That 
earmarking is there. All records whether in the city or in the rural area has clearly 
demarcated that this particular portion of a land is a common pond. But 
unfortunately the sanctity of that record is not maintained.”  
 
3.10 Regarding extent of encroachment on urban water bodies, the Ministry of Urban  
Development (MoUD) has submitted following in its written submission: 
"There are total 4,129 water bodies in the following 7 States and 2 UTs out of which 
3,686 water bodies are used for water supply  and other domestic purposes and 
198 water bodies are encroached. 
Table 4: Status of water bodies in 7 State and 2 UTs. 
States/UTs  No of 
water 
bodies 
No of water 
bodies in use 
Water bodies 
encroached 
Action taken 
for removal of 
encroachment. 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
18 18 Nil NA 
Assam 395 395 10-12 Drafted a bill 
Andaman  and  
Nicobar Island 
13 13 Nil NA 
Haryana 356 160 26 Instructions are 
issued to ULBs 
for required 
action. 
Jharkhand 11 (for 3 
cities) 
11 Nil NA 
Lakshadweep  No water body 
Tamil Nadu 2703 2647 44 Court cases 
pending further 
action are being 
taken to remove 
encroachments. 
Uttarakhand 32 22 7 Given 
instruction to 
ULBs for further 
action. 
Uttar Pradesh 601 431 99 Cases are 
pending in the 
courts efforts 
are being made 
to remove 

30 
 
encroachments 
through special 
drive. 
Total 4129 3686 198  
 
3.11 The Committee were further informed that the Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD) has 
issued an Adviso ry that the water bodies should be notified in the Municipal Land Use records as 
the municipal assets. Asked about the States/UTs which have maintained such records, the 
Ministry in its supplementary reply stated as under: 
“MoUD has intimated that such inf ormation from the States/UTs regarding 
notification of water bodies as municipal assets are not maintained by them.” 
Impact of encroachment on water bodies  
3.12  In recent years several metro cities such as Mumbai and Chennai have witnessed 
unprecedented flood. Mumbai witnessed flash flood in July 2005. In Uttarakhand there was flash 
flood in June 2013. Severe flood in Jammu and Kashmir was witnessed in the year 2014 (from 
03.09.2014 to 07.09.2014) . Another instance of  severe flood occurred in Northern Tamil Na du 
during 30.11.2015 to 09.12.2015. The following reasons have been stated to be the major factors 
for occurrence of floods in the written reply furnished by the Ministry: 
 
- “High intensity rainfall over short span of time. This phenomenon observed 
 during  Mumbai and Uttarakhand floods. 
- Inadequate channel capacity. 
- Improper drainage condition. 
- Unplanned reservoir operation. 
- In Northern Plains of India, very high velocity waters of Himalayan Rivers’ 
 enter  Northern plains  and due to flat natural slope wate r spreads over the 
 plains and causes  inundation in low lying areas for long periods. 
- Along Bay of Bengal coastline of India, creation of depression in Bay of 
 Bengal and  cyclone landfall creates meteorological conditions resulting 
 in high intensity wid espread rainfall causing floods in the landfall coastal 
 area/ zones. 
- Drainage congestion due to sudden heavy rainfall in urban conglomerates. 
- Apart from the above mentioned natural causes, human induced causes like 
 unscientific development and land use p attern especially human activities in 

31 
 
 flood  plain zones and estuarine areas of river, encroachment of natural 
 drainage  channels and water bodies, socio -economic conditions, 
 deforestation, increasing human and cattle population pressure also 
 increase the vulnerability due to floods." 
3.13 Further, the Ministry, in its  written submission, informed the Committee about the following 
measures, proposed to be taken to deal with floods: 
"Under the approved State Finance Corporation ( SFC) memorandum on flood 
forecasting of Rs. 281 Cr. during XII plan, following non -structural activities are 
proposed towards undertaking flood forecasting by CWC. 
i. Setting up of 100 new flood forecasting stations in the country based on the 
 requests received from the States in low lyi ng areas and dam projects 
 presently unrepresented by the existing network of 176 flood forecasting 
 stations of CWC. 
ii. Modernization of flood forecast network with real time satellite based 
 telemetry system on all flood forecasting stations of CWC and rain fall based 
 mathematical modelling for efficient and effective flood forecasting services 
 with sufficient forecast lead time.   
iii. Inundation modelling using available  Digital Evaluation Models  (DEMs) 
(about 3 mha flood prone area in Kosi, Mahanadi, Sabari a nd Brahmaputra 
basins whose high resolution  DEM is available with National Remote 
Sensing Centre) for inundation forecasting on pilot basis. 
a. Encroachment of river bed is one of the reasons of flooding since it reduces 
the desired waterway of the river. Mo WR, RD  and GR has prepared a 
model  flood Plain Zoning Bill way back in 1975 and circulate d it to various 
States/ UTs for implementation. The Bill envisages enactment of legislation 
about  flood plain zoning, demarcation of flood plain zones on ground 
based on the  frequency of floods and administrative measures to check 
encroachment of floods plains. Only the States of Manipur, Uttarakhand and 
Rajasthan have enacted legislation in their assemblies and others are yet to 
adopt it."  
 
3.14 When queried as to whether the encroachment on water bodies have played a major role in 
such floods, the Ministry furnished the information as forwarded by the following States in its 
written submission: 
"Andhra Pradesh has submitted that the encroachment of water bo dies are one of 
the reasons for flooding. The Gov ernment of Andhra Pradesh has taken necessary 

32 
 
steps to remove the encroachments and also increasing impounding capacity of 
water bodies under NEERU CHETTU programme by de -silting of all water bodies, 
feeder channels, supply and irrigation channels.  
Telengana has informed that due to converging of streams/Nalas and decreasing 
water bodies’ capacity area, the floods are common recurrence. However the action 
plan will be prepared in detail to prevent the encroachments. 
Gujarat has submitted that due to large scale infrastructure development works and 
residential building in urban area , surface drainage has been affected. The  non 
availability of storm water drain has resulted in inundation for a short time. As far as 
possible, the natural drains are well protected. 
Maharashtra has submitted that the pattern of rainfall is variable - spatially  and  
temporally. The intensity of rainfall in a particular area is not constant over the 
years. It varies depending on the vagaries of the nature. This causes floods in some 
areas  and  at the same time drought like situation in some other areas. The 
encroachments on water bodies do not seem to be the main reason for flooding, 
nevertheless it ag gravates the situation. The Government of Ma harashtra (Water 
Resources Department) has initiated a drive to mark the 1 in 25 years return period 
flood flow line (Blue Line)  and  1 in 100 year return period flood flow line (Red line) 
along the river banks at predominantly flood prone zones. The Wate r Resources 
Department ha s given necessary instructions to other relevant departments of 
Government of Maharashtra viz. Urban Development Department  and  Rural 
Development Department to take due care for not allowing any structure / 
encroachment to be constructed within the marked flood lines. 
Manipur has submitted that the main causes of devastating floods in the State of 
Manipur, particularly in the valley region are as follows: 
 Inadequacies of channel conveyances. 
 Inadequacies of flood protection works. 
 Reduction in the water holding capacity of natural reservoirs in the basin 
 due to progressive siltation. 
 Blocking of rivers. 
 Breaching of river banks. 
 Spill over the banks. 
 Raising of river bed caused by deposition of silt. 
 Bank erosion. 
 Poor drainage system. 
 Human encroachment in the flood plain. 

33 
 
 Unplanned urbanization. 
Ministry of Environment, Forest  and  Climate Change has informed that a policy on 
River Regulation Zone (RRZ) is being formulated by MoE F  and  CC, which is 
aimed at regulating developme nt on the banks of rivers in the flood plain. There is 
no proposed policy prescription in the proposed RRZ Policy on water bodies with 
respect to specific queries in the communication received from Parliament 
Secretariat. 
In Kerala major cities like Thiruv ananthapuram, Kochi and the low lying areas 
adjacent to rivers and lakes is experiencing flood. This is mainly due to 
anthropogenic activities such as filling up of ponds and wetlands in cities for 
developmental activities. It is fact that natural drains w hich carry water and 
discharge to large water bodies and rivers are also encroached upon or reduced to 
no flow areas. These are the major reasons for flooding in Kerala cities. 
Government has already taken a positive step in Thiruvananthapuram city called 
Operation ANANTHA to mitigate the impact of flood by evicting the encroachers 
and by rejuvenating and  restoring the ponds/drains within the city limits. 
Karnataka has submitted that the reason for floods in metro cities is due to 
encroachment of tanks, la kes and also feeder canals/ storm water drains in the 
cities. The concerned local bodies of the affected cities are taking action to prevent 
encroachment. 
Tamilnadu has submitted that the encroachment in the channels and rivers is one 
of the main reason fo r flooding. Prevention and eviction if any, are being done as 
per the Tamilnadu Protection of Tanks and Eviction Encroachment Act, 2007." 
Action against encroachers 
 
3.15 On being a sked by the Committee to state in detail the steps so far taken/being taken to 
remove the encroachments in each of the States/UTs, the Ministry, in its written submission stated: 
"In Madhya Pradesh , State’s Work Department Manual has laid down the 
procedure for removal of such encroachments. Water bodies are maintained by the 
concerned department. For prevention and removal of encroachment, the revenue 
department is authorised for taking action. Responsibility of the owner department 
is limited to informing the Revenue department. 
Assam has submitted that Revenue department has constit uted Village Land 
Management Conservation Committee (VLMCC) in rural areas in order to involve 
community for preservation of Government land including wet land. A database on 

34 
 
wetland is being made as part of online Management information system. Revenue 
department has enacted two Acts for this purpose namely -  The Assam Hill Land 
and Ecological Sites (Protection and Management ) Act, 2006 and the Guwahati 
Water bodies (Preservation and Conservation) Act, 2008." 
 
3.16 As per the information submitted by the Mini stry, the State Governments of Andhra 
Pradesh, Kerala, Karnataka, Tamilnadu and Gujarat have accepted the fact that encroachment on 
water bodies in urban areas have contributed in large scale floods. When asked about action plan 
of Central Government to pr event such encroachments, the Ministry, in its supplementary reply , 
stated: 
“Ministry of Urban Development has intimated that as Urban Development, storm 
water drainage and land use master planning etc. are State subjects, the Central 
Government is not inv olved in the maintenance and upkeep of water bodies 
including tackling of encroachments. It is the responsibility of the U rban Local 
Boards and State Government Departments such as land revenue and water 
resources/irrigation to prevent encroachments of the water bodies.” 
3.17 When further asked about the action taken against encroachments/encroachers, the 
Ministry in their written submission furnished the following information in respect of various States:  
"Manipur has submitted that a s the people ha ve now reali zed the fact that the 
water bodies (lakes, wetlands, rivers etc.) are accorded a special status for their 
protection and conservation in view of their importance as entities of incomparable 
values, any encroacher cannot challenge the prohibitory laws again st 
encroachment. In case anybody challenges the social/ conventional law, they will 
get punishment as per law. 
Arunachal Pradesh has submitted that there is no case of encroachment. 
Rajasthan has submitted that the references are being made by Revenue 
Department in Revenue courts. 
Uttarakhand has submitted that there are no such cases as submergence areas 
are free from encroachment.  
Odisha has submitted that no such cases reported. 
In Madhya Prasesh , Water Resources Department has informed the Revenue 
department from time to time.  

35 
 
In Telengana, whenever encroachments are taking place, the Civic bodies along 
with Police and revenue authorities are taking action by dismantling the structures 
in encroached area." 
3.18 During the course of oral evidence held on 18 January,2016, the Special Secretary 
informed the following to the Committee with regard to the action proposed to be taken by the 
Ministry to address the issue of encroachment on water bodies: 
“Sir, we are going to make a proper advisory and circulate that  to all the States 
along with the experience of the States that the Committee has visited. What you 
have seen in Jammu and Kashmir…the extent of losses due to encroachment of 
Dal lake, canals etc. We will make a whole picture of the steps taken and propose d 
to be taken and we will circulate the Advisory before the next meeting.” 
Monitoring mechanism for prevention and removal of encroachments 
(A) Monitoring mechanism under   Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) Scheme  
3.19 Regarding monitoring mechanism und er RRR scheme, the Ministry, while furnishing Action 
Taken Replies on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 16 th Report (15 th Lok 
Sabha) on “the Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies”, inter-alia informed that “ the 
Scheme involves  monitoring in three levels : - Water Users’ Association (WUA) at the Gram 
Panchayat Level, Cascade Association (CA) and WUA Federation at the Block Level. The 
involvement of local /block administrative levels will ensure that encroachment on the water bod ies 
are avoided”. 
 
3.20 Under the Scheme of Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of water bodies, regular 
monitoring of the project is to be carried out at each stage. Monitoring includes maintaining of both 
physical and financial progress and the outcome. Monitoring is being done with the association of 
the Coordination cell of the State Government and the Standing committee of the Panchayat at the 
appropriate level. When the local Panchayat or WUAs are monitoring, the chances of 
encroachment on the water body are less. 
 
3.21 For the water bodies where the WUAs are formed and are being maintained by them, it has 
helped to a large extent in preventing encroachments as they are vigilant and alert so that the 
benefits from the water body wouldn’t get affected by illegal encroachers.  

36 
 
(B) Monitoring mechanism in different States  
3.22 While responding to a query on monitoring mechanism as implemented for prevention and 
removal of encroachment in various States, the Ministry informed the following in their written 
submission: 
"Maharastra submitted that sections 93 to 96 of Maharashtra   Irrigation Act, 1976 
empower the Canal officer to take personal action on the encroachments. The State 
Government has also set up a monitoring mechanism by appointing “Estate 
Manager” for tak ing care of land  and  water body in possession of Water 
Resources Department. 
Manipur has submitted that for effective functioning in coordination between 
Centre, State and urban local bodies, City Level Monitoring Committee (CLMC) for 
all river and lake  conservation projects is constituted comprising of district collector 
as chairman, administrative head of urban local body,  representative of 
implementing agency, an environmental NGO and a prominent social worker.  
Besides, CLMC’s are also expected to se cure public cooperation and facilitate 
community mobilization for the conservation of water bodies in the region.  These 
mechanisms prove effective in preventing encroachments provided the committee 
works with great sincerity at each district level under th e chairmanship of district 
collector. 
Arunachal Pradesh has submitted that no such mechanism has been constituted. 
Punjab has submitted that proper monitoring by the department has proved 
effective in prevention and removal of encroachment, if any, in case  of 20 water 
bodies. However for village ponds, monitoring is being done at the level of Gram 
panchayat/ district Rural Development Agency and director Level for removal of 
encroachment , if any.  
Mizoram submitted that the State does not have existing mon itoring mechanism for 
prevention and removal of encroachment on water bodies.  
Rajasthan has submitted that Govt of Rajasthan has issued various orders to 
comply the directions of Hon’ble High Court decision in case of 11153/2011 on 
dated 29.05.2012. To mo nitor the compliances of these orders, a high level 
committee under the chairmanship of Chief Secretary, Govt of Rajasthan was 
constituted vide Government order no. F.6(50)/AR/Gr.3/2012 dated 25.07.2012.  
Further the district level monitoring committee und er the chairmanship of district 
collectors in all the districts have also been constituted vide Government order no. 
F.6 (54)/AR/Gr.3/2012 dated 30.07.2012.The district level monitoring committee is 
convening regular meeting for compliances of the directio ns of the Hon’ble High 
court.  Besides , a monitoring committee consisting 02 nos of independent persons 
have also been constituted by the Hon’ble High court in S.B. Civil Writ Petition No. 

37 
 
11153/2011 dated 23.08.2011. This committee is also visiting the projects sites  and  
submitting its report to Hon’ble High court.  The above mechanism of monitoring has 
proved effective to prevent the future encroachments, because every change in 
land use pattern in water bodies catchment (flow area) and in submergence o f 
water body  is m onitored. The High court Monitoring Committee also takes 
cognizance through news on television or newspaper. No new construction is 
permitted in the catchment.  
Tripura has submitted the following. 
 Encroachments on Government water bodies are removed by the District 
Administration as per provisions of the Tripura Public Premises (Eviction of 
Un-authorized Encroachment) Act and as per Section -15 of the TLR  and  
LR Act, 1960. 
 Watch is being kept on unauthorized encroachment on Government wat er 
 bodies through field functionaries of District Administration / Revenue 
 Department. 
 Diversion of classification of land is regulated under the provision of 
 Section-20 of the TLR  and  LR Act,1960. 
 Strategy has been adopted to bring the public water b odies to productive 
 uses by p lacing under control of Panchaya ts, Municipal Bodies, Co -
 operative Societies and through rehabilitation of urban slum dwellers of river 
 lands. 
 The strategy appears to be effective in removing encroachments. 
Uttarakhand has s ubmitted that water bodies are monitored through regular 
inspection by Department of Irrigations staff, Dist rict Administration  and  Forest 
Department. 
Odisha has submitted that the Orissa Prevention of Land Encroachment Act, 1985 
is now in force for prev ention and removal of encroachments from Gov ernment 
land. The Revenue Inspector and Thasildar from revenue Department monitor the 
matter. The revenue officials keep constant vigil over the Gov ernment Land. Steps 
are taken by Revenue Officials for removal o f encroachment, if any, by imposing 
fine  and  penalty as per law. The existing law is effective in preventing 
encroachments. 
Meghalaya has submitted that necessary steps are being taken to declare the 
water body boundary through a Government Officer. 
As per the Kerala Panchayat Raj Act, 1994/Municipal Act, 1994, the ownership of 
ponds and lakes are vested with the local bodies. The irrigation department takes 
steps to renovate and repair the water bodies based on the request of LSGIs. The 
data is not available with the irrigation department. 
Karnataka  has submitted that generally encroachments are found in tanks. Water 
Resources Department (Minor Irrigation) is surveying the tanks/water bodies in its 

38 
 
jurisdiction and encroachments , if identified , are being  removed as per the 
prevailing rules.  The boundaries are marked and fencing work / boundary trenche 
is being done to prevent encroachment. 
State Government has enacted the Karnataka Tank Conservation and Development 
Act 2014 and has established Karnataka Tank Conservation and Development 
Authority under the Chairmanship of the Hon'ble Minister for Minor Irrigation. 
Committee has taken action for conservation of all Water Bodies in the State 
including eviction of encroachments. 
Andaman  and  Nicobar Islands   has submitted that water bodies are under 
custody of user agency with the responsibility for regular maintenance and safe 
upkeepment.  Depending upon need , many important water bodies in urban / rural 
areas have been fenced with permanent / temporary fencing. 
Remaining water bodies are being regularly monitored and main water bodies have 
been provided with watch and ward management.  This is however with the 
exemption of sources in reserve forest area which are regularly watched and 
guarded by Forest department. 
Tamil Nadu  has submitted that there is an Act called Tamil Nadu Protection of 
tanks and Eviction encroachment Act 2007 enacted in Tamil Nadu and it is being 
followed. In case of encroachment, the rules stipulated in this Act are being 
followed."  
3.23 On being asked about the role of Committees formed by the State Governments with 
regard to removal of encroachments, the Ministry in its supplementary reply stated: 
“Though no specific information has been received from State Governments, such 
committees are in general to act in the matter along with concerned authorities as 
per rules  and  regulations laid down in this regard.” 
3.24 While responding to a query on effectiveness of local bodies in reducing encroachments, 
the Ministry, in their written submission, stated as below: 
"In Madhya Pradesh owner department monitors the cases of encroachment. The 
mechanism is not effective as the department is dependent on the Revenue 
department being an issue related with law and order. The policy of appeasement is 
the main cause of encroachment. Lack of determination to remove encroachment is 
the main cause.  
Involvement of local bodies has never helped or succeeded in reducing 
encroachment. The apprehension of reduced vote -bank is the main cause of 
inaction. Water bodies in cantonment area or in the premises of private companies 

39 
 
are comparatively better maintained. Local bodies having number of local 
representatives generally avoid taking strict action. 
Andhra Pradesh  has informed that the local bodies are actively involve d in 
reducing the encroachments and safe guarding the water bodies. In Andhra 
Pradesh, as per the instruction of the Watch dog committee, the unauthorized 
constructions/encroachments are identified and notices were served. The 
concerned revenue authorities  are also being addressed by the officials of Water 
Resources Department for taking necessary action for eviction of encroachment.  
Telengana has informed that all water bodies in HMDA limits are protecting by 
fixing Full Tank Level (FTL) fencing, planting trees at FTL contour, fixing FTL stone 
pillars and FTL contour trench cutting. Whenever encroachments take place, the 
Civic bodies along with Police and revenue authorities are taking action by 
dismantling the structures in encroached area.  
Sikkim has submitted that the methodology is yet to be established. 
Gujarat has submitted that under the existing monitoring mechanism for prevention 
and removal of encroachments, the concerned authority closely monitor the water 
bodies in case of encroachment and take urgent steps to remove them in 
accordance to the statutory power, existing law and rehabilitation policy of 
Government. Responsibilities of officer / staff concerned should be fixed in respect 
of non removal of encroachment and fresh encroachment. 
 Local bodies shall furnish information at early stage regarding encroachment to the 
concerned authority and depending upon this information, the action taken for 
removal of such encroachment shall be quarterly reviewed in the Water Resources 
Committee, which will help removal of encroachment at the early stage.  
Sikkim has informed that no such cases have been reported so far. 
Manipur has submitted that a ctivities aimed at involvement of local bodies/ public 
participation are built into individual projects and ar e carried out by implementing 
agencies in the state. As such, the role of local bodies has proved very helpful in 
reducing encroachments through public awareness and public participation. 
Arunachal Pradesh  has submitted that a local committee shall be form ed in due 
course. 
Rajasthan has submitted  that the Administrative orders issued by the Revenue 
Department and Panchayati Raj Department for prevention of encroachment and 
allotment of land in flow area of any water bodies have significant effect of 

40 
 
prevention of such encroachments as maximum no of water bodies are Rural 
Panchayat Tanks. Besides, the regular meeting of the District Monitoring 
Committee comprising the District level officers of Panchayati Raj Department, 
Revenue Department and Water Resource s Department have also made an impact 
in this direction.  
Tripura submitted that Involving local bodies is very much helpful in reducing     
encroachments. Such bodies can manage the interests and sentiments of the 
affected people and ensure their particip ation in the process of development 
centered on the water bodies where encroachment is to be removed. 
Odisha has submitted that the local bodies are helping for detection/identification of 
encroachment of Govt lands. Basing on their allegations/complaints,  stringent 
actions are taken by Revenue Officials for removal of encroachment through 
eviction. Besides, Pani Panchayats  and  Water Users Associations have been 
formed to maintain the water bodies  and  also to check encroachment if any. 
Karnataka has submitted that at present Local bodies are not involved. 
Andaman  and  Nicobar Islands   has submitted that local bodies are taking 
interest due to various awareness campaigns and are monitoring and keeping 
surveillance which has reduced tendency of encroachme nt considerably. It has also 
caused increased sense of ownership among residents which has helped reduction 
in tendency of encroachment as well as better use of precious water. 
Tamil Nadu  has submitted that local bodies are maintaining 25104 no. of tanks 
having ayacut less than 25 hectares and prevent the encroachment in the tanks. 
The encroachment, if any are evicted as per the provision of Tamil Nadu Protection 
of Tanks and Eviction Encroachment Act 2007." 
3.25 In reply to a query as to whether political compu lsions constitute a major reason for 
allowing encroachments on water bodies, the Ministry in its supplementary reply, submitted: 
“Encroachments happen due to number of local factors, thus issue is to be looked 
into by concerned State Government as per their rules and regulations.” 
(C)  Judicial Directions/Guidelines on the issue of encroachment and their implementation in 
different States 
3.26 On being a sked by the Committee to furnish the details of directions/ guidelines issued by 
courts, the Ministry furnished the following written information: 

41 
 
"Andhra Pradesh has informed that Hon’ble Supr eme Court in SLP No. 13695 of 
2000 dated 25.07.2001 has mentioned that it is important that material resources of 
the Community like forests, tanks, ponds, hillock, mountain  etc. are nature’s bounty. 
They maintain delicate ecologic al balance. They need to be protected for proper 
and healthy environments which enable to enjoy quality life which is essence of the 
guaranteed right under Article 21 of the constitution.  
The Hon’b le Superme Court has ordered Dt. 25. 09.2013, in Special  Leave to 
appeal (civil) No. 8519 of 2006 to restore the water bodies by evicting the 
unauthorized constructions/encroachments. The Hon’ble High court on 27 -11-2012 
against the WP No. 23829 of 1997 has  directed to preserve the lakes, tanks and 
other water bodies.  
Telengana has informed that the Hon’ble High court of Judicature at Hyderabad for 
the State of Telangana and the State of Andhra Pradesh  passed order in public 
interest litigation No: 214/2014  and directed the Government to constitute the 
committees for steps to be taken to identify the water bodies and also to protect and 
preserve the same in all respects 
Gujarat has submitted that the Hon ’ble High court of Gujarat in its order dated 
2/8/2002 in SCA 10621/2000 has given following directions / guidelines on subject 
of encroachment on water bodies, their maintenance problem and removal of the 
encroachment on water bodies. 
 All the water bodies in the territory of the state vest in state and / or t he Area 
Development Authorities or local bodies including Panchayats. In the official 
gazette, within three month from date of oral order i.e. (2/8/2002) 
 All the water bodies that vest in the State or local bodies should not be 
alienated or transferred or put to any use other than as water bodies. 
 Concerned authorities to take steps to get the standards of quality of water 
of the water bodies prescribed by the concerned authority under the law and 
device mechanism for periodic monitoring of the quality of water. 
 The National Water Policy and State Water policy, a draft containing great 
vision, it is time to move beyond policy declaration to concrete action that 
may produce results by rejuvenating  the water bodies. 
 Provision for recharging them by appropriat e storm water drains and other 
feasible measures against pollution of such water bodies. 
The State Government shall expeditiously take steps to constitute Water Resources 
Council in the chairmanship of Chief Minister and State Government will also 
constitute the Water Resources Committee headed by Chief Secretary. 

42 
 
The State Government , the urban development authorities and local bodies 
exercise their statutory powers to remove the existing encroachment and take 
measures to prevent encroachment. They prepare  records in form of videography, 
photography and panchanamas of encroachment  and  urgent steps are taken to 
remove encroachment with law and rehabilitation policies of Government. 
The question of determining the peripheral area surrounding a water body, on which 
construction may be prohibited, will be taken up by concerned authorities. 
Maharashtra has submitted that as per the information available, there are no 
specific directions/guidelines issued by the Hon’ble Supreme Court/ High Court on 
subject of enc roachment in relation to water bodies with State W ater Resources 
Department. However, the State Government has issued guidelines in connection 
with this issue vide. Government Resolution of Revenue  and  Forest Department 
dated 10/10/2013. 
Manipur has submitted that currently, there is no legal instrument specifically aimed 
at the protection and conservation of water bodies. However, several legislation 
enacted till date have relevance and provisions for conservation of water bodies 
and their biodiversity. Some of them are as follows – 
 The water (prevention and control of pollution) act 1974 as amended upto 
 1988 to prohibit discharge of untreated waste water effluents. 
 A State Water Policy has been enacted and approved by the State Cabinet 
 on 23rd September, 2015. Protection and preservation of water bodies have 
 been incorporated in the policy. 
 The Gov ernment of Manipur has enacted t he Manipur Flood Plain Zoning 
 Act, 1978 to prevent encroachment in the flood plains particularly for major 
 rivers and streams in Manipur. 
 The Supreme Court in its many pronouncements have given effects to 
 provision of various Acts to direct the States to take preventive and 
 mitigating measures for protecting the water bodies from different 
 anthropogenic pressures. 
Rajasthan has submitted -  
 No direction/guidelines issued by Hon’ble supreme court. 
 A PIL was filed in Hon’ble high court (Jodhpur) with D.B. civil Writ petition 
 No. 1536/2003 Abdul Rahamn V/s State of Rajasthan.  

43 
 
 In pursuant to the direction of Hon’ble High Court  on 02.08.2014, State 
 Government of Rajasthan constituted an Expert committee dated 
 18.07.2013 
 Hon’ble Rajasthan High Court Jaipur Bench took Suo Moto cognizance on 
 the news published in news paper of State of Rajasthan regarding Ramgarh 
 dam in Jaipur district with a Writ Petition No. 11153/2011 Suo Moto Versus 
 state of Rajasthan.  
 The Hon’ble High court issued directions on dated 29.05.2015 regarding all 
 water bodies of Rajasthan.  
Mizoram submitted that the question does not arise since there is no report on case 
of encroachment on water bodies. 
Tripura has submitted that in connection with a public litigation case in Hon’ble 
High Court of Tripura, the Court has given order for collection of status report of 45 
water bodies located under Agartala Mun icipal Corporation. The State Pollution 
Control Board has submitted the report before the Court.                                                                                     
While the same is under examination, Hon’ble High Court has expressed that apart 
from the water bodies of the Agartala Municipal Corporation, the Court may later  
like to pass orders for the other water bodies of the State as well, if need be. 
Kerala has submitted that the only known case in recent past with regard to 
directions issued by Hon'ble Supreme Court is the suo moto  case pertaining to 
Vembanad Lake. 
Karnataka has submitted that Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has given direction 
for eviction of illegal occupation and encroachment of water bodies in its order 
dated 28.01.2 011 in SLP No. 3109/2011 and the Ministry of Environment and 
Forest vide Gazette Notification dated 04.12.2010 has notified the Wetlands 
(Conservation and Management Rules) 2010, wherein restrictions imposed on the 
activities within wetlands are given. 
State Government has enacted the Karnataka Tank Conservation and Development 
Act, 2014 and has established Karnataka Tank Conservation and Development 
Authority under the Chairmanship of the Hon'ble Minister for Minor Irrigation. 
Tamilnadu has submitted that observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court are 
available in specific cases. Guidelines are followed as per Act only." 

44 
 
3.27 Further asked to furnish in detail, the reports submitted to Hon'ble Supreme Court and High 
Courts - with regard to the steps taken by the State/UT Governments for the compliance of such 
directions issued by them, the Ministry, in its written reply, stated as follows: 
“Andhra Pradesh  has informed that as per the supreme court directions, a 
committee namely Watch Dog committee was constituted by AP State Government 
vide G.O Rt. No: 386 dated 21.03.2007 and the committee has to work under the 
Chairmanship of Joint Collector of the District. The Watch Dog committee has to 
guide the line departments for taking necessary steps for eviction of unaut horized 
constructions/encroachments in water bodies for restoration of the same to their 
original status.  
Telengana has informed that the learned Gov ernment  pleader appearing for the 
State of Telangana assure d the Court that the committees as required un der 
section 3 of WALTA act 2002 will be constituted within a period of three weeks from 
the date of receipt of copy of order. 
Gujarat has informed that all water bodies under various Departments of State are 
published by State Government. 
The State Governm ent has passed resolution SUT (AIPC) – 2004-3160-(64)-K3 
Dtd. 17/5/2005 regarding water bodies that all water bodies published in the 
Government gazette shall not be alienated or transferred or put to any use, the 
quality of the water must be preserved and  encroachment must be removed 
according to prevailing law and rehabilitation policies.       
The Stare Government constitutes “Gujarat State Water Resources Council” and 
“Gujarat State Water Resources Committee” vide resolution No. SUT / 2002/ IB / 
188-(5)-Pt. -IV –K3 Dated 31 Jan. 2003.  
Manipur has submitted that in respect of the pollution control, Pollution Control 
Board of the State directly deals and takes up necessary steps in compliance with 
directions issued by the Hon’ble Supreme Court and High Courts from time to time. 
Rajasthan has submitted -  
 All the concerned departments issued the circulars/orders to comply the 
 directions issued by the Hon’ble High court on 29.05.2015. 
 The Hon’ble High court on 05.12.2015 issued directions to submit  report of 
 each district as to what steps have been taken for implementation of  the 
 judgement. It should be under affidavit of the collector, who is chairman of 
 the committee. Affidavit aforesaid should contain all the documents 
 showing action for compliance of the judgement of this court. 
 In compliance of the order issued by Hon’ble High court  05.12.2015, the 
 affidavits of 30 district collectors have been submitted to Hon’ble High court 
 on 21.01.2013. 

45 
 
 Present Hon’ble High court Monitoring committee is review ing the progress 
 periodically.  
Tripura informed that the Copy of the Report prepared by Tripura State Pollution 
Control Board on 45 water bodies of Agartala Municipal Corporation has been 
submitted to the Hon’ble Court. 
Tamil Nadu has submitted that no c ompliance report has been submitted to the 
Hon'ble Supreme Court. However the system of protection and eviction followed 
and the current status of encroachments of individual cases were reported in the 
counter Affidavit of such cases in the Hon'ble High Court. No report based on any of 
the direction has been submitted in the subject." 
3.28 On being asked as to why the State Government of Tamil Nadu has failed to submit 
compliance report and what role has been played by the Ministry to persuade such States to 
comply with the directions of the court, the Ministry, in its supplementary repl y has stated as 
follows: 
“The compliance of Hon’ble Supreme Court orders are to be done by Govt of Tamil 
Nadu. Further, as maintained above, works related to RRR of water bodies c omes 
under purview of concerned State Govts and role of Central Government is only 
catalytic to encourage them to take up such works by providing assistance for some 
of the water bodies as per availability of funds.” 
3.29 In response to a specific query raised at the meeting of the Committee held on 18 January, 
2016, regarding the impact of actions and guidelines issued by the courts, the Special Secretary, 
MoWR, RD and GR submitted the following before the Committee: 
“Sir, if you see our presentation, most of t he States have started taking action on 
this issue based on the High Court and Supreme Court judgments.  Your question 
is very relevant that we need to do a study about its impact on the field level. That 
will take some time. But most of the States have ta ken action on the advice of the 
Committee and the court.” 
3.30 Further  explaining this issue, the Ministry, in its supplementary reply , informed the  
Committee about the  action taken by some other States which is as follows: 
“The concerned State Governments have informed following; 
i. In Telengana a ll water bodies in HMDA limits under Hyderabad Metropolitan 
jurisdiction are protected by fixing Full Tank Level (FTL) fencing, planting trees at 
FTL contour, fixing FTL stone pillars and FTL contour trench cutting .  Whenever 

46 
 
encroachments are taking place, the Civic bodies along with Police and revenue 
authorities are taking action by dismantling the structures in encroached area. 
 
ii. In Arunachal Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh there is no case of encroachment.  
 
iii. In Uttar Pradesh there is no encroachment on all 193 water bodies in under Sone 
organization and 24 water bodies in Betwa organization.” 
3.31 In reply to a query as to why the Directions/Guidelines issued by Supreme Court for 
prevention of encroachment on water bo dies have not been made applicable all over the country,    
the Ministry stated following in its written reply to supplementary list of points: 
“The directions of the Supreme Court were in particular cases relating to certain 
States like, Telengana, Gujarat  and Andhra Pradesh. The maintenance of water 
bodies being State subject, the States take up works of maintenance of water 
bodies from their own resources and priorities.” 
 
(D) Awareness campaigns to prevent encroachment on water bodies 
3.32 A query of the Committee was raised on the issue of awareness campaigns undertaken by 
the State Governments to protect the water bodies from encroachments . To this,  the Ministry, in 
their supplementary reply, stated as under: 
“The States have informed as follows: 
 
Andaman  and  Nicobar 
      3 nos of Audio shoots are being broadcast from All India radio from 02.01.2015 to 
 March, 2015 on safe and hygienic water and sanitation. 
 
Telengana 
Non Government Organizations (NGO) are actively involved in Hyderabad and 
Rangareddy Districts of Telangana State. Wherever the encroachment of water 
body is initiated the NGOs lod ge complaints to the Government, Local police and 
concerning Engineering and Revenue officials. People awareness programmes like 
Grama 46abha, Burrakatha, short  plays are performed at water bodies during 
Mission kakatiya programmes. Electronic and Print media are also being involved in 
Mission Kakatiya Programme. 
Punjab 
Not required as no encroachment has been reported. 

47 
 
Uttar Pradesh 
There is no encroachment on all 193 water bodies.” 
3.33 With regard to the measures taken by the Ministry to heighten awareness among masses 
on the importance of water bodies, their maintenance and conservation, the Ministry in its 
supplementary reply informed as follows: 
“For creating awareness among the stakeholders and general masses regarding the 
need for repair, conservation and restoration of water bodies in the country, the issue 
was thoroughly discussed during Jal-Manthan organized by MoWR, RD  and  GR in 
November 2014 and February, 2016. Members of civil society/groups/NGOs from all 
over the country participated in the events.  
The matter was discussed among stake holders during India Water Week, held in 
January, 2015 thereby giving lot of publicity at the national level about the 
Conservation and maintenance of Water Bodies. 
To highlight the multiple and huge benefits arising out of the RRR of water bodies, 
CWC is organizing meetings and seminars in collaboration with State Governments for 
sustained public campaigns at state/district level for the State Government officials and 
stake holders for the proper implementation of the scheme.” 
3.34 While informing the steps taken by the Ministry to increase awareness among people, the Special 
Secretary, MoWR, RD and GR further elaborated as under during the course of evidence held on 26 
August, 2015: 
“...action has been taken up personally by the Hon. Minister. She has been taking 
personal interest in all these activities. For example, under the Jal-Kranti Campaign, 
she has taken up two vill ages in all districts of the country where all these issues, 
which have been raised like conservation of water, restoration of water bodies, etc. 
will be talked about. So, the budgetary figure may not be much but because of her 
personal involvement the awareness and participation of people have been huge... 
under the Jal Kranti work that has recently started, we have already covered Jaipur, 
Jhansi, Shimla and the next phase is now starting. We are going to cover each of 
the Districts in each of the States. This message of water conservation, repair, 
renovation and restoration of water bodies, pollution control, recharge of 
groundwater structures will all be taken to the rural areas.” 
3.35 When queried by the Committee as to what could be the practical solutions f or removal of 
encroachments, the Ministry, in its supplementary reply, stated: 

48 
 
“As per the information provided by the State Governments, mass awareness, 
better monitoring and strict law enforcement are the practical solutions.” 
3.36 During the course of oral evidence held on 26 August, 2015, while deliberating on the issue 
of action taken at the local administration level to remove encroachment, leveling/ filling of water 
bodies for the purpose of construction, the following submission was made by the Special Secretary, 
MoWR, RD and GR: 
“Sir, I am familiar with Ahmedabad situation as  a lot of work has been done in 
Gujarat.  In Ahmedabad, now it has become part of the Town Planning. They have 
their own set up. Those water bodies are clearly identified and no perm ission is 
given …  I think that it should be a part of the Town Planning and absolutely no 
permission under any circumstance should be given for any construction on that. .. 
The States have to take it much more seriously than at present.”  
3.37 The Committee, in their 16th Report on "Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water 
Bodies" (15th Lok Sabha) had recommended “ the Government to take appropriate measures to 
heighten national awareness and to build a strong national programme for removal of 
encroachments on water bodies by local bodies, first by instituting a thorough study in the matter, 
and then enact deterrent or enhance penalty provisions effective enough to tackle such 
encroachments in consultation with the Ministry of Environment  and  Forests.” The Min istry, in 
their Action T aken Reply informed the Committee that the Scheme involves monitoring in three 
levels : - Water Users’ Association (WUA) at the Gram Panchayat Level, Cascade Association 
(CA) and WUA Federation at the Block Level. The involvement of  local /block administrative levels 
will ensure that encroachment on the water bodies are avoided. 
 
 

49 
 
CHAPTER IV 
Scheme of Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of water bodies 
4.1 In order to revive, restore and rehabilitate the traditional water bodies, t he Government of 
India launched a Scheme for Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of water bodies whic h has 
multiple objectives like c omprehensive improvement and restoration of water bodies thereby 
increasing tank storage capacity, ground water recharge, increased availability of drinking water, 
improvement in agriculture/horticulture productivity, improvement of catchment areas of tank 
commands, environmental benefits through improved water use efficiency by promotion of 
conjunctive use of surface and  ground water, community participation and self -supporting system 
for sustainable management for each water body, capacity Building of communities in better water 
management and development of tourism, cultural activities, etc. by providing Central Grant t o 
State Governments under a Pilot Scheme directly linked to agriculture during the remaining period 
of Xth Five Year Plan in January 2005. It was visualized that this programme will go in a long way in 
enhancing water availability in different parts of the  country. For preservation and protection of 
urban water bodies, the Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD) has also issued Advisory which 
has been sent to all the State Governments for protection of urban water bodies.  
4.2 Based on success of the pilot scheme,  two schemes of RRR, one with domestic support 
with an outlay of Rs. 1,250 crore and other with external assistance with an outlay of Rs. 1,500 
crore were launched during XIth Plan.  
4.3 Under the scheme with loan assistance from the World Bank, Government of India takes 
25% of the World Bank loan and passes it to the State Government as Central Assistance and 
75% of the loan is transferred to the State Government on back to back basis to meet the State 
share. Under this scheme, the States were allowed to take up the repair, renovation and 
restoration of water bodies having a minimum of 20 hectare original irrigation culturable command 
area and upto a maximum of 2000 hectare. The scheme was carried out with assistance from 
World Bank. The appraisal process was coordinated by the Department of Economic Affairs. 
4.4 A total of 10 ,887 water bodies have been taken for restoration under external assistance. 
The latest status of the scheme, as received from Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of 
Finance is enclosed in Annexure - VI. 

50 
 
4.5 Under the scheme of domestic support, Central Assistance in the form of 90% of the cost of 
the project cleared by the Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) of the State Government in case of 
Special Category States, KBK (undivided) districts of Odisha and projects located in drought prone, 
tribal and naxal affected areas and 25% of cost of the Projects benefiting other areas of Non - 
Special Category States were given. A total of 3,341 water bodies were taken up for restoration in 
12 States. A total Central grant amounting to Rs. 917.259 crore had been released to the States for 
completion of works on these water bodies up to 31 st March, 2015. Out of 3341, the works on 
2,222 water bodies have been completed and an irrigation potential of 1.133 la kh ha has been 
restored. Works on remaining 1,116 water bodies are undergoing. To give impetus to early 
completion of these water bodies, an amount of Rs 27.0 crore has been released towards schemes 
of Odisha during 2014-15. However, no requests for release of fund have been received from other 
States for completion of water bodies undertaken during XI Plan. The scheme was monitored by 
Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) and the Ministry. The details of water bodies with domestic 
support including grants released, completion, potential planned etc is enclosed at Annexure-  IV. 
 
RRR Scheme during XII PLAN 
 
4.6 The scheme for Repair, Renovation  and  Restoration of Water Bodies continued during XII 
Plan and the scheme was approved by the Union Government on 20.9 .2013. Accordingly, 
Guidelines for the implementation of the scheme were issued in October, 2013. The planned outlay 
of the scheme is Rs 10,000 crore. The scheme is envisaged to provide Central Assistance for 
restoration of about 10,000 water bodies with a n earmarked Central outlay of Rs. 6 ,235 crore and 
respective State share of Rs 3 ,765 crore for the scheme with likely restoration of 6.235 lakh 
hectare. Out of 10 ,000 water bodies, 9 ,000 water bodies in rural areas and 1 ,000 water bodies in 
urban areas would be covered.  
(a) Coverage of the Scheme  
4.7 Rural and Urban Public water bodies having minimum water spread area of 5 hectare and 
from 2.0 hectare to 10 hectare respectively with B.C. ratio of more than 1.0 will be considered for 
funding during XII Pla n. All  water bodies included in  the project will be given a Unique Code 
Number. However, it is envisaged to converge all RRR projects with Integrated Water Management 
Programme (IWMP) in such a way that the treatment of catchment of water bodies to be rest ored 

51 
 
happens pari -passu with the repair and renovation of water bodies. In this regard, only those 
proposals of water bodies where the Integrated Water Management Programme (IWMP) is 
implemented would be considered for inclusion under the scheme of RRR of water bodies. Further, 
State Government is to take necessary steps for declaring the water body boundary through a 
Government order and to ensure removal of encroachments in the water body spread area/water 
body boundary before submitting the proposal for release of 2 nd installment of grant for completion 
of work on the water body under RRR. Priority will be given to water bodies in villages covered 
under Saansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY). 
(b) Funding Pattern 
4.8 The Central Assistance is provided in the fo rm of grant which is 90% of the project cost 
only in special category states (NE states, Himachal Pradesh, J  and K, Uttrakhand and undivided 
KBK districts of Odisha) as well as projects lying in drought prone area, tribal area, desert prone 
area and naxal affected areas. In case of non -special category States/areas, the grant will be 25% 
of the project cost.  
4.9 In this regard, the Committee in their 16th Report on Repair, Renovation and Restoration of 
Water Bodies, (15 Lok Sabha)  had recommended “ the Gov ernment to take further necessary 
steps to incentivise the States by enhancing the domestic and external assistance to 50% to all the 
States to come up with proposals for implementation under the RRR Scheme of water bodies with 
domestic support and with ex ternal assistance. ” While furnishing their action taken reply, the 
Ministry stated following with regard to the implementation of this recommendation: 
"As recommended by the Standing Committee, the funding pattern has been 
modified in the proposed scheme o f RRR of water bodies for XII Plan. The 
proposed funding pattern is as below:  
 For Special Category States (North -Eastern States including Sikkim, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu  and  Kashmir, Uttarakhand and undivided 
Koraput, Bolangir and Kalahandi (KBK) distri cts of Orissa) as well as 
projects benefiting desert/drought prone/tribal/naxal -affected areas, funding 
will be 90% by the Government of India as Central Assistance and 10% by 
States Governments.   
 For Non -Special Category States, the funding pattern will be 50% by 
Government of India as Central Assistance and 50% by State Government. 
The balance cost of the project as state share 10% in case of Special 
Category States and 50% in case of Non -Special Category States is to be 
arranged by the State Governments from their own resources."  
 

52 
 
4.10 However when pointed out that funding pattern has not been changed in XII Plan, the 
Ministry in their Status report on implementation of Observations/Recommendations contained in 
16th and 19th Report (15 Lok Sabha), stated as below: 
"The Central Assistance will be in the form of grant which will be 90% of project cost in 
case of Special Category States (North -Eastern States including Sikkim, Himachal 
Pradesh, Jammu  and  Kashmir, Uttrakhand and undivided Koraput, Bolangir and 
Kalahandi (KBK districts of Orissa) as well as projects lying in desert development 
programme (DDP),drought prone area/tribal area/Naxal affected area and Central 
assistance of 25% of project cost in case of Non -Special Category States/areas. The 
balance cost of the project as State share (10% in case of Special Category States/areas 
and 75% in case of Non-Special Category States/ areas) is to be arranged by the State 
Governments themselves.  
(c ) Implementation of Scheme 
4.11 When the Committee desired  to know the shortcomings/lacunae noticed in implementation 
and achievement of desired objectives under the scheme of RRR during XI Plan and measures 
taken/proposed to be taken to improve them  while continuing the scheme in XII Plan, the Ministry 
in its Status Report on implementation of Observations/Recommendations contained in 16th and 
19th Report on Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies,  (15 Lok Sabha),  informed 
the following:  
i) As per the criteria of 5 ha in rural area, it is very diffi cult to get water body of so 
much spread in rural hilly area. This is the reason for submission of very few 
schemes from hilly and North-eastern states. 
ii) For non-special general area category, central assistance is restricted to 25% of 
the cost. This is  major hindrance which has also been highlighted during Jal -
Manthan.  
iii) Many State Governments expressed their inability to find water bodies (Rural) 
whose catchment areas have already been treated under Integrated Watershed 
Management Programme  (IWMP) and in many states, the IWMP is not being 
implemented so far.” 
4.12 Asked to furnish details of impact assessment of the RRR Scheme, implemented during XI 
Plan, the Ministry, in its reply to supplementary list of points, informed the following:  
“The Post Scheme evaluation/Impact assessment of the Pilot Scheme(X Plan) was 
carried out by independent agencies like Water Technology Centre (WTC), 
Bhubaneswar and Centre for Water Resources Development  and  Management 
(CWRDM), Kerala; Water   and  Land Management  and  Training and Research 

53 
 
Institute (WALAMTARI), Hyderabad; and National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC), 
Hyderabad. Results indicate that there is an increase in storage capacity of the 
tanks, increased utilisation in Annual irrigati on and the benefits have percolated to 
SC/ST families.” 
4.13 In the Background note furnished by the Ministry, the modus operandi for implementation of 
the RRR scheme in XII Plan has been stated: 
“The Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) of water bodies would b e prepared and 
works would be implemented by Water Users’ Association (WUA) / Local 
Panchayat / A Government agency identified by the District Level Implementing 
Agency (DLIA). The implementation plan of the project will be placed before the 
Gram Sabha and its cooperation will be solicited by timely completion of the project. 
The WUA would also earn revenues by charging for its services from its members 
and build up a corpus for maintaining and managing the water bodies over time. 
The Non -Government Organiz ations (NGOs) may also play a role in 
implementation, planning and execution of the scheme subject to State 
Government’s decision. Further, for better synergy with other irrigation works, CWC 
Field Unit has been assigned to examine/scrutinize the proposals  of water bodies 
submitted by State Governments.” 
  
4.14 The impact assessment of the Scheme of RRR during XII Plan, as per the Status R eport on 
implementation of Observations/Recommendations contained in 16th and 19th Report,                    
(15 Lok Sabha), submitted by the Ministry is stated as follows:  
“As per the Guidelines of the scheme during XII Plan, Concurrent evaluation is to be 
done by the State Government themselves by involving independent agencies 
which may incl ude IIMs and IITs. Thereafte r, evaluation and impact assessment of 
the scheme will be  done by independent agencies to be identified by the 
Ministry of Water Resources. 
The Ministry has been emphasizing on submission of concurrent evaluation reports 
by the respective State Governments. The State Government shall produce periodic 
assessment reports during the monitoring visits of CWC. For the release of 2nd  and  onwards 
installment of Central Assistance, State Governments need to enclose the concurrent 
assessment reports along with the funding proposal.” 
 
(d) Monitoring mechanism 
4.15 State Government will be responsible to plan various activities envisaged under the 
scheme, monitor their implementation along with quality of works as per the relevant BIS, provide 
guidelines to District Level Implementation and Monitoring Committee (DLI  and MC) and ensure 
coordination among all concerned departments/agencies at the State level. Monitoring  would be 
done with the association of the Co-ordination Cell of the State Government. and standing committee 

54 
 
of the Panchayat at the appropriate level which will include maint aining of  both physical and 
financial progress as well as  the outcome. The water bodies under RRR would also be monitored 
periodically on sample basis by Field Office of Central Water Commission (CWC).  
 
4.16 The Ministry, in its Status Report on implementation of Observations/Recommendations 
contained in 16th and 19th Report on `Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies’,      
(15 Lok Sabha),   by the MoWR, RD  and GR inform ed the Committee the following with regard to 
independent agency identified for evaluation of the existing methods for  water body management 
including the timeline for completing the assigned mandate as recommended by the Committee:  
"The scheme for Repair , Renovation  and  Restoration of Water Bodies for XII Plan 
was approved by the Union Government on 20.9.2013 and guidelines were issued 
in October, 2013.  Due to delay in approval of scheme, no fund could be released 
during 2012 -13  and  2013-14. Fund cou ld be released during 2014 -15 only and 
works on those water bodies have just started. No request for 2 nd installment except 
Odisha, towards water bodies included during XII Plan has been received from the 
concerned State Government. Therefore, no informati on regarding identification of 
independent agency for concurrent evaluation of the existing methods of water bodies 
management is available. Government of Odisha, while requesting for 2 nd installment 
of grant, has intimated that the process of appointing i ndependent agency for 
concurrent evaluation is underway." 
(e) Present Status of RRR Scheme  
4.17 The Empowered Committee of MoWR, RD  and  GR, constituted for approval and inclusion 
of project under Scheme of RRR of water bodies, has approved 1 342 water bodies of 9 States at 
an estimated cost of Rs. 1013.428 crore for inclusion under RRR till date. The details of these 
water bodies are at Annexure-X. A total grant amounting to Rs. 1 54.776 crore has been released 
to the states for taking up works on 947 water bodies in 6 states namely Odisha (760 water 
bodies), Meghalaya (9 water bodies), Manipur (4 water bodies) ,  Madhya Pradesh (125 water 
bodies), Rajasthan (32 water bodies) and Uttar Pradesh (8 water bodies)  under RRR during 2014 -
15 and 2015 -16. Apart from  that, an amount of Rs 105.406 crore has been released towards 
continuing schemes of XI Plan during XII Plan. Total grants released during XII Plan to State 
Governments are enclosed at Annexure- X. 
 
(f) Measures to address problem of encroachment 
4.18 Under the scheme of RRR, Government of India has laid the condition that the water body 
which requires Central Assistance (CA) for its restoration, the respective State Government needs 
to take necessary steps for declaring the water body boundary through a Government Order (G.O.) 

55 
 
and to ensure the removal of encroachment in the water body spread area/water body boundary 
before submitting the proposal for release of second installment. 
 
4.19 When asked to furnish the total number of water bodies which are i ncluded under RRR 
scheme and have been covered with boundaries so far, the Ministry, in its written submission 
stated as follows: 
"As per the information available from Government of Odisha, the State 
Government has declared that all the 760 water bodies w hich have been included 
under the scheme RRR of water bodies (XII Plan) have been made free from 
encroachment before execution . To this effect, Principal Secretary, D epartment of 
Water Resources has clearly certified vide letter No. 12813 dt. 10.06.2015  and  
letter No. 21953 dt. 05.10.2015 to MoWR, RD  and  GR . Since almost all 760 nos 
water bodies are situated in the remote area, there is no possibility for 
encroachment. However, steps are taken for fixing signboards/ boundary 
demarcation pillars on the boundary of water spread area of each project to prevent 
encroachments in future.   
In Madhya Pradesh, no case of encroachment was reported in case of water 
bodies taken under RRR. 
In Andhra Pradesh , there are no encroachments in the water bodies covered 
under RRR. There are total 342 nos of water bodies in RRR and steps were taken 
for marking the boundaries of the water bodies. 
In Telengana, no water bodies in RRR X, XI and XXI programme are encroached. 
In Sikkim there is no water body encroached upon.  
In Uttar Pradesh there are 54 water bodies in Sonebhadra district and 16 in 
Chandoli district  considered in RRR. There is no encroachment in these water 
bodies.  
Maharashtra has informed that Government of Maharashtra has received first 
instalment of funds u nder RRR scheme in the year 2011 under XIth plan, as per 
guidelines issued in the  year 2009. The condition about taking  necessary steps for 
declaring the water body boundary through a G.O. and to ensure the removal of 
encroachments  in the water body spr ead  area / water body boundary - before 
submitting the  proposal for the release of second instalment has been included in  
the     guidelines of RRR in the XII plan in     the year 2013. The Government of  
Maharashtra has not received  any funds under RRR scheme after these guidelines 
were issued. As such, the action of covering water bodies included in RRR with 
boundaries has not been carried out in the State of Maharashtra, and so it will not 
be possible to comment on the issue of whether this condition h as proved to be an 
effective deterrent in prevention of encroachment.  

56 
 
Manipur has submitted that 4(four) water bodies namely – Lamphelpat, 
Waithoupat, Irong Nallah (Upper Portion) and Irong Nallah (Lower Portion) have 
started implementation under RRR sche mes with the well defined boundaries as 
embankments around the respective water bodies taking into consideration the 
highest water level attained during the past 25 – 30 years. 
Punjab has submitted that they have not received any grant under RRR. 
Rajasthan has submitted that in XI Plan, 16 projects were taken up under RRR 
programme which have been completed. Further, 32 projects were sanctioned in XII 
Plan, the works of these projects are in progress. Most of these 48 water bodies lie 
in Tribal area  and  in remote places, therefore not facing any change of land use 
problem, thus encroachment free. Therefore, there is no need of declaring the water 
body as per guidelines of RRR. Besides, the decision of Hob’ble High court has 
already taken care of encroachme nt problem and Revenue Department, 
Govrenment of Rajasthan, vide circular No. F. 10(3) Raj -6/2001-Part-5 dated 
26.06.2012 has issued direction that allotment of any land which was in name of 
Nallah, Pond, River, Dam in 1955, is prohibited for all purposes (Agriculture  and  
Non-agriculture). 
Tripura has submitted that no projects have been taken up under the RRR of water 
bodies scheme. 1(one) D.P.R. is under preparation for RRR of Rudrasagar, a 
natural lake in the State. Necessary care would be taken accord ing to the guideline 
of G.O.I. in this respect 
Uttarakhand has submitted that in eight cases boundaries are already demarked 
where as the restoration project for one body has been sanctioned vide 
Governemnt Order No. 3859 -II-2014 (04) Date 24 -01-2014 of fi nance Department 
of Uttarakhand. Boundary shall be marked after completion of restoration works. 
Total 4 nos of water bodies have been covered with boundaries. 
Kerala  has submitted that at present there is no project under RRR. 
Karnataka has submitted that under RRR programme executed during XI five year 
Plan 371 Minor Irrigation Department and 53 ZP tanks have been improved. 
Tamilnadu has submitted that 154 RRR water bodies have been covered with 
boundaries." 
 
4.20 The Committee were informed during the deliberations, held on 18 January, 2016 on the 
issue of encroachment that the emphasis on producing an encroachment free certificate / G.O. for 
the water bodies, when States required Central Assistance/ Technical Assistance from the Central 
Government for the renovation of the water bodies, seemed to be an effective deterrent in the 
prevention of encroachment. The Ministry furnished information from following States to 
corroborate this fact: 

57 
 
"Manipur has submitted that in addition to well defined boundaries  as 
embankments around the water bodies, barbed wire fencing as compound fencing 
along the boundaries are also proposed for an effective deterrent in prevention of 
encroachments. 
Rajasthan has submitted that those water bodies which are facing pressure of 
change of land use due to population increase situated near villages/roads, this 
condition proves to be effective for prevention of encroachment. It is in those states 
where court Orders/Directions have not been issued. An effective guideline at 
Central level may be useful for all State s. The guideline may lay down definition of 
water body, catchment, submergence  and  D/S flow areas where change of land 
use pattern is not permitted.  
Uttarakhand had replied in affirmative.  
Karnataka has replied affirmatively. 
Odisha has submitted that such  condition will be an effective deterrent in 
prevention of encroachment. 
Andhra Pradesh  has informed that the condition of marking the boundaries is 
really effective in prevention of encroachment of water bodies.  
Telengana has submitted in affirmative and added that whenever encroachments 
takes place the structures coming under encroached area will be dismantled and 
penal action will be taken against them." 
4.21 When queried as to how water bodies which are not included u nder RRR are being saved 
from encroachment and pre -emptive action, if any, taken to maintain and preserve these water 
bodies, the Ministry, in their supplementary reply, stated as under: 
“Monitoring of water bodies comes under purview of State Governments.  However, 
Secretary (WR, RD  and  GR) has issued an advisory (Annexure-X) to the States 
regarding encroachment on water bodies.” 
 
4.22 With a view to ensuring prevention of encroachment on water bodies, the Committee, while 
examining the Demands for Gran ts (2016 -17) (16 Lok Sabha), of the MoWR, RD and GR had 
recommended in their 9 th report that the Ministry vigorously pursue all the concerned States / UTs 
through consultation, meetings, etc. to ensure that  advisory issued by the Secretary, MoWR, RD 
and GR on 26 February, 2016 is duly complied with and the guilty (if any) are punished in case of 
the encroachments on the water bodies”. 
(g) Release of Central Assistance under RRR to encroachment free water bodies 

58 
 
4.23 During the discussion held on 18 January , 2016, the Committee were informed by the 
representative of State Government of Odisha following , on the issue of release of Central 
Assistance under the Scheme of RRR: 
“I am Engineering Chief -cum-Special Secretary of the Department of Water 
Resources. Wh at the Hon’ble Member has said is absolutely correct. The total 
sanctioned cost for these 7 60 water bodies was Rs. 361.52 crore, out of which the 
Central’s share was Rs. 282.73 crore and the State’s share was Rs. 78.79 crore.  
As per the MoU signed with th e Government of India the whole work was to be 
completed by 31st March, 2017. The first phase share of the Central Government of 
Rs. 52.90 crore has been given. We have already submitted the UC in total, that is 
for Rs. 52.90 crore of Central’s share and Rs. 11.13 crore of State’s share. The total 
comes to Rs. 64.03 crore. We have already submitted this. The Principal Secretary 
has given the undertaking and given the submission that there is no encroachment 
of water bodies as per RRR of 760 numbers are conc erned. We have submitted the 
proposal worth Rs. 163.75 crore for the second phase, but till now nothing has 
come and because of that the completion of the project by 31 st March, 2017 is a big 
question.” 
 
4.24 Further when asked as to why the Central Govern ment has not disbursed any fund under 
RRR scheme to the State of Odisha even after furnishing of undertaking by the Principal Secretary 
of the State regarding no encroachment of 760 water bodies included under RRR scheme , the 
Ministry, in its supplementary reply stated: 
“A Central assistance  of Rs. 54.746 crore has been released in 2015 -16 for 760 
water bodies under RRR scheme. 
Undertaking submitted by the Principal secretary of Government of Odisha has 
been considered as acceptable.” 
4.25 On this issue, th e Special Secretary, MoWR, RD and GR, during his oral evidence held on 
18 January, 2016 submitted: 
“Sir, due to interest taken by this Committee good progress has been made... The 
Government has given additional funds for completing current schemes, the 23  
schemes which can be completed in the next two years , we can release total 
required funds for those schemes. So, we can now release the funds in the next two 
years. So, the focus was on that. Now that we have got additional funds, we will be 
able to release those funds to them also.” 
4.26 Water bodies play a crucial role in recharging ground water. As the country is increasingly 
relying on ground water as a major source of water resources, preserving water bodies is primary 
need of the hour not only as a s ource of surface water storage but also as a source of increasing 

59 
 
recharging capacity of ground water. Therefore ground water recharge is one of the main 
objectives of the RRR scheme. 
4.27 When a query was raised on assessment of impact of RRR scheme on in creasing 
recharging capacity of ground water, the Ministry in its supplementary reply, stated as under: 
“This would depend upon local conditions and comes under the purview of 
concerned State Governments. However, in general, water bodies help in 
recharging the ground water.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
Pollution of Water Bodies 
5.1 India has a long history of human intervention  in the management of water for agriculture, 
because of the  country’s  distinctive  climate  – intense  monsoons  followed  by  pr otracted  
droughts. The water harvesting  structures called “tanks” (earthen bunded small storage  reservoirs 
formed in the  natural  depressions of  the land), indigenously  designed  by  our ancient native 
rulers and chieftains   were created over  the  past  several  centuries  with  the  substantial storage 
capacity.  As  the tanks are formed  as  chains  akin  to cascades,  our tank  system  is  proved  to  
be  superior  because  of  the  synergized hydrologic  efficiency of  the linkage between  the  tanks.  
As  one  of  the  still  surviving,  man-made  and  large  common  property  resources of the society, 
they  constitute  a  basic  life  supporting  system  in  the most  parts  of  India.  Such  marvelous  
and widespread  life supporting  traditional tank systems are  getting deteriorated  in the  recent past  
due  to  poor maintenance and lack of interest among the users.  
 
Deteriorating condition of water bodies - Reasons 

60 
 
5.2 Relative importance of some of these Water Bodies has waned due to a nu mber of 
reasons: 
 Shifting away from community based tank system to individual beneficiary oriented 
ground water dependent system 
 Prolonged and continuous neglect of maintenance 
 Heavy silting of the tank bed,  
 Choked up feeder channels,  
 Leaking and weak bu nd, leaky sluices and dilapidated surplus weirs and ill maintained 
distribution channels  
 Encroachments in the tank bund, foreshore, water-spread and supply channels  
 Deforestation and denudation in the catchments areas leading to extinction of water 
bodies as a whole for housing and urbanization  
 Indiscriminate use of tank beds as dumping yards  
All these have also contributed to deterioration of the water bodies as a whole.  
 
Existing mechanism to monitor water quality in water bodies 
5.3 Central Pollutio n Control Board (CPCB) at the Centre and State Level Pollution Control 
Boards (SPCBs) in the States were constituted under Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) 
Act, 1974 for monitoring of aquatic resources in the country. CPCB along with SPCBs monit or 
water quality of water bodies on a regular basis and are also responsible for implementation of 
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and other Environmental Acts. CPCB along 
with SPCBs monitor water quality of lakes, tanks and ponds etc . and the data of the same is 
available on CPCB web portal which is accessible to all. The State Governments may use this data 
while formulating and implementing their schemes for conservation of the water bodies.  The details 
of lakes, tanks and ponds which have been identified as polluted are provided in Annexure –XI. 
5.4 While furnishing the information on water bodies in different States, the Ministry in its 
written submission, summed up their condition as follows: 

61 
 
"Madhya Pradesh  has stated that q uality of water in rural areas is not 
deteriorating. In urban areas the quality is deteriorating because of sewage disposal 
etc. The deterioration is proportional to the quantum of water available.  
Andhra Pradesh has stated that due to release of sewage and oth er contaminated 
water into the water bodies the quality of water has deteriorated. 
Punjab has stated that  the waste water accumulates in the existing village pond 
and most of the ponds in villages are overflowing leading to inefficient drainage of 
street d rains / channels. Flooding of streets is common site in village presenting 
unsightly and unhealthy condition. Thus disposal of waste water is major public 
health problem in rural areas of the State. Stagnant waste water smells bad and 
also acts as breeding place for mosquitoes resulting in spread of diseases.   
Tripura has informed that there is deterioration of quality of water in rivers due to 
urban drainage and in some public ponds due to continuous public use in densely 
inhabited areas.   
Kerala has submitted that Water quality deteriorated due to  
(i) Rapid Urbanisation 
(ii) Thick population near water bodies leads to pollution as their waste is 
 thrown into the water bodies 
(iii) Salinity ingression 
(iv) Disposal of solid/liquid waste (including industrial waste) into water bodies 
(v) Discharge of sewage and waste water drains into water bodies 
(vi) The pit latrines in Kerala also contribute to the decline in water quality 
 specially for the presence of ecoli. 
Andaman  and  Nicobar islands  has submitted  that water quality is being 
monitored and there is no marked decline in water quality. Few wells were 
contaminated by saline sea water due to flooding during tsunami in 2004. Few of 
these wells have been improved by regular bailing out of water.”  
5.5 Responding to  a query on the issue of pollution of water bodies, during the discussion held 
on 26 August, 2015, the Special Secretary, MoWR, RD and GR stated the following: 
“Sir, I agree that we need to do much better and improve on that.  Especially the 
areas where there are industrial clusters, the quality of water is not good. A lot of 
inorganic waste is released into the water bodies. Much work is yet to be done on 
this.” 

62 
 
5.6 Throwing light on this issue further, the representative from the MoEF  and  CC s tated 
following during the course of above evidence: 
“Sir, CPCB has conducted a study on the generation of total sewage in the country 
in 2015 and that is 62,000 million ltrs per day. As against this, the available capacity 
for treatment is only 23,000 mil lion ltrs per day which is almost one third. The basic 
responsibility for installation of sewage treatment plant and laying of sewage system 
lies with urban local bodies, but they do not have funds. There is fund constraint. 
Our Ministry, Ministry of Urban  Development and MoWR, RD and GR are giving 
funds but that is not adequate. On average, for collecting and treating one million 
ltrs sewage per day an amount of 5 to 10 crore are needed. If we add this figure to 
present gap, it is coming to a figure of 2  to 2.5 lakh crore. That is one major 
reason.” 
 
5.7 The Committee, while examining the Demands for Grants (2015 -16) had discussed the 
issue of waste treatment which was observed to be major cause of water pollution in river Ganga. 
They therefore recommended that “a comprehensive time-bound and target-oriented plan of action 
need to be framed in co -ordination with other related Ministries, viz. Drinking Water and Sanitation 
and Environment, Forests and Climate Change ”. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Notes  stated 
following in this regard: 
“The major activity envisaged to clean Ganga under the Namami Gange 
programme is development of suitable treatment infrastructure to prevent untreated 
waste water entering into the river.  Other activities proposed include low cost 
sanitation/community toilet complexes, electric/improved wood crematoria, river 
surface and ghat cleaning programme. Once implemented, these activities are 
expected to reduce the flow of untreated wastewater into the river Ganga to a large 
extent.” 
Siltation in water bodies 
5.8 The Committee have been informed that 7,153 water bodies are dried up as per 
information collected during 4 th MI census and one of the reason for drying up could be siltation. 
When a query was raised on cases of shrinkage of  water bodies due to siltation resulting in their 
complete disappearance, the Ministry in their written submission informed that such details are 
maintained by concerned States. Further specifically queried on pollution of water bodies due to 

63 
 
religious pra ctices, their gradual shrinkage and  subsequent conversion/ change of land use for 
other uses, the Ministry in its supplementary reply stated as follows: 
“Religious practices may contribute to pollution/shrinkage of water bodies to some 
extent as reported by States.”  
5.9 Further a sked as to whether the Ministry has envisaged any plan to discourage such 
activities, the Ministry, in its reply to supplementary list of points, submitted that the Subject matter 
comes under purview of State Governments. 
 
 
  

64 
 
PART – II 
Observations / recommendations 
Census of Water Bodies  
The Committee note that the total number of water bodies in India, as per India – 
Water Resources Information System (WRIS) portal is 7,98,908 including temporary water 
bodies such as in salt-pan, abandoned quarries, temporary industrial ponds, lagoons, bays , 
etc. They further note that India – WRIS has reported largest number of Water bodies in 
Chattisgarh i.e. 1,04,716 followed by West Bengal . Excluding temporary water bodies, there 
are 6,35,661 water bodies.  The Committee note that the Ministry maintains database of only 
those water bodies which are being provided Central assistance under the scheme of 
Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of water bodies,  thus con fining its monitoring 
role to only such water bodies.  The Committee have been further informed that besides 
mapping of water bodies through the satellite, at present, the information on water bodies is 
collected in Minor Irrigation (MI) census , which covers both surface and ground w ater 
structures. Till now, four MI census have been conducted in the years 1986 -87, 1993 -94, 
2000-01  and  2006-07.  The Committee are concerned to note that the t otal number of water 
bodies has declined from 5,56,601 in 3 rd MI census to 5,23,816 as report ed in 4th  (MI) 
census. They observe that  5th MI census has been initiated with reference year 2013 -14 and 
in this census, information on  all water bodies of rural areas is being collected directly by 
adding an item in village schedule.    
2. In this context, the Committee further note that as per t he information received from 
various States and Union Territories (UTs) there is an increase in total number of water 

65 
 
bodies in States as Madhya Pradesh, Telangana, Arunachal Pradesh, Rajasthan, Mizoram, 
Tripura and Odisha during the last 10 years , which is mainly due to the construction of new 
tanks, check dams , etc.  Whereas, the States such as Andhra Pradesh, Manipur and Kerala 
have registered a decrease in total number of water bodies as a result of human act ivities 
such as encroachment, unplanned urbanisation, industrialisation, heavy siltation, 
deficiency in proper management of water bodies, change in land use patterns , etc.  Also, 
some States and Union Territories (UTs) such as Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka, An daman  and  
Nicobar Islands, Tamil Nadu and Punjab have reported no change in number of water 
bodies during the same period, whereas no such study has been made in the States of West 
Bengal, Nagaland and UT of Lakshadweep.  
The Committee note with concern that the Ministry has not conducted any separate 
survey / study exclusively on water bodies revealing their condition, increase/ decrease in 
their number, their status of encroachment , etc. However, the Committee also take note of 
the fact that the Secreta ry, MoWR,RD  and GR has issued an advisory to States to collect 
information about the status of encroachment of water bodies. 
3. The Committee are distressed to note that although having a pivotal role in 
management of water resources, the Central Ministry has made no efforts to keep itself 
abreast of the ground situation with regard to state of water bodies in the country.  This is 
evident from the fact that in the past , so far the Ministry has made no efforts to compile 
information on water bodies covering  such aspects as their total number , increase / 
decrease, their status in terms of shrinkage, dried / vanished, change in land use in 
catchment areas of water bodies and encroachment, etc.  Such information is not readily 

66 
 
available in the database created by the satellite mapping.  Further the data collected 
through MI census covers only those water bodies which are in rural areas / villages and 
therefore does not offer a comprehensive picture.  For such vital information, the Ministry is 
dependent upon Sta te Governments who do not conduct periodical surveys / study 
encompassing such aspects as evident from the scattered information received from 
various States and Union Territories (UTs). The Committee are of the view that there is an 
imperative need to cre ate a Central database on water bodies.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that in order to enable an objective assessment of water bodies and their 
condition, it should be made mandatory to build a database incorporating information from 
States.  The Com mittee do not accept the plea that the Ministry is unable to maintain a 
comprehensive database on water bodies as the subject of ‘water’ comes under the purview 
of State Governments. Having noted that the State Governments have been r equested to 
provide information on status of encroachment of water bodies through an advisory issued 
by the Secretary, MoWR, RD  and GR, the Committee are of the opinion that collection of 
such information should be done on a regular basis to enable the Ministry to have its own 
repertoire of data , facilitating an objective policy ma king and the appropriate intervention 
required at different intervals. Therefore, as recommended in their 9th Report, the Committee 
reiterate the Ministry to initiate steps to complete the exercise of undertaking census of 
water bodies,  within a definite time -frame.  The Committee also desire to be apprised of the 
information collected from the States on status of encroachment of water bodies within 
three months of presentation of this Report. 
 

67 
 
Need for uniform classification of water bodies 
4. From the information supplied by various States about the present system of 
classification of water bodies , the Committee find that there is no uniformity in their 
classification / categorisation.  While States s uch as Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh 
have classified water bodies on the basis of total area covered, others, such as Arunachal 
Pradesh, Punjab, Tripura and Kerala , etc. have classified them according to the type of 
water bodies viz. lakes, ponds , etc. Further Uttar Pradesh and Manipur has classified them  
on the basis of their location in rural, urban and hill areas while some of the North eastern 
States such as Sikkim, Nagaland, Mizoram and Meghalaya have no system of classifying 
water bodies. The Com mittee find that a lthough the N ational Remote Sensing Centre has 
classified the water bodies, it is not clear as to whether the Ministry has adopted the same.  
The Committee, are therefore, of the considered opinion that the Ministry should devise its 
own classification system, uniformly applicable to all the water bodies in the country, 
thereby ensuring better administration and monitoring of upkeep of water bodies in all the 
States.  The y, therefore, recommend the Ministry to look into this aspect also while 
preparing a comprehensive database and apprise them accordingly. 
Measures for restoring perishing water bodies 
5. The Committee also note with concern that as per 4 th MI census, out of 5,23,816 
water bodies, 80,128 water bodies were not in use and 18,485 water bodies were never used, 
as a result of which 1.95 million hectare of irrigation potential w as lost.  They observe that 
to revive and restore these water bodies, a scheme of Repair, Renovation and Restoration 
(RRR) of water bodies was launched in X th Plan as a pilot scheme which was later launched 

68 
 
as a full-fledged scheme in XI Plan and has been extended in XII Plan as well.  They further 
note that Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change (MoEF  and CC) has been 
running a scheme of Nationa l Wetland Conservation Programme (NWCP) since 1987 for 
conservation of identified wetlands.  For conservation / restoration of polluted and 
degraded lakes in the urban and semi urban areas, the MoEF  and CC has been providing 
assistance to States under the National Lake Conservation Programme (NLCP).  They also 
note that State Government of Telangana has launched ‘Mission Kakatiya’ in the               
year 2014-15 for restoration of 46,531 water bodies which will restore irrigation potential of 
9.87 lakh he ctares.  Besides , the Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) has renovated a 
large number of water bodies under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment 
Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS).  Also, the Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD) has 
launched a scheme called “Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation 
(AMRUT)” in June, 2015 under which rejuvenation of water bodies is being taken up as one 
of the objectives for augmenting drinking water supply and recharge of ground water and 
so far Central Assi stance of Rs. 1,818.34 crore has been released to the States under this 
scheme. 
While commending all the measures initiated by various Ministries viz. MoWR, RD  
and GR, MoEF and CC, MoRD  and  MoUD aimed at reviving and conserving water bodies 
and lakes in both the rural and urban areas, the Committee find that the number of schemes 
run by different Ministries happen to be too many. They are, therefore, of the opinion that in 
the absence of any cohesive and effective policy measures to prevent encroachments,  such 
schemes individually will have a minimal effect for the desired purpose .  Therefore, a well 

69 
 
coordinated approach is the need of the hour while formulating policies to prevent 
encroachment and rejuvenate water bodies.  Instead of multiple schemes, the re should be 
one scheme with inter-ministerial and inter-departmental coordination to make it a success.  
The Committee would, therefore, recommend the Ministry to study the feasibility of merging 
such schemes and evolve a single comprehensive scheme and apprise them of the findings 
thereabout . They would also like to be apprised of the outcome of ongoing schemes in 
terms of total number of water bodies revived and their benefits in terms of total area of lost 
irrigation potential realised, ground water re charging capacity achieved thereby and 
prevention of encroachment,  etc. during the last five years, year-wise. 
Extent of Encroachment on Water Bodies 
6. The Committee observe that at present the subject of encroachment on water bodies 
and removal thereof comes under the jurisdiction of State Government. The State and local 
administration regulate the development activities along the water bodies through the ir 
master plans for flood plains.  They further note that in order to discourage encroachment 
of water bodies covered under RRR  scheme, the Ministry has put the condition that C entral 
assistance, under the scheme of RRR  will be  released, only after the State Government 
declares their boundary, thereby removing possibility of encroachment.  However  the 
Committee are unhappy to note the grim situation with regard to maintenance and upkeep 
of water bodies which incidentally, also happen to be the major sources of water supply for 
various uses . They find that the State s of Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Tel angana, 
Nagaland, Manipur, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tripura, Assam, Kerala, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu 
have candidly accepted that water bodies in these States have been encroached mainly for 

70 
 
construction activities, agricultural purposes, slum habitations and com mercial activities. 
The Committee are further deeply concerned to note the pathetic state of water bodies in 
National Capital Territory of Delhi , where as many as 2015 water bodies have been fully 
encroached upon and 89 water bodies have been converted int o parks. Further out of 971 
existing water bodies, 346 have dried up. The Committee are of the considered view that 
lack of enforcement of existing laws and poor maintenance of land records in both the rural 
and urban areas  have resulted in rampant encroac hment and thereby violating the sanctity 
of the land records, a fact admitted by the Special Secretary of the Ministry.   
Further t he Committee observe with concern that while the State Government of 
Uttar Pradesh has informed that there has been no encroa chment on its water bodies falling 
under the department of irrigation, during the last 10 years, the records in the Ministry of 
Urban Development shows that as many as 99 urban water bodies have been encroached in 
this State, followed by 44 in Tamil Nadu, 26 in Haryana, 10 -12 in Assam and 7 in 
Uttarakhand.  Also the information on the status of encroachment of water bodies under the 
purview of Revenue Department of the State Government of Uttar Pradesh ha s not yet been 
furnished to the Committee.  Noting that the MoUD has issued an advisory for including 
water bodies as “municipal assets” in land records , the Committee express their 
displeasure over the fact that no State has maintained such record declaring water bodies 
as municipal assets. They, therefore, desire that the MoWR, RD  and  GR in conjunction with 
MoUD vigorously pursue the State Governments to include water bodies in land records so 
that they are immediately able to take action against the encroachers and thereby get such 
water bodies free from the encroachment.  Besides, monitoring by local bodies should be 

71 
 
strengthened to check encroachment on water bodies and consequent change in land use . 
Local bodies should maintain strict vigil on any change in land use in violation of land 
records in both the rural and urban areas.  They also desire to be apprised of the status of 
encroachment on all water bodies in Uttar Pradesh along with action taken against such 
encroachers. 
Impact of encroachment on Water Bodies 
7. The Committee observe that encroachme nt on water bodies has been a major cause 
of recent floods witnessed in many parts of the country viz. flash floods of Mumbai in 2005, 
severe flood in Uttarakhand in 2013, intense flood situation in Jammu and Kashmir in 2014 
and severe flood in Chennai in 2015.  They further note that besides natural factors,  human 
induced causes like unscientific development and land use pattern especially human 
activities in flood plain zones and estuarine areas of river, encroachment of natural 
drainage  channels and wa ter bodies, socio -economic conditions, deforestation,   
increasing human and cattle population pressure  are other contributing factors in creation 
of natural calamities  such as flood .  The Committee find that l ack of seriousness and 
complacency on the part of the Government cannot be more conspicuous than the fact that 
even after circulation of flood pla in zoning bill in 1975 to States with a view to prevent 
encroachment of river bed, State Governments have failed to enact laws on flood plain 
zoning - which could have played a key role in tackling the problem of encroachment. So 
far, only the States of Manipur, Uttarakhand, Rajasthan and Maharashtra, have passed law 
on flood plain zones and rive r regulation zones The Committee, therefore, desire that State 
Governments should be sensitised to hasten the legislation in order to put a check on 

72 
 
human activities on the catchment areas and natural drainage channel of water bodies, 
flood plain zones and estuarine areas of river. 
Action against  encroachers 
8. The Committee observe that few States have come forward informing their existing 
mechanism to prevent encroachments . While  States such as Assam and Manipur have 
enacted law s enabling action against encroachers / encroachment on water bodies, other 
States viz. Ma dhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Telangana have furnished information on 
administrative machinery vested with powers to take action in case of encroachments.  
However, the Committee express displeasure over the fact that the Central Government has 
shrugged off any responsibility in the matter by stating that urban development, storm 
water drainage and land use master planning , etc. are State subjects.  Also Central 
Government / Ministry has no role to play in matters of maintenance and upkeep of water 
bodies including tackling of encroachments which come under the purview of Urban Local 
Boards, Land revenue and Water Resources / I rrigation Departments under the State 
Governments.  The Committee, however, deprecate such approach on the part of the 
Ministry which a mounts to passing on the responsibility and being a mere spectator of the 
problem which pose serious challenges to the policy making and management of water 
resources.  They are of the view that even though the matter is under direct administrative 
control of State and local Government, the Central Government can play a guiding and 
supportive role.  Taking cognisance of the directions of courts  with regard to measures to 
be taken for prevention of encroachment on water bodies , the Ministry should formulate a 
model directive / guideline impressing upon States to execute the same.  The y would like to 

73 
 
be apprised of such measure, if any, being taken / to be taken by the Government.  Also, the 
Committee would like to be apprised of the information collected by t he Ministry on various 
aspects of encroachments, following advisory issued to the States.  
Monitoring mechanism for prevention and removal of encroachments from water bodies 
9. The Committee note that under the RRR scheme, monitoring mechanism has been 
instituted in the local bodies at three levels viz. Water User Association (WUA) at the Gram 
Panchayat Level, Cascade Association (CA) and WUA Federation at the Block level.  The 
monitoring of water bodies by local bodies has been effective and successful in preventing 
encroachments in many States and UTs such as Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Gujarat, 
Manipur, Rajasthan, Tripura, Odisha, Andaman  and  Nicobar islands and Tamil Nadu.  The 
Committee further note that Manipur and Andaman  and  Nicobar islands have i ncluded 
NGOs, prominent social worker s and user agency in monitoring mechanism while Odisha 
has a provision for fine and penalty for encroachers.  However, the Committee note with 
concern the fact that local bodies have not succeeded in preventing encroach ments in 
Madhya Pradesh due to policy of appeasement  and lack of determination to remove 
encroachment, as admitted by the State of Madhya Pradesh in their written submission .  
The Committee apprehend that this factor may have indirectly influenced action a gainst 
encroachers elsewhere as well.  While the role of local bodies in monitoring at local level 
cannot be denied, the Committee are of the view that involvement of user communities and 
fixing of responsibility can make it more effective and better serve  the purpose.  Community 
participation / involvement of user communities can ensure better vigilance and negate the 
possibility of connivance with encroachers. The Committee also feel that  there is a need to 

74 
 
maintain proper coordination between police and the elected representatives like village 
Sarpanch or Pradhan and Nagar Palika Chairman.  They, therefore, recommend to refurbish 
the existing monitoring mechanism by including user communities, fixing responsibility of 
concerned officials and penal provisio ns against encroachers  along with proper 
coordination in activities of various agencies of the Government .  The Committee feel that 
although, water may be a State subject, encroachment of water bodies has a definite impact 
on the environment and reduces th e capacity of accumulation of water which is very 
precious to the country as a whole. Therefore , the Committee strongly recommend the 
Ministry to issue appropriate guidelines in this regard. 
Judicial directions / guidelines on the issue of encroachment and  their implementation in 
different States 
10. As per the information received from various States , the Committee note that the 
Courts have given directions for the prevention of encroachment to several States viz. 
Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Gujarat, Mahara shtra, Manipur, Rajasthan, Tripura, Kerala, 
Karnataka and Tamil Nadu.  The Committee note that in case of Andhra Prades h, t he 
Supreme Court has observed that “material resources of the Community like forests, tanks, 
ponds, hillock, mountain , etc. are natur e’s bounty.  They maintain delicate ecological 
balance.  They need to be protected for healthy environments to enable enjoyment  of 
quality life , which is  the essence of the guaranteed right under Article 21 of the 
Constitution.”  Expressing their full agreement to th e views of the Supreme Court , the 
Committee emphasise adoption of effective policy measures and urgent action to protect 
and preserve water bodies.  

75 
 
With regard to compliance of the directions, t hey find that except Tamil Nadu, all 
other States have taken action and are at different stages of compliance. Further the Special 
Secretary, MoWR, RD and GR has accepted the need for having a study on the impact of 
these directions. The Committee, therefore, desire that as agreed by the Special Secretary  
on the need to have a study on the impact of such direction in reducing encroachments , 
saving and protecting water bodies , the Ministry should initiate such study without further 
delay to enable assessment of the impact of judicial intervention and effect iveness of 
measures suggested on protecting water bodies and apprise them of the findings thereof at 
the earliest. 
Awareness campaigns to prevent encroachment on water bodies 
11. The Committee observe that several initiatives have been taken by the State 
Governments to increase awareness among people about the need for conserving water 
bodies.  As submitted by some of the States and UTs, the Committee notice that awareness 
campaigns and public sensitisation are being carried o ut by involving NGOs, audio 
broadcasts, etc.  The MoWR,RD and GR has organised ‘Jal Manthan’ and ‘India Water Week’ 
to spread awareness about conservation and maintenance of water bodies.  Recently, a 
campaign called ‘Jal Kranti’ has been launched where two villages in all districts of the 
country have been selected to increase awareness on the issue.    While taking note of the 
measures taken so far to increase awareness among people, the Committee are of the view 
that the intensity of the awareness campaigns need s to be increased with much bigger 
exposure in media, both electronic , print  and others. Beside the need for saving water, a 
precious natural resource should also be somehow made a part of  school curriculum and 

76 
 
university education. The Committee are also of the view that the M inistry should involve 
local representatives such as Members of Parliament and State legislatures to spread the 
message and educate people in their constituency, on the need for protection an d 
conservation of water bodies.  The Committee would further like to be apprised of the funds 
allocated and spent on the awareness campaigns during the last three years. 
Inclusion of water bodies as a part of Town Planning 
12. The Committee have been informed that in Ahmedabad, protection of water bodies 
has been achieve d through their inclusion in town planning.  The Committee feel that this 
provision can be very effective and can be emulated by other States as well with strict penal 
provisions against violators. Accordingly, the Committee recommend that ‘maintenance of 
water bodies ’ should be included as integral part of the town planning process. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should take up this matter with the Ministry of 
Urban Development and the State Governments.  
Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies scheme – Implementation issues 
13. The Committee observe that the scheme of RRR , which  was launched as a pilot 
scheme in X Plan and introduced as a full scale scheme in XI Plan, has been continued 
during XII Plan . This scheme aim s to increase availability of water  by restoring and 
rejuvenating decaying water bodies.  They notice that during XII Plan, 10,000 water bodies 
(9000 in rural and 1000 in urban areas ) have been planned to be revived and restored with 
Central assistance of Rs. 6,235 crore and respective State share of Rs. 3 ,765 crore creating 
an additional irrigation potential of 6.235 lakh hectares.  Further water bodies in villages 
which are covered under Sansad Adarsh Gram Yojana (SAGY) are being given priority for 

77 
 
coverage under the scheme. They also notice that so far 1,342 water bodies of 9 States at an 
estimated cost of Rs. 1013.428 crore has been approved for inclusion under RRR. Further 
under this scheme, Special category States {North Eastern States including Sikki m, 
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Uttarakhand and undivided Koraput, Bolangir and 
Kalahandi (KBK) districts of Odisha } are being provided Central Assistance of 90% of the 
total cost of work with balance 10% being borne by State Governments and for Non-special 
category States, the Central assistance of 50% is provided , with States shar ing balance  
50%. In this regard, t he Committee, in their 16 th Report on  “Repair, Renovation and 
Restoration ( RRR) of water bodies ” presented on 27.11.2012 , during 15 th Lok Sabha , had 
recommended to increase the Central share from 50% to 75% in case of No n Special 
category States also, to incentivise them to submit proposals for including more water 
bodies under the scheme, which was accepted by the Government, as submitted in the 
action taken notes.  However, the Committee express their astonishment over the fact that 
the same has not  yet been implemented in XII Plan despite this issue being a prominent 
factor for inability of Stat es to undertake works under the scheme.  Th ey are also 
constrained to note that despite being aware of the major shortcomings in the 
implementation of RRR scheme in X I Plan, such as water bodies having water spread area 
of less than 5 hectares being ineligible rendering the scheme rarely implemente d in hilly 
areas and North Eastern States and inability of the States to find water bodies in the rural 
areas whose catchment area s have already been treated  under Integrated Watershed 
Management Programme (IWMP), no effort s/measures have been made to addr ess these 
issues while launching the scheme in XII Plan.  The Committee apprehend that with these 
issues/ difficulties, still persistent,  the completion of work on 10,000 water bodies within XII 

78 
 
Plan period may pro ve to be an uphill task.  The Committee w ould, therefore, like to know 
the status of the works / projects undertaken so far and measures taken to complete the 
work within the stipulated time period i.e. by end of XII Plan. They would also like to be 
apprised of the measures taken, if any or propo sed to be taken by the Government to 
resolve these issues/problems/difficulties  regarding the implementation of the RRR 
scheme. 
Impact assessment of RRR scheme implemented during XI and XII Plan  
14. The Committee notice that the Ministry has not furnished  any information regarding 
impact assessment of the RRR scheme implemented during XI Plan , with replies submitted 
by the Ministry - giving details of the outcome of Pilot scheme of RRR, launched during X 
Plan period .  They further observe that f or the impl ementation of the scheme during XII 
Plan, it has been envisaged that the State Governments will evaluate the scheme by 
involving independent agencies including IIMs and IITs.  The Central Government will 
thereafter evaluate and assess the impact through in dependent agencies to be identified by 
the Ministry.  However they note with concern that s o far, no State Government except 
Odisha has started the process of appointing  an independent agency for concurrent 
evaluation of the scheme in XII Plan .  The Commit tee are distressed to note that proper 
evaluation of the outcome of RRR scheme implemented during XI Plan is not yet quantified 
in terms of important parameters like increase in storage capacity, recharge capacity, 
additional irrigation potential created a nd increase in drinking water supply , etc. While 
expressing their anguish over the indifferent attitude shown by respective Governments in 
the matter, the Committee recommend that independent agencies to be identified both by 

79 
 
the Centre and State Governmen ts for the purpose, should be selected and assigned the 
task without any further delay to enable an objective analysis of the performance of the 
scheme and evaluate proper utilisation of the funds spent so far.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommend the Gove rnment to apprise them about the measures taken for impact 
assessment of the scheme implemented during XII Plan, including independent agencies 
identified, if any, their role, function and stipulated time period for submission of Evaluation 
Report, etc .  T he Committee would, however, like to be apprised of the outcome of the 
evaluation of the scheme (encompassing all the aspects, stated before) implemented during 
XI Plan within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
Effectiveness of measures taken under RRR scheme to address problem of encroachment 
15. The Committee note that a condition , that the State Government has to declare 
boundary of the water body through Government order , has been imposed on release of 
second instal lment of funds under RRR  for completion of work on the water body.  They 
notice that pursuant to this condition, the State Government of Odisha has declared 
boundary of 760 water bodies, the State Government of Andhra Pradesh has begun the 
process of demarcating boundary of 342 w ater bodies, Manipur has defined boundaries in 
respect of 4 water bodies, Uttarakhand has declared boundaries for 8 water bodies and 
Tamil Nadu has defined boundary for 154 water bodies, covered under RRR.  The 
Committee further note that this condition ha s proved to be an effective deterrent in 
prevention of encroachment as stated by State Government s of Manipur, Rajasthan, 
Uttarakhand, Karnataka, Odisha, Andhra Pradesh and Telangana.  While appreciating the 
measure taken by the Central Ministry to keep wa ter bodies covered under RRR, 

80 
 
encroachment free, which has also proved effective, the Committee desire that the Ministry 
should not limit its role to such water bodies only.  Alth ough primary responsibility to 
protect water bodies lies with the State Gover nments, the Committee, desire that the 
Ministry should play a more active role and impress upon State Governments by stressing 
the need for involving the user communities, provision for strict action against encroachers 
and fixing the responsibility of con cerned officials, etc. in the form of a guideline  for better 
monitoring of  all the water bodies of States and Union Territories. 
 
Creation of new water bodies under the Scheme of RRR 
16. The Committee observe that of late, the State Governments have taken some 
initiatives in creating new water bodies under programmes such as Mahatma Gandhi 
National Rural Employment Guaranttee Act (MGNREGA). There has also been an increase in 
total number of water bodies in States of Madhya Pradesh, Telangana, Arunachal Prad esh, 
Rajasthan, Mizoram, Tripura and Odisha during the last 10 years mainly due to construction 
of new tanks, check dams , etc. The Committee feel that creation of new water bodies is a 
welcome move and can be integrated into the ambit of existing scheme of  RRR, which 
would also make good of the loss of the water bodies as a result of encroachment, 
especially in the urban areas. They, therefore, recommend the Ministry to revi ew the 
scheme by incorporating this aspect and accordingly change the nomenclature o f the 
Scheme from “Repair, Renovation and Restoration of water bodies” to “Repair, Renovation, 
Restoration and Creation of water bodies”. They desire that the Ministry should take urgent 
steps in this direction with thrust o n creating new water bodies in the urban areas where 

81 
 
problem of encroachment has assumed enormous proportion.  In this regard t hey further 
recommend issuing appropriate guidelines/revise the existing guidelines under intimation 
to the Committee.  
Release of funds under RRR Scheme  
17. The Committee notice that the Central Government has not released its share of 
funds for the second instal lment to the State Government of Odisha, due to which work on 
water bodies has suffered in the State which in turn, has rendered completion of work by 
scheduled date of 31 March, 2017 difficult.  They were informed by the Special Secretary 
during evidence that reason for non release of funds is non - allocation of sufficient funds 
for the purpose.  The Committee express displeasure over the fact that the M inistry has 
failed to anticipate the demands for funds from different States under the RRR scheme, 
resulting in delay in disbursement of funds.   They therefore, strongly recommend that 
necessary steps be taken to not only ensure sufficient allocation of fu nds/grant but also 
their timely disbursal so that the projects under the scheme of RRR do not suffer.  The 
Committee feel that  there may be many other States, which are languishing for funds. They, 
therefore, recommend the Ministry to provide information on total number of encroachment 
free water bodies, State-wise, which have submitted their request for release of funds in the 
second phase indicating the amount and the action taken by the Ministry from time t o time 
to release the funds for the period ending 30 June, 2016.  
Pollution of water bodies 
18. The Committee are distressed to note that water quality in water bodies , which were 
traditionally playing a major role as an alternative source for catering to domestic and 

82 
 
agricultural needs, has been deteriorating.  The condition of water bodies has degraded due 
to their negligence and poor maintenance.  From the information submitted by Central 
Pollution Control Board (CPCB), the Committee observe that as many as 132 lakes , tanks 
and ponds have been identi fied with very poor water quality scattered over the States of  
Andhra Pradesh , Gujarat, Odisha, Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh , 
Chattisgarh, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Assam, Rajasthan, Goa, Kerala, Bihar, Tripura  and 
Jammu  and  Kashmir.  Further, the main reason for water pollution in water bodies is stated 
to be sewage and waste water disposal into water bodies, as a result of increased human 
habitations around the water bodies.  The Committee find that the condition of villages in 
Punjab is particularly pathetic as most of the ponds there are overflowing with 
accumulation of waste water, leading to flooding of street drains / channels, which 
ultimately creates health hazard s.  Similar problems have been encountered in States of 
Madhya Prad esh, Andhra Pradesh, Tripura and Kerala in the urban areas.  They find that 
this fact has been admitted by the Special Secretary, MoWR, RD  and GR, who emphasised 
that much work is yet to be done to improve water quality.  The Committee are concerned to 
note that at present, the treatment capacity of Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs) is on ly 
23,000 million ltrs. per day as against 62,000 million ltrs. sewage being generated per day in 
the country.  Thus, there is a requirement of additional Rs. 2 to 2.5 lakh cr ore to fill this gap 
as informed by the representative of the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate 
Change.  Therefore, urgent steps are needed to be taken in this direction.  However the 
Committee are of the view that besides creating additional tr eatment capacity there is a 
need to minimise waste generation by adopting eco -friendly methods of waste disposal, 
development of sewage infrastructure in rural areas, adoption of alternative waste disposal 

83 
 
techniques and appropriate tariffs on uses of wate r for different purposes.  The Committee, 
therefore, desire to be apprised of the  measures taken in this regard along with  year-wise 
details of projects undertaken, funds allocated and spent, targets fixed and achieved in 
respect of sewage treatment during the last three years, year-wise. 
Siltation problem in water bodies 
19. The Committee note with serious concern that a large number of water bodies (7,153 
as per 4 th MI Census) have dried up.  However, the causes for such drying have not been 
assessed by t he Ministry,  as the subject of ‘water’ comes under the domain of State 
Governments.  Since this is a very important aspect of information on the condition of water 
bodies in the country, the Committee believe that such information need to be collected and 
form part of the database on water bodies.  The Committee further recommend the Ministry 
to furnish a detailed report on this issue  covering such aspects as total no. of 
dried/vanished water bodies, causes, remedial action taken , etc. by each of the State  
Governments and Union Territories- within three months of presentation of this Report. 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                      HUKUM SINGH 
 26 July, 2016                                                    Chairperson, 
4 Shravana,1938(Saka)                                      Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 

\
Annexure -I
State-Wise Statistics of Water bodies as per India-WRISProject
51.No. State Name Water bodies (no.)
1 Andhra Pradesh* 35472
2 Arunanchal Pradesh 1212
3 Assam 14204
4 Bihar 59600
5 Chhattisgarh 104716
6 Chandigarh 1
7 Daman & Diu 21
8 Delhi 52
9 Dadara& Nagar Havelli 3
10 ·Goa 418
11 Gujarat 15261
12 Himachal Pradesh 206
13 Haryana 5523
14 Jharkhand 38739
15 Jammu & Kashmir 843
16 Karnataka 53694
17 Kerala 11876
18 Lakshadweep
19 Meghalaya 25
20 Manipur 1591
21 Madhya Pradesh 65811
22 Maharashtra 39682
23 Mizoram 494
24 Nagaland 463
25 Odisha 90865
26 Punjab 5770
27 Puducherry 11
28 Rajasthan 43841
29 Sikkim 255
30 Tamil Nadu 73082
31 Telangana* 16070
32 Tripura 131
33 Uttarakhand 802
34 Uttar Pradesh 15680
35 West Bengal 102490
36 Andaman & Nicobar Island 4
Total 798908
Size Range of Water Bodies:0.0102-67536.19 ha. Figures of AP and Telengana are
based on tentative boundary.
I\


StatelUT -wlseinformation on water bodies (Source:.lndi~RIS)
','
,
LakesIPonds,Reservoirs, Tanks and Aquaculture"
Water spreadareafha) wisedistrfbutionS.No. StateName ,
:::1 1 -to to-50 '.'50 -toO > 100 -.Total
1 Andhra Pradesh 8354 21106 4664 676 446 35246
2 Arunachal Pradesh 335 688 175 7 1 1206
3 Assam 10710 2261 267 31 27 13296
4 Bihar 16194 3299 179 29 25 19726
5 Chhattisgarh 74995 27271 1116 94 78 103554
6 Goa 126 85 35 17 28 291.
7 Gujarat 508 11719 2263 270338 15098
8 Himachal Pradesh 146 45 4 3 4 202
9 Haryana 32032287 32 1 0 5523
10 Jharkhand 13763 2628 95 13 31 '16530'
11 Jammu and Kashmir 329 376 103 10 21I
"839
12 Karnataka 3030915900 4361 678 431 51'679,
13 Kerala 9808 894 158 27 79 1:0966
14 Meghalaya 0 17 4 1 3 25"
15 Manipur 1295 213 29 3 7 1547
16 Madhya Pradesh 41472 209961915 234 20064817
17 Maharashtra 17672 17076 3115 471 455:38'189
18 Mizoram 358 127 2 0 0 4-87
19 Nagaland 349 51 1 0 1 402
20 Odisha 75112- 14863 502 62 84 ,90623
21 Punjab 3906 1829 20 7 ,
6 5768
22 Rajasthan - 16111 24161 2972 354 233 43831
23 Sikkim 61 134 50 7 3 255
24 Tamil Nadu 35267 20598 11886 1910 827 70488,
25 Telanqaria 1336 10564 3551 323 169 15943
26 Tripura 15 97 16 0 2 130
27 Uttarakhand 656 121 13 2 10 802
28 Uttar Pradesh 430110059 1061 132 127 15680
29 West Bengal 10097 1577 111 19 24 11828
30 Andaman and Nicobar Islands 0 0 2 1 0 "
3,
31 Chandigarh 0 0 0 0 1 '1.
32 Dadra and Nagar Haveli 0 2 0 0 1 3
33 Daman and Diu 1 18 2 a a 21
34 Lakshadweep a a a 0 0 0
35 Delhi -National Capital Territory 25 26 1 a 0 52
36 Puducherry 0 2 5 1 2 10
Total 3768142t1090'38710 5383 3664 635661
Source: Waterbodies have been mapped using LiSSIV-Cartosat Imerged satellitedata (2,5m Resolution)
during the period 2008-2012 under India-WRIS project This database is hosted on India-WRISportal
(http://www.india-wris.nrsc.gov.in/wris.html).


41H Minor Irrigation Census (2006-07)
State wise listof Water Bodies
(Surface Flow Schemes -Reservoirs, Tanks, Other Storages)
(Surface LiftSchemes -lifton Tanks/Ponds)
Annexure m::=-
NUMBER OF WATER BODIES
Water bodies Water bodies Total WaterS.No State Name (with Not-inuse (with In-Use bodiesMIschemes) MIschemes)
1 ANDHRA PRADESH 22877 49123 72000
2 ARUNACHALPRAD~SH 16 68 84
3 ASSAM 129 885 1014
4 BIHAR 966 4243 5209
5 CHHATTISGARH 6955 40864 47819
6 GOA 29 711 740
7 GUJARAT 1927 6341 8268
8 HARYANA 0 261 261
9 HIMACHAL PRADESH 33 812 845
10 JAMMU & KASHMIR 168 4720 4888
11 JHARKHAND 5316 38128 43444
12 KARNATAKA 14918 14563 29481
13 KERALA 167 8218 8385
14 MADHYA PRADESH 1493 54654 56147
15 MAHARASHTRA 517 88214 88731
16 MANIPUR 0 9 9,
17 MEGHALAYA 59 98 157
18 MIZORAM 12 479 491
19 NAGALAND 60 106 166
20 ODISHA 5567 34339 39906
21 PUNJAB 0 205 205
22 RAJASTHAN 1573 2399 3972
23 SIKKIM 0 0 0
24 TAMILNADU 11039 26135 37174
25 TRIPURA 19 515 534
26 UTIAR PRADESH 488 6391 6879
27 UTTARAKHAN D 2479 6145 8624
28 WEST BENGAL 3292 53672 56964
29 ANDAMAN & NICOBARS 29 1347 1376
30 CHANDIGARH 0 0 0
31 DADRA & NAGAR HAVELJ 0 31 31
32 DAMAN & DIU - - -
33 DELHI 0 10 10
I


34 LAKSHADWt.t.P - - -
35 PUDUCHERRY 0 2 2
Total: 80128 443588 523816
Note 1:- Water bodiescover allnatural or artificial unitswith some or no masonry work
used for storingwater for minor irrigation. These are usually of various types
known by differentnames like tank, reservoir, pond.
Note 2:-
Note 3:-
InMICensus information is collectedfor villages/ rural areas only.
The above data pertains to onlythoseWater Bodieswhere some minor irrigation
scheme(s) (eitherin-use or not-in-use)is/are install/edor thosewater bodies
which function as surface flowschemes.
Note 4:- 4th Minor IrrigationCensus notconducted inLakshadweep and
Daman & Diu


Annexure-m 1Y.
Details ofwaterbodiestakenupforrevival,fundreleasedandnumberofwaterbodies
completedundertheschemeofRRR duringXIPlan
(Rs.Incrore)
Name ofState No.of Total CCA (ha) Committed Fund Fund Fund Fund Fund Fund Total Funds No. of water
Water Project Central released released released released released released funds utilized bodiesBodies cost Share during during during during during during released completed2009·10 2010·11 2011·12 2012·13 2013·14 2014·15
Orissa 1321 254.33 64979 228.89 72.12 75 70.33 27.00 244.45 241.611 1128
Karnataka 427 232.77 8182.19 209.49 74.04 47.47 77.51 199.02 221.133 424
AndhraPradesh 1029 339.69 36673.71 305.72 189 189 72.800
577
Bihar 15 64.45 15718 55.3 25 27.54 52.54 58.378 14
U.P.(Budelkhand) 28 46.15 29697 41.53 29.08 10.3790 39.459 43.843
28
M.P.(Bundelkhand) 78 41.89 25254 10.47 7.33 2.62 9.95 11.056
72
Meghalaya
Umiam Lake(cost
relatedtoirrigation
1 2.83 405 2.54 1.78 0.64 2.42 2.689only)
1
Maharashtra 258 135.08 89951 119.34 80.53 80.53 56.589
105
Gujarat 34 17.47 6574 15.72 10.61 10.61 11.789 23
Chattisgarh 131 122.91 24936 110.61 34.68 37.97 72.65 77.38 111
Rajsthan 16 11.35 1351.97 7.45 7.07 7.07 12.1526 15
Haryana 3 40.24 5749 10.06 7.04 2.52 9.56 10.622 3
Total 3341 1309.16 309470.87 1117.12 146.16 374.66 291.03 I40.439 I37.97 27.00 917.259 820.043 2501


DetailsofOngoingwaterbodiesofXIIPlanundertheschemeofRepair,Renovation& Restoration(RRR)ofWater
Bodies
Committed Fund Released Committed Number ofNo. of Total project Potential to
Central No. of water Potential Fund
S.No. Name of State cost (Rs in be restored centre share to waterwater
Share Total funds bodies in restored Utilised
bodies crore) (th hal Till2013 be released bodies
(Rs in crore) 2014-15 2015-16 released (Rs in Cr) progress (hal (Rs in Crl14 (Rs.in crore)
completed
1 Odisha 760 361.520 46.110 282.73 0 52.900 54.746 107.646 175.084 38 722 7606.0 52.900
Meghalaya 9 11.430 1.096 10.29 0 0 9
2 2.520 0.000 2.520 7.770
3 Madhya Pradesh* 134 183.240 33.305 93.01 0 37.700 0.000 37.700 55.310 0 125
I 4 Uttar Pradesh 8 37.080 1.096 29.54 0 0.000 15.361 15.361 14.179 0 8
5 Manipur 4 65.442 1.047 58.9 0 10.370 0.000 10.370 48.530 0 4
6 Uttrakhand 5 12.490 0.386 11.24 0 0.000 0.000 0.000 11:240 0 0
7 Rajasthan 32 89.688 7.731 80.72 0 0.000 35.925 35.925 44.795 0 32
I
8 Tamilnadu 56 27.304 1.513 16.3823 0 0.000 4.096 4.096 12.287 0 56
9 Tamilnadu 49 27.380 0.945 16-428 0 0.000 5.128 5.128 11.300 0 49
10 Telengana 182 125.454 6.220 74.7934 0 0.000 44.876 44.876 29.917 0 182
11 Uttar Pradesh 54 33.906 6.556 20.3436 0 0.000 0.000 0 54
~ 12 Uttar Pradesh 12 12.421 1.093 3.1052 0 0.000 1.045 0 12J
13 Tamilnadu 49 23.426 1.348 14.05578 0 0 49
Total 1354 1010.781 108.445 711.53828 0 103.49 161.1762 263.622 410.4122 38 1302 7606.0 52.900
* Though Empowered Committee included 134 schemes of M.P.for fundingunder RRR Scheme, Govt of M.P.has sentproposal for release of Central Assistance wrt only125 schemes. The
cost hereby shown isfor 125 schemes only.Cost of 134 schemes is Rs 198.3079 crare.
L-.
Q:Annexure1'1


81. State Project No. of Water eGA
Noo Cost Bodies (in lakh ha)
1 Andhra Pradesh 1044.30 3000 2.5
2 Tamil Nadu 2547.00 5763 4.0
3 Karnataka 306.98 1224 0.52
4 Orissa 546.00 900 1.2
Total 4444.28 10887 8.22


I Annexure~
Details of funds released for wetland conservation projects under NWCP/NPCA
(Amt. In~ crores)
S.No. State/Union Wetland Amount released
Territory (tilldate)
1. Andhra Pradesh Kolleru 2.50
2. Assam Deepar Beel , 3.62
3. Bihar Kabar 0.47
Barilla
Kusheshwar Asthan
4. Gujarat Nalsarovar 7.37
ThaI BirdSanctuary
Khlladlva BirdSanctuery
Parle]
Wadhwana
Nanikakrad
5. Haryana Sultanpur 3.23
Bhindawas
6. Himachal Pradesh Renuka 5.50
Pong Dam
Chandratal
r Rewalsar
Khaiiiar
7. Jammu & Kashmir Wullar 8.26
Tso Morari
Tisoul Tso & Chisul Marshes
Hokersar
Mansar-Surinsar
Pangong Tsar
8. Karnataka Magadhi 2.18
Gudavi BirdSanctuary
Banal
Hidkal & Ghataprabha
Ranganthittu
9. Kerala Ashtamudi 2.80
Sasthamkotta
Kottuli -"
Vembnad Kol( Kuttanad)
10. Madhya Pradesh Barna 2.04
Yashwant Sacar
Ghatigaon
Ratapani
Sakhvasaqar
Slrour
11. Manipur Loktak 11.05
12. Mizoram Tamdil 7.70
Palak
13. Odisha Chilika 13.57
Kanila wetland
Daha wetland
• Anusupa
14. Punjab Harike 11.13
Ropar
Kanili
Nanqal
15. Raiasthan Sambhar 7.19
16. Sikkim Khechuperi HolyLake 3.25
Phendano Wetland Complex
Gurudokmar Wetland "<
Tsomgo wetland
17. Tamil Nadu PointCalimere 10.30


f -----~~---~-_._-~._--
« Kaliveli
Pallaikarni
18. Tripura Rudrasagar 1.25 --
'jg. Uttar Pradesh Nawabganj '15.33,-------
Sandi
Lakh Bahoshi
Sam as pur
Semarai Lake
Nagaria lake
Keetham Lake
Shekha wetland ,
Saman BirdSanctuary
Sarsai Nawar
Patna BirdSanctuary
Chandotal
Taal Bhaghel
20. Uttarakhand Ban Ganga JhilmilTal 0.45
Asan
21. West Bengal East Kolkata Wetland 16.90
Sunderbans
Ahiron Beel
Rasik Beel
Santraqachi
Patlakhawa- Rasomati
22. Puducherry ( UT) Ousteri lake 0.65
R&D + Others - 9.75
Total 146.49


/ Annexure-VII{
Details of Lake Conservation Projects approved under NLCP/NPCA
Amt.in~.crores
S. State Lake Approved Funds
No. cost released
(tilldate)
1. Telangana Banjara lake, Hyderabad 4.30 2.70
2. Jammu & Kashmir Dallake, Srinagar . 298.76 263.85 ,.
3. Karnataka 3 lakes inBengaluru 69.18 39,16
Bellandur lake, Bengaluru
Kotekere lake, Belgaum
Bhishma lake, Gadag
Lal Bagh, Bengaluru
Channapatna lake, Hasan
Sharanbhasveshwara lake, Gulbarga
Akkamahadevi lake, Haveri
Kundawada lake, Davangere
KoteTavarekere lake, Chikmagalur
Tripuranthkeshwar lake, Bidar
Gowramma and Hombalamma lakes, Magadi
town,Bengaluru Rural
Amanikere Lake, Tumkur
4. Kerala Veli Akkulum lake, Thiruvananthpuram 24.56 4.30
5. Madhya Pradesh Rani Talab, Rewa 87.41 16.34
Sagar lake, Sagar
Shivpuri lake, Shivpuri
Sindhsagar Lake, Ashok Nagar
6. Maharashtra Powai lake, Mumbai 28.57 18.675
9 lakes inThane
Mahalaxmi lake, Vadagaon
Rankala lake, Kolhapur
Varhala Devi lake, Bhiwandi
Siddheshwar Lake, Solapur
7. Nagaland Twin lakes inMokokchung 25.83 9.92
8. Odisha Bindu sagar lake, Bhubaneshwar 3.50 2.21
9. Rajasthan Mansagar lake, Jaipur 225.30 118.12
Anasagar lake, Ajmer
Pushkar sarovar, Ajmer
Fatehsagar lake, Udaipur
Pichola lake system, Udaipur
Nakki Lake, Mount Abu
10. Tamil Nadu Ootv lake 12.17 3.732
Kodaikanallake. Dindigut
11. Tripura 3 lakes of Agartala 2.02 0.50
12. Uttarakhand 4 lakes inNainital 64.82 42.105
Nainitallake, Nainital
13. Uttar Pradesh Mansi Ganga lake, Govardhan 201.16 88.42
Ramgarh Tal, Gorakhpur
Laxmi Tal, Jhansi
14. West Bengal Rabindra Sarovar 48.51 20.97
Mirik lake, Darjeeling
AdiGanga inSouth 24 Parganas
Sahib Bundh lake, Purulla
Grand Total 1096.09 631.00


Annexure-IX
2012-13 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16 till18/02/Z016
Renovation of Renovation of Renovation of Renovation of
traditionalwater traditional traditional traditional
No. States bodies Total Works water bodies TotalWorks water bodies Total Works water bodies Total Works
1 ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR 9.90 1102.14 21.;1.1 162Z.37 13.35 828.10 12.23 148.86
2 ANDHRA PRADESH 72063.02 457921.11 61185.60 470504.74 48631.39 236626.52 62408.86 285729.60
3 ARUNACHAL PRADESH 48.29 5101.89 90.81 9185.74 85.03 3039.07 4.59 2386.10
4 ASSAM 1578.78 62074.55 1250.19 66744.16 1068.23 47199.95 1056.86 59335.39
5 BIHAR 5453.31 178539.07 3088.90 196114.74 1384.49 97904.36 2522.63 126850.15
0 CHHATIISGARH 28304.75 212253.75 25263.77 191703.17 24219.08 165238.03 11793.97 91301.95
7 DADRA & NAGAR HAVELI NR 0.03 NR NR NR NR NR NR
8 DAMAN &DIU NR NR NR NR NR NR NR NR
9 GOA 9.24 141.65 47.53 290.97 85.24 444.33 58.87 219.90
10 GUJARAT 2867.01 57577.59 2659.95 45143.75 3049.65 43892.25 4997.44 28671.99
11 HARYANA 2407.52 37417.09 1924.85 37659.48 881.65 2;L170.98 420.46 12568.75
12 HIMACHAL PRADESH 987.51 48160.61 867.13 55519.11 473.92 39253.64 317.72 36466.22
13 JAMMU AND KASHMIR 1287.34 86914.02 762.63 76627.66 382.17 36594.28 431.95 50337.18
14 JHARKHAND 3478.84 111077.42 2648.49 86959.71 3782.97 97372.97 3391.71 101539.56
15 I<ARNATAKA 9187.89 139058.60 13296.08 200497.76 9415.25 161188.68 7463.03 133815.10
16 KERAlA 11173.35 136609.75 10960.88 124192.71 15995.39 155028.66 13486.64 ,143429.86
17 lAKSHADWEEP 22.47 122.93 2.50 46.93 1.11 35.36 1.36 8.35
18 MADHYA PRADESH 7385.54 794383.30 2186.22 243904.59 1731.76 272991.41 850.81 226756.31
19 MAHARASHTRA 5680.35 207543.97 3509.94 118793.15 4071.07 151338.62 5363.02 140570.28
20 MANIPUR 495.66 56311.52 148.13 23748.60 264.27 25105.26 89.52 12973.99
21 MEGHALAYA 391.24 26223.11 678.63 30805.83 546.84 30165.95 246.38 24619.90
22. MIZORAM 32.78 27899.76 30.01 25121.30 34.68 11373.17 128.43 14696.13
23 NAGALAND 23.21 43752.05 28.60 28538.04 7.29 15089.12 13.67 16341.20
24 ODISHA 14022.34 111274.83 13012.60 122998.96 7487.52 101677.35 10249.05 164962.45
25 PUDUCHERRY 1131.95 1132.52 1036.73 1041.48 489.59 529.66 662.63 737.55
26 PUNJAB 4109.02 14976.14 6569.27 24773.91 6040.59 20310.96 6305.10 26067.77
27 RAJASTHAN 26978.91 315035.84 19396.46 247044.43 22517.95 311616.45 23800.26 265567.66
28 SIKKIM 19.64 7650.61 17.52 10374.62 12.24 7413.31 0.00 5854.85
29 TAMIL NADU 212299.07 402375.84 217771.24 381415.99 184358.70 380571.49 229362.95 441796.57
30 TELANGANA 5261.15 167963.89 3058.07 158335.26
31 TRIPURA 2099.05 95194.32 2557.83 104624.20 3044.50 77477.17 1473.68 104351.98
32 UTIAR PRADESH 8973.44 248090.69 8847.02 329161.59 8080.93 298040.78 14229.52 263262.54
~~ UTIARAKHAND 939.92 31252.87 733.43 39131.11 . 457.16 31696.24 615.23 48034.73=>=>
34 WEST BENGAL 62620.64 384894.56 41317.32 364853.42 61757.15 390807.59 46043.99 46735"6.01
Total 486081.98 3802064.13 441911.47 3659144.22 415632.31 3399985.60 450860.63 3455094.14
Expenditure on works (MGNREGA) (Rupees in lakh)
NR=Not :{eported


----\
~
A!"!!"!exure-\if'r
STATUS OF WATER BODIES INCLDED UNDER RRR DURING XIIPLAN
(Ason25.10.2015)
(Rs inCrore)
S.No. State TotalNos.EstimatedPotentialtoCommittedCentre
of water Cost berestoredcentreshareshare
bodies (Rs.in ('000hal released
includedcrores)
1 Odisha 760 361.52 46.11 282.73 52.90
2 Meghalaya 9 11.43 1.096 10.29 2.52
3 Madhya Pradesh* 134 183.24 35.S16 93.01 37.70
4 Uttar Pradesh 8 37.08 1.096 29.54 15.361
5 Manipur 4 65.442 1.0465 58.90 10.37
6 Uttarakhand 5 12.49 0.386 11.24 0.00
7 Rajasthan 32 89.688 7.731 80.72 35.925
8 Tamil Nadu 105 54.683 2.458 49.21 0.00
9 [Farnilnaou 49 23.426 1.348 21.08 0.00
10 Uttar Pradesh 54 33.906 6.556 30.52 0.00
11 Telengana 102 125.454 6.255 112.02 0.00
A Total 1342 998.360 107.387 779.258 154.776
* Though Empowered Committee included134 schemes of M.P.for fundingunder RRR Scheme,
Govt of M.P.has sentproposal for release of Central Assistance wrt only125 schemes. The cost
hereby shown isfor 125 schemes only.Cost of 134 schemes is Rs 198.3079 crore.


/
". " " "I,
.Hft:-r
SE:CRE-:I;:'i=:','
1; .!~?';.~.':';(;,:-'
!:::~/.:j"~'r:'11;::,:)~.:
C-!l>ii!~;":~C';I-Il")\''L'I\;~;fl!l:II!
'.-f'1 ~!iir:'\'ilFr;--\
;,,j\-i'l·Jifl..'~:Jl~r.~~I'jHl GO:
(;;(:JVt-,F:!'oJMEN r OF IND!::"
\i~lt'H::iTRY(jF WAI't:"F,RE:SOUf~(.:ES
f"{IVERL1E:vELOPMcHf &
GANGA REJUVENATIOI,j
SHf'{AMSHAKTI SHAWAN,
RAFI M/I.RG.NEW DELHI·lto001
http://www.wrrnin.n!c,m
II
D.O.No.4-6j2013-WB CPt.)\.9H 26th February, 2016
Subject: Protection of Water Bodies and River Drainage Channels
Dear • I. f "" ~.'
,-
As you are aware, the State of Jammu & Kashmir experienced devastating
floodsduring September 2014. A team from ewe visitedthe State to examine the
causes and assess the damage. According to them, while the basic cause was very
heavy rainfall during September 3-7,2014 resultingin floodpeak of about 2500
cumec (88000 cusec) at Sangam and 3200 cumec (113000 cusec) at Srinagar, as
against the safe carrying capacity of river Jhelum between Sangam and Srinagar of
about 900 cumec (31700 cusec). The peak flows unfortunatelysustainedfor a good
6 hours causing inundationof large low lyingareas and heavy damage intheJhelum
basin especially in Srinagar due to over topping and subsequent breaching of flood
embankments.
2. The low lyingareas along the course of River Jhelum were functioning as
natural flooddetentionbasins during floodsand were absorbing floodwater spilling
over the banks of river Jhelum. Subsequently, the same floodwater used to get
released slowly. Ironically,during the last three to four decades, maximum
urbanization has taken place inthese low lyingareas which used to act naturally as
a cushion. The situation inJhelum Basin has got further aggravated due to siltation
resultingin limitedcarrying capacity of Jhelum and water bodies.Allthisaddedto
the devastation caused by floods.
3. The disaster was further'accentuated due to rapid encroachment on natural
drainage routes thus reducing the out-flows from mild slopedvalley with peculiar
bowl shape topography. The river Jhelum was just unable to carry the floodpeak of
about 3 times more than the safe carrying capacity. Apart from hydrological and
hydrodynamic considerations as described above, absence of floodplain zoning,
mushrooming of construction in the midst of embanked Jawlyingareas all along


river Jhelum, in utter disregard to the natural drainage system of the Srinagar city,
significantlyreduced natural waterways to drain-offaccumulated waters. Inmany
areas development of suburbs on the natural water bodies or drainage channels
itselfacted as a proverbial final straw on camel's back when the tragedy finally
struck.
4. Year 2015 saw another equally disastrous tragedy strikingthe low lyingareas
of Chennai metropolis when the entire coastal areas of Northern Tamil Nadu
received heavy to very heavy rainfall initiallyduring the period 15-21 November
2015 followedby second spellduring 30th November to 2ndDecember. This ledto
severe inundation in the coastal areas of Chennai, Thiruvallur, Kancheepuram and
Cuddalore Districts. Chennai was theworst affected.
5. Here too an interestingconsequence emerged when the estuarine river
system of Chennai sub-basin is examined. Several small lakes and wetlandsof the
rivers in and around Chennai city make a complex drainage system. Three main
rivers viz.,Cooum, Adayar and Kosasthalayar flow through Chennai city and its
suburbs and jointhe Bay of Bengal.These predominantly seasonal rivers are small in
lenqth,predominantly run dry,through urban and peri-urban areas. The discharging
capacity of these small rivers is of the order of few hundred cumecs. At many
places, sewage generated from the city is also being let out. Further,
encroachments along these rivers have reduced the carrying capacity of theserivers
significantly.
6. In and around Chennai, the four major reservoirs/lakes viz., Poondi,
Cholavaram, Red Hills(Puzhal) and Chembarambakkam, are used for drinkingwater
supply to Chennai city. These reservoirs are the life-linefor the city. Chennai
Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Board operate these reservoirs. Due to
heavy rainfall,the lakes and reservoirs in Chennai and adjoiningdistrictsgot filled
up. The concerned authorities have released water from these reservoirs
discharging into Kosasthalayar, Adyar and other riverine systems. The rivers over
flew itsbanks on either sideat many.places and has therefore inundatedthe low
lyingadjoiningareas. The other lakes surrounding Chennai city viz.,Puzhal (Red
hills)and Cholavaram also got filledup and water was released from these.
reservoirs. Further, several lakes in the city have been encroached upon by
buildings. River carrying capacity has been significantlyreduced due to
encroachments. Lack of timely de-siltingof the storm water drains and lakes has
further compounded the problems. Lack of floodzone planningand large scale
settlementsin low lyingareas, with onlycertain degree of protection against floods
of significantlyhigher magnitudes caused wide spread damage inthecity.
7. Incontextof above, itbecomes important that water bodies,natural drainage
channels and river floodplains are leftfree from encroachments so that draining
capacity of these natural water systems and drainage channels remain functional to
their capacity. Interestingly,the natural water bodies act as buffers to absorb
excess run-offgenerated out of heavy downpour, which is releasedwith significant
time lags in such a manner that peak outflows into the drainage system remain
manageable. Water bodies playa vitalrole in socio-economic development of the


.)
country Oilone hand and provide sustainable water security by and large to thelocal
population. Over the years, general neglect to the maintenance of these water
bodies has resultedincomplete disappearance of many water bodiesor reduction in
size.
8. Municipal Corporations, local bodiesand Gram Panchayats etc.toensure that
allwater bodies Intheirareas should be identified,videographed and kept freefrom
encroachment, removing encroachment of existingwater bodiesincludingcomplete
ban on disposal of sewerage and waste disposal.Rejuvenate those water bodies
which have been encroached in mission mode. Suitable mechanisms backed by
appropriate laws need to be put in place to protect future deteriorationof water
bodies Inthis context,good examples set by differentStates like Tamil Nadu,
Maharashtra & Gujarat inthisregard may be followed.The detailsinthisregard can
be seen at Annexure-/.
9. State Governments, Urban Municipal Corporations and local bodies have to
ensure that planning of urban settlementsshould conform to basic laws governing
flood plains of river systems such that loss of lifeand property is avoided in
eventualities similar to such disasters. For this purpose States must endeavor to
adopt floodplain zoning and make itpart and parcel of theirplanningnorms. Else,
repetitive havocs caused due to over topping of river banks during floodsor flood
like situations willcontinue to haunt everyone alike. r
"'-:"';t !.:i.'
Yo~rs sincerely,
Ene!:As above
(Shashi Shekhar)
Shri Vijay Kumar
Administrator
Government of Lakshadweep
Kavaratti


I
Annexure JJI
Lakes,Pondsand Tanks having veryhigh valuesof Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) and
notmeeting thewaterqualitycriteriaarearrangedindescending orderand summarizedinTable
-1.
Highest Observed B.O.D in Lakes, Tanks & Ponds
BOD StnName
320 SaiChevuru,AndhraPradesh
220 KhaziarLake,HimachalPradesh
210 PremajipetTank, AndhraPradesh
170 AsaniKunia,AndhraPradesh
160 SarconagarLake,AndhraPradesh
76 SafilgudaLake,AndhraPradesh
70 BanjaraLake,AndhraPradesh
70 NallaChevuru,AndhraPradesh
68 Durgam Chevuru,AndhraPradesh
68 NoorMd. Kunta,AndhraPradesh
63 MallnpurTank, AndhraPradesh
60 HussainSagar Lake,AndhraPradesh
58 Chandola Lake,Gujarat
51 FoxSagar,AndhraPradesh
50 ElangabeeJSystemPond,Assam
50 LangarhouseLake,AndhraPradesh
48 PcddaChevuru,AndhraPradesh
47 NalsarovarLake (San and),Gujarat
46 MiralarnLake,AndhraPradesh
44 Hanumantnl,Madhya Pradesh
43 UlsoorLake,Karnataka
39 Chinna Waddepally Tank, AndhraPradesh
39 Kapra Cheruvu,AndhraPradesh "
37 PragathlnagarCheruvu,AndhraPradesh
36 Swetaganga Pond,Orissa
35 KankoriaLake,Gujarat
34 Udhagamadnlern Lake,Tarnilnadu
33 DhudhiaTalav,Gujarat
33 NarsinhmehtaTalav,Gujarat
32 Amber Cheruvu,AndhraPradesh
32 Laxml Pond,UttarPradesh
32 SurinsarLake,Jammu & Kashmir
30 HasmathpetLake,AndhraPradesh
30 LaxmlnarayanaCbevuru,AndhraPradesh
2& KajipallyTank, AndhraPradesh
28 KistareddypetTank, AndhraPradesh
2& MatiTalab,Madhya Pradesh
28 RangadhnrnuuiCheruvu,AndhraPradesh
25.0 MaahilPond,UttarPradesh
24 MarkandaPokhari,Orissa


72 NehruNagarTalab,Chhattisgarh
21.3 Bindusagar.Ddisha
11 LaknotaTalav,Gujarat
20 MoticherLake,Gujara;
20 Olpad,Gujarat
19.5 ParvatiSagar,Orissa
19 Deepar Beel, Assam
18 SharneerpetLake,AndhraPradesh
16 CityLake Of'Nadiad,Gujarat
16 DudhpukurLake, WestBengal
16 Gandigudem, Andhra Pradesh
16 NarendraPokhari,Orissa
15 Belboni Lake,West Bengal
15 RiwalsarLake,HimachalPradesh
14.2 ShahpuraLake,Madhya Pradesh
14 HeballaValleyLake,Karnataka
14 HiikasaTailing,Reservoir,Chhattisgarh
14 Raniial Talab,Madhya Pradesh
13.5 Veeranam Lake,Tarnilnadu
13 Waddepally Tank,AndhraPradesh
12.88 Jalrnahal,Jaipur,Rajasthan
12.8 DighaliPukhuri,Assam
12.5 UrniarnLake,Meghalaya
12.4 BishnuPuskarPukhuri,Assam
12.4 RabindrasarovarNationalLake,West Bengal
12 BhadrakaliChevuru,AndhraPradesh
12 Ramappa Lake, AndhraPradesh
11.6 lndradyumnaTank,Odisha
11.5 MansarLake,Jammu & Kashmir
11.2 LowerLake AtBhopal, Madhya Pradesh
II RanjirnagarTalav,Gujarat
9.6 BotodrivaSarraPond,Assam
9.6 Ward Lake,Meghalaya
9.4 SubhagyaKunda Pond,Assam
9 HirnayatSagarLake, AndhraPradesh
9 SakiTank,AndhraPradesh
8.43 SursagarLake,Gujarat
8.4 JanuniaTalab,Madhya Pradesh
8.38 AjwahLake,Gujarat
8.2 HordaiPukhuri,Assam
8 KuwadavaLake,Gujarar
8 OruvathllkottaLake,Kerala
8 Raia Lake,Goa
7.59 JaisamandLake,Rajasthan
7.44 Sahcbbandh Lake,West Bengal
r -
.J Upper Lake,MadhyaPradesh
7.2 CurtorimLake,Goa
7.01 SaipernLake,Goa
6.6 Alappuzha,Kerala


/
(
"---_.-
6.3 Kayamkulnm, Kerala
6.3 KochbiharLake, West Bengal-
6 CararnbolimLake,Goa
6 PorurLake,Tamilnadu
5.6 Tighi Talab,Bihar
5.4 DaloniBeel, Assam-
5.4 GoysagarTank, Assam
5.4 KodungulloorLake,Kerala
5.4 Rarngarh Lake, UttarPradesh
5.34 Kodai Kanal Lake,Tamilnadu
5.3 MaharnayaMandirPukhuri,Assam
5.2 GophurTank, Assam
5.2 RajapukhuriPond,Assam
5.1 UdaisagarLake, Rajasthan
5 Bor Beel, Assam
5 MirikhLake, West Bengal
5 Padumpukhuri,Assam
5 Yercaud Lake,Tarnilnadu
4.9 SarnnrpurJheel,UttarPradesh
4.5 RajadiniaPukhuriPond,Assam
4.4 Ganga Pukhuri,Assam
4.4 Lake Vernbanadu,Kerala
4.2 BibinagarTank, AndhraPradesh
4.2 Chand DubiBeel, Assam
4.1 Mer Beel, Assam
4 Redd HillsLake,Tamilnadu
4 VellayaniLake,Kerala
3.8 Borpukhuri,Assam
3.8 GovindgarhTank, Madhya Pradesh
3.8 PeriatTank, Madhya Pradesh
3.8 Rani Talab,Madhya Pradesh
3.8 SaranBeel, Assam
3.7 Lodha Talab,Banswnra-DungarpurRoad, Banswara,Rajasthan
3.64 Rumder Lake,Goa
3.6 BaskandiPond,Assam
3.6 LaxmiNarayanBariPalaceCompound, Tripara
3:6 Rudrasagar,Tripura
3.6 Vernbannd Lake,Kerala
3.5 Rajmaw Pukhuri,Assam
3.3 GalaBeel, Assam
3.2 Anshupa Lake,Odisha
3.2 SivasagarTank, Assam
3,2 WaterReserviorAtDele,West Bengal
..~


MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES (2014-2015) 
HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 26 AUGUST, 2015 ON EVIDENCE BY THE REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF 
WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION - IN CONNECTION WITH 
EXAMINATION OF THE ‘REPAIR, RENOVATION AND RESTORATION OF WATER BODIES’. 
 
The Committee sat from 1100 hours to 1230 hours in Committee Room - C, Ground Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
 Shri Hukum Singh  - Chairperson 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Vinod Kumar B. 
3. Shri Murali Mohan Maganti 
4. Dr. Sidhant Mohapatra 
5. Shri Rodmal Nagar 
6. Shri Subhash Patel 
7. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
8. Shri S. P. Y. Reddy 
9. Shri Ram Prasad Sarmah 
10. Smt. Sathyabama V. 
11. Shri Lallu Singh           
RAJYA SABHA 
12. Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
13. Smt. Naznin Faruque 
14. Prof. Mrinal Miri 
15. Shri Amar Shankar Sable 
16. Shri A. V. Swamy 
17. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Rita Jailkhani  -  Director 
 

Ministry of Water Resources River Development And Ganga Rejuvenation 
 
1. Dr. Amarjit Singh, AS  
2. Shri Servesh Kumar, ADG (Stat.) 
3. Dr. Amita Prasad, JS(A&GW) 
4. Shri Jagmohan Gupta, JS&FA 
5. Shri C. Lal, Commissioner 
6. Shri Pradeep Kumar, Commissioner (Parl.) 
7. Shri T.S. Mehra, Commissioner   
8. Shri R.K. Gupta, Commissioner   
9. Shri K. Vohra, Commissioner  
10. Shri M. Satyanarayana, Advisor 
 
Central Water Commission 
1. Shri A.B. Pandya, Chairman 
2. Shri Narendra Kumar, Member 
3. Shri P.M. Scott, Chief Engineer 
4. Shri Yogesh Paithankar, Director 
5. Shri R.P.S. Verma, Director 
 Central Ground Water Board 
1. Shri K.B. Biswas, Chairman 
2. Dr. E. Sampath Kumar, Member 
Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change 
1. Shri Brijesh Sikka, Advisor(NRCD) 
Ministry of Finance  
1.  Shri Selva Kumar, JS  
2. Shri Rishikesh Singh, Director 
 Ministry of Urban Development 
1. Shri Praveen Prakash, JS 
2. Shri J.B. Ravinder, Dy. Advisor 
 
 

At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee  convened for 
evidence by the representatives of the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation - in 
connection with examination of  the subject ‘Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies’ .  Thereafter, the 
Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation.  the representatives of the Ministry then made a power point presentation 
2. Then the Hon’ble Chairperson, asked on existing water bodies – their shape, utility etc. and the number of water 
bodies which are able to recharge ground water.  The Additional Secretary replied that 15% water bodies were non function.  
Then the Committee asked about the measures taken to prevent encroachments, to which the Additional Secretary stated 
that second instalment of funds are released only on receiving certificate that water body is free of encroachments.  On the 
issue of creating mass awareness and sensitizing people for protection of water bodies, he stated that Jal Kranti campaign 
has started in which Hon’ble Minister has taken two villages in all districts of the country for raising awareness. 
3. On being pointed out by the Committee about the deteriorating water quality in water bodies, the representatives of 
the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change informed that as per the study conducted the existing in 2015 
capacity of Sewage Treatment Plant is only 23000 million litre per day against the to tal generation of 62000 million litre. 
Sewage generated every day.  Additional treatment capacity will require lot of funds for which depending on Central 
Government funds will not help.  Therefore, policy on proper water pricing needs to be made and imple mented to enable 
judicious use of water and made users/people bear the cost.  Asked about use of PPP model for installation of sewage 
treatment plant, the Committee were informed that PPP model was used in Mathura – Vrindavan but recovery has been 
very poor. 
4. On the issue of monitoring of water bodies, the Additional Secretary informed that in Ahmedabad water bodies 
have been included in town planning.  State Governments therefore, need to make it a part of town planning and implement 
it to prevent their encroachments.  Further on the issue of success of dugwells in recharging ground water the Additional 
Secretary informed that 200 critical blocks have improved so far.  Further remaining critical / over-exploited blocks are being 
given priority under Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana (PMKSY).  The Hon’ble Chairperson raised the issue of rampant 
use of tubewells and submersibles in villages through which water is being extracted indiscriminately and suggested that 
local representatives i.e. MPs and MLAs s hould be involved in the awareness programmes to enable better reach to the 
masses. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept for record. 
 
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  

MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES  (2015-16) HELD ON 
MONDAY, 18 JANUARY 2016 
  
The Committee sat from 1100 hours to 1315 hours in Main Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  Shri Hukum Singh – Chairperson 
      MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
1 Shri Devusinh Jesingbhai Chauhan 
2 Dr. Sidhant Mohapatra 
3 Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
4 Shri Rodmal Nagar 
5 Shri Subhash Patel 
6 Smt. Aparupa Poddar 
7 Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
8 Shri Lallu Singh 
9  Shri Liladharbhai K. Vaghela  
              
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
11. Shri Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
12. Smt. Naznin Faruque 
13. Shri Amar Shankar Sable 
14. Prof. Mrinal Miri 
15. Shri A.V. Swamy  
16. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia 
 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar    - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Rita Jailkhani    - Director 
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar   - Additional Director 

-2- 
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation/Central Water Commission 
1. Dr. Amarjit Singh, Special Secretary  
2. Shri G. S. Jha, Chairman, CWC 
3. Shri Nikhilesh Jha, Additional Secretary  
4. Shri Narendra Kumar, Member, CWC 
5. Dr. B. Rajender, JS(PP) 
6. Dr. Amita Prasad, JS (Admn. & GW) 
7. Dr. M. Satyanarayan, Advisor (NWM) 
8. Dr. Rajat Bhargava, JS(CAD) 
9. Shri R. K. Gupta, JS  
10. Shri Jagmohan Gupta, JS&FA  
11. Shri Pradeep Kumar, Commissioner (Parl.) 
12. Shri C. Lal, Sr. JC.  
13. Shri T. S. Mehra, Commissioner  
14. Shri Kiran Pramanik, Sr. JC.  
15. Shri Sarvesh Kumar, ADG Stat.  
16. Shri P. M. Scot, Chief Engineer, CWC 
17. Shri Yogesh Paithankar, Director, CWC 
18. Shri Prabhat Tyagi, Director 
19. Shri Ashok Kumar V., Deputy Director, CWC  
Ministry of Urban Development 
20. Shri Praveen Prakash, JS 
21. Shri Sailendra Vikram Singh, Director (PHE) 
Ministry of Rural Development 
22. Shri Prabhat Kumar Sarangi, JS  
23. Shri B. R. Virdi, Eco. Advisor  
Ministry of Agriculture 
24. Shri R. A. S. Patel, Asstt. Commissioner 
 
 

Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change 
25. Shri Brijesh Sikka, Advisor 
National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) 
26. Shri Abdul Hakeem, Head, Water Informatics and Policy Monitoring Division  
Representatives of States & UTs 
27. Shri S. K. Mod. Sabjan, Chief Engineer, Andhra Pradesh 
28. Shri A. K. Barman, JS, Government of Assam 
29. Shri M. K. Yadav, Director, Government of Assam 
30. Shri Sunil Kumar, Chief Engineer, Government of Bihar 
31. Shri Rajendra Kumar, Ex. Engineer, Government of Bihar 
32. Shri S. V. Bhagwat, Chief Engineer, Government of Chhattisgarh 
33. Shri U. K. Sarvaiya, Chief Engineer & Add. Secretary, Government of Gujarat 
34. Shri Ashoksinh Parmar, Deputy Secretary, Government of Gujarat 
35. Shri Rajeev Bansal, Chief Engineer, Government of Haryana 
36. Shri Anil Kumar Gupta, Engineer in Chief, Government of Haryana 
37. Shri Sushil Kapta, Spl. Secretary, Government of Himachal Pradesh 
38. Shri Prem Chand Dhiman, Addl. Chief Secretary, Government of Himachal Pradesh 
39. Shri Devraj, Chief Engineer, Government of Karnataka 
40. Shri Lianchungnunga, Secretary, Government of Mizoram 
41. Er. K. S. Takshi, Chief Engineer, Government of Punjab 
42. Shri Sukhjit Singh Bain, Director, Government of Punjab 
43. Shri Anil Kumar Sondhi, Addl. Chief Ex. Officer, Government of Punjab 
44. Shri Suren Karkidholi, Addl. Chief Engineer, Government of Sikkim 
45. Shri Niladri Naha, Director, Government of West Bengal 
46. Shri Malsur, Commissioner, Government of Telangana 
47. Shri Mir Javed Jaffar, Chief Engineer, Government of Jammu & Kashmir 
48. Dr. Sanjay Belsare, Supt. Engineer, Government of Maharashtra 
49. Dr. S. D. Singh, CEO, Government of NCT Delhi 
50. Shri Ashwani Kumar, Secretary Environment, Government of NCT of Delhi 
51. Thiru K. V. Rajan, Spl. Secretary, Government of Tamil Nadu  
52. Thiru D. Khaleel Ahmad, Chief Engineer, Government of Tamil Nadu  
53. Thiru P. Krishnamoorthy, AEE, Government of Tamil Nadu 
54. Shri Ksinh Parmar, Dy. Secretary, Government  of Gujarat 
55. Shri Kamlesh Khare, Chief Engineer, Government of Madhya Pradesh 
-4- 

56. Shri D. C. Singh, Chief Engineer, Government of Uttarakhand 
57. Shri Sunil George, SE, Government of Kerala 
58. Shri W. Nongsiej, JS, Government of Meghalaya 
59. Shri P. Pakma, Addl. Chief Engineer, Government of Meghalaya 
60. Shri A. D. Blah, SE, Government of Meghalaya 
61. Shri Vinod Shah, General Chief, Government of Rajasthan 
62. Shri R. K. Sarwal, Principal Residential Commr., Government of Tripura 
63. Shri Tapan Lodh, Chief Engineer, Government of Tripura 
64. Shri Mathura Prasad, Chief Engineer, Government of Andman & Nicobar 
65. Shri Yogesh Shukla, Special Secretary, Government of UP 
66. Shri S. C. Sharma, S. E., Government of UP 
67. Er. S.K. Pattanayak, EIC, Special Secretary, Deptt. of Water Resources, Odisha 
68. Shri Njilo Kemd, CE, Government of Nagaland 
69. Shri Lalrotluanga, SEMID, Government of Mizoram 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee   convened to take oral  
evidence of the representative s of the  Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation 
(MoWR,RD&GR), Central Water Commission, the Ministry of Urban Development, the Ministry of Rural Development,  the 
Ministry of Agriculture,  the Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change, National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) - 
in connection with the  examination of the subject "Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water Bodies"- Encroachment on 
water bodies and steps required to remove the encroachment and to restore the water bodies. Thereafter, the Chairperson 
welcomed the representatives of the various Ministries and State & UT Governments who were also  represented during the 
meeting.   
3. Thereafter the Hon'ble Chairperson desired to know about the State Governments whose representatives were not 
present in the meeting.  Responding to this, the Special Secretary  MoWR,RD&GR informed that the States who have made 
important contribution in revival of water bodies, the representatives of those States were present.  The Hon'ble 
Chairperson, then, sought a clarification from the representative of  Uttar Pradesh - which had stated  in its wri tten 
submission  that no water body is encroached in the State.  On this issue, the representative of the UP Government replied 
that this was because the information furnished to the Committee  in this regard pertains to only those water bodies which 
are under the Irrigation Department of the State.  The information on water bodies  - which are under the supervision of the 
Revenue Department of the State could not be collected ,therefore the extent of  
 
 
 

-5- 
encroachment on water bodies in the State was not fully reflected.  Further the Chairperson enquired about reasons for 
difference in total number of water bodies as shown in Annexure -I & II of the written reply furnished by the Ministry.  
Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry made a power point presentation on various issues relating to the subject.   
4. On the issue of encroachment of water bodies in UP, the Special Secretary  MoWR,RD&GR informed that the 
Ministry will conduct a survey of water bodies in the State in this regard.  Asked about th e guidelines of the Supreme Court 
on encroachment of water bodies in UP and its compliance by the State, the representative of the State Government, 
assured to furnish the information  to the Committee  later on.  The Committee further asked the representati ve of the 
Ministry as to the reasons owing to which the guidelines of Supreme Court were not being implemented uniformally in all the 
States.  Thereafter the Hon'ble Chairperson also raised the issue of unregulated extraction of water from tube wells with 
unmetered supply of electricity. 
5. Further the Committee raised the issue  of upkeep of those water bodies which were given Central funds under  
Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) Scheme after being declared "encroachment free" by the State.  The Committee 
were, however, apprised by a Member  of Parliament from the State of  Odisha that the Central Government has failed to 
disburse funds under RRR scheme for 760 water bodies identified for RRR in the State on which work was to be completed 
by 31 March, 2017.  The issue of the Central funds given for upkeep of ponds in  the State of Gujarat was also discussed. 
Issues were also raised about the encroachment of Mayurkashi river in Sainthia municipality town, encroachment of river in 
Burdwan district and encroachment of land of Farakka Barrage in the State of West Bengal, on these specific aspects the 
representative of the State of West Bengal Government assured the Committee to furnish a reply later on.   
6. Further the Committee desired to know in deta il about the extent of encroachment of water bodies in the country  
particularly after the issuance of  Supreme Court guidelines in regard thereto. During evidence the issue of soil erosion in 
the State of Assam and consequent loss of cultivable land to river Brahmaputra was also raised.  
7. On the issue of action taken by different States Governments to prevent encroachment, the Special Secretary 
informed the Committee that the Ministry will issue proper advisory to all the States to prepare a status report on the extent 
of encroachment, steps taken/proposed to be taken by them to prevent encroachment of water bodies and shall submit the 
same to the Committee.  Regarding encroachment of water bodies in Delhi, the representative of the State Government 
informed that there are 971 water bodies in Delhi, out which 346 are dry water bodies.  Further there is no fresh 
encroachment and removal of encroachment is being supervised by a Committee as per the conditions and guidelines laid 
down by the 
 
 
 

 
-6- 
 National Green Tribunal.  The Hon'ble Chairperson stressed the need for improving water quality and prevent pollution  of 
water bodies.  The issue of prevention of pollution of water in water bodies was also discussed  further by the Committee . 
Lastly, he impressed upon the representative of the State Government  that the State Government of UP has to perform 
better with regard to the maintenance of water bodies and prevention of encroachments thereon in the State. 
8. The Committee also discussed the issue of mining of sand deposited on the agricultural land after flood s, to which 
the representative of State Government of Odisha informed that the Government of Odisha has adopted a resolution in 
which it is stated that if there is removal of earth for agricultural purpose , then it will not be considered as mining activity. 
The Hon'ble Chairperson appreciated th e step taken by the Government of Odisha  in this regard . Finally he directed the 
Ministry to furnish detailed replies to the queries - which were raised by the Member s during the discussion and which 
remained unanswered. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
9. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting was kept for record. 
10. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Fourth Report on "Issues concerning Flood Management, Compensation 
and Status of Ownership of Submerged and Eroded Land in the Country including Compensation to Farmers for loss of their 
crops destroyed by Floods and Right to Disposal of the Sand left in the Fields of Farmers" ,   and adopted the same without 
any modification.  
11. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to present the Report to both the Houses of Parliament. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
  

MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2015-16) HELD ON THURSDAY, 26 JULY 2016 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1515 hours in Committee Room 'D', Ground Floor, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 Shri Hukum Singh – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Radheshyam Biswas 
3. Shri Devusinh Jesingbhai Chauhan 
4. Shri Sukhbir Singh Jaunapuria 
      5. Shri Abhijit Mukherjee 
      6. Shri Rodmal Nagar 
      7. Shri Subhash Patel 
      8. Shri Vijaysinh Mohite Patil 
     9. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram 
   10. Smt. V. Sathyabama 
   11. Shri L. K. Vaghela         
 RAJYA SABHA 
12. Shri Amar Shankar Sable 
13. Shri A.V. Swamy  
14. Shri Lal Sinh Vadodia 
 
  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Shiv Kumar   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Rita Jailkhani    - Director 
3. Shri Kushal Sarkar   - Additional Director 
 

-2- 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee.   
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration Draft Report on the subject “ Repair, Renovation and 
Restoration of Water Bodies – Encroachment on water bodies and steps required to remove the 
encroachment and restore the water bodies” .  After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the 
aforesaid draft Report without any modification.   
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to present the above Report to both the Houses 
of Parliament in the current Monsoon Session. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 
 
 