 
 
 
8 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2020-21) 
                 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                                  
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI – DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER 
DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
                 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2020-21) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained 
in the Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water 
Resources] 
                 
EIGHTH REPORT 
  
 
                    
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
February, 2021 / Magha,1942 (Saka) 
 
 


 
 
EIGHTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2020-21) 
          
(SEVENTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
         
                 
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI – DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND 
GANGA REJUVENATION 
                      
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2020-21) 
 
 (Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Third Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of Jal 
Shakti - 
Department of Water Resource, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation) 
         
Presented to Lok Sabha on  9.2.2021 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on  9.2.2021 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
         
February, 2021 / Magha,1942 (Saka) 


 
 
 
W. R. C.  No. 63 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs.  
         
         
 
         
     
                     
 
 
         
        © 2021 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha  (Sixteenth 
Edition) and Printed by  

 
 
CONTENTS 
  Page 
Composition of the 
Committee 
 
……………………………………………………………… (iii) 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………… 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER - I Report……………………………………………………… 
 
1 
CHAPTER – II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government…………………………… 
 
12 
CHAPTER - III Observations/Recommendations which the  
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government’s 
replies……………………………………………………… 
 
27 
CHAPTER - IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
the replies of the Government have not been  
accepted by the 
Committee……………...................................... 
 
28 
CHAPTER - V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still  
awaited…………………………………………………….. 
 
36 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I Minutes of the  First Sitting of the Committee held on 
6.11.2020 ……………………………………………….. 
 
37 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the  
Observations/Recommendations contained in the  
Third Report (S eventeenth Lok Sabha) of the  
Committee………………………………………………… 
38 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITON OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2020-21) 
 Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal  -  Chairperson 
 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
 
2.  Shri Vijay Baghel  
3.  Shri Bhagirath Chaudhary  
4.  Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan  
5.  Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan  
6.  Shri Chandra Prakash Choudhary  
7.  Shri Guman Singh Damor  
8.  Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit  
9.  Dr. K. Jayakumar  
10.  Shri Kaushal Kishore  
11.  Shri M. Dhanush Kumar  
12.  Shri P. Raveendranath Kumar  
13.  Shri Mohammad Akbar Lone  
14.  Shri Kuruva Gorantla Madhav  
15.  Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel  
16.  Shri Sanjay Kaka Patil  
17.  Vacant*  
18.  Smt. Nusrat Jahan Ruhi  
19.  Ms. Agatha K. Sangma  
20.  Shri D.K. Suresh  
21.  Shri A. Narayana Swamy 
 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22.  Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder  
23.  Shri Harshvardhan Singh Dungarpur  
24.  Shri N. R. Elango  
25.  Mir Mohammad Fayaz  
26.  Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena  
27.  Shri A. Mohammedjan  
28.  Shri Arun Singh  
29.  Shri Subhash Chandra Singh  
30.  Shri Rewati Raman Singh  
31.  Shri Pradeep Tamta  
 
* Shri D.S. Rathore, MP, LS ceased to be a Member w.e.f 28.12.2020 
 
 
(iii) 

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Manoj  K. Arora   - OSD (LSS) 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan   - Director 
3. Shri R. C. Sharma   - Additional Director 
4. Shri Gaurav Jain    - Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
NTRODUCTION 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (20 20-21) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Eighth - 
Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in the ir Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for 
Grants (20 20-21) relating to the Ministry of Jal Shakti (Department of Wa ter Resources, 
River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation). 
 
2.  The Third Report of the Committee was p resented to Lok Sabha and laid on the 
table of  Rajya Sabha on 5 March 2020. The Action Taken replies of the Government to all 
the recommendations contained in the Report were received in this Secretariat on 16 
June,2020. 
 
3.  The draft Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held 
on 6.11.2020. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of 
the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
New Delhi Dr. SANJAY JAISWAL 
  3 February,  2021 Chairperson 
14 Magha, 1942 (Saka) Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2020 -21) having been 
authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Eighth -  
 
 
(v) 
 
    
  

 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources deals with the Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in their Third 
Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the Demands for Grants (20 20-21) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti 
– Department of Water Resources, River Development &  Ganga Rejuvenation, which was 
presented to Lok Sabha on  5 March, 20 20. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 14 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee  have been  received from the 
Government and these have been categorized as under:  
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
(Chapter II):  
 
Para Nos. 3,4,5,6,8,9,11,12 and 13 
       (Total –9) 
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III):  
 
Para Nos. NIL       
     (Total – NIL) 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV):  
 
Para Nos. 1,2,7,10 and 14        
(Total – 5)  
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V):  
 
Para Nos. NIL        
      (Total – NIL)  
 2. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
the observations / recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
1 

 
 
A. Analysis of Demands for Grants 
 
Recommendation No. 1 (Para No. 2.1) 
 
 
3. The Committee observe d that an amount of Rs. 8960.39 crore (net) ha d been 
allocated in the Budget 2020 -21 in respect of the Department of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation (DoWR, RD & GR). However, out of Rs. 8960.39 
crore, as much as Rs. 2675 crore  was kept for servicing of anticipated liabilities towards 
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) dues, effectively rendering 
budgetary allocation of merely Rs. 6285.39 crore. Further, the Department ha d been 
allowed to borrow an amount of  Rs. 5000 crore from the NABARD. The Committee further 
noted that as compared to the last financial year (2019 -20), there was an increase of Rs. 
720.59 crore in the Revenue Section, whereas, there is a decrease of Rs. 5.45 crore under 
the Capital Section. In nutshell, there was an increase of Rs. 715.14 crore in demand for the 
year 2020-21. In this backdrop, the Committee f ound it intriguing that every year, there has 
always been under utilization of funds allocated to the Department. It was disheartening to 
note that the Department has persistently lagged behind in utilization of budgetary 
allocations during the last four years, i.e., actual expenditure of only Rs. 5313.48 crore as 
compared to BE allocation of Rs. 6887 crore in the year 2017 -18. Further, there was an 
expenditure of only Rs. 7422.08 crore as compared to BE allocation of Rs. 8860 crore in the 
year 2018-19.The Committee were also concerned over the huge committed liability of Rs. 
45812.80 crore towards outstanding principal and interest payments for borrowing from 
NABARD. Such increased dependence of the Department on the borrowing from NABARD 
over and above the budgetary provisions with apparently quite inadequate capacity to repay 
the loans, is not a healthy trend.  The Committee, however, note that this year, Rs. 5000 
crore ha d been allowed to be borrowed from NABARD which was substantially lower in 
comparison to provisio ns during previous fiscal years. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommended the Department to utilize the unused amount in the Projects which ha d been 
brought under the NABARD borrowings. The Committee further recommend ed that the 
Department should man age its resources more prudently in order to avoid future 
borrowings.  
 
4. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
“Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation (DOWR, 
RD&GR) during FY 2019 -20 was permitted to raise extra budgetary sources for the 
identified projects being funded from Long Term Irrigation Fund (LTIF) through NABARD. 
These projects as per Cabinet approval and scheme design are to be funded through LTIF 
route and budge tary funding for these projects including by way of diversion of savings 
available if any is not admissible. Details of Projects, EBRs approved and actually raised in 
FY 2019-20 are given in table below:- 
2 

 
 
(Rs. in crore) 
Project EBRs 
approved in 
FY 2019-20 
EBR raised in 
FY 2019-20 
Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP) & 
HKKP - CADWM component under PMKSY 
4200.00 1902.77 
Rajasthan Feeder - Sirhind Feeder 196.00 0 
Polavaram Irrigation Project 1850.00 1850.00 
Shahpur Kandi 150.00 60.00 
North Koel Reservoir Project 336.00 0.53 
Total 6732.00 3813.30 
 
Note: In March 2020, NABARD sought to raise Rs. 932.6057 crore (AIBP – Rs.764.4167 crore, 
CADWM – Rs. 108.66 crore, Shahpur Kandi Dam – Rs.59.529 crore) through EBR. However, 
due to the prevailing market conditions at that time, response of the investors was not 
encouraging and NABARD conveyed that it may not be desirable to raise resources from the 
market during the remaining period of FY 2019 -20. This amount being on account of committed 
liabilities has been included in borrowing programme for FY 2020-21. 
 
As regards utilization of the unused amount in the Projects which have been brought under 
the NABARD borrowings, unspent balance for previous releases available with the 
State/project authority and indicated in utilisation certificate is duly factored in while making 
fresh release.  
 
NABARD borrowings under LTIF are limited to actual releases for identified projects, which 
are regulated according to physical and financial progress of projects. The recommendation 
of the Committee for more prudent management of resources of Department has been 
noted for necessary action”. 
5. From the Action taken note furnished by the Department , the Committee note 
that the reply is silent with regard to measures taken /proposed to address the 
problem of under utilization of budgetary provisions over the years. Further the reply 
is also silent with respect to the steps taken/proposed to be taken to reduce the 
rising committed liability due to increased borrowings.  The Committee are 
constrained to observe  that on  one hand the Department has not been able to utilize 
the funds fully, year after year ,and on the other hand,  is resorting to borrowings 
from NABARD to finance its projects , which  reflects poor budgetary management 
and inefficient management of resources . The Committee cannot but emphasize the 
need to exercise optimum care by the Department in assessing the requirements of  
 
3 

 
 
funds for each scheme/programme/unit, so that the budgetary estimates are realistic 
and concerted efforts be made for efficient utilization of budgetary allocations.  The 
Committee, reiterate that the Department should put a strong case before the Ministry 
of Finance for augmenting budgetary resources of the Department , so as to obviate  
borrowings in  future.  
 
B. Low Budgetary Allocations 
 
Recommendation No. 2 (Para No. 2.2) 
 
6. The Committee note d that although the budgetary allocations of the Department of 
Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation (DoWR, RD & GR) ha d 
increased consecutively, except the year 2019 -20, during the last four fiscal years fro m Rs. 
6887 crore in the year 2017-18 to Rs. 8960.39 crore in the year 2020-21, the representative 
of the Ministry was not satisfied with the budgetary allocations. The Committee further 
observed that the initial Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) cei ling for the FY 
2020-21 was Rs. 10238.61 crore for the Department. However, actual MTEF awarded to the 
Department was just Rs. 8960.39 crore. It is an undisputable fact that t he challenges in the 
water sector of the country are enormous, however, in relati ve terms, the budgetary 
allocations of the Ministry are far from being acknowledged as sufficient. The primary 
reason for the lower budgetary allocations is that 'Water' being a State subject, the major 
responsibility for augmentation, conservation and efficient management of water resources , 
primarily, comes under the domain of the States. The role of Union Government is technical, 
advisory, catalytic and promotional in nature, which is a determining factor for lower 
budgetary allocation to the Ministry of  Jal Shakti (Department of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation). At this juncture, when the Union Government has 
taken up the subject of 'Water' in an unprecedented Mission Mode, the Committee fel t that 
merely hand-holding by the Unio n Government would not suffice and the Government has 
to play a pro -active role in 'Integrated Water Management' for environmental sustenance 
and sustainable economic development of the country.The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the Department should make all out efforts to fully and optimally utilize the 
resources at its command and should assume a catalytic role in galvanizing the efforts of 
States and Union territories in this area. Only on making full and effective utilization of 
budgetary allocation, the Department could vigorously present its case before the Ministry of 
Finance to augment its budgetary allocation, in real terms, which w ould also result in 
reducing its dependence on borrowing from NABARD besides helping the resources -
stretched States to implement the policies and programmes of the Union Government.  
 
 
4 
 

 
 
7. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
“An allocation of Rs.8245.25 crore was made in BE 2019 -20. This was reduced to 
Rs.7518.21 crore at RE level. In  spite of constraints of lockdown imposed at a crucial time 
of financial year closing due to the  COVID pandemic, the Department was able to utilise 
Rs.7416.28 crore (tentative pending finalisation of appropriation accounts). This is 99% 
utilisation RE level allocations and 90% utilisation of BE level allocations. 
By comparison, in FY 2018 -19 against BE allocations of Rs.8860 crore and RE ceiling of 
Rs.7612.52 crore, an expenditure of Rs.7422.08 crore was incurred. It was 97% utilisation 
of RE level allocations and 84% utilisation of BE level allocations. 
Case for augmenting budgetary resources of the Department would be presented to 
Ministry of Finance at the time of finalisation of Revised Estimates for the current financial 
year”. 
 
8. The Committee are not convinced with  the contention of the Department that 
the  utilization of budgetary allocation  is very close to the  Revised Estimates (RE) 
level, which is in  the range of 97-99 %,  given the fact  that  there had been a  steady 
divergence  between the Budgetary Estimates and Revised Estimates, over the years,  
which  reflects poor estimation with regard to anticipated /projected  expenditure for 
the next financial year. The Committee reiterate  that the Department should make 
realistic projections of estimates for budgetary allocations and make all efforts for 
efficient utilization of budgetary allocation . Further t his would  greatly help the 
Department in  making a claim  for enhanced budgetary allocation, in real terms, from 
the Ministry of Finance. 
 
C. National River Conservation Plan - Other Basins 
 
Recommendation No.6  (Para No. 2.6) 
 
9. The Committee observed that under the National River Conservation Plan (NRCP) - 
other basins Scheme,  proposals for Projects are received from the State Government 
outside “Ganga Basin”  and funded for taking up pollution abatement works in towns along 
various rivers and are considered for financial assistance on a cost sharing basis subject to 
their confo rmity with the Scheme Guidelines, pollution status, prioritizations, appraisal by 
independent Institutions and availability of Plan Funds. The Committee further noted that for 
the fiscal year 2020 -21, an amount of Rs. 220 crore has been kept for the NRCP - other 
Basins which was a minuscule amount in comparison to budgetary allocation of Rs. 1640.02 
crore which had been kept for river Ganga. The Committee c ame to know from the reply of 
the Department that higher allocations under this Scheme would be sought  when approval 
to revised Scheme is obtained. The Committee were not happy with the meagre allocation  
5 

 
 
to this Scheme.  The Committee, therefore, recommend ed that concerted efforts must be 
made to obtain the approval for the revised Scheme at the earliest so that higher allocation 
could be made available for the work pertaining to pollution abatement for all other major 
rivers of the country which are equally polluted as river Ganga and need urgent remedial 
measures.  
 
10. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
 
“A proposal for approval of the Cabinet for conservation and rejuvenation of rivers in an 
integrated manner in ten selected polluted river stretches in the country under the National 
River Conservation Plan (NRCP) - Other Basins, involving financial outlay o f Rs.  8,117 
crore was initiated by the Department. Based on inputs and advice to route the proposal 
through the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC), a draft EFC Note with scheme size of 
Rs.35,640 crore for implementation in 10 years period has been prepar ed and under 
consultative process.  
 
After approval of EFC, the approved proposal would be taken up for approval of the Cabinet 
based on which suitable allocation of funds would be sought from Ministry of Finance”. 
 
11. The Committee have been informed that the Department has initiated a  
proposal for conservation and rejuvenation of rivers in an integrated manner in ten 
selected polluted river stretches in the country under the National River Conservation 
Plan (NRCP) - Other Basins , with an outlay of Rs. 8117 crore, and a fter approval of  
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC), the same  would be brought before the 
Cabinet. While appreciating the efforts made by the Department in this regard, t he 
Committee urge upon  the department to expedite the process so that the said  
proposal would be approved/materialized  at the earliest and  suitable fund 
allocations are made to the proposed scheme in the next financial year 2021-22. 
 
D. Central Water Commission (CWC) – Expeditious implementation of Mihir Shah 
Committee Report 
Recommendation No.7 (Para No. 2.7) 
 
12. The Committee note d that the CWC has been entrusted with the general 
responsibility of initiating, coordinating and furthering, in consultation with the State 
Governments concerned, Schemes for control, conservation and utilization of water 
resources throughout the country for the purpose of Flood Control, Irrigation, Drinking Water 
Supply and Water Power Development. The Committee further note d that the Mihir Shah 
Committee Report had suggested for restructuring of the Central Water Commission (CWC) 
and the Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) as well as creation of a unified new entity as  
6 

 
 
National Water Commission (NWC) . For this intended purpose, the  Department had 
engaged the Indian Institute of Management (IIM), Ahmadabad as a 'Consultant' for 
suggesting the amalgamation process and to suggest a structure for the new Organization, 
that incidentally submitted its Report in September 2018. Further, the Department had also 
set up a Working Group in 2018 to suggest the amalgamation of posts in CWC and CGWB. 
The creation of NWC  involves additional financial implications, creation of new 
infrastructure, new services and creation of additional posts requiring approval from the 
Union Cabinet. The Department had further apprised the Committee that no time limit could 
be fixed in this regard since the process involves consultation with various Ministries/ 
Departments and approval/recommendations of Nodal Ministries and the CEE. The 
Committee are of the considered view that a paradigm shift is required in surface and 
ground water management in terms of introducing major reforms like merging of Central 
Water Commission (CWC) and Central Ground Water Board (CGWB). Since considerable 
time ha d already elapsed in undergo ing the deliberation and consultation process, the 
Committee, therefore, desire d that the Department should expedite the process in this 
regard so that major reforms in the water sector of the country could be carried out as per 
the needs of the time.  
 
13. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
“The observations of the Standing Committee regarding expeditious implementation of 
Dr.Mihir Shah Committee Report have been noted by the Department. In line with the 
objectives enumerated in the aforesaid Report, it is proposed to amalgamate organisations 
like the Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) and Central Water Commission (CWC) to 
create a new entity `National Water Commission’ (NWC) as an apex technical planning and 
policy arm of this Department, with the Secretariat status of an Attached Office. 
NWC may also be responsible for project approval and appraisal as well as technical 
assistance to the Department and all stakeholders on policy matters, including each River 
Basin. NWC is proposed to be headed by Chairman, who will be an officer equivalent to the 
Secretary to the Government of India and each major River Basin is proposed to be under 
the overall charge of a Member, who will be an officer equivalent to the Additional Secretar y 
to the Government of India. A  proposal for the Committee on Establishment Expenditure 
(CEE) is under examination in the Department for the purpose. Inputs essential to 
preparation of proposal are being collected from the CWC and CGWB. This exercise may 
need more time as several issues relating to merging/ amalgamation of various cadres, 
service, and creation of posts at various levels are involved. The CEE proposal will precede 
the Cabinet Note and after approval by the CEE and thereafter approval by theC abinet, 
NWC can be created. However, the observations of the committee have been noted for 
compliance”. 
 
7 
 

 
 
14. The Committee note from the Department’s reply  that   a proposal for setting 
up the Committee on Establishment Expenditure (CEE) is under examination in the 
Department, for the purpose of working out modalities  for creating a new entity , 
namely  'National Water Commission' (NWC) by amalgamating  Central Ground Water 
Board (CGWB) and Central Water Commission (CWC )  and this exercise may need 
more time as several issues relating to merging/ amalgamation of various cadres, 
service, and creation of posts at various levels are involved.  While expressing 
satisfaction over the progress made in implementation of Dr. Mihir Shah Commission 
report, the Committee desire that time lines should be fixed /laid down  so that the 
exercise for creation of proposed   `National Water Commission’ (NWC) , as an apex 
technical planning and policy arm of the  Department is completed within a definite  
time frame. The action taken in this regard may be apprised to this Committee, within 
three months of presentation of the report.  
 
 
E. National Water Mission (NWM) 
 
 
Recommendation No.10 (Para No. 2.11) 
 
15. The Committee observe d that t he Government of India has established National 
Water Mission (NWM) as one of the eight National Missions under the National Action Plan 
on Climate Change (NAPCC). The main objective of NWM is conservation of water, 
minimizing wastage and ensuring its more  equitable distribution, both across and within the 
States through integrated water resources development and management . However, it was 
disheartening to see that though NWM was constituted to implement the goals on a Mission 
Mode, it was still functioning as a part of the Ministry. Further, limitations of administrative 
and financial powers, shortage of regular officers/staff, and reduction in budget were the 
major bottlenecks in the implementation of the Projects. The Committee were of the view 
that to realize its full potential and to function as per its stated mandate, the National Water 
Mission needed to be made independent of the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommended that the Department should take necessary measures in this regard.  The 
Committee further recommend ed that the Department should initiate measures for 
enhancement of funds and posting of regular officers/staff in the Mission to address the 
above-mentioned issues in a pragmatic manner.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 

 
 
16. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
 
“The approved scheme does not envisage functioning of National Water Mission 
independent of DOWR, RD&GR. Requirement of personnel is being met by hiring of 
consultants and young professionals, apart from posting of regular officers against approved 
vacancies.  Allocations under the scheme would be enhanced depending on pace of 
expenditure and components under the approved scheme”.  
17. The Committee are not inclined to accept the contention of the Department 
that the approved scheme  does not envisage functioning of National Water Mission 
independent of DOWR, RD&GR.  The Committee are of the considered opinion that 
given the importance and the mandate of the National Water Mission, it is imperative 
that the Mission s hould be accorded independent status so that it can  have 
administrative and functional autonomy , which are essential for fulfilling the 
objectives set under the mission. The Committee therefore  recommend  that the 
approved policy in this regard should be  revisited and explore th e ways and means   
for  according independent status to the Mission. 
 
F. Farakka Barrage Project (FBP) 
 
 
Recommendation No.14 (Para No. 2.15) 
 
 
18. The Committee observed that the main objective of the Farakka Barrage Project is to 
divert adequate quantity of Ganga waters to Bhagirathi -Hooghly river system through a 
feeder canal for preservation and maintenance of Kolkata Port by improving the regime and 
navigability of th e Bhagirathi -Hooghly river system. The Committee f ound that there  was 
always under utilization of funds under FBP, i.e., actual expenditure of Rs. 138.27 crore as 
against BE of Rs. 205.04 crore in the year 2014 -15. Further, in the year 2018 -19, Rs. 
114.25 crore was actually incurred against the BE of Rs. 209.25 crore. The Committee 
noted that the main reason for shortfall in expenditure in the work of replacement of Gates 
was due to various constraints like restricted working area and poor accessibility for 
replacement of Gates and hydro -mechanical components due to a busy rail -cum-road 
bridge adjacent to the site. Further, the Committee were astonished to find that only 149 
regular employees were working in Farakka Barrage Project as against the sanctioned 
strength of 824 which is only 18% of the sanctioned strength. Such a huge shortage of 
manpower did not auger well for the smooth working of the FBP and displayed the  
9 

 
 
indifferent attitude of the Department towards the upkeep and maintenance of FBP. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the review of manpower requirement by the 
Department taking into account the technological advancements over the years which might 
have facilitated various activities/processes.The Committee also recommend ed the 
Department to take urgent measures to fill up the vacancies which are essential for smooth 
running of Farakka Barrage Project at the earliest. The Committee would like to know  the 
details of such measures. Further, the Committee would like to be apprised of the specific 
reasons for constant under utilization of fundsunder FBP.   They also recommend ed the 
Department to make necessary changes in its procedure for budgetary estima tions so as to 
improve the utilization of budgetary allocations.  
 
19. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: - 
“A detailed Staff Inspection Unit (SIU) study has been undertaken for assessing the 
requirement/optimising of manpower of Farakka Barrage Project (FBP) for its smooth 
functioning as per the present requirements/necessity. The report of SIU is under process 
for making a reference to Ministry of Finance. 
As per the budget allocation w.r.t FBP for the FY 2014 -15 was BE (Rs.205.04 cr), RE 
(146.71 cr) and the AE (Rs.138.27 cr.) which is 94% of RE 2014 -15. Further, for FY 2018 -
19 BE( Rs.209.25 cr), RE( Rs.123.47 cr) was allocated against which AE (Rs.114.25 cr) 
which is 93% of RE 2018-19 . 
Fund requirement at BE stage is ma de as per the work in progress (repair & maintenance, 
gate installation etc.) and anticipated during the year. Utilization of the fund at the RE stage 
which is based on corrected assessment is more than 90% in all these years. FBP has 
constrained in utilisation of allocations due to the following reasons: 
a. Due to the mass retirement, during the last 5 years, the staff strength (both technical 
and administrative) has gone down to 15% of the sanctioned strength this resulted in 
savings under Salaries. 
b. Due to the  vacancies in technical staff, proposed  works could not be taken up in 
time, causing underutilization of fund. 
Due to various reasons like delay in supply of steel, materials from Bhilai Steel Plant, which 
affected progress of hydraulic gate fabrication & erections work, also contributed to non -
utilization of the planned fund”. 
 
20. From the reply of the Department, the Committee note that there is a huge gap 
between BE and RE in respect of fund allocation for Farraka Barrage Project  during 
the FY2014 -15 and FY2018-19. The Committee do not accept the Department’s 
contention that actual expenditure vis –a-vis R.E  has been more than 90% during the  
10 

 
 
said years, given the fact that there is a wide variation in budgetary projections at  BE 
and R.E.  stages, which shows that there is a poor financial planning at B.E.  stage   
resulting in substantial revision of  BE allocations at RE stage. The Committee , urge 
the Department to follow prudential financial norms so that as far as possible the 
budgetary projections are realistic  and concerted efforts be made for efficient 
utilization of budgetary allocation s.  Taking note of the fact that a  detailed study by 
Staff Inspection Unit (SIU) has been undertaken by  the Department  for assessing the 
requirement/optimising of manpower of Farakka Barrage Project ,  the Committee 
desire  that the study should  be completed expeditiously and  reference be made to 
the Ministry of Finance  for sanction of posts ,  so that the  vacancies in the FBP are 
filled up at the earliest .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11  

 
 
CHAPTER -  II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation No.3 (Para No. 2.3) 
 
Low Per Capita Water Availability 
 
The Committee observe with a high degree of concern that t he average annual per capita 
water availability in the years 2001 and 2011 was assessed at 1816 cubic meters and 1545 
cubic meters respectively which could reduce further to 1340 and 1140 cubic meters in the 
years 2025 and 2050 resp ectively. The Committee note that the major reason for continual 
decrease in the per capita water availability is increase in population of the country. The per 
capita availability of water has reduced from 5177 m 3/ year in 1951 to 1545 m 3/ year in 
2011.The largest water consuming sector in the country is the agriculture, followed by 
domestic and industrial sector(s). The Committee further observe that the Department has 
taken various steps to augment the per capita water availability, viz., launching of J al Shakti 
Abhiyan, formulation of National Perspective Plan (NPP), implementation of National 
Aquifer Mapping and Management (NAQUIM), etc. In this chronology, the Government has 
also launched Atal BhujalYojana ( ATAL JAL ) which is a Central Sector Scheme w ith the 
objective of sustainable management of ground water with emphasis on demand side 
interventions and community participation. While appreciating the renewed efforts of the 
Department in this regard,the Committee would like to lay emphasis on the need  for speedy 
execution of these Schemes and Programmes so that its benefits could be disseminated at 
the ground level at the earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The Department is making vigorous efforts to implement/ execute these initiatives and 
optimise outputs and outcomes thereunder. A brief on current status under these initiatives 
is as under. 
National Perspective Plan 
The National Perspective Plan (NPP) was prepared in August 1980 by the then Ministry of 
Irrigation (now Ministry of Jal Shakti) for water resources development through inter basin 
transfer of water from water surplus basins to water -deficit basins. Under t he NPP, the 
National Water Development Agency (NWDA) has identified 30 links (16 under Peninsular 
Component and 14 under Himalayan Component) for preparation of Feasibility Reports (FRs).  
12 

 
 
Under the NPP, four priority links have also been identified for  preparation of Detailed 
Project Reports (DPR) under the Peninsular Rivers Component viz; Ken -Betwa link project 
(KBLP), Damanganga -Pinjal link project, Par -Tapi-Narmada link project and Godavari -
Cauvery link project. Based on the concurrence of the concer ned States, DPRs of KBLP, 
Damanganga-Pinjal link project and Par -Tapi-Narmada link project have been completed 
and sent to concerned States. 
Further, draft DPR of Godavari -Cauvery link project consisting of three links viz; Godavari 
(Inchampalli/Janampet) – Krishna (Nagarjunasagar), Krishna (Nagarjunasagar) – Pennar 
(Somasila), Pennar (Somasila) -Cauvery (Grand Anicut) link projects has been completed 
and circulated to party States in March 2019.  
The Government is pursuing the inter -linking of rivers (ILR) program in a consultative 
manner and accorded high priority. A “Special Committee for Interlinking of Rivers” has 
been constituted in September, 2014 under the Chairmanship of Hon`ble Minister of WR, 
RD & GR (now Ministry of Jal Shakti) for the implementat ion of ILR programme. Seventeen 
meetings of the Special Committee for ILR have been held so far (last meeting held on 
26.02.2020). Further, a Task Force for Interlinking of Rivers has been constituted by MoWR, 
RD &GR (now MoJS) in April, 2015. Eleven meeti ngs of the Task Force for interlinking of 
rivers have been held so far and the last meeting was held on 18.10.2019. Concerted efforts 
have been made for generating consensus with development of alternative plans and also 
setting out road maps for implementation of mature projects. 
The proposed transfer of water through the ILR projects may lead to increase the per capita 
availability of utilisable water in the country.  
Initiatives by National Water Mission 
Besides increasing population, rapid urbanization,  changing lifestyles, increasing 
industrialization, inadequate rainfall and inefficient water use in agriculture as well as 
industry sector are reasons for sharp decline in groundwater volume in the country and 
decline in per capita water availability. NWM  has taken several steps to address demand 
side issues. 
a) All central Ministries / Departments have been requested to install water saving 
aerators in the taps in toilets andbuild rain water harvesting structures like dug wells, 
bore wells, recharge trenches,  recharge pits, etc. in every premises to ensure that 
rain water is conserved and used to recharge the ground water aquifers. 
b) An Inter-Ministerial meeting was held under the chairmanship of Secretary, DOWR, 
RD&GR to encourage states to start the processes without delay to “Catch the next 
Rains”. State Governments have been advised to ensure building Rain Water 
Harvesting Structures (RWHS) to trap rain water from roof -top and open-grounds of 
all government, semi -government and corporate establishments before  the onset of 
the next monsoon.  
13 

 
 
c) Sahi Fasal campaign has been launched to encourage farmers in the water stressed 
areas to grow alternate crops which are not water intensive but water efficient; 
economically remunerative; healthy and nutritious; suited to the agro -climatic-hydro 
characteristics of the area; and are environmentally friendly.   Creating awareness 
among farmers on appropriate crops, micro -irrigation, soil moisture conservation 
etc;  weaning them away from water intensive crops like paddy, su garcane etc to 
crops like corn, maize etc which require less water; assisting policy makers to frame 
policies  that make effective pricing of inputs (water and electricity);   improve 
procurement and market for these alternate crops; create appropriate stor age them 
etc ultimately  leading to increase in the income of farmers are the key elements of 
“SahiFasal”  
d) State Specific Action Plans (SSAPs) for Water Sector covering Irrigation, Industry, 
domestic and waste water of a State/UT, where financial assistance of Rs. 50 lakh to 
major states and Rs. 30 lakh to small states/UTs as a grant for formulation of such 
plans is provided. MOUs have been signed with 25 States/UTs for preparation of 
SSAPs. Five States (Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Uttarakhand, Tamil N adu 
and West Bengal) have completed the first phase of SSAPs. 
e) Baseline studies have been undertaken for improving water use efficiency in 
irrigation sector and studies have been awarded to North Eastern Regional Institute 
for Water and Land Management (NERIWALM - Tezpur) -   5 nos., Water and Land 
Management Training and Research Institute (WALMTARI - Hyderabad) – 10 nos., 
Water and Land Management Institute (WALMI - Aurangabad) – 6 nos. and Centre 
for Water Resources Development and Management (CWRDM - Kerala) – 5 nos.  
f) Capacity building and training of various stake holders particularly that of Panchayati 
Raj Institutions, Urban Local Bodies and Water Users Association. 
g) A seminar series - “Water Talk” - to promote dialogue and information sharing 
among participants on variety of water related topics has been initiated  to create 
awareness, build capacities and to encourage participation in conservation and 
saving of water. 12 Water Talks have so far been conducted. 
h) National Water Mission Awards have been instituted to recognize excellence in 
water conservation, efficien t use of water and sustainable water management 
practices. First National Water Mission Awards, 2019 were held on 25 th September, 
2019 during which 22 winners were awarded in various categories. 
National Aquifer Mapping and Management (NAQUIM) 
 
National Aquifer Mapping and Management Programme was started in 2012. By the end of 
March 2020, nearly 13 lakh km 2 of the 25 lakh km 2 mappable area of the country has been 
covered. In an effort to expedite the coverage, the remaining area of ~12 lakh km 2 is 
envisaged to be covered in three years (2020-23). 
14 

 
 
 
ATAL BHUJAL YOJANA  
 
Atal Bhujal Yojana has been launched from 01 -04-2020. The scheme is to be implemented 
in seven states, viz. Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, 
Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. Implementation of the scheme is expected to benefit nearly 
8350 Gram Panchayats in 78 districts in these States. ATAL JAL will promote panchayat led 
ground water management and behavioral change with primary focus on demand side 
management 
Out of the total outlay of Rs. 6000 crore to be implemented over a period of 5 years (2020 -
21 to 2024-25), 50% shall be in the form of World Bank loan, and be repaid by the Central 
Government. The remaining 50% shall be through Central Assistance from regular 
budgetary support. The entire World Bank's loan component and Central Assistance shall 
be passed on to the States as Grants. 
 
(O.M. No. LAFEAS-SCWR023/18/2020-SCWR dated 05.03.2020) 
Recommendation No.4 (Para No. 2.4) 
 
National Water Framework Law 
 
The Committee observe that a draft National Water Framework Bill, 2016 formulated by the 
Ministry seeks to provide an over-arching National Legal Framework based on the principles 
for Protection, Conservation, Regulation and Management of 'Water' as a vita l and stressed 
natural resource, under which, the Legislation and Executive action on 'Water' at all levels of 
governance can take place. The Bill was circulated to the States to elicit their opinion. Some 
of the States like Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Utta r Pradesh, Maharashtra, Gujarat and 
Jharkhand have supported the Bill with some suggestions/comments. However, the State 
Government(s) of Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka, Punjab, Odisha and Bihar are not in 
favour of the draft Bill as they feel that the Bill would infringe on the rights of the States. The 
Bill is under examination in Uttarakhand, Arunachal Pradesh, Delhi and Lakshadweep. The 
Committee are aware that the Department of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation is regularly pursuin g the matter with the State Governments for 
seeking their cooperation for early enactment of the National Water Framework Bill. Since 
nothing tangible has come out during these long years of deliberations with the State 
Government(s),the Committee are of t he view that the Department should vigorously 
impress upon the States to shrug off their apprehensions/predicaments in the overall 
interests of the citizens of the country, beyond the geographical boundaries of their 
respective State, so that such an impor tant piece of legislation could be enacted and 
implemented at the right earnest.  
 
15 

 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation is regularly 
pursuing the state governments for seeking their cooperatio n for early enactment of the 
National Water Framework Bill. The Bill requires to be finalized keeping in view the delicate 
balance in relationship between the Centre and the State. However, as recommended by 
the Committee, the Department would again urge t he States to furnish their views 
expeditiously so that their apprehensions may be addressed to effectively. 
 
(O.M. No. LAFEAS-SCWR023/18/2020-SCWR dated 05.03.2020) 
 
Recommendation No.5 (Para No. 2.5) 
 
Namami Gange 
 
The Committee observe that the Government of India (GOI) has launched the Namami 
Gange Programme to accomplish the twin objectives of effective abatement of pollution, 
conservation and rejuvenation of the National River Ganga and its tributaries with a tot al 
budgetary outlay of Rs.20,000 crore for the period from FY 2014 -15 till 31.12.2020. The 
Committee further note that under the Namami Gange Programme, so far, a total of 310 
Projects have been sanctioned at an estimated cost of Rs. 28,909.59 crore, out of which, 
114 projects have been completed and made operational, and rest of the projects are at 
various stages of implementation. Further, out of these 310 Projects, 152 belong to 
Sewerage Infrastructure. However, only 46 of these Projects have been completed. While 
appreciating the ambitious Programme of Namami Gange, which aimed at cleaning and 
rejuvenating river Ganga by December, 2020, the Committee are concerned to note that the 
implementation of this Programme has not been able to keep pace with  the earlier 
conceived timelines.The Committee further note that the River Ganga (Rejuvenation, 
Protection and Management) Authorities Order, 2016 empowers the National Mission for 
Clean Ganga to implement the Projects in a fast track manner.Taking cogniza nce of this 
Order, the Committee hope that the Projects would now be completed in a time bound 
manner without any further delay.  
 
Reply of the government 
 
So far, till 31-03-2020, a total of 313 Projects have been sanctioned at an estimated cost of 
Rs. 28,966.53 crore, out of which, 122 projects have been completed and made operational, 
and rest of the projects are at various stages of implementation. Furthe r, out of these 313 
Projects, 152 belong to Sewerage Infrastructure. 51 of these Projects have been completed, 
balance 101 Projects are at various stages of Execution.  
16 

 
 
In year 2019 -20, 21 new Projects were sanctioned and 34 Projects were completed, 
including 14 Sewerage Infrastructure Projects. The total expenditure in FY 19 -20 had been 
2,673.09 Cr. 
Presently, 73 Sewerage Infrastructure Projects are under various stages of execution and 
28 Projects are under tendering. It is expected that in the year 20 20-21, as many as 42 
Projects may achieve their completion and the expenditure projected for sewerage 
infrastructure alone in the current year is Rs. 2,500 Cr. which is comparable with Rs 2,673 
Cr expenditure (in FY 19-20) for the entire NMCG projects. 
However, the Current Pandemic situation due to COVID-19 and consequent Lockdown, has 
slowed down the progress of various projects, including Sewerage Infrastructure Projects. 
Construction work has been allowed since April 20th 2020 but site have not become fu lly 
functional due to insufficient labour force. It is expected that the work may restore to full 
speed by end of June 2020 only. Therefore, there may be some lag in the progress in first 2 
quarters of this year but with constant monitoring by National Mis sion for Clean 
Ganga(NMCG) and concerted effort by the executing agencies it is expected that projected 
progress will be achieved and the projects will  get completed in a time bound manner. 
The details of projects under NMCG are given below: 
Year 
Number of 
Sanctioned 
Projects 
Sanctioned Cost  
(Rs. in crore) 
Number of 
Completed 
projects 
Till March, 
2014 72 4,608 16 
2014-15 21 3,184 10 
2015-16 7 584 2 
2016-17 60 2,678 11 
2017-18 40 9,547 10 
2018-19 92 7,781 39 
2019-20 21 584 34 
Total 313 28,966 122 
 
Details of financial progress over the years in Namami Gange are given below: 
 
17 
 

 
 
Rs in crore 
Year Amount 
Disbursed by 
NMCG 
2014-15 170.99 
2015-16 602.60 
2016-17 1062.81 
2017-18 1625.01 
2018-19 2626.54 
2019-20  2673.09 
Total 8761.04 
 
(O.M. No. LAFEAS-SCWR023/18/2020-SCWR dated 05.03.2020) 
 
Recommendation No.6 (Para No. 2.6) 
 
National River Conservation Plan - Other Basins 
 
The Committee observe that under the National River Conservation Plan (NRCP) - other 
basins Scheme,  proposals for Projects are received from the State Government outside 
“Ganga Basin” and funded for taking up pollution abatement works in towns along various 
rivers and are considered for financial assistance on a cost sharing basis subject to their 
conformity with the Scheme Guidelines, pollution status, prioritizations, appraisal by 
independent Institutions and availability of Plan Funds. The Committee further note that for 
the fiscal year 2020 -21, an amount of Rs. 220 crore has been kept for the NRCP - other 
Basins which is a minuscule amount in comparison to budgetary allocation of Rs. 1640.02 
crore which has been kept for river Ganga. The Committee have come to know from the 
reply of the Department that higher allocations under this Scheme would be sou ght when 
approval to revised Scheme is obtained. The Committee are not happy with the meagre 
allocation to this Scheme.The Committee, therefore, recommend that concerted efforts must 
be made to obtain the approval for the revised Scheme at the earliest so that higher 
allocation could be made available for the work pertaining to pollution abatement for all 
other major rivers of the country which are equally polluted as river Ganga and need urgent 
remedial measures.  
 
 
18 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
A proposal for approval of the Cabinet for conservation and rejuvenation of rivers in an 
integrated manner in ten selected polluted river stretches in the country under the National 
River Conservation Plan (NRCP) - Other Basins, involving financial outlay o f Rs.  8,117 
crore was initiated by the Department. Based on inputs and advice to route the proposal 
through the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC), a draft EFC Note with scheme size of 
Rs.35,640 crore for implementation in 10 years period has been prepar ed and under 
consultative process.  
 
After approval of EFC, the approved proposal would be taken up for approval of the Cabinet 
based on which suitable allocation of funds would be sought from Ministry of Finance. 
 
(O.M. No. LAFEAS-SCWR023/18/2020-SCWR dated 05.03.2020) 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
Recommendation No.8 (Para No. 2.8) 
 
Central Ground Water Board 
 
The Committee observe that Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) is a multi -disciplinary 
scientific Organization with a mandate to develop and disseminate technologies, monitor 
and implement National Policies for the scientific and sustainable development and 
management of India’s Ground Water resources including their exploration, assessment, 
conservation, augmentation, protection from pollution and distribution based on the 
principles of economic and ecological efficiency and equity. The Committee note that 
CGWB has a total strength of 4015 personnel out of which 2748 (Scientifics -880 & 
Engineering -1868) are Technical and 1267 are non -Technical. Around 31% posts in the 
CGWB are vacant due to various reasons. The Committee believe that in view of the 
precarious situation of groundwater in the country, shortage of staff to the extent of 31% 
hampers the smooth functioning of the Board and further aggravates the already alarming 
scenario as far as groundwater is concerned. The Committee, therefore, urge that CGWB , 
in consultation with the Union Public Service Commission and the Staff Selection 
Commission, takes immediate measures to fill up various vacancies without further delay to 
enable the Board to carry out its tasks efficiently and in a result-oriented manner.  
 
 
19 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Central Ground Water Board ( CGWB) has a total strength of 4015 personnel out of which 
2748 (Scientifics -880 & Engineering -1868) are technical and 1267 are non -technical. 
About 1261 (31% ) posts in CGWB are vacant due to various reasons such as in process of 
recruitment with staff s election commission‘s and UPSC; non recruitment due to various 
court cases and pending amendment of recruitment rules.  
 
Around 100 vacancies of Scientific Officers are in final stage with the Union Public Service 
Commission (UPSC) where interviews are to be held for direct recruitment and 
Departmental Promotion Committee (DPC) is to be convened by UPSC for promotion. 
However, due to lockdown and restrictions in place in view of COVID -19, the process has 
been stalled. It is expected that once Rail/Road/Air movement is restored, the UPSC will 
take necessary steps to hold the interviews and DPC meetings. Similarly, nearly 225 
dossiers of candidates selected by various Staff Selection Commission (SSC) Regions are 
awaited to be received until normal services are  restored. At Member level (pay level 14), 
out of the six posts, two are lying vacant and efforts are being made to fill the vacancies. At 
Regional Director level (pay level 13), out of the 18 posts in scientific cadre, 11 are lying 
vacant due to pending  case in the Hon’ble court. 
 
 
Giving utmost importance to the issue of Filling up of Vacancies in CGWB, the Secretary, 
DoWR,RD&GR has been conducting meeting on regular basis. Recently, a meeting, thru 
Video Conference, was held on 5th May 2020, which was p resided over by the Secretary, 
DoWR,RD&GR. While going over the progress made, the Secretary   was   of   the   view   
that   certain   Posts,   created   in   past,   may   not   be   of relevance and their efficacy 
needs to be ascertained in present day context where latest IT tools (like CAD, CAMs etc), 
modern technology / techniques and option to outsource certain tasks (like drilling bore 
wells etc), are available. The Secretary instructed that CGWB and the Ministry (GWE) 
should conduct a thorough revi ew of posts and their vacancies so that redundant / not so 
relevant posts are replaced with New Posts with desired skill sets. Such an exercise should 
result into bringing focus on priority posts vacancies and recommending some new posts (in 
lieu of existi ng ones, as Matching Saving) with desired skills, needed in present times / 
future. 
 
CGWB is making all -out efforts for filling up all the vacant posts with the concerned 
authorities. However, the present manpower in CGWB is not adequate for timely completion 
of all the envisaged targets. Secretary (WR, RD & GR) has reviewed the manpower 
situation in the Board and has advised to conduct a thorough review of posts as per the skill 
requirements. 
(O.M. No. LAFEAS-SCWR023/18/2020-SCWR dated 05.03.2020) 
20 

 
 
 
Recommendation No.9 (Para No. 2.9 and 2.10) 
 
 
Development of Water Resources Information System 
 
 
The Committee note that Development of Water Resources Information System (DWRIS) is 
a Central Sector Scheme continuing from the Twelfth Five Year Plan. It ai ms for 
standardized National Water Information System with a network of 'Data Banks' and 'Data 
Bases', improving data quality and processing capabilities through a country wide network 
of Hydrological Observation Stations. In addition to this, it endeavour s towards early Flood 
Warning System as an important non -structural measure for flood management. Further, 
the Pilot Census of major and medium irrigation projects has also been envisioned under 
this Scheme. It also strives to create an integrated data ban k to tackle coastal erosion in a 
scientific manner keeping in view the long term perspective and challenges of climate 
change.  
 
Notwithstanding the aforementioned averments, the Committee are astonished to learn that 
CWC is monitoring live storage status of 123 major reservoirs of the country on weekly 
basis which is only 66.36% of the live storage capacity estimated to have been created in 
the country. Though, the CWC has expanded Hydrological Observation Network from  the 
existing 878 Stations to 1598 Stations all over the country, the lack  of adequate manpower 
at the Hydrological Observation (HO) sites is a major impediment for running and 
maintenance of HO stations. Besides, absence of regular staff, both Supervisory and Skilled 
Work Assistant for HO works, has resulted in outsourcing of manpower.The Committee feel 
that the HOs need to be equipped with adequate manpower for their smooth 
functioning.The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend that the Department should take 
urgent and effective measures to fill up the vacancies by recruiting skilled manpower. 
Further, the Committee desire that the CWC should expand its monitoring base to cover the 
100% live storage capacity created in the country within a fixed timeframe.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 

 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
Requirements at semi-skilled and unskilled levels are being met by outsourcing. In relation 
to skilled Supervisory level, a proposal for creation of 261 posts at the level of Junior 
Engineer for running and maintenance of Hydrological Observation Sites and  also Water 
Quality Laboratories under Development of Water Resources Information System (DWRIS) 
Scheme is under consideration.  
 
CWC is monitoring the live storage of important reservoirs across the country and issuing 
weekly bulletin every Thursday since  1981. The number of reservoirs being monitored is 
being increased periodically to get better coverage of the storages across the country. 
However, as per constitutional provisions, water is a state subject and the reservoirs are 
mostly owned by the state governments. For including any reservoir under CWC monitoring, 
historical data of past ten years is required for carrying out analysis besides making 
arrangements for obtaining data regularly on weekly / daily basis from the state 
governments/project autho rities. Hence, concurrence of project authorities / state 
government is required to include any reservoir under CWC monitoring system. In general, 
reservoirs having live storage capacity more than 100 Million Cubic Meter (MCM) are 
included under the CWC mo nitoring system. However, some reservoirs of lesser capacity 
are also included, particularly in drought prone regions, as per concurrence of the project 
authorities /state governments.  
 
The recommendation of the Committee in relation to expansion of monit oring of liver 
storage capacity by Central Water Commission (CWC), regular efforts are being made to 
obtain the data / concurrence from project authorities / state governments for inclusion of 
more and more projects under the CWC monitoring system and enha nce the coverage of 
the same. 
 
Regarding filling up of the vacancies to man the HO sites, it is informed that the matter was 
taken up with ministry of Finance and DoPT etc. as it involves several issues such as revival 
of posts, framing of Recruitment rule s etc. Additional information has been sought by those 
departments. While the same is done, action is also taken engage manpower through 
outsourcing so that the work at those sited is not affected.  
 
(O.M. No. LAFEAS-SCWR023/18/2020-SCWR dated 05.03.2020) 
 
 
 
22 

 
 
Recommendation No.11 (Para No. 2.12) 
Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme 
 
The Committee observe that during 2016 -17, Ninety Nine (99) on -going Accelerated 
Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP) Major/Medium Projects along with their CADWM 
works having a potential of 76.03 lakh hectare and estimated cost of Rs. 77,595 crore have 
been identified in consultation with the States, for completion in Phases up to December, 
2019. However, the Committee observe that out of 99 prioritized Projects and 7 Phases 
(total 106 Projects), AIBP works of only 40 Projects have been completed. For completion of 
rest of the Projects, the deadline has been extended up to March, 2023. The Committee are 
not satisfied with the progress of implementation of these Projects, especially, in view of the  
fact that funds are available for these Projects through Lo ng Term Irrigation Fund (LTIF) 
created in NABARD. The Committee are apprehensive that with this pace, even the 
extended timeline would not be met.The Committee, therefore, recommend that concerted 
efforts be made by the Department to complete these Project s within the extended deadline 
as these Projects are financed through LTIF carrying loan liabilities. 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
After inclusion under PMKSY -AIBP, 40 priority projects have been completed by March 
2020.  Out of Ultimate Irrigation Potential (UIP) of 76.03 Lakh hectares (L.ha) of these 99 
prioritized projects; potential of 41.39 L.ha was created upto March, 2016 and t he balance 
potential to be created was 34.64 L.ha.   Against this balance 34.64 L.ha, irrigation potential 
of 18.19 L.ha. has been created through the 99 prioritized projects during 2016-2019.  
 
The following initiatives have been made under the PMKSY -AIBP scheme for monitoring 
and expedient completion of projects. 
 An online MIS portal has been developed for monitoring overall and component-wise 
physical and financial progress of the prioritized projects. 
 Physical and financial progress of projects is monit ored through the field units of 
Central Water Commission. One nodal officer for each of the 99 priority projects has 
been identified who is responsible for updating the physical and financial progress of 
the project regularly in the MIS developed for this purpose. 
 The Cropped Area estimation in the command of 99 priority projects is being carried 
out annually through remote sensing. 
 
23 

 
 
 Use of pressurized pipe irrigation and micro irrigation, wherever feasible, is being 
adopted to increase efficiency. In Od isha& Maharashtra, land acquisition of 6200 ha 
&4920 ha. respectively is reported to have been avoided in distribution system by 
adopting underground Piped Distribution (PDN). 
The physical progress of the prioritized projects is being comprehensively revie wed by 
Hon’ble Minister, Jal Shakti and Secretary (DoWR, RD & GR) from time to time. Matter has 
been taken up at the level of Secretary (DoWR, RD & GR) with the Chief Secretaries of all 
concerned States requesting that a special drive be taken up to comple te as many ongoing 
PMKSY-AIBP projects by 31.03.2021 as possible. To overcome issues related to railway / 
highway / gas pipe line crossings in various projects, matter has been taken up with 
Chairman of Railways / National Highways Authority of India (NHAI ) / Gas Authority of India 
Ltd. (GAIL) to accord top priority in resolving these issues.   Thus, concerted efforts are 
being made so that projects can be completed within revised time schedule. 
(O.M. No. LAFEAS-SCWR023/18/2020-SCWR dated 05.03.2020) 
 
Recommendation No.12 (Para No. 2.13) 
 
Flood Management and Border Areas Programme (FMBAP) 
 
The Committee note that the Twelfth Plan Schemes of Flood Management Programme 
(FMP) and River Management Activities & work related to Border Areas have been merged 
as “Flood Management and Border Areas Programme" (FMBAP) for the period  2017 -18 to 
2019-20 with an outlay of Rs. 3342 crore. There are 83 ongoing Projects under FMBAP. Out 
of these 83 Projects, 14 Projects have been completed and remaining are expected to be 
completed by end of March 2021. The Committee take cognizance of the fact that issues 
such as acquisition of land for the Project, litigations, non -release of State Share and 
inadequate budget allocation are the major impediments due to which the Projects are not 
completed on time. In view of the need for timely completion of these Projects, the 
Committee recommend the Department to hold discussion with State Governments/Project 
Authorities and resolve the underlying factors due to which Projects are not finished within 
the fixed timeline. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 

 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Progress of works under Flood Management Programme (FMP) as per the extant 
guidelines is monitored by Central Water Commission (CWC), Ganga Flood Control 
Commission (GFCC) and Brahmaputra Board (BB) in their respective jurisdiction and these 
agencies close ly liaise with concerned State Governments for timely completion of the 
projects. The review meetings involving State Governments, Monitoring Agencies and 
DOWR, RD&GR are held regularly to expedite early completion of FMP projects.  
  
Nevertheless, considering emergent nature of FMP projects, review meetings as suggested 
the Committee would be held with all stake holders for expediting completion of remaining 
69 FMP projects. 
 
(O.M. No. LAFEAS-SCWR023/18/2020-SCWR dated 05.03.2020) 
 
Recommendation No.13 (Para No. 2.14) 
 
 
The Committee observe that t he management of floods in the States of Bihar and Uttar 
Pradesh caused by the rivers originating from Nepal has been a matter of serious concern . 
In this regard, Government of India has been regularly in teracting with the Government of 
Nepal for construction of Dams on these rivers for mutual benefit of the two countries which  
includes flood control. Discussions are also held at three -tier mechanism established in this 
regard. The Committee note that tho ugh the draft final DPR of the Pancheshwar 
Multipurpose Project has been prepared by M/s. WAPCOS Limited, no specific reply has 
been furnished regarding the execution and completion of the Project.The Committee would 
like to know the timeline for completio n of the Pancheshwar Project as well as the reasons 
that could cause functional delay in the Project.The Committee are of the viewthat the 
Ministry should play a proactive role in completion of these Projects as it would help in 
combating the menace of flo od in downstream States of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh by the 
rivers originating from Nepal. 
 
 
 
 
25 

 
 
Reply of the Government: 
A joint Team of Officials/ Experts (ToE) has been constituted by both the countries to 
discuss and resolve the comments on DPR including issues raised by Nepal on the 
interpretation of Mahakali Treaty, sharing of the Mahakali waters and assessment of project 
benefits in order to finalize the DPR. The first meeting of ToE was held on 21 -23 August 
2017 at Kathmandu and second meeting on 5-6 September 2017 at New Delhi and the third 
meeting of ToE was held on 27th -28th February, 2019 at Kathmandu.    
During the course of the ToE meetings, most of the technical issues have been discussed 
and resolved to the satisfaction of both sides. However, certain fundamental issues relating 
to the interpretation of certain clauses of the Mahakali Treaty still remains to be  resolved 
bilaterally by both Government of India and Nepal and both the Governments are under 
discussions at highest level towards finalization of India -Nepal Pancheshwar Multipurpose 
Project under the guidance of Ministry of External Affairs. 
(O.M. No. LAFEAS-SCWR023/18/2020-SCWR dated 05.03.2020) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26  

 
 
CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27  

 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation No. 1 (Para No. 2.1) 
 
Analysis of Demands for Grants 
 
The Committee observe that an amount of Rs. 8960.39 crore (net) has been allocated in the 
Budget 2020-21 in respect of the Department of Water Resources, River Development and 
Ganga Rejuvenation (DoWR, RD & GR). However, out of Rs. 8960.39 crore, as much a s 
Rs. 2675 crore has been kept for servicing of anticipated liabilities towards National Bank 
for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) dues, effectively rendering budgetary 
allocation of merely Rs. 6285.39 crore. Further, the Department has been allowed to borrow 
an amount of Rs. 5000 crore from the NABARD. The Committee further note that as 
compared to the last financial year (2019-20), there is an increase of Rs. 720.59 crore in the 
Revenue Section, whereas, there is a decrease of Rs. 5.45 crore und er the Capital Section. 
In nutshell, there is an increase of Rs. 715.14 crore in demand for the year 2020 -21. In this 
backdrop, the Committee find it intriguing that every year, there has always been under 
utilization of funds allocated to the Department. It is disheartening to note that the 
Department has persistently lagged behind in utilization of budgetary allocations during the 
last four years, i.e., actual expenditure of only Rs. 5313.48 crore as compared to BE 
allocation of Rs. 6887 crore in the year 2017-18. Further, there is an expenditure of only Rs. 
7422.08 crore as compared to BE allocation of Rs. 8860 crore in the year 2018 -19.The 
Committee are also concerned over the huge committed liability of Rs. 45812.80 crore 
towards outstanding principal a nd interest payments for borrowing from NABARD. Such 
increased dependence of the Department on the borrowing from NABARD over and above 
the budgetary provisions with apparently quite inadequate capacity to repay the loans, is not 
a healthy trend.  The Comm ittee, however, note that this year, Rs. 5000 crore has been 
allowed to be borrowed from NABARD which is substantially lower in comparison to 
provisions during previous fiscal years. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend the 
Department to utilize the unused amount in the Projects which have been brought under the 
NABARD borrowings. The Committee further recommend that the Department should 
manage its resources more prudently in order to avoid future borrowings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 

 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation (DOWR, 
RD&GR) during FY 2019 -20 was permitted to raise extra budgetary sources for the 
identified projects being funded from Long Term Irrigation Fund (LTIF) through NABARD. 
These projects as per Cabinet approval and scheme design are to be funded through LTIF 
route and budge tary funding for these projects including by way of diversion of savings 
available if any is not admissible. Details of Projects, EBRs approved and actually raised in 
FY 2019-20 are given in table below:- 
 
(Rs. in crore) 
Project EBRs 
approved in 
FY 2019-20 
EBR raised in 
FY 2019-20 
Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP) & 
HKKP - CADWM component under PMKSY 
4200.00 1902.77 
Rajasthan Feeder - Sirhind Feeder 196.00 0 
Polavaram Irrigation Project 1850.00 1850.00 
Shahpur Kandi 150.00 60.00 
North Koel Reservoir Project 336.00 0.53 
Total 6732.00 3813.30 
 
Note: In March 2020, NABARD sought to raise Rs. 932.6057 crore (AIBP – Rs.764.4167 crore, 
CADWM – Rs. 108.66 crore, Shahpur Kandi Dam – Rs.59.529 crore) through EBR. However, 
due to the prevailing market conditions at that time, response of the investors was not 
encouraging and NABARD conveyed that it may not be desirable to raise resources from the 
market during the remaining period of FY 2019 -20. This amount bei ng on account of committed 
liabilities has been included in borrowing programme for FY 2020-21. 
 
As regards utilization of the unused amount in the Projects which have been brought under 
the NABARD borrowings, unspent balance for previous releases availabl e with the 
State/project authority and indicated in utilisation certificate is duly factored in while making 
fresh release.  
 
NABARD borrowings under LTIF are limited to actual releases for identified projects, which 
are regulated according to physical and financial progress of projects. The recommendation 
of the Committee for more prudent management of resources of Department has been 
noted for necessary action. 
 
(O.M. No. LAFEAS-SCWR023/18/2020-SCWR dated 05.03.2020) 
29 

 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 5 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 2 (Para No. 2.2) 
 
 
Low Budgetary Allocations 
 
The Committee note that although the budgetary allocations of the Department of Water 
Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenat ion (DoWR, RD & GR) has increased 
consecutively, except the year 2019-20, during the last four fiscal years from Rs. 6887 crore 
in the year 2017 -18 to Rs. 8960.39 crore in the year 2020 -21, the representative of the 
Ministry was not satisfied with the budg etary allocations. The Committee further observe 
that the initial Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) ceiling for the FY 2020-21 was 
Rs. 10238.61 crore for the Department. However, actual MTEF awarded to the Department 
was just Rs. 8960.39 crore. It is an undisputable fact that the challenges in the water sector 
of the country are enormous, however, in relative terms, the budgetary allocations of the 
Ministry are far from being acknowledged as sufficient. The primary reason for the lower 
budgetary all ocations is that 'Water' being a State subject, the major responsibility for 
augmentation, conservation and efficient management of water resources , primarily, comes 
under the domain of the States. The role of Union Government is technical, advisory, 
catalytic and promotional in nature, which is a determining factor for lower budgetary 
allocation to the Ministry of Jal Shakti (Department of Water Resources, River Development 
and Ganga Rejuvenation). At this juncture, when the Union Government has taken up t he 
subject of 'Water' in an unprecedented Mission Mode, the Committee feel that merely hand -
holding by the Union Government would not suffice and the Government has to play a pro -
active role in 'Integrated Water Management' for environmental sustenance and sustainable 
economic development of the country.The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Department should make all out efforts to fully and optimally utilize the resources at its 
command and should assume a catalytic role in galvanizing the efforts o f States and Union 
territories in this area. Only on making full and effective utilization of budgetary allocation, 
the Department can vigorously present its case before the Ministry of Finance to augment 
its budgetary allocation, in real terms, which will  also result in reducing its dependence on 
borrowing from NABARD besides helping the resources -stretched States to implement the 
policies and programmes of the Union Government.  
 
 
 
 
 
30 

 
 
Reply of the Government: 
An allocation of Rs.8245.25 crore was made in BE 2019 -20. This was reduced to 
Rs.7518.21 crore at RE level. In spite of constraints of lockdown imposed at a crucial time 
of financial year closing due to the  COVID pandemic, the Department was able to utilise 
Rs.7416.28 crore (tentative pending fina lisation of appropriation accounts). This is 99% 
utilisation RE level allocations and 90% utilisation of BE level allocations. 
By comparison, in FY 2018 -19 against BE allocations of Rs.8860 crore and RE ceiling of 
Rs.7612.52 crore, an expenditure of Rs.742 2.08 crore was incurred. It was 97% utilisation 
of RE level allocations and 84% utilisation of BE level allocations. 
Case for augmenting budgetary resources of the Department would be presented to 
Ministry of Finance at the time of finalisation of Revised Estimates for the current financial 
year. 
(O.M. No. LAFEAS-SCWR023/18/2020-SCWR dated 05.03.2020) 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No.7 (Para No. 2.7) 
 
Central Water Commission (CWC) – Expeditious implementation of Mihir Shah 
Committee Report 
 
The Committee note that the CWC has been entrusted with the general responsibility of 
initiating, coordinating and furthering, in consultation with the State Governments 
concerned, Schemes for control, conservation and utilization of water resources throughout 
the country for the purpose of Flood Control, Irrigation, Drinking Water Supply and Water 
Power Development. The Committee further note that the Mihir Shah Committee Report 
had suggested for r estructuring of the Central Water Commission (CWC) and the Central 
Ground Water Board (CGWB) as well as creation of a unified new entity as National Water 
Commission (NWC) . For this intended purpose, the  Department had engaged the Indian 
Institute of Manag ement (IIM), Ahmadabad as a 'Consultant' for suggesting the 
amalgamation process and to suggest a structure for the new Organization, that incidentally 
submitted its Report in September 2018. Further, the Department had also set up a Working 
Group in 2018 to suggest the amalgamation of posts in CWC and CGWB. The creation of 
NWC involves additional financial implications, creation of new infrastructure, new services 
and creation of additional posts requiring approval from the Union Cabinet. The Department 
has further apprised the Committee that no time limit could be fixed in this regard since the 
process involves consultation with various Ministries/ Departments and  
31 

 
 
approval/recommendations of Nodal Ministries and the CEE. The Committee are of the 
considered view that a paradigm shift is required in surface and ground water management 
in terms of introducing major reforms like merging of Central Water Commission (CWC) and 
Central Ground Water Board (CGWB). Since considerable time has already elapsed in 
undergoing the deliberation and consultation process, the Committee, therefore, desire that 
the Department should expedite the process in this regard so that major refor ms in the 
water sector of the country could be carried out as per the needs of the time.  
 
 
Reply of the Government: 
 
The observations of the Standing Committee regarding expeditious implementation of 
Dr.Mihir Shah Committee Report have been noted by the Department. In line with the 
objectives enumerated in the aforesaid Report, it is proposed to amalgamate organisations 
like the Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) and Central Water Commission (CWC) to 
create a new entity `National Water Commission’ (NWC) as  an apex technical planning and 
policy arm of this Department, with the Secretariat status of an Attached Office. 
NWC may also be responsible for project approval and appraisal as well as technical 
assistance to the Department and all stakeholders on polic y matters, including each River 
Basin. NWC is proposed to be headed by Chairman, who will be an officer equivalent to the 
Secretary to the Government of India and each major River Basin is proposed to be under 
the overall charge of a Member, who will be an officer equivalent to the Additional Secretary 
to the Government of India. A  proposal for the Committee on Establishment Expenditure 
(CEE) is under examination in the Department for the purpose. Inputs essential to 
preparation of proposal are being collec ted from the CWC and CGWB. This exercise may 
need more time as several issues relating to merging/ amalgamation of various cadres, 
service, and creation of posts at various levels are involved. The CEE proposal will precede 
the Cabinet Note and after appro val by the CEE and thereafter approval by the  Cabinet, 
NWC can be created. However, the observations of the committee have been noted for 
compliance. 
 
(O.M. No. LAFEAS-SCWR023/18/2020-SCWR dated 05.03.2020) 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.  14 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32 

 
 
Recommendation No.10 (Para No. 2.11) 
 
National Water Mission (NWM) 
The Committee observe that t he Government of India has established National Water 
Mission (NWM) as one of the eight National Missions under the National Action Plan on 
Climate Change (NAPCC). The main objective of NWM is conservation of water, minimizing 
wastage and ensuring its more  equitable distribution, both across and within the States 
through integrated water resources development and management . However, it is 
disheartening to see that though NWM was constituted to implement the goals on a Mission 
Mode, it still functions as a part of the Ministry. Further, limitations of administrative and 
financial powers, shortage of regular officers/staff, and reduction in budget are the major 
bottlenecks in the implementation of the Projects. The Committee are of the view that to 
realize its full potential and to function as per its stated mandate, the National Water Mission 
needs to be made independent of the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, strongly 
recommend that the Department should take necessary measures in this regard. The 
Committee further recommend that the Department should initiate measures for 
enhancement of funds and posting of regular officers/staff in the Mission to address the 
above-mentioned issues in a pragmatic manner.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The approved scheme does  not envisage functioning of National Water Mission 
independent of DOWR, RD&GR. Requirement of personnel is being met by hiring of 
consultants and young professionals, apart from posting of regular officers against approved 
vacancies.  Allocations under th e scheme would be enhanced depending on pace of 
expenditure and components under the approved scheme.  
 
(O.M. No. LAFEAS-SCWR023/18/2020-SCWR dated 05.03.2020) 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
33 

 
 
Recommendation No.14 (Para No. 2.15) 
 
Farakka Barrage Project (FBP) 
 
The Committee observe that the main objective of the Farakka Barrage Project is to divert 
adequate quantity of Ganga waters to Bhagirathi -Hooghly river system through a feeder 
canal for preservation and maintenance of Kolkata Port by improving the regime a nd 
navigability of the Bhagirathi -Hooghly river system. The Committee find that there has 
always been under utilization of funds under FBP, i.e., actual expenditure of Rs. 138.27 
crore as against BE of Rs. 205.04 crore in the year 2014 -15. Further, in the year 2018-19, 
Rs. 114.25 crore was actually incurred against the BE of Rs. 209.25 crore. The Committee 
note that the main reason for shortfall in expenditure in the work of replacement of Gates is 
due to various constraints like restricted working area and poor accessibility for replacement 
of Gates and hydro-mechanical components due to a busy rail -cum-road bridge adjacent to 
the site. Further, the Committee are astonished to find that only 149 regular employees are 
working in Farakka Barrage Project as ag ainst the sanctioned strength of 824 which is only 
18% of the sanctioned strength. Such a huge shortage of manpower does not auger well for 
the smooth working of the FBP and displays the indifferent attitude of the Department 
towards the upkeep and mainten ance of FBP. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the review of manpower requirement by the Department taking into account the 
technological advancements over the years which might have facilitated various 
activities/processes.The Committee also reco mmend the Department to take urgent 
measures to fill up the vacancies which are essential for smooth running of Farakka Barrage 
Project at the earliest. The Committee would like to know the details of such measures. 
Further, the Committee would like to be apprised of the specific reasons for constant under 
utilization of fundsunder FBP.   They also recommend the Department to make necessary 
changes in its procedure for budgetary estimations so as to improve the utilization of 
budgetary allocations.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A detailed Staff Inspection Unit (SIU) study has been undertaken for assessing the 
requirement/optimising of manpower of Farakka Barrage Project (FBP) for its smooth 
functioning as per the present requirements/necessity. The report of SI U is under process 
for making a reference to Ministry of Finance. 
As per the budget allocation w.r.t FBP for the FY 2014 -15 was BE (Rs.205.04 cr), RE 
(146.71 cr) and the AE (Rs.138.27 cr.) which is 94% of RE 2014 -15. Further, for FY 2018 -
19 BE( Rs.209.25 c r), RE( Rs.123.47 cr) was allocated against which AE (Rs.114.25 cr) 
which is 93% of RE 2018-19 . 
34 

 
 
Fund requirement at BE stage is made as per the work in progress (repair & maintenance, 
gate installation etc.) and anticipated during the year. Utilization of the fund at the RE stage 
which is based on corrected assessment is more than 90% in all these years. FBP has 
constrained in utilisation of allocations due to the following reasons: 
a. Due to the mass retirement, during the last 5 years, the staff strength ( both technical 
and administrative) has gone down to 15% of the sanctioned strength this resulted in 
savings under Salaries. 
b. Due to the vacancies in technical staff, proposed  works could not be taken up in 
time, causing underutilization of fund. 
c. Due to various reasons like delay in supply of steel, materials from Bhilai Steel Plant, 
which affected progress of hydraulic gate fabrication & erections  work, also 
contributed to non-utilization of the planned fund. 
 
(O.M. No. LAFEAS-SCWR023/18/2020-SCWR dated 05.03.2020) 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 

 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF THE 
GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
  NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi Dr. SANJAY JAISWAL 
3 February 2021 Chairperson 
14 Magha, 1942 (Saka) Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
36 
 

 
 
ANNEXURE – I 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES  (2020-
21) HELD ON FRIDAY, 6 NOVEMBER, 2020 
  
The Committee sat from 1400 hours to 1430 hours in Committee Room No. 'C', Parliament House 
Annexe,  New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
                         Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Kaushal Kishore 
3. Shri M. Dhanush Kumar 
4. Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel  
5. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod  
              
RAJYA SABHA 
 
6 Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
7 Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena  
8 Shri Arun Singh  
9 Shri Subhash Chandra Singh 
10 Shri Pradeep Tamta  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Manoj K. Arora  - OSD (LSS) 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan  - Director 
3. Shri R. C. Sharma  - Additional Director 
 
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting and congratulated them on 
their nomination /re-nomination to the Committee for the year 2020-21.    
 
2. ***  ***  ***  ***  ***  *** *** 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration four draft Reports namely draft Reports on the 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the First and Third 
Reports of the Committee  on “Demands fo r Grants (2019 -20) and (2020-21)" of the Ministry of Jal Shakti 
(Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation) and draft Reports on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Second and Fou rth 
Reports of the Committee on “Demands for Grants (2019 -20) and (2020 -21)" of the Ministry of Jal Shakti 
(Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation).  After some deliberation, the Committee adopted all the draft 
Reports unanimously and without any changes / amendments.   The Committee authorized the 
Chairperson to present the above four Reports to both the Houses of Parliament in the next Session of 
Parliament. 
 
4. ***  ***  ***  ***  *** *** 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
*** Minutes in respect of other matters kept separately. 
37 

 
 
ANNEXURE – II 
 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE THIRD REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE 
(i) Total number of Recommendations/Observations 
 
           14 
(ii) Recommendation/Observations which have been accepted by 
the Government  
Recommendation Nos. 3,4,5,6,8,9,11,12 and 13 
 
 
 
Total – 09 
Percentage– 64.28% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
Recommendation Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
 
Total – 00 
Percentage – Nil 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Recommendation Nos. 1,2,7,10 and 14 
 
 
 
 
 
Total – 05 
Percentage – 35.71% 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of 
the Government is still awaited 
Para Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
Total – 00 
Percentage – Nil 
 
 
 
 
 
38 