 
24 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2022-23) 
                 
         
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                  
         
                 
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI – DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES, 
RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
         
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-24) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water Resources] 
         
         
         
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
  
          
            
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
August, 2023 / Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 

TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2022-23) 
          
(SEVENTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI – DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES, 
RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
                 
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-24) 
 
 (Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti - 
Department of Water Resource, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation) 
         
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   09.08.2023 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on  09.08.2023 
  
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
         
August, 2023 / Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 

 
W. R. C.  No. 79 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
         
        © 2023 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha  (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
CONTENTS 
 
  Page  
 
Composition of 
the Committee 
 
……………………………………………………………… (i) 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………… 
 
(iii) 
 
CHAPTER - I Report……………………………………………………… 
 
01 
CHAPTER – II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government…………………………… 
 
14 
CHAPTER - III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies……………………………………………………… 
 
26 
CHAPTER - IV Observations/Recommendations in respect  of   which the 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee……………...................................... 
 
27 
CHAPTER - V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still 
awaited…………………………………………………….. 
 
33 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I Minutes of the  Tenth Sitting of the Committee held on 
08.08.2023* 
 
 
- 
 
 
II 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twentieth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
 
34 
 
 
 
 
* Minutes not enclosed. 

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2022-23) 
  
 
 
 
Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel      -            Chairperson 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA  
2.  Shri Vijay Baghel  
3.  Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan   
4.  Shri Bhagirath Choudhary 
5.  Shri Chandra Prakash Choudhary  
6.  Shri Guman Singh Damor  
7.  Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit  
8.  Dr. K. Jayakumar  
9.  Shri Dhanush M. Kumar  
10.  Shri Sunil Kumar  
11.  Shri Mohammad Akbar Lone  
12.  Shri Kuruva Gorantla Madhav  
13.  Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel  
14.  Shri Sanjay (Kaka) Ramchandra Patil  
15.  Shri P. Ravindhranath  
16.  Ms.  Nusrat Jahan Ruhi  
17.  Smt.  Agatha K. Sangma  
18.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi  
19.  Shri Chandan Singh  
20.  Shri D.K. Suresh  
21.  Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi 
 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22.  Shri H.D. Devegowda  
23.  Shri Aneel Prasad Hegde  
24.  Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena  
25.  Smt. Mausam Noor  
26.  Shri Sharad Pawar  
27.  Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee  
28.  Shri Arun Singh  
29.  Sant Balbir Singh  
30.  Shri Pramod Tiwari  
31.  Vacant  
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 
 
 

SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Smt. Suman Arora   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Sood  - Director 
3. Ms. Shanta B. Datta   - Under Secretary 
4. Shri Gaurav Jain   - Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii)

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2022-23) having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the 
Twenty Fourth Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in their Twentieth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti -Department of 
Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation. 
 
2.  The Twentieth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha on 20 March 
2023 and laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 17 March 2023. The Action Taken replies of 
the Government to all the recommendations contained in the Report were received in this 
Secretariat on 12 June, 2023. 
 
3.  The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and 
adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 08.08.2023. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
 08 August,  2023 Chairperson  
  17Sravana, 1945 (Saka) Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources (2022-23) deals with 
the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
their Twentieth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the Demands for Grants (2023-24) of the 
Ministry of Jal Shakti – Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation. 
 
2.  The Twentieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 20.03.2023 and was laid 
on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 17.03.2023. The Report contained                                     
15 Observations/Recommendations.  
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 15 Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been received from the Government. These have been examined and 
categorized as follows: - 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government (Chapter II):  
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 13 and 15 
       (Total – 11) 
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III):  
 
Recommendation Nos. NIL       
     (Total – NIL) 
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV):  
 
Recommendation Nos. 5, 9,12 and 14       
(Total – 04)  
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V):  
 
Para Nos. NIL        
      (Total – NIL) 
4.  The Committee desire that replies to recommendations made in the Chapter-I of 
this Report may be furnished to the Committee expeditiously.  
 
5.  The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.   
A. Mission Amrit Sarovar 
 
Recommendation No. 5 
 
6. The Committee observed that the Amrit Sarovar Mission had been launched by 
Hon’ble Prime Minister in addition to the existing Repair, Renovation and Restoration 
(RRR) schemes. The Department had informed that the water bodies which were 
included under the RRR scheme and were likely to be completed by August, 2023, had 
been identified to be included as Amrit Sarovars in consultation with the State 

 
 
2 
 
Governments concerned. The Committee noted that a total of 608 water bodies under 
RRR scheme have been identified for implementation as Amrit Sarovars. Out of these, 
211 water bodies have so far been renovated. The Committee took note that no separate 
dedicated fund has been proposed under Amrit Sarovar initiative. The Repair, 
Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies schemes are funded under PMKSY-
HKKP scheme. The Committee noted that the details on the work relating to Amrit 
Sarovar in the State of Manipur are yet to be added on Amrit Sarovar portal. Keeping in 
view the better monitoring for fruitful results, the Committee urged upon the Department 
to coordinate not only with Manipur but also with all the States where Mission Amrit 
Sarovar had been undertaken to provide/update all relevant information in a time bound 
manner on the portal of Amrit Sarovar.  
 
7. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“The observation of the Committee has been noted for compliance, through the 
nodal Ministry for Mission Amrit Sarovar, i.e., Ministry of Rural Development”.  
 
8. The Committee find that the nodal Ministry for Mission Amrit Sarovar is the 
Ministry of Rural Development. However, during the examination of DFG           
(2023-24), the Committee were apprised that a total of 608 water bodies under 
Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) Scheme have been identified for 
implementation as Amrit Sarovars. Further, no separate dedicated fund has been 
proposed under Amrit Sarovar Programme and the RRR of water bodies schemes 
are funded under PMKSY-HKKP Scheme. Thus, the Committee find that though the 
water bodies under RRR Scheme, administered by Ministry of Jal Shakti, have 
been identified as Amrit Sarovars, Ministry of Rural Development has been made 
the nodal agency for implementation of Mission Amrit Sarovar. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the rationale for the same. They would further like to 
be apprised of the role of the Ministry of Jal Shakti – Department of Water 
Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation in this regard along with the 
mechanism devised for proper coordination and monitoring of water bodies in 
order to achieve effective utilization of resources and timely realisation of the 
goals under both Mission Amrit Sarovar and RRR scheme. The Committee would 
also like to know the steps taken for updating all relevant information on Amrit 
sarovars created/rejuvenated in respect of each of the States and Union territories 
in a time bound manner on the portal of Amrit Sarovar.    
B. Safety of Dams 
 
Recommendation No. 9 
 
9. The Committee noted that as per the National Register of Large Dams-2019, 
there are 234 functional large dams in India which are more than 100 years old. The 
Committee took note of list as furnished by the Department, of failures from such old 

 
 
3 
 
large dams which are as follows: Tigra Project in Madhya Pradesh (completion in the 
year 1917 and failure in the year 1917 itself), Ashti Project in Maharashtra (completion in 
1883 and failure in 1933), Khadakwasla Project in Maharashtra (completion in 1880 and 
failure in 1961), Jamunia Project in Madhya Pradesh (completion in 1921 and failure in 
2002) and Jaswant Nagar Project in Rajasthan (completion in 1889 and failure in 2007). 
The Committee observed that some of them, as per the National Register of Large Dams 
– 2019, are more than 300 years old and so far none of these dams have been 
decommissioned, however, the Department has stated that the dams are normally 
designed for 100 years of useful age and their functional life also gets decreased with 
progressive reservoir sedimentation concurrently reducing project benefits. The 
Department further stated that there is no mechanism to assess the viable lifespan and 
performance of the dams and these dams are mostly owned by State Governments 
/Public Sector Undertakings/Private Agencies which carry out the Operation and 
Maintenance (O&M) works of the dams in their jurisdiction. Furthermore, realizing the 
importance of dam safety, a Dam Safety Act had been notified in the year 2021 to 
provide for surveillance, inspection, operation and maintenance of the specified dam for 
prevention of dam failure related disasters and to provide for institutional mechanism to 
ensure their safe functioning and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. In 
view of the foregoing, the Committee recommended the Department to take suitable 
measures for evolving a viable mechanism to assess the lives and operations of the 
dams and also persuade the States to decommission those dams which have outlived 
their lifespan and may pose a severe threat to life and infrastructure in case of any 
failure. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in 
this regard within three months from presentation of this Report. 
 
10. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 
“Well maintained and operated dams, if continued to be giving meaningful service, 
can have long life. Earthen Dams are generally constructed using locally available 
materials and can be compared to natural geological landforms having very long 
life. Similarly, other type of dams also, if maintained/ rehabilitated from time to 
time, they will also serve the purpose for a long time. 
 
Loss of useful storage of Dam reservoirs with time can also be managed by proper 
sediment management such as flushing by low level sluices, removal of 
accumulated sediments (if found techno economically and environmentally feasible) 
as well as Catchment Area Treatment etc. If a project, even after its designed 
useful age, is serving its benefits and is structurally safe, it is not advisable to 
decommission such dam. Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement Project Phase II 
and III(2021-2031), is a continuing Scheme of DRIP-I(2012-2021), being 
implemented under overall coordination and supervision of Ministry of Jal Shakti. 
The objective of Scheme is to improve safety and operational performance of 
selected dams in participating States along with Dam Safety Institutional 
Strengthening. 
 
It has provision for physical rehabilitation of 736 dams located in 19 States, to 
improve hydrological, structural and operational safety of selected dams, which in 
turn would help in enhancing the lives of these dams to serve the intended benefits. 
In addition to dam rehabilitation activities, the Scheme has provision for other 
important activities including publication of technical Guidelines and Manuals in 
dam safety areas, capacity building of academic Institutions, Central agencies as 
well as participating Implementing Agencies, preparation of dam specific 
Emergency Action Plan as well as O&M Manuals to improve climate and disaster 

 
 
4 
 
resilience.  These activities would also contribute in improving the Institutional 
mechanism to deal with safety and performance of the given dams. 
 
Also, there is need based provision for de-siltation of selected reservoirs. Other 
sediment management approach such as Catchment area treatment may also be 
taken up under the Scheme. 
 
To meet concerns of safety related to ageing dams, DSA 2021 has been enacted 
and has come into force w.e.f 30.12.2021. Consequent upon enactment of 
National Dam Safety Act, 2021 and in pursuance of the provisions therein, 
National Dam Safety Authority (NDSA)has been set up.  
 
To ensure long term sustainability of capacity building of dam owners, Ministry of 
Jal Shakti has decided to support identified academic institution to provide 
technical support to dam owners through the establishment of Centre of 
Excellence. In this regard a Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) was signed 
between central water commission and IIT Roorkee for Dams under the Dam 
Rehabilitation and improvement project Phase II and III at IIT Roorkee.  
 
As per Section 30-31, (Chapter VII) DSA 2021, for each specified dam, the owner 
shall, within the operation and maintenance establishment, provide a dam safety 
unit consisting of such competent levels of engineers as may be specified by the 
regulations. Every owner of a specified dam shall undertake every year, through 
their dam safety unit, a pre-monsoon and post-monsoon inspections in respect of 
each such dam and also during and after every flood, earthquake or any other 
natural or man- made calamities, or if any sign of distress or unusual behavior is 
noticed in the dam. Remedial measures shall be initiated by the concerned 
SDSOs if the dams are found to be in distressed condition. 
 
As per Section 36-37, (Chapter VIII), DSA 2021, in respect of the existing dam, 
emergency action plan shall be prepared within five years from the date of 
commencement of this Act and thereafter update such plans at regular intervals. 
 
As per section 38, Chapter IX, DSA 2021, the owner of a specified dam shall 
make or cause to be made comprehensive dam safety evaluation of each 
specified dam through an independent panel of experts, shall be conducted within 
five years from the date of commencement of this Act, and thereafter carried out at 
regular intervals as may be specified by the regulations, which includes review 
and analysis of available data on the design, construction, operation, maintenance 
and performance of the structure along with general assessment of hydrologic and 
hydraulic conditions with mandatory review of design floods as specified by the 
regulations. 
 
Therefore, as per relevant provisions of DSA 2021, the safety concerns of ageing 
dams are adequately addressed.” 
 
11. The Committee note from the replies that the life of dams can be enhanced 
by proper maintenance/rehabilitation, sediment management to ensure efficient 
operation of reservoir and catchment area treatment, etc. They further note that 
decommissioning of dams will not be required if maintained properly. Currently, 
Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement Project (DRIP) I & II is being implemented in 

 
 
5 
 
case of 736 dams located in 19 States to improve their safety and operational 
performance. Further, in order to meet safety concerns of ageing dams, Dam 
Safety Act 2021 has been enacted which has come into force w.e.f. 30.12.2021. 
However, during the examination of DFG (2023-24), the Committee were apprised 
by the Department through its written submission that there are 234 functional 
large dams of more than 100 years old age which have been recorded under the 
National Register of Large Dams – 2019, with some of them older than 300 years 
and so far, none of those dams have been decommissioned. The Committee were 
further informed that the dams are normally designed for 100 years of useful age 
and their functional life also gets decreased with progressive reservoir 
sedimentation. The Committee were also apprised that there is no mechanism to 
assess the viable lifespan and performance of the dams and these dams are 
mostly owned by State Governments/Public Sector Undertakings/Private Agencies 
which carry out the Operation and Maintenance (O&M) works of the dams in their 
jurisdiction. In view of the above information furnished by the Department during 
the examination of DFG (2023-24), including the fact that  dams are normally 
designed for 100 years of useful life, the Committee find that the Department has 
not furnished specific information on reasons for not decommissioning the dams, 
at least those which are more than 300 years old. The Committee, would therefore, 
reiterate their recommendation that Department should persuade the States to 
decommission those dams which have outlived their lifespan and may pose a 
severe threat to life and infrastructure in case of any failure.  They would further 
like to be apprised of the details of those functional dams from amongst the 234 
large dams which have been covered by DRIP I and II so far. They would also like 
to be apprised of the status of Dam Safety Units constituted in each of the 
States/UTs post enactment of Dam Safety Act, 2021. 
 
C. Cleaning of the River Yamuna 
Recommendation No. 11 
 
12. In connection with the cleaning of river Ganga, the Committee would like to recall 
the briefing meeting held on 16.12.2021 in connection with the examination of the 
subject ‘Review of Upper Yamuna River Cleaning Project up to Delhi and River bed 
management in Delhi’. During the aforesaid meeting, they were apprised by the 
Department that though the stretch of river Yamuna in Delhi is very small just 22 kms, 
however it is responsible for causing 75 to 80 percent of pollution in the river. The 
Committee noted that the bathing quality of river Yamuna particularly in the State of 
Delhi, as per parameters stipulated by the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) for 
Outdoor Bathing (organized), falls into class-B category. One of the parameters is 

 
 
6 
 
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) which should be less than 3.0 mg/l for bathing 
purpose. The Committee found very high presence of BOD in the river Yamuna in Delhi 
during 2019- 2021. Maximum concentration observed is 114 mg/L during 2020 which is 
very much high as per the prescribed limit of less than 3 mg/l BOD for bathing purpose in 
river Yamuna. In this regard, the representative of the Department had informed the 
Committee that a number of STPs in Delhi would be commissioned soon, which would 
be of great help in reducing the pollution level in the river Yamuna. He further 
emphasized the role and the steps required to be taken by the State Government in 
curbing the pollution in river Yamuna. The Committee further noted that the major 
impediments for cleaning of river Yamuna are less flow at Wazirabad during dry period, 
illegal discharge of sewage and industrial effluent, disposal of solid waste in drains, 
improper functioning of CETPs and insufficient sewage treatment capacity. Considering 
the role of Delhi stretch of river Yamuna which is responsible for major pollution load of 
the entire Yamuna river, the Committee were of the opinion that both the Union 
Government and the State Government should work in close collaboration and make all 
endeavours by taking remedial measures to overcome all the obstacles as mentioned 
above so that the rejuvenation of river Yamuna may become a reality. 
 
13. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 
“Water quality assessment of river Yamuna is carried out by Central Pollution 
Control Board (CPCB) at 33 locations, under National Water Quality Monitoring 
Programme (NWMP) in association with State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) of 
Uttarakhand (04 locations), Himachal Pradesh (04 locations), Haryana (06 
locations), Delhi (07 locations) and Uttar Pradesh (12 locations). The analysis 
results are compared with Primary Water Quality Criteria (PWQC) for Outdoor 
Bathing notified under Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986 with respect to 
parameters viz., DO, pH, BOD, Fecal Coliform and Fecal Streptococci. Based on 
recent analysis of water quality for 2022, it has been observed that in Delhi, all the 
07 monitored locations are not meeting with the criteria with respect to parameters 
DO (except Palla and Wazirabad), BOD & FC (except Palla), indicating that the 
water in river Yamuna is not fit for bathing, particularly in the State of Delhi.  
 
As per the data submitted by DPCC, the total sewage generation in Delhi is 3,491 
MLD, whereas the total installed capacity of 35 STPs is 2,874 MLD and the 
capacity actually utilized is 2,714 MLD. In addition, there are 13 Common Effluent 
Treatment Plants (CETPs) with a total capacity of 212.3 MLD is existing in Delhi 
to treat industrial wastewater generated from industries. 
 
As per NGT directions, a High Level Committee (HLC) has been constituted 
under the chairmanship of Hon’ble Lieutenant Governor, Delhi to coordinate with 
all departments involved in Yamuna rejuvenation. Action plans for rejuvenation of 
rivers have been prepared by “River Rejuvenation Committee’’ (RRC) constituted 
by the respective State Government/UT Administration, under the overall 
supervision and coordination of Principal Secretary, Environment of the 
concerned State/Union Territory, including river Yamuna.  
 
 Presently in Delhi, under Namami Gange Programme, a total of 9 projects have 
been taken up with an estimated cost of Rs.1951.03 crore to abate the pollution in 
river Yamuna. These projects are generally at advanced stage of implementation. 
These projects envisage creation of 1,268 MLD of sewage treatment capacities in 
Delhi to bridge the gap in treatment capacity. 
 

 
 
7 
 
 Stringent monitoring and regulation of industries and pollution sources is 
undertaken to assess the compliance status of Grossly Polluting Industries (GPIs) 
for enforcing regulatory framework on the polluting industries. Stringent action is 
taken by Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB)/State Pollution Control Boards 
(SPCBs)/ Pollution Control Committees against the GPIs discharging into main 
stem of Ganga River & its tributaries which are non-complying with respect to the 
prescribed norms. 
 
Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change (MoEF& CC) formulates and 
notifies standards for emission or discharge of environmental pollutants viz. air 
pollutants and water pollutants from industries, operations or processes with an 
aim to protect and improve the quality of the environment and abate 
environmental pollution. 
 
Industry specific effluent/emission standards are notified under Schedule-I: 
‘Standards for Emission or Discharge of Environmental Pollutants from Various 
Industries’ of Environment Protection Act, 1986. State Pollution Control Boards 
and Pollution Control Committees in States and Union Territories, respectively are 
adhered to ensure the compliance of these standards. So far, 47 industry specific 
effluent standards and 63 industry specific emission standards have been notified. 
 
 Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) regulates industrial pollution through 
consent mechanism. DPCC has notified stricter norms for sewage treatment in 
Delhi.  
 
NMCG has been organizing regular Yamuna Ghat cleaning campaigns on certain 
Saturdays of every month for cleaning the seven Ghats in Yamuna in association 
with different Water quality assessment of river Yamuna is carried out by Central 
Pollution Control Board (CPCB) at 33 locations, under National Water Quality 
Monitoring Programme (NWMP) in association with State Pollution Control 
Boards (SPCBs) of Uttarakhand (04 locations), Himachal Pradesh                 (04 
locations), Haryana (06 locations), Delhi (07 locations) and Uttar Pradesh         
(12 locations). The analysis results are compared with Primary Water Quality 
Criteria (PWQC) for Outdoor Bathing notified under Environment (Protection) 
Rules, 1986 with respect to parameters viz., DO, pH, BOD, Fecal Coliform and 
Fecal Streptococci. Based on recent analysis of water quality for 2022, it has 
been observed that in Delhi, the monitored locations are not meeting with the 
criteria with respect to parameters DO (except Palla and Wazirabad), BOD & FC 
(except Palla), indicating that the water in river Yamuna is not fit for bathing in the 
State of Delhi.  
 
NMCG has been organizing regular Yamuna Ghat cleaning campaigns on certain 
Saturdays of every month for cleaning the seven Ghats in Yamuna in association 
with different volunteering civil society group. 
 
Directions were issued by the Ministry of Jal Shakti to Delhi Pollution Control 
Committee (DPCC) vide communication dated 16.08.2018 under Section 5 of 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 against sub-optimal functioning of CETPs as 
well as reutilization of treated waste water in the State of Delhi. In addition, as 
reported by CPCB, directions were also issued to Delhi Jal Board (DJB) dated 
19.02.2019 under the said Act against non-complying sewage treatment plants 
operating in Delhi. 
 

 
 
8 
 
Central Monitoring Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary, DoWR, RD 
& GR, Ministry of Jal Shakti has been monitoring the progress in implementation 
of Action Plan for the State of Delhi including sewerage projects for abatement of 
pollution in the river Yamuna in a time bound manner. The Committee has also 
directed the NCT of Delhi for completing their initiatives without any further delay. 
 
The State Government of Delhi has been directed to ensure compliance of the 
existing STPs and CETPs and to take strict action against the non-complying 
industries. Time bound action plan needs to be implemented to bridge the gap in 
solid waste management in the State.” 
 
14. The Committee find from the Action Taken Reply furnished by the 
Department that based on recent analysis of water quality for 2022, it has been 
observed that in Delhi, all the 07 monitored locations with respect to Yamuna are 
not meeting with the criteria with respect to parameters Dissolved Oxygen (DO), 
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) and Faecal Coliform (FC) thus clearly 
indicating that the water in river Yamuna is not fit for bathing, particularly in the 
State of Delhi. The Committee further find that the total sewage generation in Delhi 
is 3491 MLD, whereas the total installed capacity of 35 STPs is 2874 MLD and the 
actual utilization of the capacity is 2714 MLD. In addition, there are 13 Common 
Effluent Treatment Plants (CETPs) in Delhi with a total capacity is of 212.3 MLD to 
treat industrial wastewater generated from industries. The Committee are pleased 
to note that under Namami Gange Programme, a total of 9 projects envisaging 
creation of 1268 MLD of sewage treatment capacities in Delhi have been taken up. 
These Projects when commissioned along with other STPs and CETPs in Delhi will 
be able to bridge the gap in treatment capacity. However, the Committee are of the 
view that in view of the burgeoning population and rapid urbanization especially in 
the metro city like Delhi, there is a continuous need to upgrade the sewage 
treatment capacity. The Committee thus express their hope that both the Union 
and the State Government will work in unison to improve the sewage treatment 
capacity and its effective utilization. They would also like to know the target date 
of completion of 9 sewage treatment projects taken up under Namami Gange and 
interim measures taken by the Government till then to comply with the prescribed 
bathing quality of water of river Yamuna to avoid any possible health hazard.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
9 
 
D. E-Flow for River Yamuna 
 
Recommendation No. 12 
 
15. The Committee observed that a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was 
signed by the Chief Ministers of Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, 
and National Capital Territory of Delhi on 12th May, 1994 regarding allocation of utilizable 
surface flow of river Yamuna upto Okhla Barrage (Upper Yamuna) among the co-basin 
States. The MoU stipulates that ‘A minimum flow in proportion of completion of upstream 
storages going upto 10 cumec shall be maintained downstream of Tajewala and Okhla 
Headworks throughout the year from ecological considerations, as upstream storages 
are built up progressively in a phased manner’. Further, the Principal Bench of the 
National Green Tribunal (NGT) directed that the State of Haryana shall release 10 
Cumec water directly into main stream of river Yamuna from Hathinikund Barrage and 
maintain e-flow of river till Wazirabad. The Committee noted that as per the water 
released data, the minimum 10 Cumec (352 cusec) as stipulated in the MoU is being 
released downstreams of Hathinikund Barrage and Okhla Barrage throughout the year. 
 
The Committee observed that storage as stipulated by the 1994 MoU among the 
States for maintaining minimum flow in the river Yamuna throughout the year has not 
been built so far. Even the Department reasoned that less flow at Wazirabad during dry 
period is one of the major issues that impedes cleaning of river Yamuna. The Committee, 
therefore, recommended the Department to make all out efforts in cooperation with the 
concerned States to build the storage capacity. Further, the Committee also urged upon 
the Department to consider defining e-flow for the river Yamuna on the line of the river 
Ganga in order to maintain the health of the river and also its ecosystem.  
 
16. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“There are three National Projects, planned in the upstream of the Yamuna River. 
The status of these three projects is as follows: 
 
i. Renukaji Dam Project- 
 
Renukaji Dam Project has been conceived as a storage project on Giri River (a 
tributary of river Yamuna) in Sirmour District of Himachal Pradesh. The project 
envisages construction of 148 m. high rock filled dam for supply of 23 cumec (498 
MCM) water to Delhi for 9 months from October to June and other basin States. 
The project will also generate 40 MW (2x20 MW) of power during peak flow. The 
live storage of Renukaji MPP is 498 MCM. The Project was declared as a National 
Project in 2008. The Agreement has been signed amongst six basin States of 
Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, NCT of Delhi and 
Rajasthan on the construction of Renukaji Dam Project on 11.01.2019. The project 
has been approved for implementation with central assistance from GoI in 
December 2021. 
 
ii. Lakhwar Multi-Purpose Project- 
 
 Lakhwar Multi-Purpose Project is situated on Yamuna River in Dehradun district of 
Uttarakhand. It envisages construction of 204 m. high concrete dam with 
underground power house with installed capacity of 300 MW along with 
construction of Katapather Barrage about 13.6 km downstream of Lakhwar dam. 
The live storage of the Lakhwar MPP is 330.66 MCM. The Project was declared as 
a National Project in 2008 wherein 90% of the cost of water component shall be 
provided as grant assistance by GoI. The Agreement has been signed amongst six 
basin States of Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, NCT of 

 
 
10 
 
Delhi and Rajasthan on the construction of Lakhwar Project on 28.08.2018. The 
project has been approved for implementation with central assistance from GoI in 
December 2021. 
 
iii. Kishau Multi-Purpose Project- 
 
Kishau Multi-Purpose Project has been identified as a National Project in Feb’ 
2008.  The project is a storage scheme located on river Tons (tributary of river 
Yamuna) in Dehradun district of Uttarakhand & Sirmour district of Himachal 
Pradesh. The Live Storage of the Project is 1,324 MCM and Gross Storage of the 
Project is 1,824 MCM.  Hydropower with installed capacity of 660 MW has also 
been envisaged. Efforts are being made by DoWR, RD & GR for agreement among 
the party States viz. Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, 
Rajasthan and NCT and Delhi for its implementation. 
 
As regards defining e flow of river Yamuna, a study report titled “Environmental flow 
assessment for Yamuna River from Hathnikund barrage to Okhla barrage” was 
submitted by NIH (Roorkee). There have been certain observations with regard to 
surface and sub-surface interactions etc. which are equally important. Efforts are 
being made to arrive at a consensus between stake holding States”. 
 
17. The Committee note that three National projects, viz. Renukaji Dam project, 
Lakhwar Multi-purpose project and Kishau Multi-purpose projects have been 
contemplated in the upstream of river Yamuna as storage projects which would 
help maintain minimum flow in the river, as stipulated by the 1994 MoU signed by 
Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan and National Capital 
Territory of Delhi. However, all the above three National projects are yet to be 
implemented. They further note that National Institute of Hydrology (NIH) 
submitted a Report titled “Environmental Flow Assessment for Yamuna River from 
Hathnikund Barrage to Okhla Barrage” wherein there have been certain 
observations with regard to surface and sub-surface interactions and efforts are 
being made to arrive at a consensus between stake-holding States. Taking note of 
the delay in implementation of the storage  projects, the Committee are of the view 
that e-flow for river Yamuna is essential for its health and also maintaining its 
ecosystems. Therefore, they reiterate their recommendation to the Department of 
Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation to make all out 
efforts in cooperation with the concerned States to build the storage capacity. 
They are also of the opinion that a clearly defined level of e-flow for river Yamuna, 
which is one of the main tributaries of river Ganga, is a pre requisite for making 
Namami Gange Programme a true success. The Committee, therefore, again 
recommend the Department to make concerted efforts for defining ‘E-flow’ for 
river Yamuna. 
 
 

 
 
11 
 
 E. Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP)  
 
Recommendation No. 14 
 
18. The Committee noted that Ninety-Nine (99) ongoing Major/Medium Irrigation 
projects (and 7 phases) spread in 18 States were identified during 2016-17, in 
consultation with the States, to be completed in phases.  Central Assistance to these 
projects is being provided through budgetary resources whereas State Share for these 
projects is being provided from NABARD under LTIF. Out of these 99 projects and 7 
phases (Total- 106),50 projects have been reported to be completed so far. Further, out 
of balance projects, 23 projects have seen progress of more than 90 % and 14 projects 
between 80 to 90 %. Ultimate Irrigation Potential of these 99 projects is 76.03 Lakh Ha. 
out of which 41.39 Lakh Ha. had been created upto 31.03.2016. During 2016-2022, 
additional potential of 24.35 Lakh ha. had been created through these projects. The 
Committee observed from the information furnished by the Department that the 
budgetary allocation for Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme and National/special 
Projects for FY 2022-23 was Rs. 3237.69 crore (BE) which was reduced to Rs. 1800 
crore at RE stage for FY 2022-23. However, till 31 December, 2022, no expenditure had 
been spent under this Programme. The Committee noted that the Department had not 
furnished specific reply to their query with regard to the reasons for not spending a single 
penny under such an important Scheme during first three quarters of FY 2022-23. 
Keeping in view the importance of AIBP for the agriculture sector of the country, the 
Committee, therefore, recommended the Department to act proactively and monitor the 
pace of actual expenditure and flow of funds under such an important Scheme in order to 
ensure optimum utilization of budgetary allocations. The Committee also urged the 
Department to identify the factors/reasons which restricted them from utilizing the funds 
and take suitable remedial action accordingly. 
 
19. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
“The budgetary allocation for Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme and 
National / Special Projects for FY 2022-23 was Rs. 3,237.69 crore (BE) which was 
reduced to Rs. 1,800 crore at RE stage for FY 2022-23. The final expenditure  
under the  scheme in the FY 2022-23 is Rs. 668.61crore.  
 
Major reasons for reduction in the outlay, are as follows:- 
 
(i).  Change in appraisal/approval mechanism for inclusions of new projects 
under PMKSY-AIBP:- So far, inclusion of additional projects under PMKSY-AIBP 
was possible through multi-stage intra-Ministry approval process. However, the 
appraisal/ approval process is required to be aligned with the Department of 
Expenditure guidelines, which requires inter-Ministerial consultations, approval of 
Public Investment Board/ SFC and in several cases, the approval of CCEA. While 
earlier, the entire process could be completed in a month or so, the revised 
procedure now takes 4-6 months at least. This year, DoWR, RD&GR has been able 
to seek approvals for inclusion of only one small project (total central assistance 
Rs. 50 crore) under AIBP so far, as against 5 projects having central assistance of 
about Rs. 1,280 crores approved during Dec., 2021 (when extension of PMKSY 
was approved) to March, 2022 last year.  Further, inclusion of projects having major 
requirements of central assistance (total Rs. 2,000 crore), namely, Jamrani Project 
of Uttarakhand and Bodwad Parisar Sinchai Yojana Stage-I, are presently under 
process, due to which the central assistance cannot be provisioned at this stage.   
 

 
 
12 
 
(ii). Less Utilisations by National projects: Lakhwar multipurpose project of 
Uttarakhand and Renukaji project of Himachal Pradesh are in preliminary stage of 
implementation. The two projects had projected major requirement of central 
assistance during the current financial year. However, while in case of Lakhwar 
project the tendering could be completed only recently, Renukaji project is still in its 
pre-construction stage. Further, the two projects are also struggling with the State 
share component to be collected from all co-basin States, which is to be essentially 
reflected in the Single Nodal Agency account to enable release of next installment 
of central assistance. As a result, these projects could avail central assistance of 
Rs. 38.58 crore only, which is hardly 5% of the projected requirements.  
 
(iii).  Complexities involved in Single Nodal Agency (SNA) system: Single Nodal 
Agency (SNA) system has been made mandatory for all centrally sponsored 
schemes. However, there are many complex issues involved in its implementation 
by the States, due to which in a large number of cases, the release does not take 
place even after the necessary approvals have been obtained. In such cases, 
special action is required from PFMS Section of Min. of Finance, or Department of 
Expenditure, or both, which is again a time consuming process. Another fall-out of 
this delay is that the States are not able to claim the four installments in a year 
stipulated by SNA guidelines.  
 
In 2016, with the launch of PMKSY-AIBP, 99 prioritized projects were 
included for time bound implementation and assured central assistance through 
NABARD. So far, 50 out of these projects have been completed. However, in the 
balance 49 projects, there is a major chunk of about 28 projects which are held up 
due to court cases or protests by locals. Thus, the central assistance availed is 
much less than the projected requirement on account of the above.” 
 
20. The Committee note that the budgetary allocation for Accelerated Irrigation 
Benefit Programme and National/Special Projects for FY 2022-23 was Rs. 3237.69 
crore (BE) which was reduced to Rs. 1800 crore at RE stage and the final 
expenditure under the Scheme in the FY 2022-23 was Rs. 668.61 crore. The 
Department has cited number of reasons for reduction in the outlay such as 
change in appraisal/approval mechanism for inclusion of new projects under 
PMKSY-AIBP because of which the entire process which earlier could be 
completed in a month or so, now takes 4-6 months at least. Further, the 
Department has also attributed lower utilization of budgetary resources to 
complexities involved in Single Nodal Agency (SNA) system. They further note 
that the Lakhwar multipurpose project in Uttarakhand and Renukaji project in 
Himachal Pradesh are in preliminary stage of implementation and are struggling 
with the State share component to be collected from all co-basin States which is to 
be essentially reflected in the Single Nodal Agency account to enable release of 
next instalment of Central Assistance. As a result, these projects could avail 
Central Assistance of Rs. 38.58 crore only, which is hardly 5% of the projected 
requirements. The Committee however, notice that no expenditure was incurred 
during first three quarters of Fiscal Year 2022-23 and no specific reason has been 

 
 
13 
 
furnished for the same. During the last quarter, only Rs. 668.61 crore which is 37% 
(appx.) of the RE of Rs. 1800 crore has been spent which is minuscule utilization 
of even reduced budgetary allocations. The Committee, therefore, once again urge 
the Department to maintain budgetary discipline, and undertake proper pre-Budget 
planning and exercises and also make necessary changes in its procedure for 
budgetary estimations so that prudent budgetary allocations are projected / made 
at BE stage and strive for full utilization of budgetary allocations made. 
 
The Committee also find that out of remaining 49 prioritized projects 
included under PMKSY-AIBP, a significant number of about 28 projects are held 
up due to court cases or protests by locals. The Committee would, therefore 
desire to be briefed about the steps taken by the Department in resolving these 
obstacles as well as the efficacy of these steps so that these projects may also be 
completed within a reasonable timeframe. 
 
  

 
 
14 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 1 
 
Analysis of Demands for Grants 
 The Committee note that for the year 2023-24, the Department have laid Detailed 
Demands for Grants of Rs. 20054.67 crore consisting of Rs. 19694.19 crore under 
Revenue Section and Rs. 360.48 crore under Capital Section. The Committee note that 
for FY 2023-24, the Department sought Rs. 22673.53 crore, anda budgetary allocation of 
Rs. 20054.67 crore (BE) has been proposed. In comparison to Budget Estimate (BE) 
allocationsi.e. Rs. 18967.88 crorefor FY 2022-23, the BE allocation of Rs. 20054.67 
crore for FY 2023-24 has shown a hike of 5.72% appx. The revenue provision (BE) for 
FY 2023-24 has been increased by Rs. 1146.14 crore vis-a-vis BE of Rs.18548.05 crore 
for FY 2022-23,whereas under the Capital Section, the allocationhas been reduced by 
Rs. 59.35 crore in FY 2023-24 vis-à-vis BE of Rs. 419.83 crore for FY 2022-23.The 
Committee observe that the BE provision of Rs. 18967.88 crore for Fiscal Year 2022-23 
was reduced drastically and kept at Rs. 14000 crores at Revised Estimate (RE) stage (a 
decline of 26.19% of BE allocations of Rs. 18967.88 crore). The Committee note that 
even this reduced amount was not utilized in full and only Rs. 7671.21 crore has been 
spent during the first three quarters of FY 2022-23 i.e. till 31 December, 2022. The 
Committee are of the opinion that the rest of the amount i.e. Rs. 6328.79 crore (45.20 % 
of RE of Rs. 14000 crore) would hardly be spent in the last quarter of FY2022-23. The 
representative of the Department admitted while deposing before the Committee about 
the underutilization of funds which resulted into reduction of budgetary allocations at RE 
stage andattributed it to the new financial system of Single Nodal Account wherein the 
funds to the States would be released in four instalments instead of two instalments as 
provided earlier. The Committee further note that most of the Schemes of the 
Department, particularly irrigation schemes like PMKSY where works are done from 
October to May-June and Command Area Development (CAD) where worksare carried 
out from January to March, have been impacted due to the new system introduced by 
the Ministry of Finance as these schemes are in nature-wise more compliant to 2 
instalments system rather than 4 instalments. The Committee take note that under the 
revised procedure of Ministry of Finance, funds for the Central Sector schemes are to be 
routed through the Central Nodal Account (CNA) while the State Sector schemes 
through Single Nodal Account (SNA). The Department has informed that the funds under 
the CNA is being done without much difficulty and the activities under the Central Sector 
schemes are relatively unaffected. Under the SNA, being initial year of implementation, 
State Governments are not equipped to adapt to the new fund flow mechanism. The 
Committee observe that since most of the States have not been able to submit proposals 
for release of more than 2 instalments and therefore desire thatthe Department to take 
up the matter with the Ministry of Finance and apprise them the practical difficulties in 
implementing the new system under SNA, particularly in irrigation schemes and seek 
exemption for these Schemes so that the budgetary resources may be optimally utilized 
and implementation of such Schemes are not adversely affected. The Committee would 
like to be categorically apprised of the steps taken in this regard within three months of 
presentation of this Report. 
 
 

 
 
15 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation 
(DoWR, RD & GR) humbly acknowledges the concernexpressed with regard to the 
problems, being faced by the department in releasing funds in some of the schemes, 
particularly irrigation schemes like PMKSY and Command Area Development (CAD).  
 
 On the request from DoWR, RD &GR, Ministry of Finance has decided to release 
funds under CSS in two instalments of upto 50% each if the total amount earmarked 
under the CSS for a particular State for the financial year is less than Rs. 1.00 crore. The 
department is working on the proposal to seek exemption for these schemes viz. AIBP 
and CADWM from the conditions for release in 04 instalments and allow releases in 02 
instalments so that implementation of those scheme is not hampered due to non-
releases of funds. 
 
 The concern of the Committee regarding under utilization of funds against RE 
allocation for the year 2022-23 has also been noted. Department is hand holding States 
for resolution of the issues faced by them in implementation of the SNA system and 
coordinating with the State Govt. departments, PFMS State Govt. directorates and PFMS 
HQ for early resolution of the issues pertaining to the implementation of the SNA system 
for the schemes of this department. Further, besides monthly and quarterly expenditure 
plan, regular monitoring of progress of schemes is also being undertaken.  
 
(O.M. NO. G-30012/2/2023-Bud/26 dated 12.06.2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 2 
 
Implementation of the Schemes 
 
 Though the Committee are happy to note that the budgetary allocations of some 
of the important Schemes of the Department like Namami Gange, Atal Jal and 
Interlinking of Rivers have witnessed substantial increase up to 43%, 43% and 150% 
respectively for Fiscal Year 2023-24 in comparison to their budgetary provisions of FY 
2022-23,yet, they find that some of the Programmes like Dam Rehabilitation and 
Improved Project (DRIP), Farakka Barrage Project, National Hydrology Project and 
Special Package for Maharashtra have seen noticeable decline of 50%, 35.5%, 37.5% 
and 50% respectively in their BE provisions for FY 2023-24 vis-à-vis budgetary 
allocations of FY 2022-23. The Department has enumerated various reasons for decline 
in budgetary provisions which inter aliainclude delay in appointment of consultant in 
DRIP and less requirement of funds in National Hydrology Project due to non-availability 
of microprocessor chips etc. The Committee while taking note of the various problems as 
furnished by the Department which have caused reduction in budgetary allocations, 
desire that theDepartment to take all preparedness to formulate the plan judiciously and 
realistically so that such vital Schemes could not be hampered on this account.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Budget Estimates (BE) are proposed, keeping in view the planned activities 
linked with the annual targets during a particular financial year. Efforts are made to 
formulate the plan judiciously and realistically so that budget of the department is 
realistic and vital schemes of department are not hampered due to less allocation of 
funds. In case more resources are required for a programme during 2023-24, suitable 
provision will be made at R.E. stage.  
 
(O.M. NO. G-30012/2/2023-Bud/26 dated 12.06.2023) 

 
 
16 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 
 
Challenges in Water Sector 
 The Committee note that the country has 18% of the world’s population as well as 
18% cattle population. However, it has only 4% of world’s freshwater resources. The 
water table in certain parts of the country has seen depletion due to over exploitation of 
groundwater and the climate change has further exacerbated the pressure on water 
resources. The Committee observe that with the growing population, rapid 
industrialization, increasing urbanization, the gap between demand and supply of water 
will further deteriorate the situation.Besides, as per the information furnished by the 
Department, the Committee observe that thoughthe availability of utilizable water 
quantity as per projection will be 1122 BCM in the year 2025 while the water demand 
from all sectors (Irrigation, Drinking Water, Industry, Energy, others) will be 843 
BCMresulting in excess of 279 BCM,however, eventhis excess of water may not be 
considered much due to thefactthat much of the utilizable water in the country is in the 
Brahmaputra-Barak basin due to huge spatial variation.Further, as per water demand 
projection, there will be shortfall of 58 BCM in the year 2050 when availability of utilizable 
water is projected to be same as in the year 2025 i.e. 1122 BCM, however, water 
demand from all sectors is projected to rise to 1180 BCM.  
 
Taking Cognizance of the challenges of the water sector, the Committee are of 
the view that, it is the high time to adopt a holistic approach to conserve the water 
resources while catering to the increasing requirements of water in various sectors. It 
requires multi-pronged strategy such as strengthening of legal and institutional 
framework for water conservation, crop diversification, growing of crops requiring less 
water, revive dry springs, floodwater harvesting and ensure better percolation of 
rainwater etc. Further, the Union and State Governments should work in close 
cooperation in order to find a viable and lasting solution to the water woes of the country. 
Besides, the Committee believe thatpublic participation and social awareness are 
essential to make programme a success on this count. The Committee are awarethat the 
Union government has initiated numerous steps like launching Accelerated Irrigation 
Benefits Programme (AIBP), Atal Bhujal Yojana, Jal Shakti Abhiyan, Pradhan Mantri 
Krishi Sinchayee Yojana etc. to augment the water resources of the country. They feel 
that it is high time that the common people be aware of their duties of importance of 
conservation of our limited water resources. The Committee, therefore,would like to 
suggest the Department to create a dedicated fund for public awareness in order to give 
impetus to the public awareness programmes with stringent monitoring to make it a 
success. The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
DoWR, RD &GR note the recommendation of the Committee and agree with the 
observations of the committee regarding adoption of a holistic approach to conserve the 
water resources, while catering to the increasing requirements of water in various 
sectors. DoWR, RD&GR has adopted amulti-pronged strategy for conservation of water 
resources in a holistic manner while catering to increasing requirements of water in 
various sectors. 
 
Funds have been made available under Publicity and Advertising heads tovarious 
organisations under DoWR, RD &GR in order to give impetus to the public awareness 
programmes of the department. 
 

 
 
17 
 
Central Ground Water Board (CGWB), an attached body under the aegis of 
DoWR, RD &GR, has taken up Aquifer Mapping and Management Programme during XII 
Plan, under the scheme ‘Ground Water Management and Regulation’. The Aquifer 
Mapping is aimed to delineate aquifer disposition and their characterization for 
preparation of aquifer/area specific ground water management plans with community 
participation. The management plans including agriculture sector like crop diversification, 
sprinkler system, drip irrigation, etc. are shared with the respective State Governments 
for taking appropriate measures/implementation. Further, Public Interaction Programs 
(PIP) are being organized at grass root level for disseminating the tenets of the Aquifer 
Management Plans as part of the National Aquifer Mapping and Management (NAQUIM) 
Programme for the benefit of the stakeholders, including farmers. Best practices of water 
conservation by various entities including private persons, NGOs, PSUs etc. have been 
compiled and put on the website of this Department for the benefit of general public. An 
interactive link on best practices has also been created for receiving inputs from public, 
which, after necessary evaluation/validation are put on the website for the benefit of the 
public.  
 
Central Water Commission(CWC) is also participating various exhibitions 
organized by various Govt departments, NGOs, Private sector specific to the 
water/related areas. Various events for sensitization of public, school children for efficient 
use of water is being carried out constantly throughout the country by regional offices of 
CWC.  
 
Mass awareness programmes (Trainings, Seminars, Workshops, Exhibitions, 
Trade Fares and Painting Competitions etc.) are conducted from time to time each year 
under the information, Education & Communication (IEC) Scheme of DoWR, RD&GR in 
various parts of the country to promote water conservation techniques including in the 
irrigation sector.  
 
 NWM is generating awareness for water conservation under Jal Shakti Abhiyan: 
Catch the Rain (JSA: CTR) Campaigns which is an inter-sectoral convergence of various 
Central and State Government Schemes/Programmes.  
 
Atal Jal is also conducting IEC activities at National level from their funds available 
under “Advertising & Publicity” budget head. 
 
 
(O.M. NO. G-30012/2/2023-Bud/26 dated 12.06.2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 
North-East Water Management Authority (NEWMA) 
 
 The Committee are happy to note that the Department has prepared a draft Bill, 
titled, ‘North East Water Management Authority (NEWMA) Bill, 2023’, in consultation with 
the Ministry of Law and Justice. The draft Cabinet Note for introduction of the Bill is 
currently under consideration of the Government. The Committee feel that once the Bill 
is enacted, theAuthority willcome into existence andwill manage water resources of 
Brahmaputra and Barak basin in an integrated manner with due regard to relationship 
between surface and ground water resources, keeping in view the environmental 
aspects. The Chief Ministers of all member States of the basin will be part of the 
Governing Council of the authority under the chairmanship of Union Minister of Jal 
Shakti. The States of the basin will have more say in the affairs of the NEWMA through 

 
 
18 
 
the structure of the Governing Council.Unlike its predecessor organization i.e. 
Brahmaputra Board, which was basically a single discipline body for flood control, the 
NEWMA will be a multi-disciplinary body which will also look after other water bodies viz 
- lakes etc. and their relationship with Brahmaputra and Barak basin as an integrated 
unit. The Committee laud this initiative of the Government and urge upon the Department 
to takeall out efforts for passage of the NEWMA Bill by the Parliament, so as to pave way 
for formation of the Authority for better management of water resources in the North –
Eastern region in a holistic manner.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Draft Cabinet Note was circulated amongst concerned stake holders. Suggestions received from various departments were examined. Revised draft cabinet notes and NEWMA Bills have been circulated for comments and the matter is being pursued.  
(O.M. NO. G-30012/2/2023-Bud/26 dated 12.06.2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 
 
Atal Bhujal Yojana (ATAL JAL) 
 
 The Committee note that the Atal Bhujal Yojana (ATAL JAL) is being implemented 
since April, 2020 in 8,774 water stressed Gram Panchayats of 222 administrative blocks/ 
Talukas in 81 districts of seven States, viz. Haryana, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya 
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh for five years. The Department has 
informedthat the World Bank has undertaken the midterm review of the Scheme and as 
per its findings, the programme is on track and would achieve its objectives by the 
closing date of31st March, 2025. The Department has further informed the Committeethat 
the proposals of inclusion of more water stressed areas in this Programme would be 
considered in future, depending upon the outcome of the scheme and its implementation 
status. Keeping in view the fact that the Scheme as of now has covered the above-
mentionedStates which account for about 37% of the total number of water-stressed 
(over-exploited, critical and semi-critical) blocks in India, the Committeefeel that the 
Department should make concerted efforts to cover the remaining areas/States under 
this Scheme so as to cover the remaining 63% water stressed blocks of the country.The 
Committee also note that in the States where Atal Bhujal Yojana has been 
undertaken,some of the water stressed blocks have been selected while somehave been 
left out, they, therefore,desire the Department to take proactive action and revise the 
guidelines of Atal Bhujal Yojana accordingly to bring all the water stressed blocksin the 
Selected States, where the Scheme is in operation, under this Scheme. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
ATAL JAL was started as a Pilot Programme in identified areas of 07 States with 
an aim to demonstrate the community led ground water management so that later on, all 
the States can take up this approach further to remaining areas. Expansion of ATAL JAL 
is under consideration of this department and the suggestions made by Hon’ble 
Committee will be taken into account at the time of expansion.  
 
(O.M. NO. G-30012/2/2023-Bud/26 dated 12.06.2023) 
 
 

 
 
19 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 7 
 
Ground Water Management and Regulation Scheme 
 
 The Committee observe that the Ground Water Management and Regulation 
(GWM&R) Scheme is a continuing Central Sector Scheme of the Department of Water 
Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation. The Committee note that the 
scheme has recently been approved for continuation for the period 2021-26. The 
components of the scheme include (i) Component I: Monitoring, Assessment, 
Management and Regulation and (ii) Component II: Strengthening of Infrastructure for 
Technological Upgradation (Machinery & Equipment). In addition to this, a project 
namely “National Aquifer Mapping and Management (NAQUUIM)” has also been 
approved by the Public Investment Board (PIB) for implementation under the scheme. 
The Committee note that the BE allocation for such an important Scheme has been 
reduced drastically at RE stage year by year. To illustrate, in FY 2021-22, the BE was 
Rs. 275 crore which was reduced to Rs. 170 crore at RE stage. Similarly, for FY 2022-
23, the BE of Rs. 375 crore was lowered to Rs. 315 crore at RE stage. While, the actual 
expenditure for FY 2022-23 till 31 December, 2022 is Rs. 124.84 crore (39.63% appx of 
RE allocation of Rs. 315 crore). The Committee note that the remaining amount i.e.Rs. 
190.16 crore of the RE of Rs. 315 crores would scarcely be spent in the last quarter of 
theFY 2022-23. The Department has reasoned that COVID related restrictions during 
2019-20 and2020-21 have resulted in frequent reduction of budgetary provisions at RE 
stage. The Committee note that BE for the year 2021-22 was planned in accordance with 
the activities proposed in the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) memo.The EFC in 
its meeting held on 31st August 2021 recommended that most of the activities under 
Aquifer Mapping and Management Programme (Component I) should be undertaken as 
a Project, these activities were proposed to be taken up separately under PIB and the 
RE under GWM&R scheme has been reduced. Though, the BE for the year 2022-23 has 
been increased in anticipation of the approval of the PIB project on Aquifer Mapping and 
Management Programme, yet the expenditure under PIB is to be started as the project 
got approved recently.Having taken note of the fact that the above-said project has got 
approved as well as the impact of COVID has declined the Committee therefore desire 
the Department to formulate the plan and allocate the budget prudently and as far as 
possible realisticallyso that the aim of such an important Scheme which is to provide 
scientific inputs for sustainable development and management of ground water 
resources in the country may not be affected. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Public Investment Board (PIB) proposal for NAQUIM project has been 
approved with  an outlay of Rs 805.00 Cr  for the years 2022-23 to 2025-26 as part of the 
Ground Water Management & Regulation Scheme. The physical & financial targets have 
been projected for F.Y. 2023-24.  To monitor the implementation of the scheme, 
DoWR,RD&GR and CGWB review the physical and financial progress every quarter. 
 
(O.M. NO. G-30012/2/2023-Bud/26 dated 12.06.2023) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION  NO. 8 
 
 The Committee observe that the Department had circulated Ground Water 
(Regulation and Control of Development and Management) Bill, 2005, which was a 
Model Bill, to all states/UTs for regulation and development of ground water. The 
Committee note that so far only 15 States and 6 UTs have enacted and implemented the 

 
 
20 
 
Model Bill.The Committee note that though the Department is regularly pursuing the 
matter with the State Governments urging them to enact the Model Bill and adopt the 
guidelines stipulated by the Ministry of Jal Shakti (MoJS), however number of States are 
yet to enact the Model Bill. Taking cognizance of the afore-stated facts, the Committee 
recommend that the Department may suitably modify the Model Bill taking into account 
the apprehensions and socio-political and economic realities of the States thus paving 
the way for enactment of the Model Bill by rest of the States. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Model Groundwater (Sustainable Management) Bill has been prepared by the 
Department. To tackle water related matters in a holistic and unified manner, a Draft 
Model Bill i.e., “Model State Integrated Water Resources Management Bill, 2023” 
incorporating all the major provisions of 06 water related Model Bills including Model 
Groundwater (Sustainable Management) Bill is under finalization. 
 
(O.M. NO. G-30012/2/2023-Bud/26 dated 12.06.2023) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 10 
 
Projects on Tributaries of Ganga 
 
 Though, the Committee are happy to note that the major work on main stem of 
river Ganga has been done, yet they find that some projects are left in the State of West 
Bengal which will be completed within 2 years and now the focus of the Department will 
be on the tributaries of river Ganga. The Committee note that 53 sewerage projects and 
5 projects for construction of ghats and crematoria have been sanctioned on the 
tributaries of river Ganga, out of which, 19 sewerage projects and 1 project for 
construction of ghats have been completed. From the information furnished by the 
Department, the Committee find overrun in execution of the projects due to various 
impediments such as delays in obtaining permissions for road cutting, railway/National 
Highway crossings, land procurement, forest clearances, change of sites, abnormal 
floods etc. The Committee are of the view that Namami Gange Programme is a 
commendable effort of the Government, however, rejuvenation of the river is possible 
only if it is viewed in totality including health and ecosystem of other tributaries of river 
Ganga are maintained. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Department 
shouldfocus on the tributaries of river Ganga and make concerted efforts with the States 
where these Projects are being executed so as to remove the obstacles coming in the 
way for faster completion for Ganga rejuvenation.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Namami Gange Programme covers all the tributaries of river Ganga for effective 
abatement of pollution and rejuvenation of the river Ganga and its tributaries. The 
projects are prioritized considering the high pollution load from the towns. The major 
tributaries of river Ganga on which projects have been sanctioned are Yamuna, Rispana, 
Bindal, Hindon, Ramganga, Kali East, Kali West, Gomti, Saryu, Varuna, Gandak, 
Ghaghara, Damodar, Ajoy, Banka etc.  
 
The Namami Gange Mission is focussed on convergence of different schemes, 
piloting of new projects, rational augmentation of the interventions taken up in first phase 
with a focus on the ongoing projects with operation & maintenance (O&M), new 

 
 
21 
 
interventions on tributaries and sub-tributaries of Ganga for further scaling up the river 
rejuvenation in the entire Ganga and its tributaries basin comprising all the 11 States.         
                                                   
The status of the projects under the Programme are as follows: 
 
(i) As on date, 428 projects have been sanctioned under Namami Gange 
Programme for various activities such as sewerage infrastructure, ghats & crematoria, 
river front development, river surface cleaning, institutional development, biodiversity 
conservation, afforestation and rural sanitation. 
 
(ii) Out of 428, 244 projects have been completed and balance projects are at various 
stages of execution and tendering.  
 
(iii) 186 Sewerage infrastructure projects have been taken up for creation of total STP 
capacity of 5933.37 MLD and laying of around 5238.26 Km sewerage network. As on 
date, 105 sewerage projects have been completed resulting in creation of 2610.05 MLD 
of STP capacity and laying of 4379.11 Km sewage network.  
 
(iv) As on date, the total number of sewage infrastructure projects on tributaries of 
Ganga have been increased from 53 to 60 and the Ghat projects in Ganga tributaries 
have been increased from 5 to 8.  
 
For cleaning of river Ganga and its tributaries, including Yamuna, the sewage 
treatment plants are being setup in various towns depending on various factors such as 
sewage generation from the town, characteristics of the wastewater in drains, land 
availability, topographical features, power availability, sewage travelling distance before 
meeting river etc.  
 
 
(O.M. NO. G-30012/2/2023-Bud/26 dated 12.06.2023) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 11 
 
Cleaning of the River Yamuna 
 
 In connection with the cleaning of river Ganga, the Committee would like to recall 
the briefing meeting held on 16.12.2021 in connection with the examination of the 
subject ‘Review of Upper Yamuna River Cleaning Project up to Delhi and River bed 
management in Delhi’. During the aforesaid meeting, they were apprised by the 
Department that though the stretch of river Yamuna in Delhi is very small just 22 kms., 
however it is responsible for causing 75 to 80 percent of pollution in the river. The 
Committee note that the bathing quality of river Yamuna particularly in the State of Delhi, 
as per parameters stipulated by the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) for Outdoor 
Bathing (organized),falls into class-B category. One of the parameters is Biochemical 
Oxygen Demand (BOD) which should be lessthan 3.0 mg/l for bathing purpose. The 
Committee findvery high presence of BOD in the river Yamuna in Delhi during 2019- 
2021. Maximum concentration observed is 114 mg/L during 2020 which is very much 
high as per the prescribed limit of less than 3 mg/l BOD for bathing purpose in river 
Yamuna. In this regard, the representative of the Department hasinformed the 
Committee that a number of STPs in Delhi will be commissioned soon, which will be of 
great help in reducing the pollution level in the river Yamuna. He has further emphasized 
the role and the steps required to be taken by the State Government in curbing the 
pollution in river Yamuna. The Committee further note that the major impediments for 
cleaning of river Yamuna are less flow at Wazirabad during dry period, illegal discharge 

 
 
22 
 
of sewage and industrial effluent, disposal of solid waste in drains, improper functioning 
of CETPs and insufficient sewage treatment capacity. Considering the role of Delhi 
stretch of river Yamuna which is responsible for major pollution load of the entire 
Yamuna river, the Committee are of the opinion that both the Union Government and the 
State Government should work in close collaboration and make all endeavours by taking 
remedial measures to overcome all the obstacles as mentioned above so that the 
rejuvenation of river Yamuna may become a reality.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Water quality assessment of river Yamuna is carried out by Central Pollution 
Control Board (CPCB) at 33 locations, under National Water Quality Monitoring 
Programme (NWMP) in association with State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) of 
Uttarakhand (04 locations), Himachal Pradesh (04 locations), Haryana (06 locations), 
Delhi (07 locations) and Uttar Pradesh (12 locations). The analysis results are compared 
with Primary Water Quality Criteria (PWQC) for Outdoor Bathing notified under 
Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986 with respect to parameters viz., DO, pH, BOD, 
Fecal Coliform and Fecal Streptococci. Based on recent analysis of water quality for 
2022, it has been observed that in Delhi, all the 07 monitored locations are not meeting 
with the criteria with respect to parameters DO (except Palla and Wazirabad), BOD & FC 
(except Palla), indicating that the water in river Yamuna is not fit for bathing, particularly 
in the State of Delhi.  
 
 As per the data submitted by DPCC, the total sewage generation in Delhi is 
3,491 MLD, whereas the total installed capacity of 35 STPs is 2,874 MLD and the 
capacity actually utilized is 2,714 MLD.In addition, there are 13 Common Effluent 
Treatment Plants (CETPs) with a total capacity of 212.3 MLD is existing in Delhi to treat 
industrial wastewater generated from industries. 
 
 As per NGT directions, a High Level Committee (HLC) has been constituted 
under the chairmanship of Hon’ble Lieutenant Governor, Delhi to coordinate with all 
departments involved in Yamuna rejuvenation. Action plans for rejuvenation of rivers 
have been prepared by “River Rejuvenation Committee’’ (RRC) constituted by the 
respective State Government/UT Administration, under the overall supervision and 
coordination of Principal Secretary, Environment of the concerned State/Union 
Territory, including river Yamuna.  
 
  Presently in Delhi, under Namami Gange Programme, a total of 9 projects have 
been taken up with an estimated cost of Rs.1951.03 crore to abate the pollution in river 
Yamuna. These projects are generally at advanced stage of implementation. These 
projects envisage creation of 1,268 MLD of sewage treatment capacities in Delhi to 
bridge the gap in treatment capacity. 
 
  Stringent monitoring and regulation of industries and pollution sources is 
undertaken to assess the compliance status of Grossly Polluting Industries (GPIs) for 
enforcing regulatory framework on the polluting industries. Stringent action is taken by 
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB)/State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs)/ 
Pollution Control Committees against the GPIs discharging into main stem of Ganga 
River & its tributaries which are non-complying with respect to the prescribed norms. 
 
Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change (MoEF& CC) formulates and 
notifies standards for emission or discharge of environmental pollutants viz. air 
pollutants and water pollutants from industries, operations or processes with an aim to 
protect and improve the quality of the environment and abate environmental pollution. 

 
 
23 
 
 
Industry specific effluent/emission standards are notified under Schedule-I: 
‘Standards for Emission or Discharge of Environmental Pollutants from Various 
Industries’ of Environment Protection Act, 1986. State Pollution Control Boards and 
Pollution Control Committees in States and Union Territories, respectively are adhered 
to ensure the compliance of these standards. So far, 47 industry specific effluent 
standards and 63 industry specific emission standards have been notified. 
 
  Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) regulates industrial pollution through 
consent mechanism. DPCC has notified stricter norms for sewage treatment in Delhi.  
 
NMCG has been organizing regular Yamuna Ghat cleaning campaigns on 
certain Saturdays of every month for cleaning the seven Ghats in Yamuna in 
association with differentWater quality assessment of river Yamuna is carried out by 
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) at 33 locations, under National Water Quality 
Monitoring Programme (NWMP) in association with State Pollution Control Boards 
(SPCBs) of Uttarakhand (04 locations), Himachal Pradesh (04 locations), Haryana (06 
locations), Delhi (07 locations) and Uttar Pradesh (12 locations). The analysis results 
are compared with Primary Water Quality Criteria (PWQC) for Outdoor Bathing notified 
under Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986 with respect to parameters viz., DO, pH, 
BOD, Fecal Coliform and Fecal Streptococci. Based on recent analysis of water quality 
for 2022, it has been observed that in Delhi, the monitored locations are not meeting 
with the criteria with respect to parameters DO (except Palla and Wazirabad), BOD & 
FC (except Palla), indicating that the water in river Yamuna is not fit for bathing in the 
State of Delhi.  
 
NMCG has been organizing regular Yamuna Ghat cleaning campaigns on 
certain Saturdays of every month for cleaning the seven Ghats in Yamuna in 
association with different volunteering civil society group. 
 
 Directions were issued by the Ministry of Jal Shakti to Delhi Pollution Control 
Committee (DPCC) vide communication dated 16.08.2018 under Section 5 of 
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 against sub-optimal functioning of CETPs as well 
as reutilization of treated waste water in the State of Delhi. In addition, as reported by 
CPCB, directions were also issued to Delhi Jal Board (DJB) dated 19.02.2019 under 
the said Act against non-complying sewage treatment plants operating in Delhi. 
Central Monitoring Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary, DoWR, RD & GR, 
Ministry of Jal Shakti has been monitoring the progress in implementation of Action 
Plan for the State of Delhi including sewerage projects for abatement of pollution in the 
river Yamuna in a time bound manner. The Committee has also directed the NCT of 
Delhi for completing their initiatives without any further delay. 
 
The State Government of Delhi has been directed to ensure compliance of the 
existing STPs and CETPs and to take strict action against the non-complying industries. 
Time bound action plan needs to be implemented to bridge the gap in solid waste 
management in the State. 
 
(O.M. NO. G-30012/2/2023-Bud/26 dated 12.06.2023) 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
 

 
 
24 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 13 
 
Command Area Development & Water Management (CAD&WM) 
 
 The Committee observe that the BE provision for CAD&WM for FY 2022-23 was 
Rs. 1044 crore which was reduced to just Rs. 140 crore (reduction of more than 86%) at 
RE stage. However, for FY 2023-24, it has again been raised to Rs. 400 crore (BE). On 
the issue of huge decline of budgetary allocations at the RE stage, the Department has 
informed the Committee that with the paradigm shift in implementation of PMKSY-AIBP 
in 2016, implementation of CAD&WM was restricted to paripassu implementation of the 
99 priority projects. However, work in CAD&WM has not been able to meet the 
expectations due to its bottlenecks as the farmers do not donate land or allow work in 
their farms unless they are able to see the water in a nearby canal. Further, the 
Committee find that the approval for modification in the CAD&WM which was anticipated 
to be obtained by mid of FY 2022-23 for inclusion of more projects under the Programme 
has not been received so far. Taking note of the importance of CAD&WM for achieving 
the objectives of water use efficiency, increased productivity and sustainable irrigation 
participatory environment, the Committee recommend that the Department should take 
up the matter with the Ministry of Finance to obtain approval of Rs. 600 crores for new 
projects and also suitably raise allocation at the Revised Estimates (RE) stage so that 
the execution of such an important Scheme in the FY 2023-24 is not adversely affected. 
The Committee also urge the Department to work in collaboration with the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare so that farmers may be made aware of the benefits of 
CAD&WM and accept the Scheme whole heartedly. For this purpose, if possible, the 
changes in CAD&WM may be considered to encourage the farmers. The Committee 
would categorically like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The flagship scheme for irrigation is Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai 
Yojana (PMKSY) which has 2 components i.e. Accelerated Irrigation Benefit 
Programme (AIBP) component pertaining to development of canals, dams, 
auxiliary setup etc with outlay of Rs 18,352 crore (central share from 2021-26)and 
Command Area Development & Water Management (CADWM) 
component to develop the last mile connectivity through water courses/field 
channels from distributary/ Minor canals to farm gate with an outlay of Rs 
5,566 crore (central share from 2021-26). 
 
 Inclusion of newprojects under CADWM component for the period 2022-26 is 
being proposed as “Modernisation of Irrigation Command Area Works”, for 
meaningfulenhancement of Water Use Efficiency (WUE) in existingcommand areas 
ofvarious deserving projects.  
 
 The PMKSY - AIBP and CADWM as a whole is proposed to be reoriented for 
smart irrigation at last mile connectivity. A working group has been formedtosuggest 
changes and re-orientation of the AIBP as well as the CADWM 
component of PMKSY for smart irrigation.  
 
(O.M. NO. G-30012/2/2023-Bud/26 dated 12.06.2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
25 
 
RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 15 
 
Development of Water Resources Information System (DWRIS) 
 
 The Committee note that the Development of Water Resources Information 
System scheme aims for standardized national water information system with a network 
of data banks and data bases, improving data quality and processing capabilities through 
country wide network of Hydro meteorological sites.  In addition, it endeavours towards 
early flood warning system as an important non-structural measure for flood 
management through existing network of flood forecasting stations towards effective 
flood warning and issuing flood advisories with lead time of 120 hours.  Besides, the 
scheme intends to create an integrated data bank to tackle coastal erosion in a scientific 
manner keeping in view long term perspective and challenges of climate change.  The 
Committee note that the scheme of Flood Forecasting has been merged with this 
scheme from FY 2018-19. They have been informed that DWRIS along with other 
flagship schemes of DoWR, RD & GR such as PMKSY, RBM, FMBAP, RRR of Water 
Bodies, etc. is being managed by field offices with the total sanctioned staff strength of 
6965as on 31.12.2022 (both technical and non -technical groups). Out of these 6965 
posts, 4863 post are work-charged staff. Further, out of these 4863 posts of work-charge 
staff, 3044 posts have been abolished. As on 31.12.2022, only 3217 posts have been 
filled up. The Committee find that there had been severe shortage of manpower (both 
technical and non-technical) at field set-up especially at sites for implementing the 
various activities of DWRIS. However, situation in recent years has improved with 
mandate received for outsourcing of support & supervisory services at HO sites. 
Approval has also been received for hiring of other non-technical services at those sites 
& offices. Keeping in view the importance of the DWRIS in collecting and analysing 
important data for developing a robust information system on water resources, the 
Committee recommend the Department to fill up the vacant post expeditiously for smooth 
functioning of the DWRIS Scheme. The Committee also recommend the Department to 
initiate recruitment process well in advance taking into account retirement of personnel 
and assessing the requirements of manpower so that works of the Scheme are not 
affected on this count. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
CWC with DoWR, RD &GR is working towards filling up existing vacancies in all 
Groups A, B & C sanctioned posts in a mission mode. Lately, there had been severe 
shortage of manpower (both technical and non-technical) at field set-up especially at 
sites for implementing the various activities of DWRIS. However, situation in recent year 
has improved with mandate received for outsourcing of support & supervisory services at 
HO sites.  Approvalhas alsobeen received for hiring for other non- technical services at 
those sites & offices.  
 
(O.M. NO. G-30012/2/2023-Bud/26 dated 12.06.2023) 

 
 
26 
 
CHAPTER III  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
  

 
 
27 
 
CHAPTER IV  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BYTHE COMMITTEE 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 5 
Mission Amrit Sarovar  
 The Committee observe that the Amrit Sarovar Mission has been launched by 
Hon’ble Prime Minister in addition to the existing Repair, Renovation and Restoration 
(RRR) schemes. The Department has informed that the water bodies which are included 
under the RRR scheme and are likely to be completed by August, 2023, have been 
identified to be included as Amrit Sarovars in consultation with the State Governments 
concerned. The Committee note that a total of 608 water bodies under RRR scheme 
have been identified for implementation as Amrit Sarovars. Out of these, 211 water 
bodies have so far been renovated. The Committee take note that no separate dedicated 
fundhas been proposed under Amrit Sarovar initiative. The Repair, Renovation and 
Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies schemes are funded under PMKSY-HKKP scheme. 
The Committee note that the details on the work relating to Amrit Sarovar in the State of 
Manipur are yet to be added on Amrit Sarovar portal. Keeping in view the better 
monitoring for fruitful results, the Committee urge upon the Department to coordinate not 
only with Manipur but also with all the States where Mission Amrit Sarovar has been 
undertaken to provide/update all relevant information in a time bound manner on the 
portal of Amrit Sarovar.  
Reply of the Government 
 
The observation of the Committee has been noted for compliance, through the 
nodal Ministry for Mission Amrit Sarovar, i.e., Ministry of Rural Development.      
 
(O.M. NO. G-30012/2/2023-Bud/26 dated 12.06.2023) 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para no. 8  of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 9 
 
Safety of Dams 
 
 The Committee note that as per the National Register of Large Dams-2019, there 
are 234 functional large dams in India which are more than 100 years old. The 
Committee take note of list as furnished by the Department, of failures from such old 
large dams which are as follows: Tigra Project in Madhya Pradesh (completion in the 
year 1917 and failure in the year 1917 itself), Ashti Project in Maharashtra (completion in 
1883 and failure in 1933), Khadakwasla Project in Maharashtra (completion in 1880 and 
failure in 1961), Jamunia Project in Madhya Pradesh (completion in 1921 and failure in 
2002) and Jaswant Nagar Project in Rajasthan (completion in 1889 and failure in 2007). 
The Committee observethat some of them, as per the National Register of Large Dams – 
2019, are more than 300 years old and so far none of these dams have been 
decommissioned, however, the Department has stated that the dams are normally 
designed for 100 years of useful age and their functional life also gets decreased with 
progressive reservoir sedimentation concurrently reducing project benefits. The 
Department further states that there is no mechanism to assess the viable lifespan and 

 
 
28 
 
performance of the dams and these dams are mostly owned by State Governments 
/Public Sector Undertakings/Private Agencies which carry out the Operation and 
Maintenance (O&M) works of the dams in their jurisdiction. Furthermore, realizing the 
importance of dam safety, a Dam Safety Act has been notified in the year 2021 to 
provide for surveillance, inspection, operation and maintenance of the specified dam for 
prevention of dam failure related disasters and to provide for institutional mechanism to 
ensure their safe functioning and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. In 
view of the foregoing, the Committee recommend the Department to take suitable 
measures for evolving a viable mechanism to assess the lives and operations of the 
dams and also persuade the States to decommission those dams which have outlived 
their lifespan and may posea severe threat to life and infrastructure in case of any failure. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this 
regard within three months from presentation of this Report.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Well maintained and operated dams, if continued to be giving meaningful 
service, can have long life. Earthen Dams are generally constructed using locally 
available materials and can be compared to natural geological landforms having very 
long life. Similarly, other type of dams also, if maintained/ rehabilitated from time to 
time, they will also serve the purpose for a long time. 
 
 Loss of useful storage of Dam reservoirs with time can also be managed by 
proper sediment management such as flushing by low level sluices, removal of 
accumulated sediments (if found techno economically and environmentally feasible) as 
well as Catchment Area Treatment etc. If a project, even after its designed useful age, is 
serving its benefits and is structurally safe, it is not advisable to decommission such dam. 
Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement Project Phase II and III(2021-2031), is a continuing 
Scheme of DRIP-I(2012-2021), being implemented under overall coordination and 
supervision of Ministry of Jal Shakti. The objective of Scheme is to improve safety and 
operational performance of selected dams in participating States along with Dam Safety 
Institutional Strengthening. 
 
 It has provision for physical rehabilitation of 736 dams located in 19 States, to 
improve hydrological, structural and operational safety of selected dams, which in turn 
would help in enhancing the lives of these dams to serve the intended benefits. In 
addition to dam rehabilitation activities, the Scheme has provision for other important 
activities including publication of technical Guidelines and Manuals in dam safety areas, 
capacity building of academic Institutions, Central agencies as well as participating 
Implementing Agencies, preparation of dam specific Emergency Action Plan as well as 
O&M Manuals to improve climate and disaster resilience.  These activities would also 
contribute in improving the Institutional mechanism to deal with safety and performance 
of the given dams. 
 
 Also, there is need based provision for de-siltation of selected reservoirs. Other 
sediment management approach such as Catchment area treatment may also be taken 
up under the Scheme. 
 
To meet concerns of safety related to ageing dams, DSA 2021 has been enacted 
and has come into force w.e.f 30.12.2021. Consequent upon enactment of National 
Dam Safety Act, 2021 and in pursuance of the provisions therein, National Dam Safety 
Authority (NDSA)has been set up.  
 

 
 
29 
 
 To ensure long term sustainability of capacity building of dam owners, Ministry of 
Jal Shakti has decided to support identified academic institution to provide technical 
support to dam owners through the establishment of Centre of Excellence. In this 
regard a Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) was signed between central water 
commission and IIT Roorkee for Dams under the Dam Rehabilitation and improvement 
project Phase II and III at IIT Roorkee.  
 
As per Section 30-31, (Chapter VII) DSA 2021, for each specified dam, the 
owner shall, within the operation and maintenance establishment, provide a dam safety 
unit consisting of such competent levels of engineers as may be specified by the 
regulations. Every owner of a specified dam shall undertake every year, through their 
dam safety unit, a pre-monsoon and post-monsoon inspections in respect of each such 
dam and also during and after every flood, earthquake or any other natural or man- 
made calamities, or if any sign of distress or unusual behavior is noticed in the dam. 
Remedial measures shall be initiated by the concerned SDSOs if the dams are found to 
be in distressed condition. 
 
 As per Section 36-37, (Chapter VIII), DSA 2021, in respect of the existing dam, 
emergency action plan shall be prepared within five years from the date of 
commencement of this Act and thereafter update such plans at regular intervals. 
 
As per section 38, Chapter IX, DSA 2021, the owner of a specified dam shall 
make or cause to be made comprehensive dam safety evaluation of each specified dam 
through an independent panel of experts, shall be conducted within five years from the 
date of commencement of this Act, and thereafter carried out at regular intervals as may 
be specified by the regulations, which includes review and analysis of available data on 
the design, construction, operation, maintenance and performance of the structure 
along with general assessment of hydrologic and hydraulic conditions with mandatory 
review of design floods as specified by the regulations. 
 
 Therefore, as per relevant provisions of DSA 2021, the safety concerns of ageing 
dams are adequately addressed. 
 
(O.M. NO. G-30012/2/2023-Bud/26 dated 12.06.2023) 
 
Comment of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 12 
 
E-flow for river Yamuna 
 
The Committee observe that a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed 
by the Chief Ministers of Himachal Pradesh, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, and 
National Capital Territory of Delhi on 12th May, 1994 regarding allocation of utilizable 
surface flow of river Yamuna upto Okhla Barrage (Upper Yamuna) among the co-basin 
States. The MoU stipulates that ‘A minimum flow in proportion of completion of upstream 
storages going upto 10 cumec shall be maintained downstream of Tajewala and Okhla 
Headworks throughout the year from ecological considerations, as upstream storages 
are built up progressively in a phased manner’. Further, the Principal Bench of the 
National Green Tribunal (NGT) directed that the State of Haryana shall release 10 
Cumec water directly into main stream of river Yamuna from Hathinikund Barrage and 
maintain e-flow of river till Wazirabad. The Committee note that as per the water 

 
 
30 
 
released data, the minimum 10 Cumec (352 cusec) as stipulated in the MoU is being 
released downstreams of Hathinikund Barrage and Okhla Barrage throughout the year. 
 
The Committee observe that storage as stipulated by the 1994 MoU among the 
States for maintaining minimum flow in the river Yamuna throughout the year has not 
been built so far. Even the Department has reasoned that less flow at Wazirabad during 
dry period is one of the major issues that impedes cleaning of river Yamuna. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to make all out efforts in cooperation 
with the concerned States to build the storage capacity. Further, the Committee also 
urge upon the Department to consider defining e-flow for the river Yamuna on the line 
ofthe river Ganga in order to maintain the health of the river and also its ecosystem.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
There are three National Projects, planned in the upstream of the Yamuna River. 
The status of these three projects is as follows: 
 
iv. Renukaji Dam Project- 
 
         Renukaji Dam Project has been conceived as a storage project on Giri River (a 
tributary of river Yamuna) in Sirmour District of Himachal Pradesh. The project envisages 
construction of 148 m. high rock filled dam for supply of 23 cumec (498 MCM) water to 
Delhi for 9 months from October to June and other basin States. The project will also 
generate 40 MW (2x20 MW) of power during peak flow. The live storage of Renukaji 
MPP is 498 MCM.The Project was declared as a National Project in 2008. The 
Agreement has been signed amongst six basin States of Himachal Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, NCT of Delhi and Rajasthan on the construction of 
Renukaji Dam Project on 11.01.2019. The project has been approved for implementation 
with central assistance from GoI in December 2021. 
 
v. Lakhwar Multi-Purpose Project 
 
         Lakhwar Multi-Purpose Project is situated on Yamuna River in Dehradun district of 
Uttarakhand. It envisages construction of 204 m. high concrete dam with underground 
power house with installed capacity of 300 MW along with construction of Katapather 
Barrage about 13.6 km downstream of Lakhwar dam. The live storage of the Lakhwar 
MPP is 330.66 MCM. The Project was declared as a National Project in 2008 wherein 
90% of the cost of water component shall be provided as grant assistance by GoI. The 
Agreement has been signed amongst six basin States of Himachal Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, NCT of Delhi and Rajasthan on the construction of 
Lakhwar Project on 28.08.2018. The project has been approved for implementation with 
central assistance from GoI in December 2021. 
 
vi. Kishau Multi-Purpose Project- 
 
         Kishau Multi-Purpose Project has been identified as a National Project in Feb’ 
2008.  The project is a storage scheme located on river Tons (tributary of river Yamuna) 
in Dehradun district of Uttarakhand & Sirmour district of Himachal Pradesh.The Live 
Storage of the Project is 1,324 MCM and Gross Storage of the Project is 1,824 
MCM.  Hydropower with installed capacity of 660 MW has also been envisaged. Efforts 
are being made by DoWR, RD & GR for agreement among the party States viz. 
Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan and NCT and Delhi 
for its implementation. 
 

 
 
31 
 
 As regards defining e flow of river Yamuna, a study report titled “Environmental 
flow assessment for Yamuna River from Hathnikund barrage to Okhla barrage” was 
submitted by NIH (Roorkee). There have been certain observations with regard to 
surface and sub-surface interactions etc. which are equally important. Efforts are being 
made to arrive at a consensus between stakeholdering States. 
 
(O.M. NO. G-30012/2/2023-Bud/26 dated 12.06.2023) 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION PARA NO. 14 
 
Accelerated Irrigation Benefits Programme (AIBP) 
 
 The Committee note that Ninety-Nine (99) ongoing Major/Medium Irrigation 
projects (and 7 phases) spread in 18 States were identified during 2016-17, in 
consultation with the States, to be completed in phases.  Central Assistance to these 
projects is being provided through budgetary resources whereas State Share for these 
projects is being provided from NABARD under LTIF. Out of these 99 projects and 7 
phases (Total- 106),50 projects have been reported to be completed so far. Further, out 
of balance projects, 23 projects have seen progress of more than 90 % and 14 projects 
between 80 to 90 %. Ultimate Irrigation Potential of these 99 projects is 76.03 Lakh Ha. 
out of which 41.39 Lakh Ha. had been created upto 31.03.2016. During 2016-2022, 
additional potential of 24.35 Lakh ha. has been created through these projects.The 
Committee observe from the information furnished by the Department that the budgetary 
allocation for Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme and National/special Projects for 
FY 2022-23 was Rs. 3237.69 crore (BE) which was reduced to Rs. 1800 crore at RE 
stage for FY 2022-23. However, till 31 December, 2022, no expenditure has been spent 
under this Programme. The Committee note that the Department has not furnished 
specific reply to their query with regard to the reasons for not spending a single penny 
under such an important Scheme during first three quarters of FY 2022-23. Keeping in 
view the importance of AIBP for the agriculture sector of the country, the Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to act proactively and monitor the pace of actual 
expenditure and flow of funds under such an important Scheme in order to ensure 
optimum utilization of budgetary allocations. The Committee also urge the Department to 
identify the factors/reasons which restricted them from utilizing the funds and take 
suitable remedial action accordingly. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The budgetary allocation for Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme and 
National / Special Projects for FY 2022-23 was Rs. 3,237.69 crore (BE) which was 
reduced to Rs. 1,800 crore at RE stage for FY 2022-23. The final expenditure  under the  
scheme in the FY 2022-23 is Rs. 668.61crore.  
 
Major reasons for reduction in the outlay, are as follows:- 
 
(i).  Change in appraisal/approval mechanism for inclusions of new projects under 
PMKSY-AIBP:-So far, inclusion of additional projects under PMKSY-AIBP was possible 
through multi-stage intra-Ministry approval process. However, the appraisal/ approval 
process is required to be aligned with the Department of Expenditure guidelines, which 

 
 
32 
 
requires inter-Ministerial consultations, approval of Public Investment Board/ SFC and 
inseveral cases, the approval of CCEA.While earlier, the entire process could be 
completed in a month or so, the revised procedure now takes 4-6 monthsat least. This 
year, DoWR, RD&GR has been able to seek approvals for inclusion of only one small 
project (total central assistance Rs. 50 crore) under AIBP so far, as against 5 projects 
having central assistance of about Rs. 1,280 crores approved during Dec., 2021 (when 
extension of PMKSY was approved) to March, 2022 last year.  Further, inclusion of 
projects having major requirements of central assistance (total Rs. 2,000 crore), namely, 
Jamrani Project of Uttarakhand and Bodwad Parisar Sinchai Yojana Stage-I, are 
presently under process, due to which the central assistance cannot be provisioned at 
this stage.   
 
(ii). Less Utilisations by National projects: Lakhwar multipurpose project of 
Uttarakhand and Renukaji project of Himachal Pradesh are in preliminary stage of 
implementation. The two projects had projected major requirement of central assistance 
during the current financial year. However, while in case of Lakhwar project the tendering 
could be completed only recently, Renukaji project is still in its pre-construction stage. 
Further, the two projects are also struggling with the State share component to be 
collected from all co-basin States, which is to be essentially reflected in the Single Nodal 
Agency account to enable release of next installment of central assistance. As a result, 
these projects could avail central assistance of Rs. 38.58 crore only, which is hardly 5% 
of the projected requirements.  
 
(iii).  Complexities involved in Single Nodal Agency (SNA) system:Single Nodal Agency 
(SNA) system has been made mandatory for all centrally sponsored schemes. However, 
there are many complex issues involved in its implementation by the States, due to 
which in a large number of cases, the release does not take place even after the 
necessary approvals have been obtained. In such cases, special action is required from 
PFMS Section of Min. of Finance, or Department of Expenditure, or both, which is again 
a time consuming process. Another fall-out of this delay is that the States are not able to 
claim the four installments in a year stipulated by SNA guidelines.  
 
In 2016, with the launch of PMKSY-AIBP, 99 prioritized projects were included for 
time bound implementation and assured central assistance through NABARD. So far, 50 
out of these projects have been completed. However, in the balance 49 projects, there is 
a major chunk of about 28 projects which are held up due to court cases or protests by 
locals. Thus, the central assistance availed is much less than the projected requirement 
on account of the above.  
 
(O.M. NO. G-30012/2/2023-Bud/26 dated 12.06.2023) 
 
Comment of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter I of the Report) 
 
  

 
 
33 
 
CHAPTER V  
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION IN REPSECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF 
THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                      Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
08 August, 2023                          Chairperson,                                                                      
17 Sravana,(Saka)           Standing Committee on Water Resources 
  

 
 
34 
 
ANNEXURE – II 
 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTIETH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE 
(i) Total number of Recommendations/Observations 
 
          15 
(ii) Recommendation/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government  
 
Recommendation Nos.  1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 13 and 15 
 
 
 
 
Total – 11 
Percentage– 73.33 % 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
Recommendation Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
 
Total – 00 
Percentage – Nil 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Recommendation Nos. Recommendation Nos. 5, 9, 12 and 14  
 
 
 
 
Total – 4 
Percentage –  26.66% 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the 
Government is still awaited 
Para Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
Total – 00 
Percentage – Nil 
 
 
 