 
 
 
7 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2020-21) 
                 
         
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                                 
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI – DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER AND 
SANITATION 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2019-20) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Water Resources] 
SEVENTH REPORT 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
February, 2021 / Magha,1942 (Saka) 
 


 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2020-21) 
(SEVENTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI – DEPARTMENT OF DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 
(2019-20) 
 
 (Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Second Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry 
of Jal Shakti - 
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation) 
         
Presented to Lok Sabha on   9.2.2021 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on  9 .2.2021 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
            February, 2021 / Magha,1942 (Saka) 


 
 
W. R. C.  No. 62 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
   
                     
 
 
 
         
        © 2021 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha  
(Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
  Page 
Composition of the 
Committee 
 
……………………………………………………………… (iii) 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………… 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER - I Report……………………………………………………… 
 
1 
CHAPTER – II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government…………………………… 
 
12 
CHAPTER - III Observations/Recommendations which the  
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the  
Government’s 
replies……………………………………………………… 
 
32 
CHAPTER - IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
the replies of the  Government have not been  
accepted by the 
Committee……………...................................... 
 
33 
CHAPTER - V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still  
awaited…………………………………………………….. 
 
37 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I Minutes of the First Sitting of the Committee held on 
6.11.2020……………………………………………….. 
 
38 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the  
Observations/Recommendations contained in the  
Second Report (S eventeenth Lok Sabha) of the  
Committee………………………………………………… 
39 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITON OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2020-21) 
  
  
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal  -  Chairperson 
 
 
  LOK SABHA 
 
 
2.  Shri Vijay Baghel  
3.  Shri Bhagirath Chaudhary  
4.  Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan  
5.  Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan  
6.  Shri Chandra Prakash Choudhary  
7.  Shri Guman Singh Damor  
8.  Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit  
9.  Dr. K. Jayakumar  
10.  Shri Kaushal Kishore  
11.  Shri M. Dhanush Kumar  
12.  Shri P. Raveendranath Kumar  
13.  Shri Mohammad Akbar Lone  
14.  Shri Kuruva Gorantla Madhav  
15.  Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel  
16.  Shri Sanjay Kaka Patil  
17.  Vacant*  
18.  Smt. Nusrat Jahan Ruhi  
19.  Ms. Agatha K. Sangma  
20.  Shri D.K. Suresh  
21.  Shri A. Narayana Swamy 
 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22.  Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder  
23.  Shri Harshvardhan Singh Dungarpur  
24.  Shri N. R. Elango  
25.  Mir Mohammad Fayaz  
26.  Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena  
27.  Shri A. Mohammedjan  
28.  Shri Arun Singh  
29.  Shri Subhash Chandra Singh  
30.  Shri Rewati Raman Singh  
31.  Shri Pradeep Tamta  
* Shri D.S. Rathore, MP, LS ceased to be a Member w.e.f 28.12.2020 
 
(iii)

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Manoj K. Arora - OSD (LSS) 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan - Director 
3. Shri R.C. Sharma - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Shanta B. Datta - Under Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 
 

 
 
  INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (20 20-21) having  
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present th is 
Seventh Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in th eir Second Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants  (2019-20) relating to the Ministry of 
Jal Shakti (Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation).  
 
2.  The Second Report of the Committee was p resented to Lok Sabha and laid o n 
the table of Rajya Sabha on 5 December  2019. The Action Taken replies of the 
Government to all the  Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were 
received in this Secretariat on 19 March, 2020. 
 
3.  The draft Report was considered  and adopted by the Committe e at their sitting 
held on 6.11.2020. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report (S eventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
     New Delhi Dr. SANJAY JAISWAL 
      3 February 2021 Chairperson 
14 Magha, 1942 (Saka) Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
 
 
 
                                         (v) 
 
 
  

 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources deals with the Action 
Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in their 
Second Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the Demands for Grants (2019-20) of the Ministry of 
Jal Shakti ( Department of Drinking Water and sanitation) which was presented to Lok 
Sabha on 05 December, 2019. Action Taken Notes from the Government in respect of 
all the 1 5 observations / re commendations of the Committee have been received and 
these  have been categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
(Chapter II):  
 
Para Nos.2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, 2.10, 2.13, 2.14 and 2.15 
       (Total –13 ) 
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III):  
 
Para Nos. NIL  
     (Total – NIL)  
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
 
Para Nos. 2.11 and 2.12 
       (Total – 2)  
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited (Chapter V):  
 
Para Nos. NIL  
    (Total – NIL)  
 
2.  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Governm ent on some 
of the observations/recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
1 
 
 
 

 
 
A. Under-utilisation of funds under the Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.3) 
 
3. The Committee f ound that there was huge shortfall in the utilization of funds, 
particularly in the States of Chattisgarh, Haryana, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Maharashtra, 
Telangana, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal which was attributed to 'Outcome Oriented 
Incentives' given for the construction of toilets. The Committee further note d that the 
Department ha d adopted various persuasive measures such as letters, video 
conferences and meetings, etc. to increase the aspect of util ization of allocated funds. 
However, in view of the Committee, despite the availability of funds, the existence of 
huge committed liabilities with the States d id not reflect proper utilization of available 
resources and should be looked into urgently. Ther efore, the Committee desired to be 
apprised of the underlying factors which had held up the faster utilization of funds and 
the measures taken for their redressal in the aforementioned States. 
 
4. The Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation, in its act ion taken replies, 
stated as follows: 
 
"It has been estimated from the instances of various districts across regions of 
the country, that there is a requirement of working capital. Besides, funds are 
required for other activities like Solid and Liquid Wast e Management and 
Information, Education and Communication (which is to be done on continuous 
basis). Thus, there would be some unspent balance lying with the States at any 
point of time depending on the no. of districts in the State. This Department is 
regularly following up with the States through field visits, review meetings, video 
conferences etc. in order to address the issues like delay in release of funds from 
State Finance Departments, delay in disbursal of incentive to beneficiaries due to 
cumbersome fund flow mechanism so as to liquidate the funds available with the 
States in optimal time. This Department also regularly reviews the status of 
unspent balance with the States under SBM (G) for release of funds under the 
programme." 
 
5. From the submissions made by the Department, the Committee are given to 
understand that there is a possibility of some unspent balance lying with the 
States at any point of time to meet the requirements of working capital and for 
catering to activities such as Solid and Liquid Waste Management and 
Information, Education and Communication, and  that the Department is regularly  
 
2 

 
 
following up with the States through field visits, review meetings, etc. to address 
the issues of unspent balances . The Committee, however, note that 
notwithstanding these efforts by the Government the problem of unspent 
balances under SBM(G) still persists. The Committee, therefore, urge upon t he 
Department to pursue with the States more vigorously for expeditious utilization 
of   funds  for the  projects under SBM(G), so as to ensure that the objectives of 
Swachhta on a continuous basis and sustainability of Open Defecation Free (ODF) 
status are achieved. They would also like to be apprised of the State wise details 
of the amount of Central share of funds released under SBM(G) and utilized along 
with committed liabilities of the States, if any, till date. 
 
 
B. Piped Water Supply in habitations affected with Contamination 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.10) 
 
6. The Committee observed that as per the data provided by the States on 
Integrated Management Information System ( IMIS) of the Department, there were 
56,788 rural habitations affected with water quality contamination, as on 14 thOctober, 
2019. The Committee also note d that as many as 16 States were facing fluoride 
contamination in 8,127 rural habitations, while 7 States with 13,379 rural habitations ha d 
reported water contamination with arsenic. Other major contaminants were iron with 
18,462 affected rural habitations in 18  States and 13,256 rural habitations affected with 
salinity issues in 11 States. However, keeping in view the water quality problem in many 
parts of the country, the Committee were of the view that the figure of only 56,788 rural 
habitations affected with water quality issues m ight not be reflective of gravity of the 
situation on the ground. The Committee, therefore, urge d the Department to conduct an 
Independent Technical Survey in a time bound manner to better assess the situation and 
adopt appropriate measure to deal with the problem. The Committee also recommended 
the Department to apprise them of its findings and remedial measures which could be 
enforced forthwith, within three months of presentation of thisReport. 
 
7. The Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation, in its action taken replies, 
stated as follows: 
"Jal Jeevan Mission(JJM) is a time -bound mission-mode programme to ensure 
every rural household has a functional Household Tap Connection(FHTC) by 
2024 to provide drinking water in adequate qu antity (minimum 55 lpcd) of 
prescribed quality (BIS: 10500) on regular basis. 
 
3 

 
 
The Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation had launched “Operational 
Guidelines for the implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission” on 25th December, 
2019. Under the JJM, upto 2% of the allocation to States/ UTs can be utilized by 
the States for Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance (WQM&S) activities 
which inter -alia includes setting up of and upgrading existing water quality 
laboratories at various levels, providing chemic als and consumables to 
laboratories etc. Apart from that, this fund could also be used for procuring Field 
Test Kits for in situ water quality monitoring at grass root level. 
 
As per the Constitution, ‘Water’ being State subject, Ministry of Jal Shakti can not 
enforce ‘Technical Survey’ on States. However, in order to check and improve the 
quality of drinking water supply, under JJM, the following broad guidelines have 
been given to States/ UTs for undertaking testing of sources/ samples at different 
level laboratories. 
 
i.) Sub-division/ block laboratory: It is suggested that Sub-divisional/ block labs 
will test 100% water sources under its jurisdiction; once for chemical parameters 
and twice for bacteriological parameters (pre and post monsoon) in a year, 
covering all sources of a block at least for 13 basic water quality parameters i.e. 
pH, Total dissolved solids, turbidity, Chloride, total alkalinity, total hardness, 
Sulphate, Iron, total Arsenic, Fluoride, Nitrate, total coliform bacteria, E.coli or 
thermo tolerant coliform bacteria. The positively tested samples will be referred to 
the district laboratory immediately. The other parameters may be tested as per 
local contamination. In case, block level laboratories are not available, services of 
laboratories of nearby educational institutions or universities may be explored and 
availed.  
 
ii.) District laboratory: It is suggested that district lab will test 250 water sources/ 
samples per month (i.e. 3,000 in a year as per the target of roster available on 
Department/ National Mission IMIS) covering all sources randomly spread 
geographically including the positively tested samples referred by the subdivision/ 
block laboratory/ mobile laboratory on at least for 13 basic water quality 
parameters. The district la b will also refer the positively tested samples to the 
State laboratory immediately. The other parameters may be tested as per local 
contamination at district level.  
 
iii.) State laboratory: The State lab will test at least 5% of the total drinking water 
samples across all district level laboratories with random and uniform 
geographical spread including positively tested samples referred by district/ sub -
division/ block/ mobile lab. If the number of districts in any State/ UT is large 
(>50), then the testi ng of samples/ sources may be restricted to 3% for the State 
lab. Remaining 2% may be integrated with other regional/ district laboratories. 
4 

 
 
iv) Testing of water quality using Field Test Kit (FTK):  At Gram Panchayat 
level: Gram Panchayt and/ or it s sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User 
Group, etc. will ensure to test 100% drinking water sources including private 
sources and sanitary inspection under its jurisdiction using FTK. The test results 
and sanitary inspection report will be submitted to the  concerned PHED/ RWS 
Department.  
 
All States/ UTs have been advised to accredit drinking water testing laboratories 
as per IS/ISO/ IEC:17025 at least for parameters of basic water quality 
importance and gradually upgrading to other parameters as per local  conditions. 
Also all States/ UTs have been requested to cross verify the water quality data 
and integration with other laboratories of State/ Central Government agencies. 
 
Under JJM, the States/ UTs are encouraged to explore Public-Private Partnership  
wherein the PHED/ RWS Department will collaborate with NABL/ ISO/ other 
suitably accredited private firms as Support Organization (SO) and utilize their 
strengths following all SoPs as per government procedures. Additionally, Public -
Public Partnership may also be explored wherein the PHED/ RWS Department 
will collaborate with the water quality testing laboratories of other similar State/ 
Central Government agencies. Further, States/ UTs may also designate any 
NABL/ ISO/ other suitably accredited Public or P rivate water quality testing 
laboratories/ firms on turnkey basis following all codal formalities prescribed in 
Government procedures. 
 
The States/ UTs are allowed to promote rural entrepreneurship and enterprises 
for water quality testing at local level. Also allowed to explore possibility of 
engaging laboratories established in college/ universities/ polytechnic institutes 
for water quality testing on nominal payment basis agreed among District Water 
and Sanitation Mission (DWSM) and concerned institution. 
 
The JJM also allows water samples collected by general public tested at a 
nominal rate at various level drinking water quality testing laboratories." 
 
8. The Committee note that as per the Operational Guidelines of Jal Jeevan 
Mission (JJM), released on 25 December, 2019, various measures have been 
stipulated for facilitating water quality testing by various agencies at different 
levels under JJM.  However, the Committee would like to reiterate  that  
Department should have a  comprehensive and updated list of areas affected  with  
contamination of drinking water as the problem of contaminationis still 
widespread in rural areas ,and the reported figure of 56,788 rural habitations 
suffering from the problem of water quality contamination, may not be indicative  
5 

 
 
of the  actual ground situation. Such information with the Department would help 
better analysis of the outcome of the measures initiated to resolve the problem.   
The Committee are not inclined to accept the contention of the Ministry that 
'Water’ being State subject, they cannot enforce ‘Technical Survey’ on States.  The 
Committee recommend that the Department should take initiative and impress 
upon the States the need for conducting such a survey to have a better 
assessment of the areas affected with water contamination. The Department 
should also incentivize the States in this regard by providing them with financial 
and technical support, if needed.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
measures taken in this regard at the earliest. 
 
C. Efficacy of various initiatives to address Contamination of Water in the 
Affected Areas 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.11) 
 
9. The Committee further noted that the  Department had launched the National 
Water Quality Sub-Mission (NWQSM) on 22ndMarch 2017 to provide safe drinking water 
to 27,544 Arsenic/ Fluoride affected rural habitations in the country by March, 2021, out 
of which only 11,884 habitations had, so far, been covered. Pursuant to this Mission, out 
of Rs. 3,688.34 crore released to the Arsenic/ Fluoride affected States under the 
NWQSM as on September 30th, 2019 an amount of Rs. 2,036.46 crore had been utilized 
by the States/UTs. Besides, an amount of Rs. 1 ,000 crore was released during March 
2016 to various Arsenic/Fluoride affected States/UTs for installation of Community Water 
Purification Plants and as reported by the States, as on 30 September 2019, a total 
number of 22,822 'Community Water Purification  Plants’ had been installed in 
States/UTs covering a rural population of 2,39,04,883 in 16,938 habitations. Under JJM, 
10% weightage is proposed to be given to the rural population affected by water quality, 
thus, allowing more fund for quality affected St ates and 2% of the allocation to the 
States/ UTs can be utilized for Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance activities. 
While the above initiatives had been taken by the Government to address the problem of 
contamination of water, the ground reality is still far from the intended objectives. In the 
considered view of the Committee, supply of water through pipeline in all such areas 
could greatly reduce the problem. However, the Committee were disappointed by the 
fact that extension of pipeline in such ar eas had not been given the required impetus it 
required as there we re only 1109 ongoing NRDWP piped water supply Schemes in 
Arsenic/Fluoride Affected Habitations as against total number of 21,506 Arsenic/Fluoride 
Affected Habitations as on 15 October, 2019 . The Committee were pained to note that 
people in many parts of the country were still facing the problem of water contamination 
and facing serious health hazards on this count. The Committee therefore, 
recommended the Department to lay pipelines and supp ly the water through FHTC in 
these areas on priority basis under the Jal Jeevan Mission. They also desired to be 
apprised of the targets fixed in this regard. 
6 

 
 
10. The Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation, in its action taken replies, 
stated as follows: 
 
"Jal Jeevan Mission(JJM) is a time -bound mission-mode programme to ensure 
every rural household has a Functional Household Tap Connection(FHTC) by 
2024 to provide drinking water in adequate quantity (minimum 55 lpcd) of 
prescribed quality (BIS: 10500) on regular basis. 
 
As per the Constitution of India, water is a State subject and State has been 
empowered to plan, design, implement and approve the water supply projects. 
Government of India supplements the efforts of State Government by providing 
financial and technical assistance. As such, Field level implementation of the 
programme including ‘laying of pipeline’ is the mandate of State Governments. 
However, in order to address the issues of water supply at the earliest in the 
quality affected habita tions following steps have been mandated for the States 
under JJM guidelines: 
 
i.) All State/ UTs have been advised to prioritize water quality affected areas 
for provision of Functional Household Tap Connection (FHTC).  
 
ii.) In villages with sufficient groundwater availability but having quality issues, 
in-situ suitable treatment technology may be explored. 
 
iii.) In villages with water quality issues and non -availability of suitable surface 
water sources in nearby areas, it may be more appropriate to transfer  bulk water 
from long distance.  
 
iv.) In water quality -affected habitations, especially with Arsenic and Fluoride 
contaminants, potable water has to be ensured on priority. Since, planning and 
implementation of piped water supply scheme based on a safe water s ource will 
take time, as a purely interim measure, Community Water Purification Plants 
(CWPPs) may be taken up to provide 8 -10 lpcd potable water to meet drinking 
and cooking need of every household in such villages/ habitations. However, 
SWSM to prioritize such areas for providing potable water through FHTC to every 
rural household by March, 2021. 
 
v.) All schemes (Piped Water Supply - surface/ ground water& Community 
Water Purification Plant) approved under National Water Quality Sub -Mission, 
States will take measures to provide FHTCs at service level of 55 lpcd to every 
rural household by 2021." 
7 

 
 
11. The Committee have been informed that f ield level implementation of the 
programme including ‘laying of pipeline’ is the mandate of State Governments , 
however, Government of India supplements the efforts of State Government by 
providing financial and technical assistance.  It has also been informed that since 
in water quality -affected habitations, especially with Arsenic and Fluoride 
contaminants, planning and imple mentation of piped water supply scheme based 
on a safe water source will take time, as a purely interim measure, Community 
Water Purification Plants (CWPPs) may  be  taken up to provide 8 -10 litres per 
capita per day ( lpcd) potable water to meet drinking an d cooking need of every 
household in such villages/ habitations  and the State Water and Sanitation 
Missions ( SWSM) have to prioritize such areas for providing potable water 
through FHTC to every rural household by March, 2021.However, the Committee 
find that out of 56,788 rural habitations affected with water quality contamination, 
as on 30 September , 2019 as reported by States on Integrated Management 
Information System (IMIS) of the Department, only 16,938 habitations  were 
provided with  22,822 CWPPs, and  many habitations are yet to be  covered . The 
Committee feel that i f laying of pipeline in short time is not feasible, urgent steps 
need to be taken to install more Community Water Purification Plants  in all these 
habitations. The Committee would, therefore, urge upon the Department to take all 
possible steps to install CWPPs on priority basis, in all habitations in a time 
bound manner, so as to enable installation of FHTCs in these areas at the earliest. 
They would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard within three 
months of presentation of this report. 
 
ID. Installation of Desalination Plant(s) in the Coastal Areas 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.12) 
 
12. The Committee observe d that in addition to the problem of contamination of 
water, there was an overall shortage of water in the Coastal Areas of the country, 
especially during the deficient monsoon years. The consecutive failure of monsoon in the 
Coastal Areas often g ave rise t o severe drought conditions/ water crisis requiring the 
Government/Authorities concerned to initiate emergency measures even by transporting 
water through trains which is often regarded as one of the traditional methods of 
quenching the thirst of people in these parched areas. The Committee believe that there 
is an urgent need for use of cutting -edge technology by way of installation of 
Desalination Plants to ensure adequate availability of water in these areas during all 
such crisis periods. However, the C ommittee were distressed to note that no specific 
policy has been laid out in this regard under the Jal Jeevan Mission. Even though the 
technology to purify saline water was developed in the country, the Department ha d not 
taken any proactive measure to us e it except that the onus of formulation and 
implementation of relevant policy had been put on the States. Further, the Committee  
 
8 

 
 
were also given to understand that the process of desalination of water which had been  
done successfully, on an experimental basis, in Gujarat and Tamil Nadu, involve d high 
cost. Noting that other countries of the world such as Israel have been using the cutting -
edge technology to economically convert the saline water into good quality potable 
water, the Committee u rged upon the Government to collaborate and undertake result -
oriented research in this area to enable using saline water, at a cheaper cost, to address 
the severe water crisis in the Coastal Areas. Since the key to success under the Jal 
Jeevan Mission lies  in the availability of good quality water source which can then be 
transported to households through FHTC, the Department needs to focus on use of all 
the available technology to create assured sources of good quality water in suchareas. 
 
13. The Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation, in its action taken replies, 
stated as follows: 
 
i. "Under JJM guidelines, specific policy has been laid out for making 
available adequate water in coastal areas. In these areas, augmentation of 
water supply services can be done with energy efficient small desalination 
plants with high recovery ratio. Further, in order to avoid the ingress of sea 
water, sub -surface dykes can be constructed in rivers that can also 
improve the groundwater based drinking water sources in the adjoining 
areas in convergence with MGNREGS, State schemes, etc. 
 
ii. The Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation, M/o JS has constituted 
a Technical Committee under the chairmanship of Principal Scientific 
Advisor to Government of India. The Commit tee would identify specific 
challenges faced in the provision of water supply with assistance of 
States, invite online proposals for solving them, decide and recommend 
further action including demonstration projects to address the challenges 
and develop performance and technology standards. The mandate of the 
Committee is as follows: 
 
a. invite innovative technologies in drinking water, sanitation,greywater 
management and solid waste management sectors through Department/ 
National Mission portal; 
b. shortlist technologies for techno-economic appraisal; 
c. facilitate techno-economic appraisal of technologies as per the ASSURED 
matrix framework; 
d. consider appraised technologies for acceptance; 
e. recommend any non -technological interventions needed to achieve 
scaling up the use of such technologies. 
 
Such technologies, as recommended by the Committee would be shared 
with States for adoption suiting the specific field requirement. 
9 
 

 
 
iii. Further, under JJM, Innovation and Research & Development (R&D) is 
promoted to assist States  to prioritize the areas as well as to identify the 
type of intervention to be adopted in different areas within the State. 
Further, proposals related to water and sanitation received from R&D 
institutions and innovators will be taken up for demonstration purpose on 
pilot basis after approval of Technical Committee. Under this, the research 
proposals received relating to use of saline water for drinking after 
treatment inter alia would also be considered for funding. 
 
All the above provisions made under Jal  Jeevan Mission may be explored 
by States to identify best suitable technologies and use the same." 
 
14. The Committee take note that u nder JJM guidelines, a specific policy has 
been laid out for making available adequate water in coastal areas, whereunder  
augmentation of water supply can be done by way of energy efficient small 
desalination plants with high recovery ratio, and sub-surface dykes can be 
constructed in rivers which can  improve the groundwaterbased drinking water 
sources in the adjoining area s in convergence with MGNREGS, State schemes, 
etc. The Committee  note  that though a Technical Committee has been 
constituted to identify innovative technologies for resolving the issues in drinking 
water supply and such technologies as recommended by the Technical Committee 
would be shared with States for adoption suiting the specific field requirements, 
the replyof the Ministry is silent with regard to measures taken or proposed to be 
taken by the Department to incentivize the States to adopt the  same. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that b esides, Innovation, Research and 
Development support under JJM and pilot projects for demonstration purpose , 
financial assistance should be provided to States to enable them to adopt the new 
technologies to deal wit h the challenges of providing potable drinking water , 
especially in coastal areas .The Committee specifically recommend that the 
feasibility of solar powered desalination plants may be explored and reported. 
 
E. Jal Shakti Abhiyan 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.14) 
 
15. The Committee further observed that this Programme had been launched in 256 
Water Stressed Districts. However, the Committee noted that since the Programme had 
been launched in the monsoon season of 2019, its outcome and other deliverables were   
yet to be assessed. Nonetheless, the Committee are sure that this is a composite and a 
commendable initiative and should be strengthened in a conjunctive manner not only by 
the different Government agencies but also by the community as a whole including the 
NGOs an d other stakeholders. The Committee also wished to convey that besides, 
water conservation measures, urgent steps were also required to be initiated by the  
10 

 
 
Department to prevent the wastage of water which had now been transformed as a 
major challenge e specially in the cities. In order to contain the rampant wastage of 
water, there was an urgent need for launching of widespread Awareness Campaigns 
with appropriate penalties. The Committee desired to be apprised of the tangible 
outcome of various initiatives taken by the Department in thisdirection. 
 
16. The Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation, in its action taken replies, 
stated as follows: 
 
"Under support activities of Jal Jeevan Mission, Information, Education, 
Communication (IEC) is an important component wherein activities aiming at 
driving positive behavioral changes among stakeholders including judicious use 
of water can be taken up. Further, IEC activities aiming at creating awareness 
and motivating people to take up affirmative action for protection of drinking water 
sources and against misuse of water are to be promoted. At the Gram Panchayat 
(GP) level, GP and/ or its sub -committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, 
etc. is to conduct awareness campaigns on judicious use of wate r, come up with 
mechanisms to ensure no misuse of water and ensure prescribed IEC 
campaigns. 
 
Further, the State Water and Sanitation Missions (SWSMs) have been advised to 
build suitable incentive and disincentive mechanism in the policy to discourage 
wastage of water.  Adding to this, the Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub -committee, 
i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. as part of its surveillance is to 
undertake regular sanitary inspections and collectively decide on mechanisms to 
prevent misuse of water. 
 
States are in the process of planning and rolling out campaigns as per the 
aforementioned provisions for awareness generation against misuse of water." 
17. From the Ministry’s reply the Committee note that under Jal Jeevan 
Mission,  Information, Education and Communication (IEC) activities have to be 
taken up with a view to promote  positive behavioral changes among stakeholders 
including judicious use of water, and also creating awareness and motivating 
people to take up affirmative action for pro tection of drinking water sources and 
against misuse of water.  The Committee would like to recommend that in addition 
to IEC activities, Jal Shakti Abhiyan, should also envisage programmes for 
storage of rain water during monsoon season which otherwise fl ows into sea, to 
enable conservation of water.  The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
outcome/performance of this Abhiyan  during  the last  one year. 
 
11 

 
 
CHAPTER – II 
 OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT  
Recommendation (Para No. 2.1)  
Budget Analysis of the Department 
 
The Committee observe that the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation has been 
entrusted with the responsibility to formulate policy and plan, provide finance and 
coordinate with regard to the two flagship Programmes/ Schemes of the Government of 
India for rural drinking water supply and rural sanitation, namely the National Rural 
Drinking Water Programme, re -designed as Jal Jeevan Mission and the Swachh Bharat 
Mission (Gramin). Besides, Drinking Water Supply Projects that cater to both urban and 
rural areas, its coordination issues, are also under the domain of the Department of 
Drinking Water and Sanitation. The Committee further note that an amount of Rs. 
20,016.34 has been allocated f or the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation for 
the Financial Year 2019-20. However, the Committee are surprised to note that while the 
allocations have always increased at the Revised Estimate (RE) stage since the 
Financial Year 2014 -15 and have be en adequately utilized, there was a substantial 
decrease in the RE allocations in the last Financial Year which was then arranged 
through Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR) of Rs. 8,698.20 crore for meeting the 
expenditure requirements under the Swachh Bharat  Mission (Gramin). The Committee 
are particularly concerned to note that the allocations for the current fiscal year are also 
inadequate, as the total Budget for the Jal Jeevan Mission has fallen short by 
approximately Rs. 4,700 crore as against requirement of approximately Rs. 21,000 crore 
despite provision of Rs. 6,300 crore through the Extra Budgetary Resources. While 
adequate finances is crucial for expeditious implementation of both the aforesaid 
programmes, the Committee also express concern over the increasing liability created 
by the arrangement of Extra Budgetary Resources. This aspect needs to be looked into 
while working out the budgetary provisions. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Government to take up this matter with the Ministry of Fin ance - Department of 
Expenditure and ensure provision of adequate budgetary resources to enable the 
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation to achieve all its intended objectives at the 
earliest. 
Reply of the Government  
JJM: Under Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM), Govt. of India has allocated an amount of Rs. 
10,000.66 Crore as Budget Estimates (BE) for the year 2019 -20 and it was kept same 
even at the Revised Estimates (RE) stage.  
12 
 

 
 
After the launch of JJM in August, 2019, a conference of Minister in-charge of rural water 
supply of various States was held in New Delhi followed by five regional workshops to 
discuss the modalities of the implementation of the Mission. Moreover, in consultations 
with State Governments & other stakeholders in water sector, Operational Guidelines for 
the implementation of the Mission has been released on 25.12.2019.  
 
As the programme was launched only in the month of August, 2019, States who are 
implementing the programme are in the process of planning  which is happening at three 
levels namely Village level, District level and at the State level wherein quarter -wise 
achievement of FHTCs and the corresponding financial resources required are being 
firmed up. States/ UTs have started rolling out the schem es under Jal Jeevan Mission 
especially the retrofitting of the erstwhile schemes implemented/ being implemented 
under erstwhile NRDWP to provide last mile connectivity i.e. providing piped water 
connections to the households. 
 
Hon’ble Minister Jal Shakti v ide DO letter dated 20.01.2020 has requested Hon’ble 
Finance Minister to reconsider the budget allocation for the FY 2020 -21 keeping in view 
that in the year FY 2020-21, balance target for the FY 2019-20 are also to be achieved. 
 
SBM-G: During 2019 -20 the BE allocation for Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) 
[SBM(G)] was Rs.9994 crore which has been reduced to Rs. 8338.22 crore at RE stage.  
The provision of Extra Budgetary Resources (EBR) upto Rs.5000 crore made for 
SBM(G) was given as part of balance of approv ed EBR of Rs. 15,000 crore made in the 
financial year 2018 -19 (against approved EBR of Rs.15,000 crore, only Rs. 8698.20 
crore was raised in 2018 -19).  The Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation always 
submits its demands for SBM(G) from General Budge tary Support and not from EBR. 
The provision for EBR are decided by Ministry of Finance. For 2020 -21, the entire 
allocation for SBM(G) has been made out of GBS and no EBR has been provisioned. 
 
(O.M. No.11013(12)/3/2019-Coordination dated:19.03.2020) 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.2)  
Budget Allocations and Expenditure under the Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) 
The Committee note that during the last five years, a total of Rs. 48,415.22 crore has 
been spent on SBM(G) out of which Rs. 45,945.45 crore has been  spent on the 
construction of Individual Household Latrines (IHHLs). The Committee also note that 
during the Financial Year 2018 -19, a total budget provision of Rs. 14,478.03 was made 
which was supplemented by Extra Budgetary Resource (EBR) of Rs. 8,698.20  crore in 
order to complete the projects within the targeted period. The Committee further note 
that an amount of Rs. 9,994 crores has been provided for the current Financial Year for  
 
13 

 
 
meeting the committed liabilities for the works already done by the States under SBM(G) 
during the previous years, construction of Individual Household Latrines during this year, 
Information, Education and Communication (IEC) and Capacity Building activities, 
Community Sanitary Complexes and Solid and Liquid Waste Managem ent. However, no 
information has been furnished with regard to the liabilities created under the EBR and 
provisions, if any, kept for the same. The Committee, therefore, would like to be apprised 
of the proposed expenditure under different components of SB M(G) along with the 
details of repayment of debt/accrued liabilities of the Department. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The EBR funds are raised for the purpose of meeting the gaps between budget 
availability and the requirements  of the States for the works done  under SBM(G). The 
EBR funds are part of the programme funds and used for discharging the overall 
committed liability created under the programme and not for any separate purposes. 
 
The Union Cabinet had approved raising of EBR Rs. 15,000 crore for SBM(G) through 
NABARD. During 2018 -19 EBR amounting to Rs. 8698.20 crore was raised in five 
tranches. As per the Memorandum of Agreement for EBR under SBM(G), each tranche 
of EBR funds raised for SBM(G) are treated as separate loan and shall be repayable to 
NABARD as single bullet repayment of the entire amount at the end of 10 year from the 
date of disbursement and no prepayment of principal shall be made. The coupon 
servicing of bonds (interest) shall be paid to NABARD semi -annually on applicable rates 
on the re spective due dates. Further, NABARD margin charges @ 0.40% p.a., for 
servicing the EBR, is also to be paid on the total outstanding loan amount quarterly (on 
fixed dates on 1st May, 1st August, 1st November, and 1st February). During 2019 -20, 
an amount of Rs. 765 crore has been allocated in the Budget of SBM(G) for payment of 
interest of EBR and NABARD margin charges due during the year.  
 
(O.M. No.11013(12)/3/2019-Coordination dated:19.03.2020) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.3)  
Under-utilisation of funds under the Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin) 
 
The Committee find that there is huge shortfall in the utilization of funds, particularly in 
the States of Chattisgarh, Haryana, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Telangana, 
Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal which has been attributed to 'Outcome Oriented 
Incentives' given for the construction of toilets. The Committee further note that the  
 
14 

 
 
Department has adopted various persuasive measures such as letters, video 
conferences and meetings, etc., to increase the aspect of utilization of allocated funds. 
However, in view of the Committee, despite the availability of funds, the existence of 
huge committed liabilities with the States does not reflect proper utilization of available 
resources and should be looked into urgently. Therefore, the Committee would like to be 
apprised of the underlying factors which have held up the faster utilization of funds and 
the measures taken for their redressal in the aforementioned States. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It has been estimated from the instances of various districts ac ross regions of the 
country, that there is a requirement of working capital. Besides, funds are required for 
other activities like Solid and Liquid Waste Management and Information, Education and 
Communication (which is to be done on continuous basis). Thu s, there would be some 
unspent balance lying with the States at any point of time depending on the no. of 
districts in the State. This Department is regularly following up with the States through 
field visits, review meetings, video conferences etc. in ord er to address the issues like 
delay in release of funds from State Finance Departments, delay in disbursal of incentive 
to beneficiaries due to cumbersome fund flow mechanism so as to liquidate the funds 
available with the States in optimal time. This Depa rtment also regularly reviews the 
status of unspent balance with the States under SBM (G) for release of funds under the 
programme. 
(O.M. No.11013(12)/3/2019-Coordination dated:19.03.2020) 
Comment of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No.5 of Chapter –I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.4)  
Assured Water Supply to maintain cleanliness and hygiene 
 
 The Committee are happy to note the radiant performance of the Swachh Bharat 
Mission (Gramin) of the Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation which has been 
able to achieve its objective of providing access to sanitation facility in all the rural areas  
of the country. Rural Sanitation Coverage at the time of launch of this programme in 
2014 was 38.7% which has now reached 100% within the stipulated time period of five 
years. The declaration of all the rural areas of the country as Open Defecation Free 
(ODF) and construction of more than 10 crore toilets are commendable tasks which had 
not been even thought of in the past. In consonance with the goal of maintaining the 
ODF status, the Committee are extremely happy to observe that the focus has now been  
 
15 

 
 
shifted to ODF sustainability and Solid and Liquid Waste Management. However, the 
Committee are also of considered view that one of the crucial factors for maintaining 
‘Swachhta’ is the assured supply of water which is also the determining factor for 
maintaining not only ODF sustainability but also for ensuring hygienic disposal of solid 
and liquid waste. Therefore, the issue of water availability in sufficient quantity needs to 
be addressed immediately. While the measures for water conservation such as Jal 
Shakti Abhiyan have already been initiated in the right earnest, there is an urgent need 
for educating the masses about the judicious use of water to make sure of its availability 
for all the purposes. The Committee, therefore, recommend that immediate  measures 
should be initiated by the Department, in convergence with other Ministries/Departments 
of the Government of India and also with the States/UTs to conserve water and maintain 
adequate sustainable sources of water to achieve the vision of a ‘Swach h Bharat on a 
sustainable basis.’ 
 
Reply of the Government 
Under Swachh Bharat Mission (Gramin), rural pans are used which requires only 1 -2 
liters of water for flushing as against 10 -15 liter by urban pans -thereby reducing the 
requirement of water.The suggestion of the committee to maintain adequate sustainable 
sources of water to achieve the vision of ‘Swachha Bharat on sustainable basis’ is 
already part of Jal Jeevan Mission guidelines that allow the States to plan water supply 
systems that promote sourc e sustainability in convergence with other 
Ministries/Department. 
 
(O.M. No.11013(12)/3/2019-Coordination dated:19.03.2020) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.5)  
Budget Allocations and Expenditure under the National Rural Drinking Water 
Programme 
 
The Committee find that the budget allocations under the National Rural Drinking Water 
Programme (NRDWP) has been drastically reduced since the year 2015 -16 due to 
higher amount of devolution of funds, from 32 to 42 per cent, by the Fourteenth Finance 
Commission (FFC). Accordingly, the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) has 
proposed an allocation of Rs. 23,050 crore over the three remaining years of FFC, viz., 
Rs. 6,050 crore for 2017-18, Rs. 7,000 crore for 2018-19 and Rs. 10,000 crore for 2019-
20 respectively. The Committee further note that the rationale given for higher budgetary 
allocation of Rs. 10,000.66 crore during the year 2019 -20 is the launching of Jal Jeevan 
Mission, which aims at providing 'Functional Household Tap Connection' (FHTC) in 
every rural household by 2024. For the Financial Year 2019-20, the coverage of FHTC is  
targeted to be increased to 30% of rural households from the existing 18.33%. While the 
intended goals under Jal Jeevan Mission are laudable, the Committee are apprehensive  
16 

 
 
about their accomplishment in view of the fact that the performance of many States such 
as Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Kerala, Maharashtra, Meghalaya and Tamil Nadu are not 
very impressive under the earlier NRDWP as they failed to achieve the targets of s upply 
of potable drinking water to the rural habitations during the last three years. In this 
regard, the Committee do not appreciate the oft -repeated stand by the Department that 
‘Water’ being a State subject, it has no further responsibility except for e xtending 
financial and technical assistance. In this regard, the Committee are of the view that a 
more proactive role needs to be played by the Department in taking the States on board 
to ensure that JJM also does not end in the same way as the NRDWP. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to take immediate steps in this direction in 
consultation with State Governments to achieve the cherished goals of water supply to 
every household under Jal Jeevan Mission within the targeted period. Active an d 
constant persuasion with States and effective/ regular monitoring are very much required 
for ensuring the same. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Though, ‘water supplies’ is enlisted in the State list of the Constitution of India, Ministry 
of Jal Shakti has been  playing a proactive role in the rural drinking water supply sector 
within the Constitutional framework. Accordingly, JJM has been launched as a mission -
mode programme in partnership with States which aims at universal coverage of every 
rural household through FHTC by 2024.  
 
After the launch of JJM, a conference of Minister in -charge of rural water supply of 
various States was held in New Delhi on 22nd August, 2019. Five region -wise 
stakeholder consultation workshops with State governments, sector partners, community 
building organizations, experts in water sector, etc. to discuss the modalities involved in 
implementation of JJM and to firm up the same were held, the details of which is as 
under: 
 
S.No Regional Workshop for States/ UTs of Location Dates 
1. Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & 
Kashmir, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand 
Panchkula, 
Haryana 
3-4 Sept, 2019 
2. Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Bihar, 
Chattisgarh, Jharkhand, Odisha, Rajasthan, 
West Bengal 
Puri, Odisha 11-12 Sept, 
2019 
 
3. 
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Lakshadweep, Puducherry, Tamil Nadu, 
Telangana 
 
Bangalore, 
Karnataka 
14-15 Sept, 
2019 
17 

 
 
4. Daman & Diu, Dadra & Nagar Haveli, Goa, 
Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra  
Ahmedabad, 
Gujarat 
18-19 Sept, 
2019 
5. Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, 
Tripura  
Guwahati, 
Assam 
23-24 Sept, 
2019 
Moreover, in consultations with State Governments & other stakeholders in water sector, 
Operational Guidelines for the implementation of the  Mission has been released on 
25.12.2019. 
To review progress of implementation and to sensitize practitioners on operational 
guidelines, DDWS officials have been visiting States and presenting key aspects from 
Jal Jeevan Mission operational guidelines to the engineers, district collectors/ deputy 
commissioners, etc. during review meetings and State workshops. The details are given 
below: 
 
S.No. State Dates 
1.  Telangana  8 Nov, 2019  
2.  Jammu and Kashmir  17-18 Dec, 
2019  
3.  Madhya Pradesh  8 Jan, 2020  
4.  Bihar  17 Jan, 2020  
5.  Jharkhand  17 Jan, 2020  
6.  Assam  18 Jan, 2020  
7.  Chhattisgarh  18-19 Jan, 
2020  
8.  Manipur  20 Jan, 2020  
9.  Arunachal Pradesh  20 Jan, 2020  
10.  Rajasthan  23 Jan, 2020  
11.  Maharashtra  24 Jan, 2020  
12.  Sikkim  31 Jan, 2020  
13.  Karnataka  7 Feb, 2020  
14.  Uttar Pradesh  8 Feb, 2020  
15.  Himachal Pradesh  14 Feb, 2020  
16.  West Bengal  21 Feb, 2020  
17. Jharkhand 26 Feb, 2020 
18. Uttarakhand 27 Feb, 2020 
 
18 

 
 
A one -day national conference with stakeholders, viz. health and Public Health 
Engineering (PHE)/ Rural Water Supply (RWS) Department officials from States affected 
with water quality issues, civil society, international agencies, community medicine 
practitioners, public health representatives, etc. was organized on 07.02.20202 to enable 
States to prioritize quality-affected areas & expedite provision of piped water supply with 
FHTCs, facilitate discussions on water quality related issues; cross -learning and sharing 
of best practices.  
 
Also, a conference on the Springshed Water Management was convened in Uttarakhand 
on 27 -28 Feb, 2020 in Nainital, Uttarakhand to ensure drinking water security in the 
mountain regions of India through Science based participatory Springshed Management 
approach under Jal Jeevan Mission. 
 
A Task Force consisting of policy makers, experts and practitioners having expertise in 
drinking water supply has also been constituted to analyse various drinking water 
programmes to help in fine-tuning the JJM implementation strategy. 
 
Also, a Technical Committee headed by Principal Scientific Advisor (PSA) to 
Government of India has been set up to identify and accept technologies for assisting 
States in achieving JJM objectives. 
 
Besides the above, at Central level, National Jal Jeevan Mission has been constituted. 
Thus, following four-tier institutional mechanism is being set up at various levels for time 
bound implementation of the mission:  
a.) National level        - National Jal Jeevan Mission 
b.) State level         - State Water and Sanitation Mission (SWSM) 
c.) District level        -  District Water and Sanitation Mission (DWSM) 
d.) Gram Panchayat level - Gram Panchayat/ it’s sub -committee like Village   
     Water Sanitation Committee (VWSC)/ Paani Samitis 
Under Jal Jeevan Mission, the physical and financial performance of the States/ UTs is 
being monitored through Integrated Management Information System of the Department. 
Further, utilization of fund under JJM is being mo nitored through Public Finance 
Management System (PFMS). In addition, following monitoring mechanism is proposed 
at different levels to ensure proper implementation of JJM:  
 
a) For targeted delivery and monitoring of specific outcomes, every functional 
household tap connection (FHTC) is proposed to be linked with the Aadhar 
number of the head of the household, subject to statutory provisions; 
b) Every asset created under JJM is proposed to be geo-tagged; 
c) A dedicated JJM-IMIS would be operationalised with a real time dashboard; 
 
19 

 
 
d) It is proposed to have third party inspection of the assets created under JJM by 
the States; and 
e) Functionality assessment of schemes and FHTCs. 
 
(O.M. No.11013(12)/3/2019-Coordination dated:19.03.2020) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.6)  
 
 
Under-utilization of funds under the NRDWP 
 
The Committee further note with serious concern on the inability of States/UTs to draw 
full amount of allocations under the NRDWP due to slow utilization of funds, high amount 
of unspent balances, discrepancies i n documents, viz., Audit Certificates and Utilization 
Certificates submitted by the States/UTs, etc. The Committee further note that various 
measures such as release of NRDWP fund on reimbursement mode, nomination  of 
Area Officers for each State for sensi tizing them, holding of Review Meetings, Regional 
Workshop, Video Conferences, etc., to review the financial and physical progress of 
Schemes of each State and incentivizing the performing States in terms of both physical 
and financial performance, etc., h ave been proposed under the newly launched Jal  
Jeevan Mission (JJM) to expedite the utilization of funds. However, the Committee are at 
a loss to witness a strange paradox that on the one hand, the Department has claimed 
inadequacy/shortage of funds alloc ated for the implementation of its Schemes/ 
Programmes under the NRDWP, forcing the arrangement of funds through extra 
budgetary resources, and on the other hand, even the existing allocations have not been 
utilized to the fullest due to the aforesaid fact ors. In view of the Committee, there is an 
urgent need for the Department to shrug off the passive attitude, whereby all the 
responsibilities were shifted to the States on the grounds that they had the primary 
jurisdiction on the subject of ‘Water’. The Co mmittee would, therefore, recommend the 
Department to formulate an out-of-box strategy to ensure better utilization of funds under 
the Jal Jeevan Mission. They would also like to be apprised of the amount of unspent 
balances lying with each State/UT under the NRDWP, as on 31 October, 2019. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Within the Constitutional framework, Ministry of Jal Shakti has been providing all kind of 
possible assistance to the States for achieving the target of Jal Jeevan Mission. On this 
line, Operatio nal Guidelines for the implementation of Jal Jeevan Mission has been 
prepared and launched on 25.12.2019. This Operational Guidelines provides assistance 
to States in laying the road for implementing the Jal Jeevan Mission. 
20 

 
 
Under JJM, every State/ UT has been advised/ requested to prepare a five year State 
Action Plan wherein quarter -wise annual target of FHTCs and corresponding financial 
requirements will be projected. All Schemes sanctioned under JJM are to be 
implemented by the States without cost a nd time overrun. In case of any cost escalation 
beyond the approved cost, it will have to be borne by the concerned State and no 
additional expenditure out of Central share will be permitted.  
 
Under JJM, annual allocation will be released to the States in two equal installments and 
each installment is to be released in two tranches. Department will release the fund in 
tranches after assessing the utilization of fund by the States/ UTs. Thus, releases are 
planned in consonance with ‘Just In Time’ principle of Ministry of Finance so as to avoid 
any undue parking of fund.  
 
Under JJM, every State has to have a Single Nodal Account (SNA) at the disposal of 
State Water & Sanitation Mission for carrying out all kinds of transactions which eases 
the monitoring of fund utilization and no flow of fund to District level agencies and below 
is allowed except the performance incentive to be provided to Gram Panchayats. 
Further, all transactions under JJM are to be made mandatorily through Public Finance 
Management System  (PFMS) for efficient fund utilization and ensuring transparency. 
Fund utilization by States/ UTs under JJM will be monitored through PFMS. Release of 
funds under JJM will be linked to the fund availability & utilization in PFMS and physical 
& financial pr ogress monitored through Integrated Management Information System 
(IMIS). 
 
As on 31.10.2019, State -wise amount of unspent balances lying with each State/UT 
under the NRDWP, is annexed. It is pertinent to mention here that Jal Jeevan Mission 
was launched in  August, 2019, followed by which fund was allocated to all the States/ 
UTs and releases were made only in the month of August and September, 2019.  
 
(O.M. No.11013(12)/3/2019-Coordination dated:19.03.2020) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.7)  
 
Jal Jeevan Mission – Issues and Challenges 
 
 
The Committee note that from 2019 -20, Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) has been launched 
which aims to provide potable drinking water through Functional Household Tap 
Connection (FHTC) to every rural household by 2024. They observe that this programme 
is being executed at four levels viz. National Jal Jeevan Mission, State Water and 
Sanitation Mission (SWSM) at State level, District Water and Sanitation Mission (DWSM) 
at District level and Paani Samiti/Village Water Sanitation Committee (VWSC) at Gram  
21 

 
 
Panchayat (GP) level. They note that unlike the NRDWP, bottom –up approach has 
been adopted under this programme with end result output orientation to make sure that 
objective of taking potable water right at the household level is achieved. The Committee 
further note that the Department has set 55 litres per capita per day (lpcd) water 
availability and at least three hours of water supply as the norm for ensuring availability  
of water. The Committee are of the view that though the  programme has been launched 
with commendable objectives, its success would depend on addressing several lingering 
issues such as availability of assured/dependable source of water with good quality, 
proper operation and maintenance of infrastructure, comm unity participation for  
judicious use of water, etc. The Committee would furtherrecommend that as per the 
norms being fixed by the Department, the criteria set for selection of villages under this 
programme should be water availability in the individual h ouseholds rather than a 
hamlet/village as a whole, since this has sometimes lead to mis -representation of water 
availability under the existing NRDWP. Besides, they also recommend that the executing 
bodies as contemplated at each level of State, District a nd Gram Panchayat should be 
constituted at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Under JJM, States/ UTs are to plan for achieving drinking water security and to provide 
FHTC to every rural household. In consonance with the 73rd amendment of the 
Constitution of India, Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub -committee/ local community has 
been shouldered with the responsibility of planning, implementation, management, 
operation and maintenance of water supply within the villages. Moreover, Panchayats 
have a constitutional mandate to manage drinking water. In addition, provision has been 
made in the guidelines to set up the mandatory institutional mechanism. States have 
been advised to constitute/ revamp these institutions at various levels at the earliest an d 
they are in the process of setting up the same. 
 
Further, it is necessary that within the villages, local community/ Gram Panchayat and/ 
or its sub -committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. plays the key role for 
Operation & Maintenance, cost recovery, and good governance.  
To achieve the objectives of the JJM, following has been mandatorily adopted: 
i.) in villages with sufficient groundwater availability of prescribed quality within the 
village boundary, the same local water source will be used;  
ii.) in villages with functional hand pumps, the depth can be deepened if required 
and can also be used as a source to meet the service delivery level; 
iii.) in tribal/ hilly/ forested areas, option of gravity and/ or solar power -based water 
supply schemes with low O&M expenditure to be explored and preferred. In hills 
and mountains, springs as a reliable source for drinking water to be explored; 
22 

 
 
iv.) in hot and cold deserts, innovative approaches and possible technology 
interventions will be explored; 
v.) in villages with  sufficient groundwater availability but having quality issues, in -
situ suitable treatment technology may be explored; 
vi.) in villages falling in drought -prone areas, conjunctive use of multiple sources of 
water can be explored such as ponds, lakes, rivers, gr oundwater, supply from 
long distance, rainwater harvesting and/ or artificial recharge; 
vii.) in villages with water quality issues and non -availability of suitable surface 
water sources in nearby areas, it may be more appropriate to transfer bulk 
water from lon g distance. Further, in drought -prone and desert areas, where it 
is not possible to have water supply through conjunctive use, a similar approach 
to transfer bulk water from long distance may be adopted; 
viii.) in water quality -affected habitations, especially with Arsenic and Fluoride 
contaminants, potable water has to be ensured on priority. Since, planning and 
implementation of piped water supply scheme based on a safe water source will 
take time, as a purely interim measure, Community Water Purification Plan ts 
(CWPPs) may be taken up to provide 8 -10 lpcd potable water to meet drinking 
and cooking need of every household residing in such villages/ habitations. 
However, SWSM to prioritize such areas for providing potable water through 
FHTC to every rural household by March, 2021; 
ix.) in States with water -scarce/ areas lying in rain shadow region with inadequate 
rainfall, it is necessary to plan for regional water supply schemes covering both 
urban and rural areas by sourcing water from a perennial surface source. It may 
be noted that under JJM only proportional expenditure on rural population/ 
villages with respect to regular water supply to be met; 
Under JJM, States have been advised to accord priority to FHTCs to be provided 
through retrofitting for last -mile connectivity, water quality affected habitations, villages 
falling under desert and drought prone areas, Japanese Encephalitis –Acute 
Encephalitis Syndrome (JE -AES) affected districts and Sansand Adarsh Gram Yojana 
Villages. 
(O.M. No.11013(12)/3/2019-Coordination dated:19.03.2020) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.8)  
Adequacy of funds for Jal Jeevan Mission 
 
The Committee observe that under the Jal Jeevan Mission, the Government has 
undertaken a huge task of providing FHTC to 14.60 crore rural households, i.e., 81.67% 
of rural households by 2024. This is a herculean task given the fact that, at present, the  
23 

 
 
percentage of rural household connections with Piped Water Supply (PWS) in big States 
such as in West Bengal is 1.31%, in Uttar Pradesh, it is 1.33% and in Bihar, it is a 
meagre 1.88%, which is very low as compared to States such as Himachal Pradesh, 
wherein, it is 56.27%, in Haryana, it is 53.47% and in Punjab, it is 53.28%. Only two 
States, viz., Sikkim (99.34%) and Gujarat (78.46%) have made commendable progress 
in providing PWS to  the households. The Committee further note that though the 
Department has chalked out an implementation and financial roadmap, wherein, Rs. 
20,798 crore has been allocated  as Central Share for the Financial Year 2019 -20, the 
Committee find that the budgetary allocation of Rs. 10,000.66 crore is approximately 50 
per cent of the allocated fund. The Committee, therefore, desire to  be apprised of the 
details of sources of funds proposed  to be arranged for time bound implementation of 
this ambitious Programme along with  the liabilities, if any, likely to be created in the next 
five years and ways and means for theirrepayment. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The estimated amount of Rs. 3.60 lakh Crore is proposed to be shared between the 
Union and State Governments. Central financial assistance for Jal Jeevan Mission will 
have two sources namely Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) and Extra Budgetary 
Resources (EBR).   
In addition, to enable individuals, trusts, foundations, corporate and industrial houses, 
etc. to contribu te in furthering the objective of the JJM, Rashtriya Jal Jeevan Kosh is 
being set up.  
 
Further, Government of India will extend all possible support for the Bulk water transfer/ 
regional water supply scheme in State requiring external support/ financing f rom 
NABARD, ADB, World Bank, NDB, etc. 
 
Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) is a time -bound mission mode programme and for its 
successful implementation, robust financial planning, timely funding, mobilization of 
adequate resources and prudent utilization of funds ar e pre-requisites. In this direction, 
the SWSM/ DWSM will prepare year -wise financial plan by pooling all the available 
resources for rural drinking water supply like the Central fund, State fund, other 
programmes, MPLADS, MLALADS, DMDF, CSR fund, donations, etc. 
 
(O.M. No.11013(12)/3/2019-Coordination dated:19.03.2020) 
 
 
 
24 

 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.9)  
Challenges in Piped Water Supply in rural households 
 
The Committee note with concern that at present only 53.94% of rural population have 
access to potable water supply through pipeline. The Committee further note that before 
the Jal Jeevan Mission, the focus of the Department was to cover every rural habita tion 
by potable drinking water through the Centrally Sponsored NRDWP, through any safe 
means at a reasonable distance. However, the Committee notice that as per the 
Integrated Management Information System (IMIS), several States such asBihar, 
Chattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh have reported only 11.71%, 36.22%, 
25.46% and 15.15% of rural population respectively covered with the piped water supply. 
The Committee also find that factors responsible for lower coverage are uneven 
geographical terrain,  scattered rural habitations, depletion of groundwater, adverse 
climatic conditions, delay in obtaining statutory/other clearances, etc. Although, under 
JJM, the Department has proposed functionality assessment of FHTC through a rapid 
Survey and formation of multi-village system with bulk pipeline to address the issue of 
non-availability of good quality water, the Committee are of the view that these factors 
have to be properly addressed to enable the accessibility of piped water to every rural 
household in  the country. Further, keeping in view the instances where, the villages, 
even after equipped with a pipeline network with connectivity to a good source of water, 
are  still not being provided water due to non -payment of electricity dues, the Committee 
recommend the Department to take appropriate measures to address this trifle issue 
with a view to ensuring that uninterrupted supply of water to the rural households are not 
affected. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
For ensuring long -term sustainability of the scheme, State Government/ UT 
Administration have been advised to facilitate Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub -
committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. to take decisions on user charges 
for providing household connection as well as water supply. 
Under JJM, there is a provision that incentive fund to the tune of 10% of the in -village 
infrastructure cost will be distributed in a phased manner over a period of five years. The 
incentive fund will serve as a revolving fund for meeting any urgent repair c osts of in -
village infrastructure which might disrupt water supply and the same will be replenished 
by community. The incentive fund will be provided out of the fund available with the State 
under JJM (Centre and State matching share) in the prevailing funding pattern.  
25 
 

 
 
The Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub -committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, 
etc. are eligible to receive the incentive when the scheme has been successfully 
managed for a year ensuring that every rural household covered under the scheme 
receives water in adequate quantity of prescribed quality on regular basis and water tariff 
for O&M has been regularly collected. State Water and Sanitation Missions  have been 
advised to develop tangible and transparent criteria for providing this fund which is 
meant to encourage sustainability of water supply system and O&M by Gram Panchayat 
and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. 
 
Further, to instill ‘sense of ownership’, community contribution to the tune of 5% of cos t 
towards in -village water supply infrastructure in hilly, forested, SC/ ST dominated 
villages, Himalayan and North eastern States, etc. and 10% in rest of the areas which 
will drive the communities to manage and operate the in -village water supply 
infrastructure. 
(O.M. No.11013(12)/3/2019-Coordination dated:19.03.2020) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.10)  
 
Piped Water Supply in habitations affected with Contamination 
The Committee observe that as per the data provided by the States on IMIS of the 
Department, there are 56,788 rural habitations affected with water quality contamination, 
as on 14thOctober, 2019. The Committee also note that as many as 16 States are facing 
fluoride contamination in 8,127 rural habitations, while 7 States with 13,379 rural 
habitations have reported water contamination with arsenic. Other major contaminants 
are iron with 18,462 affected rural habitations in 18 States and 13,256 rural habitations 
affected with salinity issues in 11 States. However, keeping in view the water qu ality 
problem in many parts of the country, the Committee are of the view that the figure of  
only 56,788 rural habitations affected with water quality issues may not be reflective of 
gravity of the situation on the ground. The Committee, therefore, urge t he Department to 
conduct an Independent Technical Survey in a time bound manner to better assess the 
situation and adopt appropriate measure to deal with the problem. The Committee also 
recommend the Department to apprise them of its findings and remedial measures which 
could be enforced forthwith, within three months of presentation of thisReport. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Jal Jeevan Mission(JJM) is a time -bound mission -mode programme to ensure every 
rural household has a functional Household Tap Connection(FHTC) by 2024 to provide  
26 

 
 
drinking water in adequate quantity (minimum 55 lpcd) of prescribed quality (BIS: 10500) 
on regular basis. 
 
The Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation had launched “Operational Guidelines 
for the implementation of Jal Je evan Mission” on 25th December, 2019. Under the JJM, 
upto 2% of the allocation to States/ UTs can be utilized by the states for Water Quality 
Monitoring and Surveillance (WQM&S) activities which inter -alia includes setting up of 
and upgrading existing wate r quality laboratories at various levels, providing chemicals 
and consumables to laboratories etc. Apart from that, this fund could also be used for 
procuring Field Test Kits for in situ water quality monitoring at grass root level. 
 
As per the Constitution, ‘Water’ being State subject, Ministry of Jal Shakti cannot enforce 
‘Technical Survey’ on States. However, in order to check and improve the quality of 
drinking water supply, under JJM, the following broad guidelines have been given to 
States/ UTs for undertaking testing of sources/ samples at different level laboratories. 
 
i.) Sub-division/ block laboratory: It is suggested that Sub-divisional/ block labs will test 
100% water sources under its jurisdiction; once for chemical parameters and twice 
for bacteriological parameters (pre and post monsoon) in a year, covering all 
sources of a block at least for 13 basic water quality parameters i.e. pH, Total 
dissolved solids, turbidity, Chloride, total alkalinity, total hardness, Sulphate, Iron, 
total Arsenic, Fluoride, Nitrate, total coliform bacteria, E.coli or thermo tolerent 
coliform bacteria. The positively tested samples will be referred to the district 
laboratory immediately. The other parameters may be tested as per local 
contamination. In case , block level laboratories are not available, services of 
laboratories of nearby educational institutions or universities may be explored and 
availed.  
 
ii.) District laboratory: It is suggested that district lab will test 250 water sources/ 
samples per mo nth (i.e. 3,000 in a year as per the target of roster available on 
Department/ National Mission IMIS) covering all sources randomly spread 
geographically including the positively tested samples referred by the subdivision/ 
block laboratory/ mobile laborato ry on at least for 13 basic water quality 
parameters. The district lab will also refer the positively tested samples to the 
State laboratory immediately. The other parameters may be tested as per local 
contamination at district level.  
 
iii.) State laborat ory: The State lab will test at least 5% of the total drinking water 
samples across all district level laboratories with random and uniform geographical 
spread including positively tested samples referred by district/ sub -division/ block/ 
mobile lab. If th e number of districts in any State/ UT is large (>50), then the 
testing of samples/ sources may be restricted to 3% for the State lab. Remaining 
2% may be integrated with other regional/ district laboratories. 
27 
 

 
 
iv) Testing of water quality using Field T est Kit (FTK): At Gram Panchayat level: Gram 
Panchayt and/ or it sub -committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. will 
ensure to test 100% drinking water sources including private sources and sanitary 
inspection under its jurisdiction using FTK. The test results and sanitary inspection 
report will be submitted to the concerned PHED/ RWS Department.  
 
All States/ UTs have been advised to accredit drinking water testing laboratories as per 
IS/ISO/ IEC:17025 at least for parameters of basic water quali ty importance and 
gradually upgrading to other parameters as per local conditions. Also all States/ UTs 
have been requested to cross verify the water quality data and integration with other 
laboratories of State/ Central Government agencies. 
 
Under JJM, Th e States/ UTs are encouraged to explore Public -Private Partnership is 
wherein the PHED/ RWS Department will collaborate with NABL/ ISO/ other suitably 
accredited private firms as Support Organization (SO) and utilize their strengths 
following all SoPs as per government procedures. Additionally, Public-Public Partnership 
may also be explored wherein the PHED/ RWS Department will collaborate with the 
water quality testing laboratories of other similar State/ Central Government agencies. 
Further, States/ UTs m ay also designate any NABL/ ISO/ other suitably accredited 
Public or Private water quality testing laboratories/ firms on turnkey basis following all 
codal formalities prescribed in Government procedures. 
 
The States/ UTs are allowed to promote rural entrepreneurship and enterprises for water 
quality testing at local level. Also allowed to explore possibility of engaging laboratories 
established in college/ universities/ polytechnic institutes for water quality testing on 
nominal payment basis agreed among DWSM and concerned institution. 
 
The JJM also allows water samples collected by general public tested at a nominal rate 
at various level drinking water quality testing laboratories.  
 
(O.M. No.11013(12)/3/2019-Coordination dated:19.03.2020) 
 
Comment of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No.8 of Chapter –I of the Report) 
 
 
28 
 

 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.13)  
Jal Shakti Abhiyan 
 
The Committee are happy to note that the Government has initiated a Programme  to 
conserve water on a Mission Mode in which the Ministries/ Departments and State 
Governments will work, in tandem, for water conservation under different Programmes 
run by them by way of concentrating on the following five interventionareas:- 
(i) Water conservation and RainwaterHarvesting. 
(ii) Renovation of Traditional and other Water Bodies/Tanks. 
(iii) Re-use and Bore-Well RechargeStructures. 
(iv) Watershed Development. 
(v) IntensiveAfforestation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Noted. 
 
 
(O.M. No.11013(12)/3/2019-Coordination dated:19.03.2020) 
 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.14)  
 
The Committee further observe that this Programme has been launched in 256 Water 
Stressed Districts. However, the Committee note that since the Programme has been 
launched in the monsoon season of 2019, its outcome and other deliverables are   yet to 
be assessed. Nonetheless, the Committee are sure that this is a composite and a 
commendable initiative and should be strengthened in a conjunctive manner not only by 
the different Government agencies but also by the community as  a whole including the 
NGOs and other stakeholders. The Committee also wish to convey that besides, water 
conservation measures, urgent steps are also required to be initiated by the Department 
to prevent the wastage of water which has now been transformed  as a major challenge 
especially in the cities. In order to contain the rampant wastage of water, there is an 
urgent need for launching of widespread Awareness Campaigns with appropriate 
penalties. The Committee would like to be apprised of the tangible ou tcome of various 
initiatives taken by the Department in thisdirection. 
 
 
 
29 
 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Under support activities of Jal Jeevan Mission, Information, Education, Communication 
(IEC) is an important component wherein activities aiming at drivin g positive behavioral 
changes among stakeholders including judicious use of water can be taken up. Further, 
IEC activities aiming at creating awareness and motivating people to take up affirmative 
action for protection of drinking water sources and against  misuse of water are to be 
promoted. At the Gram Panchayat (GP) level, GP and/ or its sub -committee, i.e. VWSC/ 
Paani Samiti/ User Group, etc. is to conduct awareness campaigns on judicious use of 
water, come up with mechanisms to ensure no misuse of water  and ensure prescribed 
IEC campaigns. 
 
Further, the State Water and Sanitation Missions (SWSMs) have been advised to build 
suitable incentive and disincentive mechanism in the policy to discourage wastage of 
water.  Adding to this, the Gram Panchayat and/ or its sub-committee, i.e. VWSC/ Paani 
Samiti/ User Group, etc. as part of its surveillance is to undertake regular sanitary 
inspections and collectively decide on mechanisms to prevent misuse of water. 
 
States are in the process of planning and rolling ou t campaigns as per the 
aforementioned provisions for awareness generation against misuse of water. 
 
(O.M. No.11013(12)/3/2019-Coordination dated:19.03.2020) 
 
Comment of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No.17 of Chapter –I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.15)  
Measures for creation of ‘Sponge Cities’ 
 
Further, recognising that the concept of Sponge Cities, prevailing in countries such as 
China, which broadly focuses on replacing the concrete pavements with wetlands, green 
rooftops, rain water harvesting and rain gardens to capture rainwater   and recharge the 
ground water aquifers to enable conservation of flood water, the Committee are of the 
opinion that tangible and time -bound measures need to be initiated by the Governm ent 
to explore and implement such concepts in the country. The Committee would, therefore, 
recommend the Department of Drinking Water  and Sanitation to devise measures in 
coordination with the Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation, the Ministry of Rural Development and the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs and also with the active participation ofState Governments, District 
Administrations, Panchayats, etc., for creation of such areas both in urban and rural 
parts of the country. 
30 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As per Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961, the subject flood 
(control) management falls under the ambit of Department of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation (DoWR, RD & GR), Ministry of Jal Shakti.  
 
DoWR, RD & G R had informed that  concept of sponge cities can be explored on pilot 
basis for Indian cities to tackle urban flooding considering financial viability and 
technological, environmental, social and other challenges at the same time in Indian 
context. Also, there are concepts relating to management of storm water which inter -alia 
could help in managing urban flooding. 
Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation is being 
requested to take necessary action in the matter. 
JSA also promoted water conservation and water resource management by focusing on 
accelerated implementation of five target interventions, viz. water conservation & 
rainwater harvesting, renovation of traditional and other water bodies/ tanks, reuse and 
recharge of bor e wells, watershed development and intensive afforestation. These 
activities would also enable the storing of flood waters in the rejuvenated/renovated 
water bodies and act as flood cushions both in urban and rural areas.  
(O.M. No.11013(12)/3/2019-Coordination dated:19.03.2020) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 
 

 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32 
 
 
 

 
 
CHAPTER – IV  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.11) 
 
Efficacy of various initiatives to address Contamination of Water in the Affected 
Areas 
 
 
2.11 The Committee further note that the Department has launched the National Water 
Quality Sub-Mission (NWQSM) on 22 ndMarch 2017 to provide safe drinking water  to 
27,544 Arsenic/ Fluoride affected rural habitations in the country by March, 2021, out of 
which only 11,884 habitations have, so far, been covered. Pursuant to this Mission, out 
of Rs. 3,688.34 crore released to the Arsenic/ Fluoride affected States under the 
NWQSM as on September 30th, 2019 an amount of Rs. 2,036.46 crore has been utilized 
by the States /UTs. Besides, an amount of Rs. 1,000 crore was released during March 
2016 to various Arsenic/Fluoride affected States/UTs for installation of Community Water 
Purification Plants and as reported by the States, as on 30 September 2019, a total 
number of 22, 822 'Community Water Purification Plants’ have been installed in 
States/UTs covering a rural population of 2,39,04,883 in 16,938 habitations. Under JJM, 
10% weightage is proposed to be given to the rural population affected by water quality, 
thus, allowing  more fund for quality affected States and 2% of the allocation to the 
States/ UTs can be utilized for Water Quality Monitoring and Surveillance activities. 
While the above initiatives have been taken by the Government to address the problem 
of contamination of water, the ground reality is still far from the intended objectives. In 
the considered view of the Committee, supply of water through pipeline in all such areas 
could greatly reduce the problem. However, the Committee are disappointed by the fact 
that extension of pipeline in such areas have not been given the required impetus it 
requires as there are only 1109 ongoing NRDWP piped water supply Schemes in 
Arsenic/Fluoride Affected Habitations as against total number of 21,506 Arsenic/Fluoride 
Affected Habitations as on 15 October, 2019. The Committee are pained to note that 
people in many parts of the country are still facing the problem of water contamination 
and facing serious health hazards on this count. The Committee therefore, recommend 
the Department to lay pipelines and supply the water through FHTC in these areas on 
priority basis under the Jal Jeevan Mission. They would also like to be apprised of the 
targets fixed in this regard. 
 
 
 
 
33 

 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jal Jeevan Mission(JJM) is a time -bound mission -mode programme to ensure every 
rural household has a functional Household Tap Connection(FHTC) by 2024 to provide  
drinking water in adequate quantity (minimum 55 lpcd) of prescribed quality (BIS: 10500) 
on regular basis. 
 
As per the Constitution of India, water is a State subject and State has been empowered 
to plan, design, implement and approve the water supply projects. Government of India 
supplements the efforts of State Government by providing financial and technical 
assistance. As such, Field level implementation of the programme including ‘laying of 
pipeline’ is the mandate of State Governments. However, in order to address the issues 
of water supply at the earliest in the quality affected habitations f ollowing steps have 
been mandated for the States under JJM guidelines: 
 
vi.) All State/ UTs have been advised to prioritize water quality affected areas for 
provision of Functional Household Tap Connection (FHTC).  
 
vii.) In villages with sufficient groundwater availability but having quality issues, in-situ 
suitable treatment technology may be explored. 
 
viii.) In villages with water quality issues and non -availability of suitable surface 
water sources in nearby areas, it may be more appropriate to transfer bulk water 
from long distance.  
 
ix.) In water quality -affected habitations, especially with Arsenic and Fluorid e 
contaminants, potable water has to be ensured on priority. Since, planning and 
implementation of piped water supply scheme based on a safe water source will 
take time, as a purely interim measure, Community Water Purification Plants 
(CWPPs) may be taken up to provide 8 -10 lpcd potable water to meet drinking 
and cooking need of every household in such villages/ habitations. However, 
SWSM to prioritize such areas for providing potable water through FHTC to every 
rural household by March, 2021. 
 
x.) All schemes (Piped Water Supply - surface/ ground water& Community Water 
Purification Plant) approved under National Water Quality Sub -Mission, States 
will take measures to provide FHTCs at service level of 55 lpcd to every rural 
household by 2021. 
 
 
(O.M. No.11013(12)/3/2019-Coordination dated:19.03.2020) 
34 

 
 
Comment of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No.11 of Chapter –I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2.12) 
 
Installation of Desalination Plant(s) in the Coastal Areas 
 
The Committee observe that in addition to the problem of contamination of water, there 
is an overall shortage of water in the Coastal Areas of the country, especially  during the 
deficient monsoon years. The consecutive failure of monsoon in the Coastal Ar eas often 
give rise to severe drought conditions/ water crisis requiring the Government/Authorities 
concerned to initiate emergency measures even by transporting water through trains 
which is often regarded as one of the traditional methods of quenching th e thirst of 
people in these parched areas. The Committee believe that there is an urgent need for 
use of cutting -edge technology by way of installation of  Desalination Plants to ensure 
adequate availability of water in these areas during all such crisis p eriods. However, the 
Committee are distressed to note that no specific policy has been laid out in this regard 
under the Jal Jeevan Mission. Even though the technology to purify saline water has 
been developed in the country, the Department has not taken a ny proactive measure to 
use it except that the onus of formulation and implementation of relevant policy has been 
put on the States. Further, the Committee are also given to understand that the process 
of desalination of water which has been done successfu lly, on an experimental basis, in 
Gujarat and Tamil Nadu, involves high cost. Noting that   other countries of the world 
such as Israel have been using the cutting -edge technology to economically convert the 
saline water into good quality potable water, th e Committee urge upon the Government 
to collaborate and undertake result -oriented research in this area to enable using saline 
water, at a cheaper cost, to address the severe water crisis in the Coastal Areas. Since 
the key to success under the Jal Jeevan Mission lies in the availability of good quality 
water source which can then be transported to households through FHTC, the, 
Department needs to focus on use of all the available technology to create assured 
sources of good quality water in suchareas. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
iv. Under JJM guidelines, specific policy has been laid out for making available 
adequate water in coastal areas. In these areas, augmentation of water 
supply services can be done with energy efficient small desalination plants 
with high recovery ratio. Further, in order to avoid the ingress of sea water, 
sub-surface dykes can be constructed in rivers that can also improve the 
groundwater based drinking water sources in the adjoining areas in 
convergence with MGNREGS, State schemes, etc. 
 
35 

 
 
v. The Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation, M/o JS has constituted a 
Technical Committee under the chairmanship of Principal Scientific Advisor to 
Government of India. The Committee would identify specific challenges faced 
in the provision of wa ter supply with assistance of States, invite online 
proposals for solving them, decide and recommend further action including 
demonstration projects to address the challenges and develop performance 
and technology standards. The mandate of the Committee is as follows: 
 
f. invite innovative technologies in drinking water, sanitation, greywater 
management and solid waste management sectors through Department/ 
National Mission portal; 
g. shortlist technologies for techno-economic appraisal; 
h. facilitate techno-economic appraisal of technologies as per the ASSURED 
matrix framework; 
i. consider appraised technologies for acceptance; 
j. recommend any non -technological interventions needed to achieve scaling 
up the use of such technologies. 
 
Such technologies, as recommended by the Committee would be shared with 
States for adoption suiting the specific field requirement. 
 
vi.      Further, under JJM, Innovation and Research & Development (R&D) is 
promoted to assist States to prioritize the areas as well as to identify the type 
of intervention to be adopted in different areas within the State. Further, 
proposals related to water and sanitation received from R&D institutions and 
innovators will be taken up for demonstration purpose on pilot basis after 
approval of Technical Committee. Under this, the research proposals received 
relating to use of saline water for drinking after treatment inter alia would also 
be considered for funding. 
 
All the above provisions made under Jal Jeevan Mission may be explored by States to 
identify best suitable technologies and use the same. 
 
(O.M. No.11013(12)/3/2019-Coordination dated:19.03.2020) 
 
Comment of the Committee 
 (Please see Para No.14 of Chapter –I of the Report) 
36 
 

 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF 
THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI         Dr. SANJAY JAISWAL,  
3 February, 2021         Chairperson, 
14 Magha, 1942 (Saka)    Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
 
 
 
37  

 
 
ANNEXURE – I 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES  
(2020-21) HELD ON FRIDAY, 6 NOVEMBER, 2020 
  
The Committee sat from 1400 hours to 1430 hours in Committee Room No. 'C', Parliament 
House Annexe,  New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
                         Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri Kaushal Kishore 
3. Shri M. Dhanush Kumar 
4. Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel  
5. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod  
              
RAJYA SABHA 
 
6 Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
7 Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena  
8 Shri Arun Singh  
9 Shri Subhash Chandra Singh 
10 Shri Pradeep Tamta  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Manoj K. Arora  - OSD (LSS) 
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan  - Director 
3. Shri R. C. Sharma  - Additional Director 
 
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting and congratulated them on 
their nomination /re-nomination to the Committee for the year 2020-21.    
 
2. ***  ***  ***  ***  ***  *** *** 
 
3. The Committee then took up for consideration four draft Reports namely draft Reports on the 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the First and 
Third Reports of the Committee  on “Demands for Grants (2019 -20) and (2020 -21)" of the Ministry of 
Jal Shakti (De partment of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation) and draft 
Reports on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 
Second and Fourth Reports of the Committee on “Demands for Grants (2019 -20) and (2020-21)" of the 
Ministry of Jal Shakti (Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation).  After some deliberation, the 
Committee adopted all the draft Reports unanimously and without any changes / amendments.   The 
Committee authorized the Chairperson to presen t the above four Reports to both the Houses of 
Parliament in the next Session of Parliament. 
 
4. ***  ***  ***  ***  *** *** 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned.  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
*** Minutes in respect of other matters kept separately. 
38 

 
 
ANNEXURE 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SECOND REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations/Observations              15 
 
(ii) Recommendation/Observations which have been accepted by the Government 
Para Nos.2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, 2.10, 2.13, 2.14 and 2.15 
   
   Total - 13  
    Percentage -86.67% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
 view of the Government’s replies 
  
Para Nos. NIL       Total - NIL 
   Percentage- 
0%  
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government      
have not been accepted by the Committee 
 
Para Nos. 2.11 and 2.12 
       
Total - 02 
      Percentage 13.33 - %  
 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the Government 
is  still awaited  
 Para Nos. NIL          
 
Total - NIL 
             Percentage - 0% 
39 