1 
 
 
 
13 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2021-22) 
                 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                                 
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI – DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER 
DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
                 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2021-22) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Tenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing 
Committee on Water Resources] 
                       
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
  
 
         
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
December, 2021 / Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 


2 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2021-22) 
          
(SEVENTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
         
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI – DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER 
DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION 
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2021-22) 
 
 (Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Tenth Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry 
of Jal Shakti - Department of Water Resource, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation) 
         
Presented to Lok Sabha on  07.12.2021 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on  07.12.2021 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
         
December, 2021 / Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 


3 
 
 
W. R. C.  No. 68 
         
         
                
         
         
 
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
    
                     
 
 
 
         
        © 2021 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha  
(Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by  

4 
 
CONTENTS 
  Page 
Composition of the 
Committee 
 
……………………………………………………………… (iii) 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………… 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER - I Report……………………………………………………… 
 
 
CHAPTER – II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government…………………………… 
 
 
CHAPTER - III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies……………………………………………………… 
 
 
CHAPTER - IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee……………...................................... 
 
 
CHAPTER - V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still 
awaited…………………………………………………….. 
 
 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I Minutes of the  First Sitting of the Committee held on 
21.10.2021 ……………………………………………….. 
 
 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Tenth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee………………………………………………… 
 
 
  

5 
 
 
COMPOSITON OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2021-22) 
    Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal  -  Chairperson 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Vijay Baghel 
3. Shri Bhagirath Chaudhary 
4. Shri Chandra Prakash Choudhary 
5. Shri Guman Singh Damor 
6. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
7. Dr. K. Jayakumar 
8. Shri Dhanush M. Kumar 
9. Shri Sunil Kumar 
10. Shri Mohammad Akbar Lone 
11. Shri Kuruva Gorantla Madhav 
12. Shri Nihalchand 
13. Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel 
14. Shri Sanjay Kaka Patil 
15. Shri P. Ravindhranath  
16. Ms. Nusrat Jahan Ruhi 
17. Smt. Agatha K. Sangma 
18. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
19. Shri Chandan Singh 
20. Shri D. K. Suresh 
21. Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi 
 
 RAJYA SABHA  
22. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
23. Shri Harshvardhan Singh Dungarpur 
24. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena 
25. Smt. Mausam Noor 
26. Shri Arun Singh 
27. Shri Subhash Chandra Singh 
28. Shri Rewati Raman Singh 
29. Shri PradeepTamta 
30. Vacant 
31. Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri R. C. Sharma   - Additional Director 
3. Shri Gaurav Jain   - Assistant Committee Officer 
 

6 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2021-22) having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Thirteenth - Report on the Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Tenth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti -Department of Water Resources, 
River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation. 
 
2.  The Tenth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 8 March 2021. The Action Taken replies of the Government to all the recommendations contained 
in the Report were received in this Secretariat on 02 August, 2021. 
 
3.  The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and adopted by the 
Committee at their sitting held on 21.10.2021. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Tenth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee is given in Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi Dr. SANJAY JAISWAL  
02  December,  2021 Chairperson  
11 Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
  

7 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources (2021-22) deals with the Action Taken by 
the Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in their Tenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) 
on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Jal Shakti – Department of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation for the year 2021-22. The Tenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 08.03.2021 
and was laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on the same date. The Report contained 24 
Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Government. These have been examined and 
categorized as follows:  
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government (Chapter II):  
 
Para Nos. Para Nos. 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.6,  2.8, 2.9, 2.10, 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.14, 2.15, 2.16, 
2.17, 2.18, 2.19, 2.20, 2.21, 2.22-2.23 and 2.25 
       (Total –22) 
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies (Chapter III):  
 
Para Nos. NIL       
     (Total – NIL) 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV):  
 
Para Nos. 2.7 and 2.24       
(Total – 2)  
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still 
awaited (Chapter V):  
 
Para Nos. NIL        
      (Total – NIL)  
 2. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of the observations / 
recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
A. Increasing Committed Liability 
 
Recommendation No. 4  (Para No. 2.4) 
 
3. The Committee observed that out of total budgetary allocation of Rs. 9022.57 crore for FY 2021-22 in 
respect of the Department, as much as Rs. 3600 crore which was almost 40 % of the total allocation had 
been kept for repayment of loans and other liabilities under Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana 
(PMKSY) leaving a net budgetary allocation of only Rs. 5422.57 crore for the various schemes /activities of 
the Department. Besides the Department had been permitted to borrow an amount of Rs. 5130 crore from 
the NABARD in BE 2021-22 for bridging the resource gap. The Committee were of the view that as the 
increase in committed liability of the Department on account of huge borrowing and servicing of loans, which 
was a large proportion of the budgetary allocation had greatly impaired the leverage of the Department in 
financing its ambitious and important projects. The Committee urged the Department to approach the 
Ministry of Finance for one time waiving off its committed liability so as to enable the Department to allocate 
more funds to the various important programmes which were facing resource crunch. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department in this regard.  
 
4. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 

8 
 
“During 2016-17, ninety-nine (99) on-going Major/Medium irrigation projects under Pradhan Mantri 
Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) were prioritized in consultation with States, for completion in 
phases along with their Command Area Development & Water Management (CADWM) works. 
Funding mechanism through NABARD has been approved by the Government for both Central and 
State share, as many of the projects were held up due to financial constraints at that time. The main 
reason was the lack of matching availability of funds for the scheme at central level and State level 
through budgetary resources.  Many a time, resources for central share were available but the 
States concerned could not provide their matching share and vice versa. The LTIF loan from 
NABARD provided for has indeed been serving its purpose by providing assured central assistance 
whenever required, and also State share, wherever the States have availed this option. However, 
keeping in view the large proportion of budgetary allocation required for servicing of loan, as 
recommended by the Hon’ble Committee, the issue of one time waiver for the committed liabilities 
under LTIF loan from NABARD would be taken up by the Department with Ministry of Finance”.  
 
5. The Committee note with satisfaction that in pursuance of their recommendation, the 
Department have stated that the issue of one time waiver of its committed liability under Long Term 
Irrigation Fund (LTIF), LTIF loan from National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development 
(NABARD) would be taken up by them with Ministry of Finance. The Committee urge upon the 
Department to vigorously pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance so that one time waiver of 
committed liability under LTIF loan is acceded to by the Ministry of Finance at the earliest and is 
suitably reflected in the Budget Estimates 2022-23 of the Department of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation. The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress 
made in this regard within 3 months of presentation of this Report to Parliament. 
 
B. Ground Water Management and Regulation  
 
Recommendation No. 6  (Para No. 2.6) 
 
6 The Committee noted that the Ground Water Management and Regulation Scheme had been 
launched with an objective for overall development, management and regulation of ground water in the 
country. However, the Committee observed that actual expenditure under this head had been lower vis-a-vis 
allocated funds especially against BE allocation. In FY 2016-17, the actual expenditure was only Rs. 112.25 
crore as against BE of Rs. 303.39 crore. Similarly only 254.44 crore was spent against BE allocation of Rs. 
500 crore in 2017-18 and in FY 2018-19, only Rs. 260.20 crore was incurred against BE allocation of Rs. 450 
crore.  The Committee also found that barring the financial year 2015-16, the budgetary allocations had been 
constantly reduced at RE level leaving lesser resources for carrying out the programme. Given the fact that 
the ground water levels in many parts of the country are rapidly depleting coupled with deteriorating water 
quality to a large extent, the Committee urged the Department to make concerted efforts for full utilization of 
allocated budgetary resources under such an important Scheme. Further, the Committee recommended that 
the accountability should be fixed on the persons and implementing agencies for under-utilization  of   funds 
under the scheme as it had very implications for health of groundwater resources in the country. The 
Committee also found wide variation between BE and RE allocations under this scheme every year. For the 
year 2016-17, the BE allocation was Rs. 303.39 crore which was reduced to Rs. 115 crore at RE stage. 
Similarly, for 2017-18 and 2018-19, BE was pegged at Rs. 500 crore and 450 crore, whereas at RE stage it 
was reduced to Rs. 275 crore and Rs. 260 crore respectively. This indicated lack of proper financial planning 
and foresightedness on the part of the Department in estimating the actual requirements at the beginning of 
Financial year resulting in huge alteration in budgetary allocations at RE stage. Besides, frequent adjustment 
of the funds at RE stage undermined the budget credibility. The Committee therefore recommended the 
Department to take steps to streamline its budgetary estimation system so as to avoid huge variation in BE 
and RE allocations.  The Committee recommended that with a view to increasing the efficacy in the 
implementation of the Scheme, the Ground Water Coordination Committees should also be constituted at 
District level as well. 
 
7. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 
“To ensure better utilization of the budgetary allocations, a Project Management Consultant (PMC) has 
been engaged in CGWB for streamlining various procurements. This has resulted in improved 

9 
 
utilization of funds in 2019-20 and there was no significant variation in BE and RE during this period. It 
is further submitted that since 2017-18, barring the year 2020-21 (impacted due to COVID-19 
pandemic), an expenditure of around Rs.250 crore to Rs.275 crore is being incurred under the 
GWM&R scheme and all out efforts are being made to ensure full utilisation of the allocated budget. 
 
State Ground Water Coordination Committees have been constituted for effective sharing of outputs of 
NAQUIM programme with the State Governments. The point of constitution of Groundwater Co-
ordination Committee at district level is noted for appropriate action”. 
 
8. The Committee are happy to note from the Action Taken Reply that engagement of a Project 
Management Consultant (PMC) in Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) has resulted in improved 
utilization of funds in 2019-20 and that there was no significant variation in the Budget Estimate (BE) 
and Revised Estimate (RE) during this period. The Committee expect that CGWB would continue its 
efforts for strict monitoring so that the funds allocated are fully utilized and that there is no let up in 
this regard. As regards, constitution of Ground Water Coordination Committees at district level, the 
Department in its Reply has merely stated that they have noted for appropriate action. The Committee 
trust that the Department would take concrete steps in this regard so that district level Water 
Coordination Committees are set up in a time bound manner in all the States.  
 
C. Need for a study to assess the water use efficiency 
 
Recommendation No. 7 (Para No. 2.7) 
 
9. The Committee noted that though a 'Sahi Fasal’ campaign had been launched by National Water 
Mission to encourage farmers in the water stressed areas to grow crops which were not water intensive and 
use water very efficiently, no specific study with regard to measuring water use efficiency in respect of any 
crop had been undertaken by the National Water Mission (NWM) / Central Water Commission (CWC). The 
Committee were also perturbed to learn that the data regarding water use efficiency in respect of major 
cereal and commercial crops in India vis-a-vis international standards was also not available at present.  The 
Committee notde from the submission of the Department that the water use in the irrigation sector was the 
biggest component of total water demand in the country which was appx. 78.50% of the total water demand 
in the 2010, and was projected to be around 72.50% and 68.40% in the year 2025 and 2050 respectively. 
The Committee were of the considered view that in the present scenario of fast depletion of the water 
resources both surface and ground water improving the water usage efficiency was the need of the hour and 
therefore recommended the Department to commission a study to assess the water use efficiency regarding 
the major cereal and commercial crops in India vis-a-vis  international standards in order to ensure prudent 
and economic use of water by agricultural sector. 
 
10. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 
“Details regarding water use efficiency in respect of major cereal and commercial crops in the irrigation 
sector in India vis-a-vis international standards are not available. However, water use efficiency of 
completed irrigation projects is assessed for optimum utilization of water resources. In this regard, 
‘Guidelines for improving Water Use Efficiency in Irrigation, Domestic & Industrial Sectors’ has been 
published by the Central Water Commission (CWC).  In order to make a realistic assessment of water 
use efficiency of completed major/medium irrigation projects; during 10th& 11thFive year Plans, CWC 
conducted 35 water use efficiency studies for completed major/medium irrigation projects in 7 (seven) 
States. The overall project efficiency of the studied projects ranged from 13 to 62 % with the group 
weighted average (on culturable command area basis) of the projects studied at around 36 %. The 
studies, in general, revealed inadequate maintenance, dilapidated condition of canals due to silting, 
cracks in lining, weed growth, inefficient operation, low water rates, poor participatory irrigation 
management etc. Corrective project specific structural or non-structural interventions were detailed in 
the study reports to improve the water use efficiency of the projects. The findings were conveyed to the 
respective States for follow-up for enhancing water use efficiency of the irrigation projects in their 
States aiding in better water management. 
Baseline studies have been undertaken by National Water Mission for improving water use efficiency in 
irrigation and studies have been awarded to North Eastern Regional Institute for Water and Land 

10 
 
Management (NERIWALM- Tezpur), Water and Land Management Training Institute (WALMTARI- 
Hyderabad), Water and Land Management Institute (WALMI – Aurangabad) and Centre for Water 
Resources Development and Management (CWRDM - Kerala)”.  
 
11. The Committee having noted during the examination of DFG (2021-22) that the data regarding 
water use efficiency in respect of major cereal and commercial crops in India vis-a-vis international 
standards is not available in the Department, have categorically recommended that a study be 
commissioned to assess the water use efficiency regarding major cereal and commercial crops in 
India vis-a-vis  international standards in order to ensure prudent and economic use of water by 
agricultural sector. The Department in its Action Taken Reply has again reiterated their position that 
data/details in the matter are not available with them. What is more perplexing to the Committee the 
ineptitude and is lackadaisical approach of the Department in the matter, wherein they have not 
bothered to mention whether any constraints/difficulties are being faced by them in commissioning 
the study. While expressing their serious displeasure, the Committee reiterate their recommendation 
that the Department should explore all possible ways and means in cooperation and coordination 
with other Departments/Ministries to commission a study to assess the water use efficiency in 
respect of major cereal and commercial crops in the country without any further delay.  
D. Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP) 
 
Recommendation No. 9   (Para No. 2.9) 
 
12. The Committee noted that 99 projects in 7 phases had been prioritized for completion by December 
2019 under the AIBP.  However, as on as on 31.12.2020, only 44 Projects could be completed under the 
scheme despite taking a huge loan of Rs. 37,061.77 crore (including central assistance and state share loan 
through NABARD) between the years 2016-17 till 2020-21 from NABARD for financing these Projects. The 
Committee were apprehensive that going by the pace at which these projects were being constructed, it 
would take decades to complete the envisaged projects. Since the financing of these Projects were done 
through LTIF by way of loan, the Committee recommended that  Department should take steps to streamline 
and strengthen its monitoring mechanism and use latest technologies and to plug the loopholes and the 
deficiencies observed in the implementation of the projects, so that all the pending  projects were completed 
within the revised schedule and that there were not further cost and time over-runs.  
 
13. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 
“The Department is seized of the above issue highlighted by the Hon’ble Committee. In this regard, the 
following steps have been taken to seek time bound implementation of the projects, within the 
prescribed cost: 
 
A. Assured funding is being done through Long Term Irrigation Fund (LITF), by loan from NABARD, 
not only for Central Share, but also for State Share, Both central assistance and State share for 
these projects are being provided from NABARD under LTIF. State share is being provided at an 
interest rate of 6% and rest of the interest cost is borne by the Central Government. 
B. Further, the procedure for approval of revised cost for providing central assistance for these 
prioritized projects has been simplified as below: 
i. No separate clearance/Advisory Committee clearance/Investment Clearance is required for 
funding of the projects, which have cost escalation of upto 20% on approved cost (AIBP 
component) as on 01.04.2012 and no separate investment clearance form DoWR,RD&GR is 
required.  
ii. Fast track proforma clearance from Central Water Commission (CWC) is sufficient for 
projects where revised cost may be more than the 20% over and above approved cost as on 
01.04.2012 and no separate investment clearance from DoWR, RD & GR is required. 
 
iii. Further, cost escalation over and above 20% on approved cost as on 01.04.2012 shall be 
borne by the concerned State Government for which it can avail loan from NABARD under 
Long Term Irrigation Fund (LTIF). While one time 20% increase in the estimated cost of the 
99 projects (and 7 phases) has been inbuilt in the scheme at the time of its formulation, in 

11 
 
case cost enhancement is required afterwards, a simplified Fast Track Proforma Clearance 
mechanism has been prescribed, though the central assistance amount does not change. 
C. Each of the 99 prioritised projects, right till its completion, is reviewed at various levels. During 
reviews, the bottlenecks are identified and measures to overcome them, are deliberated upon. 
 
D. The Department has also made efforts to resolve the issues pertaining to other agencies of 
Government of India, such as Railways, National Highway, Environment & Forests, etc. which are 
causing delay in completion of the 99 prioritised projects.  
 
E. The delay in completion of irrigation projects occurs due to various reasons such as paucity of 
funds, inter-State issues, delay in land acquisition and environment and forest clearance, 
rehabilitation & resettlement issues, contractual & local disputes etc.  
 
F. To avoid land acquisition, the Department has propagated large scale adoption of underground 
piped network for distribution system. In order to guide the concerned State Departments, 
guidelines for the same have also been published by Central Water Commission and circulated to 
the States. 
 
G. An online MIS has been developed for updating the progress and facilitate review of the projects. 
 
H. Remote sensing based monitoring is being done through Bhaskaracharya Institute of Space 
Applications and Geoinformatics”. 
 
14. The Committee express their satisfaction that the issue of slow progress in implementation of 
Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP) as highlighted by the Committee in their 
recommendation has been noted by the Department and a number of steps have been taken by it to 
accelerate the completion of the AIBP Projects. The Committee express the hope that these 
measures would help in faster implementation of the AIBP projects as these projects are financed by 
borrowing from Long Term Irrigation Fund (LTIF) under NABARD,  which had imposed a committed 
liability on the Department. 
 
E. Himalayan Glacier System 
 
Recommendation No. 23  (Para No. 2.24) 
 
15 Keeping in view the fact that the glaciers in the Himalayan region are constantly retreating and 
melting due to climate change and global warming, the Committee recommended the Department to 
commission a comprehensive study to assess the behaviour of Himalayan glaciers as well as the impact of 
the Hydro Electric Projects (HEP) if any, located in the region in causing Glacial Lake Outburst Flood. The 
Committee would categorically like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry in this regard, within six 
months from the presentation of this Report to the Parliament.  
 
16. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 
“The studies being carried out under Department of Science and Technology sponsored NMSHE 
project has been completed by National Institute of Hydrology and the expected to be submitted soon. 
As soon as the report is available a copy of the same will be made available to the Committee. 
 
A proposal has been framed by Central Water Commission (CWC) to install the advance warning 
system in the upper reaches of river system in the Himalayan region to the extent possible for 
monitoring of Glacial Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) with an estimated cost of Rs 95.80 crore and the 
same has been included in the draft EFC Memo of DWRIS for the period 2021-26. The salient features 
of the proposal are: 
 

12 
 
Phase-1 (0-2 years) 
In the phase-1, the sensors/equipment’s including siren system will be installed in upper reaches of 
river system as far as possible near to identified lakes and downstream up to the existing network of 
CWC. This will provide gauge to gauge warning to the local inhabitants for few hours so that precious 
life can be saved due to disaster of glacial lake outburst. The work of preparation of inventories of 
glacial lakes of 0.25 ha and above will also be carried out during this phase. All glacial lakes having 
size greater than 10 ha will be monitored on monthly basis during monsoon season in this phase. 
 
Phase-2(2-5 years) 
In the Phase-2, vulnerability index of lakes will be find out based on satellite input and ground 
verification as far as possible. In addition to this, the frequency of glacial lake monitoring of vulnerable 
lakes will be increased from currently monthly to weekly basis. Also, glacial lake outburst modelling of 
selected vulnerable lakes will be carried out periodically and based on the result affected area in the 
downstream will be identified. On the basis of this input, if required additional sensors/equipment’s will 
be installed. 
A team of experts was constituted by National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA), New Delhi for 
joint study to understand the causes of the flash floods in river Rishiganga and Dhauliganga and 
suggest mitigation/preparedness measures to prevent such flood events. The major scope of the joint 
study are hazard assessment, monitoring, forecasting and Early Warning Systems, suggestions for 
reducing risks etc.  
The team carried out a field visit in March 2021 in which all the sites were visited by the team members. 
The report, being prepared by NDMA, is under progress and in final stage. The steps suggested / 
undertaken after the joint study will be made available to the Committee. Also, necessary action will be 
taken on the report of the study”. 
 
17. From the Action Taken Reply furnished, the Committee note with concern that no specific 
reply has been furnished by the Department on the recommendation of the Committee for 
commissioning a comprehensive study to assess the behaviour of Himalayan glaciers as well as the 
impact of the Hydro Electric Projects (HEP) if any, located in the region in causing Glacial Lake 
Outburst Floods. Keeping in view the ever increasing instances of mountain hazards/disasters, the 
Committee reiterate their recommendation that a comprehensive study be carried out for assessing 
the behaviour of Himalayan regions and the impact of the Hydro Electric Projects (HEP) in causing 
Glacial Lake Outburst Flood. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the 
Ministry in this regard within 3 months of presentation of this Report. 
  

13 
 
CHAPTER -  II 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
Recommendation 1  (Para 2.1) 
 
Analysis of Demands for Grants 
 
The Committee noted that a total budgetary allocation of Rs. 9022.57 crore comprising of expenditure of Rs. 
8700.80 crore under Revenue Section and Rs. 321.77 crore under Capital Section, had been made for the 
Ministry of Jal Shakti - Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation 
(DoWR, RD &GR) for the financial year 2021-22 to implement various schemes/projects which were under 
the administrative control of the DoWR, RD & GR. The Committee noted with concern that against the 
Department’s projected BE of Rs.13380.86 crore including Rs.12392.35 crore for schemes, due to resource 
constraints, allocation to the Department had been pegged at Rs. 9022.57 crore. The Committee further 
noted that during 2020-21, the budgetary allocation of Rs. 8960.39 crore made at BE stage was later revised 
to Rs. 7262.09 crore at RE stage. The overall budgetary allocation for Financial Year (FY) 2021-22 had 
shown less than 1 % increase i.e. a meagre increase of 0.69% as compared to the FY 2020-21 Budgetary 
Estimates (BE) which seemed to be grossly inadequate to meet the targets assigned to the Department. The 
Committee expressed their concern over the current financial state of the Department and its inability  in 
convincing Ministry of Finance to make adequate BE allocations, notwithstanding the fact that the Secretary, 
DoWR, RD & GR time and again flagged the issue of inadequate budget before the Committee. The 
Committee recommended the Ministry to take up the matter with Ministry of Finance so that the budgetary 
allocations is enhanced suitably to achieve the physical targets set during the year 2021-22. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Despite the fact that the Department was able to successfully meet the expenditure ceilings given by the 
Ministry of Finance for every month and quarter in the last fiscal year, the BE allocations of Rs. 8,960.39 
crore were reduced to Rs. 7,262.09 crore at RE stage due to constraints faced by Indian economy in the 
wake of pandemic COVID-19.  The BE allocation of Rs. 9,022.57 crore for FY 2021-22 is significantly less 
than the projected requirement of Rs. 13,380.86 crore.  In deference to the recommendation of Hon’ble 
Committee, the Department will take up the matter with Ministry of Finance to enhance the budgetary 
allocations to an adequate level at RE stage. 
 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2021-Bud/62 dated 02.08.2021) 
 
Recommendation 2 (Para 2.2) 
 
The Committee were constrained to note that most of the major Schemes under the Department had 
undergone a substantial cut of at least 25% in their budgetary allocations vis-a-vis 2020-21 (BE allocations) 
barring two schemes namely Development of Water Resources Information System and Atal Bhujal Yojana, 
which had witnessed substantial increase in budgetary allocations (25% and 65%. respectively) vis-a-vis 
2020-21 (BE allocations). The Committee had been apprised by the Department that due to truncated budget 
for 2020-21 at the RE stage, they could release only 10% of the advance payment against 40% to the States 
in some schemes, which was certainly a committed liability that would be carried forward to next fiscal year.  
The Committee were of the view that this would hurt the already strained finances of the State Governments. 
The Committee were of the view that cut in projected allocation by Rs. 4358.29 crore would compel the 
Department to scale down execution of schemes and might prevent the Department from launching any new 
programme/scheme in the Fiscal year 2021-22. The Committee therefore recommended that the Department 
should take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance to suitably raise allocation at the Revised Estimates 
(RE) stage so that the priorities and timelines set for implementation of programmes / schemes of the 
Department in the FY 2021-22 were not adversely affected. 
 
 
 

14 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Keeping in view the requirement of funds during FY 2021-22, which is significantly more than the BE 
allocation for 2021-22, the Department will take up the matter of enhancement of budgetary allocation with 
Ministry of Finance at RE stage as recommended by the Hon’ble Committee. 
 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2021-Bud/62 dated 02.08.2021) 
Recommendation 3 (Para 2.3) 
 
Under-Utilization of Budgetary Resources 
 
The Committee noted that over the years the Budgetary Support / allocation to the Department had been 
gradually decreasing at RE stage barring the fiscal year 2017-18. The Committee were of the opinion that 
continuous decrease in budgetary allocation at RE level was not only symptomatic of the poor financial 
planning by the Department but also render the original budgetary allocations losing their sanctity. It also 
indicated the inability of the Department to cash the cheques the Centre wrote. The Committee, therefore, 
recommended that the Department should focus on streamlining and strengthening the monitoring 
mechanisms and plug loop holes in the implementation of various schemes / programmes in order to ensure 
that the outlays earmarked for them were fully utilized and there might not be any scope for decrease at RE 
stage.  Further, the Department should diligently carry out pre-budget exercise and also applied best 
available methodology in making more pragmatic and prudent budgetary estimates in order to avoid major 
deviations at RE level.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Though the budgetary allocations to the Department may appear to be gradually decreasing at RE stage in 
absolute numbers, the reduction rate at RE stage has been gradually improving over the years. For FY 2020-
21, realistic projections of estimates for budgetary allocations were made but due to the constraints faced by 
the whole nation resulting from the unprecedented COVID-19 pandemic, BE level allocation of Rs. 8,960.39 
crore for FY 2020-21 was reduced to Rs. 7,262.09 crore at RE stage despite the fact that the Department 
was able to fully meet the expenditure ceilings given by Ministry of Finance for every month and quarter. The 
Department was able to incur an expenditure of Rs. 7,244.08 crore (i.e. 99.75% of RE allocations) in FY 
2020-21, despite lock-downs and expenditure curbs in the first half of FY 2020-21.  
 
With regard to the efforts for efficient utilization of budgetary allocation, the expenditure position is being 
monitored regularly at various levels to ensure optimum utilization of funds. The Department has also 
initiated an expenditure dashboard for regular monitoring and intervention of the senior management and 
heads of organizations. 
 
Programme Divisions are regularly coordinating with the State Governments at various levels through 
monitoring and field visits. Review meetings are also held with field offices/states/stakeholders to expedite 
the progress.  
 
Project Management Units (PMUs) have been set up under the schemes of National Hydrology Project 
(NHP), Atal Bhujal Yojana, Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana (PMKSY) etc. to ensure effective 
implementation and timely completion of projects with prudent utilization of funds.  
 
MEP/ QEP ceilings has also been fixed in consultation with the Programme Division for timely utilization of 
funds from the beginning of the financial year itself, so that, the expenditure is met as per need.   
Due to constant monitoring, the pace of expenditure has been healthy in the first quarter of current financial 
year and an amount of Rs 160.18 crore over and above the QEP limit of Rs 1,830.14 crore could be spent 
with the approval of Ministry of Finance. 
 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2021-Bud/62 dated 02.08.2021) 
 

15 
 
Recommendation 4 (Para 2.4) 
 
Increasing Committed Liability 
 
The Committee observed that out of total budgetary allocation of Rs. 9022.57 crore for FY 2021-22 in respect 
of the Department, as much as Rs. 3600 crore which was almost 40 % of the total allocation had been kept 
for repayment of loans and other liabilities under Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) leaving a 
net budgetary allocation of only Rs. 5422.57 crore for the various schemes /activities of the Department. 
Besides the Department had been permitted to borrow an amount of Rs. 5130 crore from the NABARD in BE 
2021-22 for bridging the resource gap.  The Committee were of the view that as the increase in committed 
liability of the Department on account of huge borrowing and servicing of loans, which was a large proportion 
of the budgetary allocation had greatly impaired the leverage of the Department in financing its ambitious and 
important projects. The Committee urged the Department to approach the Ministry of Finance for one time 
waiving off its committed liability so as to enable the Department to allocate more funds to the various 
important programmes which were facing resource crunch. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
steps taken by the Department in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
During 2016-17, ninety-nine (99) on-going Major/Medium irrigation projects under Pradhan Mantri Krishi 
Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) were prioritized in consultation with States, for completion in phases along with 
their Command Area Development & Water Management (CADWM) works. Funding mechanism through 
NABARD has been approved by the Government for both Central and State share, as many of the projects 
were held up due to financial constraints at that time. The main reason was the lack of matching availability 
of funds for the scheme at central level and State level through budgetary resources.  Many a time, 
resources for central share were available but the States concerned could not provide their matching share 
and vice versa. The LTIF loan from NABARD provided for has indeed been serving its purpose by providing 
assured central assistance whenever required, and also State share, wherever the States have availed this 
option. However, keeping in view the large proportion of budgetary allocation required for servicing of loan, 
as recommended by the Hon’ble Committee, the issue of one time waiver for the committed liabilities under 
LTIF loan from NABARD would be taken up by the Department with Ministry of Finance.  
 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2021-Bud/62 dated 02.08.2021) 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 5 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation 5 (Para 2.5) 
 
Atal Bhujal Yojana 
 
The Committee noted that a new scheme namely Atal Bhujal Yojana (ATAL JAL) as approved by the Cabinet 
in December, 2019 had been launched in FY 2020-21 with an outlay of Rs. 6,000 crore, to be implemented 
over a period of 5 years (2020-21 to 2024-25). Out of the total outlay of Rs. 6,000 crore, 50% would be in the 
form of loan from the World Bank and the balance 50% would be in the form of matching contribution from 
the Government of India. The objective of the Scheme was to improve the management of groundwater 
resources in the water stressed areas through community participation in identified priority areas in 7 States, 
viz. Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh, by way of 
promoting community led ground water management and behavioral changes with primary focus on demand 
side management. The Committee noted that for FY 2020-21, the BE was kept at Rs. 200 crore which was 
reduced at RE stage to Rs. 125 crore i.e. by 37.5 %. During evidence the Department stated that a token 
supplementary demand was proposed to be made in the ongoing Budget Session of Parliament and it was 
expected that the RE allocations would be fully utilized once enabling supplementary grant was made 
available, as many proposals are in readiness and awaiting approval. However, given the fact that upto the 
third quarter of FY 2020-21 ending on 31.12.2020, only 29% of revised allocation could be utilized by the 
Department, the Committee were not much confident that the entire RE allocation would be utilized by the 

16 
 
end of Financial Year 2020-21 i.e. till 31.3.2021.   The Committee further observed that though the scheme 
was being implemented in 80 districts of 7 States, at present all the over-exploited Blocks / Mandals / Taluks 
in 80 water stressed districts were not covered under the Scheme. The Committee did not agree with the 
Department's contention that the blocks and gram panchayats, in the identified districts, had been selected 
by the respective State Governments considering the prevailing hydrogeological conditions and criticality of 
ground water situation, since it was a pilot project, Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) should work more 
closely with State Governments to impress upon them to cover all the over-exploited blocks in the identified 
80 water stressed districts. The Committee also noted that a number of States like Punjab, Tamil Nadu and 
Delhi having large number of districts where more than 50 % of Assessment Units (Blocks, Firqas, Mandals, 
Taluks) which have been categorized as ‘Over-exploited’ as per Dynamic Ground Water Resources of India, 
2017 had not been covered under the scheme.  The Committee recommended that the scheme should be 
broad based and implemented at Pan India level so as to cover all the water scarce regions and districts of 
the country particularly in those states having large number of over-exploited blocks. The Committee would 
like to apprised of the action taken by the Department in this regard within 3 months of presentation of this 
report.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Being a unique scheme with emphasis on community participation and demand side management being 
implemented for the first time in the country, plans to upscale Atal Bhujal Yojana to water-stressed districts in 
other parts of the country need to be considered based on the lessons learnt from the implementation of the 
present Scheme and its efficacy in improving the sustainability of ground water resources. For this reason, 
expanding the scheme toother water stressed areas of the country is proposed to be discussed in the mid-
term review meeting, tentatively scheduled in 2022. 
It is also worth mentioning here that Uttar Pradesh has decided to implement Atal Bhujal Yojana in the entire 
State using their own funds. 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2021-Bud/62 dated 02.08.2021) 
 
Recommendation No. 6   (Para No. 2.6) 
Ground Water Management and Regulation  
 
The Committee noted that the Ground Water Management and Regulation Scheme had been launched with 
an objective for overall development, management and regulation of ground water in the country. However, 
the Committee observed that actual expenditure under this head had been lower vis-a-vis allocated funds 
especially against BE allocation. In FY 2016-17, the actual expenditure was only Rs. 112.25 crore as against 
BE of Rs. 303.39 crore. Similarly only 254.44 crore was spent against BE allocation of Rs. 500 crore in 2017-
18 and in FY 2018-19, only Rs. 260.20 crore was incurred against BE allocation of Rs. 450 crore.  The 
Committee also found that barring the financial year 2015-16, the budgetary allocations had been constantly 
reduced at RE level leaving lesser resources for carrying out the programme. Given the fact that the ground 
water levels in many parts of the country are rapidly depleting coupled with deteriorating water quality to a 
large extent, the Committee urged the Department to make concerted efforts for full utilization of allocated 
budgetary resources under  such an important Scheme. Further, the Committee recommended that the 
accountability should be fixed on the persons and implementing agencies for under-utilization of funds under 
the scheme as it had very implications for health of groundwater resources in the country. The Committee 
also found wide variation between BE and RE allocations under this scheme every year. For the year                   
2016-17, the BE allocation was Rs. 303.39 crore which was reduced to Rs. 115 crore at RE stage. Similarly, 
for 2017-18 and 2018-19, BE was pegged at Rs. 500 crore and 450 crore, whereas at RE stage it was 
reduced to Rs. 275 crore and Rs. 260 crore respectively. This indicated lack of proper financial planning and 
foresightedness on the part of the Department in estimating the actual requirements at the beginning of 
Financial year resulting in huge alteration in budgetary allocations at RE stage. Besides, frequent adjustment 
of the funds at RE stage undermined the budget credibility. The Committee therefore recommended the 
Department to take steps to streamline its budgetary estimation system so as to avoid huge variation in BE 
and RE allocations.  The Committee recommended that with a view to increasing the efficacy in the 

17 
 
implementation of the Scheme, the Ground Water Coordination Committees should also be constituted at 
District level as well. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
To ensure better utilization of the budgetary allocations, a Project Management Consultant (PMC) has been 
engaged in CGWB for streamlining various procurements. This has resulted in improved utilization of funds in 
2019-20 and there was no significant variation in BE and RE during this period. It is further submitted that 
since 2017-18, barring the year 2020-21 (impacted due to COVID-19 pandemic), an expenditure of around 
Rs.250 crore to Rs.275 crore is being incurred under the GWM&R scheme and all out efforts are being made 
to ensure full utilisation of the allocated budget. State Ground Water Coordination Committees have been 
constituted for effective sharing of outputs of NAQUIM programme with the State Governments. The point of 
constitution of Groundwater Co-ordination Committee at district level is noted for appropriate action. 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
Recommendation No. 8   (Para No. 2.8) 
 
Water Audit 
 
The Committee were pleased to note that the Ministry of Jal Shakti had notified the guidelines for regulation 
and control of ground water abstraction in India on 24.09.2020. These guidelines included mandatory 
provision for conducting annual water audit by industries using more than 100 Kilo Litres Per Day(KLD) of 
ground water which were required to reduce their fresh water consumption by 20% over a period of three 
years. However, the Committee found that Water audit by the industries was to be carried out using their own 
funds. The Committee recommended that steps should be taken by the Department to ensure that bulk water 
consuming industries are complying with these guidelines.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Water audit has been made mandatory for all the industries withdrawing ground water more than 100 Kilo 
Litres Per Day (KLD). Such industries are required to undertake annual water audit through Confederation of 
Indian Industries (CII)/ Federation Indian Chamber of Commerce and Industry (FICCI)/ National Productivity 
Council (NPC) certified auditors and submit audit reports to the Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) for 
renewal of NOC. The annual audit report will be examined by the Expert Appraisal Committee.  
 
While the implementation and effectiveness of “General Guidelines for Water Audit and Water Conservation” 
rest with the concerned State Governments, CWC facilitates State Governments to formulate their own 
region-specific, project-specific, system-specific or service-specific guidelines. All the State Governments 
have been asked to ensure compliance in implementation of guidelines for ground water use. 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2021-Bud/62 dated 02.08.2021) 
Recommendation No. 9 (Para No. 2.9) 
 
Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme (AIBP) 
 
The Committee noted that 99 projects in 7 phases had been prioritized for completion by December 2019 
under the AIBP.  However, as on as on 31.12.2020, only 44 Projects could be completed under the scheme 
despite taking a huge loan of Rs. 37,061.77 crore (including central assistance and state share loan through 
NABARD) between the years 2016-17 till 2020-21 from NABARD for financing these Projects. The 
Committee were apprehensive that going by the pace at which these projects were being constructed, it 
would take decades to complete the envisaged projects. Since the financing of these Projects were done 
through LTIF by way of loan, the Committee recommended that  Department should take steps to streamline 
and strengthen its monitoring mechanism and use latest technologies and to plug the loopholes and the 

18 
 
deficiencies observed in the implementation of the projects, so that all the pending  projects were completed 
within the revised schedule and that there were not further cost and time over-runs.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department is seized of the above issue highlighted by the Hon’ble Committee. In this regard, the 
following steps have been taken to seek time bound implementation of the projects, within the prescribed 
cost: 
 
I. Assured funding is being done through Long Term Irrigation Fund (LITF), by loan from NABARD, 
not only for Central Share, but also for State Share, Both central assistance and State share for 
these projects are being provided from NABARD under LTIF. State share is being provided at an 
interest rate of 6% and rest of the interest cost is borne by the Central Government. 
J. Further, the procedure for approval of revised cost for providing central assistance for these 
prioritized projects has been simplified as below: 
iv. No separate clearance/Advisory Committee clearance/Investment Clearance is required for 
funding of the projects, which have cost escalation of upto 20% on approved cost (AIBP 
component) as on 01.04.2012 and no separate investment clearance form DoWR, RD& GR 
is required.  
v. Fast track proforma clearance from Central Water Commission (CWC) is sufficient for 
projects where revised cost may be more than the 20% over and above approved cost as on 
01.04.2012 and no separate investment clearance from DoWR, RD & GR is required. 
 
vi. Further, cost escalation over and above 20% on approved cost as on 01.04.2012 shall be 
borne by the concerned State Government for which it can avail loan from NABARD under 
Long Term Irrigation Fund (LTIF). While one time 20% increase in the estimated cost of the 
99 projects (and 7 phases) has been inbuilt in the scheme at the time of its formulation, in 
case cost enhancement is required afterwards, a simplified Fast Track Proforma Clearance 
mechanism has been prescribed, though the central assistance amount does not change. 
K. Each of the 99 prioritised projects, right till its completion, is reviewed at various levels. During 
reviews, the bottlenecks are identified and measures to overcome them, are deliberated upon. 
 
L. The Department has also made efforts to resolve the issues pertaining to other agencies of 
Government of India, such as Railways, National Highway, Environment & Forests, etc. which are 
causing delay in completion of the 99 prioritised projects.  
 
M. The delay in completion of irrigation projects occurs due to various reasons such as paucity of 
funds, inter-State issues, delay in land acquisition and environment and forest clearance, 
rehabilitation & resettlement issues, contractual & local disputes etc.  
 
N. To avoid land acquisition, the Department has propagated large scale adoption of underground 
piped network for distribution system. In order to guide the concerned State Departments, 
guidelines for the same have also been published by Central Water Commission and circulated to 
the States. 
 
O. An online MIS has been developed for updating the progress and facilitate review of the projects. 
 
P. Remote sensing based monitoring is being done through Bhaskaracharya Institute of Space 
Applications and Geoinformatics”. 
 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2021-Bud/62 dated 02.08.2021) 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 

19 
 
Recommendation No. 10 (Para No. 2.10) 
 
Repair, Renovation and Restoration (RRR) of Water Bodies 
 
The Committee noted that RRR was a part of Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchai Yojana (PMKSY) - Har Khet Ko 
Pani (HKKP) Programme, the objective of which was revival of irrigation potential by improvement and 
restoration of water bodies along with other multiple objectives such as enhancing the tank storage capacity, 
ground water recharge, increased availability of drinking water, improvement of catchment of tank commands 
etc. It coverd rural water bodies having minimum water spread area of 5.0 hectare and urban water bodies 
having water spread area from 2.0 hectare to 10.0 hectare. The Committee noted that at present the funding 
pattern under RRR scheme is 90 (central): 10 (State) for seven North Eastern States including Sikkim & 
three Hilly states (Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir and Uttarakhand), while for General Category 
States/UTs excluding the special areas it is 25 (central): 75 (State). For project benefiting special areas, it is 
60 (central): 40 (State). Considering the precarious financial situation of the States which was accentuated by 
COVID-19 pandemic, the Committee urged upon the Department to take up the matter with the Ministry of 
Finance for exploring the feasibility of changing the funding pattern to 90 (central): 10 (State) under the 
scheme. The Committee were concerned to note that under RRR scheme, against the release of Central 
Assistance (CA) of Rs. 79.65 crore during FY 2017-18, 30.601 thousand Ha of Irrigation Potential (IP) was 
created. However in the year 2019-20, as against CA of Rs. 64.79 crore made available, IP of only 5.274 
thousand Ha could be created which was grossly inadequate. The Committee would, therefore, like to be 
apprised of reasons such a huge reduction in IP creation in 2019-20 vis-a-vis that of the year 2017-18. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In the continuation of the scheme during the period of 15thFinance Commission, i.e., 2021-2026, key 
revisions are proposed to make the scheme more attractive to the State Governments, and also to make it 
more inclusive, so that many States who have not shown much initiative in this regard, may also come 
forward. 
Regarding reduction in IP creation during 2019-2020 vis-à-vis 2017-18, the reasons are as follows: 
a. Development cost for Repair, Restoration and Renovation of water bodies (RRR) is estimated to be 
about Rs. 1 to 1.25 lakh per hectare. With this yardstick, the creation of IP of 5,274 hectares against 
central assistance (CA) released of Rs. 64.79 crore appears to be reasonable. 
b. Further, the funding mechanism is such that initially a major part of CA is released as advance, which 
is then utilized by the States. If the mechanism spills over the financial year barrier, then there could 
be mismatch in year-wise IP creation, versus CA released. 
c. IP for 2019-20 may further increase subsequently, as in some cases, the reporting gets delayed.  
d. Further, for many schemes, the funding pattern is 25(C): 75(S). Thus, it being not attractive in many 
cases, the States complete the scheme from their own resources also, due to which the correlation 
between CA released and IP creation, gets distorted.  
The funding mechanism of the scheme is such that advance payment is given to the State Government. The 
recommendations of the Committee for 90 (central):10 (State) share has been noted. 
 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2021-Bud/62 dated 02.08.2021) 
Recommendation No. 11 (Para No. 2.11) 
 
In so far as encroachment of water bodies and their unabated pollution, the Committee did not agree with the 
contention of the Department that the works related to protection and conservation and abatement of 
pollution in Water Bodies, came under the purview of State Government concerned. Considering the fact that 
central assistance was being provided to the States for taking repair, renovation and restoration of water 
bodies, the Department could not escape from its obligation by shifting the onus to the States on the plea that 
it belonged to States. The Committee, therefore, called upon the Department to take proactive measures in 
consultation with the respective States to prevent encroachments of water bodies and to abate pollution in 
water bodies.   
Reply of the Government 
 

20 
 
The issue lies primarily in the domain of the State Government concerned. However, in order to nudge and 
facilitate the State Governments in this regard, the scheme of Repair, Renovation and Restoration of Water 
Bodies is being implemented by this Department, whereby financial support is provided. All the water bodies 
included under the RRR of Water Bodies scheme for the release of Central Assistance (CA) are 
encroachment free. Under Jal Shakti Abhiyan launched on 22.03.2021, the State Governments have been 
asked to undertake mapping of water bodies and take steps for removal of their encroachment. 
 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2021-Bud/62 dated 02.08.2021) 
Recommendation No. 12   (Para No. 2.12) 
 
MICRO IRRIGATION 
 
The Committee noted that under CADWM scheme the Department of Water Resources, River Development 
& Ganga Rejuvenation provided financial assistance to the States for creation of Micro irrigation 
infrastructure in the canal irrigated commands.  It was provisioned in the CADWM scheme that micro–
irrigation shall cover at least 10% of the targeted CCA of the Project. Central Assistance @ 50% were being 
provided with a cost norm of Rs.50,000 per hectare for development of micro irrigation infrastructure covering 
construction of sump, installation of water pump, and laying of piped conveyance system up to the field head. 
The Committee were concerned to note that out of total CCA of 610000 hectares targeted to be developed 
with micro-irrigation infrastructure only 2.5% of Culturable command area (CCA) i.e. 15000 Ha had been 
developed till December, 2020.  The Department had also informed that besides CADWM, under the extant 
scheme of PMKSY- Per Drop More Crop (PDMC) operated by Ministry of Agriculture and Farmer Welfare, 
the farmers could also avail financial assistance for installing devices – such as sprinkler/ rain gun/ drip sets 
etc. However, unwillingness of farmers to adopt micro-irrigation owing to high initial cost of micro-irrigation 
infrastructure was cited as the major constraint.  The Committee were of the view that owing to the fact that 
agriculture sector was the biggest water consuming sector in India and that adverse impact of irrigation 
through conventional methods had manifested in the form of fast depletion of groundwater, water logging and 
declining soil health, micro-irrigation was the only way forward to achieve sustainability in agriculture sector. 
Therefore, the Committee recommended that the Ministry in consultation with Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare should find ways and means to propagate the micro irrigation by encouraging and 
incentivizing the farmers  to adopt micro irrigation by hiking/enhancing the capital subsidies, and if necessary, 
review and revamp the CADWM scheme.  Further the Department should make concerted efforts for 
convergence of the scheme with other schemes to reduce the high capital cost of micro irrigation equipment.  
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendations of the Committee has been noted and efforts would be made in the matter in 
consultation with Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare.  
 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2021-Bud/62 dated 02.08.2021) 
 
Recommendation No. 13  (Para No. 2.13) 
 
Namami Gange 
 
The Committee noted that the Government of India had launched the Namami Gange Programme to 
accomplish the twin objectives of effective abatement of pollution, conservation and rejuvenation of the 
National River Ganga and its tributaries with a total budgetary outlay of Rs.20,000 crore for the period from 
FY 2014 -15 till 31.12.2020. However, out of the earmarked amount of Rs.20,000 crore under the scheme, a 
total of Rs.9,781.38 crore had been spent under the various components till 31st December 2020. The 
Committee further noted that under the Namami Gange Programme, as on 31.1.2021, a total of 335 Projects 
had been sanctioned at an estimated cost of Rs. 29,578.05 crore, out of which expenditure of Rs. 10016.91 
had been spent.  Further, the Committee noted that since 2011, towards cleaning of Ganga, 156 Sewerage 
infrastructure projects (118 on main stem of Ganga and 38 on tributaries of Ganga) had been taken up with a 
sanctioned cost of Rs. 23521.27 crore for creation of new sewage treatment capacity of 3,785.46 Million 
Litres per Day (MLD), rehabilitation of 1081.89 MLD capacity and laying of around 5066.02 KM sewerage 

21 
 
network. However, as on December 2020, only 56 of these projects had been completed resulting in creation 
of 789.9 MLD of Sewerage Treatment Plant (STP) capacity (just around 21% of envisaged target) and laying 
of 3347.23 KM sewage network implying around 66%. of the target.  The Committee while appreciating the 
progress made under Namami Gange Programme, however, were constrained to observe that the 
implementation of this Programme had not been able to keep pace with the envisaged timelines. Taking 
cognizance of the slow pace of implementation of the projects and consequent lower expenditure incurred, 
the Committee urged upon the Department to make all out efforts so that Projects may now be completed in 
a time bound manner without any further delay and cost overruns.  The Committee recommended that  a 
Study be commissioned to analyse and assess the conditions of river beds on the basis of which, efforts may 
be made to maintain an optimum level of river bed. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The NMCG is continuously striving to complete projects/schemes taken up under Namami Gange Program 
within the schedule time period and within approved costs. As a result, most of the projects which have been 
sanctioned are being completed within the sanctioned timelines and mostly within the sanctioned amounts. 
The programme has gained momentum and utilization of funds has substantially picked up since FY 2017-
18.The projects and schemes will be continued to be completed to the best possible extent within the laid 
down timeline and approved cost. So far as the recommendation to analyse and assess the condition of river 
beds through study is concerned, it is informed that: 
1.  The Himalayan rivers are characterized by exceptionally high sediment flux from the tectonically active 
hinterland. Apart from high sediment production, monsoon rainfall in the Himalayan hinterland further brings 
these sediments down into the alluvial reaches of the rivers where lower slopes and wider channels 
encourage natural deposition of sediments. As a result, many rivers have been aggrading through time in 
their alluvial reaches, thereby raising the river bed level. This often results into severe disasters such as 
frequent avulsion (rapid shifting of rivers) and extensive flooding. The human interventions such as dams and 
barrages have further aggravated the problem. 
2.  High sediment flux in these rivers is the primary cause for the rise in river bed indicating that sediment 
management should be an important component of river management strategies for the Himalayan 
rivers. Identification of aggradational stretches (rising river bed) must be done through historical analysis of 
satellite images and available maps, and focus should be on the long-term trend rather than one-time 
mapping. In addition to mapping the hotspots of aggradation, the associated processes such as channel 
dynamics and bank erosion should also be investigated and the causal factors (natural vs anthropogenic) 
should be established. Sediment management, based on strong understanding of sediment dynamics, 
should become an essential part of river management strategies. It important to understand the root cause of 
exceptionally high sediment flux from the rivers which leads to rise in the river bed. Since several Himalayan 
rivers are trans boundary rivers, an integrated assessment of land cover changes, erosion and sedimentation 
at the trans-boundary level must be initiated. Strategic silt removal may be required in many reaches marked 
as ‘hotspots’ to maintain the sediment regime of the river, particularly the river level, to an acceptable level 
and to prevent any serious disaster. All ecological hotspots along the river should be monitored closely. The 
first level zoning of all such habitats needs to be carried out before planning any desilting activities and these 
areas should be excluded from the plans. 
3.      It is also informed that morphological studies play an important role in knowing the nature of rivers 
which helps in planning, designing and maintaining of flood protection/river training works and water 
resources projects. The morphological studies help in finding the vulnerable spots for bank 
erosion/deposition. The study of river morphology and implementation of suitable river training works have 
become imperative as large areas of the country are affected by floods every year causing severe damage to 
life and property in spite of existing flood control measure taken both by Central and State Governments. 
Problems are aggregating mainly due to large quantity of silt/sediment being carried and deposited in its 
downstream reaches of river. The special behavior of the river needs to be thoroughly understood for 
evolving effective strategies to overcome the problem posed by it. 
 
This Department, through various organisations, carry out studies on rivers from time to time.   The studies 
carried out in the recent past are as under: 
 

22 
 
Central Water Commission initiated morphological study of various rivers starting from Xth Plan using 
remote sensing technique through consultancy services from various institutions. Morphological studies of 
following sixteen rivers have been completed so far and study of two rivers are going on: 
 
 
Sl. No. Name of River Name of Institution Status 
1 Gandak CWPRS, Pune Completed 
2 Ghagara  
NIH, Roorkee 
Completed 
3 Satluj Completed 
4 Tapi SVNIT, Surat Completed 
5 Ganga  
IIT, Roorkee 
Completed 
6 Sharda Completed 
7 Rapti Completed 
8 Mahanadi  
 
IIT, Kharagpur 
Completed 
9 Mahananda Completed 
10 Hooghly Completed 
11 Brahmaputra  
 
IIT, Guwahati 
Completed 
12 Subansiri Completed 
13 Pagladia Completed 
14 Krishna  
IIT, Madras 
Completed 
15 Tungabhadra Completed 
16 Yamuna  
 
IIT, Delhi 
Study of Yamuna 
completed and that 
of Kosi and Bagmati 
is going on. 
17 Kosi 
18 Bagmati 
 
Central Water Commission is also taking cross sections of 14 rivers (namely Ganga, Kosi, Gandak, Bagmati, 
Sharda, Mahananda, Ghaghara, Krishna, Tungabhadra, Mahanadi, Brahmaputra, Subansiri, Tapi and 
Yamuna) at selective locations every year and variations in river bed level are monitored.  These 
morphological studies remain basis for various interventions and works undertaken in river reaches including 
those related to bank protection and river bed restoration activities through controlled dredging for 
maintaining river connectivity and navigation. 
4. Geolgical Safeguarding:  Geological Safeguarding is important for Ganga river basin management. 
Erosion and siltation are natural phenomenon. Erosion is removal of soil, sediment and rock fragments from 
the earth surface.  Siltation is settling of suspended silt particles in river due to reduction in flow velocity 
either due to lower gradient or widening of the channel.  Erosion and siltation are related to the gradient of 
the terrain from extremely steep mountainous torrents (upper reach) to steep rivers at foothill (middle reach) 
and rivers in plains (lower reach). Upper, middle and lower reach correspond to erosion, regime and 
aggradations states respectively.  

23 
 
Attempts towards understanding of aggradation and degradation process in river beds have been done in the 
past by the Ministry. Various committees have been constituted and seminars held in this respect. Brief 
summary of some of them are as under:- 
i. Committee to Study Problems of Siltation in Rivers (Mittal Committee): D/o Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation, set up a multi-disciplinary Committee (Mittal Committee) in year 
2002 under the Chairmanship of Dr. B.K. Mittal, former Chairman, Central Water Commission, to 
identify cause and extent of siltation in rivers, suggest measures to minimize siltation, examine as to 
whether desilting is a technically feasible measure to minimize magnitude of floods in rivers, suggest 
appropriate technology/ methods of desilting of rivers if found technically feasible, find economic 
viability of desilting of rivers, propose a realistic operational programme in a time bound manner and 
other related aspects. The Committee concluded that: 
➢ Dredging in general has been found to be inadequate and should not be resorted to, particularly 
in major rivers;  
➢ There are of course some locations such as tidal rivers, confluence points and the likes, which 
can be tackled by desilting after thorough examination;  
➢ Selective dredging is suggested depending upon local condition; and  
➢ Desilting of river can marginally minimize the magnitude of flood and be effective only for a short 
period.  
ii. A Task Force under the chairmanship of Chairman, CWC to look into the problem of recurring floods in 
Assam and neighboring States as well as Bihar, West Bengal and eastern Uttar Pradesh was set up in 
the year 2004. The Task Force, considering various aspects and the cost involved in desilting of rivers 
by earth moving equipment or the dredgers, recommended that desilting operations may be carried out 
for improvement of carrying capacity of drainage channels downstream of the sluices at their outfall into 
the rivers and in upstream reaches selectively, if absolutely essential. Desilting at the mouth of the 
tributaries out falling into the main rivers, at the mouths of the rivers out falling into the sea and at other 
critical locations may also be taken up selectively after detailed studies.  
 
iii. D/o Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation had also constituted a Committee to 
prepare guidelines for desiltation of river Ganga from Bhimgauda (Uttrakhand) to Farakka (West 
Bengal) under the chairmanship of ShriMadhavChitale (Expert Member, NGRBA) in July, 2016. The 
other members of the committee were: Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation, Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change and 
Dr.MukeshSinha, Director, Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune. The committee was 
asked to establish difference between desilting and sand mining and also to establish need for desilting 
for ecology and e-flow of river Ganga. The committee submitted its report “Guidelines for desiltation 
works in Ganga from Bhimgauda to Farraka” in February, 2017 which has been shared with the States. 
iv. Further, D/o Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation, organised a one day 
conference on ‘Sediment Management in Indian Rivers’ on March 17, 2017 at Central Soil & Materials 
Research Station (CSMRS), HauzKhas, New Delhi, with the objective to comprehensively deliberate 
issues related to sedimentation of Indian rivers with all the stake-holders and develop an appropriate 
policy.  Subsequently, a Policy on Sediment Management, July-2017, has been prepared by 
Department of Water Resources, River development & Ganga Rejuvenation and published on the 
website of D/o Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation. 
5.0  Studies in Ganga Basin under NamamiGangeProgramme:  Department of Earth Sciences, IIT 
Kanpur undertook a pilot study on “Rapid Assessment of Sand Mining and its Impact on The Ganga River 
using Drone Technology” in Raiwala to Bhogpur stretch of river Ganga in Haridwar, Uttrakhand under 
Namami Gange programme. This pilot project provided basis for evolving a policy for sand mining in this 
reach. This pilot project has utilized historical remote sensing data as well as drone technology which have 
provided important insights about the geomorphic processes operating in the region (Raiwala to 
Bhogpurstretch of Haridwar, Uttarakhand). The pilot study offers scope for additional guidelines related to 
sand mining based on reference state i.e. a minimum acceptable morphological and ecological state of the 

24 
 
river, identification of aggradational stretch for mining, depth of mining based on sand budget at particular 
location, river bed mining in selected patches to maintain riffle-pool structure longitudinally etc. 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur is also carrying out studies titled ‘Geomorphic and Ecological Impacts 
of Sand Mining in Large Rivers as revealed from high resolution historical remote sensing data and drone 
surveys: Assessment, Analysis and Mitigation’. Major objective of the study are assessment of geomorphic 
and ecological impacts of sand mining on rivers using satellite images and historical data sets supplemented 
with drone surveys, assessment of associated hazards such as flash floods and bank erosion caused by 
indiscriminate sand mining superimposed by hydrological changes, integration of data for identification of 
hotspots of degradation in river catchments and suggestions for mitigation measures and formulation of 
region-specific policy guidelines for sand mining based on scientific understanding. 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2021-Bud/62 dated 02.08.2021) 
 
Recommendation No. 14   (Para No. 2.14) 
 
Clean Ganga Fund (CGF) 
 
The Committee observed that Clean Ganga Fund was constituted with the approval of Union Cabinet with 
the aim of raising contributions from the public, residents, Non Resident Indians (NRIs), Persons of Indian 
Origin (PIO) and others for financing various activities related to Ganga Rejuvenation. In January 2015, a 
Trust had been created under the Chairmanship of the Union Finance Minister for operationalisation of CGF. 
As per the trust deed of the CGF, the Board of the Trust should ordinarily meet once in three months or as 
often as might be necessary for the satisfactory conduct of the affairs of the Trust. However, the Committee 
were constrained to note that the trust had met only thrice since its constitution in the year 2015.  Further the 
Committee found that there was an expenditure of just 0.29 crore against corpus of Rs. 57.70 crore in the 
year 2017-18, Rs. 54.66 crore of expenditure against total fund of Rs. 114.88 crore in the year 2018-19 and 
35.85 crore expenditure against the corpus of Rs. 67.49 crore in the year 2019-20 which went to show poor 
utilization of funds. The Committee desired that Board of Trust should meet more often and at periodic 
intervals so as to monitor the progress of the fund activities and step up utilization of funds covered under the 
CGF.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The progress made in activities taken up under Clean Ganga Fund is regularly reviewed. The 
recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee is noted and the Board of Trustees meeting would be convened 
more frequently. 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2021-Bud/62 dated 02.08.2021) 
 
Recommendation No. 15  (Para No. 2.15) 
 
National Water Mission 
 
The Committee found that under the scheme 'Research and Development and Implementation of National 
Water Mission', there was gross under- utilization of budgetary allocations during last 5 years. While during 
FY 2015-16, the actual utilization was only 33.7% against the BE allocation of Rs. 20 crore, it drastically fell 
to 7.8% of budgetary allocation of Rs. 15 crore in FY 2017-18 and in FY 2018-19, it was 29.80% of the 
budgetary provision of Rs. 20.10 crore. It was only during the FY 2019-20 that there was substantial 
utilization of funds to the extent of 86.8% of budgetary provision of Rs. 5 Crore. However, on the other hand, 
the Committee found that simultaneously, the budgetary provision for NWM which was Rs. 20 crore in the 
year 2015-16 had been curtailed drastically to Rs. only 5 crore in FY 2019-20. For fiscal year 2021-22, an 
amount of Rs. 8 crore had been allocated for the Scheme. The Committee found it difficult to comprehend 
such a huge reduction in budget allocation to such an important scheme when compared to the BE allocation 
of Rs. 20 crore given in the year 2015-16.  The  Mission Director, NWM during the oral evidence on the 
subject “Groundwater: A Valuable But Diminishing Resource” held on 18.1.2021 appealed to the Committee 

25 
 
for augmentation of budgetary resources and bestowing more functional autonomy for effectively carrying out 
the mandate of the Scheme. The Secretary of the Department during the evidence held on 23.2.2021 in 
connection with the examination of the DFG (2021-22) had also admitted that the programme 'Jal Shakti 
Abhiyan' to be launched under NWM next year would need more funds and the ways and means were being 
explored to fund it. The Committee were constrained to observe that though the National Water Mission had 
been established by the Government of India as one of the eight National Missions under the National Action 
Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC), nevertheless it had not been able to achieve the desired outcomes. The 
Mission had also been plagued by lower budgetary support. The Committee recommended that with a view 
to accomplish the objectives of the National Water Mission i.e. conservation of water, minimizing wastage 
and ensuring its more equitable distribution both across and within States through integrated water resources 
development and management in a time-bound manner, adequate funding should be provided and more 
functional and financial autonomy should be bestowed upon NWM in order to enable the Mission to 
discharge its functions effectively and achieve the goals set under the Mission. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In the previous years, due to limitations of administrative and financial powers, shortage of regular 
officers/staff and reduction in budget, NWM had not been able to realize its full potential. However, the 
National Water Mission (NWM) has been strengthened over the period of time. Presently, it is headed by an 
officer of the Additional Secretary level. Regular officers of the level of JAG, STS etc. have also been posted 
to strengthen the functioning of NWM to achieve its objectives.  In addition, domain experts/ consultants/ 
young professionals (YPs) have also been hired through outsourcing.  A proposal regarding administrative 
and functional autonomy of NWM will be considered in view of the Committee’s recommendation. Allocations 
under the scheme would be enhanced depending on the pace of expenditure and components under the 
approved scheme. 
   
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2021-Bud/62 dated 02.08.2021) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 16 (Para No. 2.16) 
 
National Bureau of Water Use Efficiency (NBWUE) 
 
The Committee noted that the “National Bureau of Water Use Efficiency (NBWUE)” was proposed to be set 
up through a notification under Article 3(3) of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. The proposed Bureau 
would have the overall responsibility of improving water use efficiency across various sectors namely 
irrigation, drinking water supply, power generation, industries, cities etc. in the whole country. From the 
written submission made by the Department in connection with the examination of DFG (2021-22) the 
Committee found that a note regarding the setting up of NBWUE had been prepared and circulated for inter-
ministerial consultation.  It had been further stated that it was a time consuming process as it involved 
consultation with stakeholders concerned and that since the proposal was at a nascent stage, no financial 
allocation could be made in FY 2021-22.   The Committee in this regard would like to recapitulate the 
chronology of events regarding efforts for setting up NBWUE.  In the year 2013, an allocation of  Rs. 50 crore 
had been made for the purpose of setting up NBWUE after approval from EFC in XII Plan itself. Further, a 
draft cabinet note was approved by the Hon’ble Minister (W,RD&GR) which was circulated for inter-
ministerial consultations to concerned Ministries vide O.M. No. 11/8/2012-NWM dated 12.05.2015 and the  
responses were also received. However, it was then stated by the Department that clarifications as sought by 
NITI Ayog, MoEF & CC and PMO were under consideration of the Ministry.  The Committee found that in its 
latest written submission to the Committee, the Department was silent as to what progress had been made 
regarding those clarifications sought by NITI Ayog, MoEF&CC and PMO.  Taking cognizance of the aforesaid 
chronology of events, the Committee couldnot but conclude that the Department had displayed callous and 
lackadaisical attitude in establishment of proposed National Bureau of Water use efficiency. The Committee, 
considering the importance and role of increased water use efficiency in framing a critical response to 
growing water scarcity in the country including the need to maintain sustainability of water resources 
including water bodies and sustain water ecosystems and in meeting the growing demands of cities and 
industries, reiterated its recommendation to make all out efforts to set up NBWUE with statutory powers at 

26 
 
the earliest without any further delay as it would play a significant role in improving water use efficiency and 
also  making users accountable for wastage of water. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A proposal for setting up of National Bureau of Water Use Efficiency (NBWUE) was referred Ministry of 
Finance, as it involves creation of additional posts, which has sought additional input/clarification.  The 
observations and recommendation of Hon’ble Committee have been noted and the Department will make 
renewed efforts for setting up of NWBUE. 
 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2021-Bud/62 dated 02.08.2021) 
 
Recommendation No. 17   (Para No. 2.17) 
 
National Hydrology Project (NHP) 
 
The Committee noted that NHP is a Central Sector Scheme, with 100% grant to the States with World Bank 
Assistance to the tune of 50% of the project cost for establishment of National Water Informatics Centre 
(NWIC) as a repository of nation-wide water resources data. It has pan India coverage with 50 Implementing 
Agencies (IAs) (including 11 from Central Government and 39 from States).  The Committee were 
disheartened to observe that there was a persistently under-utilization of budgetary allocations under the 
scheme during the last few years.  In the year 2016-17, actual expenditure was only Rs. 51.77 crore as 
against budgetary allocation of Rs. 165 crore. Similarly, there was an expenditure of mere Rs. 177.89 crore 
and Rs. 79.22 crore vis-a-vis BE allocation of Rs. 300 crore and Rs. 250 crore during FY 2017-18 and 2018-
19 respectively. It was only in the FY 2019-20, there was substantial utilization of funds i.e. Rs. 144.71 crore 
against BE provision of Rs. 150 crore. The Department had attributed reasons for poor utilisation to the 
preparatory work in initial years of formation of NHP such as building capacity of Implementing Agencies 
(IAs), establishment of State Project Monitoring Units (SPMUs) and delay in procurement process in later 
years for under-utilization of funds.   It had been stated that preparatory work of initial years had began to 
show positive results from FY 2019-20 resulting in accelerating the pace of expenditure.  The Committee also 
found wide disparity between BE and RE in respect of the National Hydrology Project except for the year 
2019-20 when BE and RE allocation had remained the same i.e. Rs. 150 crore. The Committee 
recommended that the Department should maintain budgetary discipline,  and undertook proper pre-Budget 
planning and exercises and also made necessary changes in its procedure for budgetary estimations so that 
prudent budgetary allocations were projected / made at BE stage and strive for full utilization of budgetary 
allocations made. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is submitted that presently the project has picked up the pace which is noticed from the physical progress 
and the related commitment in respect of various activities by the implementing agencies. National Project 
Management Unit is working to provide support and enhance capacity building of the Implementing Agencies 
for effective utilization of funds. The reduction in RE is primarily due to the expenditure ceilings set by the 
Ministry of Finance in the first half of the FY 2020-21. Against Revised Estimate of Rs. 135 crore under NHP 
for the financial year 2020-21, total expenditure incurred was Rs. 134.44 crore. Considering the status of 
various activities under execution, NHP would be in a position to fully utilize the BE 2021-22 of Rs. 200 crore. 
 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2021-Bud/62 dated 02.08.2021) 
 
Recommendation No. 18   (Para No. 2.18) 
 
The Committee also noted that a number of Implementing Agencies (IAs) were facing constraints in carrying 
out their job on account of outsourcing under NHP and that National Project Monitoring Unit (NPMU) and 
Technical Assistance and Management Consultancy (TAMC) were making efforts to support such 
Implementing Agencies. The Committee could not but emphasise the pivotal role played by the NHP in 

27 
 
providing an enabling platform to the various Implementing agencies on pan-India basis for taking informed 
decisions related to scientific management of precious water resources in the country. However, limitations of 
under-utilization of budgetary allocations and shortage of adequate manpower in number of IAs were stated 
to be major bottlenecks in the implementation of the NHP. The Committee, therefore, recommended that the 
Department should take suitable measures for effective utilization of funds and addressed the problems 
arising out of lack of adequate staff in implementing the NHP programme, so that the NHP achieve its 
intended objectives, for which it had been set up. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Various measures have been undertaken under NHP to accelerate the progress and for effective utilization of 
funds.  For addressing the problems arising out of lack of adequate staff with the Implementing Agencies, not 
only support from the Central level is being extended but also provision for hiring of incremental manpower 
specifically for executing NHP activities has been made. provided to all the Implementing Agencies and they 
are being sensitized to effectively utilize these provisions.  
 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2021-Bud/62 dated 02.08.2021) 
 
 
Recommendation No. 19  (Para No. 2.19) 
 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) 
 
From the written submission made by the Department, the Committee had come to learn that the details / 
data regarding the quantum of CSR funds both in absolute terms and percentage wise earmarked and spent 
on water conservation and ground water recharge schemes by the Water Intensive Industries were not 
maintained by the Department.  The Committee recommended that Department should take up this issue 
very seriously and set up an exclusive cell in the Department to compile the data and also monitor and 
analyse the trends of amount spent by the industries both PSUs and  Private companies on water 
conservation and ground water recharge schemes.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation regarding setting up of an exclusive cell to compile,monitor and analyze the amount 
spent by the water intensive industries both PSUs and private companies on water conservation and ground 
water recharge schemes has been noted for appropriate action. 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2021-Bud/62 dated 02.08.2021) 
 
Recommendation No. 20  (Para No. 2.20) 
 
The Committee observed that in the year 2017-18 an amount of Rs. 302.95 crore was spent by WAPCOS on 
CSR activities, of which around 8.27% (Rs. 25.08 crore) was spent on water conservation scheme.  In the 
year 2019-20, though the total expenditure by the Company on CSR rose to 390.10 crore, however, the 
expenditure on water conservation schemes was reduced to Rs. 19.50 crore which was just 5% of the total 
expenditure. The Department had stated that the corporate social responsibility policy of the WAPCOS was 
governed by the guidelines issued by Department of Public Enterprises and Ministry of Corporate Affairs, 
from time to time. The Committee, while taking cognizance of the fact that the Union Minister for Jal 
Shakti  himself had lamented over the fact that only 4 percent of CSR funds were spent on water, the 
Committee recommended that the Department should approach the Department of Public Enterprises and 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs and persuaded them to allow WAPCOS which is operating in water sector to 
spend more of its CSR funds on water conservation related schemes. Further, apart from providing the 
funds, the corporate sector should also share their expertise and technical knowledge in the field of water 
conservation with State agencies for carrying out their various water conservation programmes. The 
Committee also recommended that the Department should take appropriate steps for incentivizing the 
corporate sector to encourage them to liberally contribute in development of water sector.  Further, the 
Ministry of Jal Shakti might also approach and hold consultation with the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry 

28 
 
of Corporate Affairs to frame a suitable policy for providing various concessions like tax relief, tax holiday etc. 
for corporate houses including the startups desirous of undertaking water conservation and other related 
moves in the field of water sector.   
Reply of the Government 
 
In reference to the amount of CSR funds spent by WAPCOS as mentioned in the recommendation, it would 
be appropriate to mention that the actual amount spent by WAPCOS on CSR is as under:- 
 
 
2017-18:- 
Total amount - Rs. 3.029 crore 
Spent on water - Rs. 0.250 crore 
Percentage (Spent on water of the total expenditure) – 8.27% 
2018-19:- 
Total amount - Rs. 3.980 crore 
Spent on water - Rs. 0.128 crore 
Percentage (Spent on water of the total expenditure) – 3.22% 
 
2019-20:- 
Total amount - Rs. 3.901 crore 
Spent on water - Rs. 0.195 crore 
Percentage (Spent on water of the total expenditure) - 5% 
 
2020-21:-  
Total amount - Rs. 1.648 crore (Provisional-Unaudited) 
 
The total amount spent on CSR by WAPCOS in last 4 years is Rs. 12.56 crore. Out of this, Rs. 0.57 crore 
has been spent on water conservation schemes, which is approximately 4.5% of its total expenditure on 
CSR.  
 
It would be appropriate to point out that the CSR expenditure of all CPSEs is governed by Section 135 of 
Companies Act (Annexure-I) and D/o Public Enterprises (DPE)’s guidelines for CSR dated 10.12.2018 
(Annexure II).  
 
A common theme for the CSR activities to be carried out each year by all CPSEs is decided by the DPE. 
CSR expenditure for the identified theme is around 60% of annual CSR expenditure of all CPSES. The 
identified themes in recent years were: 
 
2018-19: School Education & Healthcare 
2019-20: School Education, Healthcare Nutrition 
2020-21: Health & Nutrition  
 
The recommendations of Hon’ble Committee would be conveyed to DPE with a request toidentify Water 
Conservation & Ground Water Schemes as the common themefor CSR by all CPSEs. 
 
WAPCOS has been requested to take the note of the recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee and 
modulate their CSR activities accordingly and take up the matterwith appropriate authority in DPE as per 
DPE guidelines. 
In respect of incentivizing the corporatesector and framing a suitable policy for providing various 
concessions, consultation would be done with Ministry of Finance and Ministry of Corporate Affairs. 
 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2021-Bud/62 dated 02.08.2021) 
 
 
 

29 
 
Recommendation No. 21  (Para No. 2.21) 
 
The Committee noted that the WAPCOS Limited is a “MINI RATNA-I” Public Sector Enterprise under the 
aegis of the Ministry of Jal Shakti (MoJS), Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation (DoWR, RD & GR). Incorporated on 26th June, 1969 under the Companies Act, 1956, 
WAPCOS is a technology driven Consultancy and Engineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) 
organization with strong domestic as well as global presence in the field of Water, Power and Infrastructure 
sectors. The Committee had come to learn from the written submission of the Department that necessary 
action is being taken by the Department for listing the Company on the Stock Exchanges. The Committee 
welcomed this step of the Department as getting the Company listed on the Stock Exchanges brings about 
many advantages like providing an opportunity to raise capital to fund new projects, undertake 
expansions/diversifications and acquisitions etc. Further, as listed companies were also required to ensure 
timely disclosure of information to the Exchange as provided in the Listing Agreements, it improved 
company’s visibility and credibility among institutions and the investing public due to complying with various 
regulatory norms. The listing also offered an opportunity to the market to independently assess its true value. 
Keeping in view of all these factors, the Committee expressed the hope that the divestment of WAPCOS will 
take place in the FY 2021-22 itself.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The disinvestment of WAPCOS through IPO and listing of its shares in thestock market is being undertaken 
by DIPAM and the IPO is being expected byDIPAM to be launched in FY 2021-22. 
 
The intermediaries for the disinvestment process have been appointed byDIPAM and all requisite approvals 
have already been provided to the proposalsof WAPCOS.  
 
The recommendation of the Hon’ble Committee has been conveyed to DIPAM.  
 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2021-Bud/62 dated 02.08.2021) 
 
Recommendation No. 22 (Para No. 2.22-2.23) 
 
Himalayan Glacier System 
 
The Committee noted that the Department of Science and Technology had approved a project proposal 
entitled “Integrated Hydrological Studies for Upper Ganga Basin up to Rishikesh” under the National Mission 
for Sustainable Himalayan Ecosystem (NMSHE)  in January, 2016 at a total cost of Rs.13.04 Crore, which 
envisaged to focus on issues of comprehensive integrated hydrological studies for upper Ganga basin up to 
Rishikesh. Under this project, , two sub –projects , namely –(i) Glacial Lakes & Glacial Lake Outburst Flood 
(GLOF) in Western Himalayan region and (ii) Assessment of downstream impact of Gangotri glacier system 
at Dabrani and future runoff variations under climate change scenarios, had been taken up.  The Committee 
urged upon the Department to expedite the studies on these projects and submit their report / findings arrived 
at to the Committee at the earliest. 
The Committee observed that the recent tragedy of massive flash flood in the downstream of Rishi Ganga 
River  due to a snow avalanche trigged by landslide at the terminus of the glacier in catchment of Rishi 
Ganga river underscored the imperative to closely monitor the glaciers system in the Himalayan region more 
closely. However, the Committee were surprised to learn that there was no forecasting system to predict the 
tragic accident as the monitoring station of the Department was located at Joshi Math. The representative of 
the Department had apprised the Committee that they were planning to have more monitoring systems in 
those areas. Further, the Committee had noted with concern that out of 2038 glacial lakes in India, only 477 
lakes having size of more than 50 hectares were presently being monitored by the Department.  Besides, a 
Joint Group after the disaster of 7 February had been constituted, comprising of several agencies and 
organizations having knowledge of that area to share the same. The Committee urged upon the Department 
to take pro-active measures in this regard and deploy resources both technical and financial in these eco-
fragile regions as a number of large dams and Hydro Electric Projects were based there and if  the kind of 
tragedy that occurred on 7 February recurred albeit on a large scale, it would bring lot of destruction and 

30 
 
would have a lasting adverse impact on the geo-climate conditions of the region. The Committee desired to 
be apprised of the various steps being taken or proposed to be taken by the Department to monitor the 
movement of glaciers and avalanches and set up an Early Warning System on a real time basis so as to 
forewarn the impending glacier-related disasters.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
“The studies being carried out under Department of Science and Technology sponsored NMSHE project has 
been completed by National Institute of Hydrology and the expected to be submitted soon. As soon as the 
report is available a copy of the same will be made available to the Committee. 
A proposal has been framed by Central Water Commission (CWC) to install the advance warning system in 
the upper reaches of river system in the Himalayan region to the extent possible for monitoring of Glacial 
Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) with an estimated cost of Rs 95.80 crore and the same has been included in 
the draft EFC Memo of DWRIS for the period 2021-26. The salient features of the proposal are: 
Phase-1 (0-2 years) 
In the phase-1, the sensors/equipment’s including siren system will be installed in upper reaches of river 
system as far as possible near to identified lakes and downstream up to the existing network of CWC. This 
will provide gauge to gauge warning to the local inhabitants for few hours so that precious life can be saved 
due to disaster of glacial lake outburst. The work of preparation of inventories of glacial lakes of 0.25 ha and 
above will also be carried out during this phase. All glacial lakes having size greater than 10 ha will be 
monitored on monthly basis during monsoon season in this phase. 
Phase-2(2-5 years) 
In the Phase-2, vulnerability index of lakes will be find out based on satellite input and ground verification as 
far as possible. In addition to this, the frequency of glacial lake monitoring of vulnerable lakes will be 
increased from currently monthly to weekly basis. Also, glacial lake outburst modelling of selected vulnerable 
lakes will be carried out periodically and based on the result affected area in the downstream will be 
identified. On the basis of this input, if required additional sensors/equipment’s will be installed. 
 
A team of experts was constituted by National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA), New Delhi for 
joint study to understand the causes of the flash floods in river Rishiganga and Dhauliganga and suggest 
mitigation/preparedness measures to prevent such flood events. The major scope of the joint study are 
hazard assessment, monitoring, forecasting and Early Warning Systems, suggestions for reducing risks etc.  
The team carried out a field visit in March 2021 in which all the sites were visited by the team members. The 
report, being prepared by NDMA, is under progress and in final stage. The steps suggested / undertaken 
after the joint study will be made available to the Committee. Also, necessary action will be taken on the 
report of the study”. 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2021-Bud/62 dated 02.08.2021) 
 
 
 
Recommendation No. 24  (Para No. 2.25) 
 
Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement Project – Phase II and Phase II 
 
The Committee were happy to note that the Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement Project (DRIP) Phase II & 
Phase III with a budgetary outlay of Rs 10,211 crore and financial assistance of the World Bank (WB), and 
Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) for improving the safety and operational performance of selected 
dams across the country, along with institutional strengthening and system wide management approach had 
been approved by the Union Cabinet and was likely to commence w.e.f. May/June 2021. The Committee 
noted that at present 19 States and 3 Central Agencies were on board for rehabilitation of 736 
dams.  However, the Committee were concerned to note that some of the major dams like Hirakud Dam did 
not find place in the Programme as consent of the respective States was required. The Committee were of 

31 
 
the considered view that all such large dams should be brought under DRIP II & III so as to obviate any 
unlikely event  of failure of such dams which may cause destruction of unprecedented scale.  The Committee 
urged upon the Department to take all possible steps to persuade the respective State Governments to give 
their consent for inclusion of big dams located in their States under the ambit of DRIP Programme.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Hirakud dam, one of the dams of national importance, is a part of ongoing DRIP which was scheduled for 
closure in March 2021. However, the work of construction of additional spillway of Hirakud dam to safety 
pass the revised design flood, could not be completed under the scheme due to unilateral withdrawal by 
contractor and foreclosure of the contract. Ministry took up the matter of inclusion of Hirakud dam in the new 
DRIP Phase II and Phase III with State Government of Odisha.  State Government expressed its inability to 
include this dam but agreed that rehabilitation of Hirakud dam will be done through State budget in order to 
ensure that safety concerns are  addressed comprehensively.  
As per National Register of Large Dams (NRLD), seventy(70) dams in the country are dams of national 
importance. Out of these, 18 dams have been rehabilitated under the DRIP. Also, 21 dams have been 
proposed under new DRIP Phase II and Phase III. Five (5) of these dams are owned by Central PSUs. The 
Ministry reviewed the matter related to safety concerns of these dams which may be included in the new 
DRIP. In pursuance to this objective, in August 2020, Ministry requested all major States(Andhra Pradesh, 
Bihar, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Punjab, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh, and 
West Bengal) to review the safety concerns of remaining dams of national importance in their States and if 
required these may be included in the new DRIP Scheme which has the approval of Cabinet Committee on 
Economic Affairs (CCEA) for need-based inter-component re-allocation from one component to other within 
the Scheme, as well as inter-agency reallocation including need-based swapping of selected dams by the 
partner agencies so that State(s) can bring the remaining dams of national importance. The matter is being 
pursued with the concerned States. 
 
(O.M. No. G-30013/1/2021-Bud/62 dated 02.08.2021) 
  

32 
 
CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN 
VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
NIL 
  

33 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation No. 7 (Para No. 2.7) 
 
Need for a study to assess the water use efficiency 
 
The Committee noted that though a 'Sahi Fasal’ campaign had been launched by National Water Mission to 
encourage farmers in the water stressed areas to grow crops which were not water intensive and use water 
very efficiently, no specific study with regard to measuring water use efficiency in respect of any crop had 
been undertaken by the National Water Mission (NWM) / Central Water Commission (CWC). The Committee 
were also perturbed to learn that the data regarding water use efficiency in respect of major cereal and 
commercial crops in India vis-a-vis international standards was also not available at present.  The Committee 
notde from the submission of the Department that the water use in the irrigation sector was the biggest 
component of total water demand in the country which was appx. 78.50% of the total water demand in the 
2010, and was projected to be around 72.50% and 68.40% in the year 2025 and 2050 respectively. The 
Committee were of the considered view that in the present scenario of fast depletion of the water resources 
both surface and ground water improving the water usage efficiency was the need of the hour and therefore 
recommended the Department to commission a study to assess the water use efficiency regarding the major 
cereal and commercial crops in India vis-a-vis  international standards in order to ensure prudent and 
economic use of water by agricultural sector. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
“Details regarding water use efficiency in respect of major cereal and commercial crops in the irrigation 
sector in India vis-a-vis international standards are not available. However, water use efficiency of completed 
irrigation projects is assessed for optimum utilization of water resources. In this regard, ‘Guidelines for 
improving Water Use Efficiency in Irrigation, Domestic & Industrial Sectors’ has been published by the 
Central Water Commission (CWC).  In order to make a realistic assessment of water use efficiency of 
completed major/medium irrigation projects; during 10th& 11thFive year Plans, CWC conducted 35 water use 
efficiency studies for completed major/medium irrigation projects in 7 (seven) States. The overall project 
efficiency of the studied projects ranged from 13 to 62 % with the group weighted average (on culturable 
command area basis) of the projects studied at around 36 %. The studies, in general, revealed inadequate 
maintenance, dilapidated condition of canals due to silting, cracks in lining, weed growth, inefficient 
operation, low water rates, poor participatory irrigation management etc. Corrective project specific structural 
or non-structural interventions were detailed in the study reports to improve the water use efficiency of the 
projects. The findings were conveyed to the respective States for follow-up for enhancing water use 
efficiency of the irrigation projects in their States aiding in better water management. 
Baseline studies have been undertaken by National Water Mission for improving water use efficiency in 
irrigation and studies have been awarded to North Eastern Regional Institute for Water and Land 
Management (NERIWALM- Tezpur), Water and Land Management Training Institute (WALMTARI- 
Hyderabad), Water and Land Management Institute (WALMI – Aurangabad) and Centre for Water Resources 
Development and Management (CWRDM - Kerala)”. 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation No. 23 (Para No. 2.24) 
 
Himalayan Glacier System 
 
Keeping in view the fact that the glaciers in the Himalayan region are constantly retreating and melting due to 
climate change and global warming, the Committee recommended the Department to commission a 

34 
 
comprehensive study to assess the behaviour of Himalayan glaciers as well as the impact of the Hydro 
Electric Projects (HEP) if any, located in the region in causing Glacial Lake Outburst Flood. The Committee 
would categorically like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry in this regard, within six months from 
the presentation of this Report to the Parliament.  
 
Reply of the Government 
  
“The studies being carried out under Department of Science and Technology sponsored NMSHE project has 
been completed by National Institute of Hydrology and the expected to be submitted soon. As soon as the 
report is available a copy of the same will be made available to the Committee. 
A proposal has been framed by Central Water Commission (CWC) to install the advance warning system in 
the upper reaches of river system in the Himalayan region to the extent possible for monitoring of Glacial 
Lake Outburst Floods (GLOFs) with an estimated cost of Rs 95.80 crore and the same has been included in 
the draft EFC Memo of DWRIS for the period 2021-26. The salient features of the proposal are: 
Phase-1 (0-2 years) 
In the phase-1, the sensors/equipment’s including siren system will be installed in upper reaches of river 
system as far as possible near to identified lakes and downstream up to the existing network of CWC. This 
will provide gauge to gauge warning to the local inhabitants for few hours so that precious life can be saved 
due to disaster of glacial lake outburst. The work of preparation of inventories of glacial lakes of 0.25 ha and 
above will also be carried out during this phase. All glacial lakes having size greater than 10 ha will be 
monitored on monthly basis during monsoon season in this phase. 
Phase-2(2-5 years) 
In the Phase-2, vulnerability index of lakes will be find out based on satellite input and ground verification as 
far as possible. In addition to this, the frequency of glacial lake monitoring of vulnerable lakes will be 
increased from currently monthly to weekly basis. Also, glacial lake outburst modelling of selected vulnerable 
lakes will be carried out periodically and based on the result affected area in the downstream will be 
identified. On the basis of this input, if required additional sensors/equipment’s will be installed. 
 
A team of experts was constituted by National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA), New Delhi for 
joint study to understand the causes of the flash floods in river Rishiganga and Dhauliganga and suggest 
mitigation/preparedness measures to prevent such flood events. The major scope of the joint study are 
hazard assessment, monitoring, forecasting and Early Warning Systems, suggestions for reducing risks etc.  
The team carried out a field visit in March 2021 in which all the sites were visited by the team members. The 
report, being prepared by NDMA, is under progress and in final stage. The steps suggested / undertaken 
after the joint study will be made available to the Committee. Also, necessary action will be taken on the 
report of the study”. 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
  

35 
 
CHAPTER – V  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi Dr. SANJAY JAISWAL  
02  December,  2021 Chairperson  
11 Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
  

36 
 
Annexure-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIRST SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES                
(2021-22) HELD ON THURSDAY, 21 OCTOBER, 2021 
  
The Committee sat from 1130 hours to 1200 hours in Committee Room No. '3', ‘A’ Block, Parliament 
House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
           Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Vijay Baghel 
3. Shri Bhagirath Choudhary 
4. Dr. K. Jayakumar 
5. Shri Kuruva Gorantla Madhav 
6. Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel  
7. Shri P. Ravindhranath 
8. Smt.  Agatha K. Sangma 
 9. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
10. Shri Chandan Singh 
RAJYA SABHA 
11.      Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
12.      Shri Harshvardhan Singh Dungarpur 
13.      Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena  
14. Shri Subhash Chandra Singh 
     
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan  - Director 
2. Shri R. C. Sharma   - Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting and offered his greetings to  them 
on their nomination /re-nomination to the Committee for the year 2021-22.    
 
3. xxx   xxx  xxx  xxx  xxx  xxx 
 
4. The Committee then took up for consideration draft Reports on the Action Taken by the Government 
on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the Tenth and Eleventh Reports of the Committee  on 
“Demands for Grants (2021-22)" of the Ministry of Jal Shakti (Department of Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation) and Department of Drinking Water & Sanitation, respectively.  After 
some deliberation, the Committee adopted both the draft Reports without any changes / amendments.   The 
Committee also  authorized the Chairperson to present the Reports to both  Houses of Parliament in the next 
Session of Parliament. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned.  
 
  
  

37 
 
ANNEXURE – II 
 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TENTH REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE 
(i) Total number of Recommendations/Observations 
 
           24 
(ii) Recommendation/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government  
Recommendation Nos.  
1,2,3,4,5,6,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22 and 24 
 
 
 
Total – 22 
Percentage– 91.66 % 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
Recommendation Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
 
Total – 00 
Percentage – Nil 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
Recommendation Nos.7 and 23 
 
 
 
 
 
Total – 2 
Percentage –  8.33% 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the 
Government is still awaited 
Para Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
Total – 00 
Percentage – Nil 
 
 
 