 
5 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2019-20) 
                 
         
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
         
                 
         
                 
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI  
 (DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT & GANGA REJUVENATION) 
 
           
SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF COMMERCIAL EXPLOITATION OF WATER BY INDUSTRIES 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Third Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources} 
 
         
         
FIFTH REPORT 
  
          
            
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
March, 2020 / Phalguna,1941 (Saka) 
         

FIFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2019-20) 
          
(SEVENTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI 
 (DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES, RIVER DEVELOPMENT & GANGA 
REJUVENATION) 
 
                 
         
SOCIO-ECONOMIC IMPACT OF COMMERCIAL EXPLOITATION OF WATER BY 
INDUSTRIES 
 
{Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty Third Report (16th Lok Sabha) of the 
Standing Committee on Water Resources} 
         
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 5.3.2020 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 5.3.2020 
  
 
  
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
         
March, 2020 / Phalguna,1941 (Saka) 

 
W. R. C.  No. 39 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
         
        © 2020 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha  (Fourteenth 
Edition) and Printed by  
 
 
 
 
 

CONTENTS 
  Page 
COMPOSITION OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
………………………………………............................. 
 
(iii) 
INTRODUCTION …………………………………………………………… 
 
(v) 
CHAPTER - I Report…………………………………………………… 
 
1 
CHAPTER – II Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government………………………… 
27 
CHAPTER - III Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s replies…………………………………. 
 
41 
CHAPTER - IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
the replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee……………..................... 
 
42 
CHAPTER - V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
final replies of the Government are still 
awaited………………………………………………….. 
 
54 
ANNEXURES 
I Target Household Level Coverage of Direct Water 
Supply Connections (as per SAAP)………………….. 
 
55 
II Implementation Status of Water Tap 
Connections…………………………………………….. 
 
56 
III Statewise Breakup of Noc's Issued By CGWA to 
Packaged Drinking Water  Industries  as on 
31.03.2018……………………………………………… 
 
57 
IV Annual Public Laboratory Testing Report of 
Packaged Drinking Water/Mineral Water for the year 
………………………………………............................ 
 
58 
V Minutes of the Tenth Sitting of the Committee held on 
3.3.2020 …………………………………………….. 
 
59 
VI Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty- Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee………………………………………………. 
 
61 
 
 
 

COMPOSITON OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2019-20) 
  
 
  
  Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal  -  Chairperson 
 
 
 LOK SABHA  
 
2. Shri Vijay Baghel 
3. Shri Bhagirath Chaudhary 
4. Shri Nandkumar Singh Chauhan 
5. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
6. Shri Chandra Prakash Choudhary 
7. Shri Guman Singh Damor 
8. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit  
9. Dr. K. Jayakumar 
10. Shri Kaushal Kishore 
11. Shri P. Raveendranath Kumar 
12. Shri Kuruva Gorantla Madhav 
13. Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel 
14. Shri Sanjay Kaka Patil 
15. Shri S. Ramalingam 
16. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
17. Shri Prajwal Revanna 
18. Ms. Nusrat Jahan Ruhi 
19. Ms. Agatha K. Sangma 
20. Shri D. K. Suresh 
21. Shri A. Narayana Swamy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
22. Sardar Balwinder Singh Bhunder 
23. Shri Harshvardhan Singh Dungarpur 
24. Mir Mohammad Fayaz 
25. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena 
26. Shri Madhusudan Mistry 
27. A. Mohammedjan 
28. Shri K. Bhabananda Singh 
29. Shri Rewati Raman Singh 
30. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain 
31. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

SECRETARIAT 
 
 
1.  Dr. Preeti Srivastava  -  Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Raju Srivastava  -  Director 
3.  Shri R. C. Sharma  -  Additional Director 
4.  Smt. Shanta B. Datta  -  Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (2019-20) having been 
authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the Fifth Report on 
the Action Taken by Government on the Observations / Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water Resources 
on the subject “Socio-economic impact of commercial exploitation of water by industries”.  
 
2. The Twenty-Third Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in 
Rajya Sabha on 09 August, 2018.  The replies of the Government to all the recommendations 
contained in the Report were received on 30 November, 2018. 
 
3. The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and 
adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 3.3.2020. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Third Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) of the 
Committee is given in Annexure-IV. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                    DR. SANJAY JAISWAL, 
03 March, 2020                                                        Chairperson,                                                                      
13 Phalguna, 1941 (Saka)          Standing Committee on Water Resources 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
 This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources deals with the Action 
Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in their Twenty 
Third Report (16th Lok Sabha) on the Subject ‘Socio-economic impact of commercial 
exploitation of water by Industries’ which was presented to Lok Sabha on 09 August, 2018. 
Action Taken Notes received from the Government in respect of all the 16 observations/ 
recommendations of the Committee have been categorized as under:-  
 
(i) Observations / Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
(Chapter II):  
 
Para Nos. 1, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14, 15 and 16  
       (Total – 10)  
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III):  
 
Para Nos. NIL  
     (Total – NIL)  
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV): 
 
Para Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 10 and 12   
       (Total – 06)  
 
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited (Chapter V):  
 
Para Nos. NIL  
    (Total – NIL)  
 
2.  The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
the observations/recommendations in the succeeding paragraphs.  
 
 
  

2 
 
A. Emergence of Packaged Drinking Water as a crucial source for bridging the 
gap between rising demand for pure and safe Drinking Water and dwindling 
supply 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
3.  From the submissions made before the Committee, the Committee noted that with 
rising population and increasing Industrialisation and Urbanisation, the demand for safe and 
pure Drinking Water had gone up significantly. The Committee noted that by the year 2030, 
the country's water demand is projected to be twice the available supply and by 2050, the 
per capita availability of water is estimated to go down to 1140 m3/year from 1545 m3/year 
in 2011. They further noted that Industry and Energy Sectors, combined, constituted the 
second largest consumer of water in the country. Further growth in Water Intensive 
Industries had been quite significant putting more pressure on the availability of water. 
Against this backdrop, the Committee expressed its concern over the Ministry's submissions 
that Industrial Clusters in various parts of the country had been established often without 
due regard to the availability of assured water supply; which had further compounded the 
problem of scarcity of water and had led to increased stress on the Local Ground Water 
Resources in terms of quality and quantity. Such unabated growth in Water Intensive 
Industries along with increasing population had resulted in adverse environmental and 
socio-economic effects such as significant long term decline in Ground Water Levels, 
deterioration in water quality, degradation of large tracts of land and rising conflicts amongst 
different stakeholders. While expressing their concern over rapidly shrinking water 
resources unable to cater to the demand of rising population, the Committee felt that there 
was an urgent need to device a proper policy framework to address the socio-economic 
consequences arising out of reckless and uncontrolled use of water for purely Private 
Commercial Gains. 
 
4.  The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows:- 
  
“Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA), constituted under the Environment 
(Protection) Act of 1986 has the mandate of regulating Ground Water development 
and management in the country. With a view to facilitate sustainable development of 
Ground  Water and to ensure that necessary mechanisms are put in place to, (a) 
optimise Ground Water extraction, (b) ensure implementation of water 
conservation/augmentation measures, and (d) monitor Ground Water quality and 
prevent its contamination due to effluents, CGWA has been granting No Objection 
Certificates (NOCs) with mandatory conditions and directions for Ground Water 
withdrawal by Industries, Infrastructure units and Mining Projects since 1999 in 
States/UTs which either do not have functional Ground Water Authorities or do not 

3 
 
regulate Ground Water development through Government Orders. The Guidelines 
have evolved over time from simple directions to more inclusive and comprehensive 
Guidelines with mandatory conditions for Ground Water augmentation and 
prevention of contamination. 
 
To ensure a more robust Ground Water regulatory mechanism and to address 
various shortcomings in the existing guidelines including those related to 
implementation of recharge conditions, the Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation (MoWR, RD & GR) has revised the existing 
Guidelines for Ground Water abstraction. These Guidelines have the provision of 
Water Conservation Fee (WCF) which shall be collected from the industrial 
establishments against usage of Ground Water. The Water Conservation Fee 
collected from proponents in a State/ Union Territory (UT) shall be made available to 
the concerned States/UT to be used for facilitating measures for sustainable and 
efficient management of water resources depending on the prevalent hydro-
geological scenario, land use and agricultural practices. These interventions could 
range from implementation of water conservation/ artificial recharge measures, 
promotion of Micro-Irrigation practices through subsidies, encouraging change in 
cropping pattern to less-water consuming crops to incentivizing good Ground Water 
management  and water governance practices, coupled with mass awareness and 
capacity building campaigns. The proposed mechanism is expected to help 
States/UTs implement large scale water conservation/ artificial recharge schemes in 
priority areas in a focussed and scientific manner to ensure optimal benefits.” 
 
5. The Committee observe that Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA), 
constituted under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 has been granting 'No 
Objection Certificates' (NOCs) with mandatory conditions and directions for Ground 
Water withdrawal by Industries, Infrastructure Units and Mining Projects since 1999 
in States/UTs which either do not have functional Ground Water Authorities or do not 
regulate Ground Water development through Government Orders. The Committee 
further note that to address various shortcomings in the existing Guidelines 
including those related to implementation of recharge conditions, the Ministry of Jal 
Shakti has revised the existing Guidelines for Ground Water abstraction.  These 
Guidelines have the provision of Water Conservation Fee (WCF) which shall be 
collected from the Industrial Establishments against usage of Ground Water and 
shall be made available to the concerned States/UTs for facilitating adoption of 
measures for sustainable and efficient management of water resources depending on 
the prevalent hydro-geological scenario, land use and agricultural practices. The 
proposed mechanism is expected to help the States/UTs to implement large scale 
Water Conservation/Artificial Recharge Schemes in priority areas in a focussed and 

4 
 
scientific manner to ensure optimal benefits. However, the replies are devoid of any 
particular time frame for implementation of the proposed measures. While 
appreciating the revision in Guidelines for Ground Water abstraction and proposed 
levying of Water Conservation Fee, the Committee desire to be apprised of the time 
period by which the proposed measures are expected to be implemented to prevent 
indiscriminate exploitation of Ground Water as also the mechanism to ensure that the 
amount of fee is actually used for the purpose it is collected for. 
 
6. The Committee further note that besides proposed revision of existing 
Guidelines and levying of Water Conservation Fee, no separate Policy has been 
chalked out to address the socio-economic consequences arising out of reckless and 
uncontrolled use of Water for purely Private Commercial Gains. It is the considered 
view of the Committee that Water being a scarce commodity, there is an urgent need 
to devise a distinct and self-contained Policy to stop the commercial use of not only 
the Ground Water but also the Surface Water for profit. Keeping in view the acute 
scarcity of Water looming large over the country in the near future and role of other  
Ministries/Departments, viz., the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public 
Distribution, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, and the State Governments/ 
Union Territories, etc., in the regulation of Commercial Exploitation of Water, the 
Committee, urge the Ministry of Jal Shakti to formulate a well structured policy and 
the enforcement mechanism, urgently in consultation with Ministries/Departments 
concerned for better regulation of the Commercial Use of Water. 
 
B. GROUND WATER AS A MAJOR SOURCE OF RURAL DRINKING WATER 
 SUPPLY 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
7. The Committee noted that still 85 per cent of Drinking Water Schemes in the rural 
areas covering 17.14 lakh Rural Habitations are based on Ground Water Resources, which 
although, had ensured assured supply of water, but in the long run, may have adverse 
impact on the Underground Water Table and lead to water quality issues; as 71,077 Rural 
Habitations have reported water quality problems. There are 72.72 lakh Water Supply 
Schemes in the rural areas of the country and 56.84 lakh Hand Pumps have so far been 
installed. The Committee were particularly concerned to note that though at present, 87 per 
cent of the Rural Households had access to 'basic water,' as stated by NITI Aayog in its 
Report on Composite Water Management Index, only 50 per cent of them got Safe Water.  
Further, due to inadequate or Unsafe Drinking Water, approximately two lakh deaths were 
occurring annually in the rural areas. The Committee noted from the submissions made by 
the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation (MoDWS) that a strategic goal had been 

5 
 
established to achieve Har Ghar Jal by 2030. Also, as on 1 April, 2018, 78.14 per cent Rural 
Habitations were able to get more than 40 litre per capita per day Safe Drinking Water and 
56.04 per cent had access to Piped Water Supply. Keeping in view the alarming rate at 
which Ground Water was being depleted, the Committee desired that the Surface Water 
should be increasingly relied upon to cater to Drinking Water needs of the Rural Areas. The 
access to Piped Water supply to each Rural Household; as proposed in the strategic goal to 
be achieved till 2030 should be focussed on mainly Surface Water Sources except for the 
areas where it is not feasible. Further, expressing their concern over large scale drilling for 
Tubewells/Handpumps, the Committee recommended that a coordinated approach should 
be taken by the State Governments, Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation (MoDWS) 
and the Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) while giving permission to install Handpumps 
to check its unbridled growth and strict action should be taken against illegal drilling for 
Handpumps. The Committee also desired to be apprised of the details of Community Water 
Purification Plants being set up in rural areas to supply Purified Water in the rural areas in 
the interim period till the completion of network for Piped Water Supply. Further, keeping in 
view the serious water quality issues, particularly in the Habitations affected with Arsenic 
and Fluoride contamination, the Committee felt that the Packaged Drinking Water Industries 
might be roped in to complement the Government's efforts to supply Safe and Clean 
Drinking Water. Therefore, these Industries should be given incentive by the Government to 
set up Units/Plants in such areas and provide treated potable water to the masses at an 
affordable cost. 
 
8.  The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows:- 
  
“Water being a State subject, supply of potable water is primarily States’ 
responsibility. However, Central Government supplements the efforts of State 
Governments by way of technical and financial assistance to provide potable water 
to general public. 
 
Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation (MoDW&S) is supplementing the efforts of 
the States both technically and financially towards ensuring safe and adequate 
drinking water supply to the rural population of the country. 
 
As per the information received from MoDW&S, people in about 3.6% of the rural 
habitations (about 62,000 in numbers) are at the risk of consuming water 
contaminated with one or other geogenic contamination, whereas more than 80% of 
the rural habitations are being catered safe drinking water through one or other 
means. 
 

6 
 
The MoDW&S promotes the States to take up small, sustainable, single village 
based piped water supply schemes which have low Operation and Maintenance cost 
and are demand driven. Schemes involving community contributions are being 
provided special attention. 
 
Further, under the National Aquifer Mapping and Management (NAQUIM) 
programme, the Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) is providing technical 
assistance to States/UTs about the design of Arsenic free wells.  The concerned 
States/UTs may appropriately utilize the knowledge shared by CGWB in this 
connection for creating tubewells/borewells, etc., for drinking water purposes.” 
  
9. The Committee find that with an aim to integrate water resources management 
under one umbrella so that the issues relating to water are dealt in a holistic manner, 
the Ministry of Jal Shakti has recently been formed by the Government of India, 
thereby, integrating the erstwhile Ministry of Water Resources River Development 
and Ganga Rejuvenation and the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation. Now, the 
newly formed Ministry of Jal Shakti has two Departments, namely, the Department of 
Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation and the Department of 
Drinking Water and Sanitation. In this backdrop, the Committee are of considered 
opinion that the Ministry of Jal Shakti has now a greater role as overall management 
of water resources of the country lies with it. Notwithstanding the fact that ‘water’ is a 
State subject, the Ministry is mandated to play a centripetal role in ensuring that 
Ground Water is not excessively utilised as the only alternative for providing access 
to Safe Drinking Water in the rural areas. The Committee also note that while the NITI 
Aayog, in its Report on Composite Water Management Index, has stated that only 50 
per cent of the Rural Households have access to safe water, the Department of 
Drinking Water and Sanitation has submitted that more than 80% of the rural 
habitations are being catered safe drinking water through one or other means. They 
also note that small, sustainable, single village based Piped Water Supply Schemes 
are being encouraged for supply of water in rural areas. However, no reply has been 
furnished with regard to the emphasis on the use of mainly Surface Water for 
providing water access through piped network in rural areas as Ground Water 
resources are depleting at an alarming rate due to heavy dependence on it as an 
assured source of safe water. Expressing their concern over the widespread use of 
Ground Water, the Committee reiterate that the Surface Water should be increasingly 
relied upon to cater to drinking water needs of the Rural Areas. The Committee, 
therefore, desire to be apprised of the measures taken in this regard.  
 
10. Further, as per the submission of the Ministry, while the Schemes involving 
community contributions are being provided special attention, no information has 

7 
 
been provided on setting up of Community Water Purification Plants in the rural 
areas. The replies are also silent on the issue of illegal drilling of handpumps which 
put a further stress on the already shrinking Ground Water resources. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to take appropriate measures with 
regard to establishment of Community Water Purification Plants in rural areas and 
illegal drilling of handpumps and apprise them about the details of such measures 
taken at the earliest. 
 
11. The Committee also express concern over the fact that no information has 
been furnished on the measures taken to address the issue of water quality in the 
Habitations affected with Arsenic and Fluoride contamination. The replies merely 
state that under the National Aquifer Mapping and Management (NAQUIM) 
Programme, the Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) is providing technical 
assistance to States/UTs about the design of Arsenic Free wells.  The Committee 
would like to know whether this technical knowledge is actually being utilized by the 
States/UTs concerned to design Arsenic free wells and if so what has been the 
progress/achievement in this connection in the areas affected with Arsenic and 
Fluoride contamination.  The Committee would also like to know whether the Ministry 
has any collaboration with the Department of Atomic Energy to use the technology 
available with them for removal of arsenic from water. In the absence of any effective 
measures to ensure provision of arsenic/fluoride free water to the people in these 
areas, the Committee, reiterate the need to promote Packaged Drinking Water 
Industries in the areas severely affected with Arsenic and Fluoride contamination so 
as to complement the  efforts made by the Government to supply Safe and Clean 
Drinking Water for people residing in such areas. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that these Industries should be given incentive by the Government to set 
up Units/Plants in such areas and provide treated potable water to the masses at an 
affordable cost. The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of measures 
taken in this regard at the earliest. 
 
C. GROUND WATER, A CRUCIAL SOURCE FOR URBAN DRINKING WATER 
SUPPLY 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
12. The Committee noted that as per the Census of India, 2011, although a major 
portion of Urban Households, i.e., 70.6 per cent had access to tap water; Covered Wells, 
Uncovered Wells, Handpumps/Tube wells/Borewells still accounted for water supply to 1.65 
per cent, 4.50 per cent, 11.86 per cent and 8.90 per cent of Urban Households respectively; 
highlighting the dependence of Ground Water in Urban Water Supply as well. They were 
concerned to note the fact that although 93 per cent of urban population had access to 

8 
 
‘basic water’ as stated by NITI Aayog, large scale intercity and intra city inequities existed in 
the country which had led to heavy dependence on Privately Extracted Ground Water and 
thereby, driving down water table in most of the Cities. Ground water table in 21 Major 
Cities including Delhi, Bengaluru and Hyderabad is expected to reach Zero Level by 2021 
affecting access for 100 million people. The Committee further noted that globally Israel had 
emerged as the largest user of treated and recycled water with 94 per cent of reused water 
being used. The Committee also noted that the Government had taken several initiatives to 
provide Universal Water Coverage in 500 Cities (having population greater than one lakh) 
under Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT), launched in 2015, 
such as Rehabilitation of Old Water Supply Systems including Water Treatment Plants, 
Rejuvenation of Water Bodies and Recharging of Ground Water, etc. However, the 
Committee, while agreeing with the views of NITI Aayog that recycling/reuse of waste water 
was the need of the hour, recommended the Ministry to take appropriate measures to 
reduce dependence on fresh water. In this context, the Committee further recommended 
that appropriate measures should also be taken to lay separate Pipe Line for Recycled 
Water and Fresh Water. Further according to the Committee, reduction in intercity and intra 
city gaps in Urban Water Supply should be made one of the priority components – while 
providing for universal water coverage in 500 cities under AMRUT. The Committee desired 
to be apprised of the details of measures taken in this regard. 
 
13. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows:- 
  
“As per the reply by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, the Atal Mission for 
Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT) was launched by the Central 
Government on June 25, 2015, for 500 cities and towns across India covering about 
22.50 crore population as per census 2011. AMRUT Mission is a Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme with a total outlay of Rs. 1,00,000 crore including a Central 
Assistance of Rs. 50,000 crore spread over 5 years i.e., from the Financial Year 
2015-16 to Financial Year 2019-20. 
 
Under AMRUT Mission, out of the total plan size of Rs. 77,640 crore, major 
allocation is for water supply projects worth Rs.39,010 crore (50%) followed by 
sewerage & septage projects worth Rs.32,456 crore (42%). The Mission focuses on 
development of basic urban infrastructure in water supply sector in the Mission cities 
with the expected outcome of universal coverage for access to potable water for 
every household in Mission cities. 
 
To mitigate the problem in Drinking Water Sector, the water supply component inter-
alia, provides for augmentation of existing water supply, rehabilitation of old water 
supply systems including treatment plants and rejuvenation of water bodies, 

9 
 
specifically for Drinking Water supply and recharging of Ground Water. Recycling/ 
reuse of waste water, reduction of non-revenue water (difference between the 
volume of water put into the distribution system and the volume of water billed to 
consumers) are some of the important features. 
 
This includes end to end solution to facilitate universal coverage of household water 
supply such as source improvement work, water treatment plants, storage facilities 
like underground & overhead tanks, distribution network, improvement in pumping 
machinery and universal metering. 
 
Universal coverage of water supply is the priority sector under the Mission. At the 
inception of AMRUT, the water supply coverage was 64%. By the end of the Mission, 
it aims to cover 100% households. The target is to provide 138.77 lakh water tap 
connection to achieve universal coverage. So far Rs. 31.67 lakh tap connections 
have been provided. Details of target and achievement in water tap connections are 
given at Annexure-1 and Annexure-2 respectively. 
 
Out of the total approved water supply projects (in all State Annual Action Plans) of 
Rs. 39,011 crore, works have been completed for 69 projects worth Rs.303.32 crore 
and contracts have been awarded for 781 projects worth Rs. 26,110.28 crore. Notice 
Inviting Tenders (NITs) have been issued for 169 projects worth Rs.8,100.75 crore 
and Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) for 97 projects worth Rs.3,429.19 crore have 
been approved.” 
 
14. The Committee find that the replies of the Ministry are confined to stating the 
goals of Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban 
Transformation (AMRUT) along with the details of implementation of Projects/works 
under the Mission, so far, without furnishing any specific details of the steps taken to 
reduce the dependence on Fresh Water. AMRUT was launched by the Central 
Government on 25 June 2015, under the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, for 
500 Cities and Towns across the country covering about 22.50 crore population as 
per the Census 2011 with a total outlay of Rs. 1,00,000 crore including Central 
Assistance of Rs. 50,000 crore spread over 5 years, i.e., from the Financial Year 2015-
16 to 2019-20, with the objective to develop basic urban infrastructure in water supply 
sector in the Mission Cities with the expected outcome of universal coverage for 
access to potable water for every household in the Mission Cities. Out of the total 
Plan size of Rs. 77,640 crore, major allocation is for Water Supply Projects worth 
Rs.39,010 crore (50%) followed by Sewerage & Septage Projects worth Rs.32,456 
crore (42%) under AMRUT. Besides, augmentation of existing water supply, 
rehabilitation of old water supply systems including Treatment Plants and 

10 
 
rejuvenation of Water Bodies, specifically for Drinking Water supply and recharging 
of Ground Water, recycling/reuse of waste water and reduction of non-revenue water 
(difference between the volume of water put into the distribution system and the 
volume of water billed to the consumers) are some of the important features of 
AMRUT Mission. The Committee, however, find that no concrete reply has been 
furnished with regard to the steps taken for laying separate Pipe Line for Recycled 
Water and Fresh Water. Also, no specific reply has been furnished with regard to the 
measures taken/proposed to be taken for bridging widespread gaps in the Urban 
Water Supply both intercity and intra city, which is one of the major problems faced 
in the Urban areas and need urgent intervention. In view of the Committee, the 
intended objective of universal coverage for access to potable water for every 
household in Mission Cities cannot be realized without ensuring judicious use of 
water by increasing the use of Recycled Water for purposes other than drinking and 
equitable, consistent and sufficient access to water in all parts of the Cities. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate the need to take appropriate measures for laying 
separate Pipe Line for Recycled Water and Fresh Water. Besides, reduction in 
intercity and intra city gaps in Urban Water Supply should be made one of the priority 
components while providing for Universal Water Coverage in 500 cities under 
AMRUT. The Committee desire to be apprised of the details of measures taken in this 
regard at the earliest. 
 
D. GROUND WATER AS A RAW MATERIAL FOR PACKAGED DRINKING WATER 
INDUSTRIES 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
15. The Committee observed that out of 447 Billion Cubic Metre (BCM) of total 
Replenishable Ground Water available annually, 228 BCM was currently being used in 
Irrigation while 25 BCM was being used for Domestic, Drinking and Industrial purposes. 
They further noted that the Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) constituted in 1997 
under subsection (3) of Section 3 of Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 had been entrusted 
with the responsibility for the Management and Development of Ground Water. It gives No 
Objection Certificates (NOCs) for abstraction of Ground Water. As per the NOCs issued by 
the CGWA, Packaged Drinking Water Units/Plants were extracting 13.3 Million Cubic 
Metres of Ground Water per year. They also observed that Packaged Drinking Water/ 
Mineral Water Packaging Industries/Bottling Plants were granted permission to extract 
Ground Water - subject to the recharge obligations stipulated by the CGWA, which was 50 
per cent of Ground Water recharge in 'Safe' areas, 100 per cent of Ground Water recharge 
in 'Semi-Critical' areas and 200 per cent of Ground Water recharge in 'Critical' areas. 
Further no Industry was allowed to be set up in 'Over-Exploited' areas. Also, additional 

11 
 
measures such as adoption of villages for developing water security plans, plantations 
suitable for a particular area to enhance the Recharging Capacity and maintenance of 
Recharge Structures, etc. were suggested to compensate for the depletion of Ground 
Water. The Industries were directed to implement recharge measures within six months of 
the issuance of NOC. Besides, the CGWA had Notified 162 Areas where installation of New 
Ground Water Abstraction structures was not permitted without the prior specific approval of 
Authorised officers. However, the  Committee were perplexed to note that despite the 
aforesaid stipulations, a large number of licenses had been given in States, where 
significant number of 'over-exploited' units were lying, such as Andhra Pradesh (having 41 
units and 55 m3 of Ground Water being withdrawn per day), Gujarat (having 24 units with 8 
m3/day withdrawal), Karnataka (having 63 units with 60 m3/day withdrawal), Tamil Nadu 
(having 374 units with 895 m3/day withdrawal) and Uttar Pradesh (having 111 units with 941 
m3/day withdrawal). They further found that multiple Government Agencies / Departments 
were involved in the issuance of license to Packaged Water Industries such as State 
Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs); which gave consent to operate, subject to fulfillment of 
CGWA Guidelines for Water Intensive Industries. Further, in case of Packaged Drinking 
Water Industries / Plants, the Certifying Agencies are Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) and 
the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI). However, the Committee were 
surprised to note that 18 Packaged Drinking Water Units had been allowed to be set up in 
'Semi-Critical' areas of Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Maharashtra, 
Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand, with 2552 m3 of Ground Water being 
extracted per day. Further 1 unit each in 'Critical' areas of Chhattisgarh, Uttar Pradesh and 
Uttarakhand had been permitted withdrawing as much as 825 m3 water per day. The 
Committee were further surprised to note that despite the huge withdrawals of Ground 
Water by Packaged Drinking Water Industries, the Ministry had made no effort to find out 
the total quantum of Ground Water being abstracted by the Packaged Drinking Water 
Industries as a whole and its impact on the available Ground Water Resources in the areas, 
as also the effectiveness of measures taken to Recharge the Ground Water as a 
compensatory measure. The Committee therefore, recommended the Ministry to carry out 
assessment of total quantum of Ground Water being used by the Packaged Drinking Water 
Industries and its consequent effect on Ground Water Level in the areas where these 
Industries had come up on a large scale. The Committee further desired to be apprised of 
the details of steps taken by the Government in this regard within three months of 
presentation of this Report to the House. 
 
16. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows:- 
  
“The No Objection Certificate (NOC) accorded by Central Ground Water Authority 
(CGWA) for the Packaged Drinking Water Industries are given at Annexure-3.  
Further, the licenses for these Packaged Drinking Water Industries are being 

12 
 
accorded by Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) and the total 
quantum of Ground Water use by such Package Drinking Water Industries are 
available with them. The details in this connection are being sought from FSSAI and 
shall be submitted. The change in the Ground Water regime in an area is the 
cumulative impact of Ground Water development by the agriculture, industries, 
infrastructure, etc. Therefore, it will not be possible to assess impact of Package 
Drinking Water Units separately in the Ground Water regime.  However, it is kindly 
submitted that Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation has revised the guidelines for Ground Water extraction. A new concept 
of Water Conversation Fee has been introduced to take care of over exploitation of 
Ground Water.  The Water Conservation Fee payable varies with the category of the 
area, type of industry and the quantum of Ground Water extraction. It is designed to 
progressively increase from Safe to Over-Exploited areas and from low to high water 
consuming industries as well as with increasing quantum of Ground Water 
extraction. The Water Conservation Fee collected shall be used for creation of 
structures for artificial recharge by States/Union Territories.” 
 
17. The Committee are surprised to note that despite being the Authority 
responsible for Management, Development and Regulation of Ground Water, Central 
Ground Water Authority (CGWA), as also the Authority responsible for giving ‘NOC’ 
for setting up such industries, does not have information on the quantum of Ground 
Water being used by Packaged Drinking Water Industries. Further, from the details 
furnished on the total number of 'No Objection Certificates' (NOCs) issued by the 
CGWA as on 31.03.2018, it is found that a large number of Packaged Drinking Water 
Industries have been issued NOCs in Andhra Pradesh (24), Maharashtra (33), Tamil 
Nadu (25) and Uttar Pradesh (53), where several areas have been declared as ‘Critical’ 
and ‘Semi-Critical” as pointed out by the Committee earlier. The Committee, would 
like to know if the CGWA does not have information on the total quantity of Ground 
Water extracted and used by the Packaged Drinking Water Industries, how the NOCs 
are being issued by it for setting up such industries in the absence of this vital 
information. The Committee would also like to know about any mandatory water audit 
carried out by these industries in critical areas and the outcome of such audit. The 
Committee would, therefore reiterate the formulation of a specific mechanism for 
assessment of total quantum of Ground Water being used by the industries including 
the Packaged Drinking Water Industries and its consequent effect on the Ground 
Water Level in the areas where these Industries have come up on a large scale as 
also the steps taken for preventing possible misuse of ground water in this as well as 
other economic activities such as agriculture. The Committee desire to be apprised 
of all the relevant information at the earliest. 
  

13 
 
E. Restricting the use of Ground Water for Commercial Purposes 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
18.  The Committee further noted that Packaged Drinking Water Units/Plants 
supplemented the Government's efforts to make Safe Drinking Water available to public. 
However, the Committee were of the view that the gap between demand and supply of 
wholesome water for consumption should be bridged largely by Government as a top most 
prioritized social responsibility and not allow the Industries to exploit this Sector for purely 
Commercial Gains. Therefore, they recommended the Government to assume a prime role 
in provision of Clean and Safe Drinking Water. While acknowledging the need for 
Sustainable Management of Ground Water; which is our 'fixed deposit', vital for catering to 
increased demand in future, the Committee were of the opinion that the dual goal of making 
available Safe Drinking Water without allowing rampant use of Ground Water Resources as 
a raw material, could be achieved by encouraging the setting up of Packaged Water 
Industries on Public Private Partnership (PPP) basis, thereby ensuring Government's role in 
utilisation of water in a rational manner on the one hand and provision of safe water in a 
cost effective manner on the other. The Committee felt that the use of Ground Water, which 
is in fact a scarce community resource, as a Raw Material, should be regulated in a rational 
manner and not allowed to be used as a source of profits for industries. Taking note of the 
Ministry's submission that licensing of Packaged Drinking Water Manufacturing Units may 
be highly controlled and they must be made to use mostly Surface Water Resources, Raw 
Water Storage Structures, etc. and Ground Water only as the last resort, duly controlled by 
the States, the Committee strongly recommended that the use of Ground Water should be 
restricted and allowed to be used only in exceptional circumstances. The Committee, 
therefore, recommended the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation to bring necessary changes in Water Policy and the Guidelines accordingly at 
the earliest without any further delay as this is the most pressing need of the hour. 
  
19. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows:- 
  
“The Ministry has formulated National Water Policy 2012 which inter-alia contains 
provisions to arrest Ground Water depletion. National Water Policy 2012 contains 
the following:- 
(a) Declining Ground Water levels in Over-Exploited areas may be arrested by 
 introducing improved technologies of water use, incentivizing efficient water 
 use and encouraging community based management of aquifers. 
 

14 
 
(b) It may be ensured that industrial effluents, local cess pools, residues of 
 fertilizers and chemicals, etc., should not reach the Ground Water. 
 
 To ensure a more robust Ground Water regulatory mechanism, the existing 
 Guidelines of Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) have been revised. 
 The Guidelines have been drafted after wide public consultation and 
 modifications based on the feedback received from the stake-holders. The 
 salient features of the Guidelines include:- 
 
(a) Pan India applicability. 
(b) Introduction of Water Conservation Fee (WCF): 
 based on type of industry, 
 quantum of extraction and 
 category of the area. 
 
(c)  Mandatory requirement of digital flow meters, piezometers and digital water 
 level recorders (with or without telemetry depending upon quantum of 
 extraction). 
 
(d) Mandatory water audit by industries abstracting ground water of 500 m3/day 
 or more in Safe and Semi-Critical and 200 m3/day or more in Critical and 
 Over-Exploited assessment units. 
 
(e) Mandatory roof top rain water harvesting except for certain specified 
 industries. 
 
(f) Measures to be adopted to ensure prevention from pollution in the plant 
 premises of polluting industries/ projects. 
 
(g) Exemption from requirement of NOC has been given to:  
 agricultural users, 
 users employing non-energised means to extract water, 
 individual households (using less than 1” diameter delivery pipe), and 
 Armed Forces Establishments during operational deployment or during 
mobilization in forward locations. 
(h) Exemption (with certain requirements) has been granted to -  
 Strategic and operational infrastructure projects for Armed Forces 
 Defence  and Paramilitary Forces Establishments 

15 
 
 Government water supply agencies 
CGWA has proposed payment of Water Conservation Fee (WCF) for Ground Water 
extraction by industries, infrastructure units and mining projects. The WCF payable 
varies with the category of the area, type of industry and the quantum of Ground 
Water extraction and is designed to progressively increase from Safe to Over-
Exploited areas and from low to high water consuming industries as well as with 
increasing quantum of Ground Water extraction. 
 
The Water Conservation Fee thus collected shall be made available to the 
concerned States / UTs to be used for implementation of artificial recharge measures 
and creating awareness among the users on water conservation.” 
 
20. The Committee observe that the National Water Policy, 2012 enunciates Policy 
Measures for arresting the depleting Ground Water resources. However, in view of 
the Committee, the extant National Water Policy has not been an effective instrument 
in addressing the specific issue of Commercial Use of Water for private gains without 
any obligation to pay for the use of the Raw Material, i.e., water, which is freely 
available. The Committee earnestly consider that emphasis should be given to 
restrict the use of Ground Water, which is in fact a scarce community resource, as a 
raw material, and should not be allowed to be used as a source of profit for the 
Industries. In this regard, the Committee note that the existing Guidelines of the 
Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) have been revised. As per the revised 
Guidelines, installation of digital flow meters, piezometers and digital water level 
recorders have been made mandatory. Also, the Water Audits have been made 
mandatory in respect of industries abstracting 500 m3/day or more of Ground Water 
in Safe and Semi-Critical and 200 m3/day or more in Critical and Over-Exploited 
assessment units (except for certain specified industries) besides mandatory roof 
top rain water harvesting. Further measures need to be adopted to ensure prevention 
from pollution in the plant premises of polluting industries/ projects. CGWA has also 
proposed payment of Water Conservation Fee (WCF) for Ground Water extraction by 
the Industries, Infrastructure Units and Mining Projects. The WCF payable will vary 
with the category of the area, type of industry and the quantum of Ground Water 
extraction and is designed to progressively increase from Safe to Over-Exploited 
Areas and from low to high water consuming Industries as well as with increasing 
quantum of Ground Water extraction. The Committee are of the opinion that while 
adoption of the above stated measures will certainly help in preventing the excessive 
extraction of Ground Water, it may also result in price escalation of Packaged 
Drinking Water for the end consumers. Therefore, there is an urgent need to devise a 
policy on Commercial Uses of Water (encompassing both Ground as well as Surface 
water), to ensure that there is no reckless use of water which is the basic input for 

16 
 
survival of life and a free community resource. The Committee are also of the view 
that since provision of cheap and safe Drinking Water to the masses is one of the 
primary responsibilities of the Government, it should play a pivotal role in supply of 
Packaged Drinking Water as well. With no specific reply submitted in respect of the 
Committee’s recommendation that setting up of the Packaged Drinking Water 
Industries on Public Private Partnership (PPP) basis will ensure primary role of the 
Government in supply of cheap and Safe Drinking Water without causing its 
unnecessary wastage, the Committee again recommend the establishment of 
Packaged Drinking Water Industries on PPP basis with the Government playing a key 
role in sourcing of water and utilization of water in a rational manner. Besides, the 
Committee also desire that appropriate policy should be framed for Commercial Use 
of Water which has not been appropriately addressed in the extant National Water 
Policy. 
 
F. LICENSING CONDITIONS FOR SETTING UP PACKAGED DRINKING WATER 
 INDUSTRIES 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
21. The Committee noted that major Water Intensive Industries are Tanneries, Paper 
and Pulp, Textile, Breweries and Soft drinks, Dairy and Dairy products, Steel Mills, Thermal 
Power Plants, Fertilisers, Sugar industries, Distilleries and Packaged Drinking Water 
Industries, etc. They further noted that these Industries used Surface Water, Ground Water 
and Municipal Water. However, Ground Water contributed 35 per cent of total water 
requirement of these Industries. The Committee also noted that a total of 375 NOCs had 
been issued to the Packaged Drinking Water Industries. They further noted that specific 
Standards had been prescribed by Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) for Packaged Natural 
Mineral Water and Packaged Drinking Water. Further Sub-Regulations 2.10.7 of the FSSAI 
defines Mineral Water and its types. All Food Business Operators engaged in the production 
/ sale / Distribution of Mineral Water/Packaged Drinking Water have to follow the Standards 
of Mineral Water and Packaged Drinking Water as prescribed under Regulation 2.10.7 and 
2.10.8 of Food Safety and Standards (Food Product Standards and Food Additives) 
Regulations, 2011. Also, FSSAI grants Licenses and Registrations to units engaged in the 
production of Packaged Drinking Water and Mineral Water, as per the provisions and 
conditions prescribed in the FSS Act, 2006, Rules and Regulations made there under and 
the proposed installed capacity of the Industrial Units who apply for the License. The 
Committee, however, noted that while FSAAI granted license to all Packaged Drinking 
Water and Mineral Water Units/Plants on the basis of the provisions laid down under the 
Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registration of Food Business Regulations, 
2011), wherein procedure, requirement of documents and Conditions of License were 

17 
 
prescribed and also on the basis of the NOC from the CGWA (since 15.03.2017), it did not 
check the source of water, which would be used by the Project proponent. The Committee 
felt that in order to check the rampant use of Ground Water by the Water Intensive 
Industries, especially Packaged Drinking Water industries, in whose case, FSSAI was the 
Licensing Authority, it was imperative that source of water might also be added as additional 
criterion for issuing Licenses. This condition would ensure that new Packaged Drinking 
Water/Mineral Water units/plants were established on the basis of mainly Surface Water 
Source. The Ground Water, as a raw material for use by the industries might be allowed 
only in such areas where there was plenty of supply of Ground Water and was being 
constantly recharged naturally such as areas receiving heavy rainfall. The Committee 
recommended the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation 
to accordingly take up this matter with the FSSAI, under the Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare for amending the conditions for giving License at the earliest. 
 
22. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows:- 
  
“As per information furnished by Ministry of Health & Family Welfare 
(MoH&FW), the licenses to the Food Business Operators are being issued as 
per the provisions laid down in the Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and 
Registration of Food Businesses) Regulations, 2011. These Regulations, 
inter-alia,  prescribe the procedure, requirement of documents and conditions  
of License to obtain  a License as provided under Section 31 of Food Safety 
and Standards Act.   
 
With a view to check the rampant use of  Ground Water by the Water 
Intensive Industries, FSSAI  had issued an Order (dated 15.03.2017) insisting 
on requirement of NOC from CGWA , pursuant to a decision taken in a 
Meeting of ‘Inter-Ministerial Committee’  held on 9th February 2017, wherein, 
the NOC from CGWA was  mandated for all Packaged Drinking Water Units.  
The said Order was subsequently amended by FSSAI, in consultations with 
CGWA, vide Order dated 02.01.2018, wherein, it has been mandated vide 
condition No. 1(iii) that “In so far as grant of FSSAI License to new industries 
(extracting ground water) located in the 1034 Over-Exploited areas is 
concerned, no such requests shall be considered by FSSAI without NOC from 
CGWA. 
 
Thus, use of Ground Water source is already being reckoned as a factor 
while considering grant of license and information about source of water is 
being obtained for the purpose. However, as recommended by the Committee 
that source of water may also be added as additional criterion for issuing 

18 
 
Licenses, the same will be duly incorporated as a condition in the proposed 
new regulations for licensing and Registration of food businesses. 
 
Further, Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation has revised the Guidelines for Ground Water extraction. A new 
concept of Water Conversation Fee has been introduced to take care of over 
exploitation of Ground Water. The Water Conservation Fee payable varies 
with the category of the area, type of industry and the quantum of Ground 
Water extraction. It is designed to progressively increase from safe to over-
exploited areas and from low to high water consuming industries as well as 
with increasing quantum of Ground Water extraction.” 
 
23. The Committee are happy to note that the use of Ground Water source is 
already being reckoned as a factor while considering the grant of license by the Food 
Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) since 2.01.2018, in so far as grant of 
FSSAI license to new industries (extracting Ground Water) located in the 1034 Over-
Exploited areas is concerned.  Further, FSSAI will not even consider any request for 
issuing license to industries extracting Ground Water, without NOC from the CGWA. 
Besides, the source of water is also proposed to be added as an additional criterion 
for issuing licenses and the same will be duly incorporated as a condition in the 
proposed new Regulations for Licensing and Registration of Food Businesses. 
However, no specific information has been furnished about the time period by which 
the Regulations for Licensing and Registration of Food Businesses will be amended 
to incorporate ‘Source of Water’ as an additional criterion. Therefore, the Committee 
again recommend the Ministry to pursue the matter with the FSSAI, under the 
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare for amending the conditions for giving License, at 
the earliest, under intimation to the Committee. 
 
G. PRICING OF PACKAGED DRINKING WATER  
 
(Recommendation Para No. 10) 
 
24. The Committee noted that a large number of Packaged Drinking Water Units had 
been set up in the country whose profits had run into billions of Rupees. However, they 
were surprised to note that no study/assessment had been carried out by the Government 
with regard to the total earnings of these Industries, on the plea that this matter did not fall 
under the purview of the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation. The Ministry had only requested the States to adopt an appropriate Pricing 
Policy in respect of the Packaged Drinking Water/Beverage and Bottling industries. 
Moreover, the Ministry had not been able to furnish the information on the total amount of 

19 
 
revenue received by the State Government from these industries. Since water is free 
commodity, which should be accessible to all, the Committee found the reply of the Ministry 
with regard to pricing of the Packaged Drinking Water very terse, that it was based on the 
demand and supply side forces. Although the Ministry had accepted the fact that it was the 
bounden duty of the Government to provide Safe and Pure Drinking Water to the people at 
large, the Ministry had distanced itself from any role in this regard, citing water as a State 
subject and therefore its pricing fell under the purview of the State Government. The 
Committee, while disapproving of this attitude, recommended the Ministry to coordinate with 
the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises and the Ministry of Finance, 
Department of Revenue for a proper study/assessment of the income/profit earned by the 
Packaged Drinking Water Industries to enable formulation of appropriate Pricing Policy - in 
respect of Commercial Use of Water by Water Intensive Industries, including the 
Packaged/Bottled Water Industries.  Further, in view of the Committee, at present, utilisation 
of water as a Free Raw Material for the Commercial Purposes had grown due to lack of 
inter-ministerial coordination on this issue. Therefore, the Committee believed that there 
was an urgent need to formulate a National Policy about the Commercial Use of Water, 
laying down the proper framework and regulatory measures for better control of the Water 
Intensive Industries. They, therefore, strongly recommended the Government to chalk out a 
policy in consultation with all the concerned Ministries/Departments. They also desired to be 
apprised of the details of measures taken to ensure a congruent policy approach to address 
the issue of Commercial Use of water and its impact within three months of presentation of 
this Report to the House. 
 
25. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows:- 
  
“The National Water Policy 2012 inter-alia recommends -   
 
 Equitable access to water for all and its fair pricing, for drinking and other uses 
such as sanitation, agricultural and industrial, be arrived at through independent 
statutory Water Regulatory Authority, set up by each State, after wide ranging 
consultation with all stakeholders. 
 
 Recycling and reuse of water, after treatment to specified standards, also needs 
to be incentivized through a properly planned tariff system. 
 
 Allow Industries in water short regions to either withdraw only the make-up water 
or have an obligation to return treated effluent to a specified standard back to the 
hydrologic system. 
 Implement subsidies and incentives to encourage recovery of industrial pollutants 
and recycling/reuse. 

20 
 
 As per the revised Guidelines of Ground Water extraction of CGWA, likely to 
be notified soon, there is a provision of charging of Water Conservation Fee (WCF) 
for Ground Water extraction by industries, infrastructure units and mining projects. 
The WCF payable varies with the category of the area, type of industry and the 
quantum of Ground Water extraction. It is designed to progressively increase from 
Safe to Over-Exploited areas and from low to high water consuming industries as 
well as with increasing quantum of Ground Water extraction.  
 
 Thus, WCF, to a great extent, is likely to address the concern expressed by 
the Committee about the Ground Water exploitation of Industries for their profit 
earning.” 
 
26. From the submissions made by the Ministry, the Committee find that the 
Ministry has simply stated the recommendations of National Water Policy, 2012 with 
regard to the pricing of water, which were however, not implemented effectively, so 
far. Water continues to be a Free Raw Material with almost negligible cost imposed 
on its use in commercial activities. Now, the Ministry has proposed the introduction 
of Water Conservation Fee as per the revised Guidelines for Ground Water 
abstraction, which is being relied upon to discourage Ground Water exploitation by 
the industries for their profit earning. Also, the replies lack specific information on 
the steps taken by the Ministry to study the revenue/profit generated by the 
industries engaged in the production of Packaged Water, which is a pre-requisite for 
devising an appropriate policy on the Commercial Use of Water. Since Packaged 
Drinking Water is widely perceived to be the safest water available for consumption, 
its pricing should be appropriately governed to ensure not only cheap and safe water 
availability but also the genuine cost to be borne by the supplier for using water as a 
raw material which is a community resource. Such industries should not be allowed 
to run solely with motives to maximize profits of the entrepreneurs as the raw 
material, i.e., water being used by these companies is a natural resource.  The 
Committee feel that the spurt in the growth of Industries selling Packaged Drinking 
Water has been facilitated by the lack of a coordinated approach to regulate the 
sector. The Committee feel that there is an urgent need for framing a policy for 
regulation of water use for commercial purposes. Therefore, the Committee again 
recommend the Government to study the profitability of Packaged Drinking Water 
Industries and apprise the Committee about all its finer details. The Committee also 
recommend the Ministry to chalk out a policy in consultation with all the 
Ministries/Departments concerned to enable the formulation of a National Policy on 
the Commercial Use of Water, laying down proper framework and effective regulatory 
mechanism for proper control of the Water Intensive Industries. The Committee 

21 
 
would also like to be apprised of the details of measures taken in this regard at the 
earliest. 
 
 
H. MONITORING OF THE QUALITY OF PACKAGED DRINKING WATER  
 
(Recommendation Para No. 11) 
 
27. The Committee noted that during the three year period from 1 April, 2013 to 30 
September, 2016, out of 20,224 samples of Packaged Drinking Water drawn for testing, 
water quality was not found upto the mark in case of 3,384 samples. With regard to the 
cases of violation noticed in samples of Packaged Natural Mineral Water, out of 145 
samples drawn, 10 samples had failed. The main reason for water quality not being upto the 
mark was failure in Chemical and Micro-biological parameters. However, the Committee 
were surprised to note that action was taken only in 752 cases - where marking was 
stopped, 9 cases in which licenses were not renewed and 49 cases where licenses were 
cancelled. With regard to violations reported in quality of Packaged Natural Mineral Water, 
marking was stopped only in 10 cases and in 1 case only license was cancelled. The 
Committee further noted that implementation and enforcement of Food Safety and Standard 
Act 2006 was being done primarily by the officials of Food Safety Departments of respective 
State/Union Territory Governments; who checked compliance with the Standards laid down 
under the Act.  Further all Food Business Operators (FBOs) were required to ensure 
frequent testing of Food Products as per the Point no. 12 of Licensing Conditions mentioned 
under Annexure-3 of Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Regulation of Food 
Businesses) Regulations, 2011. Besides, FSSAI had started a Safe Water Portal wherein 
Test Reports of water samples based on license number given by the FSSAI, test results 
uploaded by FBOs, regulatory tests conducted by the State enforcement agencies and test 
results of water samples conducted by BIS were uploaded. Apart from this, the Department 
of Consumer Affairs also conducted periodic surprise visits to the licensees' premises, 
testing of factory samples and market samples and verification of corrective actions taken 
by the manufacturers to ensure good quality of water. The Committee also noted that BIS 
had been maintaining quality of ISI marked products under the Bureau of Indian Standards 
(BIS) (Certification) Regulations, 1988 and as per the relevant notification of the Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare.  
 
Having noted the multiple Agencies/Departments of both Central and State Governments, 
involved in the monitoring of the quality of water supplied through Bottles/Packaged, the 
Committee were perturbed to find that still a number of cases of Below Standard Quality 
Water being packaged and sold in the market, had been reported. Expressing their strong 
displeasure over action taken against violators only in few cases, the Committee 

22 
 
recommended that more stringent actions needed to be taken to ensure good quality of 
Packaged Water - for which quite a hefty amount is shelled out by the public. Keeping in 
view the sporadic incidences of poor quality water being packed and sold as Pure Drinking 
Water resulting in health hazards for the common public, the Committee, recommended the 
Ministry to set up a robust Monitoring Mechanism to catch hold of the spurious water being 
supplied in the market in the form of Packaged Water. For this, both the Food Safety 
Departments of State/Union Territories Government and BIS should be more vigilant. They 
further desired to be apprised of the details of total number of violations noticed, action 
taken along with the amount raised by way of penalty imposed in respect of Packaged 
Water Industries during the last ten years and also as on 31st July, 2018. 
 
28. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows:- 
  
“Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has intimated that Standards for 
Packaged Mineral Water and Packaged Drinking Water (other than Mineral 
Water)  are covered under sub-regulation 2.10.7 and 2.10.8 of Food Safety & 
Standards (Food Products & Food Additives) Regulations, 2011 respectively 
and compliance to these standards is mandatory for any Packaged Drinking 
Water manufacturer in the country. These products are also under mandatory 
certification of BIS.   Further, as per sub-regulations 2.3.14 (17) & 2.3.14 (18) 
of Food Safety and Standards (Prohibition and Restriction on sales) 
Regulations, 2011 ‘No person shall manufacture, sell or exhibit for sale 
Packaged Drinking Water and Mineral Water except under the Bureau of 
Indian Standards Certification Mark’.  
 
To ensure compliance of these provisions, regular surveillance, monitoring, 
inspection and random sampling is being done by the Officials of Food Safety 
Departments of the respective States/UTs.  In cases, where food samples are 
found to be non-conforming, recourse is taken to penal provisions under 
Chapter IX of the FSS Act, 2006 which provides both penalty and/or 
conviction with imprisonment of minimum six months and up to life term. 
 
To strengthen the enforcement machinery, FSSAI is regularly pursing the 
matter with the States/UTs. The strengthening of institutional gaps and 
building up of capacities was highlighted in the Round Table Conference held 
with Health Secretaries and Health Ministers of States/UTs on 8-9th January, 
2018.  All were requested and impressed upon to fill the gaps in manpower 
and enforcement infrastructure. Recently, FSSAI wrote a letter dated 27th 
June, 2018 to Chief Secretaries of all States/UTs to look into the matter for 
creation/filling up the posts of Designated Officers and Food Safety Officers 

23 
 
as per norms to fill up the gap and remove shortage of regulatory staff. It has 
been impressed upon that for effective compliance and enforcement and to 
ensure food safety of citizens and regulatory compliance, adequate 
manpower must be deployed. Further, FSSAI has issued a direction to 
States/UTs fixing the enhanced targets of food samples to be collected and 
analyzed in the food laboratories.  
 
As per reports received from States/UTs, the number of Packaged Drinking 
Water/Mineral Water samples analyzed and action taken thereon during the 
years 2014-15, 2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-18 for which information is 
available  has been given at Annexure 4. Information as on 31st July, 2018 is 
still to be received from the States/UTs. It may be mentioned that Food Safety 
Standards Regulations pertaining to Packaged Drinking Water and Mineral 
Water came into existence only in the year 2011. 
 
As per information received from Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), the total 
number of violation noticed during the period 2008-09 to 2017-18 is 511 
(approx.). 
 
Total amount of penalty imposed during the period 2008-09 to 2017-18 is Rs. 
55,03,500.00 (approx.)” 
 
29. The Committee note that as per the Food Safety and Standards (Prohibition 
and Restriction on Sales) Regulations 2011, manufacturing or selling Packaged 
Drinking Water and Mineral Water is not allowed except under the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Certification Mark. The Committee further note that the total number of 
violations noticed during the period 2008-09 to 2017-18 is 511 and a penalty of Rs. 
55,03,500.00 (approx.) has been imposed. Further, regular Surveillance, Monitoring, 
Inspection and random Sampling are being done by the Officials of Food Safety 
Departments of the respective States/UTs to ensure strict compliance of these 
provisions. Besides, FSSAI has also communicated to the Chief Secretaries of all 
States/UTs on 27 June, 2018 to look into the matter for creation/filling up the posts of 
Designated Officers and Food Safety Officers as per the norms to fill up the gap and 
remove the shortage of Regulatory Staff. However, the Committee find that there 
were very few convictions as against the number of violations reported during each 
of the last five years, i.e., from 2014-15 to 2017-18 with 16 convictions out of 226 
cases in 2014-15, 39 convictions out of 345 cases in 2015-16, 33 convictions out of 
224 cases in 2016-17 and 97 convictions out of 504 cases in 2017-18. The Committee, 
therefore, are of the view that urgent measures should be initiated to strengthen the 
monitoring Staff in the States/UTs to address the problem of low quality water being 

24 
 
sold in the market in the name of Packaged Water and causing serious health 
hazards. The Committee would, therefore, recommend the Ministry to take initiative in 
setting up a robust Monitoring Mechanism in consultation with the Ministry of Health 
& Family Welfare and State/UT Governments to ensure selling of Packaged Drinking 
Water/Mineral Water as per the Standards for Packaged Mineral Water and Packaged 
Drinking Water prescribed under the Food Safety & Standards (Food Products & 
Food Additives) Regulations, 2011. The Committee would also like to  be apprised of 
the details of action taken in this regard. 
 
I. NATIONAL POLICY ON COMMERCIAL USE OF WATER  
 
 (Recommendation Para No. 12) 
 
30. The Committee observed that no specific policy had been framed in respect of the 
Commercial utilisation of water which was growing tremendously due to the lack of 
adequate supply of good quality water commensurate with demands of rising population. 
With regard to the use of Ground Water in Industries; which is comparatively easily 
available, there is only CGWA laid Guidelines - which have to be followed for extraction by 
all the Water Intensive Industries viz. Packaged Drinking Water, Beverages, Breweries, 
Distilleries, etc. The quality issues in Packaged Drinking Water are governed by the FSSAI 
Rules and Regulations. The Committee further observed that the National Water Policy, 
2012 states "(a) A system to evolve benchmarks for water uses for different purposes, i.e., 
water footprints, and water auditing should be developed to promote and incentivize efficient 
use of water, (b) The Project appraisal and environment impact assessment for water uses, 
particularly for Industrial Projects, should, inter-alia, include the analysis of the water 
footprints for the use, (c) Recycle and reuse of water, including return flows, should be the 
general norm, (d) In order to meet equity, efficiency and economic principles, the water 
charges should preferably/as a rule be determined on volumetric basis. Such charges 
should be reviewed periodically, and (e) Recycle and reuse of water, after treatment to 
specified standards, should also be incentivized through a properly planned tariff system.”  
 
Although, as per the submission of the Ministry, para 7 of the National Water Policy, 2012 
suggests specific action plans for Industrial use of water such as demand management, 
water use efficiency and water pricing, the Committee found that it did not state specific 
measures for regulation of Commercial Use Of Water. As stated earlier, the Committee 
were of the view that a proper National Policy needed to be formulated with regard to 
Regulation of Commercial use of Water encompassing inter-alia, such aspects as specific 
Commercial Use of water, particular source of water to be used, quantum of water, 
appropriate pricing, taxation of commercial gains made by using water, the specific social 
and environmental obligations of Industries, etc. Also, as a corporate social responsibility 

25 
 
the industries should be actively involved in participation of such activities as adoption of 
Water Bodies for maintenance, installation of Community RO/Water Purification Plants in 
the villages, recycling/reusing of Bottles used for Packaging, etc. They, therefore, 
recommended the Ministry to frame a Policy accordingly within three months of presentation 
of this Report. 
 
31. The Ministry in its action taken note has replied as follows:-  
 
“The National Water Policy 2012 inter-alia recommends -  
  
 Equitable access to water for all and its fair pricing, for drinking and 
 other uses such as sanitation, agricultural and industrial, be arrived at 
 through independent statutory Water Regulatory Authority, set up by 
 each State, after wide ranging consultation with all stakeholders. 
 
 Recycling and reuse of water, after treatment to specified standards, 
 also needs to be incentivized through a properly planned tariff system. 
 
 Allow Industries in water short regions to either withdraw only the make-up 
 water or have an obligation to return treated effluent to a specified 
 standard back to the hydrologic system. 
 
 Implement subsidies and incentives to encourage recovery of 
 industrial pollutants and recycling/reuse. 
 
The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation 
(MoWR, RD & GR) has revised the existing Guidelines for Ground Water 
abstraction.  These Guidelines have the provision of Water Conservation Fee 
(WCF) which shall be collected from the industrial establishments against 
usage of Ground Water. The Water Conservation Fee collected from 
proponents in a State/UT shall be made available to the concerned States/ 
UT to be used for facilitating measures for sustainable and efficient 
management of water resources depending on the prevalent hydro-geological 
scenario, land use and agricultural practices. These interventions could range 
from implementation of water conservation/artificial recharge measures, 
promotion of Micro-Irrigation practices through subsidies, encouraging 
change in cropping pattern to less-water consuming crops to incentivizing 
good Ground Water management  and water governance practices, coupled 
with mass awareness and capacity building campaigns. The proposed 
mechanism is expected to help States/UTs implement large scale water 

26 
 
conservation/artificial recharge schemes in priority areas in a focussed and 
scientific manner to ensure optimal benefits and will allay the concerns of the 
Hon’ble Committee to a large extent.” 
32. The Committee note that the replies of the Ministry have not adequately 
addressed the issue of fair pricing, recycling and reuse of water, obligation for 
industries to either withdraw the make-up water or have an obligation to return the 
treated effluent to a specified standard back to the hydrological system and 
implementation of subsidies and incentives to encourage the recovery of industrial 
pollutants and recycling/reuse. The Committee further note that the revision of 
Guidelines for abstraction of Ground Water and proposed imposition of Water 
Conservation Fee is being solely relied upon to prevent the commercial exploitation 
of water for private gains. However, no time line has been specified for 
implementation of the proposed measure. Although, the Ministry has proposed to 
levy Water Conservation Fee which would serve as a deterrent and also contain the 
reckless withdrawal of Ground Water, the Committee believe that the issue of 
commercial exploitation of water cannot be addressed effectively by merely imposing 
a Fee. Water being the primary input, needed for survival which is becoming 
increasingly scarce, its commercial use need to be properly governed and regulated 
with adequate compensation for its use by the Industries. Therefore, as stated at 
Paragraph No. 6 earlier, the Committee are of the considered view that in addition to 
the proposed measures for change in Guidelines and imposing Water Conservation 
Fee, the Ministry should also chalk out a well coordinated Policy for better regulation 
of water use by the Industries including Packaged Drinking Water Industries for all 
commercial purposes. 
 
 
  

27 
 
CHAPTER - II 
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Para No. 1) 
 
EMERGENCE OF PACKAGED DRINKING WATER AS A CRUCIAL SOURCE FOR 
BRIDGING THE GAP BETWEEN RISING DEMAND FOR PURE AND SAFE DRINKING 
WATER AND DWINDLING SUPPLY 
 
From the submissions made before the Committee, the Committee note that with rising 
population and increasing Industrialisation and Urbanisation, the demand for Safe and Pure 
Drinking Water has gone up significantly. They note that by 2030, the country's water 
demand is projected to be twice the available supply and by 2050, the per capita availability 
of water is estimated to go down to 1140 m3/year from 1545 m3/year in 2011. They further 
note that Industry and Energy Sectors, combined, constitute the second largest consumer of 
water in the country. Further growth in Water Intensive Industries has been quite significant 
putting more pressure on the availability of water. Against this backdrop, the Committee are 
distressed to note the Ministry's submissions that Industrial Clusters in various parts of the 
country have been established often without due regard to the availability of assured water 
supply; which has further compounded the problem of scarcity of water and has led to 
increased stress on the Local Ground Water Resources in terms of quality and quantity. 
Such unabated growth in Water Intensive Industries along with increasing population have 
resulted in adverse environmental and socio-economic effects such as significant long term 
decline in Ground Water Levels, deterioration in water quality, degradation of large tracts of 
land and rising conflicts amongst different stakeholders. While expressing their concern 
over rapidly shrinking water resources unable to cater to the demand of rising population, 
the Committee feel that there is an urgent need to device a proper policy framework to 
address the socio-economic consequences arising out of reckless and uncontrolled use of 
water for purely Private Commercial Gains. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Central Ground Water Authority CGWA), constituted under the Environment (Protection) Act 
of 1986 has the mandate of regulating ground water development and management in the 
country. With a view to facilitate sustainable development of ground  water and to ensure 
that necessary mechanisms are put in place to a) optimise ground water extraction, b) 
ensure implementation of water conservation / augmentation measures and d) monitor 

28 
 
ground water quality and prevent its contamination due to effluents, CGWA has been 
granting No Objection Certificates (NOCs) with mandatory conditions and directions for 
ground water withdrawal by industries, infrastructure units and mining projects since 1999 in 
States/UTs which either do not have functional Ground Water Authorities or do not regulate 
ground water development through Government orders. The guidelines have evolved over 
time from simple directions to more inclusive and comprehensive guidelines with mandatory 
conditions for ground water augmentation and prevention of contamination. 
 
To ensure a more robust ground water regulatory mechanism and to address various 
shortcomings in the existing guidelines including those related to implementation of 
recharge conditions, the Ministry of Water Resources, RD & GR (MoWR, RD & GR) has 
revised the existing guidelines for ground water abstraction.  These guidelines have the 
provision of Water Conservation Fee (WCF) which shall be collected from the industrial 
establishments against usage of ground water. The Water Conservation Fee collected from 
proponents in a State/ UT shall be made available to the concerned States / UT to be used 
for facilitating measures for sustainable and efficient management of water resources 
depending on the prevalent hydrogeological scenario, land use and agricultural practices. 
These interventions could range from implementation of water conservation/ artificial 
recharge measures, promotion of micro-irrigation practices through subsidies, encouraging 
change in cropping pattern to less-water consuming crops to incentivizing good ground 
water management  and water governance practices, coupled with mass awareness and 
capacity building campaigns. The proposed mechanism is expected to help States / UTs 
implement large scale water conservation / artificial recharge schemes in priority areas in a 
focussed and scientific manner to ensure optimal benefits. 
 
 (OM No. H.11013/9/2018-GW dated 30.11.2018) 
 
Comment of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No.5 & 6 of Chapter –I  of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 6) 
 
GROUND WATER AS A RAW MATERIAL FOR PACKAGED DRINKING WATER 
INDUSTRIES 
 
Further taking note of the fact that Ground Water has emerged as a major source to meet 
the water requirement of Industries, largely due to its wide availability and Private 
Ownership, the Committee are of the view that it is high time that 'the India Easement Act, 
1882' which provides for right to extract Ground Water, be amended at the earliest in view 

29 
 
of the present and future scenario to meet the expected increase in the demand of water. 
The Committee further recommend strongly that the 'Water (Prevention and Control of 
Pollution) Cess Act, 1977' providing for levying and collection of a Cess on water consumed 
by persons carrying on certain Industries should be appropriately amended to discourage 
wastage of water. They would like to be apprised of the details of the measures taken in this 
regard at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Regarding amendment of the ‘India Easement ACT, 1882’, it is submitted that the 
suggestion is noted and the same is being referred to the concerned Ministry for appropriate 
action. 
The Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation has revised 
the guidelines for ground water extraction. A new concept of water conversation fee has 
been introduced to take care of over exploitation of ground water.  The Water Conservation 
Fee payable varies with the category of the area, type of industry and the quantum of 
ground water extraction. It is designed to progressively increase from safe to over-exploited 
areas and from low to high water consuming industries as well as with increasing quantum 
of ground water extraction. Thus, the Water Conservation Fee will act as a deterrent against 
wastage of water.  
 
(OM No. H.11013/9/2018-GW dated 30.11.2018) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 7) 
 
CONTAMINATION OF GROUND WATER BY THE PACKAGED WATER INDUSTRIES 
 
The Committee observe that Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) has conducted a study 
of 88 Industrial Clusters to ascertain the impact of Industries on the underground 51 water 
quality. They observe that many chemical constituents have been found to be in excess of 
permissible limits in case of such Industries as Pharmaceutical, Petroleum, Leather, 
Tanneries, Electroplating units, Coal and Oil Combustion in Power Plants, Fertilisers, etc. 
The most common ions found beyond permissible units are Chloride and Nitrates. The 
Committee note from the submissions made by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of 
India (FSSAI) that in case of Mineral Water Processing Plants, contamination may occur as 
a result of reverse-osmosis; which releases concentrates into Ground Water and increases 
its hardness. However, they are perturbed to note that no study to this effect so far has 
been conducted by the CGWB. It has only carried out exploratory drilling to delineate 
contaminant free aquifer zones and successful exploratory wells and thereafter handed over 
these to the concerned Agencies in the States for utilisation. 

30 
 
 
Taking note of the fact that Packaged Drinking Water Industry has thrived in the country as 
a result of increased demand and their consequent use of Ground Water as raw material is 
increasing rapidly, the Committee recommend the Government to undertake a study on the 
impact of proliferation of Packaged Drinking Water Industries on Ground Water Quality. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The suggestion given by the Committee is noted for compliance.  CGWB is being directed 
to undertake a study in this connection in consultation with Central Pollution Control Board 
(CPCB) and forward the report by 28th February, 2019. 
 
(OM No. H.11013/9/2018-GW dated 30.11.2018) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 8) 
 
LICENSING CONDITIONS FOR SETTING UP PACKAGED DRINKING WATER 
INDUSTRIES 
 
The Committee note that major Water Intensive Industries are Tanneries, Paper and Pulp, 
Textile, Breweries and Soft drinks, Dairy and Dairy products, Steel Mills, Thermal Power 
Plants, Fertilisers, Sugar industries, Distilleries and Packaged Drinking water 52 industries, 
etc. They further note that these Industries use Surface Water, Ground Water and Municipal 
Water. However, Ground Water contributes 35 per cent of total water requirement of these 
Industries. The Committee also note that a total of 375 NOCs have been issued to the 
Packaged Drinking Water industries. They further note that specific Standards have been 
prescribed by Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) for Packaged Natural Mineral Water and 
Packaged Drinking Water. Further Sub-Regulations 2.10.7 of the FSSAI defines Mineral 
Water and its types. All Food Business Operators engaged in the production / sale / 
Distribution of Mineral Water / Packaged Drinking Water have to follow the Standards of 
Mineral Water and Packaged Drinking Water as prescribed under Regulation 2.10.7 and 
2.10.8 of Food Safety and Standards (Food Product Standards and Food Additives) 
Regulations, 2011. Also, FSSAI grants Licenses and Registrations to units engaged in the 
production of Packaged Drinking Water and Mineral Water, as per the provisions and 
conditions prescribed in the FSS Act, 2006, Rules and Regulations made there under and 
the proposed installed capacity of the Industrial Units who apply for the License. The 
Committee, however, note that while FSAAI grants licence to all Packaged Drinking Water 
and Mineral Water Units / Plants on the basis of the provisions laid down under the Food 
Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registration of Food Business Regulations, 2011), 

31 
 
wherein procedure, requirement of documents and Conditions of License are prescribed 
and also on the basis of the NOC from the CGWA (since 15.03.2017), it does not check the 
source of water, which will be used by the Project proponent. The Committee feel that in 
order to check the rampant use of Ground Water by the Water Intensive Industries, 
especially Packaged Drinking Water industries, in whose case, FSSAI 53 the Licensing 
Authority, it is imperative that source of water may also be added as additional criterion for 
issuing Licenses. This condition will ensure that new Packaged Drinking Water / Mineral 
Water units / plants are established on the basis of mainly Surface Water Source. The 
Ground Water, as a raw material for use by the industries may be allowed only in such 
areas where there is plenty of supply of Ground Water and is being constantly recharged 
naturally such as areas receiving heavy rainfall. The Committee recommend the Ministry of 
Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation to accordingly take up this 
matter with the FSSAI - which is under the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare for amending 
the conditions for giving License at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As per information furnished by Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (MoH&FW), the 
licenses to the Food Business Operators are being issued as per the provisions laid down in 
the Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Registration of Food Businesses) 
Regulations, 2011. These Regulations, inter-alia,  prescribe the procedure, requirement of 
documents and conditions  of license to obtain  a license as provided under Section 31 of 
Food Safety and Standards Act.   
With a view to check the rampant use of  ground water by the water intensive industries, 
FSSAI  had issued an Order (dated 15.03.2017) insisting on requirement of NOC from 
CGWA , pursuant to a decision taken in a Meeting of ‘Inter-Ministerial Committee’  held on 
9th February 2017, wherein, the NOC from CGWA was  mandated for all Packaged 
Drinking Water Units.  The said Order was subsequently amended by FSSAI, in 
consultations with CGWA, vide Order dated 02.01.2018, wherein, it has been mandated 
vide condition No. 1(iii) that “In so far as grant of FSSAI license to new industries (extracting 
ground water) located in the 1034 over-exploited areas is concerned, no such requests shall 
be considered by FSSAI without NOC from CGWA”. 
Thus, use of ground water source is already being reckoned as a factor while considering 
grant of licence and information about source of water is being obtained for the purpose.  
However, as recommended by the Committee that source of water may also be added as 
additional criterion for issuing Licenses, the same will be duly incorporated as a condition in 
the proposed new regulations for licensing and Registration of food businesses. 
Further, Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation has 
revised the guidelines for ground water extraction. A new concept of water conversation fee 
has been introduced to take care of over exploitation of ground water.  The Water 

32 
 
Conservation Fee payable varies with the category of the area, type of industry and the 
quantum of ground water extraction. It is designed to progressively increase from safe to 
over-exploited areas and from low to high water consuming industries as well as with 
increasing quantum of ground water extraction. 
 
(OM No. H.11013/9/2018-GW dated 30.11.2018) 
Comment of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter –I  of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 9) 
 
IMPOSITION OF TAX / CHARGES LEVIED ON THE PACKAGED DRINKING WATER 
INDUSTRIES 
 
The Committee note that as in July, 2018, CGWA has issued NOCs to 375 Packaged 
Drinking Water Units using Ground Water. Further, 5873 Packaged Drinking Water Units 
hold BIS license for producing Packaged Drinking Water as per IS14543:2016, as on 
12.06.2018. Also, FSSAI has given a total of 5417 Central and State licenses for the setting 
up of Packaged Drinking Water industries. However, they find that no charges have been 
imposed / tax levied for using Ground Water, a precious raw material which is nature's 
bounty and free for consumption for all. They observe that collection of tax is vested with the 
respective State Governments. The Committee feel that while water, the elixir of life, should 
be available for free, its Commercial Use should be appropriately charged to discourage its 
wastage. In their view, imposition of tax at higher rates can be an effective deterrent against 
indiscriminate use of Ground Water by the Industries. It would, on the one hand, save 
precious Water Resource, on the other hand, the Government can use the revenue so 
generated for taking alternative measures to increase accessibility of Safe Drinking Water to 
the poorer sections of the society. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It has been informed by the Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance that vide 
Notification No. 01/2017 dated 28.06.2018, HSN 2201 with description “Waters, including 
natural or artificial mineral waters and aerated waters, not containing added sugar or other 
sweetening matter nor flavoured” is taxable at 18% in GST.  Further vide Notification No. 
06/2018 – Central Taxes (rate) dated 25.01.2018, HSN 2201 with descriptions “drinking 
water packed in 20 litres bottle” was added in schedule II of notification No. 01/2017 dated 
28.06.2017 thereby making “drinking water packed in 20 liters bottle” taxable at 12% in 
GST. 

33 
 
 
It is observed that Central Board of Indirect Taxes & Customs (CBIC) has received request 
for reduction in duty in packaged drinking water from ‘All Manipur Food Processor 
Association’, which is being referred to Fitment Committee for consideration.  Further, 
increase in tax rate may also lead to under declaration of production and evasion of tax on 
the supply of the same. 
 
Also, Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation has revised 
the guidelines for ground water extraction. A new concept of water conversation fee has 
been introduced to take care of over exploitation of ground water.  The Water Conservation 
Fee payable varies with the category of the area, type of industry and the quantum of 
ground water extraction. It is designed to progressively increase from safe to over-exploited 
areas and from low to high water consuming industries as well as with increasing quantum 
of ground water extraction. Thus, the Water Conservation Fee will act as a deterrent against 
wastage of water.  
 
(OM No. H.11013/9/2018-GW dated 30.11.2018) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 11) 
 
MONITORING OF THE QUALITY OF PACKAGED DRINKING WATER 
 
The Committee note that during the three year period from 1 April, 2013 to 30 September, 
2016, out of 20,224 samples of Packaged Drinking Water drawn for testing, water quality 
was not found upto the mark in case of 3,384 samples. With regard to the cases of violation 
noticed in samples of Packaged Natural Mineral Water, out of 145 samples drawn, 10 
samples failed. The main reason for water quality not being upto the mark was failure in 
Chemical and Micro-biological parameters. However, the Committee are 56 surprised to 
note that action was taken only in 752 cases - where marking was stopped, 9 cases in 
which licenses were not renewed and 49 cases where licenses were cancelled. With regard 
to violations reported in quality of Packaged Natural Mineral Water, marking was stopped 
only in 10 cases and in 1 case only license was cancelled. The Committee further note that 
implementation and enforcement of Food Safety and Standard Act 2006 is being done 
primarily by the officials of Food Safety Departments of respective State/Union Territory 
Governments; who check compliance with the Standards laid down under the Act.  Further 
all Food Business operators (FBOs) are required to ensure frequent testing of Food 
Products as per the Point no. 12 of Licensing Conditions mentioned under Annexure-3 of 
Food Safety and Standards (Licensing and Regulation of Food Businesses) Regulations, 
2011. Besides, FSSAI has started a Safe Water Portal wherein Test Reports of water 
samples based on license number given by the FSSAI, test results uploaded by FBOs, 

34 
 
regulatory tests conducted by the State enforcement agencies and test results of water 
samples conducted by BIS are uploaded. Apart from this, the Department of Consumer 
Affairs also conducts periodic surprise visits to the licensees' premises, take testing of 
factory samples and market samples and verification of corrective actions taken by the 
manufacturers to ensure good quality of water. The Committee also note that BIS has been 
maintaining quality of ISI marked products under the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) 
(Certification) Regulations, 1988 and as per the relevant notification of the Ministry of Health 
and Family Welfare.  
 
Having noted the multiple Agencies / Departments of both Central and State Governments, 
involved in the monitoring of the quality of water supplied through 57 Bottles/Packaged, the 
Committee are perturbed to find that still a number of cases of Below Standard Quality 
Water being packaged and sold in the market, have been reported. Expressing their strong 
displeasure over action taken against violators only in few cases, the Committee 
recommend that more stringent actions need to be taken to ensure good quality of 
Packaged Water - for which quite a hefty amount is shelled out by the public. Keeping in 
view the sporadic incidences of poor quality water being packed and sold as Pure Drinking 
Water results in to health hazards for the common public, the Committee, recommend the 
Ministry to set up a robust Monitoring Mechanism to catch hold of the spurious water being 
supplied in the market in the form of Packaged Water. For this, both the Food Safety 
Departments of State/Union Territories Government and BIS have to be more vigilant. They 
would further like to be apprised of the details of total number of violations noticed, action 
taken along with the amount raised by way of penalty imposed in respect of Packaged 
Water Industries during the last ten years and also as on 31st July, 2018. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
M/o Health & Family Welfare has intimated that Standards for Packaged Mineral Water and 
Packaged Drinking Water (other than mineral water)  are covered under sub-regulation 
2.10.7 and 2.10.8 of Food Safety & Standards (Food Products & Food Additives) 
Regulations, 2011 respectively and compliance to these standards is mandatory for any 
packaged drinking water manufacturer in the country.  These products are also under 
mandatory certification of BIS.   Further, as per sub-regulations 2.3.14 (17) & 2.3.14 (18) of 
Food Safety and Standards (Prohibition and Restriction on sales) Regulations, 2011 “No 
person shall manufacture, sell or exhibit for sale packaged drinking water and mineral water 
except under the Bureau of Indian Standards Certification Mark”.  
 
To ensure compliance of these provisions, regular surveillance, monitoring, inspection and 
random sampling is being done by the Officials of Food Safety Departments of the 
respective States/UTs.  In cases, where food samples are found to be non-conforming, 

35 
 
recourse is taken to penal provisions under Chapter IX of the FSS Act, 2006 which provides 
both penalty and/or conviction with imprisonment of minimum six months and up to life term. 
 
To strengthen the enforcement machinery, FSSAI is regularly pursing the matter with the 
States/UTs. The strengthening of institutional gaps and building up of capacities was 
highlighted in the Round Table Conference held with Health Secretaries and Health 
Ministers of States/UTs on 8-9th January, 2018.  All were requested and impressed upon to 
fill the gaps in manpower and enforcement infrastructure.  Recently, FSSAI wrote a letter 
dated 27th June, 2018 to Chief Secretaries of all States/UTs to look into the matter for 
creation/filling up the posts of Designated Officers and Food Safety Officers as per norms to 
fill up the gap and remove shortage of regulatory staff. It has been impressed upon that for 
effective compliance and enforcement and to ensure food safety of citizens and regulatory 
compliance, adequate manpower must be deployed. Further, FSSAI has issued a direction 
to States/UTs fixing the enhanced targets of food samples to be collected and analyzed in 
the food laboratories.  
 
As per reports received from States/UTs, the number of packaged drinking water/mineral 
water samples analyzed and action taken thereon during the years 2014-15, 2015-16, 2016-
17 and 2017-18 for which information is available  are given at Annexure 4.  Information as 
on 31st July, 2018 is still to be received from the States/UTs.  It may be mentioned that Food 
Safety Standards Regulations pertaining to packaged drinking water and mineral water 
came into existence only in the year 2011. 
 
As per information received from Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), the total number of 
violation noticed during the period 2008-09 to 2017-18 is 511 (approx.). 
Total amount of penalty imposed during the period 2008-09 to 2017-18 is Rs. 55,03,500.00 
(approx.) 
(OM No. H.11013/9/2018-GW dated 30.11.2018) 
Comment of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 29 of Chapter –I  of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 13) 
 
13. MEASURES TAKEN TO MITIGATE THE ADVERSE EFFECTS OF 
COMMERCIALISATION OF WATER 
 
The Committee note that the CGWA has laid down Mandatory Conditions such as 
installation of meters on the Ground Water Abstraction Structures, Implementation of 

36 
 
Artificial Recharge Measures and Recycling / Reuse of water in the NOCs issued to 
Industries using the Ground Water; with a view to prevent environmental degradation. 
Further, the Ministry has proposed Water Audit and Water Conservation Guidelines to 
promote efficient use of water. Also, as submitted by the Secretary, Ministry of Water 
Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation, incentives on the lines of 
Certificates issued by the Bureau of Energy Efficiency are proposed to be implemented in 
the Water Sector to encourage economic and efficient use of water. The Committee further 
observe that the National Water Policy, 2012 enunciates several measures for addressing 
issues in the Water Sector in a scientific manner such as adoption of latest technology, Fair 
Pricing of Water to ensure its efficient use and reward conservation along with equitable 
access to water for all. They are however greatly perturbed to note that so far, CGWA has 
not levied any charges/collect tax for using Ground Water by the Industries. However, 
revision of Guidelines for Ground Water Abstraction with a view to impose 'Water 
Conservation Fee' is presently under consideration of the Ministry. The Committee believe 
that while the proposed Guidelines can have a lasting impact on reducing wastage of water; 
however, any further delay in their formulation and implementation will only further worsen 
60 the already grim water scenario. They, therefore, recommend the Ministry to formulate 
and implement the Guidelines for Water Audit and Water Conservation, impose a hefty 
charge to discourage the use of Ground Water and introduce incentives to achieve efficient 
use of water by industries at the earliest. They would like to be apprised of the details of 
measures taken in this regard at the earliest. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The National Water Policy, 2012 provides that water budgeting and water accounting be 
carried out for each aquifer. 
 
To ensure a more robust ground water regulatory mechanism, Central Ground Water 
Authority (CGWA) under this Ministry has issued guidelines for regulation of Ground Water 
from time to time. The current guidelines are in vogue from the year 2015. These guidelines 
have now been revised. In the revised guidelines, CGWA has proposed payment of Water 
Conservation Fee (WCF) for ground water extraction by industries, infrastructure units and 
mining projects. The WCF payable varies with the category of the area, type of industry and 
the quantum of ground water extraction and is designed to progressively increase from safe 
to over-exploited areas and from low to high water consuming industries as well as with 
increasing quantum of ground water extraction. WCF guidelines stipulates mandatory water 
audit by industries abstracting ground water 500 m3/day or more in Safe and semi-critical 
and 200 m3/day or more in critical and over-exploited assessment units. For example, a 
packaged drinking water industry extracting ground water to the tune of 5000 m3/day in a 
safe assessment unit will have to pay Rs. 10 /m3 / day, whereas, a similar unit located in a 

37 
 
over-exploited assessment unit will have to pay Rs. 100/m3 / day for the same quantum of 
withdrawal. This will mean that the latter will pay WCF which is 10 times that of the former. 
Through this design, the high rates of Water Conservation Fee proposed in the draft revised 
guidelines is expected to act as a deterrent to large scale ground water extraction by 
industries, especially in over-exploited and critical areas. 
 
(OM No. H.11013/9/2018-GW dated 30.11.2018) 
Recommendation (Para No. 14) 
 
ROLE OF LOCAL ADMINISTRATION IN BRINGING DOWN THE EXCESSIVE USE OF 
GROUND WATER IN URBAN AREAS 
 
The Committee observe that regulation of Ground Water use does not come under the 
jurisdiction of Local Administrations, as it is controlled by the State Ground Water Boards / 
Departments. However, they note from the submissions of the Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Affairs (MoHUA) that the Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) have a crucial role to play in 
reducing overall consumption of Ground Water by adopting such policy measures as 
exploration of alternative water sources by investing in dams, long distance transfer of water 
and installation of desalination plants, treatment and recycling of black water (wastewater 
from toilets) and grey water (wastewater from sinks, bathtubs, washing, etc.) from 
households, industrial establishments, golf course, parks, etc. for use in non-potable 
purposes. Further the ULBs should also take measures for increasing education and 
awareness of masses, conserving water both at household and town level by installing 
robust network of pipeline, stopping leakages from mains and appropriate Pricing of Water 
to achieve economic use and management of demand. Expressing their agreement with the 
aforesaid measures, the Committee believe that over-exploitation of Ground Water in Urban 
Areas including Cities where Private Ground Water Extraction is being resorted to, in quest  
for providing alternative Water Supply at a premium and as a result of this many major cities 
having been pushed to the extent of emptying out all the reserves of Ground Water, the 
Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) can greatly help in preventing uncontrolled use of Ground Water 
and reducing unnecessary wastage of available Water Resources. The Committee are of 
the considered opinion that the Ministry should impress upon the State Governments to 
strengthen ULBs with the requisite manpower and resources to enable taking suitable 
measures for effecting judicious allocation and use of water at the lowest level. They, 
therefore, recommend the Ministry to take appropriate measures in consultation with the 
MoHUA and State Governments to ensure efficient utilisation of water at the earliest. 
 
 
 

38 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The suggestion given by the Hon’ble Committee is noted and the same is being referred to 
the Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs for appropriate action in consultation with 
States/UTs and to forward the action taken report directly to the  Committee under 
intimation to this Ministry. 
 
(OM No. H.11013/9/2018-GW dated 30.11.2018) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 15) 
 
WATER ATMs AS AN ALTERNATIVE TO EXPENSIVE PACKAGED DRINKING WATER 
 
The Committee observe that Water ATMs / Water Vending Machines are an effective 
Instrument in providing Safe and Clean Drinking Water to the masses. The installation of 
these ATMs / Kiosks can be an effective means by which the objective of making safe and 
good quality water available to the public at cheaper rates can be achieved. However, the 
Committee are also aware that as the subject of water comes under the jurisdiction of State 
Governments, they have to take a lead role in installation of such ATMs. The Committee are 
happy to note that the New Delhi Municipal Corporation (NDMC) has established 37 water 
ATMs / Vending Machines in and around parks and other locations where there is a 
reasonable footfall of visitors and another such 40 ATMs are being proposed to be installed 
on Public Private Partnership (PPP) model by September, 2018. In view of the Committee 
since availability of Packaged Drinking Water is mainly a prerequisite for the moving public 
62 / people in transition, the installation of such machines / kiosks at various public places 
such as railway stations, airports, hospitals, religious places, etc. can to a great extent solve 
the problem of making available supply of Safe and Clean Potable Water at nominal rates 
for public consumption. Further, with the installation of such ATMs, the problem of 'plastic 
pollution' also can be reduced to a great extent by providing water in recyclable paper 
glasses / refilling of glass bottles as per the convenience. The Committee would, therefore, 
recommend the Ministry to rope in the State Governments and initiate measures to facilitate 
the setting up of these kiosks all over the country to enable provision of safe drinking water 
for masses at reasonable rates. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The suggestion given by the Hon’ble Committee is noted and the same is being referred to 
the Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs for appropriate action in consultation with 
States/UTs and to forward the action taken report directly to the Committee under intimation 
to this Ministry. 

39 
 
(OM No. H.11013/9/2018-GW dated 30.11.2018) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 16) 
 
MORAL AND ETHICAL ASPECTS OF COMMERCIAL UTILIZATION OF WATER BY THE 
PACKAGED DRINKING WATER INDUSTRIES 
 
Having observed the submissions of the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & 
Ganga Rejuvenation and all other concerned Ministries / Departments / Agencies, the 
Committee find that commercial exploitation of water for Drinking Purposes is centered 
around two main issues i.e. the need to bridge the gap between demand and supply of Safe 
and Pure Drinking Water and its provision for common travelling public, tourists and persons 
spending a lot of time in commuting. However, the Committee are of the opinion that the 
supply of Pure Drinking Water for the masses is a moral and most primary duty of the 
Government, which so far stands conveniently ignored, as is evident from the Current Policy 
Plank of the Government presented before the Committee. The Committee, therefore, 
cannot simply turn a blind eye to this inherent ethical aspect and basic philosophy of a 
welfare State to provide potable water to its citizens. They, therefore, strongly feel that 
Commercialization of Water for Drinking Purposes cannot be only an issue about bridging 
the demand and supply gap but it also should involve moral and ethical issues. A vast 
country like India where divide between rich and poor is so acute and accentuated that Safe 
and Clean Drinking Water cannot be made an aspirational item; which is beyond the reach 
of most of the common people in the country. The Government’s policy cannot favour a 
situation where only those who can afford to pay high prices for quality water should be 
benefited while a vast majority of the masses have to depend on tap water so sparsely 
available and not too hygienic also and is sometimes the main cause for water borne 
diseases. So every Ministry/Department/Agency/State concerned should rise in unision to 
fill the gap between rich and poor so far as accessibility to Safe Drinking Water is concerned 
and take suitable measures to address the unethical practice of charging high rates for 
Clean Potable Water. The Committee, therefore, are of the considered view that supply of 
pure and hygienic water to the public cannot be left largely to the Private Industries whose 
sole interest is to earn profit. Further, taking note of the fact that the Governments, both at 
the Centre and State levels, are not earning a substantial amount on the tax levied on these 
Industries; which otherwise could be utilized to undertake welfare activities for the people, 
the Committee strongly recommend that the Government should play a more proactive role 
in making Safe, Pure and Hygienic water available to the common public at nominal rates. 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The suggestion given by the Hon’ble Committee is noted and the same is being referred to 
the Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs and Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation for 
appropriate action in consultation with States/UTs and to forward the action taken report 
directly to the Committee under intimation to this Ministry. 
 
(OM No. H.11013/9/2018-GW dated 30.11.2018) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

41 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

42 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 2) 
 
GROUND WATER AS A MAJOR SOURCE OF RURAL DRINKING WATER SUPPLY 
 
The Committee note with utter surprise that still 85 per cent of Drinking Water Schemes in 
the rural areas covering 17.14 lakh Rural Habitations are based on Ground Water 
Resources, which although, has ensured assured supply of water, but in the long run, may 
have adverse impact on the Underground Water Table and lead to water quality issues; as 
71,077 Rural Habitations have reported water quality problems. There are 72.72 lakh Water 
Supply Schemes in the rural areas of the country and 56.84 lakh Hand Pumps have so far 
been installed. The Committee are particularly concerned to note that though at present, 87 
per cent of the Rural Households have access to 'basic water,' as stated by NITI Aayog in 
its Report on Composite Water Management Index, only 50 per cent of them get Safe 
Water.  Further, due to inadequate or Unsafe Drinking Water, approximately two lakh 
deaths are occurring annually in the rural areas. The Committee note from the submissions 
made by the Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation (MoDWS) that a strategic goal has 
been established to achieve Har Ghar Jal by 2030. Also, as on 1 April, 2018, 78.14 per cent 
Rural Habitations are able to get more than 40 litre per capita per day Safe Drinking Water 
and 56.04 per cent have access to Piped Water Supply. Keeping in view the alarming rate 
at which Ground Water is being depleted, the Committee desire that the Surface Water 
should be increasingly relied upon to cater to Drinking Water needs of the Rural Areas. The 
access to Piped Water supply to each Rural Household; as proposed in the strategic goal to 
be achieved till 2030 should be focussed on mainly Surface Water Sources except for the 
areas where it is not feasible. Further, expressing their concern over large scale drilling for 
Tubewells / Handpumps, the Committee recommend that a coordinated approach should be 
taken by the State Governments, Ministry of Drinking Water & Sanitation (MoDWS) and the 
Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) while giving permission to install Handpumps to 
check its unbridled growth and strict action should be taken against illegal drilling for 
Handpumps. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the details of Community 
Water Purification Plants being set up in Rural Areas to supply Purified Water in the rural 
areas in the interim period till the completion of network for Piped Water Supply. Further, 
keeping in view the serious water quality issues, particularly in the Habitations affected with 
Arsenic and Fluoride contamination, the Committee feel that the Packaged Drinking Water 

43 
 
Industries may be roped in to complement the Government's efforts to supply Safe and 
Clean Drinking Water. Therefore, these Industries should be given incentive by the 
Government to set up Units/Plants in such areas and provide treated potable water to the 
masses at an affordable cost. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Water being a State subject, supply of potable water is primarily States’ responsibility. 
However, Central government supplements the efforts of State governments by way of 
technical and financial assistance to provide potable water to general public. 
 
M/o Drinking Water & Sanitation (MoDW&S) is supplementing the efforts of the States both 
technically and financially towards ensuring safe and adequate drinking water supply to the 
rural population of the country. 
 
As per information received from MoDW&S, people in about 3.6% of the rural habitations 
(about 62000 in numbers) are at the risk of consuming water contaminated with one or other 
geogenic contamination, whereas more than 80% of the rural habitations are being catered 
safe drinking water through one or other means. 
 
The MoDW&S promotes the States to take up small, sustainable, single village based piped 
water supply schemes which have low O&M cost and are demand driven.  Schemes 
involving community contributions are being provided special attention. 
 
Further, under the National Aquifer Mapping and Management (NAQUIM) programme, the 
Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) is providing technical assistance to States/UTs about 
the design of Arsenic free wells.  The concerned States/UTs may appropriately utilize the 
knowledge shared by CGWB in this connection for creating tubewells/borewells etc. for 
drinking water purposes. 
 
(OM No. H.11013/9/2018-GW dated 30.11.2018) 
 
Comment of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para Nos. 9, 10 & 11 of Chapter –I  of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 3) 
 
 

44 
 
GROUND WATER, A CRUCIAL SOURCE FOR URBAN DRINKING WATER SUPPLY 
 
The Committee note that as per the Census of India, 2011, although a major portion of 
Urban Households i.e. 70.6 per cent have access to tap water, Covered Wells, Uncovered 
Wells, Handpumps / Tube wells / Borewells still account for water supply to 1.65 per cent 
4.50 per cent 11.86 per cent and 8.90 per cent of Urban Households respectively; 
highlighting the dependence of Ground Water in Urban Water Supply as well. They are 
concerned to note the fact that although 93 per cent of urban population have access to 
‘basic water’ as stated by NITI Aayog, large scale intercity and intra city inequities exists in 
the country which has led to heavy dependence on Privately Extracted Ground Water and 
thereby, driving down water table in most of the Cities. Ground water table in 21 Major 
Cities including Delhi, Bengaluru and Hyderabad is expected to reach Zero Level by 2021– 
affecting access for 100 million people. The Committee further note that globally Israel has 
emerged as the largest user of treated and recycled water with 94 per cent of reused water 
being used. The Committee also note that the Government has taken several initiatives to 
provide Universal Water Coverage in 500 Cities (having population greater than one lakh) 
under Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT), which was 
launched in 2015, such as Rehabilitation of Old Water Supply Systems including Water 
Treatment Plants, Rejuvenation of Water Bodies and Recharging of Ground Water, etc. 
However, the Committee, while agreeing with the views of NITI Aayog that recycling / reuse 
of waste water is the need of the hour, recommend the Ministry to take appropriate 
measures to reduce dependence on fresh water. In this context, the Committee further 
recommend that appropriate measures should also be taken to lay separate Pipe Line for 
Recycled Water and Fresh Water. Further according to the Committee, reduction in intercity 
and intra city gaps in Urban Water Supply should be made one of the priority components – 
while providing for universal water coverage in 500 cities under AMRUT. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the details of measures taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As per reply by Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs, the Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and 
Urban Transformation (AMRUT) was launched by the Central Government on June 25, 
2015, for 500 cities and towns across India covering about 22.50 crore population as per 
census 2011. AMRUT Mission is a centrally sponsored scheme with a total outlay of rupees 
one lakh crore including a Central Assistance of Assistance of Rs. 50,000 crore spread over 
5 years i.e., from FY 2015-16 to FY 2019-20. 
 
Under AMRUT Mission, out of the total plan size of Rs. 77,640 crore, major allocation is for 
water supply projects worth Rs.39,010 crore (50%) followed by sewerage & septage 
projects worth Rs.32,456 crore (42%). The Mission focuses on development of basic urban 

45 
 
infrastructure in water supply sector in the Mission cities with the expected outcome of 
universal coverage for access to potable water for every household in Mission cities. 
To mitigate the problem in drinking water sector, the water supply component inter-alia, 
provides for augmentation of existing water supply, rehabilitation of old water supply 
systems including treatment plants and rejuvenation of water bodies, specifically for drinking 
water supply and recharging of ground water. Recycling/ reuse of waste water, reduction of 
non-revenue water are some of the important features. 
 
This includes end to end solution to facilitate universal coverage of household water supply 
such as source improvement work, water treatment plants, storage facilities like 
underground & overhead tanks, distribution network, improvement in pumping machinery 
and universal metering. 
 
Universal coverage of water supply is the priority sectors under the Mission. At the inception 
of AMRUT, the water supply coverage was 64%. By the end of the Mission, it aims to cover 
100% households. The target is to provide 138.77 lakh water tap connection to achieve 
universal coverage. So far Rs. 31.67 lakh tap connections have been provided. Details of 
target and achievement in water tap connections are given at Annexure-1 and Annexur-2 
respectively. 
 
Implementation status 
 
Out of the total approved water supply projects (in all SAAPs) of Rs. 39,011 crore, works 
have been completed for 69 projects worth Rs.303.32 crore, contracts have been awarded 
for 781 projects worth Rs. 26,110.28 crore. NITs have been issued for 169 projects worth 
Rs.8,100.75 crore and DPRs for 97 projects worth Rs.3,429.19 crore have been approved. 
 
(OM No. H.11013/9/2018-GW dated 30.11.2018) 
 
Comment of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter –I  of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 4) 
 
GROUND WATER AS A RAW MATERIAL FOR PACKAGED DRINKING WATER 
INDUSTRIES 
 
The Committee observe that out of 447 Billion Cubic Metre (BCM) of total Replenishable 
Ground Water available annually, 228 BCM is currently being used in Irrigation while 25 

46 
 
BCM is being used for Domestic, Drinking and Industrial purposes. They further note that 
the Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) constituted in 1997 under subsection (3) of 
Section 3 of Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 has been entrusted with the responsibility 
for the Management and Development of Ground Water. It gives No Objection Certificates 
(NOCs) for abstraction of Ground Water. As per the NOCs issued by the CGWA, Packaged 
Drinking Water Units / Plants are extracting 13.3 Million Cubic Metres of Ground Water per 
year. They also observe that Packaged Drinking Water / Mineral Water Packaging 
Industries / Bottling Plants are granted permission to extract Ground Water - subject to the 
recharge obligations stipulated by the CGWA, which is 50 per cent of Ground Water 
recharge in 'Safe' areas, 100 per cent of Ground Water recharge in 'Semi-Critical' areas and 
200 per cent of ground water recharge in 'critical' areas. Further no Industry is allowed to be 
set up in 'Over-Exploited' areas. Also, additional measures such as adoption of villages for 
developing water security plans, plantations suitable for a particular area to enhance the 
Recharging Capacity and maintenance of Recharge Structures, etc. are suggested to 
compensate for the depletion of Ground Water. The Industries are directed to implement 
recharge measures within six months of the issuance of NOC. Besides, the CGWA has 
Notified 162 Areas where installation of New Ground Water Abstraction structures is not 
permitted without the prior specific approval of Authorised officers. However, the  
Committee are perplexed to note that despite the aforesaid stipulations, a large number of 
licenses have been given in States, where significant number of 'over-exploited' units are 
lying, such as Andhra Pradesh (having 41 units and 55 m3 of Ground Water being 
withdrawn per day), Gujarat (having 24 units with 8 m3/day withdrawal), Karnataka (having 
63 units with 60 m3/day withdrawal), Tamil Nadu (having 374 units with 895 m3/day 
withdrawal) and Uttar Pradesh (having 111 units with 941 m3/day withdrawal). They further 
find that multiple Government Agencies / Departments are involved in the issuance of 
license to Packaged Water Industries such as State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs); 
which give consent to operate, subject to fulfillment of CGWA Guidelines for Water Intensive 
Industries. Further, in case of Packaged Drinking Water Industries / Plants, the Certifying 
Agencies are Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) and the Food Safety and Standards 
Authority of India (FSSAI). However, the Committee are surprised to note that 18 Packaged 
Drinking Water Units have been allowed to be set up in 'Semi-Critical' areas of Andhra 
Pradesh, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh 
and Uttarakhand, with 2552 m3 of Ground Water being extracted per day. Further 1 unit 
each in 'Critical' areas of Chhattisgarh, Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand have been permitted 
withdrawing as much as 825 m3 water per day. The Committee are further surprised to note 
that despite the huge withdrawals of Ground Water by Packaged Drinking Water Industries, 
the Ministry has made no effort to find out the total quantum of Ground Water being 
abstracted by the Packaged Drinking Water Industries as a whole and its impact on the 
available Ground Water Resources in the areas, as also the effectiveness of measures 
taken to Recharge the Ground Water as a compensatory measure. The Committee would, 

47 
 
therefore, recommend the Ministry to carry out assessment of total quantum of Ground 
Water being used by the Packaged Drinking Water Industries and its consequent effect on 
Ground Water Level in the areas where these Industries have come up on a large scale. 
The Committee further desire to be apprised of the details of steps taken by the 
Government in this regard within three months of presentation of this Report to the House. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The No Objection Certificate (NOC) accorded by Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) 
for the packaged drinking water industries are given at Annexure-3.  Further, the licenses 
for these packaged drinking water industries are being accorded by FSSAI and the total 
quantum of ground water use by such package drinking water industries are available with 
them. The details in this connection are being sought from FSSAI and shall be submitted. 
The change in the ground water regime in an area is the cumulative impact of ground water 
development by the agriculture, industries, infrastructure, etc. Therefore, it will not be 
possible to assess impact of package drinking water units separately in the ground water 
regime.  However, it is kindly submitted that Ministry of Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation has revised the guidelines for ground water extraction. 
A new concept of water conversation fee has been introduced to take care of over 
exploitation of ground water.  The Water Conservation Fee payable varies with the category 
of the area, type of industry and the quantum of ground water extraction. It is designed to 
progressively increase from safe to over-exploited areas and from low to high water 
consuming industries as well as with increasing quantum of ground water extraction. The 
water conservation fee collected shall be used for creation of structures for artificial 
recharge by States/Union Territories. 
 
(OM No. H.11013/9/2018-GW dated 30.11.2018) 
 
Comment of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No 17 of Chapter –I  of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 5) 
 
The Committee further note that Packaged Drinking Water Units / Plants supplement the 
Government's efforts to make Safe Drinking Water available to public. However, the 
Committee are of the view that the gap between demand and supply of wholesome water 
for consumption should be bridged largely by Government as a top most Prioritised Social 
Responsibility and not allow the Industries to exploit this Sector for purely Commercial 
Gains. Therefore, they recommend the Government to assume a prime role in provision of 

48 
 
clean and Safe Drinking Water. While acknowledging the need for Sustainable Management 
of Ground Water; which is our 'fixed deposit', vital for catering to increased demand in 
future, the Committee are of the opinion that the dual goal of making available Safe Drinking 
Water without allowing rampant use of Ground Water Resources as a raw material, can be 
achieved by encouraging the setting up of Packaged Water Industries on Public Private 
Partnership (PPP) basis, thereby ensuring Government's role in utilisation of water in a 
rational manner on the one hand and provision of safe water in a cost effective manner on 
the other. The Committee feel that the use of Ground Water, which is in fact a scarce 
community resource, as a Raw Material, should be regulated in a rational manner and not 
allowed to be used as a source of profits for industries. Taking note of the Ministry's 
submission that licensing of Packaged Drinking Water Manufacturing Units may be highly 
controlled and they must be made to use mostly Surface Water Resources, Raw Water 
Storage Structures, etc. and Ground Water only as the last resort, duly controlled by the 
States, the Committee strongly recommend that the use of Ground Water should be 
restricted and allowed to be used only in exceptional circumstances. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation to bring necessary changes in water policy and the Guidelines accordingly at 
the earliest without any further delay as this is the most pressing need of the hour. 
  
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has formulated National Water Policy 2012 which inter-alia contains provisions 
to arrest ground water depletion.  National Water Policy 2012 contains the following: 
a) Declining ground water levels in over-exploited areas may be arrested by introducing 
improved technologies of water use, incentivizing efficient water use and 
encouraging community based management of aquifers. 
b) It may be ensured that industrial effluents, local cess pools, residues of fertilizers and 
chemicals, etc., should not reach the ground water. 
 
To ensure a more robust ground water regulatory mechanism, the existing guidelines of 
Central Ground Water Authority (CGWA) have been revised. The guidelines have been 
drafted after wide public consultation and modifications based on the feedback received 
from the stake-holders. The salient features of the guidelines include: 
 
a. Pan India applicability. 
b. Introduction of Water Conservation Fee (WCF): 
 based on type of industry, 
 quantum of extraction and 
 category of the area. 

49 
 
c. Mandatory requirement of digital flow meters, piezometers and digital water level 
recorders (with or without telemetry depending upon quantum of extraction) 
d. Mandatory water audit by industries abstracting ground water 500 m3/day or more in Safe 
and semi-critical and 200 m3/day or more in critical and over-exploited assessment units. 
e. Mandatory roof top rain water harvesting except for certain specified industries. 
f. Measures to be adopted to ensure prevention from pollution in the plant premises of 
polluting industries/ projects 
g. Exemption from requirement of NOC has been given to:  
 agricultural users 
 users employing non-energised means to extract water, 
 individual households (using less than 1” diameter delivery pipe) and 
 Armed Forces Establishments during operational deployment or during mobilization 
in forward locations 
h. Exemption (with certain requirements)has been granted to 
 Strategic and operational infrastructure projects for Armed Forces 
 Defence  and Paramilitary Forces Establishments 
 Government water supply agencies 
 
CGWA has proposed payment of Water Conservation Fee (WCF) for ground water 
extraction by industries, infrastructure units and mining projects. The WCF payable varies 
with the category of the area, type of industry and the quantum of ground water extraction 
and is designed to progressively increase from safe to over-exploited areas and from low to 
high water consuming industries as well as with increasing quantum of ground water 
extraction. 
 
The Water Conservation Fee thus collected shall be made available to the concerned 
States / UTs to be used for implementation of artificial recharge measures and creating 
awareness among the users on water conservation. 
 
(OM No. H.11013/9/2018-GW dated 30.11.2018) 
 
Comment of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter –I  of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 10) 
 
 
 

50 
 
PRICING OF PACKAGED DRINKING WATER 
 
The Committee note that a large number of Packaged Drinking Water Units have been set 
up in the country whose profits have run into billions of Rupees. However, they are 
surprised to note that no study / assessment has been carried out by the Government with 
regard to the total earnings of these Industries, on the plea that this matter does not fall 
under the purview of the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga 
Rejuvenation. The Ministry has only requested the States to adopt an appropriate Pricing 
Policy in respect of the Packaged Drinking Water / Beverage and Bottling industries. 
Moreover, the Ministry has not been able to furnish the information on the total amount of 
revenue received by the State Government from these industries. Since water is free 
commodity, which should be accessible to all, the Committee find the reply of the Ministry 
with regard to pricing of the Packaged Drinking Water very terse, that it is based on the 
demand and supply side forces. Although the Ministry has accepted the fact that it is the 
bounden duty of the Government to provide Safe and Pure Drinking Water to the people at 
large, the Ministry has distanced itself from any role in this regard, citing water as a State 
subject and therefore its pricing falls under the purview of the State Government. The 
Committee, while disapproving of this attitude, recommend the Ministry to coordinate with 
the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises and the Ministry of Finance, 
Department of Revenue for a proper study / assessment of the income / profit earned by the 
Packaged Drinking Water Industries to enable formulation of appropriate Pricing Policy - in 
respect of commercial use of water by Water Intensive Industries, including the 
Packaged/Bottled Water Industries.  Further, in view of the Committee, at present, utilisation 
of water as a Free Raw Material for the Commercial Purposes has grown due to lack of 
inter-ministerial coordination on this issue. Therefore, the Committee believe that there is an 
urgent need to formulate a National Policy about the Commercial Use of Water, laying down 
the proper framework and regulatory measures for better control of the Water Intensive 
Industries. They, therefore, strongly recommend the Government to chalk out a policy in 
consultation with all the concerned Ministries/Departments. They would also like to be 
apprised of the details of measures taken to ensure a congruent policy approach to address 
the issue of Commercial Use of water and its impact within three months of presentation of 
this Report to the House. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The National Water Policy 2012 inter-alia recommends:  
 Equitable access to water for all and its fair pricing, for drinking and other uses such 
as sanitation, agricultural and industrial, be arrived at through independent statutory 
Water Regulatory Authority, set up by each State, after wide ranging consultation 
with all stakeholders. 

51 
 
 Recycling and reuse of water, after treatment to specified standards, also needs to 
be incentivized through a properly planned tariff system. 
 Allow Industries in water short regions to either withdraw only the make-up water or 
have an obligation to return treated effluent to a specified standard back to the 
hydrologic system. 
 Implement subsidies and incentives to encourage recovery of industrial pollutants 
and recycling / reuse. 
As per revised guidelines of ground water extraction of CGWA, likely to be notified soon, 
there is a provision of charging of Water Conservation Fee (WCF) for ground water 
extraction by industries, infrastructure units and mining projects.  The WCF payable varies 
with the category of the area, type of industry and the quantum of ground water extraction. It 
is designed to progressively increase from safe to over-exploited areas and from low to high 
water consuming industries as well as with increasing quantum of ground water extraction.  
Thus, WCF, to a great extent, is likely to address the concern expressed by the committee 
about the ground water exploitation of Industries for their profit earning. 
 
(OM No. H.11013/9/2018-GW dated 30.11.2018) 
 
Comment of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 26 of Chapter –I  of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Para No. 12) 
 
NATIONAL POLICY ON COMMERCIAL USE OF WATER 
 
The Committee observe that no specific policy has been framed in respect of the 
Commercial utilisation of water which is growing tremendously due to the lack of adequate 
supply of good quality water commensurate with demands of rising population. With regard 
to the use of Ground Water in Industries; which is comparatively easily available, there is 
only CGWA laid Guidelines - which have to be followed for extraction by all the Water 
Intensive Industries viz. Packaged Drinking Water, Beverages, Breweries, Distilleries, etc. 
The quality issues in Packaged Drinking Water are governed by the FSSAI Rules and 
Regulations. The Committee further observe that the National Water Policy, 2012 states "(a) 
A system to evolve benchmarks for water uses for different purposes, i.e., water footprints, 
and water auditing should be developed to promote and incentivize efficient use of water (b) 
The Project appraisal and environment impact assessment for water uses, particularly for 
Industrial Projects, should, inter-alia, include the analysis of the water footprints for the use. 
(c) Recycle and reuse of water, including return flows, should be the general norm. (d) In 
order to meet equity, efficiency and economic principles, the water charges should 

52 
 
preferably / as a rule be determined on volumetric basis. Such charges should be reviewed 
periodically. (e) Recycle and reuse of water, after treatment to specified standards, should 
also be incentivized through a properly planned tariff system.”  
 
Although, as per the submission of the Ministry, para 7 of the National Water Policy, 2012 
suggests specific action plans for Industrial use of water such as demand management, 
water use efficiency and water pricing, the Committee find that it does not state specific 
measures for regulation of commercial use of water. As stated earlier, the Committee are of 
the view that a proper National Policy needs to be formulated with regard to Regulation of 
Commercial use of Water encompassing inter-alia, such aspects as specific Commercial 
Use of water, particular source of water to be used, quantum of water, appropriate pricing, 
taxation of commercial gains made by using water, the specific social and environmental 
obligations of Industries, etc. Also, as a corporate social responsibility the industries should 
be actively involved in participation of such activities as adoption of Water Bodies for 
maintenance, installation of Community RO/Water Purification Plants in the villages, 
recycling / reusing of Bottles used for Packaging, etc. They, therefore, recommend the 
Ministry to frame a Policy accordingly within three months of presentation of this Report. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The National Water Policy 2012 inter-alia recommends:  
 Equitable access to water for all and its fair pricing, for drinking and other uses such 
as sanitation, agricultural and industrial, be arrived at through independent statutory 
Water Regulatory Authority, set up by each State, after wide ranging consultation 
with all stakeholders. 
 Recycling and reuse of water, after treatment to specified standards, also needs to 
be incentivized through a properly planned tariff system. 
 Allow Industries in water short regions to either withdraw only the make-up water or 
have an obligation to return treated effluent to a specified standard back to the 
hydrologic system. 
 Implement subsidies and incentives to encourage recovery of industrial pollutants 
and recycling / reuse. 
The Ministry of Water Resources, RD & GR (MoWR, RD & GR) has revised the existing 
guidelines for ground water abstraction.  These guidelines have the provision of Water 
Conservation Fee (WCF) which shall be collected from the industrial establishments against 
usage of ground water. The Water Conservation Fee collected from proponents in a State/ 
UT shall be made available to the concerned States / UT to be used for facilitating 
measures for sustainable and efficient management of water resources depending on the 
prevalent hydrogeological scenario, land use and agricultural practices. These interventions 

53 
 
could range from implementation of water conservation/ artificial recharge measures, 
promotion of micro-irrigation practices through subsidies, encouraging change in cropping 
pattern to less-water consuming crops to incentivizing good ground water management  and 
water governance practices, coupled with mass awareness and capacity building 
campaigns. The proposed mechanism is expected to help States / UTs implement large 
scale water conservation / artificial recharge schemes in priority areas in a focussed and 
scientific manner to ensure optimal benefits and will allay the concerns of the Hon’ble 
Committee to a large extent. 
 
(OM No. H.11013/9/2018-GW dated 30.11.2018) 
 
Comment of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 32 of Chapter –I  of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

54 
 
CHAPTER – V 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF THE 
GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI Dr. SANJAY JAISWAL, 
03 March, 2020 Chairperson, 
13  Phalguna, 1941 (Saka) Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 

55 
 
  
 
 


56 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


57 
 
Annexure - III 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STATEWISE BREAKUP OF NOC'S ISSUED BY CGWA TO 
PACKAGED DRINKING WATER  INDUSTRIES  AS ON 31.03.2018 
Sl. 
No. 
State No. of 
NOC 
accorded 
Quantum of ground 
water withdrawal 
allowed (cubic m/yr) 
1 Andhra Pradesh 24 527660 
2 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
5 48065 
3 Assam 103 948129 
4 Bihar 12 385250 
5 Chhattisgarh 13 183168.25 
6 Delhi 1 9600 
7 Gujarat 9 307186 
8 Haryana 17 1233556 
9 Himachal Pradesh 2 210000 
10 Jammu & Kashmir 1 9000 
11 Jharkhand 2 20100 
12 Karnataka 8 80115 
13 Madhya Pradesh 2 13500 
14 Maharashtra 33 791587 
15 Manipur 3 51680 
16 Mizoram 1 7370 
17 Meghalaya 3 34290 
18 Nagaland 3 22127 
19 Odisha 8 1231952.5 
20 Punjab 18 1181777 
21 Rajasthan 13 397110 
22 Tamil Nadu 25 615217 
23 Telangana 2 4200 
24 Tripura 8 45925 
25 Uttar Pradesh 53 4554229 
26 Uttarakhand 6 384321 
  Total 375 13297114.75 

58 
 
Annexure - IV  
Annual Public Laboratory Testing Report of Packaged Drinking Water/Mineral Water for 
the year  
 
Year No. of 
samples 
analysed 
No. of 
samples 
found non-
conforming 
No. of 
Civil/ 
Criminal 
cases  
Launched 
Convictions No. of cases in which 
Penalties imposed 
/Amount raised 
2014-15 734 226 130 16 14/Rs. 3, 18, 000 
2015-16 767 345 176 39 64/Rs.30,49,100 
2016-17 697 224 131 33 40/Rs.7,05,500 
2017-18 1127 504 260 97 148/Rs.39,70,500 
 
 
 
 
 
  

59 
 
Annexure-V 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2019-20) HELD ON TUESDAY, 3 MARCH 2020 
   
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1530 hours in Committee Room '139', First 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  
Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal – Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Vijay Baghel 
3. Shri Bhagirath Chaudhary 
4. Shri Guman Singh Damor 
5. Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit 
6. Dr. K. Jayakumar 
7. Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel 
8. Shri Sanjay Kaka Patil 
9. Shri S. Ramalingam 
10. Shri Dipsinh Shankarsinh Rathod 
11. Shri Prajwal Revanna 
12. Shri A. Narayana Swamy 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
13. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Preeti Srivastava   - Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri Raju Srivastava    - Director 
3. Shri R.C. Sharma   - Additional Director 

60 
 
  
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee. 
Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration (a) Draft Report on Demands for Grants 
(2020-21) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti -Department of Water Resources, River Development 
& Ganga Rejuvenation; (b) Draft Report on Demands for Grants (2020-21) of the Ministry of 
Jal Shakti - Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation; and (c) Draft Report on Action 
Taken by Government on Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty Third 
Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject 'Socio-economic impact of commercial 
exploitation of water by industries'. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the 
aforesaid three draft Reports with minor modifications.   
3. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to present the above Reports to 
both the Houses of Parliament in the current Session. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
*** 
  

61 
 
ANNEXURE - VI 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS/ 
OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY THIRD REPORT (SIXTEENTH LOK 
SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(i) Total number of Recommendations/Observations                      16  
 
(ii) Recommendation/Observations which have been accepted by the Government 
 Para Nos. 1, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14, 15, and 16   
   
       Total - 10  
Percentage -62.50% 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
 view of the Government’s replies 
 Para Nos. NIL             Total - NIL  
        Percentage- 0%  
 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
 not been accepted by the Committee 
 Para Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 10 and 12            
 
Total – 06 
           Percentage 37.50 - %  
                                         
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of the Government is 
 still awaited  
 Para Nos. NIL                                                    
 
Total NIL 
                  Percentage - 0% 
 
 
 
 
 