 
18 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2022-23) 
                 
         
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
                  
         
                 
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI – DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES, 
RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION  
 
         
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2022-23) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Standing Committee on Water Resources ] 
         
         
         
EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
  
 
         
            
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
         
December, 2022 / Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 

EIGHTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2022-23) 
          
(SEVENTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
         
         
         
MINISTRY OF JAL SHAKTI – DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES, 
RIVER DEVELOPMENT AND GANGA REJUVENATION 
 
                 
         
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2022-23) 
 
 (Action Taken by the Government on the Observations / 
Recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2022-23) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti - 
Department of Water Resource, River Development and Ganga 
Rejuvenation) 
         
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   20.12 .2022 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on  20.12.2022 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
                 
         
December, 2022 / Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 

 
W. R. C.  No. 73 
         
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
         
         
         
Price :  Rs.  
         
         
         
         
         
 
 
 
         
     
                     
 
 
 
         
        © 2022 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
  
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha  (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
CONTENTS 
 
  Page 
 
Composition of 
the Committee 
 
……………………………………………………………… (iii) 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………… 
 
(v) 
 
CHAPTER - I Report……………………………………………………… 
 
1 
CHAPTER – II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government…………………………… 
 
11 
CHAPTER - III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies……………………………………………………… 
 
32 
CHAPTER - IV Observations/Recommendations in respect  of   which  the 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee……………...................................... 
 
33 
CHAPTER - V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still 
awaited…………………………………………………….. 
 
39 
 ANNEXURES 
 
 
I Minutes of the  Third Sitting of the Committee held on 
15.12.2022  
 
40 
 
 
II Status of filling up of vacancies in CGWB as on 06.06.2022 42 
 
III Status of Ground Water Monitoring Wells (As on March 
2021) 
 
57 
 
IV 
 
Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the  Fifteenth  
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) of the Committee 
 
59 

COMPOSITION OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER RESOURCES 
(2022-23) 
  
 Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel      -             Chairperson 
 
 
 LOK SABHA 
 
 
2.  Shri Vijay Baghel  
3.  Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan   
4.  Shri Bhagirath Choudhary 
5.  Shri Chandra Prakash Choudhary  
6.  Shri Guman Singh Damor  
7.  Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit  
8.  Dr. K. Jayakumar  
9.  Shri Dhanush M. Kumar  
10.  Shri Sunil Kumar  
11.  Shri Mohammad Akbar Lone  
12.  Shri Kuruva Gorantla Madhav  
13.  Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel  
14.  Shri Sanjay (Kaka) Ramchandra Patil  
15.  Shri P. Ravindhranath  
16.  Ms.  Nusrat Jahan Ruhi  
17.  Smt.  Agatha K. Sangma  
18.  Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi  
19.  Shri Chandan Singh  
20.  Shri D.K. Suresh  
21.  Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi 
 
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
22.  Shri H.D. Devegowda  
23.  Shri Aneel Prasad Hegde  
24.  Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena  
25.  Smt. Mausam Noor  
26.  Shri Sharad Pawar  
27.  Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad  
28.  Shri Arun Singh  
29.  Sant Balbir Singh  
30.  Shri Pramod Tiwari  
31.  Vacant  
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Chander Mohan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Sood  - Director 
2. Shri Ram Lal Yadav   - Additional Director 
3. Shri Gaurav Jain   - Assistant Committee Officer 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Water Resources (202 2-23) having 
been authorized b y the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present the 
Eighteenth - Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in their Fifteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on Demands for Grants (202 2-23) of t he Ministry of Jal Shakti -Department of 
Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation. 
 
2.  The Fifteenth Report of the Committee was presented to Lok Sabha and laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on 23 March 2022. The Action Taken replies of the G overnment to 
all the recommendations contained in the Report were received in this Secretariat on                     
23 June, 2022. 
 
3.  The replies of the Government were examined and the Report was considered and 
adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 15.12.2022. 
 
4. An analysis of the Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifteenth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) of the Committee is given in Annexure-IV. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
 16 December,  2022 Chairperson 
25 Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Water Resources (202 2-23) deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their 
Fifteenth Report (17th Lok Sabha) on the Demands for Grants  (2022-23) of the Ministry of Jal 
Shakti – Department of Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation. 
 
2.  The Fifteenth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 23.03.2022 and was laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on the same date. The Report contai ned 18 
Observations/Recommendations.  
 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 18 Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been received from the Government. These have been examined and 
categorized as follows: - 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
(Chapter II):  
 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, and 18 
       (Total – 15) 
 
(ii) Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to purs ue in 
view of the Government’s replies (Chapter III):  
 
Recommendation Nos. NIL       
     (Total – NIL) 
 
(iii) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee (Chapter IV):  
 
Recommendation Nos. 3,11 and 15       
(Total – 03)  
(iv) Observations / Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited (Chapter V):  
 
Para Nos. NIL        
      (Total – NIL) 
 
4. The Committee desire that replies to recommendations made in the Chapter -I of this Report 
may be furnished to the Committee expeditiously.  
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of their 
Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.   
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
A. Water Resources Scenario 
 
Recommendation No. 3 (Para No. 2.3) 
 
6. The Committee noted that water availability per person is dependent on population of the 
country and the per capita water availability in the country is reducing progressively.  The 
average annual per capita water availability in the years 2001 and 2011 was assessed as 1816 
cubic meters and 1545 cubic meters respectively, which may further reduce due to increase in 
population.  Annual per capita water availability of less than 1700 cubic meters is considered as 
water stressed condition, whereas annual per capita water availab ility below 1000 cubic meters 
is considered as a water scarcity condition. The Committee further note d with concern that the 
biggest water consuming sector in the country was the agriculture, followed by domestic and 
industrial sector(s). The Committee ha d been informed that the Department had  taken various 
steps to increase the per capita water availability, viz., launching of Jal Shakti Abhiyan, 
formulation of National Perspective Plan (NPP), implementation of National Aquifer Mapping 
and Management (NAQU IM), Atal Bhujal Yojana (ATAL JAL) etc.  Notwithstanding  these 
measures, the Committee we re of the view that there was an urgent need to decrease the 
water consumption in the agriculture sector. The Committee believe d that crop diversification 
and crop pla nning accompanied with application of modern technologies like moisture sensor 
would be of significant help in improving the per capita water availability by producing more with 
less usage of water. The Committee therefore recommend ed that the Department t akes pro -
active steps and work in close collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture and Indian Council 
of Agricultural Research (ICAR) in order to achieve the goal of decreasing the usage of water in 
agriculture sector.  Further, keeping in view the fac t that subsidized electricity and fertilizer ha d 
encouraged farmers to grow water -intensive crops even in the areas having water scarcity, 
the Committee were of the considered opinion that institutional changes were the need of the 
hour.  The Committee, th erefore, urge d the Department to work in close collaboration with 
the Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Power and the concerned States to explore the option 
of having energy efficient pricing which may become an important tool for sustainable 
management of groundwater resources.  
 
7. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows:  
“CGWB, an attached body under the aegis of DoWR, RD &GR, has taken up Aquifer Mapping 
and Management Programme during XII Plan, under the scheme ‘Ground Water Management 
and Regulation’. The Aquifer Mapping is aimed to delineate aquifer disposition and the ir 
characterization for preparation of aquifer/area specific ground water management plans with 
community participation. The management plans including agriculture sector like crop 
diversification, sprinkler system, drip irrigation, etc. are shared with th e respective State 
Governments for taking appropriate measures/implementation. Further, Public Interaction 
Programs (PIP) are being organized at grass root level for disseminating the tenets of the 
Aquifer Management Plans as part of the National Aquifer M apping and Management 
(NAQUIM) Programme for the benefit of the stakeholders, including farmers. So far, 1,093 such 
programs have been conducted in different parts of the country including ‘o ver-exploited’ and 
‘critical’ ground water areas in which nearly 90,000 people including farmers have been 
sensitized on various aspects of water conservation and ground water management. The 
NAQUIM outputs are shared with the State Governments through the State Ground Water 
Coordination Committees (SGWCC) which are hea ded by the concerned Principal Secretaries 
of the respective States. From 2018, CGWB has started sharing the NAQUIM 

3 
 
recommendations to the District Authorities and so far outputs in respect of 377 districts are 
already shared with the District authorities.  Outputs are also being shared with other central 
agencies for their effective utilization. CGWB also provides technical assistance to the State 
Governments, as and when requested for such assistance.Best practices of water conservation 
by various entities including private persons, NGOs, PSUs etc have been compiled and put on 
the web site of this Department for the benefit of general public. An interactive link on best 
practices has also been created for receiving inputs from public, which, after necessary  
evaluation/validation are put on the website for the benefit of the public. 
Mass awareness programmes (Trainings, Seminars, Workshops, Exhibitions, Trade Fares and 
Painting Competitions etc.) are conducted from time to time each year under the information , 
Education & Communication (IEC) Scheme of DoWR, RD & GR in various parts of the country 
to promote water conservation techniques including in the irrigation sector. 
For crop diversification and water use efficiency in agriculture sector, an awareness cam paign 
viz. ‘Sahi Fasal’ campaign was launched by National Water Mission on 14.11.2019 to nudge 
farmers in the water stressed areas to grow crops which are not water intensive, but use water 
very efficiently; and are economically remunerative; are healthy a nd nutritious; suited to the 
agro-climatic-hydro characteristics of the area; and are environmentally friendly.   Under Sahi 
Fasal, series workshops have been organized in Amritsar (Punjab) on 14.11.2019, Aurangabad 
(Maharashtra) on 13.01.2020 and Kurukshe tra (Haryana) on 14.02.2020 and with technical 
experts in New Delhi on 26-27.11.2019. 
Working in  close coordination with other Ministries/Departments Jal Shakti Abhiyan : Catch the 
Rain (JSA:CTR) Campaign was launched by Hon’ble Prime Minister on 22.03.20 21 to cover all 
the blocks of all districts (rural as well as urban areas) across the country during 22 ndMarch 
2021 to 30 thNovember 2021 - the pre -monsoon and monsoon period.  Jal Shakti Abhiyan: 
Catch the Rain (JSA: CTR) -2022 has been launched by Hon’ble  President on 29.03.2022in all 
districts (rural as well as urban areas) of the country with the theme “Catch the Rain, where it 
falls, when it falls”  The campaign will be implemented from 29 March, 2022 to 30 November, 
2022 - the pre-monsoon and monsoon period in the country. 
A Joint D.O. letter signed by 10 Secretaries of Various Ministries/Departments was written to all 
Chief Secretaries on 15.04.2022 for implementation of Jal Shakti Abhiyan: Catch the Rain 
(JSA:CTR) - 2022 campaign during pre -monsoon and  monsoon period from 29.03.2022 to 
30.11.2022 in all rural and urban districts of the country, focussing on harvesting and 
conservation of rainwater. The principle of reuse, recycle and recharge of water would be 
inherent to the Abhiyan and the management of used or waste water specially grey water would 
also be part of the campaign.  
As the country is celebrating Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav to celebrate and commemorate 75 years 
of independence, it has been decided to create or revive 75 water bodies called 'Am rit 
Sarovars' in each districts of the country.   Hon'ble Prime Minister, in his Mann Ki Baat 
addressed to the Nation on 24th April, 2022 gave a clarion call to construct 75 Amrit Sarovars in 
each district.   Efforts in this direction have already been initi ated and approximately 50,000 
Amrit Sarovars nationwide shall be accomplished during the Amrit Kal from 24th April, 2022 to 
15th August, 2023.   A Joint advisory in this regard has also been issued to all State/UTs on 
18.04.2022 by 6 Secretaries of Ministri es/Departments of Government of India.    Guidelines for 
Amrit Sarovars have been issued by Department of Rural Development to share district wise 
plan with them and as well as with National Water Mission, Ministry of Jal Shakti.   The action 
plan should inc lude GPS mapping and time required to complete the activity.    While finalising 

4 
 
the sites, Districts may provide focus on water -stressed blocks specially with reference to 
drinking water. 
There commendation of the Committee to decrease water consumption in  Agriculture is also 
being followed under Atal Bhujal Yojana, where emphasis has been given on efficient irrigation 
so as to increase the water efficiency through demands side interventions such as use of micro 
irrigation systems, crop diversification etc.  States will be incentivized based upon their 
performance on these parameters. 
A meeting was held under the chairmanship of Secretary, DoWR, RD & GR on 13.04.2022 with 
the representatives of Department of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research, and States of Gujarat, Haryana, Maharashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan and 
Tamil Nadu to discuss more efficient use of water in agriculture and related issues”.  
 
8. The Committee regret to note that the Action Taken Reply furnished by the 
Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga Rejuvenation is silent on 
the specific  recommendation of the Committee urging the Department to explore the 
option of having energy efficient pricing in close collaboration with the Ministry of 
Agriculture, Ministry of Power and the concerned States which may become an 
important tool for sustainable management of groundwater resources. Considering the 
fact that managing water use in agriculture is a way forward to prevent rampant wastage 
of water, t he Committee reiterate their recommendation that the Department should 
pursue actively in coordination with the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Power 
and the concerned States  the option of effective water pricing for a more sustainable 
use of water in agriculture sector. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps 
taken by the Department in this regard within 3 months of presentation of this Report.  
 
B. Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) 
 
Recommendation No. 9 (Para No. 2.9) 
 
9. The Committ ee note d that the Central Ground Water Board (CGWB), a  
Multidisciplinary Scientific Organization ha d been entrusted with the onerous responsibility of 
developing and disseminating information technologies, monitor and implement national 
policies for the sc ientific and sustainable development and management of India's Ground 
Water resources including their exploitation, assessment, conservation, augmentation, 
protection from pollution and distribution based on principles of economic and ecological 
efficiency and equity.  However, the Committee note d with concern from the submission made 
by the Department that the CGWB had been plagued by a serious problem of lack of manpower 
which was hampering its functioning. At present out of total sanctioned staff strength of 4017, 
almost 32% posts i.e., 1300 are lying vacant in the Board. Further, out of 882 Sanctioned 
Strength in Scientific category, only 545 posts are filled and appx. 38% (337)  are vacant. 
Similarly, out of 1868 Sanctioned Strength in Engineering category 1338 are filled and 530 
(39.61%) are vacant. The Committee were dismayed to observe such a huge shortage of 
human resources in CGWB in general and Scientific and Engineering ca tegories in particular 
which indicates the lackadaisical attitude of the Department towards such an important organ of 
the Department. The Committee were of the view that such a huge shortage of manpower d id 
not auger well for the smooth working of the CGW B. The Committee, therefore, recommend ed 
the Department to take urgent measures to fill up all the vacancies particularly in its Scientific 
and Engineering sections which are the backbone of CGWB, on pro -active and urgent basis at 

5 
 
the earliest. The Committ ee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in this regard within 
three months of presentation of this Report.  
 
10. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows:  
 
“The following steps have been/are being taken by CGWB to strengthen its manpower 
1. Requisition for filling up posts through direct recruitment has been initiated   and 
submitted to UPSC / SSC.  
2. Action has been taken/being taken to fill up the promotion vacancies. 
3. To fulfill the immediate requirement of CGWB, young pr ofessionals and consultants are 
engaged on a contractual basis. 
 
The vacant posts in the scientific and engineering discipline in CGWB will be filled up as per 
the nominations being received from the recruitment agencies i.e UPSC and SSC.  
 
The details of the vacant posts in scientific and engineering disciplines in CGWB and the 
steps being taken for filling the vacancies are given in Annexure II”. 
 
11. The Committee are concerned that the lack of manpower particularly in Scientific 
and Engineering sections for a long time is hampering the functioning of Central Ground 
Water Board (CGWB) which is entrusted with the onerous responsibility of developing 
and disseminating information technologies, monitor and implement national policies for 
the scientific and sustainable development and management of India's Ground Water 
resources including their exploitation, assessment, conservation, augmentation, 
protection from pollution and distribution based on principles of economic and 
ecological effi ciency and equity. The Committee have flagged this issue from time to 
time in their earlier DFG reports. The Department has now furnished the steps taken by it 
to augment the manpower of the CGWB. The Committee hope that the steps taken by the 
Department w ill yield desired results and the posts particularly in Scientific and 
Engineering sections will be filled urgently for the proper functioning of the CGWB 
thereby resulting in the proper and efficient management of groundwater resources for 
sustainability and their efficient utilization. 
 
C. Amendment to 'The India Easement Act, 1882' 
 
Recommendation No. 11 (Para No. 2.11) 
 
12. The Committee note d that though Government of India had  taken various steps and 
launched some Programmes to improve the Ground water situation in the country, however, 
there still remain ed some gaps in the institutional framework, one of them being 'The India 
Easement Act, 1882' which is a stumbling block in g round water control. The Act prohibits the 
creation of easementry rights over ground water and enables the owner to have full control of 
the water beneath his property enabling him to use it as deemed appropriate which also results 
in mining of ground wate r at many places leading to its over -exploitation. Taking cognizance of 
the dangerous depletion of water table coupled with deteriorating water quality, the Committee 
urged upon the Department to take necessary steps in cooperation with the Ministry of Law  and 

6 
 
Justice to amend 'the India Easement Act, 1882' on a priority basis so as to plug the much 
needed loophole in groundwater conservation mechanism by providing legislative and 
institutional backing. 
 
13. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows: 
 
“A meeting was held on 25.04.2022 under the chairmanship of the Joint Secretary 
(Admin, IC & GW) regarding the proposed amendment to the Easement Act in which 
Chainman, CGWB, Member, CGWA, Director (GW, DoWR, RD & GR) and 
representatives from the Ministry of Law and Justice participated. The Ministry of Law and 
Justice informed that the subject matter of amendment to the Indian Easement Act, 1882 
is the responsibility of the Ministry of Jal Shakti and it can propose the amendment if 
required. 
A question was raised in the meeting considering the present scientific knowledge of 
ground water flows and data generated through NAQUIM Studies, when it is established 
beyond doubt that the ground water flows pass in a defined channel based on the wate r 
table elevations in shallow aquifers and piezometric heads in deep aquifers, whether the 
amendment in the Indian Easement Act, 1882 is necessarily required or not.  
In this regard, CGWB organized a brainstorming session on 24th May 2022 through online 
mode wherein senior officers of CGWB, experts from various organizations and retired 
officers of CGWB participated. 
The outcome of the brainstorming session revealed that the amendment to section 7 (b) 
(g) of the Indian Easement Act, 1882 is not required. Further, it has been decided that a 
brief explanation can be added to the Explanation for section 7 (b) (g) which is “The 
ground water flowing below the land surface flows in a defined channel following the 
hydraulic head and water table contouring”. Hence , the owner of the land has no absolute 
right to the water flowing beneath his land to use it as deemed appropriate. However, the 
right of the owner mentioned in 7 (b) (j) remains the same”. 
14. The Committee have been informed that the Department has orga nized a 
brainstorming session on 24th May 2022 through online mode wherein senior officers of 
CGWB, experts from various organizations and retired officers of CGWB participated 
which emerged with the view that amendment to section 7 (b) (g) of the Indian E asement 
Act, 1882 is not required, however, a brief explanation can be added to the Explanation 
for section 7 (b) (g) which says “The ground water flowing below the land surface flows 
in a defined channel following the hydraulic head and water table contou ring”. Hence, 
the owner of the land has no absolute right to the water flowing beneath his land to use it 
as deemed appropriate. However, the right of the owner mentioned in 7 (b) (j) remains 
the same. The Committee are not convinced with the contention of the Department as the 
Action taken reply of the Department is silent with regard to measures taken/proposed to 
be taken to address the problem of depleting groundwater table by providing legislative 
and institutional framework. The Committee are of the vi ew that amending the Easement 
Act is required for creating the easementry rights over ground water and to ensure that 
no one is at liberty to exploit and pollute water resources. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their recommendation that Department make s concerted efforts to make 
required amendments to the 'The India Easement Act, 1882'. 
 
 

7 
 
D. National River Conservation Plan - Other Basins 
 
Recommendation No. 15 (Para No. 2.15) 
 
15. The Committee note d that under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of ‘National River 
Conservation Plan (NRCP)’, financial assistance is being provided to State Governments on cost 
sharing basis between the Central & State Governments for conservation of rivers. While the Capital  
expenditure is shared between Central and State/Union Territories, Operating expenses is borne 100% 
by the State /Union Territories (UTs) Governments.  The Committee further note d that for the fiscal year 
2022-23, an amount of Rs. 250.68 crore ha d been ke pt for the NRCP - other Basins, which was  a 
minuscule amount in comparison to budgetary allocation of Rs. 2800 crore earmarked for river Ganga 
under Namami Gange Mission II Project. In  this regard, the Department had  apprised the Committee 
that if required additional allocation would be sought at RE stage. However, the Committee in this regard 
would like to recall that during the examination of the DFG (2020 -21), on the issue of meager allocation 
under this Scheme (BE was just Rs. 220 crore in FY 2020 -21), it was informed by the Department that 
higher allocations under this Scheme would be sought when approval to revised Scheme was obtained. 
The Committee were not satisfied with the meager allocation of mere Rs. 250.68 crore for FY 2022-23 to 
this Scheme considering the fact that NRCP covers 34 rivers in 77 towns spread over 16 States  in the 
country. The Committee we re thus constrained to observe that the Department ha d displayed callous 
and lackadaisical attitude in its endeavours for increasing the budgetar y allocations for this very 
important Programme.  The Committee we re of the considered view that since all other major rivers of 
the country are also equally polluted as river Ganga, they also require the same attention and remedial 
measures.  They, theref ore, recommended the Department to take proactive steps in augmenting the 
budgetary allocations for this Programme at RE stage / Supplementary Demand stage. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the steps taken by the Department within three months of  presentation of 
this Report. 
16. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows:  
“NRCP is a centrally sponsored scheme with sharing of capital expenditure between 
Central and State/Union Territories (UTs) Governments, and operational expenditure is 
borne 100% by the State/Union Territories (UTs) Governments. Also total outlay for a 
period of 5 years from 2021 -22 to 2025 -26 is Rs.1,252 crore, with an average annual 
outlay of around Rs.225 crore. In case of Namami Gange Mission -II both capital and 
operational expenditure are borne by the NMCG.  
Apart from this, there is a difference in fun ding pattern between Namami Gange Mission 
(NGM) and National River Conservation Plan (NRCP). NGM is central sector scheme with 
100% funding, while NRCP is a centrally sponsored scheme wherein the Central 
Government normally funds to the extent of 60% of fu nd in non-NE States/UTs and 90:10 
for NER, Himalayan States/UTs.  This is why the difference of budgetary allocation 
between NMCG and NRCP is substantial. 
Cleaning and rejuvenation of rivers is a continuous process. Rivers and other water bodies 
in the country are polluted mainly due to discharge of untreated or partially treated sewage 
from cities/ towns and industrial effluents in their respective catchments. It is the 
responsibility of the States/Union Territories (UTs), Local Bodies and Industrial Units  to 
ensure required treatment of sewage and industrial effluents to the prescribed norms 
before discharging into rivers and other water bodies, coastal waters or land to prevent 
and control of pollution therein. For conservation of rivers, this Department has been 
supplementing the efforts of the States/UTs by providing financial and technical assistance 

8 
 
for abatement of pollution in identified stretches of rivers in the country through the central 
sector scheme of Namami Gange for rivers in Ganga basin, an d centrally sponsored 
scheme of National River Conservation Plan (NRCP) for other rivers. 
NRCP has so far covered polluted stretches on 34 rivers in 77 towns spread over 16 
States in the country with the project sanctioned cost of Rs. 6,050.18 crore, and i nter-
alia, a sewage treatment capacity of 2,677 million litres per day (mld) has been created. 
Proposals for pollution abatement works/schemes in identified towns along polluted river 
stretches are received from the States/UTs from time to time for conside ration under the NRCP, 
which are sanctioned based on their prioritization, conformity with the NRCP guidelines, 
availability of funds etc. At RE stage, supplementary demand for additional funds may be made 
in compliance of recommendation of the Committee”. 
 
17. From the action taken reply furnished by the Department , the Committee note that the 
Department has merely stated the reason for huge gap in the budgetary allocation of the 
‘National River Conservation Plan (NRCP)’ and Namami Gange Programme and did  not give a 
specific reply to the issue raised by the Committee in their recommendation, i.e.  taking proactive 
steps in augmenting the budgetary allocations for the NRCP. Keeping in view the miserable 
condition of many rivers of the country and rising pol lution therein, affecting humans as well as 
other flora and fauna, the Committee reiterate their recommendation of substantially increasing 
the budgetary allocations under the NRCP so that sufficient funds may be available for 
conserving other major rivers  of India. The Committee further hope that additional funds would 
be made available at  RE stage, supplementary demand for additional funds may be made in 
compliance of recommendation of the Committee.  
E. Need to frame a National Embankment Policy  
 
Recommendation No. 17 (Para No. 2.17) 
 
18. The Committee understood  that at present there was no comprehensive Embankment 
Policy to repair and maintain river banks in the country.  In this regard, the Committee we re 
constrained to note that the Department had not furnished specific reply to their query with 
regard to the preparation of a National Embankment Policy. The Department merely stated that 
flood management falls within the purview of the State Governments and hence flood 
management and anti-erosion projects are formulated and implemented by the concerned State 
Governments. It was also stated that regular review meetings are held with State Governments 
officials to sensitize about the issue of upkeep and maintenance of the embankments, however, 
State Governments fail to maintain embankments as per requirements due to paucity of funds 
on their part.  The Ministry further stated that there is no proposal under consideration to 
provide financial assistance to the States for upkeep and maintenance of the embankments. 
Taking cognizance of the fact that floods wreak havoc and bring untold miseries to thousands of 
the people every year, the Committee were of the considered opinion that river embankments, if 
properly maintained, may play an important role in minimizing the devastating impact of floods. 
The Committee, therefore, urge d upon the Department to review their stated policy / position 
and explore ways and means to frame a comprehensive national embankment policy specifying 
protocols/ SoPs required to be followed scrupulously for re -enforcement of the river banks. 
Further, the Committee also desire d that the Department should make arrangements for 

9 
 
providing financial assistance to the needy States to upkeep the embankments.  Keeping in 
view the recurring devastation taking place in the border areas of the States of Bihar and Uttar 
Pradesh every year due to the menace of floods by the rivers originating from neighbouring 
country, the Committee further recommended that the Department may explore the feasibility of 
providing financial assistance to the States under Flood Management and Border Areas 
Programme (FMBAP). 
 
19. The Department in its action taken note has replied as follows:  
“The primary responsibility of flood management including erosion control falls within the 
purview of the States, the Union Government supplements the efforts of the States by 
providing technical guidance and promotional financial assistance for management of 
floods in critical areas. Under the ongoing Flood Management and Borde r Areas 
Programme( FMBAP) of DoWR, RD & GR, Ministry of Jal Shakti, the State Governments/ 
UTs have been provided central assistance of Rs.2,252.53 crore during the period 2016 -
17 to 2020-21 for undertaking flood management/anti erosion projects. The 415 completed 
projects under FMBAP have given protection to an area of around 4.99 mha and protected 
a population of about 52.21 million. 
 
The Government of India has been making continuous efforts to assist the State 
Governments in effective flood management a nd erosion control. Morphological Studies 
by various IIT s and NIIT s have been carried out form major rivers like Ganga, 
Brahmaputra, Sharda, Rapti, Kosi, Bagmati, Subansari, Krishna, Mahanadi, Mahanada, 
etc. These studies aid in finding the vulnerable spot s for bank erosion/deposition, 
aggradations/de gradation etc. As far as embankments are concerned, these are generally 
considered economical, quick and most popular method of flood protection and have been 
constructed extensively in the past. Embankments ( including ring bunds and town 
protection works) confine the flood flow sand prevents pilling, there by reducing the 
damage. However, construction of embankments is to be carried out after proper 
scientific, morphological and modelling studies of river for identifying changes in river 
courses, vulnerable locations, rise in afflux due to jacketing etc. 
 
As far as feasibility of providing financial assistance to the States under 
Flood Management and Border Areas Programme (FMBAP) is concerned, it 
is mentioned that projects for raising and strengthening of embankments 
are considered eligible for funding under the programme. Moreover, the 
scope of exiting FMBAP has been modified to include flood protection 
works on all cross border/border rivers where as the earl ier scope was 
limited to flood management works on Border Rivers with Bangladesh , 
Nepal and Pakistan and embankments on Kosi and Gandak rivers in Nepal portion. 
 
Central Water Commission has published a detailed handbook for “Flood Protection, 
Anti-erosion, and River Training Works” to deal primarily with structural measures of 

10 
 
flood management like flood protection works, anti erosion measures and river training 
works. This handbook contains details of construction materials, guidelines for design 
embankment, bank revetment, spurs/groynes, RCC porcupines, drainage improvement 
works, Construction methodology, cost estimate and unit rate analysis to provide a ready 
reference to plan, construct and monitor the flood management projects in an integrated 
manner. The handbook is available on the official website of 
CWC http://www.cwc.gov.in/sites/default/files/Handbook-05-Jun-12_0.pdf 
Besides above, Ganga Flood Control Commission, Patna has prepared guidelines for 
“Use of Geo-textiles/ Geo-bag / Geo-tubes in Construction of Flood Management Works” 
keeping in view flood management works is progressively increasing in the country with 
above material as a possible alternative for bould ers in construction of anti -erosion and 
river training works”. 
 
20. The Committee note from the action taken replies that the Department has taken a 
number of steps for strengthening the flood management and anti -erosion works in the 
country. As far as embankments are concerned,  the Department has merely stated that 
construction of embankments is to be carried out after proper scientific, morphological 
and modeling studies of river for identifying changes in river courses, vulnerable 
locations, rise in a fflux due to jacketing etc. However, the reply has remained silent on 
the aspect of framing a National Embankment Policy. The Committee therefore once 
again urge the Department to carry out the scientific, morphological and modeling 
studies of river and ba sed on the outcome of these studies, frame a National 
Embankment Policy. 
 
 
 
 
  

11 
 
 
CHAPTER - II  
 
OBSERVATIONS / RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 1 (Para 2.1) 
 
Budget Analysis 
The Committee are happy to note that in comparison to Budgetary Estimates (BE) allocations of 
Rs. 9022.57 crore for Financial Year (FY) 2021 -22, the BE allocations of Rs. 18967.88 crore for 
FY 2022 -23 has shown a massive hike of appx. 110%. However, the overall budgetary 
allocation for FY 20 22-23 has shown increase of approx. 5% vis -a-vis Revised Estimates (RE) 
allocations of Rs. 18008.70 crore for FY 2021 -22. The budgetary allocation of Rs. 18967.88 
crore includes Rs. 18548.05 crore under Revenue section and Rs. 419.83 crore under Capital 
section. The massive increase in budgetary allocations for FY 2022 -23 vis-a-vis BE allocations 
for FY 2021 -22 is because t ill the year 2020 -21, the Central share for the projects under 
PMKSY-AIBP & CADWM was raised through long term loan from NABARD, however , from the 
current year, the same is being funded through budgetary support  instead of raising loan from 
NABARD. Moreover, an amount of Rs. 1,400 crore has been set aside for the project of 
interlinking of rivers. In this regard, the Committee would like t o point out that the Committee in 
their earlier Demand For Grants (DFG) Reports have always flagged the issue of increasing 
committed liability of the Department on account of huge borrowing and servicing of loans, 
which has been a large proportion of the budgetary allocation resulting in impairing the leverage 
of the Department in financing its ambitious and important projects to a large extent. The 
Committee commend the Department for their persistent efforts in pursuing the matter with 
Ministry of Finance which has resulted in this enhanced budgetary allocation. 
However, at the same time, the Committee observe with concern that there is a continuous 
tendency on the part of the Department to surrender the budgetary allocations at the end of 
fiscal year. While, in 2018-19, against the budgetary allocation of Rs. 8860/ - crore, the amount 
surrendered was Rs. 1467.14 crore, similarly in FY 2020 -21, an amount of Rs. 1695.30 crore 
was surrendered against allocation of Rs. 8960.39 crore. Even in FY 2021 -22, only Rs. 6327.04 
crore has been spent in first three quarters against the RE allocation of Rs. 18008.70 crore. The 
Committee further observe that utilization of funds on many important Schemes of the 
Department like Flood Management and Border Areas Programme (F MBAP), National River 
Conservation Plan - Other Basins, Atal Bhujal Yojana, Research & Development and 
Implementation of National Water Mission, Namami Gange Programme and Ground Water 
Management and Regulation Scheme have been negligible as compared to th e budgetary 
allocations at RE level for FY 2021 -22 (upto 31.12.2021). The Committee also observe that the 
Department has spelled out various reasons for under utilization of funds under the various 
Schemes/Programmes which inter alia include restrictions a nd lockdown in connection with 

12 
 
COVID-19; delay in the award of contracts due to poor response by the bidders, due to which 
implementation of the planned activities got delayed; non submission of audited statement of 
expenditure by State Governments; and de lay in compliance by the States in designating of 
Single Nodal Agency as per directions of Department of Expenditure on revised procedure for 
release of funds to States for Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) & monitoring utilization of 
the funds. The Commit tee express their concern over the under utilization of budgetary 
allocations of such a magnitude under different Schemes of the Department towards the major 
part of the Financial Year and feel that it is not a one off event and has become a continuous 
trend as indicated by recurring surrender of allocated funds by the Department to the Ministry of 
Finance. The Committee are therefore constrained to take the view that the Department has 
been lackadaisical in implementation of various programmes/schemes run by it, thus resulting 
in surrendering of such large amount of funds. The Committee do not appreciate the manner in 
which the Department has been surrendering the unspent balances year after year.  The 
Committee are apprehensive that going by the earlier tr end of the Department in surrendering 
the budgetary allocations, the Department would not be able to fully utilize the increased 
allocations in FY 2021-22. Taking into account the growing population and rising water needs of 
a fast developing nation as wel l as the indications of the impact of climate change resulting in 
great strain on availability of utilizable water, huge underutilization and subsequent surrendering 
of funds does not auger well for development and conservation of water sector of India. Th e 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Department to adhere to monthly and quarterly 
expenditure plans from fiscal year 2022 -23 strictly. The Committee also recommend that the 
pace of expenditure and flow of funds under the various Schemes should be monitor ed at 
regular intervals so as to avoid such huge surrender of funds. 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
DoWR, RD & GR humbly acknowledges the appreciation given by the Committee to this 
department for its persistent effort in pursuing the Ministry of Finance and resolving the issue of 
increasing committed liability of the Department on account of huge borrowing and servicing of 
loans which has also resulted in the enhanced budgetary allocation. 
Further, it is important to note that in the FY -2021-22, the BE of Rs.  9,022.57 crore (net) was 
allocated to this Department at the outset of the financial year which was revise d at RE stage to 
Rs. 18,008.70 crore in December, 2021 by MoF. Despite massive hike of allocation of approx 
99.59%at RE stage in December, 2021 leaving only 3 months’time for utilization of funds , the 
Department made all out efforts and utilized Rs. 17 ,258 crore i.e. 96% of the total allocation  
made in RE 2021-22. 
The concern of Committee over the underutilization of budgetary al locations under different 
schemes of the Department has been noted by the Department.  To implement the 
recommendation of the Committee to adhere to Monthly and Quarterly expenditure plans from 

13 
 
fiscal year 2022 -23 and avoid huge surrender of funds, regular monitoring of progress of 
schemes is being undertaken.  
 
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2022-Budget Section-MoWR-Part (1)/30] 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 2 (Para 2.2) 
 
The Committee are dismayed to find wide disparity between BE an d RE estimations in respect 
of the budgetary allocations of the Department. While in the FY 2018 -19, the BE was pegged at 
Rs. 8860/- crore, it was reduced to Rs. 7612.52 crore at RE stage, similarly in Fiscal year 2020 -
21, the BE of Rs. 8960.39 crore was r educed to Rs. 7262.09 crore at RE level. Further, the 
Committee find that in comparison to BE allocations for FY 2021-22 which was just Rs. 9022.57 
crore, the budgetary allocations of Rs. 18008.70 crore at RE stage for FY 2021 -22 has shown a 
massive hike of appx. 99.59%. The Department have attributed the reasons to enhancement in 
the budgetary allocations at RE stage in FY 2021 -22, to the addition of new projects under 
schemes, namely, ‘Interlinking of Rivers’, ‘Accelerated Irrigation Benefit Programme and  
special/National Projects (PMKSY -AIBP)’ and ‘Command Area Development and Water 
Management (CADWM)’ and the need of additional funds for a few existing schemes. Though, 
the Committee are glad to note increased allocation for the Department at RE stage for  FY 
2021-22, however, such a hike also indicates the lack of foresight and planning on the part of 
the Department in projecting their estimates at BE stage. The Committee are of the view that 
such a disproportionate level of budgetary allocations at RE sta ge jeopardizes the sanctity of 
initial budgetary allocations at BE stage. The Committee recommend that the Department 
maintains budgetary discipline, conduct proper pre -Budget planning and exercises thoroughly, 
and make necessary changes to its budgetary e stimations procedure so that prudent and 
realistic budgetary allocations are projected / made at the BE stage itself in order to avoid 
disproportionate budgetary estimations at RE stage.  As regards actual utilization, the 
Committee note that as on 31.12.2021, only Rs. 6327.04 could be spent by the Department and 
Rs. 11681 crore is yet to be spent.  The Department has informed that Rs. 4300 crore 
earmarked for Ken -Betwa link project is to be utilized during the financial year.  Besides a 
number of proposals under Namami Gange, AIBP, CADWM, SMI & RRR are ready for release.  
The Committee urge upon the Ministry to formulate monthly expenditure management plans 
followed by its close monitoring so as to ensure that the balanced fund is fully utilized by the 
end of the fiscal year.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Though the budgetary allocations to the Department may appear to be gradually decreasing at 
RE stage in absolute numbers, the reduction rate at RE stage has been gradually improving 
over the years. During FY-2021-22, there were s ignificant developments that led to significant 
higher budget allocation in the Revised Estimates and also the budget allocation for FY -2022-

14 
 
23.  Firstly, the first interlink river project  under national perspective plan, viz., Ken  Betwa Link 
Project (KBLP) was approved for which , in the revised estimate  stage, an allocation of Rs. 
4,300 crore was made. The Government of India approved the implementation of ILR-KBLP at 
an estimated cost of Rs 44,605 crore with central support of Rs 39,317 crore through an SPV in 
December 2021.   Secondly, the change in mechanism of funding for the AIBP component of 
PMKSY was effected . The funding under PMKSY -AIBP/ special projects and CADWM was 
made through Extra Budgetary Reso urces (EBRs) up to March 2021. N o BE allocation was 
kept as EBR for 2021-22 as Ministry of Finance did not authorize the raising of EBR for these 
schemes in 2021 -22. With the change in system of funding , budgetary allocation of Rs. 3 ,700 
crore was made at RE stage  for the AI BP & CADWM scheme. These two are the primary 
reasons for increase in the budget of the Department of Rs. 8 ,000 crore, out of total increase of 
Rs. 8986.13 crore at the RE stage. 
Moreover, all the schemes of this Department were reviewed and approved afresh  for 
implementation for the next five years. In the process, some guidelines were also revised giving 
more flexibility to the department to take up new projects which has been a pressing demand 
from the State Governments. 
Further, it is important to note t hat in the FY -2021-22, the BE of Rs. 9 ,022.57 crore ( net) was 
allocated to this Department which was revised at RE stage to Rs. 18 ,008.70 crore on 28 th 
December, 2021 by MoF. It would not be out of place to mention that despite massive hike of 
allocation o f approx 99.59% at RE stage and paucity of time for utilization of funds, this 
Department made all out efforts and utilized Rs. 17,258 crore i.e. 96 % of the total allocation  of 
RE 2021-22. 
The Budget Estimates (BE) are proposed keeping in view the planned activities linked with 
annual targets during a particular financial year , whereas provisions proposed at RE stage is 
based on the mid -term review and actual/current status of planned targets and achieved 
targets. At ti mes, some variations occur due to uncertainties in materialization of originally 
planned targets. The department accepts the recommendation of the Committee  that close 
monitoring of planned activities and linked expenditure plans, can help in minimizing th e gap 
between BE and RE figures  and will implement the recommendation through rigorous and 
regular monitoring of its activities and associated expenditure. 
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2022-Budget Section-MoWR-Part (1)/30] 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 4 (Para 2.4) 
 
Interlinking of Rivers 
The Committee note that Union Cabinet has accorded approval for the implementation of Ken -
Betwa Link Project at an estimated cost of  Rs. 44,605 crore with Central support of Rs. 39,317 
crore and also approved formation of a Special Purpose Vehicle for its implementation. Further, 

15 
 
budgetary allocation of Rs. 4300 crore in RE 2021 -22 and Rs.1400 crore in year 2022 -23 has 
been made for this programme with focus on land acquisition and environment management 
plan at the initial stage. Th e Committee also note that the Finance Minister in her budget 
speech has stated that draft detailed project report of five river links, namely Damanganga -
Pinjal, Par-Tapi-Narmada, Godavari-Krishna, Krishna-Pennar, and Pennar -Cauvery have been 
finalized. Th e Ministry has stated that o nce a consensus is reached among the beneficiary 
States, the Centre will provide support for implementation. However, the Committee observe 
that the main problem in execution of interlinking of rivers projects is the lack of con sensus 
among the different States for implementation of this Project. The Committee are of the view 
that Interlinking of rivers will go a long way not only in eliminating the impacts of famines and 
recurring devastating floods to a great extent but also pr ovides a much needed viable solution 
to the problems of dependence of Indian agriculture on monsoon.  Nevertheless,  the 
Committee are also aware that interlinking of rivers is a complicated issue as sensitivity and 
emotions are attached with the subject ‘ water’ in respective States and Inter -State nature of the 
rivers make it difficult for the States to arrive at a mutually agreed decision.  Under such a 
scenario, the role of the Union Government assumes critical importance and the Committee feel 
that it i s high time that Union Government intervenes pro -actively and engage all the 
stakeholders in addressing the contentious issues. In this regard, the Committee call upon the 
Department to redesign its strategies according to the socio -political and economic realities of 
the regions where the Department wishes to implement inter -linking of rivers project. The 
Department may also in consultation with the Ministry of Finance work out some solution in 
form of providing various concessions like devolution of large r share of tax resources and 
grants, tax relief, tax holidays etc. to encourage the States to opt for this important Scheme.  
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Interlinking of Rivers programme has been accorded priority by the Government of India. 
Further, as directed by the Supreme Court of India, it is to be promoted as a national 
programme for the benefit of the nation. 
As observed by the Committee, the main challenge in implementation of interlinking of rivers 
projects is the lack of consensus among the different States for implementation of ILR projects. 
The States surpluses in water resources generally do  not agree to such surpluses and done  
States in general demand more water. The States are apprehensive about disturbing the 
existing allocation of water as per awards/inter-State agreement.  
 
As decided in the 4 thmeeting of Task Force for Interlinking of Rivers held on 15thJune 2016, a 
legal group was constituted vide office memorandum dated 18.07.2016 to look into legal 
aspects and required enabling provisions for implementation of Interlinking of Rivers and other 
related issues.  The legal group submitted its report dur ing March, 2017.The key 
recommendations of the legal group are: 
 

16 
 
 There is no need for any constitutional amendment for bringing the subject ‘water and its 
management’ either under the concurrent list or under the Union list.  In particular, the 
group felt that no such change is called for in regard to the planning and implementation 
of the inter basin water transfers or the NPP.  
 It is very important that the decisions in regard to ILR are  taken by building the 
consensus, if not unanimity, amongst all the States concerned.  
 However, agreeing to a negotiated settlement will be facilitated if an alternative decision 
making process, through legal means, is available for use. 
 
 The broad strate gy adopted by Govt. of India in pursuing the ILR programme in the 
country is as under: 
1. Looking at the sensitivity of the States, the Government of India is pursuing the inter -linking 
of rivers (ILR) program in a consultative manner on priority. The consult ations with States 
and other experts/ stakeholders are being held on regular basis at various platforms i.e. at 
AGM of NWDA Society chaired by Hon’ble Minister, MoJS, Special Committee for ILR 
(SCILR) chaired by Hon’ble Minister, MoJS, Governing Body of NW DA chaired by 
Secretary, DoWR,  RD&GR, MoJS, Task Force –ILR chaired by Advisor, MoJS, etc. The 
Hon’ble, Minister, MoJS, Secretary (DoWR,  RD&GR) and Director General, NWDA also 
pursue the matter with party States to sort out the issues and reach consensus.  After a 
prolonged pursuation and deliberations , a tripartite agreement was signed amongst States 
of Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Central Government, for the implementation of Ken -
Betwa Link Project (KBLP) on 22 nd March, 2021 in the august presence of Hon’ble Prime 
Minister. Most of the statutory clearances for the link project have been obtained. The Govt. 
of India has approved the implementation of KBLP with 90 % (Central): 10% (State) funding 
pattern, with an est imated cost of Rs 4 ,4605 crore (year 2020-21 price level) with central 
support of Rs 39 ,317 crore through a Special Purpose Vehicle viz; Ken Betwa Link Project 
Authority (KBLPA) on 08.12.2021. The Gazette Notification for constitution of the Steering 
Committee and KBLPA has been issued on 11.02.2022. An allocation of budget of Rs. 4,300 crore 
in RE of FY 2021 -22 and Rs. 1 ,400 crore in FY 2022 -23 has been made for the project.  An 
expenditure of Rs 4 ,639.46 cr was spent on the project during FY 2021 -22. The project is 
planned to be completed in 8 years.  
 
2. The approval of KBLP with financial support on 90 (C ): 10 (S) funding pattern will not only 
help in expediting the implementation of such capital intensive project in a time bound 
manner but also encourage  other States  to come forward for implementation of  other ILR 
projects.  
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2022-Budget Section-MoWR-Part (1)/30] 
 
 
 
 
 

17 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 5 (Para 2.5) 
 
Namami Gange Programme 
 
The Committee note that the Government of India (GOI) has launched the Namami Gange 
Programme to accomplish the twin objectives of effective abatement of pollution, conservation 
and rejuvenation of the river Ganga and its tributaries. The Committee further  note that under 
the Namami Gange Programme, as on 31.12.2021, a total of 363 Projects have been 
sanctioned at an estimated cost of Rs. 30841.53 crore, out of which, 177 projects have been 
completed and made operational, and rest of the projects are at var ious stages of 
implementation. Further, out of these 363 Projects, 161 pertains to Sewerage Infrastructure, 
and only 74 of these Projects have since been completed. While appreciating the ambitious 
Programme of Namami Gange, which aims at cleaning and reju venating river Ganga, the 
Committee are disappointed to note the slow progress of the Projects particularly the projects 
related to the sewerage infrastructure which the Committee believe is the focal point and 
mainstay of Namami Gange Programme. In view o f this, the Committee recommend that 
Department should take all possible steps to streamline and improve their monitoring 
mechanism and strive to remove the hindrances / bottlenecks faced in the implementation of 
the projects, so that all the pending proje cts are completed within the defined timeline so as to 
obviate the possibility of cost and time over-runs.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
Till 31st March 2022, a total of 366 projects have been sanctioned at an estimated cost of Rs. 
30,671 crore, out of which, 197 projects have been completed and made operational, and rest 
of the projects are at various stages of implementation. Further, out of these 366 projects, 160 
pertain to sewerage infrastructure, with 81 of these projects completed since. 
 
2.  A three-tier monitoring mechanism is in place to track the progress of projects: 
 
a. Executing agency – The DPRs are prepared by the executing agency at the State level, 
which is responsible for the execution as well as day to day monitoring of the project. The 
designs are vetted by reputed institutes including IITs and other accredited universities. 
b. Project engineer – Independent project engineer s are appointed for HAM based PPP 
projects, to ensure that the project is undertaken in a timely manner.  
c. NMCG – NMCG is involved in the monitoring of the projects to remove bottlenecks and also 
for expediting the pace of projects being. 
3. In order to expedite implementation of the sewerage infrastructure projects by 
overcoming the bottlenecks and ensure  timely completion of projects, the following 
measures/monitoring mechanisms are being taken by NMCG: 
1. Continuous coordination/ meetings/ follow up with SPMGs/ Executing Agencies. 

18 
 
2. Resolving delay in road/railway crossing permissions by conducting high level  inter-
Ministerial meeting with Railways and NHAI. 
3. Regular review meetings are chaired by DG -NMCG with State agencies. Project reviews 
are also carried out by the Hon’ble Minister , DoWR, RD &GR, Ministry of Jal Shakti  as 
well as Secretary, DoWR, RD & GR not only with various officers of NMCG and the State 
Governments to remove bottlenecks and also for expediting the pace of projects being 
executed at various levels. 
 
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2022-Budget Section-MoWR-Part (1)/30] 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 6 (Para 2.6) 
 
The Committee note that Namami Gange Programme has been renamed as Namami Gange 
Mission II which includes National Ganga Plan, National River Conservation Plan and Ghat 
Works for beautification of River Front. The allocation for this Scheme has been earmarked at 
Rs 2800 crore at BE stage for the fiscal year 2022 -23. The salient features of Namami Gange 
Mission II inter alia include: accelerated interventions on tributaries, convergence of existing 
schemes of Central and State Governments with the Nama mi Gange Programme and 
introduction of new interventions, scaling up Public -Private Partnership (PPP) development 
efforts and ‘one city one operator’ model, enhanced focus on Fecal Sludge and Septage 
Management (FSSM) in all Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) and r ural areas and decentralized 
wastewater treatment system in non -sewered small and medium towns, developing of 'circular 
economy' model focusing on reclaim, reuse, recycling and responsible manufacturing in 
addition to waste management etc. The Committee ob serve that though the nomenclature of 
the Scheme has been renamed as Namami Gange Mission II, however, under its previous 
version, there was recurring underutilization of funds under this Scheme vis -à-vis BE allocation. 
In the year 2017 -18, actual expendit ure was only Rs. 1423.21 crore as against budgetary 
allocation of Rs. 2550/- crore. Similarly, there was an expenditure of mere Rs. 2307.5 crore and 
Rs. 1553.40 crore vis -a-vis BE allocation of Rs. 3070/ -  crore and Rs. 1970/ - crore during FY 
2018-19 and 2019-20 respectively. The Committee also find wide disparity between BE and RE 
in respect of the Namami Gange Programme. The Committee feel that that continuous disparity 
in budgetary allocation at RE level indicates deficiency in financial planning by the Department. 
The Committee strongly feel that in order to make Namami Gange Mission II a success, the 
underlying factors which hinder the implementation of the projects under the earlier version of 
Namami Gange need to be overcome. Further, the Committee al so desire that the Department 
should make efforts to put in a place a stringent monitoring mechanism to ensure that the funds 
allotted to different Schemes including Namami Gange Programmes are utilized to the 
maximum extent and there is no wastage of earm arked outlays. They also recommend the 
Department to maintain fiscal discipline and undertake proper pre -Budget planning and 
exercises so that prudent budgetary allocations are projected / made at BE stage in order to 
obviate huge tweaking of allocations at RE stage. 
 

19 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
In FY 2021 -22, enhanced allocation at RE stage was sought and provided based on actual 
progress achieved in implementation of various projects. The enhanced allocation of Rs. 1 ,900 
crore was almost fully utilized.Under Namami Gange, various steps have been taken to ensure 
optimum utilization of funds. The projects are being closely monitored to ensure progress of 
projects to ensure better utilization of funds. 
 
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2022-Budget Section-MoWR-Part (1)/30] 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 7(Para 2.7) 
 
Atal Bhujal Yojana 
 
With a view to improve the management of groundwater resources with community participation 
and convergence of ongoing schemes in select water stressed areas in identified States viz. 
Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh, 
Atal Bhujal Yojana was launched by the Government in April 2020.  The Committee note that in 
2020-21, as against Rs. 330 crore allocated in RE stage for the scheme,  only Rs. 147.21 crore 
has been spent as on 17.02.2022.  In 2022 -23, the allocation for the scheme has more than 
doubled to Rs. 700 crore.  Explaining the reasons for hike in allocation, the Ministry stated that 
after two years, now  almost all the States h ave their institutional structure in place and are 
ready to implement the scheme.  As regards extending the scheme to other States, it has been 
stated that a mid -term review of the scheme and on that basis, a view will be taken for 
expansion of the scheme.   The Committee are of the view that since all the States have now 
established their institutional structure, the Department during its mid -term review of this 
Scheme should explore every possibility of making this Scheme broad based, expanding its 
scope at Pan India level so that all the water scarce regions of the country may be benefited by 
this important Scheme.  The Committee may also be apprised of the outcome of the mid -term 
review of the Atal Bhujal Yojana. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The low utilisation of fund upto 31.12.2021 was mainly because a large portion of the fund was 
for incentive to the States which was to be released only after getting physical verification report 
by the third party verification agency which got completed in February, 2022 and subsequently 
more than 99% of the fund was utilised by March, 2022. The BE-21-22 allocation to Atal Jal 
was Rs. 330 crore, which remained same at RE -2021-22 stage, the total fund utilized was Rs. 

20 
 
327.48 crore . Mid-term review is scheduled to be completed in this calendar year and based 
upon the evaluation/feedback, decision on extension of the scheme will be taken. The 
Committee would also be apprised of the outcome of the mid-term review after it is completed. 
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2022-Budget Section-MoWR-Part (1)/30] 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 8 (Para 2.8) 
 
Inter-State Water Disputes Tribunals 
 
The Committee note that presently 5 Inter -State Water Disputes Tribunals, viz. Krishna Water 
Disputes Tribunal, Vansadhara Water Disputes Tribunal, Mahadayi Water Disputes Tribunal, 
Mahanadi Water Disputes Tribunal and Ravi & Beas Waters Tribunal are in operation in the 
country. A cumulative expenditure of Rs. 106.31 crore has been incurred on the Tribunals till 
31.12.2021. In order to further streamline the adjudication of inter-State river water disputes, the 
Inter-State River Water Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 2019 was introduced in Lok Sabha on 
25.07.2019 and considered and passed by Lok Sabha on 31.07.2019. The Bill envisages to 
establish a single Tribunal with permanent establishment and infrastructure so as to obviate the 
need to set up a separate tribunal for water dispute in respect of each river basin which is 
invariably a time -consuming process. However, the Ministry has now informed that further 
amendment is required in clause -3 (related to Section -4 of ISRWD Act, 1956) of the proposed 
Bill and the issue was discussed with the Solicitor General of India and consequently it was 
decided by the Ministry of Jal Shakti that before  the Bill is taken up for consideration in Rajya 
Sabha, clause-3 of the Bill (related to section -4 of ISRWD Act, 1956) needs to be amended by 
adding the words “and the Tribunal shall proceed to deal with such water disputes from the 
stage at which it was s o transferred”, at the end of line 17 after the word ‘Tribunal’.  In view of 
the above facts, the Ministry has declined to set any definite time frame for passage of the Bill. 
The Committee are of the considered view that multifarious tribunal/authorities will be of no use 
in resolving the issue of water disputes between different States. The Committee believe that a 
new tribunal with permanent establishment and its own permanent infrastructure as envisaged 
in the Bill passed by Lok Sabha in 2019 will play an important role in not only cutting down cost 
of establishment and other expenditures of multiple tribunals but also be of great help in 
facilitating faster adjudication of water disputes in a time bound manner. The Committee urge 
the Department to take necessary steps for early passage of ‘The Inter -State River Water 
Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 2019 in Rajya Sabha. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the action taken in this regard by the Department within three months of presentation of this 
Report. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Inter-State River Water Disputes (Amendment) Bill, 2019 proposed to setup a single, 
permanent Tribunal to adjudicate all inter-State river water disputes replacing existing Tribunals 

21 
 
so as to obviate with the need to set up a separate tribunal for each water dispute which is 
invariably a time-consuming process. The Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on 25.07.2019 and 
was subsequently passed by the House on 31.07.2019. The Bill would next be taken up for 
consideration in Rajya Sabha. 
Pursuant to passage of the Bill in Lok Sabha, it has been observed that further amendment is 
required in clause-3 (related to section-4 of ISRWD Act, 1956) of the proposed Bill. The issue in 
question pertains to the intention that in case a Tribunal is already in existence after the Act 
comes in to force, the concerned bench of the single tribunal shall proceed to deal with such 
dispute from the stage at which it is transferred. However, this aspect has only been specifically 
mentioned in the context of the Ravi Beas Waters Tribunal in clause-12 of the Bill and not as a 
general principle in clause 3. 
 
The issue was discussed with the Solicitor General of India and consequently it was decided by 
this Department that before the Bill is taken up for consideration in Rajya Sabha, clause-3 of the 
Bill (related to section-4 of ISRWD Act, 1956) needs to be amended by adding the following in 
the last line at the end of line 17 after the word ‘Tribunal’- “and the Tribunal shall proceed to 
deal with such water disputes from the stage at which it was so transferred.” 
 
As discussed with SGoI, the following course of action is required for official amendment to be 
made in ISRWD (Amendment) Bill, 2019: 
i. To move a Cabinet Note seeking approval of the Cabinet to amend the proposed ISRWD 
(Amendment) Bill, 2019 (as passed by Lok Sabha), inserting the provision. 
ii. After the Cabinet approves the changes, the Bill will be introduced in the Rajya Sabha in 
the coming Session of Parliament, 2021. After the Rajya Sabha clears the Bill, it will go 
back to the Lok Sabha to be passed. 
Accordingly, draft Cabinet Note was prepared and after approval of Hon’ble Minister for Jal 
Shakti, the approved draft Cabinet Note was sent to Department of Legal Affairs and Legislative 
Department vide this Division’s OM dated 11.08.2021 for consideration and vetting. Legislative 
Department vide OM dated 05.10.2021 requested that ‘administrative Ministry may confirm that 
the draft Official Amendments, as pre pared by Legislative Department, meets with intentions 
and requirements of this Ministry and is in consonance with this Ministry’s proposal contained in 
the Draft Note for the Cabinet’. In response, this Department vide OM dated 09.11.2021 
conveyed Legislative Department that draft official amendments, as prepared by Legislative 
Department, meet with intentions and requirements of this Ministry and is in consonance with 
this Ministry’s Proposal contained in the Draft Note for the Cabinet. 
Further, Legislative Department vide their Note dated 11.11.2021 after approval of Hon’ble 
Minister for Law and Justice has concurred the proposal and has also informed that Department 
of Legal Affairs has also concurred with the same. Accordingly the draft Cabinet Note has been 
revised and got approved by the Hon’ble Minister for Jal Shakti. 

22 
 
7.The revised draft Cabinet Note was circulated on 28.02.2022 to  concerned departments for 
comments. The comments/ observations of concerned Departments have been in corporate in 
the draft Cabinet Note, and after approval of Hon’ble Minister for Jal Shakti, the draft Cabinet 
Note has been sent on 07.04.2022 to Cabinet Secretariat for consideration. 
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2022-Budget Section-MoWR-Part (1)/30] 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 9 (Para 2.9) 
 
Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) 
 
The Committee note that the Central Ground Water Board (CGWB), a  
Multidisciplinary Scientific Organization has been entrusted with the onerous responsibility of 
developing and disseminating information technologies, monitor and implemen t national 
policies for the scientific and sustainable development and management of India's Ground 
Water resources including their exploitation, assessment, conservation, augmentation, 
protection from pollution and distribution based on principles of econ omic and ecological 
efficiency and equity.  However, the Committee note with concern from the submission made by 
the Department that the CGWB has been plagued by a serious problem of lack of manpower 
which is hampering its functioning. At present out of to tal sanctioned staff strength of 4017, 
almost 32% posts i.e., 1300 are lying vacant in the Board. Further, out of 882 Sanctioned 
Strength in Scientific category, only 545 posts are filled and appx. 38% (337) are vacant. 
Similarly, out of 1868 Sanctioned St rength in Engineering category 1338 are filled and 530 
(39.61%) are vacant. The Committee are dismayed to observe such a huge shortage of human 
resources in CGWB in general and Scientific and Engineering categories in particular which 
indicates the lackada isical attitude of the Department towards such an important organ of the 
Department. The Committee are of the view that such a huge shortage of manpower does not 
auger well for the smooth working of the CGWB. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Department to take urgent measures to fill up all the vacancies particularly in its Scientific and 
Engineering sections which are the backbone of CGWB, on pro -active and urgent basis at the 
earliest. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in t his regard within three 
months of presentation of this Report.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The following steps have been/are being taken by CGWB to strengthen its manpower 
 
1. Requisition for filling up posts through direct recruitment has been initiated   a nd submitted to 
UPSC / SSC.  
2. Action has been taken/being taken to fill up the promotion vacancies. 
3. To fulfill the immediate requirement of CGWB, young professionals and consultants are 
engaged on a contractual basis. 
 

23 
 
The vacant posts in the scientific and engineering discipline in CGWB will be filled up as per the 
nominations being received from the recruitment agencies i.e UPSC and SSC.  
 
The details of the vacant posts in scientific and engineering disciplines in CGWB and the steps 
being taken for filling the vacancies are given in Annexure II. 
 
 
 
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2022-Budget Section-MoWR-Part (1)/30] 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 10 (Para 2.10) 
 
From the submission of the Department, the Committee note that CGWB had a network of 
around 15000 monitoring wells in the year 2012. It was proposed to increase monitoring wells 
by 35000 through in -house as well as through participatory mode. However, as o f 
31stDecember 2021, CGWB has only 22800 monitoring wells, as the activities under the 
participatory ground water management component of the scheme for 2012 -17 could not take 
off. The Committee are of the view that m easurements of water levels in wells is  the most 
fundamental indicator of the status of this resource and are critical to meaningful evaluation of 
the quantity and quality of groundwater and its interaction with surface water. In order to 
achieve this objective, the Committee recommend the Depa rtment to take effective steps to 
increase the number of observation wells with Digital Water Level Recorders and Telemetry to 
monitor the ground water level.   Taking cognizance of the fact that only 19 States/UTs have 
enacted the Model Bill for regulatio n and development of ground water so far, the Committee 
express their disappointment that the advantages of this Model Bill in restoring and ensuring 
groundwater security through availability of sufficient quantity and appropriate quality of 
groundwater to  all stakeholders in rural and urban areas remain untapped.  They, therefore, 
urge the Department to make all concerted efforts to persuade the remaining States to enact 
this important Bill at the earliest.  The efforts / steps taken in this regard may be apprised to the 
Committee within three months of presentation of the Report to Parliament. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
CGWB, an attached body under the aegis of DoWR, RD &GR,  periodically monitors the 
groundwater levels throughout the country on a regional scale, four times in a year during the 
months of March/April/May, August, November and January through a network of monitoring 
wells. At present, CGWB has a network of 22,835 monitoring wells ( as on March 2021) 
(Annexure III). Further,  the State Governments also have their own ground water level 
monitoring network of around 43,500 stations making the total number of ground water 
monitoring stations in the country around 66,000. 
 

24 
 
In order to increase the number of observation wells, a proposal has been prepared to install 
9,000 piezometers. All these 9 ,000 piezometers are proposed to be fitted with Digital Water 
Level Recorder (DWLR) with telemetry system. In addition to above, CGWB has also taken up 
installation of 5 ,260 DWLRs with tel emetry system in the existing piezometers of CGWB in 
convergence with NHP. 
Model Bill has been e nacted and implemented in 19 States/ UTs (14 States and 5 UTs). 13 
States/ UTs (10 States and 3 UTs) have taken initiatives for enactment of Model Bill and the 
remaining States have intimated that it is not necessary to enact legislation.  
Ministry of Jal Shakti has issued new guidelines on 24.09.2020 to be implemented by Central 
Ground Water Authority (CGWA) for regulation of ground water withdrawal by industria l, 
infrastructure and mining projects. As per these guidelines, ground water extraction for 
agricultural activities has been exempted from regulation.  These guidelines have pan-India 
applicability. The matter is being pursued with State Authorities to adop t CGWA Guidelines/ 
enact Act in line with CGWA guidelines. 
 
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2022-Budget Section-MoWR-Part (1)/30] 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 12 (Para 2.12) 
 
National Aquifer Mapping and Management (NAQUIM) Programme 
 
The Committee observe that the National Aquifer Mapping and Management (NAQUIM) 
programme is the major component of the Ground Water Management and Regulation 
(GWM&R) Scheme. The objectives of NAQUIM studies include delineation and characterization 
of aquifers, preparation of ground water manage ment plans, implemention of demonstrative 
projects on aquifer rejuvenation, conducting public interaction programmes for disseminating 
the tenets of the Aquifer management plans at the grass -root level. The Committee note that 
out of the total identified a rea of nearly 25 lakh sq. km.  under NAQUIM studies as on 31st 
December 2021, an area of 18.7 lakh sq. km. (18.97 covered upto 31 st January 2022) has been 
covered.  The Committee are, however, concerned over the fact that Aquifer Mapping Reports 
in respect  of only 11.25 lakh sq. km. have been finalized and placed on the CGWB website. 
The Committee feel that such a huge gap that exist in mapping and preparation of Aquifer 
Reports under such an important Scheme will undermine the whole exercise of this import ant 
and ambitious project of mapping the aquifers of the country. In view of the fact that NAQUIM is 
essential for sustainable management of Ground Water Resources in the country and further 
given the fact that output of NAQUIM are also shared with the Sta tes/UTs for suitable 
intervention, the Committee urge upon the Department to take necessary steps to complete the 
finalization of Aquifer Reports within a prescribed time limit as soon as mapping has been 
carried out. The steps taken in this regard may be apprised to the Committee within three 
months of presentation of the Report to Parliament. 

25 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
As on date, reports in respect of 14 lakh sq km have been issued. Earnest attempts are being 
made to issue reports in respect of the entire area covered as on 31st March 2022, which is 
nearly 21 lakh sq km by September 2022. The steps taken in this regard include deploying 
more number of officers to the regional offices where such requirements are there. The 
progress is being reviewed at regular intervals.  
 
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2022-Budget Section-MoWR-Part (1)/30] 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 13 (Para 2.13) 
 
Irrigation Census 
 
The Committee observe that the scheme ‘Rationalization of Minor Irrigation Statistics’ (RMIS) 
was launched in 1987 -88 in the DoWR, RD &GR, Ministry of Jal Shakti (MoJS), with 100% 
Central assistance to the States/UTs. In 2017 -18, the scheme wa s renamed as “Irrigation 
Census” and brought under the Centrally sponsored umbrella scheme, “PMKSY and other 
schemes” to build up a comprehensive and reliable database in the Minor Irrigation (MI) sector 
for effective planning and policy making. Detailed d ata base on Minor Irrigation works in the 
country has been generated through five census carried out under the Scheme so far with 
reference years 1986 -87, 1993 -94, 2000 -01, 2006 -07 and 2013 -14 respectively. The 
Committee are happy to observe that the scope  of irrigation census has now been expanded to 
include census of water bodies with 100% Central assistance. The first census of water bodies 
has been launched in the States/UTs in convergence with Sixth Minor Irrigation Census. The 
census of water bodies i nter alia includes collection of  information on all important aspects of 
the water bodies, including their size, condition, status of encroachments, use, storage 
capacity, status of filing up of storage etc. While appreciating the steps taken by the 
Government to include census of water bodies with 100% Central assistance in the Irrigation 
Census, the Committee urge upon the Department to explore the feasibility of expanding the 
scope of Irrigation Census to cover medium and micro -irrigation schemes as it will help in 
bringing most of the irrigation schemes and their data under a single platform, which in turn will 
be of great use in formulating better informed schemes for the irrigation sector and will address 
irrigation issues in much more broader framework.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The Minor Irrigation(Statistics) Wing of the DoWR, RD & GR, Ministry of Jal Shakti has been 
conducting census of Minor Irrigation structures quinquennially since1986-87. So far, five 
censuses have been conducted with reference years 1986-87, 1993-94, 2000-01, 2006-07 and 
2013-14 respectively. The scope of ‘Irrigation Census’ scheme was already enlarged by the 
launch of first census of water bodies in convergence with the 6th Minor Irrigation Census 
(Reference year 2017-18). 

26 
 
 
Before taking up the census work each time, a Steering Committee is constituted under the 
chairmanship of Secretary, DoWR, RD&GR with representatives of line Ministries/stakeholders 
like NITI Aayog, Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Statistics & Programme Implementation, 
Ministry of Panchayati Raj, Chairman of Central Water Commission (CWC) & Central Ground 
Water Board (CGWB), Principal Secretaries from selected State Governments etc. for finalizing 
the statistical instruments like questionnaire, guidelines etc. The Standing Finance Committee 
(SFC) for continuation of the 'Irrigation Census' scheme for a period of 5 years from 2021-22 to 
2025-26 has recommended that the expansion of scope of Minor Irrigation census with 
coverage of major and medium irrigation schemes may be explored for discussion in the 
Steering committee that will be constituted in due course for 7th Minor Irrigation Census and the 
2nd Census of water bodies with reference year 2022-23. 
 
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2022-Budget Section-MoWR-Part (1)/30] 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 14 (Para 2.14) 
 
Special Package for Irrigation Projects 
 
The Committee note that a Special Package was approved during the meeting of the Cabinet 
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) held on 18.07.2018 for providing Central Assistance to 
complete 83 Surface Minor Irrigation (SMI) projects and 8 Major / Medium Irrigation (MMI) 
Projects in drought prone districts in Vidarbha, Marathwada and rest of Maharashtra in phases 
up to the year 2023 -24. The overall bala nce cost of the said projects as on 1.4.2018 is 
estimated to be Rs.13651.61 crore. The Ultimate Irrigation Potential of the projects under the 
Special Package is 4.06 L Ha out of which an irrigation potential of 0.33 L Ha has been created 
up to 03/2018. An  additional irrigation potential of 0.97 L Ha has been created during 2018 -21.   
The Committee note that during 2021 -22, the allocation in RE was Rs. 600 crore vis -à-vis BE 
allocation of Rs. 400 crore. During 2022 -23, the BE has been pegged at Rs. 800 cror e.  The 
Committee express the hope that going by past trend, the entire amount allocated in 2021 -22 
would be utilized under the scheme.  The Department have informed that challenges like land 
acquisition, court cases, resettlement & rehabilitation and Rail way and Highway crossings are 
the bottlenecks that are hindering the progress of the projects and a number of steps are being 
taken to overcome these challenges. The Committee welcome the efforts of the Government to 
provide not only the much needed relief  to address the agrarian distress in Vidarbha and 
Marathwada and other chronically drought prone areas of rest of Maharashtra but also making 
all out endeavours to make this prograame successful by putting in place a vibrant mechanism 
to overcome the chall enges being faced in the implementation of this Programme. The 
Department has apprised the Committee that presently there is no proposal for extending this 
Special Package to other parts/regions of the country facing similar challenges. The Committee 
desire that the Department may review their stand and actively examine the feasibility of 
extending similar package to address agrarian distress prevailing in other chronically drought 
prone areas of rest of the country. 

27 
 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
"The RE allocation for 2021-22 under the Special Package for Maharashtra was Rs.600 crore. 
However, this was subsequently revised to Rs.725 crore and the utilization  is 100%. The 
Special Package was a one -time approval and not a regular scheme of the Ministry. Under the 
Special Package, Central Assistance (CA) @ 25% of the balance cost of projects as on 1.4.18 
(as well as 25% reimbursement for the expenditure incurred during 2017 -18) is eligible. CA is 
released @25% of the expenditure made on reimburse ment basis.  However, States can 
propose their Major Medium Irrigati on(MMI)/Extension, Renovation & 
Modernization(ERM)projects for inclusion under the PMKSY –AIBP scheme approved for 
implementation during 2021 -26. Projects benefitting special area, i.e., mor e than 50% 
command of the project falls under Drought Prone Area Programme (DPAP), Desert 
Development Programme (DDP), Tribal area, Flood prone area, Left Wing Extremist area, 
Bundelkhand, Vidarbha, Marathwada and KBK (Odisha)  can avail central assistance  @ 
60(Central): 40 (State) against 25 (Centre): 75 (State) for the projects falling in general area.  
Also, provision for relaxation in inclusion criteria has been made for the project benefitting such 
special areas and they can be included under PMKSY -AIBP even if their physical progress is 
less than 50%. 
 
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2022-Budget Section-MoWR-Part (1)/30] 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 16 (Para 2.16) 
 
Dam Rehabilitation and Improvement Programme (DRIP) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry of Jal Shakti, Department of Water Resources, River 
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation (DoWR,RD&GR) initiated World Bank assisted Dam 
Rehabilitation and Improvement Project (DRIP) in April 2012, with an objective to improve 
safety and operational performance of selected dams along with institutional strengthening with 
system wide management approach. The overall coordination and supervision was entrusted to 
Central Water Commission. The physical rehabilitation activities have been completed for  99% 
(221 out of 223 dams) of the dam portfolio and the rehabilitation at balanced two dam projects 
was under progress and would be completed under new Scheme DRIP Phase II. The 
Committee observe that actual expenditure under this head has been lower vis -a-vis BE 
allocation. In FY 2018 -19 and 2019 -20, the actual expenditure incurred was Rs. 49.32 crore 
and 41.61 crore as against BE allocation of Rs. 124 crore and Rs. 89.37 crore respectively. 
Similarly, in 2020 -21, only Rs. 30.51 crore was spent against BE allocation of Rs. 55/ - crore. 
The Department have attributed the reasons for underutilization of resources to delay in 
payment of few liabilities viz DC -DR system (part of Main and Backup Server), restrictions 
during COVID period, Non -materialization of In ternational Training Program for officials of 

28 
 
CSMRS, not placing the requisite procurement orders by the CSMRS before March 31, 2021, in 
order to enable them to incur the planned expenditure. Keeping in view the importance of DRIP 
Programme in improving th e safety parameters of the dams of the country and also noting that 
coronavirus pandemic is waning due to widespread vaccination drive,  the Committee urge the 
Department to now tighten their belt and make every possible effort to make full utilization of 
budgetary provisions under this important Scheme. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
In DRIP Scheme, t he major provisions allocated under  BE 2022-23 is towards advance 
payment to new CPMU Consultant, which is currently under advanced stage of procurement, 
monthly payment invoices of the Consultant, payment to IIT Roorkee in respect of 
establishment of Centre of Excellence, payment towards equipments already procured under 
previous DRIP scheme whose installation and commissioning got delayed due to COVID-19 
pandemic. The progress of these activities is being regularly monitored by Department at 
various levels as well as official mechanism available for the scheme, and all possible efforts 
are being made to ensure efficient utilization of allocated funds. 
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2022-Budget Section-MoWR-Part (1)/30] 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 17 (Para 2.17) 
Need to frame a National Embankment Policy  
The Committee understand that at present there is no comprehensive Embankment Policy to 
repair and maintain river banks in the country.  In this regard, the Committee are constrained to 
note that the Department has not furnished specific reply to their que ry with regard to the 
preparation of a National Embankment Policy. The Department has merely stated that flood 
management falls within the purview of the State Governments and hence flood management 
and anti -erosion projects are formulated and implemented by the concerned State 
Governments. It was also stated that regular review meetings are held with State Governments 
officials to sensitize about the issue of upkeep and maintenance of the embankments, however, 
State Governments fail to maintain embankments  as per requirements due to paucity of funds 
on their part.  The Ministry further stated that there is no proposal under consideration to 
provide financial assistance to the States for upkeep and maintenance of the embankments. 
Taking cognizance of the fact that floods wreak havoc and bring untold miseries to thousands of 
the people every year, the Committee are of the considered opinion that river embankments, if 
properly maintained, may play an important role in minimizing the devastating impact of floods . 
The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Department to review their stated policy / position and 
explore ways and means to frame a comprehensive national embankment policy specifying 
protocols/ SoPs required to be followed scrupulously for re -enforcement of the river banks. 
Further, the Committee also desire that the Department should make arrangements for 

29 
 
providing financial assistance to the needy States to upkeep the embankments.  Keeping in 
view the recurring devastation taking place in the border area s of the States of Bihar and Uttar 
Pradesh every year due to the menace of floods by the rivers originating from neighbouring 
country, the Committee further recommend that the Department may explore the feasibility of 
providing financial assistance to the States under Flood Management and Border Areas 
Programme (FMBAP). 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
The primary responsibility of flood management including erosion control falls within the 
purview of the States, the Union Government supplements the efforts of the States by providing 
technical guidance and promotional financial assistance for management of floods in critical 
areas. Under the ongoing Flood Management and Border Areas Programme( FMBAP) of 
DoWR, RD & GR, Ministry of Jal Shakti, the State Governments/ UTs have been provided 
central assistance of Rs.2,252.53 crore during the period 2016-17 to 2020-21 for undertaking 
flood management/anti erosion projects. The 415 completed projects under FMBAP have given 
protection to an area of around 4.99 mha and protected a population of about 52.21 million. 
 
The Government of India has been making continuous efforts to assist the State Governments 
in effective flood management and erosion control. Morphological Studies by various IIT and 
NIIT have been carried out form major rivers like Ganga, Brahmaputra, Sharda, Rapti, Kosi, 
Bagmati, Subansari, Krishna, Mahanadi, Mahanada, etc. These studies aid in finding the 
vulnerable spots for bank erosion/deposition, aggradations/de gradation etc. As far as 
embankments are concerned, these are generally considered economical, quick and most 
popular method of flood protection and have been constructed extensively in the past. 
Embankments (including ring bunds and town protection works) confine the flood flow sand 
prevents pilling, there by reducing the damage. However, construction of embankments is to be 
carried out after proper scientific, morphological and modelling studies of river for identifying 
changes in river courses, vulnerable locations, rise in afflux due to jacketing etc. 
 
As far as feasibility  of  providing  financial  assistance  to  the  States  under  Flood  
Management  and  Border  Areas  Programme  (FMBAP)  is  concerned,  it  is  
mentioned  that  projects  for  raising  and  strengthening  of  embankments  are  
considered  eligible  for  funding  under  the  programme.  Moreover,  the  scope  of  
exiting  FMBAP  has  been  modified  to  include  flood  protection  works  on  all  cross  
border/border  rivers  where  as  the  earlier s cope  was  limited  to  flood  management  
works  on  Border Rivers  with  Bangladesh , Nepal and Pakistan and embankments on 
Kosi and Gandak rivers in Nepal portion. 
 
Central Water Commission has published a detailed handbook for “Flood Protection, Anti -
erosion, and River Training Works” to deal primarily with structural measures of flood 
management like flood protection works, anti erosion measures and river training works. This 
handbook contains details of construction materials, guidelines for design embankment, bank 

30 
 
revetment, spurs/groynes, RCC porcupines, drainage improvement works, Con struction 
methodology, cost estimate and unit rate analysis to provide a ready reference to plan, 
construct and monitor the flood management projects in an integrated manner. The handbook 
is available on the official website of CWC  http://www.cwc.gov.in/sites/default/files/Handbook-
05-Jun-12_0.pdf 
Besides above, Ganga Flood Control Commission, Patna has prepared guidelines for “Use of 
Geo-textiles/ Geo -bag / Geo -tubes in Construction of Flood Management Works” keeping in 
view flood management works is progressively increasing in the country with above material as 
a possible alternative for boulders in construction of anti-erosion and river training works. 
 
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2022-Budget Section-MoWR-Part (1)/30] 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 18 (Para 2.18) 
Rain Water Harvesting  
 
The Committee note with satisfaction that the Government of India has taken several initiatives 
like launching of Jal Shakti Abhiyan (JSA), institution of National Water Awards, organizing 
mass awareness programmes, preparation of Master Plan for Artificial Recharge to 
Groundwater, compiling best practices of wa ter conservation by various entities and putting 
them on the websites of the Ministry for the benefit of the general public for sustainable 
management of groundwater including rainwater harvesting. However, at the same time, the 
Committee are disheartened to note from the written submission of the Department that CGWB 
has not set any target and fixed timelines to increase the adoption and propagation of 
Rainwater harvesting technology in the country. The Committee are of the view that without 
having quantif iable goals/targets in place, no programme can achieve the desired outcome 
however, noble the intentions are. Taking into account the rapid depletion of groundwater table 
in large part of the country, the Committee recommend that on the lines of NAQUIM 
Programme, the Department should identify the geographical area where rainwater harvesting 
technology may be used effectively to replenish the groundwater table and take pro -active 
action to carry out the exercise within the defined timeline. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Master Plan for Artificial Recharge to Groundwater - 2020 has been prepared by CGWB , an 
attached body under the aegis of DoWR, RD & GR, in consultation with States/UTs which is a 
macro level plan indicating various structures for the different terrain conditions of the country 
including estimated cost. In the Master Plan geographical areas where feasible areas for 
artificial recharge to gr ound water has already been identified. The Master Plan envisages 

31 
 
construction of about 1.42 crore rain water harvesting and artificial recharge structures in the 
country to harness 185 Billion Cubic Metre (BCM) of monsoon rainfall. DPR has to be prepared 
by the concerned line department at an implementable level like any other water supply project 
or city development project. Implementation has to be done through existing schemes only and 
no separate scheme/fund has been envisaged for implementation. 
 
The Ministry of Rural Development in consultation and agreement with the Department of Water 
Resources, RD & GR and the Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare has developed an 
actionable framework for Natural Resources Management (NRM), titled ‘Mission Wate r 
Conservation” to ensure gainful utilization of funds. The Framework strives to ensure synergies 
in Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme(MGNREGS), Pradhan 
Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY), erstwhile integrated Watershed Manageme nt 
Programme (IWMP) now PMKSY Watershed development Component and Command Area 
Development & Water Management (CADWM), given their common objectives. Types of 
common works undertaken under these programmes/ schemes are water conservation and 
management, wa ter harvesting, soil and moisture conservation, groundwater recharge, flood 
protection, land development, Command Area Development & Watershed Management. 
 
Along with other Ministries/Department, Department of Water Resources, River Development 
and Ganga Rejuvenation (DoWR,RD&GR) and its organizations including CGWB are working 
to achieve the targets of Jal Shakti Abhiyan: Catch the Rain (JSA:CTR) and JSA:CTR–2022 as 
per the focused interventions of the campaigns during defined timelines. 
 
The inventions of JSA:CTR and JSA:CTR-2022 mainly focus on water conservation and rain 
water harvesting. Intervention-wise progress (completed as well as ongoing works) as on 
07.04.2022 includes (i) Water Conservation & Rain water Harvesting Structures :16,22,957; 
(ii)Renovation of Traditional Water Bodies: 2,96,958; (iii) Reuse and Recharge Structures: 
8,31,961; (iv) Water shed Development: 19,18,395; (v) Intensive Afforestation :36,75,68,460. 
 
 
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2022-Budget Section-MoWR-Part (1)/30] 
 
 
 
 
  

32 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES  
 
 
 
NIL

33 
 
CHAPTER – IV  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 3 (Para 2.3) 
 
 
Water Resources Scenario 
 
The Committee note that water availability per person is dependent on population of the country 
and the per capita water availability in the country is reducing progressively.  The average 
annual per capita water availability in the years 2001 and 2011 was  assessed as 1816 cubic 
meters and 1545 cubic meters respectively, which may further reduce due to increase in 
population.  Annual per capita water availability of less than 1700 cubic meters is considered as 
water stressed condition, whereas annual per ca pita water availability below 1000 cubic meters 
is considered as a water scarcity condition. The Committee further note with concern that the 
biggest water consuming sector in the country is the agriculture, followed by domestic and 
industrial sector(s). The Committee have been informed that the Department has taken various 
steps to increase the per capita water availability, viz., launching of Jal Shakti Abhiyan, 
formulation of National Perspective Plan (NPP), implementation of National Aquifer Mapping 
and Management (NAQUIM), Atal Bhujal Yojana (ATAL JAL) etc.  Notwithstanding these 
measures, the Committee are of the view that there is an urgent need to decrease the water 
consumption in the agriculture sector. The Committee believe that crop diversificatio n and crop 
planning accompanied with application of modern technologies like moisture sensor will be of 
significant help in improving the per capita water availability by producing more with less usage 
of water. The Committee therefore recommend that the D epartment takes pro-active steps and 
work in close collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture and Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research (ICAR) in order to achieve the goal of decreasing the usage of water in agriculture 
sector.  Further, keeping in v iew the fact that subsidized electricity and fertilizer have 
encouraged farmers to grow water -intensive crops even in the areas having water scarcity, 
the Committee are of the considered opinion that institutional changes are the need of the 
hour.  The Com mittee, therefore, urge the Department to work in close collaboration with the 
Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Power and the concerned States to explore the option of 
having energy efficient pricing which may become an important tool for sustainable 
management of groundwater resources.  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
CGWB, an attached body under the aegis of DoWR, RD &GR, has taken up Aquifer Mapping 
and Management Programme during XII Plan, under the scheme ‘Ground Water Management 

34 
 
and Regulation’. The Aquifer Mapping is aimed to delineate aquifer disposition and their 
characterization for preparation of aquifer/area specific ground water management plans with 
community participatio n. The management plans including agriculture sector like crop 
diversification, sprinkler system, drip irrigation, etc. are shared with the respective State 
Governments for taking appropriate measures/implementation. Further, Public Interaction 
Programs (P IP) are being organized at grass root level for disseminating the tenets of the 
Aquifer Management Plans as part of the National Aquifer Mapping and Management 
(NAQUIM) Programme for the benefit of the stakeholders, including farmers. So far, 1,093 such 
programs have been conducted in different parts of the country including ‘o ver-exploited’ and 
‘critical’ ground water areas in which nearly 90,000 people including farmers have been 
sensitized on various aspects of water conservation and ground water managem ent. The 
NAQUIM outputs are shared with the State Governments through the State Ground Water 
Coordination Committees (SGWCC) which are headed by the concerned Principal Secretaries 
of the respective States. From 2018, CGWB has started sharing the NAQUIM 
recommendations to the District Authorities and so far outputs in respect of 377 districts are 
already shared with the District authorities. Outputs are also being shared with other central 
agencies for their effective utilization. CGWB also provides technic al assistance to the State 
Governments, as and when requested for such assistance.Best practices of water conservation 
by various entities including private persons, NGOs, PSUs etc have been compiled and put on 
the web site of this Department for the benef it of general public. An interactive link on best 
practices has also been created for receiving inputs from public, which, after necessary 
evaluation/validation are put on the website for the benefit of the public. 
 
Mass awareness programmes (Trainings, Se minars, Workshops, Exhibitions, Trade Fares and 
Painting Competitions etc.) are conducted from time to time each year under the information, 
Education & Communication (IEC) Scheme of DoWR, RD & GR in various parts of the country 
to promote water conservation techniques including in the irrigation sector. 
 
For crop diversification and water use efficiency in agriculture sector, an awareness campaign 
viz. ‘Sahi Fasal’ campaign was launched by National Water Mission on 14.11.2019 to nudge 
farmers in the water stressed areas to grow crops which are not water intensive, but use water 
very efficiently; and are economically remunerative; are healthy and nutritious; suited to the 
agro-climatic-hydro characteristics of the area; and are environmentally friendly.   Un der Sahi 
Fasal, series workshops have been organized in Amritsar (Punjab) on 14.11.2019, Aurangabad 
(Maharashtra) on 13.01.2020 and Kurukshetra (Haryana) on 14.02.2020 and with technical 
experts in New Delhi on 26-27.11.2019. 
 
Working in  close coordination with other Ministries/Departments Jal Shakti Abhiyan : Catch the 
Rain (JSA:CTR) Campaign was launched by Hon’ble Prime Minister on 22.03.2021 to cover all 
the blocks of all districts (rural as well as urban areas) across the country during 22 ndMarch 
2021 to 30 thNovember 2021 - the pre -monsoon and monsoon period.  Jal Shakti Abhiyan: 
Catch the Rain (JSA: CTR) -2022 has been launched by Hon’ble President on 29.03.2022in all 
districts (rural as well as urban areas) of the country with the theme “Catch the Rain, where it 

35 
 
falls, when it falls”  The campaign will be implemented from 29 March, 2022 to 30 November, 
2022 - the pre-monsoon and monsoon period in the country. 
 
A Joint D.O. letter signed by 10 Secretaries of Various Ministries/Departments was  written to all 
Chief Secretaries on 15.04.2022 for implementation of Jal Shakti Abhiyan: Catch the Rain 
(JSA:CTR) - 2022 campaign during pre -monsoon and monsoon period from 29.03.2022 to 
30.11.2022 in all rural and urban districts of the country, focussin g on harvesting and 
conservation of rainwater. The principle of reuse, recycle and recharge of water would be 
inherent to the Abhiyan and the management of used or waste water specially grey water would 
also be part of the campaign.  
As the country is celebrating Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav to celebrate and commemorate 75 years 
of independence, it has been decided to create or revive 75 water bodies called 'Amrit 
Sarovars' in each districts of the country.   Hon'ble Prime Minister, in his Mann Ki Baat 
addressed to the Nation on 24th April, 2022 gave a clarion call to construct 75 Amrit Sarovars in 
each district.   Efforts in this direction have already been initiated and approximately 50,000 
Amrit Sarovars nationwide shall be accomplished during the Amrit Kal from  24th April, 2022 to 
15th August, 2023.   A Joint advisory in this regard has also been issued to all State/UTs on 
18.04.2022 by 6 Secretaries of Ministries/Departments of Government of India.    Guidelines for 
Amrit Sarovars have been issued by Department o f Rural Development to share district wise 
plan with them and as well as with National Water Mission, Ministry of Jal Shakti.   The action 
plan should include GPS mapping and time required to complete the activity.    While finalising 
the sites, Districts ma y provide focus on water -stressed blocks specially with reference to 
drinking water. 
There commendation of the Committee to decrease water consumption in Agriculture is also 
being followed under Atal Bhujal Yojana, where emphasis has been given on efficien t irrigation 
so as to increase the water efficiency through demands side interventions such as use of micro 
irrigation systems, crop diversification etc. States will be incentivized based upon their 
performance on these parameters. 
 
A meeting was held under the chairmanship of Secretary, DoWR, RD & GR on 13.04.2022 with 
the representatives of Department of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research, and States of Gujarat, Haryana, Maharashtra, Punjab, Rajasthan and 
Tamil Nadu to discuss more efficient use of water in agriculture and related issues.  
 
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2022-Budget Section-MoWR-Part (1)/30] 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 

36 
 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 11 (Para 2.11) 
 
Amendment to 'The India Easement Act, 1882' 
The Committee note that though Government of India has taken various steps and launched 
some Programmes to improve the Ground water situation in the country, however, t here still 
remains some gaps in the institut ional framework, one of them being 'The India Easement 
Act, 1882' which is a stumbling block in ground water control. The Act prohibits the creation of 
easementry rights over ground water and enables the owner to have full control of the water 
beneath his property enabling him to use it as deemed appropriate which also results in mining 
of ground water at many places leading to its over -exploitation. Taking cognizance of the 
dangerous depletion of water table coupled with deteriorating water quality, the Co mmittee urge 
upon the Department to take necessary steps in cooperation with the Ministry of Law and 
Justice to amend 'the India Easement Act, 1882' on a priority basis so as to plug the much 
needed loophole in groundwater conservation mechanism by providi ng legislative and 
institutional backing. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
A meeting was held on 25.04.2022 under the chairmanship of the Joint Secretary (Admin, IC & 
GW) regarding the proposed amendment to the Easement Act in which Chainman, CGWB, 
Member, CGWA, Director (GW, DoWR, RD & GR) and representatives from the Ministry of Law 
and Justice participated. The Ministry of Law and Justice informed that the subject matter of 
amendment to the Indian Easement Act, 1882 is the responsibility of the Ministry of Jal Shakti 
and it can propose the amendment if required. 
A question was raised in the meeting considering the present scientific knowledge of ground 
water flows and data generated through NAQUIM Studies, when it is established beyond doubt 
that the ground wate r flows pass in a defined channel based on the water table elevations in 
shallow aquifers and piezometric heads in deep aquifers, whether the amendment in the Indian 
Easement Act, 1882 is necessarily required or not.  
In this regard, CGWB organized a brainstorming session on 24th May 2022 through online 
mode wherein senior officers of CGWB, experts from various organizations and retired officers 
of CGWB participated. 
The outcome of the brainstorming session revealed that the amendment to section 7 (b) (g) of 
the Indian Easement Act, 1882 is not required. Further, it has been decided that a brief 
explanation can be added to the Explanation for section 7 (b) (g) which is “The ground water 
flowing below the land surface flows in a defined channel following  the hydraulic head and 
water table contouring”. Hence, the owner of the land has no absolute right to the water flowing 

37 
 
beneath his land to use it as deemed appropriate. However, the right of the owner mentioned in 
7 (b) (j) remains the same. 
 
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2022-Budget Section-MoWR-Part (1)/30] 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
RECOMMENDATION NO. 15 (Para 2.15) 
 
National River Conservation Plan - Other Basins 
 
The Committee note that under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of ‘National River 
Conservation Plan (NRCP)’, financial assistance is being provided to State Governments on 
cost sharing basis between the Central & State Governments for conservation of rivers. While 
the Capital expenditure is shared bet ween Central and State/Union Territories, Operating 
expenses is borne 100% by the State /Union Territories (UTs) Governments.  The Committee 
further note that for the fiscal year 2022 -23, an amount of Rs. 250.68 crore has been kept for 
the NRCP - other Basins, which is a minuscule amount in comparison to budgetary allocation of 
Rs. 2800 crore earmarked for river Ganga under Namami Gange Mission II Project. In this 
regard, the Department has apprised the Committee that if required additional allocation will be 
sought at RE stage. However, the Committee in this regard would like to recall that during the 
examination of the DFG (2020 -21), on the issue of meager allocation under this Scheme (BE 
was just Rs. 220 crore in FY 2020 -21), it was informed by the Depart ment that higher 
allocations under this Scheme would be sought when approval to revised Scheme is obtained. 
The Committee are not satisfied with the meager allocation of mere Rs. 250.68 crore for FY 
2022-23 to this Scheme considering the fact that NRCP cov ers 34 rivers in 77 towns spread 
over 16 States in the country. The Committee are thus constrained to observe that the 
Department has displayed callous and lackadaisical attitude in its endeavours for increasing the 
budgetary allocations for this very important Programme.  The Committee are of the considered 
view that since all other major rivers of the country are also equally polluted as river Ganga, 
they also require the same attention and remedial measures.  They, therefore, recommend the 
Department to take proactive steps in augmenting the budgetary allocations for this Programme 
at RE stage / Supplementary Demand stage. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
steps taken by the Department within three months of presentation of this Report. 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
NRCP is a centrally sponsored scheme with sharing of capital expenditure between Central and 
State/Union Territories (UTs) Governments, and operational expenditure is borne 100% by the 
State/Union Territories (UTs) Governments. Also  total outlay for a period of 5 years from 2021 -

38 
 
22 to 2025-26 is Rs.1,252 crore, with an average annual outlay of around Rs.225 crore. In case 
of Namami Gange Mission-II both capital and operational expenditure are borne by the NMCG.  
Apart from this, there is a difference in funding pattern between Namami Gange Mission (NGM) 
and National River Conservation Plan (NRCP). NGM is central sector scheme with 100% 
funding, while NRCP is a centrally sponsored scheme wherein the Central Government 
normally funds to  the extent of 60% of fund in non -NE States/UTs and 90:10 for NER, 
Himalayan States/UTs.  This is why the difference of budgetary allocation between NMCG and 
NRCP is substantial. 
Cleaning and rejuvenation of rivers is a continuous process. Rivers and other  water bodies in 
the country are polluted mainly due to discharge of untreated or partially treated sewage from 
cities/ towns and industrial effluents in their respective catchments. It is the responsibility of the 
States/Union Territories (UTs), Local Bod ies and Industrial Units to ensure required treatment 
of sewage and industrial effluents to the prescribed norms before discharging into rivers and 
other water bodies, coastal waters or land to prevent and control of pollution therein. For 
conservation of rivers, this Department has been supplementing the efforts of the States/UTs by 
providing financial and technical assistance for abatement of pollution in identified stretches of 
rivers in the country through the central sector scheme of Namami Gange for r ivers in Ganga 
basin, and centrally sponsored scheme of National River Conservation Plan (NRCP) for other 
rivers. 
NRCP has so far covered polluted stretches on 34 rivers in 77 towns spread over 16 States in 
the country with the project sanctioned cost of R s. 6,050.18 crore, and inter -alia, a sewage 
treatment capacity of 2,677 million litres per day (mld) has been created. 
 Proposals for pollution abatement works/schemes in identified towns along polluted river 
stretches are received from the States/UTs from time to time for consideration under the NRCP, 
which are sanctioned based on their prioritization, conformity with the NRCP guidelines, 
availability of funds etc. At RE stage, supplementary demand for additional funds may be made 
in compliance of recommendation of the Committee. 
[O.M. No. G-30013/2/2022-Budget Section-MoWR-Part (1)/30] 
 
Comment of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter – I of the Report) 
 
 
 
 
  

39 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – V  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLY OF THE 
GOVERNMENT IS STILL AWAITED  
 
 
 
 
NIL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel 
  16 December,  2022 Chairperson 
  25 Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) Standing Committee on Water Resources 
 
  

40 
 
ANNEXURE – I 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON WATER 
RESOURCES (2022-23) HELD ON THURSDAY, 15 DECEMBER, 2022 
   
The Committee sat from 1500 hours to 1715 hours in Main Committee Room, Ground 
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel   –  Chairperson  
 
MEMBERS 
 LokSabha 
 
2. Shri Vijay Baghel 
3. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan 
4. Shri Bhagirath Choudhary 
5. Shri Guman Singh Damor 
6. Dr. K. Jayakumar 
7. Shri Dhanush M. Kumar 
8. Shri Sunil Kumar 
9. Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel 
10. Shri Pratap Chandra Sarangi 
11. Shri Shivkumar C. Udasi 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Shri Aneel Prasad Hegde 
13. Dr. Kirodi Lal Meena 
14. Smt. Mausam Noor 
15. Sant Balbir Singh 
 
  
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Chander Mohan  - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Ajay Kumar Sood  - Director 
3. Shri Ram Lal Yadav   - Additional Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened to consider and adopt Draft Report on Actio n Taken by the Government on Demands 
for Grants (2022 -23) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti (Department of Water Resources, River 
Development & Ganga Rejuvenation).  
 
3. ***    ***  ***   ***   ***   ***  
4. ***    ***  ***   ***   ***   *** 
5. ***    ***  ***   ***   ***   *** 

41 
 
 
6. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration Draft Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on Demands for Grants (2022 -23) of the Ministry of Jal Shakti (Department of 
Water Resources, River Development & Ganga Rejuvenation).  After some deliberation, the 
Committee adopted the aforesaid draft Report without any modification. 
 
7.  The Committee authorized the Chairperson to present the Reports on their behalf to 
both the Houses of Parliament in the current Session. 
 
  The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 
*** 
 
 
  

42 
 
 
Annexure II 
 Status of filling up of vacancies in CGWB as on 06.06.2022 
SL 
N
O 
Designati
on of 
Post 
CGWB 
Stream 
Level Sancti
oned 
Strengt
h 
Filled 
up 
Stren
gth 
DR / 
PR 
Criteri
a as 
per RR 
Vaca
nt 
Post
s 
Action taken 
to fill up DR 
vacancies 
Action taken to fill up PR 
vacancies 
  GROUP - 
A 
                
1 Chairma
n 
SCI Level 
15 
(HAG
) 
1 1 100% 
Promot
ion 
0     
2 Member SCI Level 
14 
4 1  100% 
Promot
ion 
3   Vacancy advertised by DoWR 
for filling 03 vacancies by 
Deputation 
3 Member Engg. Level 
14 
1 0  100% 
Promot
ion 
1   Not eligible in 2022. DPC for 
2023  submitted to DoWR 
4 Project 
Director 
(Member 
Scientific 
level) 
SCI Level 
14 
1 0 By 
deputa
tion 
1   Advertised by the DOWR - 
under process. 
5 Regional 
Director 
SCI Level 
13 
18 17 100% 
Promot
ion 
1   
DPC for 01 post will be 
submitted. 
6 Regional 
Director 
Engg. Level 
13 
3 3 100% 
Promot
ion 
0    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 Scientist-
D 
(Hydroge
ology) 
SCI Level 
12 
294 213  
50% 
by 
Promot
ion 
50% 
by 
Direct(
81  
DR-48( Offer 
issued- 16, 
Advertised-
20, 
Requisition 
to submit -
12) 
 
PR-33( DPC is to be convened 
after completion of FCS from 
Sc-B to Sc. C  
due to the cap of 174 posts) 
Presently FCS proposal from 
Sc B to Sc C under 
consideration with 
8 Scientist-
C 
(Hydroge
ology) 
SCI Level 
11 

43 
 
9 Scientist-
B 
(Hydroge
ology)    
SCI Level 
10 
Filled 
by at 
the 
level of 
Scienti
st-B) 
DoWR/UPSC. 
10 Scientist-
D 
(Chemica
l) 
SCI Level 
12 
32 28 50% 
by 
Promot
ion 
50% 
by 
Direct(
Filled 
by at 
the 
level of 
Scienti
st-B) 
4 DR- 03 
(Offer 
issued-
joining 
awaited)     
DR- 01 ( 
Post 
advertised 
by the UPSC 
-2022 
Exam) 
  
11 Scientist-
C 
(Chemica
l) 
SCI Level 
11 
12 Scientist-
B 
(Chemica
l)Restrict
ed to 23 
for Sc-
B(Chem). 
SCI Level 
10 
13 Scientist-
D 
(Geophys
ics) 
SCI Level 
12 
31 20 50% 
by 
Promot
ion 
50% 
by 
Direct(
Filled 
by at 
the 
level of 
Scienti
st-B) 
 
 
 
11 DR-05 ( 
offer issued 
- 05, joining 
awaited 
),nominatio
n awaited - 
01, post 
advertised 
for 01 ( 
Exam - 
2022) 
Scientist-B (Geophysics) – 04 
 DPC is under Process. 
14 Scientist-
C(Geoph
ysics) 
SCI Level 
11 
      
15 Scientist-
B(Geoph
ysics) 
SCI Level 
10 

44 
 
16 Scientist-
B, C & D 
(Hydrom
eteorolog
y) 
SCI Level 
10, 
11 & 
12 
9 7 25% 
by 
Promot
ion         
75% 
by 
Direct 
Recruit
ment 
2 01 post of 
Scientist-B 
(Hydrometeo
rology)-
Requisition 
will be 
Submitted 
after 
amendment 
of RR 
(Proposal 
under 
Preparation) 
For 01 Post - DPC for the 
recruitment year 2022 
submitted to UPSC. UPSC 
sought some clar ifications 
and reply under process. 
17 Scientist-
D 
(Hydrolog
y) 
SCI Level 
12 
8 3 40% 
by 
Promot
ion 
5 For 03 
Vacancies:-  
Advertised 
by UPSC .                                                 
For 01 
Vacancy:-  
Under 
revival For 
01 
vacancy:-  
Requisition 
will be 
submitted 
after 
receiving 
nomination 
of previous 
requisition 
because 
UPSC does 
not accept 
fresh o nes 
till the time 
disposal of 
earlier 
requisitions.  
  
18 Scientist-
C 
(Hydrolog
y) (Sc -C 
restricted 
to 7) 
SCI Level 
11 
60% 
by 
Direct 
Recruit
ment 
0 
19 Artist SCI Level 
10 
1 0 100% 
Promot
ion 
1   Post revived. DPC will be 
submitted. 
20 System 
Analyst 
SCI Level 
10 
1 0 100% 
Direct 
1 Post revived 
in 3/2022. 
Fresh 
proposal 
submitted 
to DoWR 
  
21 Program
mer 
SCI Level 
10 
1 0 100% 
Direct 
1 With UPSC   

45 
 
22 Superint
ending 
Engineer 
Eng Level 
12 
5 1  100% 
by 
Promot
ion 
4   Superintending Engineer:- 03 
DPC is with  UPSC. 
For 01 Post: Promotion order 
issued and joinig awaited. 
23 Executiv
e 
Engineer 
Eng Level 
11 
19 17  100% 
by 
Promot
ion 
2   DPC sent to DOWR on 
01/2022   
24 Asstt. 
Executiv
e 
Engineer 
Eng Level 
10 
32 13 75% 
by 
Promot
ion  
25% 
by 
Direct 
Rect 
(DR) 
19 For 03 DR 
vacancies of 
AEE:  To be 
submitted 
after 
amendment 
of RR (RR 
amendment 
proposal 
sent on 
10.03.2022) 
For 16 Posts -  DPC sent to 
DOWR on 03.12.2021 and 
subsequent clarification date 
15.03.2022.  
25 Member 
(Finance) 
Min Level 
14 
1 1 100% 
deputa
tion 
0     
26 Director 
(Admn.) 
Min Level 
13 
1 0 100% 
by 
deputa
tion/ 
absorp
tion/ 
re-
emp. 
1 To  issue 
order by 
DoWR 
  
27 Dy. 
Commisi
oner 
(Stat) 
Sci Level
-12 
1 1 Ex-
Cadre 
Post 
0 This post is 
to be filled 
up by Dept. 
Of 
Statistics. 
Request 
sent on 
22.02.21 
and 
reminders 
on 6.10.2 
and 
14.03.22 
  
28 Dy.Direct
or(Statist
ics) 
Sci Level
-11 
1 1 Ex-
Cadre 
Post 
0     

46 
 
29 Asstt. 
Director(
Stat) 
Sci Level
-10 
1 0 Ex-
Cadre 
Post 
1 This post is 
to be filled 
up by Dept. 
Of 
Statistics. 
Request 
sent on 
22.02.21 
and 
reminders 
on 6.10.2 
and 
14.03.22 
  
30 FAO Min Level 
12 
1 1 100% 
deputa
tion 
0     
31 Administ
rator 
Min Level 
11 
1 0 100% 
deputa
tion 
1 Proposal 
submitted 
in UPSC 
  
32 Sr. AO Min Level 
11 
1 1 100% 
promot
ion 
0     
33 DD (OL) Min Level 
11 
1 1 Compo
site 
metho
d 
0     
34 LIO Min Level 
11 
1 0 100%  
deputa
tion 
1 Post vacant 
for 
 More than 
07 years 
and hence 
under the 
purview of 
deemed 
abolition. 
Proposal for 
creation of 
post 
submitted 
to DoWR. 
  
35 AD (OL) Min Level 
10 
1 1 Compo
site 
metho
d 
0     
  GROUP - 
A TOTAL  
    472 331   141     
  GROUP-
B(Gz) 
          0     

47 
 
 
36 
Assistant 
Hydro 
geologist 
SCI Level 
8 
129 76 10% 
by 
Promot
ion        
90% 
by 
Direct 
53 Asst. Hydro 
geologist: 48  
 
Requisition 
for 48 
vacancies 
sent to 
Ministry on   
22.12.2021.
DoWR 
sought 
some 
clarification
s and the 
same is 
under 
process.  
 
Asst. Hydro 
geologist:   
03  
Requisition 
will be 
submitted 
to Ministry 
after 
nomination 
of previous 
requisition.                  
For          01 
Post - 
Dossier 
received and 
offer issued 
and joining 
awaited. 
For  01 Vacancy: -  No 
candidate eligible in ST 
category.  
37 Assistant 
Geophysi
cist 
SCI Level 
8 
19 10 100% 
Promot
ion  
9   For 09 vacancies -                    
Requisition submitted to 
DOWR on 01.04.2022. DoWR 
has sought some clarification 
vide letter dated 26.04.2022. 
which is under process. As 
desired by DoWR, a proposal 
for revival of 03 post of 
Assistant Geophysicist has 
been submitted to DoWR on 
23.05.2022.   

48 
 
38 Assistant 
Chemist 
SCI Level 
8 
23 18 33% 
by 
Promot
ion 
67%Di
rect 
5 Asst. 
Chemist: 04  
Requisition 
for 04 
vacancies 
sent to 
Ministry on 
23.06.21. 
DOWR 
submitted 
the same to 
UPSC. 
UPSC raised 
some 
deficiencies, 
reply will be 
submitted 
shortly. 
For 01 Post: DPC is under 
process. 
39 Assistant 
Hydrologi
st 
SCI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Level 
8 
5 3 100% 
Direct 
2 
Requisition 
will be 
submitted 
after 
amendment 
of RR. (RR 
Proposal 
sent on 
05.01.2022) 
  
40 Assistant 
Hydro 
meteorol
ogist 
SCI Level 
8 
3 1 100% 
Promot
ion  
2   For 02 vacancies - No eligible 
candidate is available in the 
feeder grade. Posts advertised 
in employment news on 19 -
25 Sept 2020. Application 
received and No eligible 
candidate found. Hence, as 
per RRs, approval for filling 
up of these vacancies 
through Direct R ecruitment 
sent to Ministry. But 
returned with the remarks 
that these vacancies may be 
revived.  Proposal for revival 
of 02 vacancies has been sent 
to Ministry vide this office 
letter dated 24.02.2022. 
41 Officer 
Surveyor 
SCI Level 
7 
16 13 100% 
Promot
ion 
3   For 01 - joining awaited and 
For 02 -DPC under process  
42 Chief 
Draftsma
n 
SCI Level 
7 
19 14 100% 
Promot
ion 
5   For 05 vacancies: - DPC 
under process 

49 
 
43 Cartogra
pher 
SCI Level 
7 
4 1 100% 
Direct 
3 Vacancies 
kept under 
Matching 
savings. 
  
44 Assistant 
Engineer 
Eng Level 
8 
20 15 50% 
by 
Promot
ion  
50% 
by DR 
5 Assistant  
Engineer:- 
01  
Advt by 
UPSC on 
Sept. 2020.   
For 03 posts  under revival – 
Proposal submitted to DoWR 
on 02.09.21  followed by 
clarifications on 01.2.22 and 
10.2.22.                                           
01 post - No eligible 
candidate(ST) 
45 Driller-
In-
Charge 
Eng Level 
8 
69 61 66.66
% by 
promot
ion 
failing 
which 
by 
direct 
recruit
ment 
and 
33.33.
% by 
DR 
8 For 04 posts 
of DIC: - 
Advt. By 
UPSC on 01 
March 
2022.  
For 01 post, 
NAC 
received and 
proposal to 
be 
submitted 
to DoWR 
shortly.                                                          
For 03 Vacancies: No eligible 
candidate(ST) 
46 Administ
rative 
Officer 
Min Level 
8 
21 20 100% 
promot
ion 
1     
47 Sr PS Min Level 
8 
1 1 100% 
promot
ion 
0     
48 PS Min Level 
7 
5 4 100% 
promot
ion 
1   DPC under process : 01 
49 Assistant 
Account 
Officer 
Min Level 
8 
17 11 Ex-
Cadre 
Post 
6 To be filled 
by 
Controller of 
Accounts-
Request 
sent 
  
  GROUP -
B(G) 
TOTAL  
    351 248   103     
  GROUP-
B (NG) 
                

50 
 
50 STA(Hydr
ogeology) 
SCI Level 
7 
28 15 100% 
Direct 
13 Requisition 
sent to SSC 
on 
17.11.2021 
for 03, 
Advertised 
0n 
12.05.22. 
For - 04, 
Requisition 
sent 
26.11.19, 
Advertised 
on 
25.02.20. 
For -05, 
Requisition 
sent on 
26.02.21.Ad
vertised on 
12.05.22, 
For 01 -
Requisition 
to SSC on 
14.09.21. 
 
  
51 STA 
(Hydrom
eteorologi
st) 
SCI Level 
7 
1 0 100% 
Direct 
1 For 01 
vacancy:- 
Requisition 
sent to SSC 
25.01.22 
  
52 STA(Che
mical) 
SCI Level 
7 
24 14 100% 
Direct 
10 Post 
advertised 
on 25.2.20 - 
06, 
Requisition 
sent on 
3.2.21 and 
17.8.21 - 
04. Post 
advertised 
on 12.05.22 
- 04.  
  
53 STA(Geo
physics) 
SCI Level 
7 
14 5 100% 
Direct 
9 Post 
advertised   
on 24.9.21 -
08 , 
Requisition 
sent on 
24.2.22 - 
01. 
  

51 
 
54 Draftsma
n 
SCI Level 
6 
62 26 100% 
Direct 
36 Post 
advertised 
on 24.9.21 -
10, Post 
advertised 
on 
12.05.22-
07, 
Requisition 
sent on 
24.12.21- 
19. 
  
55 Surveyor SCI Level 
6 
50 5 100% 
Direct 
45 Posts 
advertised 
on 12.05.22 
- 28          
Requisition 
sent on   
28.01.22 - 
17. 
  
56 STA(M) Eng Level 
7 
11 9 50% 
by 
Promot
ion  
50% 
by DR 
2 For 02 
Direct 
vacancies 
:Requisition 
sent to SSC, 
Chandigarh 
on 
18.01.2021.   
Being 
advertised 
in  Phase 10 
as informed 
by SSC.                                           
  
57 Foreman  Eng Level 
6 
48 33 50% 
by 
Promot
ion  
50% 
by DR 
15                                              
For 10 
Vacancies:- 
Requisition  
sent to SSC, 
Chandigarh  
and 
Kolkataon 
Being 
advertised 
in Phase 10.      
NAC 
awaited - 02                                                                                                        
For 03 vacancies - DPC is to 
be convened. 
58 Junior 
Engineer 
Eng Level 
6 
18 14 100% 
by 
Direct  
4 Dossier 
awaited - 
02, 
Advertised 
01 on 
24.9.21 , 
NAC 
awaited -01 
  
  

52 
 
59 Store 
Supdt. 
Eng Level 
6 
7 6 100% 
by 
promot
ion 
failing 
which 
DR 
1 Offer issued 
- 01  
  
60 Driller-
cum-
Mechanic 
Eng Level 
6 
181 92 30% 
by 
promot
ion 
70% 
by DR 
89 Advertised 
77 
vacancies 
by SSCs on 
24.9.21, 
NAC 
awaited -12 
  
61 Office 
Superint
endent 
Min Level 
6 
116 102 100 % 
promot
ion 
14   LDCE under process: 11, 
DPC under  process : 03 
62 Sr. 
Translati
on 
Officer  
Min Level 
7 
1 0 100% 
promot
ion 
1   DPC proposal under process. 
63 Jr. 
Translati
on 
Officer 
Min Level 
6 
6 4 100% 
direct 
2 Dossier 
awaited 
from SSC - 
01 , NAC 
awaited ;01 
  
64 Stenogra
pher (G -
I) 
Min Level 
6 
42 23 80% 
DR + 
20% 
PR 
19 For 16 DR 
Vacancies - 
Age as per 
RR is 18-27, 
As per advt 
by SSC agae 
is 18 -30. 
Approached 
Ministry for 
amendment 
of RR. 
Ministry 
advised to 
explore 
feasiliblity of 
amendment 
of advt 
published 
by SSC 
instead of 
amendment 
of RR. Case 
being 
processed 
further. 
  

53 
 
65 Staff Car 
Driver 
(SG) 
Min Level 
6 
25 23 100% 
promot
ion 
2   DPC under process : 02 
  GROUP -
B(NG) 
TOTAL  
    634 371 0 263     
  GROUP-
C 
          0     
66 Draftsma
n Grade -
III 
SCI Level 
4 
1 1 100% 
Direct 
0     
67 Photogra
pher 
Grade-I 
SCI Level 
5 
1 1 100% 
Promot
ion 
0     
68 Photogra
pher 
Grade-II 
SCI Level 
4 
1 0 100% 
Direct 
1 Vacancy 
kept under 
Matching 
Saving 
  
69 Laborato
ry 
Assistant 
SCI Level 
3 
16 14 100% 
Promot
ion 
2   DPC is under process 
70 Laborato
ry 
Attendan
t 
SCI Level 
1 
58 27 100% 
Direct 
31 Requisition 
for 44 
vacancies 
sent to SSC 
Regions.  
  
71 ADCM -I Eng Level 
5 
159 138  100% 
by 
Promot
ion 
21   DPC is to be convened for 21 
posts after Dir (Admn) joins. 
72 ADCM-!! Eng Level 
4 
159 153  100% 
by 
Promot
ion 
6   DPC is to be convened for 06 
posts after Dir(Admn) joins. 
73 TOD Eng Level 
2 
808 553 100% 
by DR 
255 NAC: 31, 
Requisition  
sent : 106, 
Dossier 
awaited: 
118,  
  
74 Store 
Keeper 
Eng Level 
4 
31 30  100% 
by 
Promot
ion 
1   DPC is to be convened  for 01 
posts after Dir(Admn) joins. 
75 Electricia
n-I 
Eng Level 
5 
2 1  100% 
by 
Promot
ion 
1   DPC is to be convened  for 01 
posts after Dir(Admn) joins. 
76 Electricia
n-II 
Eng Level 
4 
2 1 100% 
by DR 
1   To send Requisition to SSC 

54 
 
77 Mechanic
-I 
Eng Level 
5 
55 47  100% 
by 
Promot
ion 
8   DPC is to be convened  for 08 
posts after Dir(Admn) joins. 
78 Mechanic
-II 
Eng Level 
4 
55 18 100% 
by 
promot
ion 
failing 
which 
by DR 
37   Dossier received - 02, NAC 
awaited : 35 
79 Slotting 
m/c opr 
(SMO)-I 
Eng Level 
5 
4 0  100% 
by 
Promot
ion 
4   For Matching Saving 
80 SMO-II Eng Level 
4 
5 0 100% 
by DR 
5 For 
Matching 
Saving 
  
81 Carpente
r 
Eng Level 
4 
1 0 100% 
by DR 
1 For 
Matching 
Saving 
  
82 Asstt. 
Store 
Keeper 
Eng Level 
2 
94 71 40% 
by 
promot
ion 
60% 
by DR 
23 NAC: 02, 
Requisition 
sent: 10,  
Dossier 
received : 
01,  
DPC is to be convened  for 10 
posts after Dir(Admn) joins. 
83 Blacksmi
th 
Eng Level 
2 
11 7 25% 
by 
promot
ion 
75% 
by DR 
4 Pre 
appointmen
t formalities: 
01, 
Requisition 
sent : 03 
  
84 TO(M) Eng Level 
1 
31 19 100% 
by DR 
12 Dossier 
received: 01, 
Requisition : 
11 
  
85 TO(S) Eng Level 
1 
37 22 100% 
by DR 
15 Offer issued 
- 01 
,Requisition: 
14 
  
86 Hammer-
man 
Eng Level 
1 
4 1 100% 
by DR 
3 Requisition 
sent : 03 
  

55 
 
87 Stenogra
pher (G -
II) 
Min Level 
4 
15 9 100% 
DR 
6 For 02 
Vacancies - 
Fresh 
dossiers 
awaited 
from SSC as 
02 
candidates 
not joined.                     
For 03 
Vacancies:- 
Requisition 
sent to SSC.                                          
For 01 
Vacancy:- 
NAC  
awaited 
from 
Surplus 
Cell. 
  
88 UDC Min Level 
4 
166 93 100% 
promot
ion 
73   DPC under process : 04, Not 
eligible 69 
89 LDC Min Level 
2 
99 56 85% 
DR + 
15% 
PR 
43 Requisition 
sent to SSC- 
38 
LDCE under process: 05 
90 Gestetne
r 
Operator 
(Sr.) 
Min Level 
2 
8 2 100% 
promot
ion 
6   Matching Savings 
  

56 
 
91 Dispatch 
Ride 
Min Level 
2 
1 0 100% 
promot
ion 
1   NAC received. Requisition to 
send to SSC 
92 Staff Car 
Driver 
(G-I) 
Min Level 
5 
172 170 100% 
promot
ion 
2   DPC under process : 02 
93 Staff Car 
Driver 
(G-II) 
Min Level 
4 
148 128 100% 
promot
ion 
20 To submit 
requisition 
to SSC  
  
94 Staff Car 
Driver 
(OG) 
Min Level 
2 
148 23 80% 
DR + 
20% 
PR 
125 For 121 
vacancies 
authorized 
to regions, 
NAC  to be 
obtained : 
01 
DPC to be convened : 03 
95 MTS Min Level 
1 
251 149 100% 
DR 
102 Dossier 
awaited : 
52, Joining 
awaited : 
01, 
Requisition 
sent to SSC: 
30, NAC 
awaited : 19 
  
96 Cleaner Min Level 
1 
17 5 100% 
DR 
12 For 04 
Vacancies:- 
Under 
revival.       
Joining 
awaited : 
01, 
Requisition 
sent: 07                                                       
  
  Group C- 
Total  
    2560 1739   821     
  Total of 
all posts 
    4017 2689   132
8 
    
 
 

57 
 
Annexure - III 
 
Status of Ground Water Monitoring Wells (As on March 2021) 
Sl 
No 
Name of the 
State/UTs 
Number of GW Monitoring Wells                
DW 
(Dug 
Well) 
PZ 
(Piezomet
er) 
HP 
(Hand
pump) 
SP 
(Spring) 
Total  
1 Andhra Pradesh 674 193     867 
2 Arunachal 
Pradesh 26 4     30 
3 Assam 345 28     373 
4 Bihar 745 23     768 
5 Chhattisgarh 1156 268     1424 
6 Delhi 21 93     114 
7 Goa 88 44     132 
8 Gujarat 679 264     943 
9 Haryana  536 795     1331 
10 Himachal Pradesh 128 0     128 
11 Jammu & 
Kashmir 287 14     301 
12 Jharkhand 442 20     462 
13 Karnataka 1413 262     1675 
14 Kerala 1374 217     1591 
15 Madhya Pradesh 1202 309     1511 
16 Maharashtra 1724 177     1901 
17 Manipur 0 0     0 
18 Meghalaya 53 11     64 
19 Nagaland 22 8     30 
20 Odisha 1518 82     1600 
21 Punjab  202 946     1148 
22 Rajasthan 708 558     1266 
23 Tamil Nadu 793 593     1386 
24 Telangana 293 443     736 
25 Tripura 105 16     121 
26 Uttar Pradesh 785 202     987 
27 Uttarakhand 40 5 129 41 215 
28 West Bengal 763 786     1549 

58 
 
UT s 
            
1 Andaman & 
Nicobar 111 2     113 
2 Chandigarh 1 29     30 
3 Dadra & Nagar 
Haveli 17 0     17 
4 Daman & Diu 11 2     13 
5 Pondicherry 9 0     9 
TOTAL 16271 6394 129 41 22835 

59 
 
ANNEXURE – IV 
 
[Vide Para 4 of the Introduction] 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTEENTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) OF THE COMMITTEE 
(i) Total number of Recommendations/Observations 
 
          18 
(ii) Recommendation/Observations which have been accepted by 
the Government  
 
Recommendation Nos.  1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 16, 
17, and 18 
 
 
 
Total – 15 
Percentage– 83.33 % 
 
(iii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies 
Recommendation Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
 
Total – 00 
Percentage – Nil 
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
 
Recommendation Nos. Recommendation Nos. 3,11 and 15  
 
 
 
 
Total – 3 
Percentage –  16.66% 
(v) Recommendation/Observation in respect of which final reply of 
the Government is still awaited 
Para Nos. NIL 
 
 
 
Total – 00 
Percentage – Nil 

60 
 
 